The Supreme Court observed that a separate bail application need not be insisted while considering the application under Section 88, 170, 204 and 209 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
"There need not be any insistence of a bail application while considering the application under Section 88, 170, 204 and 209 of the Code", a bench comprising Justices SK Kaul and MM Sundresh ordered.
Section 88 deals with the power to take bond for appearance : When any person for whose appearance or arrest the officer presiding in any Court is empowered to issue a summons or warrant, is present in such Court, such officer may require such person to execute a bond, with or without sureties, for his appearance in such Court, or any other Court to which the case may be transferred for trial.
Section 170 is about cases to be sent to Magistrate when evidence is sufficient.: If, upon an investigation under this Chapter, it appears to the officer in charge of the police station that there is sufficient evidence or reasonable ground as aforesaid, such officer shall forward the accused under custody to a Magistrate empowered to take cognizance of the offence upon a police report and to try the accused or commit him for trial, or, if the offence is bailable and the accused is able to give security, shall take security from him for his appearance before such Magistrate on a day fixed and for his attendance from day to day before such Magistrate until otherwise directed.
Section 204 and 209 of the Code deals with Issue of process and Commitment of case to Court of Session when offence is triable exclusively by it. 
Non-bailable warrants not to be issued as a matter of course
When the courts seek the attendance of a person, either a summons or a warrant is to be issued depending upon the nature and facts governing the case. Section 87 gives the discretion to the court to issue a warrant, either in lieu of or in addition to summons. The exercise of the aforesaid power can only be done after recording of reasons. A warrant can be either bailable or non-bailable. Section 88 of the Code empowers the Court to take a bond for appearance of a person with or without sureties.Considering the aforesaid two provisions, courts will have to adopt the procedure in issuing summons first, thereafter a bailable warrant, and then a non-bailable warrant may be issued, if so warranted, as held by this Court in Inder Mohan Goswami v. State of Uttaranchal, (2007) 12 SCC 1. Despite the aforesaid clear dictum, we notice that non-bailable warrants are issued as a matter of course without due application of mind and against the tenor of the provision, which merely facilitates a discretion, which is obviously to be exercised in favour of the person whose attendance is sought for, particularly in the light of liberty enshrined under Article 21 of the Constitution. Therefore, valid reasons have to be given for not exercising discretion in favour of the said person. 
For due compliance of Section 170 of the Code, there is no need for filing of a bail application
On Section 170 CrPC , the bench referred to Siddharth v. State of U.P., (2021) 1 SCC 676 and observed thus:
"This is a power which is to be exercised by the court after the completion of the investigation by the agency concerned. Therefore, this is a procedural compliance from the point of view of the court alone, and thus the investigating agency has got a limited role to play. In a case where the prosecution does not require custody of the accused, there is no need for an arrest when a case is sent to the magistrate under Section 170 of the Code. There is not even a need for filing a bail application, as the accused is merely forwarded to the court for the framing of charges and issuance of process for trial. If the court is of the view that there is no need for any remand, then the court can fall back upon Section 88 of the Code and complete the formalities required to secure the presence of the accused for the commencement of the trial. Of course, there may be a situation where a remand may be required, it is only in such cases that the accused will have to be heard. Therefore, in such a situation, an opportunity will have to be given to the accused persons, if the court is of the prima facie view that the remand would be required. We make it clear that we have not said anything on the cases in which the accused persons are already in custody, for which, the bail application has to be decided on its own merits. Suffice it to state that for due compliance of Section 170 of the Code, there is no need for filing of a bail application. "
Issuing a warrant may be an exception (Section 204 CrPC)
Section 204 of the Code speaks of issue of process while commencing the proceeding before the Magistrate. Sub-section (1)(b) gives a discretion to a Magistrate qua a warrant case, either to issue a warrant or a summons. As this provision gives a discretion, and being procedural in nature, it is to be exercised as a matter of course by following the prescription of Section 88 of the Code. Thus, issuing a warrant may be an exception in which case the Magistrate will have to give reasons.
Section 209 of the Code pertains to commitment of a case to a Court of Sessions by the Magistrate when the offence is triable exclusively by the said court. Sub-sections (a) and (b) of Section 209 of the Code give ample power to the Magistrate to remand a person into custody during or until the conclusion of the trial. Since the power is to be exercised by the Magistrate on a case-to-case basis, it is his wisdom in either remanding an accused or granting bail. Even here, it is judicial discretion which the Magistrate has to exercise. As we have already dealt with the definition of bail, which in simple parlance means a release subject to the restrictions and conditions, a Magistrate can take a call even without an application for bail if he is inclined to do so. In such a case he can seek a bond or surety, and thus can take recourse to Section 88. However, if he is to remand the case for the reasons to be recorded, then the said person has to be heard. Here again, we make it clear that there is no need for a separate application and Magistrate is required to afford an opportunity and to pass a speaking order on bail.
Section 436A CrPC
The Court noted that, under Section 436A CrPC, when a person has undergone detention for a period extending to one-half of the maximum period of imprisonment specified for that offense, he shall be released by the court on his personal bond with or without sureties. 
"The word 'shall' clearly denotes the mandatory compliance of this provision. We do feel that there is not even a need for a bail application in a case of this nature particularly when the reasons for delay are not attributable against the accused. We are also conscious of the fact that while taking a decision the public prosecutor is to be heard, and the court, if it is of the view that there is a need for continued detention longer than one-half 55 of the said period, has to do so. However, such an exercise of power is expected to be undertaken sparingly being an exception to the general rule.", the bench said.
Also Read : "Democracy Can Never Be A Police State ": Supreme Court Stresses Importance Of Bail; Issues Guidelines To Prevent Unnecessary Arrest & Remand
Accused Entitled To Bail If Arrest Was In Breach Of Sections 41, 41A CrPC : Supreme Court
Supreme Court Recommends Union Govt To Introduce Separate Act To Streamline Grant Of Bail; Sets Timeline For Disposal Of Bail Pleas
Case details 
Satender Kumar Antil vs Central Bureau Of Investigation |  (SC) 577 | MA 1849 OF 2021 | 11 July 2022
 Coram: Justices Sanjay Kishan Kaul and MM Sundresh




