Counsel for Petitioner :- Vikas Vikram Singh
Counsel for Respondent :- Abhinav N. Trivedi,Shubham Tripathi
Heard the counsel for the petitioner and Sri Shubham
Tripathi, the counsel for the University.
The present petition has been filed challenging the order
dated 13.09.2019 and the order dated 27.09.2019 whereby
the petitioner has been suspended from any medical work
and has been restrained from visiting any women's ward of
the hospital from 08:00 pm to 08:00 am till completion of
his MD course.
The facts in brief are that the petitioner who was working
as Junior Resident in the department of Radiotherapy was
suspended by means of the order dated 13.09.2019
(Annexure no.1)           on the ground that a newspaper
publication reported that in the institution in question, some
Junior Resident had sexually abused the daughter of a
patient and as such based upon which, the enquiry was
proposed. Subsequently, on 13.09.2019 itself, the petitioner
was served with a show cause notice. The petitioner filed a
response to the said show cause notice on 13.09.2019 itself.
It is stated that without even considering the reply of the
petitioner, the impugned order came to be passed on
27.09.2019 (Annxure no.2) stating that the allegations
levelled in the newspaper on 13.09.2019 was got inspected
and after sanction from the Vice Chancellor, the petitioner
was suspended for a period of six months from all the
medical work and was also restrained from entering any
female ward from 08:00 pm to 08:00 am in the morning.
The counsel for the petitioner argues that initially the
complaint was made by a Staff Nurse against the ward boy
who was working in the ward in question and the same is
contained in Annexure no.5. The said complaint was
countersigned by the daughter of the patient, however
subsequently the daughter of the patient made a separate
complaint wherein she also made similar complaint against
the ward boy, however she also stated that the petitioner
used harsh language against the said complainant. The gist
of the complaint made is contained as Annexure no.6. A
perusal of the said complaint makes it clear that the
petitioner was not named and it was stated that along with
the ward boy, another person was also present whose
conduct and behaviour was full of anger for which the
complainant felt very bad.
A counter affidavit has been filed annexing therewith a
copy of the enquiry report based upon which the impugned
order has been passed, which is contained as Annexure no.
CA-2, the enquiry report based upon the investigation,
reported that in various newspapers there was mention of
victim's age as 16 years which was found to be incorrect as
the age of the victim is of thirty years. It was also recorded
that the victim had stated before the Committee that the
petitioner had used improper language for which she felt
very bad. The enquiry report further found certain
allegations against the ward boy as made by the
complainant. After recording the allegations levelled by the
complainant before the enquiry committee, the enquiry
committee advised the punishment as has been awarded by
means of the impugned order.
The counsel for the petitioner argues that the order is bad in
law inasmuch as it casts stigma. He further argues that even
from the perusal of the enquiry report, which is on record,
no allegations based upon which the order has been passed
were found to be true, he further argues that even the said
enquiry report was never provided to the petitioner prior to
passing of the said order nor was the petitioner called by
the Enquiry Committee. He lastly argues that even for the
sake argument, the enquiry report is treated to be gospel
truth, no reasonable man can form a opinion that there was
any conduct of the nature which can be termed as
misconduct of a sexual orientation leading to the
punishment as has been done by means of the impugned
order, thus the order suffers from vice of wednesbury
arbitrariness also.
Admittedly, the period for which the petitioner was
suspended has already come to end, however, the second
part of the punishment of not appearing in the female ward
from 08:00 pm to 08:00 am still continues against the
Considering the material on record, the allegation levelled
were against the ward boy and from perusal of the
substance of the allegations levelled against the petitioner
by the complainant through a letter and subsequently before
the enquiry committee, it is clear that there was no
allegation against the petitioner with regard to any
misconduct of a sexual nature so as to warrant the
punishment as has been awarded to the petitioner by means
of the impugned order. Although the order suffers from the
vice of procedural arbitrariness also, however, as this Court
finds that there was prima facie no substance against the
petitioner so as to inflict punishment of the nature inflicted
by the impugned order, as such, the same cannot be
sustained and is set aside. The petitioner shall be entitled to
pursue his courses and studies in accordance with law.
The writ petition stands allowed.
Location: High Court of Judicature at