438 CR.P.C. No. - 9396 of 2022
Counsel for Applicant :- Akash Tomar
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
438 CR.P.C. No. - 9378 of 2022
Counsel for Applicant :- Awadhesh Kumar Malviya
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
438 CR.P.C. No. - 9363 of 2022
Counsel for Applicant :- Sushil Shukla,Aditya Prakash Singh
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
1.     Heard learned counsels for the parties as well as perused
the material available on record.
2.     The    applicants     in   the   aforesaid   anticipatory   bail
applications are alleged to have committed offences punishable
under the Scheduled Caste and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention
of Atrocities) Act, 1989 (hereinafter referred as ‘SC/ST Act’).
3.     All the three anticipatory bail applications have been
dismissed by the respective Special Judge SC/ST Act. The
question of admissibility of jurisdiction of the aforesaid bails
vide concurrent jurisdiction enshrined in Section 438 of Cr.P.C.
has been agitated.
4.     For the sake of verbiage, the contentions put by the learned
counsels are concised below:
(i) As per the law laid down in Prathvi Raj
Chauhan     vs.  Union     of  India   &    Others1,
notwithstanding the bar under Sections 18 and 18-A
of the Act, the application for anticipatory bail is
maintainable.
(ii) The application for anticipatory bail under
SC/ST Act can be filed under Section 438 Cr.P.C. in
the High Court as well as Sessions Court.
5.     It is argued on behalf of the applicants that as per the
settled law of the Apex Court passed in case of Prathvi Raj
Chauhan (supra), if the complaint does not make out a prima
facie case for the applicability of the provisions of the SC/ST
Act, 1989, the bar created by Sections 18 and 18A(i) shall not
apply. The only caveat is that the power has to be used sparingly
and is not to be used so as to convert the jurisdiction into that
under Section 438 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
6.     It is further argued on behalf of the applicants that the
Apex Court in the judgment of Siddharth vs. State of U.P. and
Others2, has opined that if the Investigating Officer does not
believe that the accused will abscond of disobey summons,
he/she is not required to be produced in custody. It was also
opined that personal liberty is an important aspect of our
constitutional mandate. The occasion to arrest an Accused during
investigation arises when custodial investigation becomes
necessary or it is a heinous crime or where there is a possibility
of influencing the witnesses or accused may abscond. Merely
because an arrest can be made because it is lawful does not
mandate that arrest must be made. A distinction must be made
between the existence of the power to arrest and the justification
for exercise of it. If arrest is made a routine, it can cause
incalculable harm to the reputation and self-esteem of a person.
If the Investigating Officer has no reason to believe that the
accused will abscond or disobey summons and has, in fact,
throughout cooperated with the investigation we fail to
appreciate why there should be a compulsion on the officer to
arrest the accused.
7.     The Apex Court in the matter of State of Andhra Pradesh
through I.G., National Investigating Agency vs. Mohd.
Hussain alias Saleem3 has held that if an application of bail or
pre-arrest bail in the case instituted under the Act is made under
the provisions prescribed in Chapter XXXIII of the Code in a
Special Court or an exclusive Special Court and it is granted or
refused, an appeal under newly inserted Section 14A(2) of the
Act would lie before the High Court.
8.     In case of State of Gujarat vs. Salimbhai Abdulgaffar
Shaikh and Others4, it was provided that under the prevention of
Terrorism Act, 2002, the exercise under Section 439 and 482
Cr.P.C. by the High Court was found illegal and the bail could be
granted only under the special provision and an appeal under
Section 34 of Prevention of Terrorism Act against the order of
rejection or allowing a bail could only be filed in the High Court
before a Double Bench.
9.     In Section 21(4) of NIA Act, the expression used is "bail"
without saying whether it is regular bail or anticipatory bail.
S.437 to 439 of the Code state that a person accused of or
suspected of the commission of offences of the type referred
therein may be "released on bail". The only difference between
S.437, S.439 and S.438 is that an order of anticipatory bail under
S.438 insulates a person arrested from custody while an order of
bail under S.437 or 439 enables him to be released from custody.
10.    The Advanced Law Lexicon, 3rd Edition defines "bail" as
"Bail means to set liberty a person arrested or
imprisoned, on security being taken for his
appearance on a day and a place certain, which
security is called bail. A security such as cash or a
bond; especially, security required by a Court for the
release of a prisoner who must appear at a future
time."
Anticipatory bail is explained as meaning, "an order
of anticipatory bail constituting an insurance against
Police custody following upon arrest for some
offence or offences in respect of which the order is
issued".
11.     In Black's Law Dictionary, 9th Edition, the expression
'bail' is given the meaning, "A security such as cash or a bond;
especially security required by a Court for the release of a
prisoner who must appear in Court at a future time".
12.     The expression "bail" only means the security given by the
person accused or suspected of the commission of offence for his
release from custody or to insulate him from custody. The
expression 'bail' used in S.21(4) of the NIA Act could therefore
be regular bail as well as anticipatory bail. Such a view is
required to be adopted to avoid, as aforesaid unintelligible,
absurd or unreasonable results.
13.     The basic rule of interpretation is to give effect to the plain
meaning of the statute. If it is not clear and ambiguous, then the
court can take recourse to other modes of interpretation. There
are two types of aids of interpretation- internal and external.
Internal aids are within the statutes as title, preamble, schedule
and other provisions of the said Act. If the ambiguity is still not
clear, then the court can use external aids to interpret a particular
provision     i.e.  dictionary,  parliamentary    debates,   foreign
judgments, provisions of other Acts (pari materia).
14.    An unembellished inspection of Section 21 of the NIA Act
vis-à-vis Section 14A of the Act, reveals that clause (1) and (4)
of the NIA Act are in pari materia to the newly inserted Section
14A(1) and (2) of the Act.
15.    After the decision in Prathvi Raj Chauhan (supra), the
legal position is that an anticipatory bail in a crime where an
offence under SC/ST is alleged can be granted only if the Court
is satisfied that the allegations levelled do not prima facie make
out a case under SC/ST Act. The position of law remains same
even after the enactment of Section 18A of the Act.
16.    Under SC/ST Act, there is special procedure and Special
Courts/Exclusive Special Courts for dealing with the cases
involved in the offences against the scheduled castes and
scheduled tribes. A reading of the provisions of Sections 2(d),
2(bd) and Section 14 categorically indicate that the said offences
are exclusively triable by Special Courts as contemplated by the
17.    It is further to be kept in mind that under the special
provisions of the SC/ST Act, the right of the victim and the
witnesses are on a higher pedestal than provided under Cr.P.C.
From the entire scheme of the act, including the powers of the
Special Courts, it can be concluded that the Act has given
primacy and exclusivity to the Special Courts over normal
Courts. The expression 'bail' in Section 14A of SC/ST Act
includes anticipatory bail as well.
18.    Thus, in view of the aforesaid principles enumerated
above, the Special Court while dealing with an application for
anticipatory bail must ascertain whether a prima facie case for an
offence punishable under the Act is made out, then only the
application for anticipatory bail can be considered. The order
granting or rejecting the anticipatory bail under the provisions of
SC/ST Act shall be amenable to the appellate jurisdiction of the
High Court under Section 14A of the Act and not Section 438
19.    In view of the aforesaid observations, the present
anticipatory bail applications are dismissed.
20.    In the interest of justice and proper adjudication, the
applicants are at liberty to file an appeal under Section 14A of
the SC/ST Act.
21.    The certified copy of the orders and other relevant
documents shall be returned to the counsels for the applicants
after obtaining photostat copies, which shall be kept on record.