Constitution of India seeking issuance of writ of habeas
corpus for production of the corpus Amir – son of the
petitioner, before this Court who is alleged to have been
illegally detained by the Special Operation Group (SOG herein
2.      It is the case of the petitioner that she resides with her
family at the address given in the cause title, Siyasatnagar,
Chandola Lake, Isanpur, Ahmedabad. She has three sons and
three daughters. The corpus Amir is one of her sons who is
married and he also has three children; two sons and one
daughter. The petitioner has her Election Card, Ration Card
as also Aadhar Card to substantiate her version. She is
residing in Ahmedabad with her family for a long time. She
was doing the labour work in Ahmedabad on construction site
in her young age when the corpus Amir was born at work
place. She being an illiterate lady, the requirement of
registration of birth was not known to her and therefore, the
birth of the Amir was not registered. However, he is married
and has three children who are all born in Ahmedabad.
2.1. It is further the say of the petitioner that in the
aftermath of Godhra incident in the year 2002, the State
Government had rehabilitated the families as per the order
passed in Special Civil Application No. 14664 of 2008 on
dated 28.01.2010. The petitioner also received a plot and Rs.
50,000/- from the Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation in the
name of her husband Sidiq Doudbhai Shaikh.
2.2. On 18.06.2020, it is the grievance of the petitioner that
when her son was working near octroi point, the respondent –
SOG with a suspicious mind that he is a Bangladeshi National
and is staying in India without any valid authorization and
permission, he was taken to the detention centre. It was given
to understand to the family that after finishing certain inquiry,
he would be released, however, he is continued to be in
detention centre from 18.06.2020. This is nothing but an
illegal custody. It is further the say of the petitioner that the
custody of the corpus is with SOG, Juhapura Police Station. It
is under the false allegation and pretext that his son is
Bangladeshi National that he is kept at detention centre.
2.3. The petitioner visited the detention centre as also the
police station and substantiated her version with Election
Card and Aadhar Card of her and those of her husband so also
the Ration Card of theirs where, in the Ration Card, names of
her     family      members have     been  mentioned.        Petitioner
therefore approached this Court, inter alia, stating that
number of visits have been made to the concerned authority,
however, her son is not released from the detention.
Therefore, she is before this Court with the following prayers:
“(a) Your Lordship may be pleased to admit this
(b) The Hon’ble Court may be pleased to issue a writ
of Habeas Corpus or any other appropriate writ, order
or direction, directing the respondent no.2 herein to
produce petitioner’s son Amirbhai, respondent no.3
(c) Your Lordship may be pleased to grant interim
relief and by way of interim order be pleased to direct
the respondent authority- SOG to produce corpus of
Amirbhai, respondent no.3 before this Hon’ble Court,
pending admission and final disposal of this petition;
(d) The Hon’ble Court may be pleased to issue a writ
of Habeas Corpus or any other appropriate writ, order
or direction, directing the respondent no.2 herein to
release the petitioner’s son, Amirbhai from illegal
detention forthwith.
(e) Your Lordship may be pleased to pass such orders
as through fit in the interest of justice.”
3.     This Court issued notice on 14.07.2020 and directed the
corpus to be produced before it on 16.07.2020 through video
conference         from  the  nearest       Court    where       Assistant
Commissioner of Police, SOG was asked to remain personally
present. Dr.Harshad Patel, Deputy Commissioner of Police,
SOG also was present as directed by this Court and the
following order came to be passed on 16.07.2020.
“1. Today, the Corpus is present before this Court
through Video Conference. He is kept at SOG Office,
2. Dr. Harshad Patel, DCP, SOG, is also present before
us through video conference. According to him, the
corpus is suspected of being Bangladeshi national and
though inquired, no documents have been produced by
him for verification of certificate of birth or any other
document, which may confirm his nationality, and
therefore, restriction order came to be passed against
him on 30.06.2020. He also has further submitted that
his mother has furnished the documents, indicating his
Aadhar Card and other documents for verification on
08.07.2020 and the same have been sent to the
concerned authority for verification yesterday, i.e. on
15.07.2020. According to him, along with four other
Bangladeshis, who travelled to this Country two to four
years back, the Corpus has been placed under
restriction order. According to the corpus, he has no
been kept with all facilities and no cause of concern is
given.
2. The      corpus does not complain of anything although,
he has      been asked, by asking Mr. Annirudhsinh Parmar,
PI, to      remain out of the chamber, from where, the
corpus      remained present for video conference.
3. Learned PP, Mr. Amin, appearing with learned APP,
Mr. Manan Mehta, has urged that the legality of stay of
the corpus on the Indian soil requires to be examined.
He, therefore, has sought one day’s time for verifying
from the authority which has issued Aadhar Card, since,
the base documents for issuance of Aadhar Card are
birth certificate or proof of birth and residential proof,
required by the authority concerned.
4. Considering the fact that there is no criminal
antecedent, as confirmed by Dr. Harshad Patel, DCP,
SOG, on a specific query from the Court ,it has been
urged that the man possibly travelled to this Country
from Bangladesh, as a child aged 3 to 4 years.
5. Let the details be furnished to this Court on the part
of the State or by the Office of the SOG, in particular.
Dr. Harshad Patel, DCP, SOG is directed to ensure that
the corpus shall be looked after properly. The corpus
shall be presented before this Court tomorrow through
video conference, which shall be arranged at City Civil
Court, Ahmedabad, in the presence of a Presiding
Officer of the City Civil Court.
6. S.O. to 17TH JULY, 2020. To be listed at the top.”
3.1.     As the corpus was not produced from the nearest Court
but from the SOG Office, Juhapura, we deemed it appropriate
to fix the matter the next day i.e. on 17.07.2020 and directed
the corpus to be present through video conference held at
City Civil and Sessions Court, Ahmedabad. Accordingly, on
17.07.2020, he was kept present in presence of presiding
4.     The School Leaving Certificate and other materials also
had been directed to be produced before this Court as the
corpus studied upto 3rd standard in Municipal School No. 6,
Urdu Medium, situated near Haveli, Khamasa, Raikhad and
accordingly, the Principal, Municipal School No. 6, Urdu
Medium,         situated  near  Haveli,      Khamasa,     Raikhad          was
directed        to  produce   Birth    Certificate,    School        Leaving
Certificate and the General Register of the School reflecting
birth date or any other material which the school has in
connection with the date of birth and admission of the corpus
in the school.
4.1. It was also noticed that in the Election Card issued by
the Election Commission of India in the name of the corpus,
there was a requirement of certain directions as three to four
years back, the request had been made for such correction
however, no response has been given by the authority
concerned. The corpus was permitted to approach the
concerned authority and it was directed to provide necessary
assistance, if the corpus approached the authority concerned.
The School Leaving Certificate obtained by the applicant was
permitted to be verified through advocate.
5.     Pursuant    to  the order      passed   by    this    Court         on
24.07.2020, learned advocate Mr. Anand Yagnik appeared for
the applicant and he made a request to permit him to meet
the corpus. Learned Public Prosecutor had no objection to the
lawyer meeting the client, however, according to him, it was
to be permitted in presence of the officer of the SOG as he
was apprehending undesired and unsustainable allegations,
on the ground of right of privacy. It was objected to by
learned advocate Mr. Yagnik as according to him, that would
frustrate the very purpose of meeting and he urged that the
police officer can remain at an inaudible distance. He also had
objected to the very act of detention at SOG Centre.
5.1. This Court, after hearing both the sides at length,
permitted the meeting at the City Civil and Sessions Court,
Ahmedabad where the corpus was directed to be produced
and the meeting was to be conducted at the Mediation Centre
which was to take place in presence of the judicial officer as
may be deputed by learned Principal Judge, City Civil and
Sessions Court. The Police Officer who was to take the corpus
to the City Court was also directed to remain outside the
mediation centre.
6.      On 31.07.2020, when the matter was fixed for hearing,
learned advocate Mr. Yagnik had expressed his satisfaction
for the arrangement made for meeting the corpus and over
the physical and mental condition of the corpus.
7.      As per the request of learned advocate, the matter was
thereafter fixed for the petitioner to file its further affidavit
which was filed by the petitioner on 05.08.2020.
7.1. According to her, at the time of filing the affidavit, her
son was almost for 45 days in the custody of SOG. He is
illegally detained in absence of any FIR or any formal
complaint and without any sincere efforts to identify the
genuineness of his citizenship. This conduct has become a
trend and the only victims of this atrocious conduct are the
poor citizens of India staying in slums and who are
marginalized and voiceless.
7.2. According to the petitioner, the detention and the witch
hunt of the detenue by the SOG with an attempt to partake
the     application of  the  Foreigners   Tribunal       established
pursuant to Foreigners (Tribunals) Order, 1964 envisaged
under the Foreigners Act, 1946 and to determine issues of
citizenship, is completely de hors its powers, jurisdiction and
authority and hence, is illegal and unconstitutional. What is
fundamentally flawed in the whole attempt to detain and
question the citizenship of the detenue is the fact that when
his parents’ citizenship is not questioned and they are deemed
to be citizens of India then, how could their child’s citizenship
be put to scrutiny and that too, in the complete violation of
due process.
7.3. It is further urged that the respondents are bent upon
scrutinising the birth certificate of the detenue, which is
unfortunately because of circumstances out of the control of
the petitioner and the detenue not available and the
respondents have completely failed to investigate the lineage
of the detenue, which has put all doubts of the respondents to
rest. According to the petitioner, there were several people
living in slum around the Chandola Lake including the family
of the detenue because of their West Bengal origin and the
suspicion loomed large for them. The detenue had been
similarly detained earlier and on the very ground, however, he
was released by the end of the day.
7.4. According to the petitioner, the detenue is born out of
the wedlock of Sidikbhai Daudbhai Shaikh and the petitioner
herself. Not only the detenue is not Bangladeshi but, her
parents do not have any relatives and acquaintances in
Bangladesh. They have nothing to do with Bangladesh.
Several years ago, they have migrated from Bangladesh to
Gujarat and have been residing in the slum areas around
Chandola Lake, Ahmedabad. The petitioner and her family
belong to the lowest strata of the society. They live in
extremely poor condition and are illiterate. They are engaged
in manual work to earn their livelihood like those of
Masoners, Carpenters, and Rag Pickers and other casual
labour. According to him, the detenue has four children and a
wife to look after. His family and children are sleeping hungry
as he is the only bread earner.
7.5. According to the petitioner, the father of the detenue is
around 61 to 64 years of age who was born in Simulia Village
of Chhapra Taluka of Nadia District in the State of West
Bengal. Because of his search of work, he came to Gujarat
State. Likewise, the corpus was born in Deganga which is a
community developed block that forms an administrative
division in North 24 Parganas District in the State of West
Bengal. The parents of petitioner resided at Ahmedabad for a
long time and in fact the petitioner and her husband got
married at Ahmedabad.
7.6. The grandfather and great grandfather of the detenue
were residing in Simulia Village of Chhapra Taluka of Nadia
District in the State of West Bengal. The name of the
grandfather is Hajra Shaikh and the name of the great
grandfather was Dhiru Shaikh. He was called and referred to
in the village as Dal-lada and the story of how he had daal he
cooked for feeding the villagers which had led the people to
give him this name.
7.7. It is further the say of the petitioner that these are the
evidences which require consideration while examining the
person’s citizenship. It is further her say that her parents and
maternal         grandparents of    the     detenue     also      lived        in
Ahmedabad. It is further his say that she has seven children;
four girls and three boys. The eldest son is Munir who is 40
years of age, second child is detenue Amir who is 36 years of
age and the third one is Munira who is 34 years of age and
other four being younger to her.
7.8. The corpus – detenue being 36 years of age was born in
the year 1984, which is also reflected in the Identification
Card available with him and since Section 3 of the Citizenship
Act, 1955 provides that all those who are born on or after 26 th
Day of January, 1950 but before the 1 st Day of July, 1987, shall
be    citizens by birth, the corpus having been born prior to
1987, is citizen by birth. His parents also are citizens of this
7.9. It is further the say of the petitioner that in the year
2009, in complete violation of due process of law and without
availing any opportunity of hearing, the dwelling place of the
petitioner and her family had been demolished. Therefore,
Public       Interest  Litigation      was    made     essentially           for
rehabilitation. Thereafter, the petitioner lived in Ganeshnagar
along with her children whereas detenue Amir lived near
Chandola Lake with his wife and children.
7.10.It is the say of the petitioner that she and her husband
both are possessed Election Card, Aadhar Card, Document
issued       by    Ahmedabad     Municipal      Corporation            (AMC),
Allotment letter issued by AMC. The petitioner – mother also
had Pan Card. The elder brother of the detenue and the eldest
son of the petitioner also possess Election Card, Election
Receipt, School Leaving Certificate and Aadhar Card. The
detenue himself possess Election Card, Ration Card, his
daughter’s         birth certificate,       Slum    Survey        Receipt,
Aadhar Card and Aadhar Card of his family members.
It is reiteratively urged that the petitioner has got Election
Card which is sufficient to decide all the doubts regarding the
citizenship of the detenue.
7.11.It is further urged, on the basis of the various laws, that
the detention of the detenue is illegal and his confinement by
the respondents and SOG is violative of his fundamental
rights. It is mentioned that in School Leaving Certificate of the
corpus the place of birth is mentioned as Bengal – Devadanga.
There is no document to show that Bangladesh is the birth
place of the petitioner. The corpus has been born in the city of
Ahmedabad and he has been living there with his parents.
Even otherwise, their origin also is West Bengal and they are
citizen of India. The petitioner has her origin at Deganga, it
sounds like Devaganga or to some it may sound like
Devadanga which is a community developed block. Someone
as illiterate as the deponent on being asked her native during
the admission of the ward in the school must have stated
Deganga and hence, without any application of mind, in the
place of birth, the school authorities have mentioned the same
instead of mentioning the actual birth place of the ward which
is Ahmedabad. However, the personnel of the SOG with a
fixed mindset are certainly not equipped to understand the
concept of Anglicisation and the play of accent that may lead
to some discrepancies here and there and hence is bent upon
proving that the detenue is a Bangladeshi with malafide
intention and indicated in their affidavit in reply that the
detenue is an original resident of Village Diyadanga, Post
7.12. The grievance is also made that the petitioner when was
permitted to produce the School Leaving Certificate of the
corpus, the request is made to the Principal however, her
approach had completely changed on 23.07.2020 as on
22.07.2020, some of the officers visited the school premises. It
was further urged that the original school extract or
concerned record be called for which would indicate true and
relevant details.
7.13. It is further the say of the petitioner that there is a
tribunal in fact to examine the issue of citizenship, moreover,
the condition precedent is that the detenue being a foreigner
or an illegal immigrant, the exercise of power for detaining
him does not exist. It is further her say that 15 to 18 other
detenue in the SOG premises are there and one detenue
named Zahid is lodged there for about more than 8 years. One
Mr. Pannu is there for more than 4 years. A lady is also there
for a long time who is separately kept in presence of women
police. There is one detenue namely Saiful who was brought a
day prior to the corpus and others and they are languishing
there without any proper inquiry or trial in SOG Centre. There
the corpus is provided food and permitted to meet the family
members. He has no complaint of custodial violence or ill
treatment by the SOG.
8.     The affidavit-in-reply has been filed by Dr. Harshad
Patel, Deputy Commissioner of Police, SOG, Ahmedabad City
on dated 16.07.2020 where he has denied all the allegations.
It was insisted that her son Amir Sidikbhai Shaikh is the
citizen of Bangladesh and is originally resident of Village:
(Bangladesh). He, when was detained in the office of this
respondent, he never produced or supplied any documentary
evidence to justify that he is a citizen of Republic of India. His
office undertook the exercise of finding out the non-nationals
of    India       and  during the     drive,    near    Chandola           Lake,
Ahmedabad, on 20.06.2020, the corpus Aamir Sidikbhai
Shaikh along with four other similar such persons was
arrested by the officers of SOG, Ahmedabad City Police. None
of the five persons has supplied any document indicating
citizenship of Republic of India. Photocopy of Aadhar Card
was also not supplied at the relevant point of time but now, it
has been produced in this petition. Their COVID-19 virus test
had been carried out and the report came negative.
8.1. Thereafter, on taking cognizance of the report submitted
by the office of this respondent, on 02.07.2020, the office of
the Additional Commissioner of Police, Special Branch,
Ahmedabad by exercising powers under Section 3 (2)(g) of the
Foreigners Act, 1946 and under Section 5 of the Foreigners
Order,       1948     so also as    per     the  notification       of     State
Government dated 02.12.1960, had passed an order to keep
the corpus and others under restriction till their deportation.
8.2. The joint interrogation was carried out on 09.07.2020 by
six agencies namely; (i) The Intelligence Bureau, Central
Government, (ii) The Intelligence Bureau, State of Gujarat,
Air Force Agency (Warrant Officer 9 – AFLU) and; (vi) Special
8.3. It was revealed that they are Bangladeshi and their entry
was without any document and permission. He is residing in
India illegally and therefore, as per the provisions of
Foreigners Act, 1946 and Foreigners Order, 1948, the process
needs to be completed. According to this respondent, except
the copy of the Aadhar Card, no other document had been
produced and as per the provision of The Aadhar (Targeted
Delivery of Financial and other Subsidies, Benefits and
Services) Act, 2016, more particularly as per Section 9 of the
Aadhar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and other Subsidies,
Benefits and Services) Act, 2016, the Aadhar Card is not the
document of citizenship. Section 9 of the Act reproduced as
“”9. Aadhar number not evidence of citizenship or
domicile, etc.
The Aadhar number or the authentication thereof shall
not, by itself, confer any right of, or be proof of,
citizenship or domicile in respect of an Aadhar number
holder.”
8.4. The Unique Identification Authority of India (UIDAI) has
said that Aadhar is not the document of citizenship. The press
release dated 18.02.2020 by the UIDAI has also been annexed
to that effect. It is further stated in the reply that the office of
the deponent had made attempts to verify the genuineness of
the Aadhar Card and also asked for documents, on the basis of
which, Aadhar Card was issued in the name of the corpus
Aamir, by sending e-mail to the office of Assistant Director
General, UIDAI, Mumbai dated 14.07.2020 and a reminder
also had been sent on 16.07.2020. The report is awaited.
8.5. According to this respondent, the corpus is kept at SOG,
Ahmedabad and on completion of requisite procedure, he
would be deported to Bangladesh. Following the Foreigners
Act, 1946 and Foreigners Order, 1948 and the notification of
the State Government dated 02.12.1960 the corpus is kept in
restrictions as he is the citizen of Bangladesh.
9.     The further affidavit is also filed by Mr. Mukeshkumar
Naranbhai Patel, Deputy Commissioner of Police, SOG,
Ahmedabad City on 10.08.2020 where he has pointed out the
inconsistency emerging from the material and documents
submitted by the petitioner, more particularly, his date of
birth and place of residence.
9.1. So far as the date of birth of the petitioner is concerned,
as per the Election Card, the petitioner was 38 years of age as
on 01.01.2002. It means her year of birth is 1964 and the
identity card is issued on 05.07.2003. As per the Election Card
submitted by the petitioner, her date of birth is XX.XX.1961.
This has been issued in January, 2011. As per her Pan Card,
the date of birth is 01.03.1961 and as per the Aadhar Card,
her birth date is 01.01.1961.
9.2. The date of birth of the husband of the petitioner as per
the    Identity      Card  issued    by      Election     Commission             is
XX.XX.1956. Aadhar Card mentions the date of birth of her
husband as 01.01.1951. The passbook of Canara Bank of her
husband mentions the date of birth on 15.04.1961.
9.3. So far as the date of birth of the corpus – Aamir
Sidikbhai Shaikh is concerned, the Aadhar Card placed along
with the record shows his date of birth as 01.06.1984. The
Election Card placed along with the additional affidavit shows
his age as on 01.01.2002 as 22 years. As per the inquiry, the
Election Card has become invalid. As per the communication
received        from   the  Government         of  India,      Ministry          of
Electronics and Information Technology, Unique Identification
Authority of India (UIDAI), Regional Office, Mumbai on dated
20.07.2020 addressed to Dr. Harshad Patel, DCP, Ahmedabad
and the concerned authority has proceeded for deactivation of
Aadhar Card. As per the School Leaving Certificate of
respondent no.3, the date of birth is 01.06.1984 and as per
the petitioner’s affidavit, his birth is not registered.
9.4. So far as the place of birth is concerned, petitioner has
stated that the place of birth of all children is Ahmedabad. As
per the School Leaving Certificate of respondent no.3, the
corpus’s place of birth is Devadanga. The said certificate is
9.5. The school leaving certificate of respondent no.3’s
brother Munir mentions the place of birth as mentioned for
respondent no.3 where his date of birth is 01.06.1982. The
Election Card of his shows the date of birth as XX.XX.1981.
The School Leaving Certificate issued on 03.04.2010 reflects
reason for leaving the school as continuous absence.
9.6. The School Leaving Certificate of his sister also shows
the reason for leaving as going out of town. As per the
interrogation report dated 09.07.2020, the place of birth of
the respondent – corpus is Village-Diadanga, Post-Kaile,
9.7. It is urged that he has been detained on the basis of
suspicion and confinement also followed. This respondent
denied that the respondent no.3 is rightful citizen of India.
There is no material prior to 24.07.2020 and subsequent to
24.07.2020 to show that he is a citizen of India. It is further
the say of this respondent that the Deputy Director, UIDAI
had communicated that the documents related to Aadhar Card
are not available and the process for deactivating the same in
initiated as mentioned in the written communication dated
9.8. Aadhar Number is issued only if there is no duplication /
matching biometric found in UIDAI system for which Aadhar
is already issued. Aadhar as a means of identity is different
than other documents due to use of biometrics to ensure
uniqueness and there is no possibility of obtaining duplicate
Aadhar due to biometric de-duplication. Further vide letter
from Dr. Patel dated 17.07.020 request was made to provide
documents of Aadhar Number belonging to the corpus and as
per the records of UIDAI, the Aadhar Number was active and
documents were not available in UIDAI system and therefore,
as per Chapter VI of the Aadhar (Enrolment and Update)
Regulation, 2016 (as amended), in absence of any valid
supporting documents, the Aadhar Number needed to be
deactivated till its updated by the Aadhar Holder after
furnishing         its valid and     supportive     documents             and
accordingly, the office proceeded for deactivation of Aadhar in
compliance of Chapter VI. This will be referred to in
appropriate time further.
10.    All in all, it is urged that petitioner has inconsistently
attempted to gain the sympathy by placing certain details at
paragraph 22 in her affidavit which is unacceptable and
moreover, in Special Criminal Application (Habeas Corpus)
No. 315 of 2017 vide order dated 25.01.2017 the Division
Bench had not entertained the writ petition and had also
observed that the question of nationality cannot be decided in
habeas corpus petition. Therefore, this Court should not
entertain this any further.
11.    This Court has heard learned advocate Mr. Anand
Yagnik appearing with learned advocate Mr. Chintan Acharya
and Mr. Vanraj Gohel appearing for the petitioner. He has
extensively argued and taken this Court through various
provisions of the Foreigners Act, 1946, the Foreigners Order,
1948, the Foreigners (Tribunal) Order, 1964, the Foreigners
(Tribunals) Amendment Order, 2019, the Citizenship Act,
1955, the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019, the Citizenship
Rules, 2019, the Registration of Electros Rules, 1960, the
Aadhar Act, 2016 and the Aadhar (Enrolment and Update)
11.1. His principal submission is that there is a serious error
committed by not allowing the applicant to discharge his
onus, moreover, he cannot be deprived of his life and liberty
under Article 21 without following the due process. According
to him, without issuance of notice and without giving
opportunity of hearing, he has been detained. There is an
abject violation of principle of natural justice and therefore,
the action is illegal and unsustainable. He needs to be
enlarged forthwith. There is no trial contemplated and what
all he is required is to be given is an opportunity before the
Civil    Authority and   unless    there  is   a    modification            or
cancellation by the Central Government, he cannot be
deprived of his right.
12.    We had called upon learned Additional Solicitor General
and Senior Advocate Mr. Devang Vyas to address the Court on
the procedure of deportation of illegal nationals. On seeking
instructions, he has urged that there are two kinds of persons
who can be called illegal; those who have already travelled on
a travel document and such document has expired and they
continued to stay illegally, thus, their entry is legal however,
by sheer afflux of time, their stay become illegal and second
category of people are those who have entered illegally. The
procedure of both would vary. According to him, once the
person travels to India with valid travel document, the FRRO
would permit the person to enter the country and continue
being in the country. Once the travel document expires, he is
required to be deported after getting a travel document
prepared for such persons. So far as other category of persons
is concerned, the first step would be for deportation process
of verification of nationality. The State Authority would
contact the ministry of external affairs and would request the
nationality verification as prescribed by the nationality
verification form, more particularly, in respect of Bangladesh
nationals, the ministry would send to the High Commission of
Bangladesh in New Delhi or in four other places where
Deputy High Commission functions i.e. at Kolkata, Mumbai,
Agartala        and Guwahati  requesting   them     to    verity       the
nationality of an individual and thereafter, to issue a travel
permit and upon verification of nationality, such travel permit
is issued and deportation of detainee happens. However, there
is no standard time frame observed with regard to the time
taken by Bangladeshi Authorities to verify the nationality for
particular individual.
12.1. He further added that Bangladeshi Nationals who are
intercepted at border while crossing into India unauthorizedly
would be immediately sent back by the Border Security Force
(BSF) however, in case of those who have inadvertently
crossed the border, they would be interrogated and after once
they are found innocent, they are handed over to the border
guards after holding a flag amity and the details are being
furnished to the Ministry of Home Affairs, Foreign Division
every month.
12.2. All          State   Governments          or     Union          Territory
Administrations need to set-up Special Task Force in each
district of the State for detecting, identifying and intercepting
illegal immigrants from Bangladesh settled in the State. For
those immigrants who are apprehended in the country, the
action is taken under Section 14(A)(b) of the Foreigners Act,
1946 and those cases which are referred to Bangladesh High
Commission for nationality verification, till the nationality of
such Bangladeshi nationals is confirmed, they are kept at
detention         centres  set-up   by      the State     and     the      Union
Territories concerned. It is further his say that in respect of
Bangladeshi nationals found to be staying unauthorizedly in
any particular State or Union Territory, proper inquiry is
required to be conducted by the State Government or the
Union Territory Administration and if the person concerned
claims Indian citizenship and residence of a place in any other
Indian State, the concerned State Government or Union
Territory would send to the Home Secretary of that State and
District Collector, from where the suspected person claims to
hail and also for the details of near relatives etc. and proper
report needs to be sent by the concerned State Government or
District Magistrate to the deporting State Government after
proper verification within a period of 30 days. If no report is
received within the period of 30 days, the competent authority
is empowered to take necessary action to deport suspected
national. There are bound to be sufficient number of detention
centres in each State where the illegal immigrants would be
retained, pending their deportation.
12.3. He has also further stated that after completion of the
inquiry, the illegal immigrants from the neighbouring country
detected in the State or Union Territory other than the border
States with the Bangladesh would be properly escorted in
group as far as possible and handed over to the BSF in West
Bengal. Those who are being escorted, should also carry with
them, the order issued by the competent authority of the State
Government or Union Territory Administration under Section
3(2)(c) of the Foreigners Act, 1946.
12.4. The BSF also is required to inform all the State
Governments and Union Territories, the name, designation,
telephone, e-mail ID of designated officer of BSF to whom the
illegal immigrants are to be handed over. The State Police
which will be escorting the illegal immigrants also needs to
carry the appropriate order issued by the competent authority
of the State Government under Section 3(2)(c) of the
Foreigners Act. The State Government would initially incur
expenditure of transportation up to the designated point
before being handed over to the BSF and subsequently such
amount is to be reimbursed along with the amount incurred
for performing the functions by the agencies on behalf of the
Central Government under the Foreigners Act, 1946.
12.5. He has also urged the Court that there is no time limit
for completing the procedure since a lot would depend on the
response being given by the Bangladesh High Commission as
a lot would depend on the authority of Bangladesh as the
response may not come well in time. According to learned
ASG, thus, when it is in relation to those persons whose
documents           or the visas   have       expired     and     the      travel
documents’ invalidity is the issue for being illegally in the
country, generally the same is being responded promptly and
within one month ordinarily, such person is being transported.
Whereas, in case of those who have illegally entered the
country, it may take a little longer time as Bangladesh
authority usually takes a longer time to conduct the inquiry at
their end, since accepting the illegal immigrants is the
responsibility of the neighbouring State. He also has urged
that there are certain circulars of Ministry of External Affair
which are confidential in nature and therefore, he can always
share the same with the Court, the gist of which he has
already argued before the Court.
13.    Having thus heard both the sides and also on careful
examination of entire material, it can be safely noted that it is
a matter of record that on 20.06.2020 the Police Sub-
Inspector Mr.M.N.Solanki and Mr. Siyadia and others, when
were patrolling in the area of Isanpur Chandola Lake near
Aisha Mosque and other Mosque, the five Bangladeshi
persons were caught, by keeping the panch witnesses with the
team      of    the Police Officers,      namely   Ubeidullmulla            s/o
Ibaduttmulla, Saaiful s/o Mandar Dulal, Umar Aaifbhai Shaikh,
Aamirbhai Sidikbhai Shaikh, Mustakin s/o Kurbab Paudud.
They were inquired of their passport and visa however, none
of them had either the passport or the visa and they also
admitted of being Bangladeshi Nationals. They had no other
proof of Election Card, Driving Licence, Pan Card or any other
proof. No objectionable material against India was found from
them and there was no other objectionable item found.
13.1. The statement had been recorded by the Police Sub-
Inspector Mr. N.M.Solanki and as they continued to be in
India without any passport or visa, they had been detained at
7:45 pm on the very day i.e. on 20.06.2020. The report has
been prepared by the Deputy Commissioner of Police, SOG,
Crime Branch which specifies that as they have entered India
without any valid document of passport or visa and as there is
an absence of any document indicating that they have Indian
Nationality like Election Card, Ration Card, Driving Licence
passport or visa, they are infiltrated and illegal immigrants
and therefore, the report is submitted to the Additional Police
Commissioner, Special Branch, Ahmedabad City with the
enclosure of the report of the PSO, Panchnama, Statemen of
these five persons, Interrogation Form, Application Form of
Foreign        Prisoner  of his/her       personal    data       and        the
13.2. According to the respondent – State, they have been
given the opportunity on the very day and after inquiring from
them when they failed to adduce any necessary material
establishing their nationality, they have been put under the
restriction and this is an interim measure permissible under
the law.
13.3. The challenge is made by way of the writ of habeas
corpus where the challenge is essentially made to the order
passed on 02.07.2020 by the Civil Authority i.e. the Additional
Police Commissioner, Special Branch, Ahmedabad City, which
on the strength of this report tendered to him, exercised the
powers under Section 5 of the Foreigners Order, 1948,
Section 3(2)(g) of the Foreigners Act, 1946 and a Notification
of the State Government numbering as R.G.F/1160(II) dated
02.12.1960 and till they were deported from India, they are
kept under the restriction at SOG, Crime Branch, Juhapura,
13.4. It is given to understand that this is an interim measure
meant for prohibiting, regulating or restricting the entry of
foreigners into India or their departure therefrom or their
presence or continuous presence. It is also further the say of
the State that there is no violation of principle of natural
justice and this is simply placing the persons under restriction
and nothing beyond the same. Once such order is passed by
the Additional Commissioner of Police, it is for the Ministry of
External Affairs and Ministry of Home Affairs to decide. The
time factor of which cannot be ascertained as it would depend
on the response of the country from which the illegal
immigrants have come.
14.     It is a matter of record that there are three affidavits
filed by the petitioner who is the mother of the detenue who
when was produced before this Court and when was
permitted to meet the lawyer, has not complained of any ill
treatment. Supply of food and meeting the family members at
SOG Centre also is permitted. The serious grievance raised is
of undefined and unregulated confinement and that too,
without fulfilling principle of natural justice. By way of
circular issued by the Government of India, Ministry of Home
Affairs and as also submitted before this Court by the learned
ASG that those Bangladeshi nationals who enter India illegally
after 25.03.1971 are treated as illegal immigrants. Those
infiltrated and those who overstayed unauthorizedly after
expiry of visa are to be deported back to Bangladesh. The
procedure has been also prescribed as per the instructions
issued by the Ministry of Home Affairs.
14.1. There are different ways in which this procedure of
deportation is carried out. Firstly, if they are intercepted at
the border while crossing unauthorizedly into Indian Border,
they shall be immediately sent back by the BSF. Secondly, in
case of inadvertent crossers, if they are found innocent, they
are being handed over at the flagmity.       Thirdly, the Special
Operational Group in the State and in the Union Territory, are
set-up for identifying and intercepting illegal immigrants.
Those who are illegal immigrants, if are apprehended in the
country against whom the action is taken under Section 14(A)
(b) of the Foreigners Act, they are referred to the Bangladesh
High Commission for nationality verification through the
Ministry of External Affairs and till the nationality of such
Bangladeshi nationals is confirmed, they are kept in detention
centre set-up in the State or Union Territory.
14.2. Proper inquiry is conducted by the State Government
and if the person concerned claims citizenship and residence
of a place in any other Indian State, that State or Union
Territory would be sent the details addressed to the Home
Secretary of the State including the name, parentage,
residential address, details of near relatives etc. and that
State will ensure the appropriate report is sent within 30
days. The competent authority will ensure with the detention
of such person to ensure the physical availability and if no
report is received within 30 days, the competent authority
may      take      necessary action       to deport    the      suspected
Bangladeshi national.
14.3. After completion of the inquiry, the illegal immigrants
are taken by the concerned State or Union Territory Police
with proper escort in a group or individually and handed over
to the BSF in West Bengal at the places designated and the
BSF would facilitate their exit from India to Bangladesh. The
appropriate order issued by the competent authority of the
State or Union Territory Administration under Section 3(2)(c)
of the Foreigners Act after proper inquiry, shall need to be
carried out. The State Police shall need to escort the illegal
immigrants from Bangladesh to carry out the appropriate
order issued by the competent authority of the State
Government under Section 3(2)(c) of the Foreigners Act.
There is a sufficient number of detention centres also in the
State for the said purpose.
15.    These       instructions very       clearly   require       the      State
Governments or the Union Territory Administrations to ensure
proper supervision on the inquiry process and to maintain a
complete record of the illegal immigrants who are being
handed over for the purpose of deportation. Consolidated
instructions regarding the procedure to be followed for
deportation or repatriation of the foreign nationals also
requires that as per Section 3 of the Foreigners Act, 1946,
“the Central Government may by order make provision, either
generally or with respect to all foreigners or with respect to
any particular foreigner or any prescribed class or description
of a foreigner, for prohibiting, regulating or restricting the
entry of foreigners into India or, their departure therefrom or
their presence or continued presence therein.” The powers for
deportation/repatriation of foreigners are vested in Central
Government in terms of Section 3 (2)(c) of the Foreigners Act,
1946 and according to which orders made under section 3
may provide that foreigners may not and shall not remain in
India or in any prescribed area therein. Further under Section
3(2)(e) of the Foreigners Act, 1946 read with para 11 (2) of
the Foreigners Order, the Central Government has powers to
issue orders requiring the foreigners to reside in a particular
place and of imposing restrictions on his movement. These
powers under Section 3(2)(c) and 3(2)(e) of the Foreigners Act
and Foreigners Order, 1948 have also been delegated to the
State      Government  and   Union        Territory    Administration.
Separate Notifications have been issued from time to time
delegating these powers to the State Government and Union
15.1. Worthwhile it is to be reproduced at this stage Section 2
of the Foreigners Act, 1946 which defines “foreigner who is a
person who is not citizen of India.” The power to make orders
is provided under Section 3 which is as follows: -
(1) The Central Government may by order1 make
provision, either generally or with respect to all
foreigners or with respect to any particular foreigner or
any prescribed class or description of foreigner, for
prohibiting, regulating or restricting the entry of
foreigners into 2[India] or, their departure therefrom or
their presence or continued presence therein.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality
of the foregoing power, orders made under this section
(a) shall not enter 2[India], or shall enter 2[India] only at
such times and by such route and at such port or place
and subject to the observance of such conditions on
(b) shall not depart from 2[India], or shall depart only at
such times and by such route and from such port or
place and subject to the observance of such conditions
(c) shall not remain in 2[India], or in any prescribed area
therein; 3[(cc) shall, if he has been required by order
under this section not to remain in India, meet from any
resources at his disposal the cost of his removal from
India and of his maintenance therein pending such
(d) shall remove himself to, and remain in, such area in
2[India] as may be prescribed; tc" (d) shall remove
himself to, and remain in, such area in 1[India] as may
(e) shall comply with such conditions as may be
prescribed or specified— tc" (e) shall comply with such
conditions as may be prescribed or specified—"
(i) requiring him to reside in a particular place; tc" (i)
requiring him to reside in a particular place;"
(ii) imposing any restrictions on his movements; tc" (ii)
imposing any restrictions on his movements;"
(iii) requiring him to furnish such proof of his identity
and to report such particulars to such authority in such
manner and at such time and place as may be prescribed
or specified; tc" (iii) requiring him to furnish such proof
of his identity and to report such particulars to such
authority in such manner and at such time and place as
(iv) requiring him to allow his photograph and finger
impressions to be taken and to furnish specimens of his
handwriting and signature to such authority and at such
time and place as may be prescribed or specified; tc" (iv)
requiring him to allow his photograph and finger
impressions to be taken and to furnish specimens of his
handwriting and signature to such authority and at such
time and place as may be prescribed or specified;"
(v) requiring him to submit himself to such medical
examination by such authority and at such time and
place as may be prescribed or specified; tc" (v) requiring
him to submit himself to such medical examination by
such authority and at such time and place as may be
(vi) prohibiting him from association with persons of a
prescribed or specified description; tc" (vi) prohibiting
him from association with persons of a prescribed or
(vii) prohibiting him from engaging in activities of a
prescribed or specified description; tc" (vii) prohibiting
him from engaging in activities of a prescribed or
(viii) prohibiting him from using or possessing
prescribed or specified articles; tc" (viii) prohibiting him
from using or possessing prescribed or specified
(ix) otherwise regulating his conduct in any such
particular as may be prescribed or specified; tc" (ix)
otherwise regulating his conduct in any such particular
(f) shall enter into a bond with or without sureties for
the due observance of, or as an alternative to the
enforcement of, any or all prescribed or specified
restrictions or conditions; tc" (f) shall enter into a bond
with or without sureties for the due observance of, or as
an alternative to the enforcement of, any or all
prescribed or specified restrictions or conditions;" 4[(g)
shall be arrested and detained or confined;] and may
make provision 5[for any matter which is to be or may
be       prescribed and]      for    such     incidental           and
supplementary matters as may, in the opinion of the
Central Government, be expedient or necessary for
giving effect to this Act. 5[(3) Any authority prescribed
in this behalf may with respect to any particular
foreigner make orders under clause (e) 6[or clause (f)] of
sub-section (2).]”
15.2. Section 3(2)(g) provides that the orders made under this
section may provide that the foreigner shall be arrested and
detained or confined.
15.3. Section 8 of the Foreigners Act, 1946 provides for
determination of nationality. Worthwhile it would be to
(1) When a foreigner is recognized as a national by the
law of more than one foreign country or where for any
reason it is uncertain what nationality if any is to be
ascribed to a foreigner, that foreigner may be treated as
the national of the country with which he appears to the
prescribed authority to be most closely connected for
the time being in interest or sympathy or if he is of
uncertain nationality, of the country with which he was
last so connected: Provided that where a foreigner
acquired a nationality by birth, he shall, except where
the Central Government so directs either generally or in
a particular case, be deemed to retain that nationality
unless he proves to the satisfaction of the said authority
that he has subsequently acquired by naturalization or
otherwise some other nationality and still recognized as
entitled to protection by the Government of the country
whose nationality he has so acquired.
(2) A decision as to nationality given under sub-section
(1) shall be final and shall not be called in question in
any Court: Provided that the Central Government, either
of its own motion or on an application by the foreigner
concerned, may revise any such decision.”
15.4. Section 9 of the Foreigners Act, 1946 provides for
burden of proof, profitable it would be to reproduce the said
“9. Burden of proof.—If in any case not falling under
section 8 any question arises with reference to this Act
or any order made or direction given thereunder,
whether any person is or is not a foreigner of a
particular class or description the onus of proving that
such person is not a foreigner or is not a foreigner of
such particular class or description, as the case may be,
shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian
Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), lie upon such person.”
16.    It is thus clear that for the purpose of prohibiting,
regulating or restricting the entry of foreigners into India or
their departure therefrom or their presence or continued
presence, the Central Government has the power to make
provision either generally or with respect to all foreigners or
with respect to any particular foreigner or any prescribed
class or description of foreigners. This also authorizes the
Central Government to make the order and provide that
foreigner shall be arrested or detained or confined and may
make a provision for such incidental or supplementary
matters, which in the opinion of the Central Government, is
expedient and necessary for giving effect to this act.
Therefore, to say that by way of interim measures, the powers
exercised are of only restriction, does not go with the scheme
of the provision which does not provide for the restriction but
speaks of the arrest, detention or confinement.
17.    With regard to the examination of nationality, Section 8
provides that when a foreigner is recognised as a national by
the law of more than one foreign country or where for any
reason, it is uncertain what nationality is to be ascribed to a
foreigner, he may be treated as the national of the country
with which he appears to the prescribed authority to be most
closely connected for the time being in interest or sympathy
or if he is of uncertain nationality, of the country with which
he was last so connected, decision as to the nationality given
under sub-section (1) shall be final and shall not be called in
question in any Court, provided of course that the Central
Government either on its own motion or an application by the
foreigner concerned, may revise any such decision. So far as
burden of proof is concerned, Section 9 provides that if in any
case not falling under Section 8, any question arises with
reference to this Act or any order made or direction given
thereunder whether any person is or is not a foreigner, the
onus will be upon such person not withstanding anything
contained in the India Evidence Act, 1872.
18.    Worthwhile it would be to refer to the Foreigners Order,
1948 at this juncture. A notification has been issued by the
Ministry of Home Affairs on 10.02.1948 in exercise of the
powers conferred by Section 3 of the Foreigners Act, 1946
and in supersession of the Foreigners Orders, 1939 and all
notifications amending the same, the Central Government has
made the said order of 1948. The definition clause of Order 2
provides for civil authority which means such authority as
may be appointed by the Central Government in this behalf
for such areas as it thinks fit. Order 5 provides for power to
grant permission to depart from India. It states that no
foreigner shall leave India without the leave of the civil
authority having jurisdiction at such port and leave shall be
refused by the civil authority if it is satisfied that the foreigner
has failed to comply with the formalities of departure, or when
his presence is required in India to answer a criminal charge,
or in the event when his departure may prejudice the relation
of the Central Government with the foreign power and the
departure of the foreigner has been prohibited under the
order issued by the competent authority. The civil authority
also may prohibit the departure of the foreigner where it is
satisfied that such departure would not be conducive to the
public interest. Whenever the civil authority issues an order
under Clause-A, it would report the matter forthwith to the
Central Government which may cancel or modify the order.
Order 5(A) provides for power to examine the persons. It
would be profitable to reproduce the same: -
“5. (A) Power to examine persons: The civil authority
may examine any person who seeks leave to enter India
or to depart there from or during his stay in India for the
Purposes of the Foreigners Act, 1946, or of any order
made thereunder; and it shall be the duty of every such
person to furnish to the civil authority such information
in such manner and at such times, as that authority may
require.”
18.1. It is clear from this order that the civil authority has
power to examine any person who seeks leave to enter India
or to depart therefrom or during his stay in India for the
purposes         of Foreigner Act,     1946 or    any    other        made
thereunder and it is the duty of every such person to furnish
to the civil authority such information in such a manner and at
such times as the authority may require.
19.    The Court is conscious of the Foreigners (Tribunal)
Order, 1964. The order passed by the Ministry of Home
Affairs on 23.09.1964 authorizes the Central Government to
refer the question as to whether a person is or is not a
foreigner within the meaning of Foreigners Act, 1946, to the
tribunal, to be constituted for the said purpose, for its opinion.
The tribunal can dispose of such questions by following the
procedure prescribed. The powers of the tribunal are the
powers of the civil Court while trying a suit under the Code of
Civil procedure in respect of summoning or enforcing the
attendance of the person or examining him on oath, requiring
the discovery of production of document and issuing the
commission for examination of the witnesses.
20.    This Court is conscious of the two decisions which are
sought to be relied upon by the respondent – State, where the
Division Bench of this Court has chosen, in a matter of writ of
habeas corpus, not to enter into the aspect of nationality on
the ground that it would be open for the detenue or the
relatives to apply to the competent authority under Section 8
of the Foreigners Act, 1946.
8527 of 2016, the husband of the petitioner was a citizen of
Bangladesh and several criminal cases were registered
against him. He resided in India without proper documents.
The petitioner was granted bail in connection with the
criminal cases. The order came to be passed under Section
11(1) and 11(2) of the Foreigners Act ordering to keep the
husband of the petitioner in confinement/restrictions. The
petitioner also produced certain documents that he was an
Indian national. As the question of nationality surfaced, the
Court directed him to approach the concerned authority under
Section 8 and disposed of the habeas corpus petition.
20.2 Likewise, in Special Criminal Application No. 315 of
2017, it was contended by the respondent – State that prima
facie material emerged that the petitioner’s wife was a
Bangladesh national and she was staying in India without
permission. She was, therefore, kept in confinement by the
Special Operational Group. The concern was voiced about the
wellbeing of hers and the authorities had been directed to
produce her before the Court. On inquiry, there was no ill
treatment found. As there was a question of nationality of the
lady, the Court held that the same cannot be decided in the
habeas        corpus   petition.    There       were      several         original
documents such as Voter’s Card, Aadhar Card etc. concerning
the lady which had been supplied to the SOG to show that she
was a citizen of India. The Court directed that it would be
open for the petitioner to bring these to the notice of the
authorities and produce the copies of such documents for
consideration and despite that exercise, if the question of
nationality remain undecided, it would be always open to the
petitioner to take up the issue with the concerned ministry or
the Central Government in terms of the Foreigners Act.
21.    Being conscious of these decisions and also conscious of
the fact that in the event of deciding the question of
nationality, the issue shall have to be raised before the
appropriate        authority  by    the      petitioner,    this      Court        is
restricting its inquiry into the validity and propriety of the
order passed by the civil authority by examining the principles
of administrative law. It shall have to be questioned as to
whether the order passed was legal, rational and the
procedural propriety also shall need to be inquired into. The
principle of natural justice would demand the hearing as also
considering the material which has been placed before the
authority concerned.
22.     Without entering into the aspect of the nationality, if one
looks at the report prepared by the Deputy Commissioner of
Police in his capacity as a senior officer reporting to the
Additional Commissioner of Police who has been made a civil
authority, it is quite apparent that the inquiry has been
limited to the visa and the passport. The person concerned
since could not produce the same on the very day of patrolling
i.e. on 20.06.2020, the respondent no.3 along with other four
persons has been detained at the detention centre of SOG and
since then, the corpus continues to be at the SOG Centre.
23.     It is to be noted at this stage that there are various
documents which have been produced before this Court,
which in the report, are missing. There has been no inquiry at
all made of the parents of the present corpus as the mother is
the petitioner and her nationality is not questioned nor
doubted even. There are six children of the petitioner and the
corpus is one of them. Several years before, the SOG had also
made an inquiry and detained the respondent no.3 and later
on, he was released on having not found anything adverse.
The corpus has been once again during the patrolling
questioned by the authority and since he could not show his
passport and visa, he has been detained on the ground that he
is a Bangladeshi national. It is admitted by the respondent
authority that he has no criminal background. He is a labourer
working for his livelihood. He has his wife who is an Indian
national and four children are born out of their wedlock. The
documents of his parents, his siblings, his wife and his
children have not been regarded by the authority concerned
as there was no opportunity given for him to establish his
nationality. The Central Government has delegated the
powers to the civil authority which is from the State
Government and the powers also are given to them to inquire
into the nationality of a person, therefore, the powers are to
be exercised in accordance with law. The least that is
expected of the person who has been given such wide and
vital powers of recommending the deportation of a person on
the basis that he is not an Indian national, is to avail an
opportunity of hearing to the person concerned. We had
pertinently queried learned Public Prosecutor as to whether
there is any notice given and a separate opportunity has been
made available for those who have been suspected as foreign
nationals, to adduce the relevant material for proving the
nationality. So far as the corpus is concerned, his education
from 3rd standard is in the school at Juhapura. He also has
produced before this Court his Aadhar Card so also his
Election Card. Certain anomalies in the names from Aamir to
Amir is much emphasized. It is to be highlighted here
specifically that the report of the Deputy Police Commissioner
and of the Additional Police Commissioner, Special Group also
refers him as Amir and not Aamir and thus, this anomaly can
surely not been blown out of proportions.
24.    Be that as it may, there is no doubt with regard to his
identity. His entire family is in India. The order mentions his
relatives and family being in Bangladesh, this being a common
order for all the five persons who had been detained on the
same day, the authority possibly being unmindful of the
individual case, has reported it. The form filled-in by the
authority also gives the details which are incorrect and based
on the same, the Additional Police Commissioner has on
02.07.2020 exercised the powers under Section 3(2)(g) of the
Foreigners Act, 1946, Section 5 of the Foreigners Orders and
the     authorization   he   received       vide   notification         dated
02.12.1960 of the State Government and directed the order or
detention till the order of deportation is received.
25.     Worthwhile it is to make a mention that when this Court
requested the learned ASG to address the Court on possible
time period for the deportation in case of the foreign nationals
and particularly Bangladeshi nationals, he fairly submitted
that depending on the response received from the Bangladesh
Authority, on due verification of the nationality of those
persons for whom the proposal is sent for deportation, the
implementation is made. There is no fix period, as a lot
depends on other outer agencies. Although, it is not confirmed
by the respondent, by way of an affidavit it is claimed that
there are persons who are not deported for more than four to
eight years. This Court is not choosing to enter into that as
this is not the scope of this petition, at the same time, so far
as the case on hand is concerned, when it has been noticed by
this Court incidentally while addressing the issue raised by
the petitioner, let this aspect be taken up with requisite
seriousness by the concerned authority dealing with issue of
deportation at the level of External Affairs Ministry and
learned ASG is expected to play a vital role in streamlining
this aspect and its due implementation, up-keeping the human
dignity. It is quite obvious from the order passed on
02.07.2020 that the same is without availing any opportunity
to the corpus to adduce the necessary material.
26.     Without     evaluating  the      material    which      has       been
produced before this Court by the corpus, we deem it
appropriate to direct the authority concerned to avail that
opportunity and for the corpus to produce, for consideration
of the authorities, the necessary testimonials.
27.     Admittedly, as mentioned above, the report prepared by
the DCP was without even availing opportunity to the corpus
and the Additional Commissioner has acted upon the same.
We are conveyed that till date, nothing has moved and the
corpus continues to be at the detention centre. When serious
flaw is noticed in observing principles of natural justice,
without entering the issue of nationality, on a limited ground
of    non-availment      of  opportunity,    this    Court       deems          it
appropriate to intervene and to that limited extent, indulgence
would be inevitable, noticing unbridled powers assigned to
the authority, of course, for catching illegal/unauthorized
nationals. Resultantly, the opportunity requires to be availed
noticing apparent breach of administrative law and very
peculiar facts concerning respondent no.3 and his family.
28.     Till that exercise is completed, the petitioner shall be
released on the reasonable terms and conditions, as deemed
appropriate by the concerned authority within one week of
receipt of copy of this order, so as to ensure his availability if
he cannot satisfy the authority on the strength of his
29.     The corpus since has questioned his confinement at the
SOG, without entering into the issue of nationality and its
nuances, to be determined by the concerned authority as the
same is found to have been done in disregard to the basic
requirement of availing opportunity. This petition to that
limited extent is allowed and disposed of in above terms.