for the petitioners with the petitioners.
(The case has been taken up for hearing through video
The petitioners, claiming themselves to be aged about 17
years and 6 months and 28 years respectively, have approached this
Court seeking protection of their life and liberty on the averments that
they performed marriage on 16.06.2021 at their friends residence as per
Hindu rites and ceremonies against the wishes of respondents No.4 to 6
and the petitioners are apprehending threat to their life and liberty at
their instance.
Learned Counsel for the petitioners has submitted that the
petitioners after performing marriage are living together. The
petitioners have apprehension of danger to their life from respondents
No.4 to 6. No action for protection of their life and liberty has been
taken by the police despite making of representation by them and
direction in this regard may be issued to respondents No.2 and 3 for
protection of their life and liberty. In support of his submissions learned
Counsel for the petitioners has placed reliance on the judgments passed
by the Coordinate Bench of this Court in CRWP-7911-2020 (O&M)
titled as 'Divya Vs. State of Punjab and others' decided on 09.10.2020
and CRWP-7659-2020 titled as 'Banshi Lal and another Vs. State of
Haryana and others' decided on 25.09.2020.
Notice of motion.
Pursuant to supply of advance copy, Mr. P.S. Walia, Asstt.
AG, Punjab has appeared and accepted notice on behalf of respondents
No.1 to 3.
Learned State Counsel has submitted that petitioner No.1 is
less than 18 years of age falling within the definition of child under
Section 2(a) of the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006. Section 9
of the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006 provides punishment for
a person who performs child marriage. Petitioner No.2 is not entitled to
custody of petitioner No.1. The life and liberty of petitioner No.1 has to
be protected by sending her to child care institution under the care of
Child Welfare Committee. In support of his submissions, learned State
Counsel has placed reliance on judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court in
Independent Thought Vs. Union of India and another : (2017) 10
SCC 800 and this Court in CRM-M-22389-2020 titled as 'Parminder
Singh Vs. State of Haryana and others' decided on 24.09.2020.
Learned State counsel also seeks time to file detailed reply
and address arguments.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner also seeks time to
submit copies of the judicial precedents relied upon by him.
Petitioner No.1 has also prayed for providing requisite
protection to her against physical harm by respondents No.4 to 6. Since
petitioner No.1 is now in Chandigarh, requisite protection has also to be
provided to her in U.T. Chandigarh. In view of the facts and
circumstances of the case, U.T. Chandigarh and Senior Superintendent
of Police, U.T. Chandigarh are ordered to be impleaded as respondents
No.7 and 8. Memo of parties be amended accordingly.
At this stage, Mr. Shashank Bhandari, Addl. Public
Prosecutor has appeared and accepted notice on behalf of respondents
No.7 and 8 and seeks time to complete his instructions.
Adjourned to 23.07.2021.
Notices to respondents No.4 to 6 be issued for the date
fixed and notices be also given dasti, if so desired.
In the meanwhile, respondent No.8-Senior Superintendent
of Police, U.T. Chandigarh is directed to take over custody of petitioner
No.1 from petitioner No.2 and to ensure that till further orders to the
contrary petitioner No.1 is kept in Aashiana, Sector-15, Chandigarh and
also to take appropriate action for protection of her life and liberty from
danger at the instance of respondents No.4 to 6. All the expenses for
stay of petitioner No.1 in Aashiana, Sector-15, Chandigarh shall be
borne by the U.T. Chandigarh.
Respondent      No.2-Senior     Superintendent    of    Police,
Malerkotla is also directed to take appropriate action for protection of
the life and liberty of petitioner No.2 at the place of his present
residence as may be warranted by the threat perception/facts and
circumstances of the case.
However, nothing in this order shall prevent respondents
No.2 and 3 from registering criminal case against petitioner No.2 and
taking appropriate action against him in accordance with law as may be
warranted by the facts and circumstances of the case.
To be shown in the urgent list.
A copy of this order be supplied to learned State Counsel
for the State of Punjab and learned Additional Public Prosecutor for
U.T. Chandigarh and be also sent to respondent No.2-Senior
Superintendent of Police, Malerkotla and respondent No.8-Senior
Superintendent of Police, U.T. Chandigarh for requisite compliance.