1.     This petition, under Article 227 of the Constitution of India,
assails orders dated 8th July, 2021 and 6th May, 2022, passed by the
learned Additional District Judge (the learned ADJ) in CS 412/2021
(Kiran Chander v. Krishan Kakkar).
2.     The order dated 8th July, 2021 rejects an application filed by the
petitioner, as the defendant in CS 412/2021, seeking dismissal of the
suit under Order VII Rule 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
(CPC). Towards the conclusion of the impugned order dated 8th July,
2021, the learned ADJ directes the respondent (as the plaintiff in CS
412/2021) to file two documents. The subsequent order dated 6th
May, 2022, passed by the learned ADJ, which constitutes the second
order under challenge in these proceedings, disposes of an application,
filed by the petitioner under Section 151 of the CPC, seeking a
direction to the respondent-plaintiff to comply with the order dated 8th
July, 2021 “in its true spirit” and, accordingly, to extend the time
available with the petitioner to file written statement.   The learned
ADJ has, vide the second impugned order dated 6th May, 2022, held
that the respondent had complied with the directions contained in the
first impugned order dated 8th July, 2021 regarding filing of
documents, and has extended the time available with the petitioner to
file written statement in the suit by a period of four weeks from 6th
3.     CS 412/2021 was filed by the respondent against the petitioner,
alleging that, having purchased 500 sq. ft. of land from the respondent
vide sale deed dated 30th July, 2012, and having also executed an
agreement to sell dated 14th August, 2012 in respect of an additional
400 sq. ft. of land, the petitioner had paid only part consideration
against the said transactions and that the time available with the
petitioner to pay the balance consideration had expired. The suit,
therefore, sought a decree of possession as well as injunction and
mesne profits, in favour of the respondent-plaintiff.
4.     During the pendency of the suit, the petitioner-defendant filed
an application under Order VII Rule 11 of the CPC, which stands
dismissed by the first impugned order dated 8th July, 2021. Mr. Aman
Usman, learned Counsel for the petitioner has restricted his challenge
qua the impugned order dated 8th July, 2021, which rejects the said
application, to the findings of the learned ADJ with respect to the plea,
advanced by the petitioner, predicated on Section 53A of the Transfer
of Property Act, 1882. The other allegations, raised in the application
of the petitioner under Order VII Rule 11 have been given up by Mr.
Usman in Court.
5.     The submissions in the application under Order VII Rule 11,
dealing with Section 53A of the Transfer of Property Act, read thus:
OF APPARENT BAR OF A LAW: That on a meaningful
reading of the plaint, the submission of the Plaintiff emerges
•      the Plaintiff contracted to transfer for
consideration (Rs. 1.01 Crore herein) the
immovable property (Suit property herein) by
•      the Defendant, in part perfonnance of the
contract (the " Said Agreement" herein), took
possession of the property (Suit Property
•      the Defendant has done some act in furtherance
of the contract (by making several payments to
the Plaintiff spanning over eight years of the
That on the basis of the above, it appears that the present Suit
is barred by the Provisions under Section 53 A of the Transfer
of Property Act, 1882 which state clearly that the Plaintiff is
debarred from enforcing any right in respect of the Suit
Property against the defendant other than a right expressly
provided by the terms of the contract (the Said Agr eement
herein).
That the relevant section 53A of the Transfer of Property Act,
Section 53A in The Tr ansfer of Pr oper ty Act, 1882
"53A. Part performance.- Where any person contracts
to transfer for consideration any immoveable property
by writing signed by him or on his behalf from which
the terms necessary to constitute the transfer can be
ascertained with reasonable certainty, and the
transferee has, in part performance of the contract,
taken possession of the property or any part thereof, or
the transferee, being already in possession, continues in
possession in part performance of the contract and has
done some act in furtherance of the contract, and the
transferee has performed or is willing to perform his
part of the contract, then, notwithstanding that 2[***]
where there is an instrument of transfer, that the
transfer has not been completed in the manner
prescribed therefor by the law for the lime being in
force, the transferor or any person claiming under him
shall be debarred from enforcing against the transferee
and persons claiming under him any right in respect of
the property of which the transferee has taken or
continued in possession, other than a right expressly
provided by the terms of the contr act: Pr ovided that
nothing in this section shall effect the r ights of a
transferee for consideration who has no notice of the
contract or of the part pc1/or111a11cc thereof"
12.     That the Plaintiff has withheld that vital document, viz.
the " Said Agr eement" dated 14.08.2012 from the court
intentionally to avoid the rigour of Section 53 A of the TP Act
and consequently the rigour of provision under Order 7 Rule
11 CPC. That however, the language of the provision of Order
7 Rule 11 (d) of CPC "where the suit appears from the
statement in the plaint to be barred by any law;" is sufficient
to reject the plaint squarely at this stage.”
6.     With respect to the aforesaid allegation, figuring in the
petitioner’s application under Order VII Rule 11 and predicated on
Section 53A of the Transfer of Property Act, the impugned order dated
8th July, 2021 of the learned ADJ holds that the plaint did not reflect
existence of the requisite ingredients of Section 53A and, at best, the
plea regarding the suit being barred by Section 53A would have to be
examined during trial. The relevant observations in this regard, as
they find place in the impugned order dated 8th July, 2021, read thus:
“Similarly from plaint nothing as to plea of sec 53 A TPA can
be inferred so as to reject the plaint. Entire plaint is pointing
towards lack of essential ingredients of Sec 53A and any
contention of sec 53A to be raised will be in the nature of
defence which can be raised only by way of written
statement.”
7.     Section 53A of the Transfer of Property Act engrafts a statutory
proscription on a transferor of immoveable property enforcing, against
the transferee, certain rights in respect of the immoveable property, in
the circumstances envisaged by the provision.             Pared down to its
essentials, Section 53A applies where a person contracts in writing for
transfer, for consideration, of immoveable property. In the event of
such a contract of transfer of immoveable property, the provision
applies either (i) where the transferee has, in part performance of the
contract, taken possession of the property or part of the property, or
(ii) where the transferee is already in possession of the property,
continues in possession thereof and does some act in furtherance of
the contract. Mr. Usman, learned Counsel for the petitioner submits
that his case falls under circumstance (i) as, even as per the averments
in the plaint, the petitioner has, in part performance of the contract
with the respondent, taken possession of the suit property.
8.     Section 53A does not, however, end there. In addition to these
circumstances, the provision requires, for its application, an additional
circumstance, i.e., that “the transferee has performed or is willing to
perform his part of the contract”.         It is only, therefore, where, in
addition to one of the two circumstances (i) and (ii) in para 6 supra ,
there is, additionally material to indicate that the transferee has
performed or is willing to perform his part of the contract that the
proscription in Section 53A would come into play.
9.        It is trite, as held in Srihari Hanumandas Totala v. Hemant
Vithal Kamat1 that, while adjudicating on an application under Order
VII Rule 11 of the CPC, the Court is entitled only to look at the
averments in the plaint and the documents filed therewith and at
nothing else. The averments in the written statement or in other
documents, which do not accompany the plaint, are irrelevant. Nor is
it permissible for the defendant to set up a case for dismissal of the
plaint under Order VII Rule 11 – as the defendant appears to have
done in the present case – on the ground that the plaintiff has
suppressed documents which, had they been placed on record, would
have disclosed that the plaintiff had no sustainable cause of action. To
reiterate, the scope of examination by the Court exercising jurisdiction
under Order VII Rule 11 has necessarily to peregrinate at all times,
within the boundaries of the plaint and the averments contained
therein, read with the documents filed with the plaint, and cannot
venture any further.
10.       Mr. Usman very fairly acknowledges that the plaint, as filed by
the respondent-plaintiff does not contain any assertion that the
petitioner was willing to perform his part of the contract.         This,
however, according to Mr. Usman, is reflected in certain
communications between the respondent and the plaintiff which the
plaintiff has deliberately suppressed.
11.    Even if that were so, however, the Court could not examine
such documents while adjudicating on an application under Order VII
Rule 11. The Court, to reiterate yet again, can only examine the
averments in the plaint and the documents filed with the plaint.
12.    The learned ADJ has not rejected the petitioner’s challenge to
the maintainability of the suit, predicated on Section 53A of the
Transfer of Property Act.        He has merely held that no case for
rejecting the suit, under Order VII Rule 11 of the CPC, could be said
to exist on the basis of the averments contained in the plaint. This
finding is, in my view, clearly unexceptional. Needless to reiterate,
neither would the impugned order, nor would the present judgment,
inhibit the petitioner from retaining the right, at any subsequent stage
of the suit and in accordance with law, to press for dismissal of the
suit as being barred by Section 53A of the Transfer of Property Act. It
and when such a plea id raised, at the appropriate stage, the Court
would, needless to say decide the plea in accordance with the law.
13.    For these reasons, no fault can be found with the impugned
order dated 8th July, 2021, insofar as it rejects the petitioner’s
application under Order VII Rule 11 of the CPC.            The order is,
therefore, upheld in its entirety.
14.    The second impugned order dated 6th May, 2022 is essentially a
sequel to the first impugned order dated 8th July, 2021. The learned
ADJ had, in the order dated 8th July, 2021, required the respondent to
file the agreement and the e-mail reply, on which the petitioner-
defendant had relied, during the proceedings which took place on 8th
15.    The respondent, purportedly in compliance with the said
directions, did place certain documents on record. These documents,
according to the petitioner, do not amount to compliance with the
directions contained in the order dated 8th July, 2021. For this reason,
the petitioner moved a further application under Section 151 of the
CPC, for a direction to the respondent to place the aforesaid
documents, as per the order dated 8th July, 2021, on record, by
complying with the order “in its true spirit” and, consequently, to
extend the time available with the petitioner-defendant to file its
written statement in response to the plaint.
16.    The latter relief stands granted by second impugned order dated
6th May, 2022 grants the second relief sought, inasmuch as it has
extended the time available with the petitioner to file written statement
by a period of four weeks. However, it has rejected the petitioner’s
prayer for a further direction to the respondent to comply with the
order dated 8th July, 2021 in its true spirit.
17.    With respect to this latter aspect, the learned ADJ holds that, as
per the respondent, it had filed certified copies of the aforesaid
documents, which had been relied upon by the petitioner in CS SCJ
734/2021, instituted by the petitioner against the respondent. This,
according to the respondent, amounted to sufficient compliance with
the direction contained in the concluding paragraph of the order dated
18.    The learned ADJ has observed that the respondent had made a
categorical submission that she had filed all the documents on which
she chose to rely, which included the documents which were
requisitioned by the order dated 8th July, 2021, and that the respondent
did not seek to place any other documents on record. The learned
ADJ has observed that it was beyond doubt that, for proving her case,
the respondent would have to stand on her own feet and could not be
forced to file documents on which she did not choose to rely.
Needless to say, if the respondent was remiss in filing documents
which were necessary for substantiating the case set up by her, as the
plaintiff before the learned ADJ, the consequences would follow.
19.    It is, however, axiomatic, that, in any litigation, the choice of
the documents which are to be brought on record is the sole
prerogative of the party who files the documents.         No Court can
compel a party to file documents on which the party did not choose to
rely, save and except in respect of certain specific eventualities for
which provisions are contained in the CPC.
20.   No exception can, in my view, therefore, be taken to the finding
of the learned ADJ, in the second impugned order dated 6th May,
2022, to the extent it holds that no further directions were required to
be issued, to the respondent, for complying with the directions
contained in the first impugned order dated 8th July, 2021.
21.   It is reported that the petitioner has already filed the written
statement in accordance with the liberty granted by the learned ADJ
vide order dated 6th May, 2022.
22.   The costs imposed by the learned ADJ stand waived.
23.   This petition stands disposed of in the aforesaid terms.