1.      The instant writ petition has been preferred questioning the
assumption of jurisdiction by the National Commission for Scheduled
Castes [“Commission”] and the proceedings that have been initiated in
light of the complaint made by the second respondent.
2.      The record would reflect that the respondent No. 2 was provisionally
appointed as an Engineer in the petitioner company on 07 April 2010. His
services were confirmed upon completion of the training period on 09 April
2011. The petitioner asserts that on a consideration of his performance, his
W.P.(C) 2789/2019                                                  Page 1 of 13
services came to be terminated on 25 September 2012. Six years after the
aforesaid termination, the second respondent made a complaint to the
Commission on 08 July 2018. Since the contents of that complaint would
have some bearing on the challenge which stands raised, it is extracted
National Commission for Schedule Caste
Subject: Termination from the job because of Schedule Caste by Torrent
Power Private Limited Agra. Special appeal for reinstatement.
Most respectfully submitted that applicant was appointed on 09/04/2010
in Torrent Power Private Limited Agra. Appointment Letter was issued
on 24/04/2010. Applicant was appointed on the post of Engineer.
Because of the good work of the applicant, Torrent Power Limited has
confirmed the job of applicant on 09/04/2011 and promoted him to the
post of Executive.
That company has started harassing him by different methods as he
belongs to Schedule Caste. Even though applicant kept performing his
duties effectively.
That Torrent Power Limited has sent a registered letter on 25/09/2012 at
the house of applicant through which company has terminated the service
of him without mentioning any reason and fault.
It is requested that Hon‟ble President should pass an order for his
reinstatement from the date 25/09/2012 of his termination with all
promotion and increment. Applicant will be highly obliged. Thanking
W.P.(C) 2789/2019                                                         Page 2 of 13
3.      Taking cognizance of the said complaint, the Commission summoned
the Principal Secretary (Power) Government of Uttar Pradesh as well as the
Managing Director of respondent No.3. It also required the presence of the
Vice President (Technical) of the petitioner.             The Commission, on 08
January 2019, noted the submissions addressed by the petitioner who had
asserted that the services of the second respondent had come to be
terminated on account of “non-performance”. The petitioner is also stated
to have submitted that there was no suitable post against which respondent
No.2 could be re-engaged bearing in mind his educational qualifications.
Taken note of the aforesaid, the Commission proceeded to pass the
following directions: -
“4. The petitioner stated that he is being harassed and as FIR has been
lodged against his father by Torrent Power Ltd. The V.P., Torrent Power
Ltd. stated that the FIR against petitioner‟s father is totally unrelated
issue.
5. It was decided that SP, Agra, and DM, Agra, will examine the FIR
against the petitioner‟s father and submit a report on whether it is
motivated or based on factual circumstances.
6. The present of Shri Sudhir Mehta, Chairman, Torrent Power Ltd. and
Shri Jinal Mehta, Managing Director, Torrent Power Ltd., for next
hearing is to be ensured by MD, DVVNL, and Principal Secretary
(Power), Govt. 1f UP, to solve this matter. The MD, DVVNL, and
Principal Secretary (Power) Govt. of UP, to also be present in the next
hearing.”
4.      Assailing the aforesaid proceedings, learned counsel for the
petitioner submitted that undisputedly the engagement of the petitioner was
on a contractual basis and terminable with notice. It was pointed out that
there was no occasion or justification for the Commission having taken
cognizance of the complaint which was laid by the second respondent six
W.P.(C) 2789/2019                                                         Page 3 of 13
years after the order of termination had come to be passed. The petitioner
further contends that a reading of the complaint itself would establish that
no allegation had been leveled by the petitioner which may have sustained
an allegation of harassment or ill-treatment by the petitioner solely on
account of him belonging to a Scheduled Caste.
5.      Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the jurisdiction which
the Commission exercises in terms of Article 338 of the Constitution stands
restricted to an enquiry and investigation into specific complaints which
allege deprivation of rights and safeguards guaranteed to members of the
Scheduled Castes and Tribes. Learned counsel has placed reliance upon the
decision rendered by the Court in Fresenius Kabi Oncology LTD. v.
National Commission for Scheduled Castes, and Ors.1 where while
ruling on the scope of the authority conferred on the Commission, the Court
observed as follows: -
“6. I have considered the submissions made by the learned counsels for
the parties. The learned counsel for the respondent no. 4 has handed over
a copy of the complaint filed by the respondent no. 4 before the
respondent no. 1. Apart from mentioning in the subject matter of the
complaint that he was a Scheduled Caste candidate, the entire complaint
does not make any reference of any Constitutional or Statutory Rights of
the respondent no. 4, as a Scheduled Caste being violated by the
petitioner. In fact, the complaint is one of seeking resignation by
exercising force. It does not even state that the resignation was sought
only against the respondent no. 4 who happened to be a Scheduled Caste
candidate. In fact, in the counter affidavit filed by the respondent no. 4
before this Court, the respondent no. 4 himself gives names of three more
persons whose services were terminated by the petitioner during the
period in question. However, they are not stated to be belonging to
Scheduled Caste category.
7. In Lal Chand & Ors. (Supra), this Court has held that an enquiry in
terms of sub clause (b) of Clause 5 of Article 338 of the Constitution of
India can be initiated by the Commission only where the complaint
relates to specific incident of depriving a person of the rights conferred
upon and safeguards provided for the persons, who as a class belong to
Scheduled Castes. It is only such deprivation as a Scheduled Caste, which
can be made a subject matter of such an enquiry by the Commission.
8. In Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. (Supra), this Court reiterated
that a complaint relating to mere commercial disputes cannot be made the
subject matter of inquiry before the Commissioner.
9. Similarly in National Seed Corporation Ltd. (Supra), this Court held
that challenge to voluntary retirement scheme which does not have any
challenge based on the specific rights and safeguards of the Scheduled
Caste, cannot be made subject matter of inquiry by the Commission.
10. In view of the above well-settled principles of law, the exercise of
jurisdiction by the respondent no. 1 on the complaint of the respondent
no. 4 is clearly unsustainable.”
In view of the aforesaid, learned counsel would submit that entire
proceedings which have been initiated are liable to be quashed.
6.      Learned counsel appearing for the Commission, on the other hand,
would submit that there exists no justification for the instant challenge
being entertained since the Commission had only initiated a process of
enquiry and had not framed any directions which could possibly be viewed
as being prejudicial to the interest of the petitioner. It was further submitted
that the Commission found that the services of the petitioner had come to
be terminated without the requisite notice as was contemplated in the
appointment letter. According to learned counsel, this fact itself constituted
a valid ground for the Commission to have drawn and initiated proceedings.
7.      The scope of the jurisdiction which stands conferred upon the
Commission by virtue of Article 338 of the Constitution is no longer res
integra. The Court observes that apart from the salient observations which
W.P.(C) 2789/2019                                                           Page 5 of 13
stand noticed by the Court in Fresenius Kabi Oncology, the jurisdiction of
the Commission was explained by the Court in Municipal Corporation
Delhi v. Lal Chand and Ors.2 as follows: -
“...7. It would be noticed that sub-clause (a) empowers the Commission
to undertake an investigation and sub-clause (b) empowers it only to
make an enquiry and not an investigation. Investigation and enquiry are
altogether different connotations, envisaging application of different
procedures. Therefore, no investigation can be carried out by the
Commission into matters which can be subject matter only of an enquiry.
However, a perusal of the communication dated 14.12.2012 would show
that on receipt of a complaint from respondent No. 1, the Commission
decided to „investigate‟ into the matter. This, however, was beyond
jurisdiction of the Commission since it can make only an enquiry and not
investigation into specific complaints of deprivation of rights and
safeguards of the Scheduled Castes.
8. The Commission, vide communication dated 03.01.2011, thereby
enclosing minutes of the meeting/hearing on 27.12.2010, directed the
Commissioner, MCD to handover plots in question to respondent No. 1,
who was stated to be its rightful owner and also submit a compliance
report. It is an undisputed legal proposition that the Commission, while
acting under Article 338(5) of the Constitution, can only make
recommendations, but cannot issue any direction to the Government or
any other person or Authority. A reference in this regard may be made to
the following view taken by a Division Bench of this Court in Professor
Ramesh Chandra v. University of Delhi, LPA No. 280/2007, decided on
“6. It is not possible to agree with the learned senior counsel that
the Commission under Article 338 of the Constitution of India is
an adjudicatory body which can issue binding directions or
injunction orders. ….
…..While conferring limited powers of a civil court for some
purposes, Article 338 has not given the Commission, the power to
adjudicate and pass binding and executable decrees like a civil
court.
…It is clear from the reading of Clauses 6-8 that the reports made
by the Commission are recommendatory in nature and cannot be
equated with decrees/orders passed by Civil Courts which are
binding on the parties and can be enforced and executed. It cannot
be said that the reports of the said Commission are alternative to
the hierarchical judicial system envisaged under the Constitution
of India.”
In All India Indian Overseas Bank SC and ST Employees' Welfare
Association v. Union of India (UOI) (1996) 6 SCC 606, the
Commission issued a direction to a bank stopping a promotion
process pending further investigation and final verdict by the
Commission. The Apex Court, however, held that the
Commission having not been specifically granted any power to
issue interim injunctions, a power vesting in a safeguard, had no
authority to issue an order of this nature.”
9. It is thus quite clear that the Commission clearly exceeded its
jurisdiction by taking upon itself adjudicatory role of deciding the title of
the land subject matter of the complaint made by respondent No. 1,
constituting a Demarcation Committee and directing MCD to handover
possession of the said land to respondent No. 1. No such power, in my
view, could have been exercised by the Commission which even if it is
presumed that the complaint made by respondent No. 1 comes within the
purview of sub-clause (b) of clause (5) of Article 338 could only have
forwarded it to MCD with appropriate recommendations. Neither the
Commission could have taken an adjudicatory role which law assigns
only to a Court of competent jurisdiction nor could it have directed MCD
to hand over a disputed piece of land to respondent No. 1. Even
thereafter, the Commission in its meeting held on 04.04.2011 directed
demarcation of the area by a Committee which was to include three
persons named by the petitioner and minutes dated 16.05.2011, requiring
that the claim of the petitioner should be considered in the light of the
findings of the Demarcation Committee constituted by DDA on the
directions of the Commission. The Commission went to the extent of
observing in the meeting held on 20.06.2011 if the officers of MCD tried
to grab the land of a Scheduled Caste, they would be booked under POA
Act, 1989. This clearly was beyond the power of the Commission.
10. In my view, even an inquiry in terms of sub-clause (b) of clause (5)
can be initiated by the Commission only where the complaint relates to a
specific incident of depriving a person of the rights conferred upon and
safeguards provided for the persons, who as a class belong to Scheduled
Castes. It is only such deprivation and not deprivation of any civil right
of a person belonging to a Scheduled Castes which can be subject matter
of such an inquiry. To take a view that the Commission can inquire into
any specific complaint made by a person belonging to a Scheduled Castes
irrespective of the nature of the complaint, would render the words “with
W.P.(C) 2789/2019                                                            Page 7 of 13
respect to deprivation of the rights and safeguards of the Scheduled
Castes” wholly redundant which certainly could not have been the
legislative intent. Had the intention of the Legislature been to entrust the
Commission with duty to inquire into any complaint made by a person
belonging to a Scheduled Castes, the wording of sub-clause (b) would
have been altogether different. The Legislature in that case would have
said without any qualification, that it shall be the duty of the Commission
to inquire into specific complaints made by Scheduled Castes or a person
belonging to a Scheduled Castes. There are many rights granted to and
safeguards provided only for the persons belonging to Scheduled Castes,
the reservation in public appointments and admissions to educational
institutions being such instances. To take a few other examples, if there is
a welfare scheme of the State or an instrumentality of the State for the
benefit of the members of Scheduled Castes alone, any complaint
alleging deprivation of benefit of the said scheme can certainly be
inquired into by the Commission. Then, there are reservations made by
some instrumentalities of the State in making various allotments such as
allotments of plots/flats by Delhi Development Authority and allotment
of petrol pumps/LPG outlets by oil marketing companies. Specific
complaints with respect to such matters can also be brought to the notice
of the Commission and inquired into by it. To take yet another instance if
a person belonging to a Scheduled Caste is refused caste certificate by the
State, he can make a complaint in this regard to the Commission since
such certificates are sought to avail the rights conferred only upon the
members of Scheduled Castes. If the State comes out with a scheme to
grant financial assistance to the members of the Scheduled Castes, any
complaint alleging denial of such benefit can also be brought to the
notice of the Commission and enquired into by it. But the disputed issues
such as claims of title to a property which, by their nature, involve
adjudication by an adjudicatory body cannot be subject matter of an
inquiry in terms of sub-clause (b) even if the complainant belongs to a
Scheduled Caste. The legal right to a property claimed can be by every
citizen, irrespective of whether he belongs to a Scheduled Castes or not
and a complaint alleging deprivation of property by State or one of its
instrumentalities would certainly not be a matter with respect to
deprivation of rights and safeguards of Scheduled Castes alone. Some
support in this regard is available from the decision of Supreme Court
in Collector, Bilaspur v. Ajit P.K. Jogi AIR 2012 SC 44. In the aforesaid
case, the sixth respondent before the Apex Court filed a complaint before
the Commission alleging that the first respondent did not belong to a
Scheduled Tribe and had obtained false caste certificate. The
Commission issued a show-cause notice to the first respondent,
proposing to verify his caste certificate and also referred the complaint to
the Government of Chhatisgarh, which constituted a Committee for
verification of the caste certificate. The Commission later called upon the
W.P.(C) 2789/2019                                                            Page 8 of 13
State Government to conduct verification of genuineness of the caste
certificate and initiate urgent necessary action for its cancellation and
also for taking criminal action. The said order was challenged by the first
respondent before Chhatisgarh High Court which allowed the writ
petition filed by him. Being aggrieved from the said decision of the High
Court, the State of Chhatisgarh filed an appeal before the Apex Court.
Upholding the order of High Court to the extent it quashed the order
passed by the Commission, the Apex Court inter alia held as under:-
“12. It is evident from Article 338 as it originally stood, that the
Commission was constituted to protect and safeguard the persons
belonging to scheduled castes and scheduled tribes by ensuring:
(i) anti-discrimination, (ii) affirmative action by way reservation
and empowerment, and (iii) redressal of grievances. The duties
under Clause 5(b) of Article 338 did not extend to either issue of
caste/tribe certificate or to revoke or cancel a caste/tribe
certificate or to decide upon the validity of the caste certificate.
Having regard to the Sub-clause (b) of Clause (5) of Article 338,
the Commission could no doubt entertain and enquire into any
specific complaint about deprivation of any rights and safeguards
of Scheduled Tribes. When such a complaint was received, the
Commission could enquire into such complaint and give a report
to the Central Government or State Government requiring
effective implementation of the safeguards and measures for the
protection and welfare and socio-economic development of
scheduled tribes. This power to enquire into „deprivation of rights
and safeguards of the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes‟ did
not include the power to enquire into and decide the caste/tribe
status of any particular individual.”
11. The following is the State of Objects and Reasons, appended to the
Constitution (Sixty-eight Amendment) Bill, 1990, whereby Article 338
“Article 338 of the Constitution provides for a Special Officer for
the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes to investigate all
matters relating to the safeguards provided for the Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes under the Constitution and to report
to the President on their working. It is felt that a high level five-
member Commission under article 338 will be a more effective
arrangement in respect of the constitutional safeguards for
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes than a single Special
Officer as at present. It is also felt that it is necessary to elaborate
the functions of the said Commission so as to cover measures that
should be taken by the Union or any State for the effective
implementation of those safeguards and other measures for the
W.P.(C) 2789/2019                                                                Page 9 of 13
protection, welfare and socio-economic development of the
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and to entrust to the
Commission such other functions in relation to the protection,
welfare and development and advancement of the Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes as the President may, subject to any
law made by Parliament, by rule specify. It is also felt that the
reports of the said Commission shall be laid before Parliament
and the Legislatures of the States.
2. The Bill seeks to achieve the aforesaid objects.”
It would thus be seen that the legislative intent behind even the Amended
Article was to address the grievance of the members of Scheduled Castes,
through the Commission, only with respect to such rights and safeguards,
which the Constitution or any other statute grants only to the members of
such castes.
12. The Rules of Procedure of the Commission, to the extent they are
relevant, read as under:
“7.4 The following aspect may kept in mind while filing
complaints before the Commission.
(d) Complaints should clearly disclose the violation of
Reservation policy, DOPT OMs, Government of India Orders,
State Government Orders, PSUs and Autonomous Bodies orders
or any other violation Rules or Reservation.
(g)     The      cases     of     Administrative      nature   like
transfer/posting/grading of ACRs will not be taken up by the
Commission unless there is caste based harassment of petitioner.
(h) No action will be taken on the matters where there is no
mention of violation of Reservation policy, DOPT OMs,
Government of India Orders, State Government Orders, PSUs and
Autonomous Bodies orders or any other violation of Rules of
Reservation. Hence the matters where there is no mention of
violation of above Rules need not be referred to the Commission
as complaints.”
It would thus be seen that even as per the Rules framed for the
Commission, the matters which do not involve violation of reservation
policy and allied matters are not expected to be inquired into by the
Commission, and the emphasis is on inquiring into his complaints which
W.P.(C) 2789/2019                                                           Page 10 of 13
relate to deprivation of rights and safeguards made available only to the
members of the Scheduled Castes.”
8.      Having noticed the extent of the jurisdiction which the Commission
could have possibly exercised, the Court at the outset notes that a bare
perusal of the complaint as made would evidence that the second
respondent had merely made a general allegation that the petitioner had
started harassing him “by different methods” since he belonged to a
Scheduled Caste. It becomes pertinent to observe that the second
respondent did not allege or refer to any specific instance / instances in
support of his allegation that he had been ill-treated by virtue of belonging
to a particular class. In order to invoke the jurisdiction of the Commission,
it was incumbent upon the petitioner to have alleged or at least prima facie
established, that the action of the petitioner was actuated by mala fides and
motivated by the fact that he belonged to a particular class. The Court is
thus constrained to observe that the Commission cannot possibly be
recognized to have the authority to assume jurisdiction or initiate an
enquiry under Article 338 based on such a specious complaint and
unsubstantiated allegations.
9.      It would be pertinent to observe that the Commission is empowered
to initiate an enquiry provided a member of a Scheduled Caste is able to
establish, at least prima facie, that he had been ill-treated or discriminated
solely on account of the fact that he belonged to that class. The Commission
is constitutionally empowered to enquire and investigate into instances of
deprivation of rights of the Scheduled Castes/Tribes. That presupposes that
the action complained of is founded on an allegation that a member of that
particular class was discriminated against or arbitrarily dealt with solely on
W.P.(C) 2789/2019                                                         Page 11 of 13
account of his social status. It is equally important to note that it is not
every violation of a perceived civil right of a member of that class which
would justify the Commission assuming jurisdiction. As has been
repeatedly held, it is the right of a member of Scheduled Caste/Tribe
guaranteed by law and aimed at the protection of their rights which is the
sine qua non for the Commission to initiate action.       In the facts of the
present case, it is manifest and apparent that no such foundation or material
had been laid or placed by the second respondent.
10.     The Court further observes that the complaint itself came to be made
almost six years after the services of the petitioner had come to be
terminated. This was thus a factor which should have necessarily weighed
with the Commission before it proceeded to initiate an enquiry. Insofar as
the issue of the petitioner having not placed the respondent No.2 on notice
prior to termination is concerned, it may only be observed that that would
be an aspect which would relate to the merits of the termination. The Court
notes that it was not the allegation of the second respondent that he was not
placed on notice by the petitioner solely on account of the fact that he
belonged to a Scheduled Caste. In any case, the merits or otherwise of the
action of termination was liable to be investigated and inquired into only if
the respondent No.2 had been able to establish that the action was based on
mala fides or motivated by the fact that he belonged to the Scheduled
Castes. Accordingly, and for the aforesaid reasons, the Court finds itself
unable to sustain the assumption of jurisdiction by the Commission.
W.P.(C) 2789/2019                                                Page 12 of 13
11.     The writ petition is accordingly allowed. All proceedings pertaining
to the complaint registered as No. B-6/UP-53/2018/SSW-II shall
consequently stand quashed.