+                W.P.(C) 291/2023 and CM APPL. 1161/2023
Through: Ms. Hetu Arora Sethi, ASC with Mr.
Siddarth Agarwal, Advocate for R-1
Mr. Kirtiman Singh, CGSC with Mr.
Bhardwaj, Mr. Madhav Bajaj and Mr.
Yash Upadhyay, Advocates for R-2
1.        This hearing has been done through hybrid mode.
2.        The present petition has been filed by the Petitioner who is the mother
of an unmarried minor girl aged fourteen years. At the time of filing of the
Petition, the girl was pregnant with a gestational period of fifteen weeks and
four days. The minor girl is stated to be studying in the ninth standard, and
her family belongs to the lower income group.
3.        The petition was filed seeking permission of the Court to terminate
pregnancy of the minor girl which was stated to be the result of an
accidental consensual relationship. The matter was considered by the Court
on 11th January, 2023 and Ms. Zubeda Begum, ld. Counsel, was appointed
W.P.(C) 291/2023                                                              Page 1 of 8
as Amicus Curiae to assist the Court. The Court had also directed the
Petitioner and the minor girl to be present with her mother, to interact with
them. On 12th January, 2023, the Court and the ld. Amicus interacted with
the Petitioner and the minor girl in the presence of a doctor. Upon
interacting, the Court was of the view that the conception was indeed a
result of a consensual, one-off act and the interest of the minor girl would be
best served by terminating the pregnancy. Therefore, vide order dated 12th
January, 2023, the Court permitted the minor daughter of the Petitioner to
undergo the procedure for medical termination of pregnancy at AIIMS, New
Delhi. The relevant portion of the said order reads as under:
“14. Accordingly, at this stage, the following
directions are issued:
i. The minor daughter of the Petitioner is permitted
to undergo the procedure for medical
termination of pregnancy at the All India
Institute of Medical Sciences ("AIIMS"), New
Delhi, under the supervision of a properly
constituted medical team. The expenses towards
the same shall be borne by the Respondent No.2 -
Union of India. The doctor deputed at the
Medical Centre of the Delhi High Court shall
assist the minor and her mother in this process;
ii. In the course of performing the procedure for the
termination of the pregnancy and thereafter, it
shall be ensured that the foetus is duly preserved,
in accordance with law, for the purposes of DNA
sampling or evidence, as may be directed;
iii. The Respondent No.2 - Union of India is directed
to make arrangements and to facilitate the
termination of the pregnancy at AIIMS, New
Delhi, which shall take place at the earliest, and,
in any case, on or before 16th January, 2023,
after complying with the prescribed procedures;
W.P.(C) 291/2023                                                            Page 2 of 8
iv. The identity of the Petitioner, as also, her family
shall not be disclosed in any of the hospital
records by AIIMS, the medical team, the RMP or
any of the concerned authorities;
v.      The report in terms of Section 19(1) of the
POCSO Act, shall also not disclose the identity
of the minor and her family or any other details
by which she can be identified;
vi. The report prepared in terms of Section 19(1) of
the POCSO Act shall be maintained and placed
before this Court in a sealed cover. The same
shall await further orders of this Court. The said
sealed cover shall be filed by Ms. Hetu Arora
Sethi, Id. Counsel, at least three days before the
next date of hearing;
vii. Status report as to the termination of the minor's
pregnancy be also filed by the Respondent No.2 -
Union of India by the next date of hearing;
4.        Ld. Counsel for the Petitioner has informed the Court today that in
terms of order dated 12th January, 2023, the procedure for termination of
pregnancy is stated to have been undertaken at AIIMS, New Delhi on 20th
January, 2023 and the minor girl has also been discharged.
5.        A status report dated 20th January, 2023 issued by AIIMS, New Delhi
has been filed on the record of the Court. The report states that in terms of
the previous order dated 12th January, 2023, AIIMS had constituted a
medical board consisting of -
• Two Professors from the Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology,
and Department of Radio-diagnosis.
• One Additional Professor from the Department of Paediatrics and One
Assistant Professor from the Department of Obstetrics and
• One member of the from the Department of Hospital Administration.
6.        The Report further states that the foetus sample is has been collected.
Let the foetus sample be preserved by AIIMS.
7.        Thus, the termination of the Petitioner’s minor daughter’s pregnancy
has taken place. However, there is an urgent and immediate cause of
concern that this writ petition raises in respect of the termination of
pregnancy in case of the unfortunate event of the pregnant person being a
minor girl.
8.        The current position as is revealed to the Court, is that, Registered
Medical Practitioners (RMPs) are generally reluctant to carry out the
termination of pregnancy without disclosing the identity of a minor girl and
her family and without lodging a police report. This causes huge
predicament to the minor child as also her family. In the opinion of this
Court, this issue has been squarely dealt with by the decision of the Supreme
Court in X v. Principal Secretary, Health and Family Welfare Dept.,
GNCTD 2022 SCC Online SC 1321, where after considering the Rule 3B of
the Medical Termination Pregnancy Rules, 2003 the Court has observed as
“77.       Rule 3B(b) includes minors within the
category of women who may terminate their
pregnancy up to twenty-four weeks. They have been
included in the list of special categories of women
because adolescents who engage in consensual sexual
activity may be unaware that sexual intercourse often
results in pregnancy or be unable to identify the signs
of a pregnancy. The Protection of Children from
Sexual Offences Act 2012 is gender neutral and
criminalizes sexual activity by those below the age of
W.P.(C) 291/2023                                                          Page 4 of 8
eighteen. Under the POCSO Act, factual consent in a
relationship between minors is immaterial. The
proscription contained in the POCSO Act does not -
in actuality - prevent adolescents from engaging in
consensual sexual activity. We cannot disregard the
truth that such activity continues to take place and
sometimes leads to consequences such as pregnancy.
The legislature was no doubt alive to this fact when
it included adolescents within the ambit of Rule 3B
of the MTP Rules.
78. The absence of sexual health education in the
country means that most adolescents are unaware of
how the reproductive system functions as well as how
contraceptive devices and methods may be deployed
to prevent pregnancies. The taboos surrounding pre-
marital sex prevent young adults from attempting to
access contraceptives. The same taboos mean that
young girls who have discovered the fact that they are
pregnant are hesitant to reveal this to their parents or
guardians, who play a crucial role in accessing
medical assistance and intervention.
79. Furthermore, Section 19(1) of the POCSO Act
requires that any person, including a child, who has
knowledge of the commission of an offence punishable
under the POCSO Act, or an apprehension that such
an offence may be committed, is mandatorily required
to provide information to the Special Juvenile Police
Unit or the local police. Section 19(2) of the POCSO
Act stipulates that every such report under Section
19(1) shall be ascribed an entry number and recorded
in writing, read over to the informant, and entered in
a block to be kept by the police unit. Failure to
report, as mandated by Section 19, is a punishable
offence under Section 21 of the POCSO Act. Neither
the POCSO Act or the Protection of Children from
Sexual Offences Rules 2012 prescribe a template or a
format for the report mandated under Section 19(1).
80. When a minor approaches an RMP for a medical
W.P.(C) 291/2023                                                           Page 5 of 8
termination of pregnancy arising out of a consensual
sexual activity, an RMP is obliged under Section
19(1) of the POCSO Act to provide information
pertaining to the offence committed, to the concerned
authorities. An adolescent and her guardian may be
wary of the mandatory reporting requirement as they
may not want to entangle themselves with the legal
process. Minors and their guardians are likely faced
with two options -one, approach an RMP and possibly
be involved in criminal proceedings under the
POCSO Act, or two, approach an unqualified doctor
for a medical termination of the pregnancy. If there is
an insistence on the disclosure of the name of the
minor in the report under Section 19(1) of POCSO,
minors may be less likely to seek out RMPs for safe
termination of their pregnancies under the MTP Act.
81. To ensure that the benefit of Rule 3B(b) is
extended to all women under 18 years of age who
engage in consensual sexual activity, it is necessary
to harmoniously read both the POCSO Act and the
MTP Act. For the limited purposes of providing
medical termination of pregnancy in terms of the
MTP Act, we clarify that the RMP, only on request
of the minor and the guardian of the minor, need
not disclose the identity and other personal details of
the minor in the information provided under Section
19(1) of the POCSO Act. The RMP who has
provided information under Section 19(1) of the
POCSO Act (in reference to a minor seeking medical
termination of a pregnancy under the MTP Act) is
also exempt from disclosing the minor's identity in
any criminal proceedings which may follow from
The RMP's report under Section 19(1) of the
POCSO Act. Such an interpretation would prevent
any conflict between the statutory obligation of the
RMP to mandatorily report the offence under the
POCSO Act and the rights of privacy and
reproductive autonomy of the minor under Article
W.P.(C) 291/2023                                                         Page 6 of 8
21 of the Constitution. It could not possibly be the
legislature's intent to deprive minors of safe
abortions.
82 As opposed to consensual sexual activity among
adolescents, minors are often subjected to sexual
abuse by strangers or family members. In such cases,
minor girls may (due to their tender age) be unaware
of the nature of abuse the abuser or rapist is
subjecting them to. In such cases, the guardian of
minor girls may belatedly discover the fact of the
pregnancy, necessitating the leeway granted by Rule
9.        Moreover, as observed in the order dated 12th January, 2023, passed
by this Court, minors and their families may be forced to approach non-
registered unqualified medical practitioners, quacks, mid-wives, to terminate
the pregnancies because of the fear of disclosure of their identity, which
could also result in adverse impact on the physical and mental health of the
minor.
10.       Accordingly, in terms of the order passed by the Supreme Court
extracted above and in order to avoid risks to pregnant minor girls, the
GNCTD is directed to issue a circular to the effect that in case of any
minor’s guardian or family approaching any RMP for termination of
pregnancy, the identity of the minor, guardian or the family, shall not be
disclosed in the RMP’s report to the police, if a request to that effect is made
by the guardian or the family to the RMP. Moreover, the police shall also
ensure that in such cases, the report, which is registered, does not publicly
disclose the identity of the minor and her guardian or the family.
11.       At this point, certain issues have been raised by Ms. Hetu Arora Sethi,
ld. ASC in respect of consensual relationships especially when the male
W.P.(C) 291/2023                                                          Page 7 of 8
counterpart involved is also a minor. Let the said concerns be brought on
record in the counter affidavit to be filed in terms of paragraphs 12 & 16 of
the order dated 12th January, 2023.
12.       The medical report filed by the AIIMS is taken on record.
13.       Let a Copy of this order be sent to Medical Superintendent, AIIMS
hospital through counsel for compliance of the direction given in para 6
above.
15.       Keeping in mind the circumstances surrounding the present case, the
orders in this petition were earlier not uploaded by this Court. Let all the
orders in this matter now be uploaded.