CRAN 1 of 2019 (Old No. CRAN 1730 of 2019)
For the Appellant         :       Mr. Kallol Kumar Basu, Adv.
Appeal is directed against the judgment and order dated
15.02.2009 and 16.02.2009 passed by the learned Additional
Sessions Judge, Fast Track Court-II, Tamluk, Purba Medinipur, in
Sessions     Trial  Case  No.    3(8)14   convicting the   appellant for
commission of offence punishable under Sections 302 of the Indian
Penal Code and sentencing him to suffer rigorous imprisonment for
life and to pay fine of Rs. 5,000/-, in default of payment of fine to
suffer rigorous imprisonment for six months       more for the offence
punishable under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code.
On 27.12.2013 Sk. Farhad, a 10 year old boy, had gone out to
fly kite with his friends. He did not return home in the evening. His
mother Rasida Begum (P.W.2) became worried and started searching
for him. The boy could not be found. On the next day, that is,
28.12.2013 in the morning, one Sk. Salauddin (P.W.7) found the body
of a boy lying in the canal near Simulhanda Primary School. He
informed his father Sk. Badiruddin (P.W. 8) who in turn informed the
family members of the missing child. Body of the child was identified
by his mother and other relations. It was sent for post mortem
examination. Two days later, father of the boy, Sk. Khalilur Rahaman
(P.W. 1) returned to his native village from his place of work at
Mumbai. He lodged written complaint alleging his son had been
murdered by an unknown person and Panskura P.S. Case No.
392/13 dated 30.12.2013 was registered for investigation. Couple of
days later, Sk. Khalilur Rahaman made statement implicating the
appellant who was the Moulabi of a nearby mosque. It was alleged
that the appellant had illicit relationship with Rasida, mother of the
boy. The child had disclosed the illicit relationship to his father and
accordingly appellant nursed a grudge against him. In course of
investigation, a gunny bag and rope were recovered from an open
spot near the mosque. Appellant absconded and was later arrested on
12.03.2014. Charge sheet was filed against him and charges were
framed under Sections 302/201 of the Indian Penal Code. Appellant
pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried. Prosecution examined 16
witnesses to prove its case. Defence of the appellant was one of
innocence and false implication. In conclusion of trial, learned trial
Judge by the impugned judgment and order convicted and sentenced
the appellant as aforesaid.
Mr. Basu, learned Counsel appearing for the appellant
submits there is no direct evidence implicating the appellant in the
crime. First Information Report was registered against unknown
accused. Motive to commit the crime has not been proved. There is no
evidence on record that the child was last seen with the appellant
prior to his death. Gunny bag and rope were recovered from an open
space and did not implicate the appellant in any manner whatsoever.
Appellant had gone to his native place in Bihar and was subsequently
arrested at Panskura Railway Station. It cannot be said that he had
absconded. Even so, mere abscondence does not establish guilt of an
accused. Circumstances proved in the instant case do not lead to an
irresistible conclusion of guilt against the appellant. Hence, he is
entitled to an order of acquittal.
Mr. Banerjee, with Ms. Ghosh, learned Counsels for the State
argues appellant had strong motive to commit the crime. The child
had seen the appellant and his mother Rasida in a compromising
position. He reported the matter to his father, Sk. Khalilur Rahaman
who reprimanded the appellant. Hence, he nursed grudge against the
child. Victim suffered ante mortem head injury and died due to
drowning. Appellant had removed his body in a gunny bag tied with a
rope and dumped it in the canal. The said gunny bag and rope were
recovered from a spot behind the mosque. After the incident,
appellant absconded and repeatedly changed his SIM Card to avoid
being detected. Finally, he was arrested on 12.03.2014. These
circumstances clearly establish his guilt and prove the prosecution
case beyond doubt.
From the evidence on record and the submissions at the Bar it
appears the prosecution case is based on circumstantial evidence.
Admittedly, there is no direct evidence that the appellant had
murdered the victim.
When a case is based on circumstantial evidence it is the duty
of the prosecution: -
(a) to prove all the circumstances relied upon against the
appellant, beyond doubt;
(b) the circumstances so proved must form a complete chain
which irresistibly points to the guilt of the accused and rules
out all other possible hypothesis of innocence.
Let me examine whether the aforesaid requirement of law have
been satisfied in the facts of the present case.
P.W. 1(Sk. Khalilur Rahaman) is the father of the victim child
and the first informant. He deposed he used to work at Mumbai. He
had telephoned his wife and wanted to talk with his son. His wife told
him that his son was sleeping. When he wanted to talk with his
daughter, his wife told him that his daughter was not at home. He
heard a male voice in the house. On the next day, he again telephoned
his son who informed him that the appellant had come to the house
and had spent the night there. After two days he returned to his
residence and reprimanded the appellant and told him he should not
come to his house. He again left for Mumbai. After reaching Mumbai
he was informed by his son that the appellant continued to come to
his house. Subsequently, he received information that his son was
missing. Hearing the news, he returned home. He was told, body of
his son was found floating in the canal near the Simulhanda Primary
School. He lodged written complaint at Panskura Police Station
marked as “Exbt.-1”. In course of investigation, he informed the police
that he suspected the appellant had murdered his son as he had
disclosed the illicit relationship between the appellant and his wife to
him. Police seized various articles in the course of investigation. He
was a signatory to the seizure list.
His brothers Jaidul Ali and Sk. Safik Ali were examined as P.W.
3 and P.W. 12 respectively.
P.W. 3 (Jaidul Ali) deposed his nephew Sk. Farhad Ali was
missing from 27.12.2013. They searched for him but could not trace
him out. On 28.12.2013 one Badiruddin (P.W. 8) informed them that
the dead body of a boy was lying in a ‘khal’ near Simulhanda Primary
School. After receiving the news, he along with Rashida, mother of the
missing boy and others went to the spot and identified the child as
Farhad. Subsequently, his brother Khalilur Rahaman (P.W. 1)
returned and lodged F.I.R.
P.W. 12 (Sk. Safik Ali) deposed appellant had illicit relationship
with his brother’s wife. He had informed his brother about such
relationship. Farhad saw them in a compromising position. One day
Farhad did not return home. On the next morning, his body was
found in a ‘khal’ near the Simulhanda Primary School. On the next
day, appellant went missing from the mosque. Police recovered a
polythene bag lying at a spot in the rear side of the mosque. He was
the signatory to the seizure list.
P.W. 2 (Rasida Begum) mother of the victim was examined in
the present case. She deposed her son went missing on 27.12.2013.
On the next day, his body was found in a ‘nala’ near Simulhanda
Primary School. Police came and interrogated her about the incident.
Her husband returned home and lodged F.I.R.           She was declared
In the course of cross-examination, she stated after the
incident, appellant had fled from the village.
P.W. 4 (Sk. Saifuddin Ali) and P.W. 9 (Sk. Rijuan Ali) are friends
of Farhad. Both of them deposed in the evening of 27.12.2013. Farhad
was playing with them in a field near Simulhanda Primary School.
Farhad stated he was thirsty and went away to drink water.
Subsequently, he did not return.
P.W. 6 (Sk. Fajlur Rahaman) a local witness had also seen
Farhad flying kite in the field near Simulhanda Primary School. He
further deposed on 30.12.2013, police recovered a gunny bag
containing wearing apparels of Sk. Farhad from the room of the
P.W. 7 (Sk. Salauddin) deposed on 28.12.2013 at about 5.00
a.m., he saw the body of a boy lying in a canal near the primary
school. He informed his father, Badiruddin. Badiruddin, on his
return, had informed the family members of the missing boy who
came to the spot and identified the body, as that of Farhad.
P.W. 5 (S.I. Subhendu Pandit) is the police officer who held
inquest over the body of the victim marked as “Exbt.-5”.
P.W. 15 (Dr. Pradip Kumar Das) held post mortem examination
over the body of the deceased. He opined cause of death was due to
head injury with symptom of drowning, ante mortem in nature. He
further stated death did not occur just after fall. Victim had taken few
shallow gasps in moribund condition. He proved post mortem report
marked as “Exbt.-10/1”.
P.Ws. 13, 14 and 16 are the police witnesses.
P.W. 13 (Biswajit Halder) received the written complaint from
P.W. 1 and drew up F.I.R.
P.W. 14 (Ex. SI Swadesh Majumdar) commenced investigation
in the case. He drew up two rough sketch maps with index. He
collected inquest as well as post mortem reports. He seized a plastic
bag, coconut rope and gunny bag under a seizure list. He examined
P.W. 16 (SI Kamrul Jaman) was the second investigating officer.
He tried to trace out the whereabouts of the appellant. He went to
Bihar to arrest the appellant but failed. He tried to locate the tower
location of the mobile phone of the appellant. He collected SDR and
CDR of the mobile phone of the appellant. He finally arrested the
appellant on 12.03.2014. at Panskura Railway Station. He submitted
From the aforesaid evidence on record it appeared that the
victim boy namely Sk. Farhad had gone missing from his residence in
the evening of 27.12.2013. He had left his residence for flying kite
with his friends in a field near Simulhanda Primary School. P.Ws. 4
and 9, his friends deposed on the fateful evening, Farhad was playing
with them in the field. He felt thirsty and left the field in search of a
glass of water. Thereafter he went missing. His relations searched for
him throughout the night but failed. Around 5 a.m on 28.12.2013 his
body was recovered in a canal near the primary school by one Sk.
Salauddin (PW 7). After two days his father lodged FIR against
unknown accused. Involvement of the appellant in the murder arose
out of suspicion as his father (PW 1) and uncle (PW 12) suspected that
the appellant nursed grudge against the victim because the latter had
seen the appellant in a compromising position with his mother and
divulged such fact to PW 1.
Mr.  Banejee     has  strenuously   contended    this  constitutes
sufficient motive for the appellant to commit murder.
P.Ws. 1 and 12 i.e father and uncle of Farhad have spoken
about the illicit relationship between the appellant and Rasida, wife of
PW 12 stated victim had seen his mother in a compromising
position with the appellant. PW 1 stated his son informed him over
telephone that the appellant spent night at his residence. However,
another brother of PW 1 namely Jaidul Ali (PW 3) is completely silent
with regard to such illicit association between the appellant and his
sister-in-law, Rasida. Evidence of PW 12 with regard to child seeing
the appellant and her mother in a compromising position ought to be
taken with a pinch of salt. In cross-examination, he admitted he
resides in a different house and had heard about such incident.
Further analysis of the evidence on record would show apart from the
victim, PW 12 had also informed PW 1 about the illicit relationship
between the appellant and Rashida, wife of PW 1.
Thus, it cannot be said that the intimacy between appellant and
her mother Rashida was divulged to PW 1 only by Farhad. PW 12,
uncle of Farhad, had also informed his brother about such
In such view of the matter it is difficult for me to understand
why the appellant would nurse grudge against the minor son of his
lover and not against other relations of Khalilur (PW 1) like PW 12
who had also informed the former about his illicit relationship. Hence,
motive to commit the crime does not appear to be convincing.
Coming to the other circumstance, namely, recovery of gunny
bag and rope from the backside of the mosque of the appellant, I note
that the articles were recovered from an open space which is
accessible to all. Moreover, there is nothing on record to show that the
gunny bag or rope so recovered were used to murder the victim or
dispose of the body in the canal. No forensic report is placed on record
to establish presence of blood or other bodily fluids in the seized
articles. Evidence of PW 6 that the wearing apparels of the deceased
were found inside the gunny bag is an exaggeration and not
corroborated by the evidence of the investigating officer Kamrul
Jaman (PW 16), or other evidence on record. Hence, recovery of the
gunny bag and rope from a place near the mosque does not in the
absence of any forensic report establish a live link between the
recovered articles and murder of the victim.
From the evidence on record it appears that the victim was last
seen in a field which is adjoining the primary school. His body was
also recovered from a canal adjoining the school. The mosque is
situated at a considerable distance from the place where the victim
was last seen alive or where his dead body was found. No evidence is
forthcoming that on the fateful evening or immediately prior to the
death of the victim, appellant was last seen with the child. Absence of
this vital incriminating circumstance results in a clear snap in the
chain which cannot be said to be complete to clinch the culpability of
the appellant.
Faced with this predicament Mr. Banerjee has strongly relied on
the abscondence of the appellant immediately after the incident.
Referring to the evidences of PWs 3 and 12 he submits appellant went
missing from the mosque immediately after the incident and did not
return to the village. Second investigating officer (PW 16) was unable
to arrest him in spite of raiding his native village in Bihar. He was
finally arrested on 12.3.2014 at Panskura railway station. It is settled
law abscondence of an accused by itself does not establish his guilt.
In Sk. Yusuf Vs. State of West Bengal1, the Apex Court held as
“31. … It is a settled legal proposition that in case a
person is absconding after commission of offence of which he
may not even be the author, such a circumstance alone may
not be enough to draw an adverse inference against him as it
would go against the doctrine of innocence. It is quite
possible that he may be running away merely on being
suspected, out of fear of police arrest and harassment.”
The aforesaid proposition of law wholly applies to the facts of
the present case. Evidence on record shows apart from vague
suspicion owing to a hunch that the appellant may have nursed
grudge against the child for divulging his illicit association with her
mother, no evidence was led to show that the appellant had clear
access to the child soon before his death so as to complete the chain
of circumstances pointing to his guilt. It may be apposite to note even
PW 1 did not lodge FIR against the appellant in the first instance.
After a couple of days out of suspicion the appellant was implicated in
the instant case.
Under such circumstance, it             is likely out of fear and
apprehension of false implication and harassment the appellant may
have ran away from the village and secreted himself. Abscondence of
the appellant when judged in the backdrop of the fact and
circumstance of the case cannot by any stretch of imagination be
treated to be conclusive evidence with regard to his guilt
In the light of the aforesaid discussion, I am of the opinion
prosecution has failed to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt and
the appellant is entitled to an order of acquittal.
Conviction and sentence of the appellant is set aside.
Appeal is allowed. Connected application being CRAN 1 of 2019
(Old No. CRAN 1730 of 2019) stands disposed of.
Appellant Md. Firoz Ala @ Firoj Alam shall be forthwith released
from custody, if not wanted in any other case upon executing a bond
to the satisfaction of the trial Court which shall remain in force for a
period of six months in terms of Section 437A Cr.P.C.
Let a copy of this judgment along with the lower court records
be forthwith sent down to the trial Court at once.
Photostat certified copy of this judgment, if applied for, shall be
made available to the appellant within a week from the date of putting
in the requisites.