This petition is filed under Section 482 of Code of
Criminal Procedure (hereinafter referred to as 'Cr.P.C.' for
short) by petitioners/accused Nos.2 and 3 seeking to quash
FIR, complaint and charge sheet filed in Crime No.12/2021-
22/10065IE2/100606 of Indi Excise Police Station, Vijayapura
Sub-Division,   Vijayapura,   registered  for  the   offences
punishable under Sections 15 (c), 18 (c), 25, 61 & 8 (c) of
the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985
(hereinafter referred to as 'NDPS Act' for short) in Special
Case (NDPS) No.10/2022 on the file of Prl. Dist. & Sessions
02.    The brief case of the prosecution is that on
Division, received a credible information that some person by
name Jasavanthkumar transporting poppy straw powder
through Pandarapur via Shirdoan road by keeping it behind
the driver seat in Eicher Company vehicle No.HR-38-T-5583
in fertilizer bags. Immediately, he recorded the statement,
reduced into writing and requested panchas and Gazetted
officer to the raid. Accordingly, they went to the said place
and all the materials to raid have been collected, search
warrant was prepared. Thereafter, at about 10:20 hours one
Eicher Company container came. As per information received,
it was stopped and enquired the name of the driver. He told
his name as Jashwantakumar. On searching the container,
they found fertilizer bag. Then they opened the said bag.
They found NDPS articles and when enquired regarding
licence, he does not possess any licence to trnasport the
same and he intent to sell the same in Bangalore. He told
that the vehicle belongs to NITCO Logistics Pvt. Limited. The
respondent-Police weighed the seized materials and it is
found that it is about 500 grams of poppy straw powder in 10
packets. The accused were arrested and said powder and
vehicle were seized. The police registered the complaint and
after completing investigation, they have filed charge sheet
against the driver of the said vehicle and also accused Nos.2
03.    The learned Magistrate has taken cognizance and
issued summons to the accused persons, which is challenged
in this petition.
04.    Heard Smt. Geeta Sindhe, the learned counsel for
the petitioners and Sri. Gururaj V. Hasilkar, the learned
counsel for the respondent – State.
05.    The learned counsel for the petitioner argued that
the petitioners were falsely implicated in this case without
there being any basis or reason regarding commission of the
alleged offences. Taking cognizance of the alleged offences
against    these   petitioners is   only  mechanical,    without
assigning any reasons. The petitioner No.1 is the Senior
Manager at NITCO Logistic Private Limited and the petitioner
No.2 is the Managing Director of the said Company. The said
company is having good standing in India with several branch
offices and is more than five decades old. The Company
provides transportation, logistics services, is a well known
and a reputed company. There are no criminal antecedents
against these petitioners. There is no room for illegal
activities in the Company. The goods loaded in the vehicle
are all as per the supporting invoices and the container is
sealed after loading of the goods. It is contended that the
container is to be opened at the place of destination to
unload the goods. The container is lock it will be opened only
at the place of unloading of the goods by giving one time lock
password. There is no scope for illegal transportation. Inspite
of giving the explanation by the Company regarding their
functioning, the petitioners are falsely implicated in this case.
The said contraband was recovered from the possession of
the said Jashvanth Singh the driver of the vehicle who has
placed the same in the driver's cabin, behind the driver seat
in fertilizer bags. Nothing was recovered from the container.
No material is forthcoming regarding the NITCO Logistics
Company being involved in any such illegal transportation.
The charge sheet material does not show that these
petitioners in any way committed the said offences. The
allegations against these petitioners is under Section 15(b),
38 and 25 of NDPS Act, 1985. None of the ingredients are
attracted against these petitioners. There is no material for
invoking the provision of Section 38 of the NDPS Act. Neither
the Company or its officials or Managing Director, have any
knowledge or they knew about the transportation of the
illegal contraband by driver in his cabin. By over looking the
offence punishable under Section 25 of the NDPS Act, these
petitioners are illegally implicated in this case. Therefore,
taking cognizance and registering the case against these
petitioners is bad in law. In support of her arguments, the
learned counsel has relied upon the decision of this Court in
the case of Rameshkumar s/o Sh, Bhimising vs. The
State    of   Karnataka     in   Crl.P.No.201458/2019      and
decision of the High Court of Orissa in the case of Balbir
Singh vs. State of Orissa reported in 1995 Crl.L.J. 1762.
Hence, the learned counsel for the petitioners prays to allow
the petition.
06.   Against this, the learned High Court Government
Pleader argued that there are statements of the witnesses to
show that the vehicle belongs to NITCO Logistic Private
Limited. The said contraband was transported in the said
vehicle. Whether these petitioners are having knowledge or
not, is to be proved at the time of trial, not at this stage.
There is also the presumption under the NDPS Act. Therefore,
at this stage, it is premature to quash the charge sheet.
Hence, the learned High Court Government Pleader prays to
dismiss the petition.
07.   I have perused the FIR, complaint, charge sheet,
statements of the complainant and accused. The seizure of
panchanama clearly shows that when the said vehicle was
intercepted as per the information received by the police
officials and checked, the accused No.1 was a driver and he
informed his name and behind the driver’s seat in the cabin
there was a bag and contraband powder. Then, he was
enquired regarding the materials in the container and he has
not given any information. However, he stated that the
vehicle belongs to NITCO Logistics Pvt. Ltd., and the officials
or the company does not know that he is transporting the
said contraband powder. Even the owners of "goods" who
loaded goods is also not know about any such articles
transported by him. Thereafter, police have collected the
invoice and again as per the panchanama dated 06.12.2021
the said container door was break opened, as it was locked
and it can be opened only at the place of unloading by giving
one time lock password. The Investigating Officer found that
as per the invoice carried by the driver, there were goods
such as blankets, uniform, radiators, pillow and other
materials as shown in the panchanama and no contraband
substance was found in the said container. I have also
perused the statements of the witnesses. There is no material
against these petitioners that they have committed offences
as alleged against them.
08.   It is also necessary to refer relevant Section of
NDPS Act to appreciate the contention of the petitioner. They
are Sections 8(c), 25, 61 of the NDPS reads as under:
"8. Prohibition of certain operations.-
(c)    produce,   manufacture,   possess,
sell, purchase,   transport,   warehouse,   use,
consume,    import   inter-State, export  inter-
State, import into India, export from India or
tranship any narcotic drug or psychotropic
substance.
premises, etc., to be used for commission
of an offence.-Whoever, being the owner or
occupier or having the control or use of any
house, room, enclosure, space, place animal or
conveyance, knowingly permits it to be used
for the commission by any other person of an
offence punishable under any provision of this
Act, shall be punishable with the punishment
provided for that offence.
(1) Where an offence under Chapter IV has
been committed by a company, every person,
who, at the time the offence was committed
was in charge of, and was responsible to, the
company for the conduct of the business of the
company as well as the company, shall be
deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be
liable to be proceeded against and punished
Provided that nothing contained in this
sub-section shall render any such person liable
to any punishment if he proves that the
offence was committed without his knowledge
or that he had exercised all due diligence to
prevent the commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained
in sub-section (1), where any offence under
Chapter IV has been committed by a company
and it is proved that the offence has been
committed with the consent or connivance of,
or is attributable to any neglect on the part of,
any director, manager, secretary, or other
officer   of   the   company,      such    director,
manager, secretary of other officer shall be
deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall
be liable to be proceeded against and punished
Explanation—For the purposes of this
(a)   “company”        means    any     body
corporate and includes a firm or other
association of individuals; and
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm,
means a partner in the firm.
61. Confiscation of goods used for
concealing illicit drugs or substances.- Any
goods used for concealing any [narcotic drug,
psychotropic       substance      or     controlled
substance] which is liable to confiscation under
this Act shall also be liable to confiscation.
Explanation.-   In this    section "goods"
does not include conveyance as a means of
09.   If these Sections are reads together, there is
nothing to show that these petitioners are either knowing the
owners of the said logistic or they have knowingly permitted
driver to transport such contraband substance. When the
accused No.1 - driver himself stated that owners of the
vehicle or owners of the goods were not knowing that he is
transporting the said contraband substance, the question of
prosecuting   these   petitioners  does   not  arise  at  all.
Admittedly, they have stated that the NITCO Logistics
Company is a reputed logistic and working since last five
decades. They have stated that procedure of loading and
unloading is that once a goods are loaded and invoice is
given to the driver, the lock will be opened at the place of
unloading by giving one time lock password and nobody can
open the said container and on search no contraband was
found in the container. It is evident from the statements of
the witnesses, charge sheet materials and in view of the
contents of the panchanama, which shows that neither
owners nor officials and owner of NITCO Logistic Company
were knowing about accused No.1 transporting contraband
substances.    Therefore,   prosecuting    them   under  above
charged offences, is bad in law.
10.    The Orissa High Court in the case of Balbir
Singh vs. State of Orissa reported in 1995 Crl.L.J. 1762
held in the identical situation and at Para No.4 to 6 held as
"4.    Section 25 of the Act provides, inter
aliea,  that  whoever    being    the   owner  of
conveyance knowingly permit it to be used for
commission by any other person of an offence
under any provision of the Act, shall be
punishable    with   the   sentence     mentioned
therein. The linchpin of the offence under
Section 25 thus, lies in knowingly permitting
use of the vehicle for commission of any
offence under the Act. No doubt under Section
26 of the Act, the Court shall presume culpable
mental state of the accused in any prosecution
for an offence under the Act. Similarly, under
section 64 of the Act, presumption is available
to be raised that the accused has committed
an offence under Chapter-IV of the Act. Similar
presumption     can   be   raised   in   case  of
contiscation   of  conveyance     etc.,  used   in
carrying any narcotic drug as provided under
Section 60 (3) of the Act. But in a case under
Section 25 of the Act, it is for the prosecution
to establish that the owner of the vehicle
knowingly permitted the vehicle to be used for
commission of an offence under the Act. I say
so because of the specific mention of the word
'knowingly' by the legislature in section 25 of
the Act. The legislature is not expected to use
unnecessarily any word or expression. It does
not use any word without meaning something.
As such, the expression 'knowingly' has to be
given due weight. When the Legislature has
employed the word knowingly in Section 25 of
the Act, it has to be held that so far as the
offence under section 25 is concerned, it is for
the prosecution to establish that with the
owner's knowledge, the vehicle was used for
commission of an offence under the Act and
the presumption      of culpable mental    state
referred to in section 36, 54 and 60 (3) of the
Act cannot be pressed into service by the
prosecution. In Raghunath Singh vs. State of
Journal 575, the Supreme Court held that the
words 'knowing' or 'knowingly' are used to
indicate that knowledge as such must be
proved    either   by    positive  evidence   or
circumstantially   before    mens   tea   can be
established. The words 'knowing' or 'knowingly'
are obviously more forceful than the words
'has reason to believe' because they insist on a
greater degree of certitude in the mind of the
person who is said to know or to do the act
5. The next question is as to what are the
materials available against the petitioner in
support of the charge under section 25 of the
Act. The learned counsel for the State fairly
stated that the only material against the
petitioner is the extra-judicial confession made
by the co-accused (occupants of the vehicle)
stating that the petitioner had sent them to
Sileru for procurement and transportation of
ganja. In this connection, he has referred to
the FIR and the statements of K.N.Sahu,
constable and Dr. B.K. Prusty, Medical Officer,
recorded under Section 161 of the Code. The
aforesaid material would at best amount to
confession of co-accused. It is now well-settled
that   confession   of  co-accused    cannot  be
treated as substantive evidence. In dealing
with a case against the accused person, the
Court cannot start with the confession of a co-
accused. It must begin with other evidence
adduced by the prosecution and after it has
formed its opinion with regard to the quality
and effect of the said evidence, then it is
permissible to turn to the confession in order
to receive assurance to the conclusion of guilt
if the judicial mind is about to reach on the
said other evidence. In other words, confession
by a co-accused can be pressed into service
only when the Court is inclined to accept other
evidence and feels the necessity of seeking for
an assurance in support of its conclus8ion
deducible from the said evidence.
6.     For the aforesaid reasons, I am of the
considered opinion that merely because the
petitioner is the owner of the vehicle, that by
itself is not sufficient to sustain the charge
under section 25 of the Act. Something more is
necessary    to  indicate    that  the  petitioner
knowingly permitted his vehicle to be used for
commission of offence by          other which is
lacking."
11.    The Co-ordinate Bench of this Court in the case of
Rameshkumar S/o Sh. Bhimsing vs. The State of
Karnataka in Cril.P.No.201458/2019 dated 29.01.2020,
wherein at paragraph No.7 held as under:
"7.   In   the   instant  case,   the   very
complaint     very     clearly   and    specifically
mentions that the owner of the vehicle Sri
Ramesh Kumar had no knowledge about his
driver carrying the contraband in the lorry.
The complainant has clearly stated that he
enquired the driver who told him that the
owner of the vehicle being Sri Ramesh Kumar
is  unaware      of   the   driver   carrying   the
contraband in his lorry at the instance of Suraj
Singh.     Thus, at the very first instance the
complaint itself in clear term says that the
owner of the vehicle had no knowledge about
his vehicle being used for illegal activity by its
Secondly, even according to the learned
High Court Government Pleader his discussion
with the Investigating Officer revealed that
Investigating Officer has not collected any of
the material to establish any nexus between
the alleged commission of crime and the owner
of   the    vehicle.       Learned    High    Court
Government Pleader also submitted that there
are no material to show that the present
petitioner who is the owner of the vehicle had
any knowledge about his vehicle being used for
any illegal activity of carrying any contraband
goods in it.    Learned High Court Government
Pleader fairly submits that it is only based on
the endorsement issued by RTO authorities
that the said vehicle stands in the name of the
present petitioner, the said petitioner was also
arraigned as an accused in the charge sheet.
A perusal of the charge sheet materials placed
before this Court also reveals that no material
has been collected by the Investigating Officer
to show that the present petitioner being the
owner of the seized vehicle had any knowledge
about   the   driver  of  the  vehicle  carrying
contraband in it.
Thus, prima facie, it shows that the
ingredients of section 25 of NDPS Act which is
levelled against the present petitioner has not
been fulfilled by the Investigating Officer by
placing the material. As such, the filing of the
charge sheet against the present petitioner is
nothing but a harassment of the present
petitioner by the Investigating Officer. Thus,
the petition not only deserves to be allowed
but with cost payable by the respondent-State
to the petitioner."
12.    Therefore, in view of the principles stated in the
above decisions, charge sheet materials, allegations against
these petitioners, the statement of the driver, the contents of
the panchanama and Sections referred above, it is evident
that these petitioners cannot be prosecuted as they have
nothing to do with the said alleged offences. Therefore,
continuing the proceedings against them is nothing but abuse
of process of law and Court. Hence, the said proceedings are
liable to be quashed. Accordingly, I proceed to pass the
The petition filed under Section 482 of Cr.P.C. is
The FIR, complaint and the charge sheet in Crime
No.12/2021-22/10065IE2/100606         in  Indi   Excise  Police
Station registered on 29.09.2021, for the offences punishable
under Sections 15 (c), 18 (c), 25, 61 and 8 (c) of NDPS Act,
1985 with respect of accused Nos.2 and 3 – petitioners and
the entire proceedings in Spl.Case (NDPS).No.10/2022 on the
file of the Prl. Districts and Sessions, Court at Vijayapur, so
far as these petitioners concerned, are hereby quashed.