The petitioner, a centenarian, now 102 years, is knocking at
the doors of this Court seeking a direction by issuance of a writ in
the nature of mandamus directing the 1st respondent to pay the
petitioner `3,71,280/- along with interest being the arrears of
petitioner’s Central Gaurava Dhana to be jointly and severally paid
by the respondents within a time frame.
2. Facts adumbrated are as follows:-
The petitioner, who is now 102 years old, was a recipient of
Swatantra Sainik Samman Gaurava Dhana (Pension) (‘Pension’ for
short) being a freedom fighter from 1974 from Government of
India. This honorary pension was granted to the petitioner by both
the Central and the State Governments respectively. The petitioner
maintains an account at the 4th respondent/Canara Bank to which
account monthly pension of the petitioner gets credited.
3. On 01-11-2017 the pension of the petitioner was abruptly
stopped.    When enquired about the reason for such stoppage, it
was indicated to the petitioner that he had not submitted his Life
Certificate for the year 2017-2018 and later he submitted the Life
Certificate on 24-12-2018. The Government issued sanction letter
belatedly releasing pension for the period from 24-12-2018 to 05-
10-2020. However, the arrears of pension between 01-11-2017 to
24-12-2018 were not paid, which amounted to `3,71,280/-. When
the amount was not received, the petitioner knocked at the doors of
this Court in Writ Petition No.7813 of 2020 seeking a writ of
mandamus to the respondents for release of arrears of pension and
this Court by its order dated 24-06-2020 directed the respondents
to take appropriate action within two weeks. When nothing came
about, the petitioner moved this Court in C.C.C.No.449 of 2020,
pursuant to which, the 1st respondent issued a sanction letter dated
05-10-2020. However, pension for the period from 01-11-2017 to
24-12-2018 was not released on the specious plea that the
petitioner had not submitted Life Certificate. Again the petitioner
knocked at the doors of this court in Writ Petition No.22468 of 2021
for release of pension for the aforesaid period. This Court in terms
of its order dated 10-06-2022 considering the purport of guidelines
for grant of such pension allowed the petition in part and directed
the 4th respondent therein, Government of India to take appropriate
decision in terms of the Scheme for disbursement of pension after
assessing entitlement of the petitioner. Pursuant to the order
passed by this Court and claiming to be considering the grievance
of the petitioner, a communication comes to be issued on 13-09-
2022 directing that the petitioner is not entitled to the arrears for
the solitary reason that the petitioner did not submit a Life
Certificate in November, 2017. It is this communication dated 13-
09-2022 that leads the petitioner to this court in the subject
4. Heard Smt. Veena J. Kamath, learned counsel appearing
for the petitioner, Sri Shanthi Bhushan, learned Deputy Solicitor
General    of  India appearing   for  respondent    No.1  and   Smt.
B.G.Nayana Tara, learned counsel appearing for respondents 2 to 4
and Sri M.Vinod Kumar, learned Additional Government Advocate
appearing for respondent No.5.
5. The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner would
contend with vehemence that the petitioner due to his old age and
other problems was not in a position to visit the Bank and submit
the Life Certificate in 2018 for the period from 01-11-2017 to 24-
12-2018. Due to non-submission of Life Certificate pension is not
paid for close to 13 months. The petitioner being the recipient of
pension under the Scheme is not in dispute.           The only reason
rendered is non-submission of Life Certificate, for which the
petitioner is not responsible but the officials of the Bank in terms of
guidelines had to get certificate from the hands of the petitioner.
She seeks a direction for release of the said amount.
6. The learned Deputy Solicitor General of India representing
the 1st respondent/Union of India would vehemently refute the
submissions to contend that the Central Government is no way
responsible for deduction or non-payment of pension and non-
submission of Life Certificate would automatically stall pension.
Therefore, submission of Life Certificate to the Bank and such entry
being made by the Bank is imperative. If at all someone is
responsible, it is the Bank officials and not the Union of India.
7. The learned counsel appearing for the respondents/Bank
has filed elaborate statement of objections raising certain technical
pleas – that the communication is not called in question and the
judgment of the Apex Court in the case of UNION OF INDIA v. A.
ALAGAM PERUMAL KONE1 clearly holds that Life Certificate has to
be submitted by the freedom fighter under the Scheme and further
contends that there is no duty of the Bank officials to go and collect
the Life Certificate in every case where it is not given and therefore,
seeks dismissal of the petition contending that the action of the
Bank is in tune with law.
8. In reply, the learned counsel for the petitioner would
contend that the judgment in the case of A.ALAGAM PERUMAL
KONE (supra) was with regard to the petitioner therein was eligible
to get pension or otherwise. While considering eligibility, the Apex
Court also notices a submission of Life Certificate being imperative
for grant of pension. In the case at hand, there is no dispute with
regard to eligibility.   She would contend that in W.P.No.22468 of
2021 filed by the petitioner for the very same relief, a co-ordinate
Bench of this Court has considered all the issues that are now
sought to be re-agitated by the Union of India or the Bank and the
order having become final, it would not lie with the Union of India
or the respondents/ Bank to contend otherwise. The only issue now
is whether non-submission of Life Certificate in the peculiar facts of
this Court would lead to non-payment of pension.
9. I have given my anxious consideration to the submissions
made by the respective learned counsel and have perused the
material on record.
10. The afore-narrated facts are not in dispute. The only
reason rendered in the communication which denies the petitioner
pension is taking recourse to clause 2.3 of the policy Guidelines
with regard to payment of pension under the Central Samman
Pension Scheme. The Union of India through the Ministry of Home
Affairs has notified certain guidelines for disbursement of Central
Samman Pensions to be followed and disbursed by the authorized
Public Sector Banks. It is not in dispute that the petitioner is held
entitled for pension under the Scheme and the 4th respondent/Bank
is the authorized Public Sector Bank for such disbursement in terms
of the Scheme. Certain guidelines that are germane read as follows:
2.1  Each bank should obtain a Life Certificate (As per
Annexure-II) once a year in the month of November
from the concerned freedom fighter or the
dependent, as the case may be. For the purpose of
obtaining Life Certificate, it is clarified that the
pensioner must come face to face with the banker.
Whenever it is found that the pensioner is too old to
come to the bank then the bank officer must visit
his/her place of residence before obtaining the Life
Certificate. In case where the pensioners are above,
the age of 80, the Life Certificate should be taken
by the bank twice a year, once in May (Before 31st
May) and once in November (before 30 Nov.).
2.2  If a pensioner does not submit his Life Certificate
by 30th November, the Bank should immediately
stop the pension. If the pensioner submits the Life
Certificate few months after the November deadline
but before nest 31st October, then the Bank may
resume the pension and pay the arrears.
2.3  If a pensioner does not submit his Life Certificate by 30th
November and thereafter does not submit it even till next
31st October, then the pension is deemed to have been
cancelled and in such cases, the Bank should return the
disburser’s portion of PPO to the CPAO. After the said
deemed cancellation, if the pensioner re-appears
either at the Bank or at the Ministry, the pension
shall only be resumed after a fresh sanction order is
issued by the Ministry followed by an issuance of
fresh PPO. In such cases, no arrears shall be paid.
2.4  Duty of the Bank in the event of non-submission of
Life Certificate:- It is presently seen that, in case where
the pensioner does not submit the life certificate, the
banks stop the pension and let the matter rest at that.
This is not enough. It is expected from the bank that,
apart from stopping the pension, they should
immediately visit the pensioner to find out why
he/she did not submit the life certificate. This will
help bank to timely update its data (in case the pensioner
has expired) and recover any excess payments.”
(Emphasis supplied)
Clause 2 of the said guidelines deals with Life Certificate and Banks’
responsibility. It is these guidelines that form the fulcrum of the
entire issue in the lis. Clause 2.1 directs that the Bank shall obtain
Life Certificate once a year in the month of November from the
concerned freedom fighter or the dependent as the case may be.
For the purpose of obtaining Life Certificate the pensioner must
come face to face with the banker. Whenever it is found that the
pensioner is too old to come to the Bank, then the Bank officer
must visit his or her place of residence before obtaining the Life
Certificate.    In case the pensioner is above 80 years, the Life
Certificate should be taken by the Bank twice a year – once in May
and once in November.
11.   Clause 2.3 directs that if a pensioner would not submit
his Life Certificate by 30th November and thereafter does not submit
even till 31st October, then pension is deemed to have been
cancelled and in such a case, the Bank should return disburser’s
portion to the Union of India. Clause 2.4 mandates the duty of the
Bank in the event of non-submission of Life Certificate. The
guidelines would direct that in case where the pensioner does not
submit the Life Certificate, the Bank would stop pension and leave
the matter at rest. The guidelines would indicate that, it was not
enough and it is expected from the Bank that, apart from stopping
pension, it should immediately visit the pensioner to find out why
he or she did not submit the Life Certificate. The guidelines direct
that this will help the Bank to timely update the data in case the
pensioner has died and recover any excess payment.
12. On a coalesce of the guidelines (supra) what would
unmistakably emerge is that if the pensioner is too old to come to
the Bank, it is the Bank officer who should visit his/her residence
before obtaining the Life Certificate.   Clause 2.4 mandates that
stopping of pension is not enough but it is expected from the
officers of Bank that they immediately visit the pensioner to find out
why he or she did not submit the Life Certificate.
13. In the teeth of the aforesaid guidelines, the issue in the
lis has to be considered. It is admitted that the petitioner did not
submit the Life Certificate from 01-11-2017 to 30-11-2018 which
was for a period close to 13 months and led to deemed cancellation
of payment of pension. The petitioner did submit the Life Certificate
on 24-12-2018, even then, the pension was not restored in terms
of the guidelines only on the ground that the petitioner had
submitted the Life Certificated after 30-11-2018.      This leads the
petitioner to this Court in writ petition 7813 of 2020. This Court in
terms of its order dated 24-06-2020 noticing the fact that the
petitioner was already 100 years old, directed appropriate orders to
be passed to restore the pension on the report submitted by the
State Government within two weeks. This was not complied with.
The petitioner had to invoke the contempt jurisdiction of this Court.
It is during the pendency of the contempt petition, pension to the
petitioner was restored, therefore, this becomes the first proceeding
initiated by the petitioner for restoration of pension at the age of
100 years. The pension though was restored, arrears between the
period 01-11-2017 to 30-11-2018 was not granted. Claiming the
said amount, the petitioner again knocks at the doors of this Court
in Writ Petition No.22468 of 2021, this becomes the second petition
at the age of 101 years.      The submissions made by the Union of
India and the Bank before the co-ordinate Bench and consideration
of the co-ordinate Bench becomes germane for a consideration of
the issue in the present lis, as all the submissions that are now
being advanced by the Bank, were in fact made, and all of them
have been negatived by the co-ordinate Bench and those findings
have attained finality. The order of the co-ordinate Bench reads as
5. Learned counsel for the petitioner inviting
attention of this Court to Annexure-D/Guidelines for
Disbursement of Central Samman Pensions, to be followed by
Authorized     Public  Sector   Banks,  submits    that    the
petitioner would be entitled for arrears of pension,
pointing out particularly Clause 4.2[iii]. Further pointing
out to Clause 2.4 of the Guidelines, learned counsel would
submit that it is the obligation of the Bank to obtain life
certificate that too when pensioners are aged above 80
years. Only because pensioner has not submitted life
certificate, it is not open for the respondent-Bank to stop
the pension. Learned counsel would contend that the
timeline mentioned in Clause 2.2 for submission of life
certificate is not mandatory and even though there is
delay in submitting life certificate, once life certificate is
submitted, the respondents ought to have paid pension
from the date it was stopped. Thus, she submits that
action of the respondents is wholly arbitrary and
unreasonable. It is submitted that the Scheme is a social
benevolent Scheme and as such, pension once sanctioned
cannot be stopped or discontinued but for valid reason. It
is also submitted that pension sanctioned is for lifetime.
6. Per contra, learned Assistant Solicitor General
Sri.Shanthi Bhushan submits that pension of the
petitioner was stopped from 01.11.2017 since the
petitioner failed to submit life certificate as required.
Learned Assistant Solicitor General invites attention of
this Court to Clause 2.3 of the Guidelines at Annexure-D
and submits that life certificate shall be submitted once
in a year in the month of November from the concerned
freedom fighter or the dependent, as the case may be
and in cases where pensioners are above the age of 80,
life certificate should be taken by the Bank twice a year,
once in May and once in November. Further, he invites
attention to Clause 2.2 and submits that if the petitioner
does not submit life certificate by 30th November, the
Bank has no option but to stop the pension. If the
pensioner submits life certificate few months after
November deadline but before next 31st October, then
the Bank may resume the pension and pay the arrears.
He submits that the petitioner failed to submit his life
certificate and submitted his life certificate only on
24.12.2018 and therefore, the pension is granted afresh
in terms of Clause 2.3 of the Guidelines. Learned
counsel would invite attention to Annexure-R3/letter
dated 19.02.2019 by the petitioner to the 4th
respondent, to say that petitioner has admitted that due
to     old     age     he     could     not      submit    life
certificate in time. Further, he submits that Clause 2.3
makes it clear that in such case, no arrears shall be
paid. He also points out that if the pensioner fails to
submit life certificate till next 31st October, then pension
is deemed to have been cancelled. Petitioner’s pension
was deemed to have been cancelled and therefore after
submission of his life certificate on 24.12.2018, pension
was sanctioned afresh from the date of submitting life
certificate. Therefore, he justifies the action of the
fourth respondent.
7. Learned counsel Smt.Nayana Tara.B.G., for
respondent Nos.1 to 3 justifies the action of the
respondent-Bank in stopping pension to the petitioner
for his failure to submit life certificate within the period
prescribed under Annexure-D/Guidelines. Learned
counsel would submit that the petitioner failed to
submit life certificate in the month of November as
required under Clause 2.1 of the Guidelines and the
petitioner failed even to submit before 31st October.
Inviting attention of this Court to clause 2.3 of the
Guidelines, submitted that if the pensioner fails to
submit life certificate till next 31st           October, then
pension      is    deemed     to    have      been       cancelled
and the Bank has no option but to return the PPO to
CPAO. Further, she points out that the Bank has acted in
accordance with the Guidelines at Annexure-D and there
is no challenge to the Guidelines. She also submits that
when pension is sanctioned afresh, pensioner would not
be entitled to arrears in terms of Clause 2.3 of the
8. It is an admitted fact that the petitioner was
Dhana [Pension], (Freedom Fighters Pension) in the
year 1974. The petitioner was also sanctioned Freedom
Fighters Pension by the State Government. The
petitioner was drawing his pension both Central and
State through third respondent-Bank. The petitioner’s
Central pension was stopped with effect from
01.11.2017 as the petitioner failed to submit his life
certificate. The relevant portion of the Guidelines
No.45/03/2014-FF[P] issued by the Ministry of Home
Affairs [Annexure-D] in the matter of payment of
freedom fighters pension, Clause 2 and 4 reads as follows:
Certificate (As per Annexure-II) once a year in the
month of November from the concerned freedom
fighter or the dependent, as the case may be. For
the purpose of obtaining Life Certificate, it is clarified
that the pensioner must come face to face
with the banker. Wherever it is found that the
pensioner is too old to come to the bank then the
bank officer must visit his/her place of residence
before obtaining the Life Certificate, In case where
the pensioners are above the age of 80, the Life
Certificate should be taken by the bank twice a
year, once in May (Before 31 May) and once in
November( before 30 Nov).
2.2 If a pensioner does not submit his Life
Certificate by 30TH November, the Bank should
immediately stop the pension. If the pensioner
submits the Life Certificate few months after the
November deadline but before next 31 October, then
the Bank may resume the pension & pay the
2.3 If a pensioner does not submit his Life
Certificate by 30th November and thereafter does
not submit it even till next 31st October, then the
pension is deemed to have been cancelled and in
such cases, the bank should return the disburser's
portion of PPO to the CPAO. After the said deemed
cancellation, if the pensioner re-appears either at
the bank or at the Ministry, the pension shall only
be resumed after a fresh sanction order is issued by
the Ministry followed by an issuance of fresh PPO.
arrears shall be paid. In such cases, no arrears
shall be paid.
2.4 Duty of the Bank in the event of non-
submission of life certificate – It is presently seen
that, in case where the pensioner does not submit
the life certificate, the banks stop the pension and
let the matter rest at that. This is not enough. It is
expected from the banks that, apart from
stopping the pension, they should immediately
visit the pensioner to find out why he/she did
not submit the life certificate. This will help
bank to timely update its date (in case the pensioner
has expired) and recover any excess payments.
4.       Period      of    Undrawn      Pension     &
4.1 “Period of Undrawn Pension” means the
period beginning from the month of November in
which the pensioner defaulted in submitting his/her
Life Certificate. This period therefore begins on 1st
Even if by mistake of computer system of the Bank,
a few months' pension continues to be credited to
the pensioner's account, such amount will still be
treated as 'Undrawn Pension'.
4.2. Whenever a pension has commenced
but subsequently, after few months or years, the
pension remains undrawn for any reason including
non-submission of Life Certificate by the pensioner
or due to his/her prolonged sojourn in a foreign
country or ill health, then following situations may
(i)      If the pensioner does not submit the Life
Certificate in the month of November, then
his    pension    should   immediately   be
stopped. Thereafter, the bank should wait
till next 31st October for the pensioner to
appear and submit the Life Certificate.
(ii)      If he appears and submits the Life
Certificate before the end of next 31st
October, then the bank may resume the
pension and pay the arrears. (As per Para
2.2 of these Guidelines)
(iii)    If he does not submit the Life Certificate
even before end of next 31st October, the
pension is deemed to have been cancelled
(as per para 2.3 of these Guidelines) and
arrears should await Ministry's directions.
Under no circumstances, regardless of any
reason, if a pension has been stopped by the bank,
and the period of undrawn pension is more
than 1 year then the pension should not be
resumed automatically by the bank.
No arrears for a period of more than one year
should be paid by the bank without prior approval
of the Ministry.”
09. Clause 2.1 of the Guidelines requires the Bank
to obtain life certificate once a year in the month of
November from the concerned freedom fighter or the
dependent in whose favour pension is sanctioned. It is
also made clear in the said clause that for the purpose of
submitting life certificate, the pensioner must come face to
face with the banker. If the pensioners are not able to visit
the Bank due to old age, then the Bank Officer must visit
the place of residence of the pensioner to obtain the life
certificate. If the pensioners are above the age of 80, the
life certificate shall be taken by the Bank twice a year,
once in May and once in November. If the pensioner does
not submit life certificate by 30th of November, the Bank
shall immediately stop pension. If the pensioner submits
life certificate before next 31st of October, then the Bank
can resume pension and pay the arrears. If the pensioner
fails to submit life certificate even till next 31st October,
then the pension is deemed to have been cancelled. If the
pensioner re-appears either at the Bank or at the Ministry,
a fresh sanction is necessary by the Ministry. Clause 2.3
makes it clear that in such cases no arrears shall be paid.
If the life certificate is not submitted as required under
clauses 2.1 and 2.3, the Bank has no option but to cancel
the pension. Clause 2.4 of the Guidelines requires the
Bank apart from stopping the pension should visit the
pensioner to find out why the pensioner did not submit
life certificate. Clause 4.2 (iii) states that if the life
certificate is not submitted before end of next 31st October,
pension     is   deemed    to   have   been  cancelled   and
any payment of arrears should await Ministry’s directions.
A cumulative reading of the above Guidelines makes it
clear that normally a pensioner would not be entitled to
arrears when the pension is cancelled for non-submission
of life certificate, but payment of arrears is totally not
prohibited. Payment of arrears at the directions of
Ministry could be paid.
10. In the instant case, admittedly the petitioner
failed to submit his life certificate as on November 2017.
The letter dated 19.02.2019 [Annexure-R3] by the
petitioner to the fourth respondent-Ministry, it is clear
that due to his old age, he could not timely submit life
certificate. It also makes it clear that the petitioner
requested the Bank to help him out. Life certificate is said
to have been submitted by the petitioner only on
24.12.2018 and from the said date, pension is resumed
afresh under Annexure-C dated 05.10.2020.
11. It is true that pensioner shall submit life
certificate in terms of Clause 2.1 before the month of
November of every year. If the life certificate is not
submitted within next 31st October, pension is deemed
to have been cancelled. In the instant case, since the
petitioner-pensioner failed to submit life certificate by
31st October next, the pension was deemed to have been
cancelled. Clause 2.1 requires whenever pensioner is
too old to come to the Bank, then the Bank officer must
visit the place of residence of the pensioner to obtain
life certificate. Clause 2.4 would state that apart from
stopping the pension, the Bank is required or expected
to visit pensioner to find out why he/she did not submit
life certificate. Learned counsel for the respondent-Bank
was not in a position to submit as to what is the effort
made by the Bank to visit the petitioner when the
petitioner failed to submit his life certificate and
whether the Bank has found out why the petitioner did
not submit his life certificate. Admittedly, in the year
2017, the petitioner was aged 97 years and the Bank
could not expect the petitioner to visit the Bank. A
conjoint reading of Clause 2.1 and 2.4 of the Guidelines
abundantly makes it clear that it is the duty and
obligation of the third respondent-Bank to visit
pensioner to obtain the life certificate, when
the aged pensioner fails to submit his life certificate.
Moreover, it is pertinent to note that the third
respondent-Bank continued to credit State Freedom
Fighters Pension while stopping Central Pension, when
both require life certificate.
12. Freedom Fighter Pension under the scheme is
granted for the life time and petitioner has not become
ineligible or suffered any disability for receiving pension.
No doubt, submission of life certificate is a necessary
requirement and if pension is stopped for non-submission
of life certificate, on submission of life certificate pension
gets continued. When the Freedom Fighters Pension is for life
and when the pensioner is alive, there is no reason to
deny pension for the period of delay in submitting life
certificate. The purpose of life certificate is to demonstrate
that the pensioner is alive to receive pension or to see that
pension is not misused on the death of pensioner.
13. It is not the case of the respondents that the
petitioner had become ineligible for receiving Freedom
Fighters Pension or the petitioner suffered any disability
for receiving freedom fighters pension. Only reason for
stoppage of Freedom Fighters Pension was that the
petitioner had not submitted life certificate. The third
respondent-Bank could not have expected the petitioner
who was 97 years of age to come to Bank and submit
life certificate. Even though Clause 2.3 of the Guidelines
states that on re-submission of life certificate, pension
is sanctioned afresh and no arrears shall be paid, clause
4.2(iii) would state that any payment of arrears should
await the Ministry’s directions. The Ministry has not
taken any decision as to whether the petitioner would
be entitled for arrears of pension in the peculiar facts of
the present case i.e., the petitioner was aged 97 years
and there is failure on the part of the Bank to visit the
pensioner when he failed to submit life certificate.
introduced by the Central Government in a social
beneficial Scheme for the benefit of freedom fighters and
their families. In the peculiar facts of the present case, it
is unreasonable to deny the arrears of pension to the
petitioner. The object of the scheme is to benefit the
freedom fighters. The object was also to honor the freedom
fighters and where it was necessary, also to mitigate the
sufferings of those who had given their all for the country
for the hours of its need. Freedom Fighters pension is a
form of gratitude extended by an indebted Nation in
recognition of sacrifice made by freedom fighters for achieving
independence.       Liberal    approach      has      to     be
adopted in such matters.
15. For the reasons recorded above, the writ
petition is allowed in part and the fourth respondent is
directed to take appropriate decision, in terms of clause
4.2(iii) of the Guidelines for Disbursement of Central
Samman Pension (Annexure-D), with regard to
entitlement of the petitioner for payment of arrears
from 01.11.2017 to 24.12.2018, keeping in mind the
observations made above, within a period of three
months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order
and communicate its decision to the petitioner as well
as 3rd respondent-Bank.”
This Court (supra) after analyzing the guidelines on a thorough
scrutiny directs that payment of arrears between 01-11-2017 and
24-12-2018 should be decided after assessing the entitlement of
the petitioner.     This leads to issuing of communication dated
13.09.2022. The communication of Government of India reads as
“3. In view of the direction and observations of
Hon’ble Court contained in the Court order dated
10.06.2022, your case has been examined and it has been
found that arrears for the period from 1-12-2017 to
23.12.2018 are not admissible to you due to following
i.   Life Certificate was not submitted by you in
November 2017 and then even up to 31st October
2018. Non-submission of life certificate was
confirmed by Bank. In representation dated
19.02.2019, you had also admitted that life
certificate was not submitted timely.
ii.  As life certificate was not submitted in November 2017
and even up to 31st October 218, your case came in the
ambit of para 2.3 of this Ministry’s Revised Policy
Guidelines dated 06-08-2014. The para 2.3 states –
“2.3 If a pensioner does not submit his Life
Certificate by 30th November and thereafter does
not submit it even till next 31st October, then the
pension is deemed to have been cancelled and in
such cases, the bank should return the disburser’s
portion of PPO to the CPAO. After the said deemed
cancellation, if the pensioner re-appears either at
the bank or at the Ministry, the pension shall only
be resumed after a fresh sanction order is issued
by the Ministry followed by an issuance of fresh
PPO. In such cases, no arrears shall be paid.”
In accordance with the Para 2.3, this Ministry vide letter
dated 5-10-2020 issued fresh sanction restarting pension
w.e.f. 24-12-2018, while no arrears were paid for the
period before 24-12-2018.
iii. In Para 13 of the Order dated 10-06-2022, Hon’ble High
Court has observed “Even though Clause 2.3 of the
Guidelines states that on re-submission of life certificate,
pension is sanctioned afresh and no arrears shall be paid,
clause 4.2(iii) would state that any payment of arrears
should await the Ministry’s directions.” The Para 4.2 (iii)
of Revised Policy Guidelines states – If he (pensioner)
does not submit life certificate by next 31st October, the
pension is deemed to have been cancelled (as per Para
2.3 of these Guidelines) and any payment of arrears
should await Ministry’s directions.” As appears from the
Para 4.2(iii), this Ministry may pay arrears in cases of
deemed cancellation of pension by relaxing the Para 2.3
of Revised Policy Guidelines. But the relaxation to pay the
arrears, as mentioned in para 4.2(iii) is not admissible in
your case because such relaxation may be made in some
exceptional cases only wherein the pensioner was not at
fault in submission of life certificate at his end, but the
pension got deemed cancelled due to fault at some other
end. While in your case, it has been confirmed by Bank
and you both that life certificate was not submitted in
November 2017 and then even up to 31st October, 2018.
iv.     For resumption of pension, you could have submitted life
certificate or sent a representation to Bank/ Ministry in
this regard during the period of 1-11-2017 to 31-10-
2018, which is not a small period, but it was a full year.
But no such representation was received from your side.
v.      In other similar cases of deemed cancellation of pension
due to non-submission of life certificate also, this Ministry
has not paid any arrears while restarting pension.
4. As mentioned above, arrears are not admissible to you
for the period of non-submission of life certificate. However, it
has been noted that pension was not paid to you for the month
of November 2017. While your pension, due to non-submission
of life certificate in November, 2017 should have been stopped
after payment of pension of November, 2017. Thus, the arrears
for the period from 1.11.2017 to 30-11-2017 are payable to
5. You are requested to send a copy of Bank passbook
attested by Bank Branch (along with BSR Code) so that your
latest account details may be known and arrears for the period
from 1-11-2017 to 30-11-2017 may be credited in your
It is this communication that drives the petitioner yet again to this
Court, for the third time, now at the age of 102 years.
14.   It is not in dispute that the petitioner is entitled for the
said pension.     The only issue is, whether non-submission of Life
Certificate for a brief period of one year could take away the right of
the petitioner to get pension in the peculiar facts. Though
submission of Life Certificate is imperative in terms of the
guidelines and duty is cast on every pensioner to submit a Life
Certificate, certain duty is also cast upon the Bank officials as well.
The duty that is cast upon the Bank officials is that they should visit
a person whose Life Certificate has not come about immediately to
update their data with regard to restoration of pension or
otherwise.    The duty of the Bank is given a go bye. Vehement
objections are put up by the learned counsel appearing for the Bank
in order to save the officers who have derelicted in their duty in not
adhering to the guidelines. Union of India has filed its statement of
objections placing the blame on the Bank in terms of the guidelines
for having derelicted in such duty. The objections of Union of India
“(vi) That it is humbly submitted that it can be
assumed that the pension of the petitioner was stopped
because of the failure of the Bank, but it cannot be
assumed that his pension was deemed cancelled only
because of the failure of the Bank itself as there is a gap
of one year between the withholding and cancellation of
pension. The decision of the Ministry not to pay the
arrears of his pension was based on these arguments.”
The Union of India indicates that it was assumed that pension of the
petitioner had to be stopped because of failure of the Bank. But, it
cannot be assumed that his pension was deemed cancelled only
because of failure of the Bank as there is a gap of one year between
withholding and cancellation of pension. The decision of Union of
India cannot be found fault with, is the objection. The purport of
the objection is that it was the duty of the Bank under the
guidelines to have secured a Life Certificate.        No doubt, the
guidelines indicate that pension would be stopped immediately on
non-submission of Life Certificate by any person under this
particular scheme. It does not stop at that. Duty then begins on the
part of the Bank.
15.   The officers have displayed apathy to the cause of the
petitioner in the peculiar circumstances of the case by not taking
the Life Certificate as by then the petitioner was 97 years old and
was recipient of pension for a long time under the Scheme. Above
all, all these submissions have been made and negatived by the co-
ordinate Bench in the order quoted supra. Therefore, the petitioner
would be entitled to all the arrears along with interest, as the Bank
has failed to collect Life Certificate from the hands of the petitioner
in terms of the guidelines. The Bank ought to have visited the
petitioner and collected the Life Certificate and regulated pension.
A caveat, not in every case the Bank is obliged to do so. In cases
where there are genuine problems of pensioners who are unable to
visit up to the Bank, it is the duty of the Bank officers to visit those
persons and take Life Certificate and update them on the system.
The      pensioners    could  be     septuagenarians,   octogenarians,
nonagenarians or centenarians like the petitioner. Therefore, this
order cannot be construed to be sweeping direction in all cases
where the Life Certificate has to be secured by the Bank officers,
but in genuine cases, the Bank officers ought to perform their duty
in terms of the guidelines so as to avoid unnecessary litigation of
the kind that has been generated not once, twice, but three times.
16.   Pension,  is  trite,  not  a  bounty.      In   a   broader
significance, it is a measure of socio-economic justice, which
inheres economic security, in the fall of life when physical and
mental capabilities of a pensioner begins to ebb corresponding the
aging    process. The raison d’etre for grant of pension is the
inability to provide for oneself due to such old age.       This can be
withheld, curtailed or taken away, only in accordance with law.
Ebbing mental prowess and physical incapacity due to age was one
of the prime reasons why the certificate could not be submitted in
time.    This, in the peculiar facts of this case, by no stretch of
imagination, can be construed to take away the right of the
petitioner for grant of pension, particularly, in the teeth of the
guidelines.   Therefore, the Union of India and the Bank ought to
have paid arrears of pension to the petitioner and not driven the
petitioner to yet another round of litigation, third in line, at the age
of 102 years. In view of the preceding analysis, the petitioner is
held entitled to arrears of pension from 01-11-2017 to 24-12-2018,
coupled with interest and cost of litigation.
17. For the aforesaid reasons, I pass the following:
(i)     The Writ Petition is allowed with costs of `1,00,000/-
to be paid jointly and severally paid by respondents 1
and 4.
(ii)      A mandamus issues to the respondent No.1 to pay
arrears of pension which is quantified at `3,71,280/-
along with interest at 6% per annum from
24-12-2018 till date of payment.
(iii)     The aforesaid payment shall be made within 2 weeks
from the date of receipt of a copy of this order,
failing which, the petitioner would become entitled to
interest at 18% per annum from 24-12-2018 up to
the date of payment.