This is a second bail application of the applicant. The first
bail application has been rejected vide order dated
23.09.2021 passed by this Court in Criminal Misc. Bail
Application No.35243 of 2021.
Heard Mohd. Ashraf learned counsel for the applicant and
learned A.G.A. for the State.
This application has been filed seeking the release of the
applicant on bail in Case Crime No.412 of 2021, under
Sections 379 IPC and Section 3/8 U.P. Prevention of Cow
Slaughter Act, 1955 at Police Station Bhojipura, District
Submission of counsel for the applicant is that the
applicant is innocent and has been falsely implicated in
the present case due to ulterior motive. The applicant is
not named in the first information report. During
investigation, the complicity of the applicant has been
shown in the present case on the basis of his
confessional statement. After his arrest, two cases has
been slapped upon the applicant. Nothing has been
recovered from the possession of the applicant. There is
no independent eye witness of the recovery. The recovery
that has been shown is false and fabricated. Several
other submissions in order to demonstrate the falsity of
the allegations made against the applicant have also
been placed forth before the Court. It has been assured
on behalf of the applicant that he is ready to cooperate
with the process of law and shall faithfully make himself
available before the court whenever required.
Learned counsel for the applicant has lastly submitted
that the the applicant is languishing in jail since
03.08.2021 and in the wake of heavy pendency of cases
in the Court, there is no likelihood of any early conclusion
of trial, therefore, the applicant may be enlarged on bail.
He has also given an undertaking that in case the
applicant is release on bail, the applicant shall deposit
Rs.1 lakh in Registered Gaushala at Bareilly and also
shall serve at Gaushalal within a period of month.
On the other hand, learned AGA for the State has
vehemently opposed the prayer for bail.
After perusing the record in the light of the submissions
made at the bar and after taking an overall view of all the
facts and circumstances of this case, the nature of
evidence, the period of detention already undergone, the
unlikelihood of early conclusion of trial and also the
absence of any convincing material to indicate the
possibility of tampering with the evidence, this Court is of
the view that the applicant may be enlarged on bail.
Let the applicant-Saleem Alias Kaliya, who is involved in
aforementioned case crime be released on bail on his
furnishing a personal bond and two sureties each in the
like amount to the satisfaction of the court concerned
subject to following conditions. Further, before issuing the
release order, the sureties be verified.
(i) The applicant shall deposit Rs.1 lakh in favour of any one
Registered Gaushal of District Bareilly within a month after
release. Immediately after release from jail, the applicant shall
himself availablet at Gaushalal and seve the cows for a period
of one month.
(ii) The applicant shall file an undertaking to the effect that he shall
not seek any adjournment on the date fixed for evidence when the
witnesses are present in Court. In case of default of this condition, it
shall be open for the Trial Court to treat it as abuse of liberty of bail
and pass orders in accordance with law.
(iii) The applicant shall remain present before the Trial Court on
each date fixed, either personally or through his counsel. In case of
his absence, without sufficient cause, the Trial Court may proceed
against him under Section 229-A IPC.
(iv) In case, the applicant misuses the liberty of bail during trial and
in order to secure his presence proclamation under Section 82
Cr.P.C., may be issued and if applicant fails to appear before the
Court on the date fixed in such proclamation, then, the Trial Court
shall initiate proceedings against him, in accordance with law, under
(v) The applicant shall remain present, in person, before the Trial
Court on dates fixed for (1) opening of the case, (2) framing of
charge and (3) recording of statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C. If
in the opinion of the Trial Court absence of the applicant is
deliberate or without sufficient cause, then it shall be open for the
Trial Court to treat such default as abuse of liberty of bail and
proceed against him in accordance with law.
(vi) The Trial Court may make all possible efforts/endeavour and try
to conclude the trial within a period of one year after the release of
the applicant.
In case of breach of any of the above conditions, it shall
be a ground for cancellation of bail.
It is made clear that observations made in granting bail to
the applicant shall not in any way affect the learned trial
Judge in forming his independent opinion based on the
testimony of the witnesses.
Location: High Court of Judicature at