1)    The petitioners have invoked the writ jurisdiction of
this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India
for issuance of a Writ of Mandamus commanding upon
the respondents not to disengage them with respect to
operation of Food Fair Price Shops allotted to them under
valid and proper licences.
2)    Before a closer look at the grounds urged in the
memo of petition, it shall be apt to have an overview of the
background facts giving rise to the present petition.
3)    Case   set   up   by    the    petitioners      is   that   the
Government of J&K issued a policy for opening Fair Price
Shops under targeted Public Distribution (Control) Order,
2015 and a scheme thereunder was issued by the
Government vide Order No.127-FCS&CA of 2016 dated
04.08.2016. The object of the scheme with respect to
opening      of   Food    Fair  Price    Shops    at    other
villages/locations was to provide easy access/availability
of food to every household at the nearest possible location
and to provide livelihood to the unemployed youth on
commission basis. According to the petitioners, they are
operating and running the Food Fair Price Shops at
different   villages/locations allotted   to them    by   the
concerned competent authority after completing the legal
formalities and requirements.
4)    It is further case of the petitioners that petitioner
No.1 was granted licence in reference to approval issued
by the Administrative Department on 06.02.2003 and
sanction was accorded to him for grant of dealership on
commission basis for the location Khoshipora for 243
rationees.    Petitioner  No.2  was    granted  licence    on
20.08.2014 and the sanction for dealership was accorded
to him for the location K-Check Wagund covering three
villages for 489 rationees. Petitioner No.3 was granted
licence on 23.02.2006 and dealership sanction was
accorded in his favour for the area, namely, Dalwatch for
557 rationees. Petitioner No.4 was granted licence on
20.082014 for Lower Munda location for 235 rationees.
Petitioner No.5 was granted licence on 20.12.2011 and
was accorded dealership sanction for Check Budwani and
he was supplying ration to 285 rationees. Petitioner No.6
was given licence on 20.10.2003 and was accorded
sanction for grant of dealership for the area known as
Drienen    and   he   was  supplying     ration   among     376
rationees.   Petitioner  No.7   was    granted      licence   on
11.04.2004 for the area, namely, Drienen Wanpora and he
was supplying ration to 755 rationees. Similarly, petitioner
No.8 has been given licence on 13.10.2003 for the
location,   namely,   Kurigam,    for   304    rationees    and
petitioner No.9 was granted license on 10.06.208 and he
was supplying ration to 213 rationees. All the petitioners
have been granted dealership on commission basis to deal
with the transaction regarding sale and storage of food
grains and sugar under public distribution system to the
consumers of their concerned areas.
5)    The   grievance   of  the   petitioners    is    that  the
Government of J&K has come up with a new policy vide
Government      Order   No.70-FCS&CA        of    2018     dated
12.03.2018 and they apprehend that their position may
be   disturbed    without  following    the   due     procedure
established by law. Consequently, petitioners seek a
Mandamus commanding upon the respondents not to
disengage them and disturb their existing position with
respect to the operation of Food Fair Price Shops allotted
to them under valid licenses.
6)    Countervailing the stand taken by the petitioners,
the respondents are affront on the predominant premise
that the present petition being based on assumptions and
presumptions is not maintainable.         According to the
respondents, none of the Constitutional, Statutory or
fundamental rights of the petitioners have been violated
and since no order has been passed and no action has
been taken by the respondents, therefore, the present
petition, being misdirected and misconceived, is liable to
be dismissed. The respondents have taken a specific stand
that whenever any order will be issued, it will be based on
and strictly in accordance with rules and guidelines
issued on the subject.
7)    Having   heard   rival   contentions of   the  learned
counsels and having appreciated the law governing the
field, I am of the considered opinion that it no longer
remains    res integra    that   a  writ petition  on   mere
apprehension or assumptions and presumptions is not
8)    While reiterating the grounds urged in the memo of
petition, Mr. Gulzar Ahmad Bhat, learned advocate
appearing for the petitioners has relied upon judgments of
the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the cases of D. A. V.
College, Bathinda etc. vs. The State of Punjab and
others     (AIR    1971   SC    1731)     and   Adi   Saiva
Sivachariyargal Nala Sangam vs. The Government of
Tamil Nadu reported in (2016) 2 SCC 725,          to submit
that a writ petition under Article 226 can be maintained
even on the basis of apprehensions when fundamental
rights of the citizens are threatened.
9)    I have carefully gone through the case law cited at
bar by learned counsel for the petitioners and on perusal
of both the citations, it is clear that both the cases are
clearly   distinguishable    on  facts and   circumstances
attending the present case.
Supreme Court has held that a petition under Article 32 of
Constitution is maintainable if fundamental rights of the
petitioner are either threatened or violated and it is not
necessary for any person, who considers himself to be
aggrieved, to wait till the actual threat has taken place.
However, Hon’ble Supreme Court made this observation in
the background that the Government of Punjab had
issued various circulars in the light of Sections 4(2) and 5
of the Punjab University Act 35 of 1961. It is pertinent to
mention that Hon’ble Supreme Court quashed the said
circulars being ultra vires of the powers vested in the
11)   Similarly,      the      Apex      Court      in    Adi      Saiva
Sivachariyargal Nala Sangam (supra), has observed that
institution of writ proceedings need not await actual
prejudice and adverse effect and consequences. In the said
case, the writ petitioners had assailed certain orders and
ordinances issued by the Government of State of Tamil
Nadu. Relevant extract of the judgment, for the facility of
reference, is reproduced below:
“It is difficult for us to accept the contentions
advanced on behalf of the respondents with regard to
the maintainability of writ petitions on two counts.
Firstly, it is difficult to appreciate as to why the
petitioners should be non-suited at the threshold
merely because the G.O. dated 23.05.2006 has not
been given effect to by actual orders of the State
Government. The institution of a writ proceeding
need not await actual prejudice and adverse effect
and consequence. An apprehension of such harm, if
the same is well founded, can furnish a cause of
action for moving the Court. The argument that the
present writ petition is founded on a cause relating to
appointment in a public office and hence not
entertainable as a public interest litigation would be
too simplistic a solution to adopt to answer the issues
that have been highlighted which concerns the
religious faith and practice of a large number of
citizens of the country and raises claims of century old
traditions and usage having the force of law. The
above is the second ground, namely, the gravity of the
issues that arise, that impel us to make an attempt to
answer the issues raised and arising in the writ
petitions for determination on the merits thereof.”
(underlined for emphasis)
12)   It is evident from the afore-quoted case law that a
petition can be entertained if fundamental right of a
citizen is threatened and the petitioner need not await the
actual prejudice or adverse effects and consequences,
provided his apprehension is well founded. In other words,
the   petitioner        is    obliged     to   give    reasons     for   his
apprehension and writ petition cannot be maintained on
mere assumptions and without any basis.
13)   Adverting to the present case, the only apprehension
of the petitioners is that since the Government of J&K has
introduced a new scheme dated 12th March, 2018, their
position may be disturbed. The relevant extract of the said
Government Order, reproduced in the writ petition, is as
“The licenses obtained under any of the previous
relevant order in force on the date of coming into
force of this order, shall be deemed valid, subject to
the condition that the same is certified by the
concerned Director, FCS&CA, that the licence holder
is fulfilling all the codal formalities enumerated under
law/rules/orders/guidelines in vogue meant for the
public distribution system so far as it pertains to the
issuance of licence for Fair Price Shop dealership, and
accordingly a certificate to this effect be submitted to
the Administrative department within 15 days from
issuance of this order.”
14)   It is evident from the afore-quoted Government Order
that the licences obtained under the previous orders are
deemed valid subject, however, to the condition that the
same is certified by the concerned Director, FCS&CA, to
ensure that the licence holder fulfills all the codal
formalities under relevant law/rules/orders/ guidelines in
vogue meant for the public distribution system. As a
matter of fact the existing position of the licence holders
under the previous order has been taken care of under the
new order dated 12.03.2018 and there is nothing on the
record to suggest that respondents have any intention to
initiate any action, much less to pass any order, affecting
the rights of the petitioners. It is manifest as such that
petitioners have filed the present petition on the basis of
mere apprehensions, which is unfounded and cannot be
15)   I am fortified in my opinion by an order dated
03.05.2019 passed by this Court in the case of Nazir
Ahmad vs. State and others [WP(C) No.1601/2019]. The
relevant extract of the order is reproduced below:
“4. The present petition challenges the action which
the petitioner apprehends may be taken on the basis
of aforesaid complaint. I am of the opinion that mere
filing of a complaint again the petitioner does give him
any cause of action to approach this Court. I find the
present writ petition is premature at this stage as no
formal action adversely affecting the rights of the
petitioner is either initiated or taken. The writ, on
mere apprehension, is not maintainable, unless there
is material on record to indicate that the adverse
action is imminent or there is real threat of invasion of
rights of the petitioner. In the instant case, nothing of
this sort has been placed on record.”
16)   In a similar fact situation, this Court in Charanjit
Singh Kala and others vs. Union of India and others
[WP(C) No.2318/2022 dated 03.11.2022] has made the
following observations:
“7.It is settled proposition of law that no writ petition
can be filed on mere apprehension or without any
cause of action which admittedly has not been
accrued in the present case and thus the present
petition, in light of the aforesaid facts and
circumstances is not maintainable and is liable to be
dismissed.”
17)   Similarly, High Court of Kerala in Hamjad Ali vs.
Union of India and others [WP(C) No.27165 of 2020
dated on 08.12.2020] observed as below:
“To answer the said question, it is only apposite to
refer to a decision of the Hon’ble Apex Court in
Manish S. Pardasani v. Inspector State Excise,
reported in [2019(2) SCC 660]. In the said decision, the
Apex Court while deprecating the judgment carrying
certain directions issued in a writ petition filed
apprehending issuance of an adverse order by an
appellate authority held that the High Court should
not have pre-empted the passing of any adverse order
by an authority and further held that the settled
position is that a court could stay or quash only those
orders, which are impugned in the lis before it and in
other words, only if an order is actually passed, that
will be available for challenge and a writ petition
founded only on an apprehension shall not be
maintained under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India. Certainly, this Court will not be justified in
passing an order not to execute a detention order
when the petitioner himself is not certain whether
such an order has been passed against him.
In the said circumstances, we are of the view that this
writ petition is premature. The petitioner could not
have approached this Court merely based on an
apprehension. The writ petition is, therefore, liable to
fail and accordingly it is dismissed.”
18)  High     Court       of    Kerala       in   Parent      Teachers’
Association and another vs. State of Kerala and others
[WP(C) No.8695 of 2006 decided on 08.11.2010] has also
“In the facts and circumstances of the case, I do not
think that the petitioners have any subsisting
grievance which can be entertained in a petition
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India. As
rightly submitted by the learned counsel for the
respondents, the apprehension of the petitioners
voiced in the Writ Petition shows that the Writ Petition
is premature. No rights of the petitioners are affected
as of now. If any Notification is issued proposing the
upgradation of any school, the parties concerned
would get an opportunity to raise their objections. I do
not think that the petitioners have made out sufficient
grounds for granting any relief to them at this stage.”
19)  In identical circumstances, High Court of Orissa at
Cuttack in M/S East End Technologies Private Limited
vs. Union of India and others (WP(C) No.22223 of 2022)
“Having heard learned Sr. counsel appearing for the
petitioner and after going through the records, it
appears that the petitioner has approached this Court
by filing this writ petition in apprehension. Therefore,
the writ petition is premature one. However, in the
event any adverse order is passed by the authority, it
is open to the petitioner to pursue its remedy before
the appropriate forum in accordance with law.”
20)     Having regard to what has been observed and
discussed above, the present petition having been filed on
unfounded            apprehensions         and    being     premature         is
dismissed with connected CM(s). Interim direction, if any,
shall stand vacated.
Whether the order is speaking: Yes/No
Whether the order is reportable:Yes/No