The petitioner has approached this Court by filing this
petition under Section 438 of the Cr.P.C. for grant of anticipatory bail in
FIR No.117 dated 27.9.2022 under Sections 420, 120-B of the IPC
registered at Police Station Kathunangal, District Amritsar.
Notice of motion.
On the asking of this Court, Mr. GS Sandhu, DAG, Punjab
accepts notice on behalf of the respondent-State.           At this stage, Mr.
Ritesh Pandey, Advocate appears and files Vakalatnama on behalf of the
It is alleged in the complaint moved by the complainant-
Harpreet Singh against Arshdeep Singh and              Sarabjit Kaur that the
accused persons agreed to send the complainant and his wife to France in
a sum of Rs.17.00 lacs and as such he transferred the money in the bank
account of accused. Thereafter accused persons started delaying the matter
on one pretext or the other. Accused persons also stopped to receive his
phone calls. It is alleged that accused persons in connivance with each
other have cheated the complainant.
Learned counsel for the petitioner, inter alia, submits that the
petitioner is being dragged in the present case without any connecting
evidence against her. The petitioner is sought to be implicated only on the
basis that the amount has been transferred into the account of her son.
Learned counsel further submits that nothing is to be recovered from the
petitioner and thus no custodial interrogation is required.
On the contrary, learned counsel for the State assisted by the
learned counsel for the complainant submits that the petitioner alongwith
other co-accused have committed serious offence and a huge amount is
involved in this case which is yet to be recovered. Learned counsel
submits that in the FIR, there is specific allegation against the petitioner
that after the transfer of Rs.8.00 lakhs from the account of complainant
Harpreet Singh into the account of petitioner's son- Arshdeep Singh, even
then his mother Sarabjeet Kaur called the complainant at her home and
gave the photocopy of the visa and demanded Rs.4.00 lakhs on the pretext
of getting the ticket issued. Upon this, on 25.2.2022, the complainant
deposited Rs.2.00 lakhs in the account of son of the petitioner and further
a sum of Rs.2.00 lakhs have been deposited in the account of petitioner's
son. Learned counsel submits that it has been found that petitioner's son
and the petitioner in connivance with each other defrauded the
complainant to the tune of Rs.12,35,000/-. The investigation is at initial
stage and recovery is yet to be effected from the accused persons and as
such custodial interrogation of the petitioner is necessary for finding out
the modus operandi of commission of offence.
Having heard learned counsel for the parties, I am of the
considered opinion that there are chain of events and persons in the
commission of offence, as per prosecution story. The petitioner has been
specifically named in the FIR and there are specific allegations against
the petitioner that on her asking the complainant deposited the aforesaid
amount in the account of her son.           There are serious allegations of
cheating and fraud and prima facie involvement of the petitioner in the
commission of offence in connivance with other co-accused is writ large.
Recovery is yet to be made. In this view of the matter, I do not deem it a
fit case for grant of concession of anticipatory bail to the petitioner. The
petitioner’s custodial interrogation is necessary for complete and effective
investigation. In case the same is denied to the investigating agency, it
would leave many gaps and                loopholes, adversely affecting the
investigation, which is uncalled for. Moreover, investigation is at initial
Needless to say, such type of cheating, duping and fraud is
rampant in our society and is often adopted by fraudsters and
unscrupulous persons on pretext of sending innocent people abroad and
thereby duping them. This has become a cakewalk to amass wealth
illegally over night which needs to be curbed with an iron hand to save
the innocent people.
It is settled proposition of law that power exercisable under
Section 438 of the Cr.P.C. is somewhat extraordinary in character and it is
to be exercised in exceptional cases. This view of mine finds support from
the judgment of Hon’ble Supreme Court in Madhya Pradesh Vs.
In view of the discussion made above, the present petition
being devoid of any merit is dismissed. Nothing said herein shall be
construed as an expression of opinion on the merits of the case.