Tulsi Puri (now deceased) through his LRs                 .....Respondents
Present :    Mr. Munish Kumar Garg, Advocate for the petitioner.
The instant revision petition has been preferred under
Article 227 of the Constitution of India for setting aside of the order
dated 23.05.2022 passed by learned Civil Judge (Sr. Divn.), Narwana in
Execution Petition No.32 of 2019 in case titled as 'Tulsi Puri through
his LRs Vs. Siriya through his LRs' whereby objections under Order 47
read with Section 151 of the CPC preferred by the petitioners were
Learned counsel for the petitioner inter alia contends that
the Court below while passing the impugned order dated 23.05.2022
whereby his objections under Order 47 read with Section 151 of the
CPC were dismissed, committed manifest error. He further submits that
the trial Court failed to appreciate that the respondents were shown to
be joint owners of share to the extent of 14/442 (i.e. 0 kanal 6 marla
were joint) in the jamabandi 2012-13. However, they had sought
possession of land measuring 8 kanal 7 marla in the execution
proceedings. He submits that the respondents could not seek possession
of land beyond 0 kanal 6 marla as their ownership rights were limited to
the extent of their respective shares only. Thus, in the absence of other
co-owners they had no right to take possession of land beyond their
share. Learned counsel also argued that since there had been non-
compliance of order 1 Rule 8 of the CPC by the trial Court the decree
could not be executed.
I have heard learned counsel and perused the material on
It would be relevant to point out that the suit land is in the
joint ownership of the respondents and other co-owners as per the
entries recorded in the ownership column of the jamabandi for the year
2012-13. Not only this, admittedly no partition by metes and bounds
has also been effected.
In the circumstances this Court is unable to concur with the
submissions of the learned counsel that the respondent being a co-
owner could not seek possession of land beyond his share. Hon'ble
Supreme Court in M/s India Umbrella Manufacturing Co. Vs.
Bhagabandei Agarwalla (D) by LRs : 2004(1) RCR (Civil) 686 and
36 has held that any one owner out of the co-owners can seek
possession of the entire joint land. Such co-owner would do so on his
own behalf, in his own right and as an agent of other co-owners. The
consent of other co-owners would be assumed to have been taken
unless it is shown to the contrary that co-owners were not agreeable and
despite their disagreement, a suit had still been instituted.
Learned counsel has failed to bring to the notice of this
Court any material from which it could be shown that other co-owners
were not agreeable to take possession. Moreover, the scope of
interference in execution proceedings is very limited as the Court
cannot go behind the decree. The execution proceedings cannot be
allowed to become another round of litigation.