Following orders were passed in the matter on 22.2.2021:-
"Petitioner is substantively appointed as headmaster in a primary school. It appears that
vide order dated 13.7.2017, District Basic Education Officer, Chandauli has sent the
petitioner on deputation on the post of Zila Vyayam Shikshak. Petitioner has joined as
such and is working since then. On the deputation post, petitioner is performing various
works as have been specified in paragraph no. 5 of the writ petition. An order has now
been passed by the Director General School Education on 19.1.2021 which is assailed in
this petition. It records that for various works relating to supervision of games and scouts
activity, teachers have been sent on deputation but they are not performing teaching
workand are only performing other works. A direction, therefore, has been issued to all
District Basic Education Officers requiring the games and scouts teachers/ physical
education teachers attached at the block level to be relieved so that these teachers could
perform their primary function as teacher in the school and only in addition to it they may
perform other functions. A consequential order has been passed by the District Basic
Education Officer, Chandauli relieving the petitioner from the additional work assigned
to him on account of his deputation. Aggrieved by these orders, petitioner is before this
Learned counsel for the petitioner states that more than 3500 teachers have been assigned
other than non teaching activity in the State of U.P. and attention of the Court has been
invited to Annexure-12 to the writ petition in support thereof. It is further contended that
there is no justification for the respondents to pass orders impugned inasmuch as games
teachers, in sufficient number, are otherwise available and regular functioning of the
school is otherwise restricted on account of Covid-19 pandemic. Submission is that the
orders impugned are wholly arbitrary.
Sri Anuj Agrawal, Sri Deo Dayal and Sri Durga Singh, learned counsel for the
respondents defend the orders passed by the authorities.
A perusal of the order impugned would clearly reveal that the Director General, School
Education has directed the District Basic Education Officer to direct all the teachers who
have been assigned additional duties to ensure that they perform their preliminary
responsibility of teaching work in the institution. It is only thereafter that they can
perform other works. This order of the Director General, School Education is clearly in
aid of the cause of education inasmuch as teachers have the preliminary responsibility to
perform teaching work and all other functions are only secondary. The Director General,
School Education, therefore, must examine and ensure that the order dated 19.1.2021 is
implemented in letter and spirit inasmuch as the teachers who are either headmaster or
teachers must be repatriated to their parent cadre and should be authorised to perform
teaching work first. There is no reason as to why the teachers are being given other works
in preference to their substantive appointment as teachers. It is only in extra time that
additional responsibility could be given to them. The Director General, therefore, shall
ensure that the petitioner alongwith others who are substantively appointed as teachers
are repatriated to their parent cadre and are directed to perform work of teaching first. In
the event petitioner has not joined his parent cadre, it shall be open for the authorities to
take necessary action in the matter.
The Director General, School Education shall examine this aspect of the matter and file
his affidavit, clearly specifying as to how he proposes to ensure that teaching work is
given primary and additional work is not assigned to them at the cost of teaching work.
The Director General, School Education has filed his personal
affidavit clearly stating that all teachers, who are assigned
duties of games and scouts activities, have been repatriated to
perform their parent teaching work. It is further stated that
petitioner has also been repatriated and has joined at his original
place of posting as Headmaster of the Primary School.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has pressed, with vehemence,
the averments made in para 16 of the writ petition, which are
"16. That, it is pertinent to mention here that there are 75 District and 880 blocks in the
State of Uttar Pradesh. There are 3402 ARP (Academic Resource Persons) and KRP
(Key Resource Person) who are basically appointed as assistant teachers in Junior High
Schools and now they are performing the duties as ARP/KRP for supportive supervision
in Mission Prerana for running e-schools. ARP/KRP who are getting Rs.2500/- as
Mobility allowances. It is provided in the G.O. dated 07.08.2020 that they shall report in
BRC Office. Meaning thereby they are not reporting to their schools concern for teaching
the students. Further, it is provided in the aforesaid G.O. that SRG shall not report to
their school but they shall report to the project District offices and they would not go to
their schools unless the students are not coming to the school during Covid-19
It is submitted by learned counsel for the petitioner that
petitioner is only games' teacher and his activity of teaching in
school is not that important as of teachers who are to teach
Science and Humanity subjects. It is submitted that such
teachers have been given additional work and are also getting
allowance of Rs.2500/- per month, whereas petitioner's
allowance is only Rs.300/- per month. It is submitted that there
is no justification to repatriate the petitioner and the State has
not treated him at par with other teachers, who are to act as
academic key resource person.
This Court is at a loss to understand as to what exactly is the
grievance of petitioner. Petitioner is substantively a Headmaster
in a Primary School and his primary duty is to perform teaching
work and to supervise the primary institution. There is no
factual issue that petitioner has been repatriated to perform
teaching work. Payment of petitioner as Headmaster is also not
disputed. His entire anxiety is to somehow get the additional
work for which Rs.300/- per month is to be paid extra. For such
purposes he is claiming parity with key resource persons.
Performing of additional duties is not the reason for which a
teacher is appointed. It is only after performing of essential
functions as teacher that State can ask a teacher to perform
additional work. Performance of additional work in no
concerned teacher/Headmaster. This Court, therefore, is not
inclined to entertain petitioner's grievance, inasmuch as the
respondents have merely asked the teachers to perform their
essential teaching work and not encourage allocation of
additional duties as District Coordinator etc. The Director
General shall, therefore, ensure that other category of teachers
are also not allowed to perform non-teaching work at the cost of
teaching work, which is likely to impair the work for which
they have been appointed. The Director General shall ensure
that all teachers substantively appointed as such are allowed to
function and perform teaching work first and only thereafter
additional work may be given to them in case of need.
Necessary decision in that regard would be taken by the
Director General, School Education, forthwith.
Subject to the above observations, this writ petition is
consigned to records.