The petitioner is before this Court calling in question
proceedings in C.C.No.22955 of 2021 pending on the file of the
I Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Bangalore arising
out of crime in Crime No.245 of 2021 registered for offences
punishable under Sections 66(C), 66(D) and 67(A) of the
Information Technology Act, 2000 and Sections 419 and 420 of
2.   Heard Sri Amar Correa, learned counsel for the
petitioner, Shri K.S.Abhijith, learned High Court Government
Pleader for respondent No.1 and Sri S.Diraviam Dinesh, learned
counsel appearing for respondent No.2.
3.   Brief facts, as projected by the prosecution, are as
The    complainant    is   an   information   technology
professional.   The petitioner and the complainant come in
CRL.P No. 8929 of 2021
contact with each other with a dating app ‘Tinder’.      Both of
them get acquainted to each other and it appears that on a
particular night when they were on chat, the complainant
claims to be completely stressed and expresses such stress to
the petitioner. The petitioner then represents that she has an
instagram page “positivity-for-a-360-life” and she is a Wellness
Therapist who would advocate and promote general well being
of mind, body and soul. The complainant on the representation
being made by the petitioner with regard to her qualification in
the therapist goes on transferring amounts on class to class
basis. After the end of the class, the complainant claims to be
satisfied of the class and then transferred the money.
4.    This goes on throughout the period the country was
engulfed with Covid-19 and intermittent lock-down being in
place. The classes of wellness therapy goes little wrong when
the complainant begins to get interested in meeting the
wellness therapist, the petitioner, as they had never met each
other.    The transaction or the classes had happened through
instagram. The complainant getting interested in the petitioner
started sending lewd messages and started to post indecent
contents containing pornography and other material on the
CRL.P No. 8929 of 2021
inbox of the petitioner. Then the petitioner blocks the account
of the complainant. It is then the complainant begins to dig at
the veracity of the therapy that the petitioner claimed and
comes to know that the petitioner had 15 such profiles of
instagram or other social media and then registers a complaint
against the petitioner for offence of cheating and the offence
under the Information Technology Act in Crime No.245 of 2021.
The Police after investigation file a charge sheet for the very
offences so alleged earlier on 4-08-2021 in C.C.No.22955 of
2021. It is the filing of the charge sheet that drives the
petitioner to this Court in the subject petition.
5.    The   learned   counsel  for   the   petitioner would
contend that the petitioner who is a wellness therapist is
innocent of what is alleged against her. It is the complainant
who approached the petitioner for his well being and after
taking treatment, on being satisfied with every class, has
voluntarily transferred all the amounts. It is only because the
petitioner did not yield to the lewd requests of the complainant,
the complaint comes to be registered. It is purely a matter of
contract between the petitioner and the complainant who has
CRL.P No. 8929 of 2021
consented to the classes and seeks quashment of entire
5.1. On the other hand, the learned counsel appearing
for    the   2nd   respondent/complainant   would   refute  the
submissions to contend that it is not the complainant who
approached the petitioner since the first message comes from
the petitioner to the complainant in a particular name called
‘Rishta’ which is not her name. She then represented that she
is a wellness therapist and lured the petitioner into treatment
and ultimately cheated the petitioner for transfer of close to
Rs.3,15,000/- and would, therefore, contend that the petitioner
is a con-woman and seeks dismissal of the petition. The learned
High Court Government Pleader would also contend that there
are abundant materials of cheating against the petitioner and
therefore, it is a matter for trial.
6.   I have given my anxious consideration to the
submissions made by the respective learned counsel and
perused the material on record.
7.   The afore-narrated facts though not in dispute a
little elaboration of the charge sheet materials which are
CRL.P No. 8929 of 2021
appended to the petition clearly demonstrate that the petitioner
initially sent a message to the complainant on Tinder and later
began to chat with the complainant or the complainant with the
petitioner on instagram.     The chats would reveal that on a
particular night when the complainant came to be stressed out,
the petitioner represents that she is a wellness therapist and
has a team of wellness therapists and her team would take care
of the well being of the petitioner.     It is from this date the
wellness therapy on the complainant began. Wellness classes
were administered upon the complainant and the complainant
on being satisfied with those classes had sent several amounts
intermittently totaling to Rs.3,15,000/- to the petitioner for the
said therapy.
8.   The complainant generates interest in the petitioner
and seeks that he wanted to meet her which she refused and
then the therapy goes wrong. The complainant starts to send
lewd messages which led to blocking of the account of the
complainant. It is later the discovery happens with regard to
the nature and functioning of the petitioner through several
instagram web pages. Then a complaint comes to be registered
against the petitioner. It is here it becomes germane to notice
CRL.P No. 8929 of 2021
the claim of the petitioner. The petitioner claims to be a
wellness    therapist,  a    professional, handling   a  web-page
‘positivity-for-a-360-life’. The claim of the petitioner is seen in
the consent form, therefore, the consent form becomes
germane to be noticed, and is extracted hereunder for the
purpose of quick reference:
Teletherapy is an online service which
facilitates mental health therapy sessions
between a client (you) and a counsellor/coach
(us). Our online sessions are conducted
through Skype, Hangouts, Zoom sessions or
any interactive internet technologies. Client
and the counsellor/coach need not be in the
same physical location.
Sessions are based on an individual’s need and
expectations. Clients are expected to attend sessions
regularly and require a minimum of twenty-four
hours’ notice for cancellation and reschedule. Also,
cancellations of sessions are at the discretion of the
client and coach/counsellor.
Our service (through teletherapy), program            or
curriculum is not an emergency service provider:
We are in no means affiliated with a
government entity. We cater only on a need-to-
basis. At the moment, we are not partnered
with any of the other private organizations
which in turn offer any coupons, discounts or
anything        that       promises      credits       a
reimbursement policy and thereon. Such
claims, at any point shall not be entertained by
any coach/counsellor.
Our services includes an elaborate curriculum
designed on holistic wellness a baton bearer that
empathizes with the mind, body and the soul.
Wellness being multidimensional, focusses on
integrating a self’s Spiritual, Physical, Emotional,
Career, Intellectual, Environmental, Social aspects
for continued growth and balance. The program
which executes through teletherapy sessions will also
include perception-based activities.
Please note that we do not promote any religion in
the process.
Complementary          and     alternative   therapies
include,     expressive      art    therapy,    picture
perception, journal/journey therapy, Trauma-
CBT), Neuropsychology, narrative therapy,
Schema Therapy among others.
The continuum extends to understanding self-
responsibility & love, stress management, critical
thinking, finding meaning, transcending, supportive
therapy, effective communication and so on. This is
designed to provide a sense of optimal wellness, but
by no means is prescriptive. The roadmap ahead is
not one-size-fits-all!
Clients and Coaches are allowed to keep their details
confidential. If a client choose not to reveal his/her
name for documentation purposes, the coach can
auto address the client with a pseudo name.
In case of clients having a deterministic diagnosis,
we rely on supportive, alternative therapies than
differential diagnosis By this, we only provide
supportive and emotional case. In rare cases, we
limit our consult to a maximum of sharing an
opinion, which by no means should be considered
prescriptive. Ultimate decision, however, remains
with the clients always!
The client is privileged to his/her privacy. By no
means, a counsellor/coach is allowed to share any
personal information with a third-party source unless
summoned by an authorized subject in cases of a
client’s wrongful doing or a misleading conduct.
Should there be such cases, we are allowed to either
participate in the exercise or opt-out of it totally. Any
subject affiliated with offering wellness program will
not be held responsible or will not be included in
anything that may seem demeaning or be subjected
to jeopardy. If such instances occur, we may
approach the court of law.
The content or information shared within a
counselling season is by no means admissible as a
government document or in the court of law or as
any medium-bases evidence, should there be a
summon.
information and have understood all terms and
conditions of the offering/service. I hereby consent
to all the code of conduct and best practices as
mentioned,      to   maintain    a    healthy      client-
coach/counsellor relationship.
In the said consent form, it is claimed that the team of
the petitioner, are baton bearers which emphasizes wellness of
mind, body and soul. It also depicts that complementary and
alternative therapies to include, expressive art therapy, picture
perception, journal/journey therapy, trauma-focused cognitive
CRL.P No. 8929 of 2021
behavioral    therapy,    neuropsychology,      narrative  therapy,
schema therapy among others. The complainant has no doubt
signed the consent form but that does not mean that the
petitioner can escape the clutches of law merely because the
complainant     has  signed    the    consent form.   There   is no
document or rather is an admitted fact that the petitioner has
no qualification to be in the field of any kind of wellness therapy
as projected. It is her own generated web page, without any
qualification. Therefore it is a case where the petitioner without
any substance or qualification lured the customers into the web
of wellness therapy through the web page.
9.    A perusal at the chats that are appended clearly
demonstrate that it is the petitioner who has lured the
complainant getting into the said wellness therapy and the
discovery as also the charge sheet material is that the
petitioner has several such web pages in different names. In
fact the name of the petitioner is not even divulged in the
therapy that she has administered upon the complainant in the
subject petition. Therefore, it becomes necessary for a trial for
the petitioner to come out clean. It is also germane to notice
that over the lewd messages, a crime is registered by the
CRL.P No. 8929 of 2021
petitioner against the complainant and the same is pending
adjudication. Therefore, the petitioner is required to come out
clean in the impugned proceedings as the offences alleged
against the petitioner are for the one punishable under Sections
419 and 420 of the IPC. Section 419 and 420 of the IPC read as
“419.    Punishment       for     cheating    by
personation.—Whoever cheats by personation shall
be punished with imprisonment of either description
for a term which may extend to three years, or with
fine, or with both.
420. Cheating and dishonestly inducing
delivery of property.—Whoever cheats and thereby
dishonestly induces the person deceived to deliver
any property to any person, or to make, alter or
destroy the whole or any part of a valuable security,
or anything which is signed or sealed, and which is
capable of being converted into a valuable security,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven
years, and shall also be liable to fine.”
Section 420 has its ingredients in Section 415. Section
415 mandates that if the accused has induced the victim or
lured the victim into parting with any property with a dishonest
intention at the inception, it becomes an ingredient for the
offence of cheating. The chats would reveal that the petitioner
had initially represented that she is a wellness therapist and
her team would take care of the complainant. Therefore,
CRL.P No. 8929 of 2021
without having any team or any qualification whatsoever, it was
the web page prima facie created to lure the complainant and
the like. It is therefore, the offence of cheating comes clearly
made out against the petitioner. The other offences alleged are
the one punishable under the Information Technology Act. An
entry in the complaint or the summary of the charge sheet
clearly makes out an offence that would become ingredients of
Sections 66(C) & (D) and 67(A) of the Information Technology
Act and these are in the realm of seriously disputed questions
of fact.   Reference being made to the Judgment of the Apex
Court in the case of KAPTAN SINGH v. STATE OF UTTAR
PRADESH – (2021) 9 SCC 35, in the circumstances, becomes
apposite.   The Apex Court in the said judgment has held as
“9.1. At the outset, it is required to be
noted that in the present case the High Court in
exercise of powers under Section 482 CrPC has
quashed the criminal proceedings for the
offences under Sections 147, 148, 149, 406,
329 and 386 IPC. It is required to be noted that
when the High Court in exercise of powers
under Section 482 CrPC quashed the criminal
proceedings, by the time the investigating
officer after recording the statement of the
witnesses, statement of the complainant and
collecting the evidence from the incident place
and after taking statement of the independent
witnesses and even statement of the accused
persons, has filed the charge-sheet before the
CRL.P No. 8929 of 2021
learned Magistrate for the offences under
Sections 147, 148, 149, 406, 329 and 386 IPC
and even the learned Magistrate also took the
cognizance. From the impugned judgment and
order [Radhey Shyam Gupta v. State of U.P., 2020
SCC OnLine All 914] passed by the High Court, it
does not appear that the High Court took into
consideration the material collected during the
investigation/inquiry and even the statements
recorded. If the petition under Section 482 CrPC
was at the stage of FIR in that case the
allegations in the FIR/complaint only are
required to be considered and whether a
cognizable offence is disclosed or not is
required to be considered. However, thereafter
when the statements are recorded, evidence is
collected and the charge-sheet is filed after
conclusion of the investigation/inquiry the
matter stands on different footing and the
Court      is    required       to   consider      the
material/evidence         collected     during     the
investigation. Even at this stage also, as observed
and held by this Court in a catena of decisions, the
High Court is not required to go into the merits of the
allegations and/or enter into the merits of the case
as if the High Court is exercising the appellate
jurisdiction and/or conducting the trial. As held by
this       Court      in Dineshbhai        Chandubhai
Patel [Dineshbhai    Chandubhai     Patel v. State   of
in order to examine as to whether factual contents of
FIR disclose any cognizable offence or not, the High
Court cannot act like the investigating agency nor
can exercise the powers like an appellate court. It is
further observed and held that that question is
required to be examined keeping in view, the
contents of FIR and prima facie material, if any,
requiring no proof. At such stage, the High Court
cannot appreciate evidence nor can it draw its
own inferences from contents of FIR and
material relied on. It is further observed it is
more so, when the material relied on is
disputed. It is further observed that in such a
CRL.P No. 8929 of 2021
situation,      it  becomes      the     job     of     the
investigating authority at such stage to probe
and then of the court to examine questions
once the charge-sheet is filed along with such
material as to how far and to what extent
reliance can be placed on such material.
Sonar [Dhruvaram       Murlidhar    Sonar v. State        of
(Cri) 672] after considering the decisions of this
Court in Bhajan Lal [State of Haryana v. Bhajan Lal,
1992 Supp (1) SCC 335 : 1992 SCC (Cri) 426] , it is
held by this Court that exercise of powers under
Section 482 CrPC to quash the proceedings is an
exception and not a rule. It is further observed that
inherent jurisdiction under Section 482 CrPC though
wide is to be exercised sparingly, carefully and with
caution, only when such exercise is justified by tests
specifically laid down in the section itself. It is further
observed that appreciation of evidence is not
permissible at the stage of quashing of proceedings
in exercise of powers under Section 482 CrPC.
Similar view has been expressed by this Court
in Arvind Khanna [CBI v. Arvind Khanna, (2019) 10
of Telangana v. Managipet, (2019) 19 SCC 87 :
(2020) 3 SCC (Cri) 702] and in XYZ [XYZ v. State of
173] , referred to hereinabove.
9.3. Applying the law laid down by this Court in
the aforesaid decisions to the facts of the case on
hand, we are of the opinion that the High Court has
exceeded its jurisdiction in quashing the criminal
proceedings in exercise of powers under Section 482
10. The High Court has failed to appreciate and
consider the fact that there are very serious triable
issues/allegations which are required to be gone into
and considered at the time of trial. The High Court
has lost sight of crucial aspects which have emerged
CRL.P No. 8929 of 2021
during the course of the investigation. The High
Court has failed to appreciate and consider the fact
that the document i.e. a joint notarised affidavit of
Mamta Gupta Accused 2 and Munni Devi under which
according to Accused 2 Ms Mamta Gupta, Rs 25 lakhs
was paid and the possession was transferred to her
itself is seriously disputed. It is required to be noted
that in the registered agreement to sell dated 27-10-
2010, the sale consideration is stated to be Rs 25
lakhs and with no reference to payment of Rs 25
lakhs to Ms Munni Devi and no reference to handing
over the possession. However, in the joint notarised
affidavit of the same date i.e. 27-10-2010 sale
consideration is stated to be Rs 35 lakhs out of which
Rs 25 lakhs is alleged to have been paid and there is
a reference to transfer of possession to Accused 2.
Whether Rs 25 lakhs has been paid or not the
accused have to establish during the trial, because
the accused are relying upon the said document and
payment of Rs 25 lakhs as mentioned in the joint
notarised affidavit dated 27-10-2010. It is also
required to be considered that the first agreement to
sell in which Rs 25 lakhs is stated to be sale
consideration and there is reference to the payment
of Rs 10 lakhs by cheques. It is a registered
document.       The     aforesaid     are   all   triable
issues/allegations which are required to be
considered at the time of trial. The High Court has
failed to notice and/or consider the material collected
during the investigation.
11. Now so far as the finding recorded by the
High Court that no case is made out for the offence
under Section 406 IPC is concerned, it is to be noted
that the High Court itself has noted that the joint
notarised affidavit dated 27-10-2010 is seriously
disputed, however as per the High Court the same is
required to be considered in the civil proceedings.
There the High Court has committed an error. Even
the High Court has failed to notice that another FIR
has been lodged against the accused for the offences
under Sections 467, 468, 471 IPC with respect to the
said alleged joint notarised affidavit. Even according
CRL.P No. 8929 of 2021
to the accused the possession was handed over to
them. However, when the payment of Rs 25 lakhs as
mentioned in the joint notarised affidavit is seriously
disputed and even one of the cheques out of 5
cheques each of Rs 2 lakhs was dishonoured and
according to the accused they were handed over the
possession (which is seriously disputed) it can be
said to be entrustment of property. Therefore, at this
stage to opine that no case is made out for the
offence under Section 406 IPC is premature and the
aforesaid aspect is to be considered during trial. It is
also required to be noted that the first suit was filed
by Munni Devi and thereafter subsequent suit came
to be filed by the accused and that too for permanent
injunction only. Nothing is on record that any suit for
specific performance has been filed. Be that as it
may, all the aforesaid aspects are required to be
considered at the time of trial only.
12. Therefore, the High Court has grossly
erred in quashing the criminal proceedings by
entering into the merits of the allegations as if
the High Court was exercising the appellate
jurisdiction and/or conducting the trial. The
High Court has exceeded its jurisdiction in
quashing the criminal proceedings in exercise
of powers under Section 482 CrPC.
13. Even the High Court has erred in observing
that original complaint has no locus. The aforesaid
observation is made on the premise that the
complainant has not placed on record the power of
attorney along with the counter filed before the High
Court. However, when it is specifically stated in the
FIR that Munni Devi has executed the power of
attorney and thereafter the investigating officer has
conducted the investigation and has recorded the
statement of the complainant, accused and the
independent witnesses, thereafter whether the
complainant is having the power of attorney or not is
to be considered during trial.
14. In view of the above and for the reasons
stated above, the impugned judgment and order
[Radhey Shyam Gupta v. State of U.P., 2020 SCC
OnLine All 914] passed by the High Court quashing
the criminal proceedings in exercise of powers under
Section 482 CrPC is unsustainable and the same
deserves to be quashed and set aside and is
accordingly quashed and set aside. Now, the trial is
to be conducted and proceeded further in accordance
with law and on its own merits. It is made clear that
the observations made by this Court in the present
proceedings are to be treated to be confined to the
proceedings under Section 482 CrPC only and the
trial court to decide the case in accordance with law
and on its own merits and on the basis of the
evidence to be laid and without being influenced by
any of the observations made by us hereinabove.
The present appeal is accordingly allowed.”
(Emphasis supplied)
In the light of the aforesaid facts and the judgment of the
Apex Court in the case of Kaptan Singh, I do not find any
warrant to interfere with the case on hand as the petitioner has
not   demonstrated      by  production     of such   unimpeachable
evidence of sterling character for this Court to interfere or
interject the proceedings in exercise of its jurisdiction under
Section 482 of the CrPC.
10.    A parting observation in the case may not be inapt.
It is in public domain that there are huge mushrooming of so
called therapies and therapists on social media i.e., instagram,
twitter or facebook as the case would be, wherein therapists
CRL.P No. 8929 of 2021
pose themselves to be in the field of any therapy. It is also in
public domain that they are all pseudo-therapists who are
“instagram     influencers”.    The     present   case   concerns
psychosomatic therapy or the wellness therapy. Therapists of
the kind, are many in number on social media, in reality, they
are not bound by any ethics or not regulated by any norms.
Cases of this nature have begun to emerge in large proportions
where people wanting to get some therapy fall prey to such
pseudo-therapists.    Therefore, it is time that the Government
comes up with some regulatory measure to check the growth of
such therapists.
11.   Since the wellness therapy has generated such
illness as is complained of by the complainant and finding no
merit in the petition, the petition stands dismissed.
I.A.No.1/2021 is disposed, as a consequence.