service on 30.09.1984. During his course of employment, the bank on
26.04.2011 issued a charge-sheet leveling certain imputations in context
of disbursement of term loans etc. After a departmental inquiry the bank
imposed a penalty of dismissal from service on 09.02.2012.                   The
respondent challenged the order of the disciplinary authority by filing an
appeal and on such appeal being filed vide order dated 13.01.2014, the
appellate authority reduced the punishment to that of compulsory
3.1    But for his dismissal from service on 09.02.2012, the respondent
would have superannuated on 30.04.2012. On the penalty being modified
to that of compulsory retirement, the petitioner preferred an application
before the competent authority under the Act in Form-N complaining of
non-payment of gratuity within the statutory period of 30 days as required
under Section 7 of the Act. The Bank on 15.09.2015 issued a show-cause
notice under Section 4(6)(a) of the Act asking the respondent to show
cause as to why the order of forfeiture of gratuity be not passed. After
inviting response from the respondent, vide order dated 15.09.2015, the
bank held that since the respondent by his act of misconduct had caused
monetary loss to the bank, the amount of gratuity be withheld. The
Controlling Authority under the Act by the order impugned held that
under Section 7 of the Act, it was incumbent on the bank to pay gratuity
within the stipulated time limit and therefore passed an order of paying
3.2    On an appeal being filed, the Appellate Authority based on the
facts and on appreciation of Section 4(6) of the Act and holding that the
notice under Section 4(6)(a) of the Act was an afterthought confirmed the
order of the Controlling Authority.
4.     Mr. Nagesh Sood, learned advocate for the petitioner bank would
submit that the order of the Controlling Authority as well as the Appellate
Authority directing the petitioner to pay the amount of gratuity was
misconceived and not in accordance with law. Relying on the show-
cause notice issued to the respondent under Section 4(6)(a) of the Act, he
would submit that once the bank having found that the respondent was
responsible for causing monetary loss of Rs.4.36 crores which was
quantified by the competent authority, it was just and proper for the bank
to withhold such gratuity.
4.1    Mr. Sood would extensively read the order of the Appellate
Authority and submit that it was wrong for the Appellate Authority to
pass an order relying on the decision of the Apex Court in the case of
Jaswant Singh Gill vs Bharat Coking Coal Ltd. and Others [2007-I-
CLR-427 (SC).        He would submit that that judgement has been
subsequently overruled by a decision of the Apex Court in the case of
Chairman-cum-Managing Director, Mahanadi Coalfields Limited vs.
Rabindranath Choubey reported in (2020) 18 SCC 71. He would
submit that reading the order of the Appellate Authority would indicate
that the Appellate Authority under the Act went into the merits of the
order of the disciplinary authority which it could not have in light of the
decision in the case of Mahanadi Coalfields (supra).                  Relevant
paragraphs of the decision in the case of Mahanadi Coalfields (supra)
were read out extensively in support of the submission of Mr. Sood that
once having found that financial loss was caused to the bank and an order
under Section 4(6)(a) of the Act was passed quantifying the loss caused to
the bank and based on a departmental proceedings when the charge-sheet
was issued for such proceedings, having found the respondent guilty of
the misconduct as held by the decision in Mahanadi Coalfields (supra),
the action of the bank withholding gratuity could not be faulted.
4.2    Qua the second submission of the aspect of the authority awarding
interest at the rate of 10%, Mr. Sood would rely on the decision of this
court in the case of Ramanbhai Balchand Parmar vs State of Gujarat
and Others [2016 LawSuit(Guj) 1837] and submit that at best the rate
of interest could be reduced to 6% as awarded in the case of Ramanbhai
5.     Mr. Manan Bhatt, learned advocate for the respondent inviting the
court’s attention to the timeline would indicate that after the order of
dismissal was passed on 09.02.2012 based on the charge-sheet issued, on
an appeal being filed before the Appellate Authority, the penalty reduced
was that of compulsory retirement. He would take the court through the
charge-sheet imputing allegations against the petitioner where there was
no imputation with regard to financial loss caused to the bank. He would
also take the court through the first order of the disciplinary authority by
which a penalty of dismissal was imposed wherein at best what was
proved against the respondent was failure to take all possible steps to
protect the interest of the bank, failure to discharge his duties with utmost
devotion etc. He would support the order of the Appellate Authority and
submit that as required under Section 4(6)(a) of the Act there was no
quantification of the loss caused to the bank except for a figure of Rs.4.36
crores mentioned in the final order. Quantification was something that
was a sine qua non in context of the procedural aspects as required under
Section 4(6)(a) of the Act and according to him the decision of the High
Court of Punjab and Haryana in the case of UCO Bank and Others vs.
Anju Mathur rendered in Letters Patent Appeal No. 566 of 2012 (O
& M) and that of the Karnataka High Court in the case of J.B. Micheal
D’Souza vs. Appellate Authority Under The Payment of Gratuity
Act, Bangalore and Others reported in 2002 (92) FLR 1200 also held
that if there was failure to quantify loss caused to the bank there was
breach of the Section 4(6)(a) of the Act and therefore the orders of the
Controlling Authority as well as the Appellate Authority are just and
6.     The payment of Gratuity Act provides that under Section 7 of the
Act a person who is eligible for payment of gratuity is entitled to payment
of such amount within 30 days from the date it becomes payable. It is
open for the authorities under the provisions of Section 4(6) of the Act,
notwithstanding the provision of sub section (1) of section 4 to withhold
gratuity of an employee whose services have been terminated for any act,
wilfull omission or negligence causing any damage or loss or (2)
destruction of property belonging to the employer. It is open for the
employer to forfeit gratuity to the extent of damage or loss so caused.
6.1    Facts on hand would indicate that before the petitioner could
superannuate on 30.04.2012, a statement of allegations and imputations
was issued to the petitioner on 26.04.2011. Reading the statement would
indicate that certain acts and omissions on the part of the respondent were
alleged that he committed while he was the Branch Manager. Instances
were set out based on which a departmental inquiry was conducted and an
order of dismissal dated 30.04.2012 was passed. Reading the order of
penalty initially passed on 09.02.2012 would indicate that the disciplinary
authority held that the respondent used his power in an arbitrary manner
and sanctioned loans haphazardly without following laid down norms.
He was grossly negligent in keeping due diligence etc. He therefore was
held to have committed misconduct and was dismissed from service on
the ground that he failed to take positive steps to protect the interest of the
bank; that he failed to discharge his duties with utmost devotion,
diligence, integrity and honesty and acted otherwise in the best
performance of his initial duties.
6.2    On an appeal being filed by the respondent, the appellate authority
on 13.01.2014 modified the order to that of compulsory retirement on the
ground that the inquiry officer had held the charge of lack of honesty and
integrity mainly relying on circumstantial evidence. As no direct oral or
documentary evidence had been brought on inquiry, a benefit of doubt on
the counts as aforesaid was extended to the respondent. After the penalty
was modified to that of compulsory retirement on 13.01.2014 till such
time the bank did not think it fit to invoke the provisions of Section 4(6)
(a) of the Act. It was only on 15.09.2015 that the show cause notice in
question was given and the same is on record. Reading the show cause
notice would indicate that it reiterates the charges that the respondent was
imputed with for the misconduct and the notice simply stated that the
respondent had caused monetary loss to the bank of Rs.4.36 crores. An
order of forfeiture was passed on 23.11.2015.          Reading the timeline
would indicate that despite a charge-sheet being issued in the year 2011
and the dismissal order of 2012, it was only after the penalty was
modified to that of compulsory retirement in January 2014 and after the
respondent approached the bank, did the bank think it fit to invoke the
provisions of Section 4(6)(a) of the Act.
7.     Perusal of the order of the Appellate Authority under the Act
would indicate and in my opinion rightly so that this action of the bank
was clearly an afterthought. The appellate Authority having extensively
quoted the provisions of Section 4(6)(a) of the Act confirmed the order of
the Controlling Authority holding that the bank had almost after three
years of the date of superannuation of the respondent thought it fit to
invoke the provisions of Section 4(6)(a) of the Act.
8.     As far as the submission of Mr. Sood, learned counsel for the bank
relying on the decision in the case of Mahanadi Coalfields (supra) is
concerned in support of his submission that the reliance of the judgement
of Jaswant Singh Gill (supra) by the Appellate Authority was
misconceived will not help him. The issue before the Apex Court in the
case of Mahanadi Coalfields (supra) was whether it was permissible for
the employer under the Rules concerned to withhold gratuity after
superannuation of the employee on the grounds of pendency of
disciplinary proceedings against him.         The question before the Apex
Court was interpretation of the rules of the bank where the bank had
continued departmental proceedings against a delinquent employee who
had superannuated. It was in this context that the rule was interpreted in
favour of the bank and the judgment in the case of Jaswant Singh Gill
(supra) was interpreted. The facts in the present case would indicate
otherwise. A charge-sheet was issued in the year 2011 which culminated
into the order of dismissal on 09.02.2012. The superannuation would
have been on 30.04.2012 before which the disciplinary proceedings had
well concluded. On an appeal being filed on 13.01.2014, the order of
penalty was modified to that of compulsory retirement. Approximately
three years after the order of dismissal and more than a year after the
compulsory retirement did the bank think it fit to invoke the provisions of
Section 4(6)(a) of the Act      to initiate proceedings for forfeiture of
9.     The decision of the Division Bench of the Punjab and Haryana
High Court in the case of Anju Mathur (supra) when applied to the facts
of the present case would indicate that it was a case where a punishment
of compulsory retirement was inflicted upon the respondent therein. A
show cause notice was issued and the court after considering the show-
cause notice as is evident on reading the present notice came to the
conclusion that there was no quantification of the loss caused by the
respondent employee. But for a single line averment in the notice that the
respondent herein had caused loss of Rs.4.36 crores to the bank nothing
apparently is indicated in the notice as to on what basis did the bank come
to such a conclusion. So also is the question of law decided by the
Karnataka High Court in the case of J.B. Micheal D’Souza (supra).
10.    As far as the contention raised by the learned counsel for the
petitioner that it was not open for the competent authority under the Act
to delve into the order of the disciplinary authority by placing reliance on
the case of Mahanadi Coalfields (supra) is out of context inasmuch as
reference to the decision in the case of Mahanadi Coalfields (supra) was,
as stated above, in the context of the interpretation of the powers of the
authorities to continue disciplinary proceedings post retirement. Aid can
always be taken by the authorities under the Act to assess the mindset of
the bank especially when the bank had sought to invoke Section 4(6)(a)
of the Act       more than two and half years after the respondent was
penalised. It was in this context that the authority appreciated the order
of the Controlling Authority which also did not hold the respondent of
having caused financial loss or damage to the bank.
11.    As far as the discretion of the Controlling Authority to award
interest at the rate of 10% considering the decision in the case of
Ramanbhai (supra), the rate of interest is reduced to that of 8% from that
12.    In view of the above, petition is partly allowed. The orders passed
by the Controlling Authority as well as the Appellate Authority so far as
directing payment of amount of Rs.9,77,440/- as gratuity are confirmed.
However, the rate of interest of 10% is reduced to that of 8% with effect
from 16.02.2012.     The orders impugned are modified accordingly. No