Shri Amit Lahoti, learned counsel for the petitioner.
Shri Ramadhar Chaubey, learned Public Prosecutor for the
This petition under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure is directed against the order dated 18.06.2021 passed by
learned 7th Additional Sessions Judge, Morena in Criminal Revision
No.33/2021 by which the petitioner's revision under Section 397
Cr.P.C.    for grant of interim custody of the vehicle seized for
commission of offence under Section 8/20 of Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 ( in short "the NDPS'"Act) has
been rejected finding no merit.
2.     The petitioner is registered owner of Tata Tigor Car bearing
registration No. MP07-TA2281, which was found involved in the
commission of offence punishable under Section 8/20 of the NDPS
Act. He filed an application under Section 457 Cr.P.C. for interim
custody of the aforesaid vehicle before learned Judicial Magistrate
First Class, Morena which was rejected on 04.06.2021 against which
he filed a revision before the 7th Additional Sessions Judge, which
was also dismissed holding that since the vehicle in question is liable
to be confiscated under Section 60 of the NDPS Act, therefore, it
cannot be directed to be released on interim custody.
3.     Shri Amit Lahoti, learned counsel for the petitioner submits
that though the vehicle seized is liable to be confiscated under Section
60 of the NDPS Act, yet, by virtue of Section 36-C of the NDPS Act
as well as by virtue of Section 51 of the NDPS Act, the provisions
contained in Section 451 or 457(1) of the Cr.P.C. would be applicable
as none of the provisions of the NDPS Act are inconsistent with the
provisions of the Cr.P.C. and therefore, in a deserving case, the right
of interim custody provided under Section 451 or 457(1) of the
Cr.P.C. cannot be denied and if the vehicle is allowed to remain in
police station till the trial is concluded, it will go waste and it will be
contrary to the decision of the Supreme Court in the matter of
Sunderbhai Ambalal Desai Vs.State of Gujarat (2002 (10) SCC
4.     On the other hand,           Shri G.P.Chaurasia, learned Public
prosecutor appearing for the respondent/State submits that in view of
the provisions contained in Section 60 of the NDPS Act, the vehicle
in question is not liable to be released in favour of the petitioner.
5.     Heard learned counsel for the parties and considered the rival
submissions made herein-above and also gone through the records.
5.     Section 60 of the NDPS Act provides for confiscation of
vehicle seized in commission of the offence punishable under the
provisions of the NDPS Act, which states as under:-
"60. Liability of illicit drugs, substances, plants,
articles and conveyances to confiscation.-(1) Whenever
any offence punishable under this Act has been committed,
the narcotic drug, psychotropic substance, controlled
substance, opium poppy, coca plant, cannabis plant,
materials, apparatus and utensils in respect of which or by
means of which such offence has been committed, shall
be liable to be confiscation.
(2) Any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance or
controlled substances lawfully produced, imported inter-
State, exported inter-State, imported into India,
transported, manufactured, possessed, used purchased or
sold along with, or in addition to, any narcotic drug or
psychotropic substance or controlled substances which is
liable to confiscation under sub-section (1) and there
receptacles, packages and coverings in which any narcotic
drug or psychotropic substance or controlled substances,
materials, apparatus or utensils liable to confiscation under
sub-section (1) is found, and the other contents, if any, of
such receptacles or packages shall likewise be liable to
confiscation.
(3) Any animal or conveyance used in carrying any
narcotic drug or psychotropic substance or controlled
substance, or any article liable to confiscation under sub-
section (1) or sub-section (2) shall be liable to
confiscation, unless the owner of the animal or
conveyance proves that it was so used without the
knowledge or connivance of the owner himself, his agent,
if any, and the person-in-charge of the animal or
conveyance and that each of them had taken all reasonable
6.     The aforesaid provision does not provide for confiscation of
any vehicle immediately after its seizure. Confiscation is a separate
procedure unconnected with conviction, acquittal, or discharge of the
accused. It is only satisfaction of the court trying an offence under
the Act, to decide as to whether the vehicle is liable to be confiscated
or not. A detailed procedure for making confiscation under Section
60 of the NDPS Act has been provided in Section 63 of the NDPS Act
"63. Procedure in making confiscations.-(1) IN
the trial of offences under this Act, whether the accused is
convicted or acquitted or discharged, the court shall
decide whether any article or thing seized under this Act is
liable to confiscation under section 60 or section 61 or
section 62 and, if it decides that the article is so liable, it
may order confiscation accordingly.
(2) Where any article or this seized under this Act
appears to eb liable to confiscation under section 60 or
section 61 or section 62, but the person who committed
the offence in connection therewith is not known or
cannot be found, the court may inquire into an decide
such liability, and may order confiscation accordingly:
Provided that no order of confiscation of an article
or this shall be made until the expiry of one month form
the date of seizure, or without hearing any person who
may claim any right thereto and the evidence, if any,
Provided further that if any such article or thing,
other than a narcotic drug, psychotropic substance,
(controlled substance), the opium poppy, coca plant or
cannabis plant is liable to speedy and natural decay, or if
the court is of opinion that its sale would be for the benefit
of its owner, it may at any time directed it to be sold; and
the provisions of this sub-section shall, as nearly as may
be practicable, apply to the net proceeds of the sale."
7.     As such, by virtue of Section 60 of the NDPS Act, any
conveyance used for commission of offence is liable to confiscation
in accordance with Section 63 of the NDPS Act after hearing the
person who may claim any right thereto and considering the evidence,
if any, which he may produce in support of the claim and confiscation
order can be made only at the end of the trial. Neither of the said
provisions (Section 60 and 63 of the NDPS Act) contained in the Act
empowers the trial Court to make an order for proper custody of such
a conveyance pending trial.
8.     At this stage, it would be appropriate to notice Section 51 of the
Procedure, 1973 to apply to warrants, arrests, searches
and seizures.- The provisions of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) shall apply, in so far as they
are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, all the
warrants issued and arrests, searches and seizures made
9.     By virtue of Section 51 of the NDPS Act, the provisions of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 have been made applicable in so
far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of the Act, to all
warrants issued and arrests, searches and seizures made under the Act.
Since the provision contained in Section 451 of the Cr.P.C. providing
provision for interim custody in so far as it relates to passing of order
for proper custody of conveyance pending conclusion of trial, is not
inconsistent with any of the provisions including Sections 60(3) and
63 of the NDPS Act, in appropriate cases order for release of
conveyance used for carrying narcotic drugs pending conclusion of
trial can be under Section 451 of the Cr.P.C. (See B.S.Rawant v.
Shaikh Abdul Karim and another).
10.    However, any Amendment Act No.2 to 1989, the NDPS Act
was amended and Section 36-C was inserted in the Act making the
provisions of the Cr.P.C. applicable to the proceedings before the
Special Court. Section 36-C of the NDPS Act states as under:-
"36-C. Application of Code to proceedings before
Special Court - Save as otherwise provided in this Act,
the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2
of 1974), (including the provisions as to bail and bonds)
shall apply to the proceedings before a Special Court and
for the purpose of the said provisions, the Special Court
shall be deemed to be a Court of Sessions and the person
conducting a prosecution before a 'Special Court' shall be
deemed to be a Public Prosecutor".
11.    By virtue of Section 36-C of the NDPS Act, "Save as otherwise
provided in this Act", the provisions of the Cr.P.C. have been made
applicable to the Special Court constituted under the provisions of the
NDPS Act by Amendment Act No.2 of 1989 with effect from
29.5.1989. "Save as otherwise provided in the Act" em,employed in
Section 36-C of the NDPS Act, is indicative of/reflection of the word
"exception" intended to exclude some provisions of the Cr.P.C. like
Section 360 Cr.P.C. etc., which have been expressively excluded by
the NDPS Act by Sections 32A and 33 of the NDPS Act. As such, the
above stated phrase has qualified the operation of the Cr.P.C. in the
proceedings before the Special Court to the extent provided in the
NDPS Act. Once the Cr.P.C. has been made applicable,the provisions
of the Cr.P.C. contained in Selections 451 and/or 457 of the Cr.P.C.
would automatically be attracted.        As such, with effect from
29.5.1989, the Cr.P.C. as a whole, subject to the exception craved out
as noticed herein-above, has been made applicable to the proceeding
before the Special Court (NDPS) and therefore application under
Section 451 or 457 of the Cr.P.C. for interim custody of the vehicle
seized in commission of offence punishable under the NDPS Act
would be maintainable and the Special Judge (NDPS) is empowered
to consider the application under Section 451/457 of the Cr.P.C. on
12.    In Principles of Statutory Interpretation by Justice
G.P.,Singh, it has been held that the bar of jurisdiction has to be
strictly construed and unless it is expressly barred, bar cannot be
inferred or implied and this principle is also applicable to criminal
13.     In the matter        of   Rajasthan     State Road Transport
Corporation and others v. Mohar Singh, their Lordships of the
Supreme Court relying upon the above-stated celebrated text
(Principles of Statutory Interpretation by Justice G.P.Singh), held as
"21. We may in this behalf profitably notice the
following excerpts from Principles of Statutory
Interpretation (11th Edn.) by Justice G.P.Singh:
"It is a principle by no means to be whittled down'
and has been referred to as a 'fundamental rule'. As a
necessary corollary of this rule provisions excluding
jurisdiction of civil courts and provisions conferring
jurisdiction on authorities and tribunals other than civil
courts are strictly construed. The existence of jurisdiction
in civil courts to decide questions of civil nature being the
general rule and exclusion being an exception, the burden
of proof to show that jurisdiction is excluded in any
particular case is on the party raising such a contention.
The rule that the exclusion of jurisdiction of civil court is
not to be readily inferred is based on the theory that civil
courts are courts of general jurisdiction and the people
have a right, unless expressly or impliedly debarred to
insist for free access to the courts of general jurisdiction of
the State. Indeed, the principle is not limited to civil
courts alone, but applies to all courts of general
jurisdiction including criminal courts. the rule as stated
above relating to strict construction of provisions
excluding jurisdiction of courts of general jurisdiction was
recently expressly approved by the Supreme Court."
14.     Since the provisions of the Cr.P.C. including Section 451/457
have been expressly made applicable by virtue of Section 36-C of the
NDPS Act to the proceedings before the Special Court (NDPS) and
there is no express bar contained in the NDPS Act for grant of interim
custody as contained in Section 52C of the Indian Forest Act, 1927, as
amended by the M.P. Amendment Act, 1983, therefore, merely on the
ground that the vehicle is liable to confiscation under Section 60 of
the NDPS Act, it cannot be held that once the vehicle is seized for
commission of offence under the NDPS Act, interim custody cannot
eb granted, as jurisdiction of criminal court has to be construed
strictly unless expressly excluded.
15.     The Supreme Court in Sunderbhai Ambala Desai (supra) has
laid down parameters for considering the application for interim
custody expeditiously and judiciously so that the owner of the article
would not suffer because of its remaining unused or by its
misappropriation and court or the police would not be required to
keep the vehicle in safe custody. It was observed as under:-
" 7. In our view, the powers under Section 451
Cr.P.C. should be exercised expeditiously and judiciously.
it would serve various purposes, namely:-
1.owner of the article would not suffer because of its
remaining unused or by its misappropriation.
2.court or the police would not be required to keep
3.if the proper panchanama before handing over
possession of article is prepared, that can be used in
evidence instead of its production before the Court during
the trial. If necessary, evidence could also be recorded
describing the nature of the property in detail; and
4.this jurisdiction of the Court to record evidence
should be exercised promptly so that there may not be
further chance of tampering with the articles."
16.     In view of the above, the finding of the Court below that since
the vehicle is liable to be confiscated, interim custody under Section
451/457 of the Cr.P.C. cannot be granted, is liable to be set aside and
accordingly, the impugned orders dated 04.06.2021 and 18.06.2021
passed by Judicial Magistrate First Class, Morena as well as Seventh
Additional Sessions Judge, Morea are hereby set aside. Accordingly,
by allowing the application, the vehicle is ordered to be released on
(i) It is ordered that on furnishing personal bond of
Rs.2,50,000/- (Rupees Two Lac Fifty Thousand Only) with
one solvent surety in the like amount to the satisfaction of the trial
Court by the petitioner, the aforesaid vehicle (Tata Tigor bearing
registration No. MP 07-TA 2281) shall be handed over to the
respective petitioner on Supurdginama on proving ownership of the
(ii) whenever it would be required by the competent Court the
same will be produced on petitioner's own expenses at the place as
(iii) at the time of release of the vehicle on Supurdginama, the
aforesaid Authority shall ensure to take note of chassis number,
engine number and registration number of the aforesaid vehicle and
(iv) the petitioner shall neither alter or change the condition of
the aforesaid vehicle in any manner whatsoever during pendency of
(v) the petitioner shall not create any third party rights over the
(vi) the petitioner shall not fiddle with or scratch or erase
numbers engraved in the chassis and engine of the vehicle;
(vii) in the event, all or any of the aforesaid conditions are
found to have been violated, the respondent / State is at liberty to
move this Court to such modification / variation of the order passed
by this Court today.
With the aforesaid, this application stands disposed of.