1.     Heard Shri Udai Chandani, learned counsel for the petitioner and
learned Standing Counsel for the revenue. No counter affidavit has been
filed despite stop order dated 20.5.2022 (passed on the listing application).
2.     Present writ petition has been filed against the order dated 23.9.2021
passed by Proper Officer/respondent no.3 - Additional Commissioner,
Grade-II (Appeal), Trade Tax, Banda. By that order, the appeal authority has
confirmed the order dated 20.07.2021 passed by respondent no.4/Assistant
Commissioner, Banda Sector Trade Tax, Banda, cancelling the petitioner's
registration in exercise of power vested in that authority under Section 29(2)
(a) of U.P. Goods and Services Tax Act 2017 (hereinafter referred to as the
3.     Having heard learned counsel for the parties and having perused the
record, the order dated 20.07.2021 and the consequential appeal order dated
23.9.2021 are wholly unsustainable in law. Earlier, the petitioner was visited
with the notice dated 8.6.2021 making mention of certain infractions
committed by him under other laws (excluding the Act), in the execution of
certain service contracts awarded by the Nagar Palika Parishad, Atarra,
Banda. Petitioner had submitted its reply thereto.
4.     Thereafter, on 09.07.2021, a show cause notice was issued with
reference to Section 29(2)(a) of the Act. It reads as below:
Show Cause Notice for Cancellation of Registration
Whereas on the basis of information which has come to my notice, it appears that your
registration is liable to be cancelled for the following reasons:
1. Non compliance of any specified provisions in the GST Act or the Rules made
thereunder as may be prescribed.
You are hereby directed to furnish a reply to the notice within seven working days from
the date of service of this notice.
If you fail to furnish a reply within the stipulated date or fail to appear for personal
hearing on the appointed date and time, the case will be decided ex parte on the basis of
available records and on merits.
Please note that your registration stands suspended with effect from 09/07/2021
5.    The reply furnished by the petitioner apart, the said authority
proceeded to pass the impugned order dated 20.07.2021. That reads as
Order for Cancellation of Registration
This has reference to your reply dated 20/07/2021 in response to the notice to show cause dated
09/07/2021 whereas no reply to notice to show cause has been submitted;
The effective date of cancellation of your registration is 19/07/2021
Determination of amount payable pursuant to cancellation:
Accordingly, the amount payable by you and the computation and basis thereof is as follows:
The amounts determined as being payable above are without prejudice to any amount that may
be found to be payable you on submission of final return furnished by you.
You are required to pay the following amounts on or before 30/07/2021 failing which the
amount will be recovered in accordance with the provisions of the Act and rules made
thereunder.
6.     That order has been confirmed in appeal by referring to allegations
contained in the first notice dated 08.06.2021 that was issued with respect to
infractions made under other laws.
7.     Cancellation of registration has most serious civil consequences.
While Section 29(1) of the Act provides for specific grounds for cancellation
with effect from the date of occurrence of certain events, sub-section (2)
provides for harsher consequences including cancellation of registration with
retrospective date. However, a registration may not be cancelled on mere
whims and fancies of the Proper Officer. It may be cancelled under sub-
section (2) of Section 29 of the Act, if the registered person contravenes any
provision of the Act or Rule as may have been prescribed for that purpose or
if such person does not furnish returns for three tax periods consecutively or
does not furnish returns for six months continuously or he does not
commence business within six months of grant of registration or he is found
to have obtained registration by means of fraud, wilful misstatement or
suppression of facts.
8.     In the present case, the show cause notice was issued, ostensibly with
reference to Section 29(2)(a) of the Act, inasmuch as, the notice dated
9.7.2021 alleged non-compliance of specified provisions of GST Act or the
Rules. However, that notice did not disclose the exact violation of the Act or
the Rules, alleged. Unless that allegation was specified in the notice with
details and unless material considered adverse to the petitioner had been
confronted to it for the purposes of eliciting its reply thereto, the notice dated
9.7.2012 would remain completely vague and mute.
9.     A person who may be visited with the notice proposing such a harsh
civil consequence had a perfect right to be informed of the exact allegations
levelled against him. In a way, the harshest penalty contemplated is
cancellation or registration of the assessee. The cancellation of the
registration has the consequence of bringing the business of an assessee to a
complete stand still. Its a death of his business. It has adverse impact on his
fundamental right to do business.
10.         The petitioner was not confronted either with the substance of the
allegation of violation of the provisions of the Act and the Rules framed
thereunder and it is not shown that alleged violations were such, as may
have warranted cancellation of the petitioner’s registration under Section
29(2)(a) of the Act. Also, since the material if any that may have founded the
basis for such allegation had not been confronted to the petitioner, the entire
exercise would remain an irregular exercise. In fact, the proceedings had
been initiated, continued and concluded without jurisdictional facts shown to
exist. Since the cancellation notice did not refer to the notice dated 8.6.2021,
reference made to it in the appeal order is irrelevant and uncalled. Even then,
it does not make out allegation of violation of Section 29(2)(a) of the Act.
11.         In view of the above, the impugned orders dated 23.09.2021,
06.09.2021 and 20.07.2021 are quashed.
12.         Accordingly, the present petition is allowed. Let the registration of the
petitioner be restored forthwith. Further, it is left open to the revenue
authorities to initiate fresh proceedings, if warranted, on cogent material and
basis.