W.P.Nos.10088, 11595, 11598, 11601, 16702, 17966, 17969 and
11082, 16010, 16011, 17308, 17310, 17314, 17315, 20537 and
W.P.No.10088 of 2022:
Education Promotion Society for India,
rep. by its Executive Secretary,
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare,
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
rep. by its Secretary,
Prayer: Petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India
praying for a writ of declaration declaring that Section 10(1)(i) of the
Nation Medical Commission Act, 2019 is ultra vires the Constitution of
India, illegal, null and void and consequently call for the records of the
third respondent in the Office Memorandum dated 03.02.2022 in
reference No.NMC/ US(NMC)/ Fee-Regulating-Committee/ 2021-22
issued in exercise of the power granted under Section 10(1)(i) of the
National Medical Commission Act, 2019 and quash the same.
For the Petitioner in : Mr.Vijay Narayan
W.P.No.10088 of 2022       Senior Counsel
for Mr.Abishek Jenasenan
For the Respondents in : Mr.R.Sankaranarayanan
W.P.No.10088 of 2022       Addl. Solicitor-General
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
A batch of writ petitions has been filed to challenge Section
10(1)(i) of the National Medical Commission Act, 2019 [for brevity,
“the Act of 2019”] and the Office Memorandum dated 3.2.2022
issued in exercise of the power conferred under Section 10(1)(i) of
the Act of 2019.
2. The writ petitions have been preferred by the Education
Promotion Society for India, Pondicherry Institute of Medical
Sciences, apart from various medical colleges.              The Education
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
Promotion Society of India is a society which consists of various
educational institutions across the country, including Deemed to be
Universities and private self-financing institutions affiliated to the
State Universities in the respective States.
3. Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the writ petitioners
referred to the previous litigation in regard to the seat matrix for
admission and the fee for the medical course, when a challenge was
made to capitation fee charged by few medical colleges.
4. It is submitted by learned counsel for the petitioners that
the Apex Court has addressed the issue aforesaid and the first
judgment on it was in the case of Unni Krishnan J.P. and others
v. State of Andhra Pradesh and others, (1993) 1 SCC 645. In
the said judgment, a scheme was devised to have 50% of the seats
to be “free seats” and the remaining 50% of the seats to be
“payment seats”. By virtue of the said judgment, a disparity on fee
arose in view of the fact that a candidate given admission against a
“free seat” was to pay a meagre amount, while the candidate
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
admitted against the “payment seat” was to pay higher amount of
5. The scheme evolved in Unni Krishnan J.P. and others,
supra, did not continue for long in view of the judgment of the Apex
Court in the case of T.M.A.Pai Foundation and others v. State
of Karnataka and others, (2002) 8 SCC 481, wherein it was
held that the scheme evolved in Unni Krishnan J.P. and others,
supra, cannot be considered to be reasonable as it cross-subsidizes
the fee of the students admitted against “free seats” by those
admitted against “payment seats”, as the cost incurred by the
institution to impart medical education has to be borne by and large
by the students admitted against the “payment seat”.
6. In the light of the said judgment, the petitioners have
challenged the Office Memorandum dated 3.2.2022 issued by the
National Medical Commission which provides that fee of the 50%
seats in the private medical colleges and deemed universities should
be at par with the fee in the government medical colleges of the
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
State and Union Territory and for the remaining 50% seats,
guidelines are laid down for fixation of fee and other charges to
cover the cost incurred by the institution.           It is submitted that by
virtue of the Office Memorandum under challenge, the student
admitted and subjected to fee to be determined against 50% seats
as per the Office Memorandum would subsidize the fee of the
students admitted on the fee at par with the fee in the government
medical colleges.
7. It is the stand of the petitioners that the Apex Court in the
case of T.M.A.Pai Foundation and others, supra, has recognised
the rights of the citizens and religious denominations to establish
and administer educational institutions and the same view has been
endorsed by the Apex Court in the case of Islamic Academy of
Education and another v. State of Karnataka and others,
(2003) 6 SCC 697, wherein it was held that there can be no rigid
fee structure, rather each institution must have freedom to fix its
own fee structure taking into consideration the factors laid down in
that judgment.           The said fundamental right has been completely
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
taken away by the impugned Office Memorandum by fixing a rigid
fee structure for 50% of the seats at par with the fee of the
students in the government medical colleges.
8. Learned counsel for petitioners submitted that, by virtue of
the Office Memorandum under challenge, 50% of the students
taking admission in the M.B.B.S. Course would be paying fee at par
with the fee of the students in the government medical colleges,
which may be Rs.18,000/- to Rs.20,000/-, while the students taking
admission against the remaining 50% of the seats would subsidize
the fee of the first 50% of the students by paying around Rs.40
Lakhs to Rs.70 Lakhs to bear the cost incurred by the institution.
It is for the reason that, even according to the respondents, the
expenditure on each student remains up to Rs.30 lakhs for the
M.B.B.S. course which is subsidized by the government for their
medical college and if the aforesaid is taken into account, then 50%
of the students would be paying around Rs.60 lakhs towards fee to
cross-subsidize the other 50% of students admitted on a fee at par
with the fee in the government medical colleges, i.e., Rs.18,000/-
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
9. The aforesaid arrangement coming out of the Office
Memorandum is not permissible in the light of the Apex Court
judgments in the case of T.M.A.Pai Foundation and others and
Islamic Academy of Education and another, supra.                     In fact,
similar arrangement was permitted by the Apex Court in the case of
Unni Krishnan J.P. and others, supra, where the scheme was to
divide the seats in every professional college in equal proportion,
treating 50% of the seats to be “free seats” and the remaining 50%
of the seats to be “payment seats”.               By virtue of the Office
Memorandum, the scheme evolved in the case of Unni Krishnan
J.P. and others, supra, has been brought back by the National
Medical Commission.            In view of the above, not only the Office
Memorandum under challenge, but Section 10(1)(i) of the Act of
2019 deserves to be struck down as it offends Article 19(1)(g) of
the Constitution of India.
10. It is further submitted that the Apex Court in the case of
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
Islamic Academy of Education and another, supra, even
directed setting up a State Level Committee in each State as a
regulatory mechanism to supervise the fee collected by medical
institutions, wherein each educational institute was given a right to
place before the Committee, the proposed fee structure for the
medical course. The Committee can either approve or modify the
proposal made by the educational institute. The Committee was not
given suo motu or independent power for fixation of fee. Pursuant
to the judgment in the case of    Islamic Academy of Education
and another, supra, fee for the medical course is approved or
modified by the Committee headed by a Retired High Court Judge.
The said system has been done away by the respondents by
bringing Section 10(1)(i) of the Act of 2019 and the Office
Memorandum and now the authority to determine the fee has been
given to the State Fee Regulatory Authority. In view of the above,
the Office Memorandum offends the judgment of the Apex Court in
the case of Islamic Academy of Education and another, apart
from T.M.A.Pai Foundation and others, supra.
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
11. Learned counsel for the petitioners further submitted that
as per the Office Memorandum under challenge, if the government
quota seats are less than 50% of the total sanctioned seats in
medical college, the remaining candidates would avail the benefit of
fee equivalent to the government medical college fees up to 50% of
seats based on the merit. In view of the arrangement aforesaid, if
in a medical institution the government quota seats are less than
50%, then the fee up to 50% of the seats would be charged at par
with the fee in the government medical colleges to cross-subsidize
their fee by other 50% students.
12. It is further submitted that even if Section 10(1)(i) of the
Act of 2019 is held to be constitutionally valid, the power is only to
frame the guidelines and not to determine the fee. However, in the
case on hand, the Office Memorandum decides the fee of the 50%
seats to be at par with the fee in the government medical colleges
and for the remaining 50% seats, fee is to be determined by the
State Fee Regulatory Authority.            Thus, the Office Memorandum
determining rigid fee structure is going beyond the power conferred
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
under Section 10(1)(i) of the Act of 2019 to frame guidelines. The
meaning of the word “guidelines” has also been given to show it to
be not a regulation, but a non-binding recommendation. The Office
Memorandum           under  challenge    cannot   be   considered     to   be
guidelines, but a mandate in regard to the fixation of fee by the
medical institutions and, therefore, the Office Memorandum issued
by the National Medical Commission is beyond the power conferred
on it. Section 10(1)(i) of the Act of 2019 gives power to frame the
guidelines and not the rigid fee structure.
13. Learned counsel for the petitioners further submitted that
the fee in the government medical colleges is subsidized by the
State utilizing the funds of public exchequer, which is nothing but
tax payers money and, therefore, if at all fee of the 50% seats in
the private medical colleges and deemed to be universities is to be
charged at par with the fee in the government medical colleges,
then it should be subsidized by the government, as otherwise there
would be disparity in fee structure between two sets of students, as
50% of the seats would be charged at the rate decided by the State
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
Fee Regulatory Authority to cross-subsidize fee for other 50%
students paying the fee at par with the government medical
colleges making it an exorbitant fee to be charged from 50% seats,
which may even remain unfilled in the absence of availability of
students to pay huge amount of fee. Any seat that remains vacant
would be a loss to the nation as well as the institution because they
would not be in a position to recover the proportionate amount so
as to bear the cost to run the institution after keeping some surplus
amount for future expansion of the institution, as permitted by the
14. The further limb of the argument of learned counsel for
the petitioners is in reference to the standard of education
maintained by the educational institutions. In the previous regime
before Section 10(1)(i) of the Act of 2019 and the Office
Memorandum under challenge, the medical institution was to
propose         the  fee  structure   before the   Committee     and    after
examining         the  books   of   accounts  and   other   materials,    the
Committee used to approve or modify             the fee structure of each
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
institution   independently.    In   case   a   medical    institution   is
maintaining higher standard of education and provides best possible
facilities to the students at higher cost, then it was allowed to
charge the higher fee, subject to the approval of the Committee.
By virtue of the Office Memorandum, the fee of all the medical
colleges would be one and the same and thereby it would affect
those colleges which are providing better facilities and education of
excellence to the students. The standard of education is going to
be sacrificed by the arrangement made by the respondents through
the Office Memorandum under challenge. It is in the circumstance
that the government is not in a position to provide education to all
the students and, therefore, necessity of private institutions was felt
and even recognised by the Apex Court. Therefore, the educational
institution should be given liberty to fix their own fee depending on
the expenditure, subject to the approval of the Committee, and
there should not be a rigid fee structure. The prayer is, therefore,
to strike down Section 10(1)(i) of the Act and the Office
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
15. Per contra, learned Additional Solicitor General of India
appearing on behalf of the respondents submitted that Section
10(1)(i) of the Act of 2019 is not hit by any constitutional provision,
rather the National Medical Commission is empowered to frame
guidelines to regulate the fee of medical courses.          The aforesaid
would come out from the judgment of the Apex Court in the case of
Modern Dental College and Research Centre and others v.
State of Madhya Pradesh and others, (2016) 7 SCC 353,
which was also cited by learned counsel for the petitioners.
16. It is submitted that the Apex Court has issued directions
from time to time regarding the seat matrix for admission to
medical courses and even the fee structure till the rules are brought
for the aforesaid.          In view of the above, the National Medical
Commission was given liberty to frame provision for determination
of the fee and, accordingly, Section 10(1)(i) of the Act of 2019 was
brought to give power to the National Medical Commission to frame
guidelines for determination of fees and all other charges in respect
of 50% seats in private medical institutions and deemed to be
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
universities.       Section 10(1)(i) of the Act of 2019 does not offend
Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution of India. As per the judgments
of the Apex Court in the cases of T.M.A.Pai Foundation and
others          and    Islamic Academy of Education and another,
supra, the fee proposed by the institution was to be approved by
the Committee and even in the Office Memorandum, the same
position has been maintained. The only difference is that earlier the
proposed fee by the institution was to be approved by the
Committee headed by a Retired Judge of the High Court and now it
would be by the State Fee Regulatory Authority.
17. It was, however, admitted that the legal position in regard
to a Deemed to be University was different, but now all the medical
colleges – whether under the private university or Deemed to be
University, would be guided by one parameter given under Section
10(1)(i) of the Act of 2019 and the guidelines for determination of
fees. With the issuance of the Office Memorandum under challenge
no change has been made other than change of the authority for
determination of fee from a Committee headed by the Retired High
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
Court Judge to the State Fee Regulatory Authority.                Therefore,
Section         10(1)(i) of  the  Act   of   2019  is  not   offending    any
constitutional provision, rather the Office Memorandum was issued
to regulate the fee structure in a proper manner.
18. Learned Additional Solicitor General has given reference to
the judgment of the Apex Court in the case of Modern Dental
College and Research Centre and others, supra. In the said
judgment, all the earlier judgments of the Supreme Court were
discussed elaborately, which includes the judgment of the Larger
Bench of Seven Judges in the case of P.A.Inamdar v. State of
Maharashtra, (2005) 6 SCC 537 and the judgment in the case of
Islamic Academy of Education and another, supra, to regulate
the fee structure aimed to protect the student community as a
whole as also the minority institutions and to maintain the required
standard of professional education on non-exploitative terms.                It
was with the clarity that the Committees constituted pursuant to
the direction of the Apex Court were to continue for regulating fee
structure until a suitable legislation is brought by the government.
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
The Central and State Governments were given liberty to come out
with        a detailed well thought  legislation setting   out   suitable
mechanism to regulate the admission procedure and also the fee
structure. In view of the above, Section 10(1)(i) of the Act of 2019
was brought to regulate the fee structure and pursuant to the
power conferred therein, the Office Memorandum under challenge
was issued. The Apex Court in the said case also held that though
“occupation” is a fundamental right which empowers the educational
institutions to admit students and fix the fee, but scope of such
right has been discussed and limitations were imposed therein.
Thus, it is not that the medical institutions are having absolute
liberty to determine the fee, thus the provision relating to fixation of
fee        is not  unconstitutional.  The   medical  institutions   were
completely barred from charging capitation fee.       It was, however,
with recognition of the right that cost of education may vary from
institution to institution and, for that, many variable factors are to
be taken into account while fixing the fee, which is permitted even
under the Office Memorandum under challenge.
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
19. He further submitted that the Apex Court has not
permitted commercialisation of education having regard to the
larger interest and welfare of the student community to promote
merit, achieve excellence and curb malpractices. Giving reference
to various paragraphs of the judgment in Modern Dental College
and Research Centre and others, supra, it is submitted that the
Office Memorandum is not offending any of the judgments of the
Apex Court and, for that, any provision of the Constitution.
20. An elaborate argument on all the issues was made to
contest the submission of learned counsel for the petitioners, which
would be dealt with by us while recording the finding in reference to
the rival submissions of the parties.
21. We have considered the rival submissions of learned
counsel for the parties and scanned the record carefully.
22. The challenge to Section 10(1)(i) of the Act of 2019 has
been made mainly in reference to the judgment of the Apex Court
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
in the case of        T.M.A.Pai Foundation and others and            Islamic
Academy of Education and another, supra, whereas learned
Additional Solicitor General has relied on the judgment of the Apex
Court in the case of Modern Dental College and Research
Centre and others, supra, where all the earlier judgments of the
Apex Court have been referred and summarized with a finding that
the respondents can frame statutory provision to regulate fee for
medical courses. The relevant paragraphs of the judgment in the
case of Modern Dental College and Research Centre and
others, supra, are quoted hereunder for ready reference:
“43. In order to ensure that the said CET is fair,
transparent       and       merit-based, T.M.A.       Pai
Foundation v. State of Karnataka, (2002) 8 SCC 481,
also permitted the Government to frame regulations
for    unaided     private   professional    educational
institutions. Paras 67 and 68 which permit framing of
such regulations are reproduced below: (SCC p. 549)
“67. We now come to the regulations that
can be framed relating to private unaided
professional institutions.
68. It would be unfair to apply the same
rules and regulations regulating admission to
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
both     aided   and      unaided     professional
institutions. It must be borne in mind that
unaided professional institutions are entitled
to autonomy in their administration while, at
the same time, they do not forego or discard
the principle of merit. It would, therefore, be
permissible    for    the   university    or    the
Government,      at    the   time    of   granting
recognition, to require a private unaided
institution   to    provide     for   merit-based
selection while, at the same time, giving the
management         sufficient     discretion      in
admitting    students.     This   can   be   done
through various methods. For instance, a
certain percentage of the seats can be
reserved for admission by the management
out of those students who have passed the
common entrance test held by itself or by
the State/university and have applied to the
college concerned for admission, while the
rest of the seats may be filled up on the
basis of counselling by the State agency.
This will incidentally take care of poorer and
backward     sections    of   the   society.   The
prescription of percentage for this purpose
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
has to be done by the Government according
to the local needs and different percentages
can be fixed for minority unaided and non-
minority unaided and professional colleges.
The same principles may be applied to other
non-professional   but  unaided   educational
institutions     viz.    graduation        and
postgraduation non-professional colleges or
institutes.”
44. A plea was raised by the appellants that by
exercising the power to frame regulations, the State
could not usurp the very function of conducting this
admission test by the educational institutions. It was
argued that it only meant that such a CET is to be
conducted by the educational institutions themselves
and   the     Government   could   only   frame    the
regulations to regulate such admission tests to be
conducted by the educational institutions and could
not take away the function of holding CET.
45. This argument has to be rejected in view of the
unambiguous and categorical interpretation given by
the Supreme Court in       P.A. Inamdar v. State of
Maharashtra, (2005) 6 SCC 537, with respect to
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
certain observations, particularly in para 68 in T.M.A.
Pai Foundation. In this behalf, we would like to
recapitulate that in T.M.A. Pai Foundation, a Bench of
eleven Judges dealt with the issues of scope of right
to set up educational institutions by private aided or
unaided, minority or non-minority institutions and
the extent of government regulation of the said
right. It was held that the right to establish and
administer an institution included the right to admit
students and to set up a reasonable fee structure.
But the said right could be regulated to ensure
maintenance      of   proper    academic     standards,
atmosphere and infrastructure. Fixing of rigid fee
structure, dictating the formation and composition of
a   governing    body,   compulsory    nomination     of
teachers and staff for appointment or nominating
students for admissions would be unacceptable
restrictions. However, occupation of education was
not business but profession involving charitable
activity. The State can forbid charging of capitation
fee and profiteering. The object of setting up
educational institution is not to make profit. There
could, however, be a reasonable revenue surplus for
development of education. For admission, merit
must play an important role. The State or the
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
University could require private unaided institution to
provide    for merit-based     selection while    giving
sufficient discretion in admitting students. Certain
percentage of seats could be reserved for admission
by management out of students who have passed
CET     held   by    the    institution  or   by     the
State/University.      Interpretation    of      certain
observations in para 68 of the judgment in T.M.A.
Pai Foundation has been a matter of debate to which
we will advert to in detail hereinafter.
46. As pointed out above, immediately after the
judgment in T.M.A. Pai Foundation, a group of writ
petitions were filed in this Court, which were dealt
with by a Bench of five Judges Islamic Academy of
Education v. State of Karnataka, (2003) 6 SCC 697 :
2 SCEC 339. Four of the Judges were the same who
were party to the judgment in T.M.A. Pai Foundation.
The issue considered was the extent of autonomy in
fixing the fee structure and making admissions. This
Court held that while there was autonomy with the
institutions to fix fee structure, there could be no
profiteering and no capitation fee could be charged
as imparting of education was essentially charitable
in nature. This required setting up of a committee by
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
each of the States to decide whether fee structure
proposed by an institute was justified and did not
amount to profiteering or charging of capitation fee.
The fee so fixed shall be binding for three years at
the end of which a revision could be sought.
47. With regard to the autonomy in admission, it was
noted that the earlier judgment kept in mind “the
sad reality that there are a large number of
professional colleges which indulge in profiteering
and/or charging of capitation fees”. For this reason,
it was provided that admission must be based on
merit.     It    was     impossible       to     control
profiteering/charging   of    capitation   fee    unless
admission was on merit. It was further observed that
requiring a student to appear at more than one
entrance test led to great hardship as the students
had to pay application fee for each institute, arrange
for and pay for the transport to appear in the
individual tests. Thus, management could select
students either on the basis of CET conducted by the
State or association of all colleges for a particular
type, for example, medical, engineering or technical,
etc.  Some    of  the  institutions   have   their  own
admission procedure since long against which no
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
finger had ever been raised and no complaint made
regarding fairness and transparency—which claim
was     disputed.   Such    institutions   as  had    been
established for 25 years could apply for exemption to
the    Committee      directed   by   the   Court   to   be
constituted.      This    Court    directed   the     State
Governments to appoint permanent committees to
ensure that the test conducted by association of
colleges was fair and transparent.
48. The matter was then considered by a larger
Bench of seven Judges in P.A. Inamdar v. State of
Maharashtra, (2005) 6 SCC 537. It was held that the
two committees for monitoring admission procedure
and determining fee structure as per the judgment
in Islamic Academy of Education were permissible as
regulatory measures aimed at protecting the student
community       as   a   whole   as   also  the   minority
themselves in maintaining required standards of
professional education on non-exploitative terms.
This did not violate Article 30(1) or Article 19(1)(g).
It was observed that: (P.A. Inamdar case)
“145. … Unless the admission procedure and
fixation of fees is regulated and controlled at
the initial stage, the evil of unfair practice of
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
granting admission on available seats guided
by the paying capacity of the candidates
would be impossible to curb.”
On this ground, suggestion of the institutions to
achieve the purpose for which committees had been
set up by post-audit checks after the institutions
adopted their own admission procedure and fee
structure, was rejected. The committees were,
thus, allowed to continue for regulating the
admissions    and   the   fee   structure   until   a
suitable legislation or regulations were framed
by the States. It was left to the Central
Government and the State Governments to
come out with a detailed well-thought out
legislation setting up a suitable mechanism for
regulating    admission     procedure     and     fee
structure. Para 68 in T.M.A. Pai Foundation
case was      explained      by     stating     that
observations permitting the management to
reserve certain seats was meant for poorer and
backward sections as per local needs. It did not
mean to ignore the merit. It was also held that CET
could be held, otherwise merit becomes casualty.
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
There is, thus, no bar to CET being held by a State
agency when the law so provides.
49. Thus, the contention raised on behalf of the
appellants that the private medical colleges had
absolute right to make admissions or to fix fee is not
consistent with the earlier decisions of this Court.
Neither merit could be compromised in admissions to
professional institutions nor capitation fee could be
permitted. To achieve these objects it is open to the
State to introduce regulatory measures. We are
unable to accept the submission that the State could
intervene    only  after  proving   that   merit    was
compromised or capitation fee was being charged. As
observed in the earlier decisions of this Court, post-
audit measures would not meet the regulatory
requirements. Control was required at the initial
stage itself. Therefore, our answer to the first
question    is   that  though   “occupation”      is  a
fundamental right, which gives right to the
educational institutions to admit the students
and also fix the fee, at the same time, scope of
such rights has been discussed and limitations
imposed thereupon by the aforesaid judgments
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
themselves explaining the nature of limitations
on these rights.
71. We may again remind ourselves that though
right  to   establish   and    manage educational
institution is treated as a right to carry on
“occupation”, which is the fundamental right
under Article 19(1)(g), the Court in T.M.A. Pai
Foundation       had      also     cautioned       such
educational    institution    not     to  indulge     in
profiteering     or     commercialisation.         That
judgment      also     completely        bars     these
educational      institutions       from      charging
capitation   fee.   This   is  considered      by    the
appellants themselves that commercialisation
and exploitation is not permissible and the
educational institutions are supposed to run on
“no profit, no loss basis”. No doubt, it was also
recognised that the cost of education may vary
from   institution   to   institution    and   in   this
respect many variable factors may have to be
taken into account while fixing the fee. It is
also     recognised      that     the     educational
institutions may charge the fee that would take
care of various expenses incurred by these
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
educational institutions plus provision for the
expansion of education for future generation.
At the same time, unreasonable demand cannot be
made from the present students and their parents.
For this purpose, only a “reasonable surplus” can be
generated.
72. Thus,    in T.M.A.   Pai   Foundation, P.A.Inamdar
and Unni         Krishnan,        profiteering        and
commercialisation of education has been abhorred.
The    basic   thread   of   reasoning   in   the   above
judgments is that educational activity is essentially
charitable in nature and that commercialisation or
profiteering through it is impermissible. The said
activity subserves the looming larger public interest
of ensuring that the nation develops and progresses
on the strength of its highly educated citizenry. As
such, this Court has been of the view that while
balancing the fundamental rights of both minority
and non-minority institutions, it is imperative that
high   standard    of  education   is  available   to   all
meritorious candidates. It has also been felt that
the only way to achieve this goal, recognising
the private participation in this welfare goal, is
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
to ensure that there is no commercialisation or
profiteering by educational institutions.
73. In view of the said objectives, this Court had
devised     the   means     of   setting   up   regulatory
committees to oversee the process of admissions
and fee regulations in Islamic Academy of Education.
However, while indirectly approving the concept of
regulatory bodies, this Court in P.A. Inamdar was of
the view that the scheme should not be directed by
this Court exercising its powers under Article 142 of
the Constitution, but must be statutorily regulated
by the Centre or the State laws.
74. The      principles    enunciated     in T.M.A.     Pai
Foundation and P.A. Inamdar were applied in Islamic
Academy of Education, where a challenge was
mounted      against   the   directions  issued    by  the
Director of Education to the recognised unaided
schools under Section 24(3) read with Sections 18(4)
and 18(5) of the Delhi School Education Act, 1973,
inter alia, directing that no fees/funds collected from
parents/students would be transferred from the
recognised unaided school fund to a society or trust
or   any    other   institution.  After   examining    the
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
directions and the accounting principles in detail, this
Court upheld the said directions on the ground that it
was open to the State to regulate the fee in such a
manner so as to ensure that no profiteering or
commercialisation of education takes place.
75. To put it in a nutshell, though the fee can be
fixed by the educational institutions and it may vary
from institution to institution depending upon the
quality of education provided by each of such
institutions, commercialisation is not permissible. In
order to see that the educational institutions are not
indulging in commercialisation and exploitation, the
Government is equipped with necessary powers to
take regulatory measures and to ensure that these
educational institutions keep playing vital and pivotal
role to spread education and not to make money. So
much so, the Court was categorical in holding that
when it comes to the notice of the Government that
a particular institution was charging fee or other
charges which are excessive, it has a right to issue
directions to such an institution to reduce the same.
76. The next question that arises is as to how such a
regulatory framework that ensures no excessive fee
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
is charged by the educational institutions can be put
in place. In Modern School v. Union of India, (2004)
5 SCC 583, this Court upheld the direction of the
Delhi High Court for setting up of a committee to
examine as to whether fee charged by the schools
(that was a case of fixation of fee by schools in Delhi
which are governed by the Delhi School Education
Act,    1973)  is  excessive     or  not. The    ratio  of
judgments     in T.M.A.    Pai    Foundation and Islamic
Academy of Education was discussed in the following
manner: (Modern School case, SCC pp. 600-01, para
“16. The judgment in T.M.A. Pai Foundation
case was    delivered    on   31-10-2002.    The
Union of India, State Governments and
educational    institutions    understood     the
majority judgment in that case in different
perspectives. It led to litigations in several
courts. Under the circumstances, a Bench of
five  Judges     was    constituted   in Islamic
Academy        of     Education v. State       of
Karnataka so that doubts/anomalies, if any,
could be clarified. One of the issues which
arose     for     determination,     concerned
determination of the fee structure in private
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
unaided professional educational institutions.
It   was     submitted     on   behalf    of   the
managements       that   such   institutions   had
been given complete autonomy not only as
regards admission of students but also as
regards    determination     of  their   own    fee
structure.    It  was    submitted    that   these
institutions were entitled to fix their own fee
structure which could include a reasonable
revenue      surplus    for   the    purpose     of
development of education and expansion of
the institution. It was submitted that so long
as there was no profiteering, there could be
no   interference    by   the   Government.      As
against this, on behalf of the Union of India,
State    Governments       and    some    of   the
students, it was submitted, that the right to
set   up    and   administer     an   educational
institution is not an absolute right and it is
subject to reasonable restrictions. It was
submitted that such a right is subject to
public    and    national   interests.    It   was
contended that imparting education was a
State function but due to resource crunch,
the States were not in a position to establish
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
sufficient number of educational institutions
and      consequently,      the   States     were
permitting private educational institutions to
perform State functions. It was submitted
that the Government had a statutory right to
fix the fees to ensure that there was no
profiteering. Both sides relied upon various
passages      from    the    majority  judgment
in T.M.A. Pai Foundation case. In view of
rival    submissions,     four  questions    were
formulated. We are concerned with the first
question, namely, whether the educational
institutions are entitled to fix their own fee
structure? It was held that there could be no
rigid fee structure. Each institute must have
freedom to fix its own fee structure, after
taking into account the need to generate
funds to run the institution and to provide
facilities necessary for the benefit of the
students. They must be able to generate
surplus which must be used for betterment
and growth of that educational institution.
The fee structure must be fixed keeping in
mind      the    infrastructure   and    facilities
available, investment made, salaries paid to
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
teachers     and   staff,   future  plans    for
expansion and/or betterment of institution
subject to two restrictions, namely, non-
profiteering and non-charging of capitation
fees. It was held that surplus/profit can be
generated but they shall be used for the
benefit of that educational institution. It was
held that profits/surplus cannot be diverted
for any other use or purposes and cannot be
used for personal gains or for other business
or enterprise. The Court noticed that there
were    various   statutes/regulations    which
governed the fixation of fee and, therefore,
this Court directed the respective State
Governments to set up a committee headed
by   a   retired High     Court  Judge   to  be
nominated by the Chief Justice of that State
to approve the fee structure or to propose
some other fee which could be charged by
the institute.”
77. This Court also held that for fixing the fee
structure, the following considerations are to
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
be kept in mind: (Modern School case, SCC p.
(a)    the   infrastructure    and   facilities
(b) investment made, salaries paid to
teachers and staff;
(c) future plans for expansion and/or
betterment of institution subject to two
restrictions    viz.  non-profiteering     and
non-charging of capitation fees.
We may hasten to add here itself that Section 9 of
the 2007 Act takes care of the aforesaid parameters
in abundance.
78. As   can   be   seen   in T.M.A.  Pai  Foundation
case itself,  this  Court   has   observed   that   the
Government can provide regulations to control the
charging of capitation fee and profiteering. Question
3 before the Court was as to whether there can be
government regulations, and if so, to what extent in
case of private institutions? What the Court has
observed in para 57 of the judgment is instructive
for our purposes and the same is reproduced below:
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
“57. We, however, wish to emphasise one
point, and that is that inasmuch as the
occupation of education is, in a sense,
regarded as charitable, the Government can
provide     regulations   that     will   ensure
excellence in education, while forbidding the
charging of capitation fee and profiteering by
the institution. Since the object of setting up
an educational institution is by definition
“charitable”, it is clear that an educational
institution cannot charge such a fee as is not
required for the purpose of fulfilling that
object.    To   put   it differently,    in    the
establishment of an educational institution,
the object should not be to make a profit,
inasmuch      as   education    is    essentially
charitable in nature. There can, however, be
a reasonable revenue surplus, which may be
generated by the educational institution for
the purpose of development of education and
expansion of the institution.”
In para 69 of the judgment, while dealing with this
issue, this Court again observed that an appropriate
machinery can be devised by the State or university
to ensure that no capitation fee is charged and that
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
there is no profiteering, though a reasonable surplus
for the furtherance of education is permissible.
Although the Court overruled the earlier judgment
in Unni Krishnan, which was to the extent of the
scheme framed therein and the directions to impose
the same, part of the judgment holding that primary
education is a fundamental right was held to be
valid. Similarly, the principle that there should not
be capitation fee or profiteering was also held to be
correct.
79. When we come to the judgment in Islamic
Academy of Education, the first question framed by
this Court was whether the educational institutions
are entitled to fix their own fee structure. It is
pertinent to note that this judgment brought in a
committee to regulate the fee structure which was to
operate until the Government/appropriate authorities
consider framing of appropriate Regulations. It is
also material to note that in para 20 the Court has
held that the direction to set up committees in the
States   was   passed    under   Article  142    of the
Constitution   and   was    to  remain   in   force  till
appropriate legislation was enacted by Parliament.
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
80. The judgment in P.A. Inamdar, though sought to
review    the    judgment    in Islamic    Academy      of
Education,    left  the   mechanism     of   having   the
Committees      undisturbed.   In   para   129    of  the
judgment in P.A. Inamdar, this Court observed that
the State regulation should be minimal and only to
maintain fairness in admission procedure and to
check exploitation by charging exorbitant money or
capitation fees. In para 140, it has been held that
the charging of capital fee by unaided minority and
non-minority institutions for professional courses is
just not permissible. Similarly, profiteering is also
not permissible. This Court went on to observe that
(SCC p. 605, para 140) it cannot shut its eyes to the
hard realities of commercialisation of education and
evil practices being adopted by many institutions to
earn large amounts for their private or selfish ends.
In respect of Question 3 framed thereunder, which
was with respect to the government regulation in the
case of private institutions, this Court, in para 141 of
the judgment, answered that every institution is free
to devise its own fee structure, but the same can be
regulated in the interest of preventing profiteering
and no capitation fee can be charged. In para 145,
the suggestion for post-audit or checks is rejected if
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
the institutions adopt their own admission procedure
and fee structure since this Court was of the view
that   fixation   of fees   should    be   regulated    and
controlled at the initial stage itself.
81. It is in the aforesaid context that we have to
determine the question as to whether the provisions
relating to fixation of fee are violative of Article
19(1)(g) of the Constitution or they are regulatory in
nature, which is permissible in view of clause (6) of
Article 19 of the Constitution, keeping in mind that
the Government has the power to regulate the
fixation   of   fee  in   the  interest     of   preventing
profiteering and further that fixation of fee has to be
regulated and controlled at the initial stage itself.
When we scan through Section 9 of the 2007 Act
from     the   aforesaid   angle,   we    find    that   the
parameters which are laid down therein that have to
be kept in mind while fixing the fee are in fact the
ones which have been enunciated in the judgments
of this Court referred to above. It is also significant
to note that the Committee which is set up for this
purpose,     namely, Admission     and   Fee    Regulatory
Committee, is discharging only a regulatory function.
The fee which a particular educational institution
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
seeks    to   charge   from   its students  has    to  be
suggested by the said educational institution itself.
The Committee is empowered with a purpose to
satisfy itself that the fee proposed by the educational
institution    did  not   amount    to  profiteering   or
commercialisation of education and was based on
intelligible factors mentioned in Section 9(1) of the
2007 Act. In our view, therefore, it is only a
regulatory measure and does not take away the
powers of the educational institution to fix their own
fee. We, thus, find that the analysis of these
provisions by the High Court in the impugned
judgment [Assn. of Private Dental and Medical
Colleges v. State of M.P., 2009 SCC OnLine MP 760],
contained in para 42, is perfectly in order, wherein it
is observed as under: (Assn. of Private Dental case,
“42. We are of the view that Sections 4(1)
and 4(8) of the 2007 Act have to be read
with Section 9(1) of the 2007 Act, which
deals with factors which have to be taken
into consideration by the Committee while
determining the fee to be charged by a
private    unaided   professional  educational
institution. A reading of sub-section (1) of
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
Section 9 of the 2007 Act would show that
the location of private unaided professional
educational institution, the nature of the
professional course, the cost of land and
building,     the     available    infrastructure,
teaching, non-teaching staff and equipment,
the    expenditure     on    administration    and
maintenance, a reasonable surplus required
for    growth     and    development      of    the
professional     institution   and    any    other
relevant    factor,   have   to  be   taken    into
consideration      by   the   Committee      while
determining the fees to be charged by a
private    unaided     professional   educational
institution. Thus, all the cost components of
the particular private unaided professional
educational     institution   as   well   as    the
reasonable surplus required for growth and
development of the institution and all other
factors relevant for imparting professional
education have to be considered by the
Committee       while    determining    the    fee.
Section 4(8) of the 2007 Act further provides
that the Committee may require a private
aided or unaided professional educational
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
institution to furnish information that may be
necessary for enabling the Committee to
determine the fees that may be charged by
the institution in respect of each professional
course.      Each    professional    educational
institution, therefore, can furnish information
with regard to the fees that it proposes to
charge      from    the    candidates    seeking
admission taking into account all the cost
components, the reasonable surplus required
for   growth    and   development    and    other
factors    relevant    to   impart  professional
education as mentioned in Section 9(1) of
the   2007     Act  and   the  function   of  the
Committee is only to find out, after giving
due    opportunity    of  being  heard    to  the
institution as provided in Section 9(2) of the
2007 Act whether the fees proposed by the
institution to be charged to the student are
based on the factors mentioned in Section
9(1) of the 2007 Act and did not amount to
profiteering and commercialisation of the
education. The word “determination” has
been     defined   in Black's  Law    Dictionary,
Eighth Edn., to mean a final decision by the
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
Court    or  an   administrative   agency.    The
Committee, therefore, while determining the
fee only gives the final approval to the
proposed fee to be charged after being
satisfied that it was based on the factors
mentioned in Section 9(1) of the 2007 Act
and     there     was    no    profiteering     or
commercialisation       of    education.      The
expression “fixation of fees” in Section 4(1)
of the 2007 Act means that the fee to be
charged from candidates seeking admission
in   the    private   professional    educational
institution did not vary from student to
student and also remained fixed for a certain
period as mentioned in Section 4(8) of the
2007 Act. As has been held by the Supreme
Court    in  Peerless   General    Finance    and
Investment Co. Ltd. v. RBI, (1992) 2 SCC
343, the Court has to examine the substance
of the provisions of the law to find out
whether     provisions   of  the    law   impose
reasonable restrictions in the interest of the
general public. The provisions in Sections
4(1), 4(8) and 9 of the 2007 Act in substance
empower the Committee to be only satisfied
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
professional educational institution did not
amount to profiteering or commercialisation
of education and was based on the factors
mentioned in Section 9(1) of the 2007 Act.
The provisions of the 2007 Act do not
therefore,   violate  the    right  of  private
professional educational institution to charge
its own fee.”
91. Thus, when there can be regulators which can fix
the charges for telecom companies in respect of
various services that such companies provide to the
consumers; when regulators can fix the premium
and other charges which the insurance companies
are supposed to receive from the persons who are
insured; when regulators can fix the rates at which
the producer of electricity is to supply the electricity
to the distributors; we fail to understand as to
why there cannot be a regulatory mechanism
when it comes to education which is not
treated as purely economic activity but welfare
activity aimed at achieving more egalitarian
and prosperous society by empowering the
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
people of this country by educating them. In
the    field    of    education,   therefore,     this
constitutional     goal   remains    pivotal   which
makes        it    distinct    and     special      in
contradistinction with other economic activities
as the purpose of education is to bring about
social transformation and thereby a better
society as it aims at creating better human
resource which would contribute to the socio-
economic and political upliftment of the nation.
The concept of welfare of the society would
apply more vigorously in the field of education.
Even otherwise, for economist, education as an
economic      activity,  favourably   compared      to
those     of    other   economic    concerns      like
agriculture and industry, has its own inputs
and outputs; and is thus analysed in terms of
the basic economic tools like the laws of
return, principle of equimarginal utility and the
public finance. Guided by these principles, the
State is supposed to invest in education up to a
point where the socio-economic returns to
education equal to those from other State
expenditures, whereas the individual is guided
in his decision to pay for a type of education by
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
the possibility of returns accruable to him. All
these     considerations make       out   a case for
setting up of a stable regulatory mechanism.
92. In    this   sense,   when   imparting   of    quality
education      to   cross-section   of   the     society,
particularly, the weaker section and when such
private educational institutions are to rub shoulders
with the State managed educational institution to
meet the challenge of the implementing ambitious
constitutional    promises,   the  matter    is   to   be
examined in a different hue. It is this spirit which we
have kept in mind while balancing the right of these
educational institutions given to them under Article
19(1)(g) on the one hand and reasonableness of the
restrictions    which   have  been   imposed     by   the
impugned legislation. The right to admission or
right    to   fix  the   fee  guaranteed      to    these
appellants is not taken away completely, as
feared. T.M.A. Pai Foundation gives autonomy
to   such     institutions   which   remains      intact.
Holding of CET under the control of the State does
not impinge on this autonomy. Admission is still in
the hands of these institutions. Once it is even
conceded by the appellants that in admission of
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
students “triple test” is to be met, the impugned
legislation aims at that. After all, the sole purpose of
holding CET is to adjudge merit and to ensure that
admissions which are done by the educational
institutions, are strictly on merit. This is again to
ensure     larger   public  interest.    It   is   beyond
comprehension that merely by assuming the power
to hold CET, fundamental right of the appellants to
admit the students is taken away. Likewise, when it
comes to fixation of fee, as already dealt with in
detail, the main purpose is that the State acts as a
regulator and satisfies itself that the fee which is
proposed by the educational institution does not
have the element of profiteering and also that no
capitation fee, etc. is charged. In fact, this dual
function of regulatory nature is going to advance the
public interest inasmuch as those students who are
otherwise meritorious but are not in a position to
meet unreasonable demands of capitation fee, etc.
are   not    deprived   of  getting    admissions.     The
impugned      provisions,  therefore,   are     aimed    at
seeking laudable objectives in larger public interest.
Law is not static, it has to change with changing
times and changing social/societal conditions.
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
173. Right to be treated fairly and to get admission
through a non-arbitrary, non-discriminatory, fair and
transparent procedure is a fundamental right of the
students under Article 14. Any law which creates an
artificial  classification  between   private   unaided
institutions and other institutions and creates a
disparity in the matter of admission whereby a
meritorious student could be denied admission to
pursue     higher   education  in  a  private   unaided
institution solely because such institution has an
unfettered right to choose its own students without
following    a  uniform    and  transparent   admission
procedure would be violative of the rights of the
aspiring students guaranteed under Article 14. Right
of the students to admission in private unaided
medical colleges is a right of equality in opportunity.
On many occasions, this has led to a conflict
between fundamental rights of private educational
institutions on the one hand and the rights of
students and public at large on the other. However,
the law is now settled. In such cases where there is
a conflict between fundamental rights of two parties,
this Court in para 59 in Sharda v. Dharmpal, (2003)
4 SCC 493 held that only that right which would
advance public morality or public interest would
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
prevail. In para 39 in State of Gujarat v. Mirzapur
Moti Kureshi Kassab Jamat, (2005) 8 SCC 534, this
Court held that when a fundamental right clashes
with the larger interest of society, it must yield
to the latter. The interest of citizens or section
of    community,     howsoever      important,     is
secondary to the interest of the nation and
public at large and of the right of the students
to avail opportunity of merit-based admission
in professional unaided educational institutions
would advance the public interest and as such
the rights of the students would prevail over
the rights of the private unaided professional
educational institutions.”
23. The paragraphs quoted above make a reference of the
earlier judgments of the Apex Court starting from the case of Unni
Krishnan J.P. and others, supra, and all the                  subsequent
judgments referred by learned counsel for the petitioners.
24. In the judgments in the cases of T.M.A.Pai Foundation
and others and Islamic Academy of Education and another,
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
supra, apart from P.A.Inamdar, supra, it has been held that till
provisions are brought by the respondents to regulate the fee of the
private medical colleges, the determination of fee would be by a
Committee headed by a Retired Judge of the High Court, apart from
a Chartered Accountant and the Secretary of the department
concerned.         The National Medical Commission under Section 57 of
the Act of 2019 has been given power to frame rules and Section
10(1)(i) of the Act of 2019 empowers framing of the guidelines for
determination of fees and all other charges in respect of 50% seats
in private medical institutions and Deemed to be Universities which
are governed by the Act of 2019.
25. Section 10(1)(i) of the Act of 2019 is quoted hereunder
for ready reference:
“10. Powers and functions of Commission.
(1) The Commission shall perform the following
functions, namely:-
(i) frame guidelines for determination of fees
and all other charges in respect of fifty per cent
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
of seats in private medical institutions and
deemed to be universities which are governed
under the provisions of this Act.”
The provision aforesaid gives power to the National Medical
Commission to frame guidelines for determination of fees of the
private medical colleges and deemed to be universities.
26. At this stage, the argument of learned counsel for the
petitioners in reference to the special character of Deemed to be
Universities and to regulate the fee structure in reference to the
University Grants Commission (Regulation of Admission and Fees in
brevity, “the UGC Regulations of 1997”] would be relevant.
Regulation 7 of the Regulations of 1997 provides for determination
of fair tuition fee for the courses. However, medical education is a
specialised professional course and National Medical Commission
was constituted to regulate the standard of medical education and
related matters.         The special legislation would prevail over the
general        and,   accordingly, the  fee   structure  of  the    medical
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
institutions under a private university or a Deemed to be University,
apart from State medical university, can be regulated by the
National Medical Commission as per Section 10(1)(i) of the Act of
27. The aforesaid provision does not take away the power of
the medical colleges or, for that, even the university, rather they
are having liberty to establish and administer the institution in the
manner provided under law and otherwise Section 10(1)(i) of the
Act of 2019 does not control the fee structure, but gives power to
the National Medical Commission to frame guidelines.               Therefore,
we hold that the provision under challenge does not offend any of
the judgments of the Apex Court, which may include the judgment
in the case of          Islamic Academy of Education and another,
supra.
28. The issue in regard to the validity of the provision and the
Office Memorandum needs to be considered even in the light of the
recent judgment of the Apex Court in the case of Modern Dental
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
College and Research Centre and others, supra, where a
reference of the earlier judgments of the Apex Court in regard to
the right of the educational institution to admit students and
determine fee structure on their own was addressed.
29. In the case of Modern School v. Union of India,
(2004) 5 SCC 583, referred in the judgment of Modern Dental
College and Research Centre and others, supra, four questions
were formulated, out of which the first question was whether the
educational institutions are entitled to fix their own fee structure. It
was held that there could be no rigid fee structure and each
institution must have freedom to fix its own fee structure after
taking into account the need to generate funds to run the institution
and to provide facilities for the benefit of the students.             The
institutions may generate surplus to be used for betterment and
growth of that educational institution. The fee structure must be
fixed keeping in mind the infrastructure and facilities available,
investment made, salaries paid to teachers and staff, future plans
for expansion and/or betterment of institution, subject to two
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
restrictions, namely non-profiteering and non-charging of capitation
fees.         The Apex Court noticed that various statutes/regulations
govern the fixation of fee and, therefore, the Court in the case cited
above, directed the respective State Governments to set up a
Committee headed by a retired High Court Judge to be nominated
by the Chief Justice of that State to approve the fee structure or to
propose some other fee which could be charged by the institute.
30. In the case of  T.M.A.Pai Foundation and others,
supra, the Apex Court observed that the Government can provide
regulations to control the charging of capitation fee and prevent
profiteering by the institution. The third question before the Apex
Court in the aforesaid case was as to whether there can be
government regulations and, if so, to what extent in case of private
institutions. The question was answered holding that the occupation
of education, in a sense, is charitable. The government can provide
regulations that will ensure excellence in education, while forbidding
the charging of capitation fee and profiteering by the institution.
The object behind the establishment of an educational institution
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
should not be to make profit, as education is essentially charitable
in nature.         However, there can be reasonable revenue surplus,
which may be generated by the educational institution for the
purpose of development of education and expansion of the
institution.
31. In the case of  Islamic Academy of Education and
another, supra, the first question framed by the Apex Court was
whether the educational institutions are entitled to fix their own fee
structure. The said judgment introduced a Committee to regulate
the fee structure which was to operate until the government/
appropriate authorities consider framing of appropriate regulations.
In paragraph (20) of the said judgment, it was specified that setting
up of the Committee in the State was an order passed under Article
142 of the Constitution of India and would remain in force till
appropriate legislation is enacted by the Parliament.
32. In the case of  P.A.Inamdar, supra, though the Apex
Court sought to review the judgment in the case of Islamic
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
Academy of Education and another, supra, it left the mechanism
of having the Committees undisturbed. It was with an observtaion
that the State regulation should be minimal and only to maintain
fairness in admission procedure and to keep a check on the
exploitation of students by charging exorbitant money or capitation
fees.        It was further observed that it cannot shut its eyes to the
hard realities of commercialisation of education and evil practices
being adopted by many institutions to earn large amounts for their
private or selfish ends.       It was held that every institution would be
free to devise its own fee structure, but the same can be regulated
to prevent profiteering and charging of capitation fee.
33. In the context aforesaid, the Apex Court in the case of
Modern Dental College and Research Centre and others,
supra, addressed the issue whether the provisions relating to
fixation of fee are violative of Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution of
India. It was held that the government has the power to regulate
the fixation of fee in the interest of preventing profiteering and that
the fixation of fee has to be regulated and controlled at the initial
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
stage itself.       In the aforesaid judgment, the challenge was to the
provisions of the         Niji Vyavasayik Shikshan Sanstha (Pravesh Ka
Viniyaman Avam Shulk Ka Nirdharan) Adhiniyam, 2007, which were
brought         to   regulate   the  admission  of  students    in    private
professional educational institutions and fix the fees. In the case on
hand,         Section  10(1)(i)   of the  Act  of  2019 and     the    Office
Memorandum were brought for the same purpose.
34. In the case of Modern Dental College and Research
Centre and others, supra, the Apex Court addressed the need for
a regulatory mechanism when it comes to education, which cannot
be treated as a purely economic activity, but is a welfare activity
aimed at achieving a more egalitarian and prosperous society by
empowering the people of this country by educating them.               While
answering the issue on challenge to the provisions of the Act of
2007 in reference to Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution of India, it
was held that the right to admission or right to fix the fee is not
taken away completely and the judgment in the case of T.M.A.Pai
Foundation and others, supra, gives autonomy to the institutions
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
and the same remains intact.          In the said judgment, a reference
was made to the earlier judgment in the case of State of Gujarat
v. Mirzapur Moti Kureshi Kassab Jamat, (2005) 8 SCC 534,
wherein it was held that when a fundamental right clashes with the
larger interest of society, it must yield to the latter. The interest of
citizens       or    section  of  community,  howsoever     important,     is
secondary to the interest of the nation and public at large and of
the right of the students to avail opportunity of merit-based
admission         in   professional unaided  educational   institutions   to
advance the public interest and, as such, the rights of the students
would prevail over the rights of the private unaided professional
educational institutions.
35. In the light of the judgments, referred to above, it
becomes clear that the Parliament was having power to bring the
provision to regulate the fee structure in the medical institutions
and, therefore, Section 10(1)(i) of the Act of 2019 cannot be held to
be unconstitutional.
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
36. We may now refer to the UGC Regulations of 1997 to
regulate the fee. A reference of the UGC Regulations of 1997 has
been given in a petition filed by the Deemed to be University to
submit that when legislation exists under the University Grants
Commission Act, 1956, then it could not have been encroached by
the Act of 2019, more specifically Section 10(1)(i) of the Act of
2019, and thereby Section 10(1)(i) of the Act of 2019 so as the
Office Memorandum would not apply to the Deemed to be
37. To appreciate the argument, we have gone through
Regulation 7 of the UGC Regulations of 1997 which provides the
procedure for determination of the fee and the criteria given therein
is by and large similar to what has been given in the Office
Memorandum.          Therefore, there would be no conflict in regard to
the procedure for determination of the fee.            However, it is
submitted that the Office Memorandum so as Section 10(1)(i) of the
Act of 2019 has divided students into two categories for the purpose
of fee, which arrangement does not exist in the UGC Regulations of
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
1997.         As per the Office Memorandum, the fee of the 50% seats
would be at par with the fee in the government medical colleges
and for the remaining 50% seats, the fee is to be determined by the
38. To understand the issue, we need to refer to the Act of
2019 brought by the Parliament to govern the medical education
and more especially the standard of education. The Act of 2019 is a
special act to govern the medical education, while the UGC
Regulations of 1997 are general provisions for determination of the
fee of the courses taken by Deemed to be Universities. After the
enactment of the Act of 2019, what will prevail is the special act
over the general act and otherwise the UGC Regulations of 1997
cannot be read in contrast to the Act of 2019. It is no doubt true
that the University Grants Commission Act, 1956 gives power for
framing of the regulations and by virtue of it, the UGC Regulations
of 1997 were framed. It is, however, applicable for all the courses
imparted by the Deemed to be Universities, while the Act of 2019 is
a specialised act for the medical courses. Till the Act of 2019 was
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
brought         with    a   provision   empowering   the   National    Medical
Commission           to   frame    guidelines  even   for   Deemed      to   be
Universities, the UGC Regulations of 1997 were governing the
subject, however therein also it is guided by the principles brought
for the medical courses.            It cannot be imagined that despite the
judgments of the Apex Court from time to time and, for that, the
last judgment in the case of P.A.Inamdar, supra, followed by the
judgment in the case of Modern Dental College and Research
Centre and others, supra, the Deemed to be Universities should
be governed differently for determination of fee for medical courses.
39. We do not find that Section 10(1)(i) of the Act of 2019
offends the UGC Regulations of 1997, rather those regulations
would operate for all the courses imparted by the Deemed to be
Universities other than medical courses.            The view aforesaid has
been taken for the reason that the medical colleges operated by the
private university and the Deemed to be University should have
same standard of fee to avoid exploitation of the students taking
admission.
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
40. In view of the above, we do not find that Section 10(1)(i)
of the Act of 2019 is to be struck down for its application on
Deemed to be Universities.
41. The issue that now remains is in reference to the Office
Memorandum to regulate the fee structure of 50% seats on the
criteria given therein.
42. A perusal of the Office Memorandum would show that all
the relevant factors to determine the fee have been taken into
account, as otherwise considered by the Apex Court in the case of
P.A.Inamdar,           supra,   apart  from     the  cases    of   T.M.A.Pai
Foundation and others and              Islamic Academy of Education
and another, supra. The Office Memorandum does not rigidly fix
the fee structure against 50% seats, rather it would depend on the
amount spent on different heads to determine the fee. If a medical
institution       is  providing  better   facilities to   the    students   or
maintaining         higher  standard  of   education    by  spending     huge
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
amount, the Office Memorandum does not exclude consideration of
those aspects for determination of the fee. The Office Memorandum
is taking care of all the aspects for determination of the fee against
the 50% of the seat and it would not take away the right of the
educational institution to get the fee fixed after taking into
consideration the cost they incur to maintain high standard of
education.
43. The Office Memorandum, however, does not contemplate
a fee structure to be proposed by the medical college to be
scrutinized by the        State Fee Regulatory Authority, which was the
system under the old regime of a Committee headed by the Retired
Judge of the High Court. The question would be as to whether this
would take away the right of the institution to fix the fee, because
now it would not be proposed by them.
44. In our considered opinion, the Office Memorandum gives
criteria for determination of fee and all that has been referred to
therein would take care of the cost incurred by a medical institution
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
for imparting education. The fee would be determined based on the
aforesaid and thereby, for clarification, the fee would be determined
for each institution based on the record produced by it. The only
difference would be that earlier the production of record before the
Committee headed by the Retired High Court Judge was with
indication of the proposed fee, which feature has been eliminated in
the Office Memorandum.            However, the aforesaid would not take
away the right of the institution to fix the fee. In fact, earlier also it
was to be determined by the Committee based on the criteria laid
down by the Apex Court from time to time.
45. The next issue that pops up for consideration is about the
50% of the seats to be governed with the fee at par with the fee of
the students in the government medical colleges.
46. The recommendation of the Expert Committee constituted
by the National Medical Commission makes a reference of the
judgments of the Apex Court that fee structure should not be such
which may result in cross-subsidizing of fee by one set of students
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
for the other set of students.        The recommendation of the Expert
Committee shows variation of fee for government quota seats in
different States.        It has further made a mention about the fee
against the management quota seats. A statement giving the data
of different States was also prepared.         The statement aforesaid
shows difference of fee between government quota seats and
management quota seats and if the difference is of a nature which
may result in cross-subsidization of fee by one set of students for
other set, then it would be opposed to the judgments of the Apex
Court starting from T.M.A.Pai Foundation and others, Islamic
Academy of Education and another, P.A.Inamdar, supra, till
the last judgment in the case of          Modern Dental College and
Research Centre and others, supra.
47. The aforesaid may have a serious consequence because
the poor may subsidize the fee of the rich, as fee structure for 50%
of the seats would be at par with the fee in the government medical
colleges and obviously those seats would be taken by the students
who secured merit position. The Apex Court analyzed the aforesaid
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
by giving illustration that a rich candidate would be in a position to
take coaching and may secure higher merit position and based on
the aforesaid if he occupies government seat, then he would be
paying a meagre amount, while the rest of the 50% of seats would
be filled by the remaining candidates and they would be paying
higher amount of fee to subsidize the fee of the first 50% students
and in that event the poor may subsidize the fee of the rich. This
aspect could not be taken into consideration by the Expert
Committee while making recommendations, though it has referred
the judgments of the Apex Court on the issue.
48. Learned Additional Solicitor General submitted that the
purpose of bringing Section 10(1)(i) of the Act of 2019 is to
regulate the fee of 50% of the seats of the management quota, as
otherwise the fee of the first 50% of seats is to be at par with the
fee of the students in the government medical colleges. The fees
would be regulated in the same manner as was obtaining before
bringing the Act of 2019 and thereby it was submitted that the
Office Memorandum is basically to regulate the fee of 50% of the
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
49. We do not find a clarification of that nature in the Office
Memorandum and otherwise it rigidly talks about the fee for first
50% of seats at par with the fee in the government medical
colleges. A perusal of the fee structure of different States given in
the report of the Expert Committee would show a meagre fee
charged in the government medical colleges for the reason that it is
subsidized by the government out of the money of the tax payer.
The government is not subsidizing it for the private medical colleges
and by virtue of it, if the Office Memorandum would operate, the
50% of the students would           pay fee at par with the fee in the
government medical colleges, which even as per the report of the
Expert Committee would be one-sixth or one-tenth of the fee
charged         from  the   students     taking   admission   against     the
management quota seats.           The result of the aforesaid would be
nothing but cross-subsidizing of the fee by one set of students for
another set, which was the position obtaining after the case of
Unni Krishnan J.P. and others, supra. The Apex Court in the
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
subsequent judgments in the cases of T.M.A.Pai Foundation and
others, Islamic Academy of Education and another, and
P.A.Inamdar, supra, did not approve the aforesaid. In the recent
judgment in the case of Modern Dental College and Research
Centre and others, supra, while the National Medical Commission
is allowed to bring the regulation, it was not to cross-subsidize the
fee of one set of students by another.
50. In view of the above, there is a need for the National
Medical Commission to give a re-look to the Office Memorandum
under challenge, when it would be operating not in one State, but in
all      the    States of  the country  having   different   seat  matrix
arrangement as well as fee structure for government quota and
management quota seats. The aforesaid has been elaborately
referred by the Expert Committee in its report.        In few States, the
management quota seats are limited to 15% and the government
quota seats are at 85% and in variation, in few States, the
government quota seats were 30% and the remaining were
management quota seats, apart from NRI quota, etc.          The intention
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
behind bringing Section 10(1)(i) of the Act of 2019 is to determine
the fee of the management quota seats, which was earlier
determined by the Committee headed by the Retired High Court
51. In view of the foregoing discussion, we find reason to
direct the National Medical Commission to re-visit the Office
Memorandum dated 3.2.2022 in the light of the observations made
by us and if the intention of the Parliament was to make provision
for determining the fee structure for all the seats in the medical
colleges, then to amend Section 10(1)(i) of the Act of 2019
appropriately. However, the provision now operating and held to be
constitutionally valid allows the National Medical Commission to
regulate fee of 50% of seats and if such regulation of fee is
permitted in regard to the management quota seats, then the Office
Memorandum under challenge can operate, but the question would
be for determination of fee for the remaining 50% seats to be at par
with the fee in the         government medical colleges.        To avoid
confusion of any nature, it would be appropriate for the respondents
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
to take a decision on it at the earliest so that a proper fee structure
is determined for the students, which may not result in cross-
subsidization of fees.
52. The aforesaid is required even for the reason that if there
would be a huge difference of the fee structure between two sets of
students, then it may even result in sacrificing the merit of the
candidates in view of the fact that after filling of first 50% of seats
of government quota at par with the fee of the government medical
colleges, the remaining would be offered to the next meritorious
candidate and if the next meritorious candidate is not in a position
to bear the burden of high fee, he/she would be unable to take
admission in the medical college and then the seat would go to the
next meritorious candidate, who may be below the caliber of the
candidate who could not afford to pay high fee.                 This would
ultimately result in sacrificing the merit and the worst scenario
would be when no candidate down in the merit list is ready to take
the burden of paying high fee and the seat remains vacant, which
would be a loss to the institution and the nation.
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
53.  The   aforesaid  aspects   have   not   been   taken    into
consideration         by    the    Expert     Committee    while     making
recommendation, though it has undertaken extensive work not only
for collection of data from different States, but even considering the
suggestions and objections from the medical colleges. The Expert
Committee while making recommendation, however, could not
visualize that if there would be huge different in the fee structure
between two sets of students, it may result in sacrificing the merit.
54. In the result, the writ petitions are disposed of with the
direction that in the light of the observations and finding recorded in
the preceding paragraphs, the National Medical Commission should
at the earliest come out with a fresh Office Memorandum after
giving a re-look to the Office Memorandum under challenge. Till the
exercise aforesaid is undertaken, the fee structure may be governed
by the present system.
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
There will be no order as to costs. Consequently, connected
miscellaneous petitions are closed.
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare,
W.P.No.10088 of 2022 etc.
16702, 17966 17969 and 21517 of 2022