This is an application for regular bail filed by the sole accused
in Crime No.788/2022 of Kannamali Police Station, where he
alleged to have committed offences punishable under Sections
22(b) and 8(C) of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances
Act (`NDPS Act’ for short hereinafter).
2.      The prosecution allegation is that at about 5.30 p.m on
17.12.2022 the accused was found in possession of 0.9 gram of
MDMA for the purpose of sale against the prohibition contained in
the NDPS Act and accordingly he was nabbed and contraband was
taken into custody.         Pursuant to recovery, crime alleging
commission of the above offences was registered.
3.    While pressing for grant of regular bail, the learned counsel for
the petitioner highlighted the progress of the investigation and custody
of the petitioner from 17.12.2022. That apart the learned counsel
for the petitioner argued that in this matter the mandate of Section
50 of the NDPS Act has been violated. It is specifically pointed out
that violation of Section 50 is noticeable on two aspects. The first
point argued is that when search was conducted by the C.I of Police
as part of the investigation/detection, a police officer holding the
rank of C.I, though he is a gazetted officer was present, and such an
officer is not a competent gazetted officer to witness search since
the same would offend the mandate of Section 50 of the NDPS Act.
4. In addition to that, the learned counsel for the petitioner
argued secondly that as per the mandate of Section 50, it is
necessary for the empowered officer to inform the right of the
person to be searched before a gazetted officer or a Magistrate and
if he so requires, he shall be taken before a gazetted officer or a
Magistrate for search, and if he so opts, failure to conduct his
search before a gazetted officer or Magistrate, that may not vitiate
the trial but would render the recovery of illicit suspect and vitiate
conviction and sentence of the accused.
5. Whereas the learned Public Prosecutor zealously opposed
bail highlighting the stature of the petitioner as a habitual offender
having involvement in multiple crimes, inclusive of 3 crimes under
the NDPS Act. The learned Public Prosecutor would submit that if
the petitioner will be released on bail, he would repeat the same
offences. It is submitted further that a gazetted officer working in
the police department is also a competent gazetted officer within
the sweep of Section 50 of the NDPS Act. That apart, there is no
mandate in law that search of the person shall be by taking the
accused before the gazetted officer and the same can be in the
converse also. Therefore, the petitioner doesn't deserve bail and he
shall be kept in custody till the trial is over.
6. The following are the crimes where the involvement of
the petitioner has been pointed out by the learned Public
(1) Crime 207/16 u/s 279 IPC,
(8) Crime 938/2017 u/s 323, 324, 294(b), 34 IPC
(9) Crime 1524/2021 u/s 452, 427, 294(b), 506, 143, 147, 148, 149 IPC
(10) Crime 1521/2021 u/s 143, 147, 294(b), 506 IPC & 4(i), (3) of
Kerala Healthcare Institution (Prevention and Violence & Damage Act,
(11) Crime 371/2021 u/s 27(b) of NDPS Act,
(13) Crime 412/2019 u/s 118 (e) of KP Act and 184 of M.V Act
(14) KEDO Act & 118(a) of KP Act.
7.      In view of the rival arguments, three vital questions
emerge for consideration as under:
i)      Whether C.I of police or any other gazetted officer
working in the Police Department, in any way, either disqualified
or incompetent to be a gazetted officer for the purpose of Section
ii)       A gazetted officer, who is part of the detecting or
investigating team can be a competent gazetted officer for the
purpose of Section 50 of the NDPS Act?
iii)     If the investigating/detecting officer not taking the
accused to the gazetted officer and the gazetted officer being
brought to the place of detection, can the same be held as non-
compliance of the mandate of Section 50 of the NDPS Act?
8.     In this case the learned counsel for the petitioner placed
decision of the Apex Court reported in [(2014) 5 SCC 345], State
of Rajasthan v. Premanand & anr. to contend that failure to
conduct search before a gazetted officer as mandated under Section
50 of the Act is fatal to the investigation and non compliance of the
same is a serious matter to be adjudged in favour of the petitioner.
The learned counsel also highlighted the Constitutional Bench
decision reported in [(1994) 3 SCC 299], State of Punjab v. Balbir
Singh, wherein also it was held that compliance of Section 50 of
the NDPS Act is mandatory.
9.     In this connection, reference to Section 50 of the NDPS
Act is apposite. Section 50 provides as under:
“50. Conditions under which search of persons shall be conducted.
(1) When any officer duly authorised under section 42 is about to
search any person under the provisions of section 41, section 42 or section
43, he shall, if such person so requires, take such person without
unnecessary delay to the nearest Gazetted Officer of any of the departments
mentioned in section 42 or to the nearest Magistrate.
(2) If such requisition is made, the officer may detain the person until he
can bring him before the Gazetted Officer or the Magistrate referred to in
sub-section (1).
(3) The Gazetted Officer or the Magistrate before whom any such
person is brought shall, if he sees no reasonable ground for search, forthwith
discharge the person but otherwise shall direct that search be made.
(4) No female shall be searched by anyone excepting a female.
(5) When an officer duly authorised under section 42 has reason to
believe that it is not possible to take the person to be searched to the nearest
Gazetted Officer or Magistrate without the possibility of the person to be
searched parting with possession of any narcotic drug or psychotropic
substance, or controlled substance or article or document, he may, instead of
taking such person to the nearest Gazetted Officer or Magistrate, proceed to
search the person as provided under section 100 of the Code of Criminal
(6) After a search is conducted under sub-section (5), the officer shall
record the reasons for such belief which necessitated such search and within
seventy-two hours send a copy thereof to his immediate official superior."
10.       Even on meticulous reading of Section 50 of the NDPS
Act, the argument advanced by the learned counsel for the
petitioner as regards to incompetence of the police officer as a
gazetted officer could not be understood rather inferred. In fact,
Section 50(5) provides that when an officer duly authorised under
section 42 has reason to believe that it is not possible to take the person
to be searched to the nearest Gazetted Officer or Magistrate without the
possibility of the person to be searched parting with possession of any
narcotic drug or psychotropic substance, or controlled substance or
article or document, he may, instead of taking such person to the
nearest Gazetted Officer or Magistrate, proceed to search the person as
provided under section 100 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
Thus Section 50 imbibes presence of gazetted officer or a
Magistrate at the time of body search of an accused or a suspect
and it is not safe to hold that a police officer being a gazetted
officer is either disqualified or incompetent to witness a search in
terms of Section 50 of the NDPS Act. Therefore, it has to be held
that any police officer being a gazetted officer is a qualified and
competent gazetted officer for search of a person as stipulated in
Section 50 of the NDPS Act.
11.     However, an exception is carved out as per the decision
in State of Rajasthan v. Premanand & anr. (supra), to the effect
that when the gazetted officer is an officer forming part of the
detecting or investigating team, he is not a competent officer since
he cannot be held as an independent officer to ensure search
without false implication.
12.     Coming to the second question, going by the statutory
wording under Section 50 of the NDPS Act, which provides that if
the person who wants to be searched, if requires, takes such person
without unnecessary delay to the nearest gazetted officer of any of
the Departments mentioned under Section 42 or to the nearest
Magistrate, it could not be held that when the search was conducted
in the presence of a gazetted officer after ensuring his presence at
the place of recovery, after safeguarding the measures of false
implication under Section 50 of the NDPS Act. The point argued
by the learned counsel for the petitioner is that in tune with the
mandate of Section 50 of the NDPS Act, it is necessary for the
investigating officer to take the person or accused to the nearest
gazetted officer or before a Magistrate and search conducted by
securing the presence of the gazetted officer at the place of search
would offend the mandate of Section 50 of the NDPS Act. On
perusal of the statutory wording in Section 50(1) of the NDPS Act,
it is provided that the officer shall take such person before the
gazetted officer or the Magistrate and as per Section 50(2) of the
NDPS Act, if such requisition is made (by the person to be
searched), the officer may detain the person until he can bring him
before the gazetted officer or the Magistrate referred to in sub
section (1). Similarly, Section 50(3) also provides that a gazetted
officer or the Magistrate before whom any such person is brought
shall, if he sees no reasonable ground for search, forthwith
discharge the person but otherwise shall direct that search be made.
13.    Although the statutory wordings would give rise to an
inference that the person to be taken/bring before the gazetted
officer or the Magistrate, no hard and fast interpretation to be given to
lay a proposition that if search was conducted in the presence of the
gazetted officer or before the Magistrate by securing their presence at
the place of search, the search is either vitiated or the same is
against the mandate of Section 50 of the NDPS Act.             To put it
differently, when search is before a competent gazetted officer or
the Magistrate, within the sweep of Section 50 of the NDPS Act,
either by taking the person to be searched before the gazetted
officer or the Magistrate or securing the presence of the gazetted
officer or the Magistrate to the place of search, it has to be held that
the mandate of Section 50 stands complied. Therefore, the second
challenge at the instance of the learned counsel for the petitioner
also cannot be accepted.
14. Coming to the crux of the case, 0.9 gram of MDMA was
seized from the accused on 17.12.2022, the same is intermediate
quantity. Therefore, there is no rider in the form of Section 37 of
the NDPS Act in this matter. However, the aggravating factors are
the involvement of the petitioner in 14 crimes prior to this
occurrence. Out of which, 3 are under Section 27(b) of the NDPS
Act, but many of the antecedents are pertaining to minor offences,
to be foreseeable from the list extracted herein above. Adverting
to the facts discussed, noting the progress of investigation and the
custody of the petitioner from 17.12.2022, by imposing stringent
conditions, the petitioner can be enlarged on bail and one amount
the conditions is that the petitioner shall not involve in any other
offence during the currency of bail and any such event, if reported
or came to the notice of this Court, the same alone shall be a reason
to cancel the bail hereby granted.
15. Accordingly, the petition stands allowed and the petitioner
can be released on bail on the following conditions:
i.     Accused/petitioner shall be released on bail on his
executing bond for Rs.60,000/- (Rupees Sixty Thousand Only)
with two solvent sureties each for the like amount to the
satisfaction of the jurisdictional court concerned.
ii. Accused/petitioner shall not intimidate the witnesses or
tamper with evidence. He shall co-operate with the investigation
and shall be available for trial. He shall visit the Investigating
Officer on every Monday in between 9 a.m and 12 noon for a
period of two months and also appear before the Investigating
Officer as and when directed.
iii. Accused/petitioner shall not leave India without prior
permission of the jurisdictional court.
iv. The petitioner shall surrender his passport, if any, within 7
days from the date of their release, before the trial court. If he has
no passports, he shall file an affidavit in this regard on the date of
execution of the bond or within 3 days thereafter.
v.     Accused/petitioner shall not involve in any other
offence during the currency of bail and any such event, if reported
or came to the notice of this Court, the same alone shall be a reason
to cancel the bail hereby granted.