PRAYER: Writ Petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India for issuance of a writ of Certiorarified Mandamus to call for the
records from the 1st respondent pertaining to the impugned order passed
in Ref.No.MDU/Legal/W.P.No.1514/2017 dated 23.08.2019 quash the
same and consequently directing the respondents 1 to 4 to implement the
High Court orders and also consequently direct the above respondents to
implement the resolution passed in the 223rd Board Meeting, also the
Office Note approved by the Management and further, the 3rd
respondent's legal department (Writs) letter in ref. Legal/W.P.No.18300
1.To implement and sanction the annual increments in every years
from the dismissal date to the reinstatement date.
2.To implement and sanction to pay the review benefits and 10
years weightage increments in the whole service period and etc.,
properly.
3.To change the pay revision from old basic pay to the new basic
pay in terms of pay revision in terms of Wage Settlement under Sub-
Section 12(3) of the I.D. Act with attendant benefits with retrospective
from 23.12.1994 to July 2005 to the petitioner.
4.To direct the respondents to revise the terminal benefits namely
gratuity, earned leave salary, commuted value of pension and monthly
pension based on the pay revision given and settlement from the date of
his retirement to till the date of actual payment and disburse the
difference amounts for the same to him together with interest at the rate
of 6% per annum payable within the stipulated time limit that may be
fixed by this Court.
The order passed by the respondent Transport Corporation in
proceedings dated 23.08.2019 informing him about his eligibility for
gratuity and pensionary benefits is under challenge in the present writ
petition.
2.The petitioner was appointed as Driver in the respondent
transport corporation and retired from service on 31.05.2011 on attaining
the age of superannuation.
3.The writ petitioner was dismissed from service due to an
accident made by him against the private bus on 23.12.1994.
Challenging the order of dismissal, the petitioner raised an industrial
dispute before the labour Court and labour Court passed an award in
I.D.No.189/1995 in favour of the writ petitioner for reinstatement. The
petitioner was reinstated into service and thereafter allowed to retire from
service.
4. The learned counsel for the petitioner reiterated that the terminal
and pensionary benefits due to the petitioner has not been settled fully.
However, it was settled partially. The writ petitioner earlier filed W.P.
(MD) No.1514/2017 and this Court passed an order to consider the
representation and based on the orders of this Court dated 19.03.2019,
the present impugned order has been passed.
5. Perusal of the impugned order reveals that service particulars of
the petitioner has been taken into consideration and accordingly, the
eligible gratuity amount and other pensionary benefits are settled in
favour of the writ petitioner.
6. The learned counsel for the petitioner raised an objection that
the calculation made by the respondent corporation is incorrect. The
petitioner has given a calculation and as per the calculation of the
petitioner, the amounts are to be settled.
7. This Court is of the considered opinion that it is a disputed facts
between the parties. What exactly the correct amount of terminal and
pensionary benefits to be settled to an employee is to be decided with
reference to the service records and other particulars, as the petitioner
was dismissed from service and reinstated pursuant to the award of the
labour Court.
8. Such disputed facts cannot be adjudicated in a writ proceedings
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India. It requires examination of
documents in original and further verification of service records are
warranted. Power of judicial review cannot be extended for the purpose
of adjudication to such disputed issues in writ proceedings. This exactly
is the reason why the high Court is expecting the litigants to approach the
competent authorities and the competent forum constituted for such
adjudication.
9. Several statues or rules contemplate provision for appeal,
revision and review etc. Such alternate remedy is to be exhausted and it
is paramount importance in the sense that the disputed issues between the
parties requires an elaborate adjudication with reference to the
documents and evidences.
10. Therefore, exhausting the alternate remedy is the rule,
entertaining a writ petition is an exception. In all circumstances, the
aggrieved person has to exhaust the alternate remedy contemplated under
the Act, Rules or otherwise. Only on exceptional circumstances, where
there is a gross injustice or if any damage which cannot be rectified, then
alone high Court would dispense with the alternate remedy and entertain
a writ petition.
11. The practice prevailing amongst the litigants directly
approaching the high Court with a prayer to direct the respondents to pay
the entire pensionary and service benefits need not be encouraged. The
litigants are calculating their terminal and pensionary benefits in their
own ways. When the respondents appear they say that they have settled
as per the service records and as per the pay rules in force or in alternate
writ petitions are disposed of to consider the representation of the
petitioner. Again, the respondents are fixing the same terminal and
pensionary benefits and communicate an order and contempt petition is
also filed. Based on the said order, pursuant to the directions by the high
Court to consider the representation, again another writ petition is filed
with the same prayer to dispose of the terminal and pensionary benefits.
Again the question arises whether the high Court can compute the exact
terminal and pensionary benefits. The only change made in the second
writ petition would be that the order passed pursuant to the directions to
consider the representation is challenged in addition and nothing further.
12.Unfortunately the litigants are driven to Court again and again
for redressing the very same grievances. In the present case, the only
grievance of the writ petitioner is that the terminal and pensionary
benefits are not settled fully as per the claim of the petitioner. However,
as per the respondents, the pensionary and terminal benefits were already
settled and an order to that effect has also been passed.
13.This Court is of the considered opinion that the litigants cannot
be made to suffer by way of multiplicity of proceedings. The justice
delivery system should thrive hard to ensure that the aggrieved persons
get speedy justice and their genuine grievances are redressed in
accordance with law. Contrarily, if they were driven to Court repeatedly
and finally their grievances are not addressed or redressed then the faith
in the justice delivery system is in peril and therefore, the Courts are
expected to be cautious in dealing with the multiplicity of proceedings
and the possibility of creating multiplicity of proceedings and to ensure
that the issues are decided on merits at the first instance itself. Once the
issues are decided and the rights of the parties are crystallized, then all
appropriate reliefs can be granted even in a writ petition filed for a
direction to consider the representation. Courts are empowered to
adjudicate the issues and if necessary mold the prayer and grant
appropriate relief to redress the grievances. Contrarily, issuing a direction
to consider a representation may be an easy way out for disposal of the
case. But it will not do any service to the cause of justice. The litigants
are driven again back to the Court by way of further litigations and it
may take several long years and ultimately the faith and trust in the
system will be shakened and the high Court cannot allow such
impressions to go on in the public domain.
14. This Court is witnessing many number of such writ petitions
and many number of litigants are unable to redress their grievances even
after filing two or three writ petitions and contempt petition. Such a
situation can never be allowed to continue and the issues are expected to
be decided on merits and in accordance with law by crystallizing the
rights of the parties. In the event of not establishing right then the writ
petition is not entertainable. Again maintainability of the writ petition
need not be questioned. However entertainability is the question which
is to be considered. All writ petitions are maintainable under Article 226
of the Constitution of India, however entertainability is to be decided
with reference to the rights of the parties or its infringement. Therefore,
this Court is of the considered opinion that parties must be allowed to
exhaust the alternate remedy provided under the statutes and in the
service rules and thereafter approach the Court, if they are further
aggrieved and the Courts are expected to adjudicate the issues on merits
and settle the issues for the purpose of providing complete justice to the
parties approaching the Court. This being the principles, which all are
settled by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India on several occasions, this
Court is of an opinion that the practice of entertaining a writ petition
without exhausting the alternate remedy needs to be discouraged and
cannot be encouraged.
15. In the present case, the petitioner rightly approached the labour
Court challenging the order of dismissal. An award was passed in favour
of the writ petitioner and accordingly he was reinstated and allowed to
retire from service. Now towards disputing the terminal benefits, which
were settled pursuant to the award and by fixing the pay of the writ
petitioner, if at all there is any dispute in pay fixation pursuant to the
labour Court award or otherwise, then the petitioner has to approach the
competent labour Court for computation of the benefits or for any other
appropriate relief, as the case may be. If at all the grievance of the
petitioner is not redressed by the labour Court, thereafter they are at
liberty to approach the high Court under Article 226 of the Constitution
of India. In the event of such approach, the factual findings of the labour
Court with reference to the documents and evidences would be of greater
assistance to the high Court for the purpose of taking a decision by
exercise of powers of judicial review under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India. Thus, the factual findings of the labour Court in
such circumstances undoubtedly would of greater assistance for taking an
appropriate decision.
16. The power of judicial review under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India is to ensure the processes through which the
decision is taken by the competent authorities in consonance with the
statues and rules in force, but in a decision itself. This being the scope
under the Constitution, the high Court need not venture into an
adjudication of the disputed facts between the parties, at all
circumstances.
17. In view of the above principles, this Court is of the considered
opinion that the petitioner being a workman and retired from service,the
service conditions were governed under 12(3) settlement and after
retirement under the pension scheme and therefore, he is at liberty to
approach the labour Court for appropriate relief to redress his grievance
in the manner known to law.
18. With this liberty, the writ petition stands disposed of. No costs.
Consequently connected Miscellaneous Petition is closed.