Dated this the 30th day of March, 2022
In what circumstances does sex on a promise to
marry become rape? Does the law postulate determination
of the criminality of the sexual act in the context of
'consent' on the premise of inviolability of sexual
autonomy? Does law contemplate to categorise a sexual
act based on consent only on the understanding of the
2. Perhaps we have to answer the above mentioned
questions based on the factual background of the case
in this appeal which arises from a judgment convicting
the appellant for the offence under Section 376 of the
3. The appellant has been sentenced to undergo
imprisonment for life and to pay a fine of Rs.50,000/-
in the impugned judgment.     He has been acquitted for
other charges framed against him under Sections 406 and
420 of the IPC. The appellant had sexual intercourse
with the victim on three occasions. The prosecutrix and
the accused are relatives. The accused is the son of
the prosecutrix’s uncle. They were in love for more
than 10 years. The case of the prosecutrix, hereinafter
referred to as PW1, was that she and the accused
married on 3-4-2014 at Manarcaud Temple and thereafter,
they went to Kumily, where they pledged her ring and a
pair of earrings at Kosamattam Finance. According to
PW1, as the accused had no money for registering the
marriage, she had pledged the gold ornaments as above.
Thereafter, PW1 and the accused stayed at a lodge in
Thekkady and therein they had sexual intercourse. It is
stated by her that the next morning also, she was
physically abused (sexually). The accused then left for
Theni for a meeting and asked PW1 to go to his house.
PW1 then would say that she was not accepted at the
house of the accused and his mother had a quarrel with
her.  The  mother  of  the  accused  also  demanded  25
sovereigns of gold ornaments and Rs.1,00,000/-. The
accused, thereafter, came to his house and since they
were not allowed to enter the room, they remained at
the sit-out of the house. On that day also, they had
physical relationship. This was on 5-4-2014. PW1 and
the accused went to the house of PW1 in Kottayam. By
that time, the parents of PW1 made a complaint before
the Police Station at Vandiperiyar. When the police
called    the   accused,   he   stated   that    they  were   in
Kottayam. There also at the house of PW1, the accused
had sexual intercourse with PW1. The alleged sexual
intercourse occurred between 3-4-2014 and 5-4-2014. The
accused married PW3 on 08/04/2014. Though PW1 deposed
that    she   had    been    physically     exploited   (rather
mentioned    as   'physically    abused'    if  translation   in
vernacular     language     is    made    -    shaareerikamaayi
peedippichu). The case as above would not disclose any
violent or forceful sexual act. The charge framed by
Firstly, that you on 28th day of May 2012, conducted the
engagement of marriage with CW1 and received Rs.25,000/- and ten
sovereigns of gold ornaments from CW1 and thereby committed an
offence punishable under Section 420 of the Indian Penal Code
which is within the cognizance of this Court.
Secondly, that you on 03.04.2014 made CW1 to believe that
you would marry her and took her to Vandipperiyar and stayed in
Room No. 103 of New residency lodge at Thekkadi in Ward No.
XI/284 of Kumily Panchayath and had sexual intercourse with CW1
from  03.04.2014  to  05.04.2014  against  her will  and  thereby
committed an offence punishable under Section 376 of Indian Penal
Thirdly, on the same and same time you received the gold
ornaments worn by CW1 by misrepresenting her that money is
required for registering the marriage and pledged the same and
used the money for your own use and thereby committed the offence
punishable under Section 406 of Indian Penal Code, within the
cognizance of this Court.
The   charge    discloses    that   the   accused   had   sexual
intercourse with PW1 from 3/4/2014 to 5/4/2014 against
her will. Nevertheless, it has come out from PW1, as
well as the findings of the Sessions Court that, this
was not a case of forcible sexual act as against her
will but a sexual act on a promise to marry where the
consent is implicit. We find the charge as framed was
defective, but it has not resulted in any form of
prejudice to the accused.
4. The incidents of rape alleged, occurred in the
year 2014. The amended provisions of the Indian Penal
Code, 1860 and the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 as amended
by Act 13 of 2013 will have to be considered in this
case. Though PW1 has not spoken in detail about the
nature of the rape committed on her in regard to
penetration, insertion etc., her testimony that she has
been sexually abused means to convey that there was
sexual intercourse between her and the accused. The
Court cannot ignore the background of the witness while
analysing the testimony of such a witness. She was a
maidservant coming from a rural background. She is not
an educated woman. The Court cannot expect such a woman
to  narrate  the  instances of  sexual  intercourse  in
detail. The shyness and ignorance, coupled with the
pompous edifice of the Court room would dissuade such a
person from disclosing the sexual act in detail. From
the charge itself, it was revealed to the accused that
the allegations of sexual intercourse with PW1 is the
foundation of the prosecution’s case. Therefore, it
cannot be said that the accused also had not understood
the nature of the sexual act alleged to have been
committed by him.
Understanding the ‘consent’ of a woman on a promise to
5. The consent of a woman on a promise to marry is
an enigma for the prosecution to prove. Consent refers
to the state of mind of both parties in an act. In a
sexual act, if both have understood the nature of the
sexual relationship, consent is implicit in such a
relationship. While considering the relationship, the
Court will have to weigh the position of the accused to
control the woman. It is to be remembered that the
statutory  provisions   of  the  offence    of  rape  as
understood in the Indian Penal Code, is not gender
neutral. A woman, on a false promise of marrying and
having sexual relationship with a man, with the consent
of the latter obtained on such false promise, cannot be
punished for rape. However, a man on a false promise of
marrying a woman and having sexual relationship with
the woman would lead to the prosecution ’s case of rape.
The law, therefore, creates a fictitious assumption
that the man is always in a position to dominate the
will   of the  woman.   The  understanding   of  consent
therefore,    has   to   be  related    to  the  dominant    and
subordinate relationship in a sexual act.
6. Section 375 of the IPC states that a man is
said to commit rape if he has had any form of sexual
intercourse without the consent of a woman. Explanation
2 to Section 375 refers to the form of expression of
‘consent’. It is appropriate to refer to explanation 2
Explanation 2: Consent means an unequivocal voluntary agreement
when the woman by words, gestures or any form of verbal or non-
verbal communication, communicates willingness to participate in
Provided that a woman who does not physically resist to the act
of penetration shall not by the reason only of that fact, be
regarded as consenting to the sexual activity.
There cannot be any room for doubt in this case as to
the consent of PW1 for having sexual intercourse with
the accused. PW1 referred to three incidents of sexual
intercourse. First of such incidents happened in a
lodge. She did not raise any complaint immediately
thereafter. Again, she had sexual intercourse at the
residence of the accused. The third incident happened
at her own house where also, she did not raise any
complaint. According to her, she was promised by the
accused that he would marry her. She also deposed about
proposing the marriage at the Manarcaud Temple. But no
ceremonies were conducted to establish legal marriage.
She approached the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Kottayam,
with a complaint.      This was forwarded to the police for
investigation.        The   police   registered     an   FIR   on
7. Section 90 of IPC refers to a consent as not
consent intended by any provisions of the Indian Penal
90. Consent known to be given under fear or misconception. —A
consent is not such a consent as is intended by any section of
this Code, if the consent is given by a person under fear of
injury, or under a misconception of fact, and if the person doing
the act knows, or has reason to believe, that the consent was
given in consequence of such fear or misconception; or
Consent of insane person.—if the consent is given by a
person who, from unsoundness of mind, or intoxication, is unable
to understand the nature and consequence of that to which he
Consent of child.—unless the contrary appears from the
context, if the consent is given by a person who is under twelve
years of age.
8. We shall now advert to some of the precedents
before considering the point of guilt of the accused in
this   case.   In   Pramod   Suryabhan   Pawar   v.   State   of
Maharashtra and another [(2019) 9 SCC 608], the Apex
Court distinguished sexual relationship based on false
promise to marry and a breach of promise to marry. The
Apex   Court   held   that   the  offence    of  rape   is   not
constituted when it was only a breach of promise to
marry. The false promise of marriage is explained as a
promise not given in good faith, with no intention of
being adhered to at the time it was given. In Anurag
Soni v. State of Chhattisgarh [(2019) 13 SCC 1] on a
similar line, the Apex Court, noting that the accused
had no intention to marry the prosecutrix, held that
engaging in a physical relationship on the pretext of
marriage, fell in the category of rape. In               Deepak
Gulati   v.   State   of  Haryana   [MANU/SC/0546/2013]      the
Hon’ble Supreme Court distinguished rape and consensual
sex and held that “there is a clear distinction between
rape and consensual sex and in a case like this, the
Court must very carefully examine whether the accused
had actually wanted to marry the victim or had mala
fide motives and made a false promise to this effect
only to satisfy his lust. As the latter falls within
the  ambit  of  cheating  or  deception.”   In   Dhruvaram
Murlidhar  Sonar  (Dr.)  v.  State  of  Maharashtra    and
Others [2019 (1) KHC 403], the Apex Court held that if
the accused had not made a promise with the sole
intention  to  seduce  the  prosecutrix   to   indulge  in
sexual act, such an act would not amount to rape. In
State of Uttar Pradesh v. Naushad [(2013) 16 SCC 651]
again the Hon’ble Supreme Court held that the consent
of the victim obtained by the accused by giving false
promise of marrying her would amount to committing
9. The false promise of marriage refers to the
state of mind of the accused. The point of guilt is
relatable to the state of mind of the accused at the
time of committing the act of sex. If the accused had
no real intention to marry, it can be easily concluded
that the consent of the victim is a misconception of
fact. The accused might have had intention to marry but
he was not sure whether the marriage would take place
or   not.  If   the  accused   had  not  disclosed  full
information to the prosecutrix regarding the factors
which would hamper or hinder the impending marriage
with her, can the Court hold that sexual autonomy had
been   violated   or not?   Had  the  accused  disclosed
information about the chances of marriage, would she
have consented? If there was no full disclosure of
factors that could have a bearing on the consent of the
woman, can we hold that such cases fall in the category
of breach of promise? We need to discuss this in
Ostensible consent and sexual autonomy:
10. Non-disclosure of material facts that would
impact the consent of the victim is to be considered
in the context of criminalizing a sexual act quo sexual
autonomy of the woman. Law on rape broadly classifies
rape into two categories. One causing bodily harm. The
second category of offence against sexual autonomy.
The first category of offence has been referred under
Section  375  of  the  IPC  by  nature of harm  caused
against her will. In the second category there are two
sub categories. One refers to sexual acts without her
consent. In this context, without consent has to be
understood with reference to Section 90 of the IPC.
The other sub category is with ‘consent’ as referred
to in Section 375 from descriptions three to six. Sex
on promise to marry can be established as rape only if
it is coming under the first sub category that means
the accused has violated the decisional autonomy of
the victim at the time of having sex with the victim.
False promise to marry has already been categorized as
the type of act to attract the provision of the IPC.
Non-disclosure of the material facts, affecting the
consent of the victim has not been adverted to in any
of the precedents cited at the bar.
11. Sexual autonomy of a woman to decide upon her
body is a natural right and part of her liberty. The
dominant nature of men to subordinate the decisional
autonomy of women has been perceived by the legislature
while making the penal provision as not gender neutral.
The law presumes a man's position to subordinate the
decisional     autonomy    of  a   woman.     The   idea   of   the
legislature is to protect the sexual autonomy of the
12. On account of such position or relation she is
having with a man, the law recognises both forceful act
as well as a violation of sexual autonomy within the
ambit of the penal provision.
13.   In   an   article   written     by   Jack   Vidler   on
‘Ostensible Consent and the Limits of Sexual Autonomy’
published     in  the   Macquarie    Law    Journal,    Volume   17
(2017),    the    author    refers   to    establishing      sexual
“Sexual autonomy (and autonomy more generally) is a philosophical
concept, so its fundamental features are relatively consistent
throughout   various  interpretations.   According   to  Madhloom’s
Kantian   analysis   of  autonomy,   a    person   must   have  the
‘capacity ... to decide ... and pursue a course of action’.This
highlights  the   dual  requirement  of  autonomy:  possession  of
relevant information, and the (ideally unrestrained) ability to
act in accordance with a personal assessment of that information.
Lacey defines sexual autonomy as ‘the freedom to determine one’s
own sexual experiences, to choose how and with whom one expresses
oneself sexually’. Schulhofer conceives of sexual autonomy as the
‘right of every person to freely choose or refuse any sexual
encounter’. He argues this right ‘must be fully protected’,
requiring a model of ‘affirmative consent’, wherein the emphasis
is to look for the presence, not absence, of consent. Further, a
comprehensive review of US jurisdictions in 2012 found that the
common elements of the various consent definitions were freedom
and  ‘capacity’,   such  as  acting on  free  will  with  relevant
knowledge of the act. The presence of the philosophical dyad of
autonomy in the operational principle of consent both suggests
that sexual autonomy is simply personal autonomy in a sexual
context, and reaffirms the link between sexual autonomy and
consent in general. Herring similarly understands sexual autonomy
as the ‘right to choose with whom we have sexual contact’.
Providing a more operational account, however, Herring posits
that sexual autonomy is violated when, inter alia, consent is
given in ignorance of significant relevant facts. Thus, deception
and informational constraints may vitiate consent and violate
sexual autonomy.Though this is a common theme in other authors’
conceptions, Herring specifically acknowledges its operational
consequences — that consent is vitiated if the complainant would
not have engaged in the sexual interaction if they ‘had known the
truth’;  that   is,  if  they  had  had  access  to  the  relevant
information that was previously obscured from them. They must
have knowledge of the key facts involved in making the decision
to engage in sexual conduct in order for their consent to
properly safeguard their autonomy. These facts have also been
termed ‘material facts bearing significantly on the decision to
14. In an another article by Nora Scheidegger on
‘Balancing Sexual Autonomy,            Responsibility, and         the
Right to Privacy: Principles for Criminalizing Sex by
Deception’, published in German Law Journal, Volume 22,
(2021), the author explains the concept of the right to
“The right to sexual autonomy comprises negative and positive
dimensions. The negative dimension includes the right to be free
from non-consensual or unwanted sexual contact and the right to
refuse to have sexual relations with anyone at any time. The
positive  dimension   includes   the   right   to   engage   in  sexual
activity  one  wishes   to  pursue    with   any   consenting   person.
However, this positive right to sexual self-determination is not
unlimited. Sexuality is not a solo activity, and therefore has
“built-in limits.” A person’s right to positive sexual self-
determination can only exist as long as it is not in conflict
with someone else’s negative right to self-determination. The
negative right generates on others duties not to interfere. It is
only through consent that the other person is released from non-
interference  and  that   consent   makes  it    morally   and  legally
permissible for others to engage with her in ways that would
otherwise be impermissible.”
15. The sexual act on promise to marry is an
offence against the decisional autonomy of a woman
having the choice to engage in physical intimacy. The
material    facts    related   to   consent,  known  to   the
offender or the accused, if not disclosed at the time
of   the  sexual    act,   the  consent   so obtained   would
violate the decisional autonomy of the victim to engage
in physical intimacy or not. The offender may have the
intention to marry; he may also know at the time of
committing the sexual act that there are obstacles to
the marriage. If he was not certain about the marriage,
he is bound to disclose that fact to the woman. If such
fact was not disclosed, consent may fall under the
category of ‘misconception of fact’ and the consent
would be vitiated under the category of misconception
of fact as referred to in Section 90 of the IPC.
16. In an article by Omar Madhloom, on “Deception,
Mistake   and Non-disclosure:      Challenging the   Current
Approach to Protecting Sexual Autonomy”, published in
Northern Ireland Legal Quarterly, Volume 70 No.2, the
author refers to non-disclosure of material facts as:
A material fact is one which plays a significant role in C’s decision
to permit or engage in sexual activity; and it may be material to her,
whether it would be material to someone else.
Non-disclosure and mistake should nullify consent because it prevents
individuals  from   setting  their  own   standards  with   regards  to  the
characteristics of their sexual partners. Consent should be deemed
valid where C is mistaken about D’s attributes, such as his marital
status,   religious    affiliations   and   wealth.    Where   D   withholds
information relating to a material fact, and he does so for the purpose
of  manipulating  her   decision  to  have   sex,  C’s   consent  should  be
considered to have been vitiated by his non-disclosure. The focus
should be on the impact the deceptive conduct had on the individual’s
17. The law recognizes an offence with reference
to two elements. Actus reus and mens rea. Actus reus
constitutes either commission or omission of acts. The
voluntary act or omission is called actus reus in our
legal system. Mens rea refers to the state of mind of
the accused at the time of the act. Misconception of
fact to vitiate consent as referred under Section 90 of
IPC may happen on false promise or omission to disclose
material facts. If the accused has a reason to believe
that such material facts would vitiate consent, that
denotes mens rea.
18.   Thus,    the   legal    position  is  clear.
Non-disclosure   of   material   facts  by  the accused
affecting the consent would amount to violation of the
sexual autonomy of the woman. Sexual autonomy consists
of two requirements. First, the possession of relevant
information and second the ability to act in accordance
with the personal assessment of that information. The
material facts known to the accused if not shared with
the woman at the time of committing the sexual act,
certainly would encroach upon her right to protect her
decisional  autonomy.    Section   375  of  IPC clearly
envisages any violation of sexual decisional autonomy
as an offence.
19. Section 114-A of the Indian Evidence Act, as
amended in the year 2013, gives presumption as to the
absence of consent in certain prosecutions for rape.
114-A.   Presumption   as  to  absence  of   consent  in  certain
prosecution for rape. - In a prosecution for rape under clause
(a), clause (b), clause (c), clause (d), clause (e), clause (f),
clause (g), clause (h), clause (i), clause (j), clause (k),
clause (l), clause (m) or clause (n) of sub-section (2) of
section 376 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), where sexual
intercourse by the accused is proved and the question is whether
it was without the consent of the woman alleged to have been
raped and such woman states in her evidence before the Court that
she did not consent, the Court shall presume that she did not
20. Sex on promise to marry will give rise to the
presumption under Section 114-A of the Indian Evidence
Act. Section 376(2) of the IPC states that certain
categories     of    relationships    and   positions    attract
aggravated      forms     of   punishment.      Section    114-A
presumption are relatable to certain types of sexual
acts referred to in Section 376(2) of the IPC. It is
appropriate to refer to Section 376(2)(f) of the IPC,
(f) being a relative, guardian or teacher of, or a person
in a position of trust or authority towards the woman, commits
The reference under Section 376 (2)(f) of the IPC to a
male in a position of trust towards the woman would
clearly indicate that a sexual act on a promise of
marriage   would  give  rise   to  the   presumption   under
Section 114-A of the Indian Evidence Act as in every
sexual act, based on a promise to marry, there exists
an element of trust.
21. However,   in   order   to   give  rise   to   the
presumption under Section 114-A of the Indian Evidence
Act, in context of prosecution on a promise to marry,
the woman has to state in her evidence that the promise
was false with necessary elements at the time of the
sexual act or has to state that non-disclosure of
material facts affected her consent. It is only when
foundational facts are disclosed to show false promise
or non-disclosure of material facts, as referred to as
above,   the  presumption   under  Section   114-A   of  the
Indian Evidence Act is attracted. Once foundational
facts   are  disclosed  in   evidence,   unless  and   until
disproved, the presumption is that of the guilt of the
22. A combined reading of Section 90 of the IPC
and Section 114-A of the Indian Evidence Act gives the
following proposition of law in the context of sexual
relationship on a promise to marry.
i. Law presumes lack of consent when a woman states in
evidence that she did not consent, if the prosecution
is able to prove sexual intercourse by the accused.
ii. This presumption is available in favour of the
prosecution if the consent was obtained in any of the
circumstances narrated under Section 90 of the IPC.
iii. The woman must state in evidence the foundational
facts constituting elements for false promise or non
disclosure of materials facts.
23. Coming back to the facts of this case, the
prosecution has miserably failed to prove the sexual
act was on false promise or consent was obtained by
non-disclosure of material facts. The prosecutrix had
not  stated  anything  in  evidence to  constitute  the
foundational facts for attracting the presumption under
Section 114-A of the Evidence Act. Merely for the
reason that the accused contracted another marriage
immediately after the sexual act with the victim cannot
give rise to the presumption of lack of consent. We
cannot ignore the social circumstances of the parties.
The  lack   of  consent   has   to  be  stated  by  the
prosecutrix. The victim and accused were in a love
relationship for more than ten years. The sexual act
referred to only occurred just before the preparation
for the marriage was made. The prosecution evidence
itself would show that there was resistance from the
parents of the accused to accept the marriage without
dowry. That would show that the sexual act committed by
the accused was with real intention to marry the victim
and  he  could  not  hold   onto   his promise  due  to
resistance from his family. In the absence of any other
evidence on the side of the prosecution, the conduct of
the accused can only be treated as a breach of promise.
In light of the discussions, we are of the view that
the accused is entitled to benefit of doubt as the
prosecution has failed to prove the sexual act was on a
false promise to marry or the consent was obtained by
non-disclosure of material facts.
We, therefore, allow the appeal, set aside the
impugned judgment of conviction and sentence, acquit
the appellant/accused and direct him to be released and
set  at  liberty  forthwith,  if he   is not  otherwise