1.    Kumari D., a minor girl aged 16 years has
presented this petition through her mother seeking for
a direction to the 2nd respondent to medically terminate
the pregnancy forthwith.
2.    For the sake of protecting the privacy and
confidentiality of the minor girl and her family, both her
name and her mother's name are not being stated and
shall not be stated in the records which would be in the
public domain.
3.   It is the case of the petitioner that she was a
victim of a sexual crime which was inflicted on her on
08.02.2021. In respect of this sexual crime, Crime
No.142/2021 has been registered by the Sadalaga
Police   Station    for  the   offences   under    Sections
376(2)(n), 366(A), 506, 34 of the Indian Penal Code
(for short ‘IPC’) and under Sections 4 and 6 of the
Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012
(for short ‘POCSO Act’), against two persons who
incidentally are a father and son duo.
4.   The petitioner states that her case was
referred to the Child Welfare Committee established
under the Juvenile Justice Act and the said Committee
requested the 2nd respondent to medically terminate
the pregnancy of the petitioner. The Committee also
informed the 2nd respondent that the mother had also
given her consent for termination of pregnancy.
5.   However,    it  appears    that   the   medical
practitioner and the 2nd respondent were of the view
that the pregnancy could not be terminated as the
outer limit of 24 weeks set down in Section 3 of the
Medical    Termination     of   Pregnancy     Act,    1971
(hereinafter called as ‘the 1971 Act’) had passed.
6.   The petitioner is therefore before this Court
contending that she cannot be forced to carry the
burden of crime and cannot be compelled to deliver a
baby which has been conceived against her will. The
petitioner is calling upon this Court to exercise its
constitutional   power    under    Article  226    of  the
Constitution   of  India   and   to  direct  the   medical
practitioner to terminate the pregnancy. It is submitted
that there cannot be a curtailment of the constitutional
power of this Court by any statutory limitations. It is
also contended that if the petitioner is forced to deliver
the child, it would be a direct infringement on the
fundamental guarantee to her under Articles 14 and 21.
7.   I have heard the learned counsel for the
petitioner and the learned High Court Government
8.   The 1971 Act was enacted to provide for
termination of certain pregnancies by registered Medical
Practitioners and the matters connected therewith.
9.   In law, the termination of pregnancy is made
a  criminal   offence   under  the   provisions   of   IPC.
However, Section 3 of the 1971 Act, grants an
exemption from criminal liability to a registered Medical
Practitioner   to  terminate  the   pregnancy    if  it  is
performed in accordance with the provisions of the
1971 Act. The Act, in effect, decriminalizes the act of
terminating the pregnancy if it is performed by a
registered Medical Practitioner, if it is in accordance
with the provisions of the 1971 Act.
10. Section 3(2) (a) of the 1971 Act states that
the pregnancy may be terminated by a registered
medical practitioner if the length of pregnancy does not
exceed 20 weeks if the medical practitioner is of the
opinion, formed in a good faith, that such continuation
of the pregnancy would involve a risk to the life of the
pregnant women or cause grave injury to her physical
or  mental   health    or   by  the continuance  of  the
pregnancy there is a substantial risk that the child if
born,   would   suffer   from   any  physical or mental
11. Section 3(2) (b) of        the  Act states the
pregnancy can be terminated if the length of pregnancy
has exceeded 20 weeks, but, has not exceeded 24
weeks, in cases of the prescribed category of women, if
not less than two medical practitioners form an opinion,
in good faith, that such continuation of the pregnancy
would involve a risk to the life of the pregnant women
or cause grave injury to her physical or mental health
or by the continuance of the pregnancy there is a
substantial risk that the child if born, would suffer from
any physical or mental abnormality.
12. Two explanations have been provided to clear
any ambiguity that may arise under Section 3 of the
13. The first explanation is in relation to the
termination    of  pregnancy,      where  the   length   of
pregnancy does not exceed 20 weeks. In such cases, if
pregnancy has occurred as a result of a failure of any
device or method used by any woman or her partner
for the purpose of limiting the number of children or
preventing    pregnancy,   it   is  made    clear  that   a
presumption may be drawn that the anguish caused by
such pregnancy constitutes a grave injury to the mental
health of the pregnant woman.
14. The second explanation is in relation to
both   sub-clauses  (a)   and  (b) of  Section   3 i.e.,
pregnancies in respect of the pregnancy up to 20 weeks
and pregnancies beyond 20 weeks but which does not
exceed 24 weeks. It is explained therein that where any
pregnancy is alleged by the pregnant women to have
been caused by rape, it shall be presumed that the
anguish caused by pregnancy constitutes a grave injury
to the mental health of the pregnant woman.
15. The significant factor to be noticed in these
two explanations is the kind of presumption that the
law prescribes over the cases in which pregnancies
have occurred due to an alleged rape. Unlike the 1st
explanation, which states that a presumption may be
drawn,    the   2nd  explanation   mandates     that  a
presumption shall be drawn that the anguish caused by
the pregnancy constitutes a grave injury to the mental
health of the pregnant woman. This statutory and
irrebuttable presumption would apply, both, in cases,
where the length of pregnancy is not only up to 20
weeks but and also in cases where it exceeds 20 weeks
but does not exceed 24 weeks.
16. It is thus clear that the law creates a
statutory presumption of grave injury to the mental
health of the pregnant woman if she alleges that the
pregnancy was caused due to an alleged rape.
17. However, since the 1971 Act does not provide
for termination of pregnancy after 24 weeks by medical
practitioners even if it is alleged by the pregnant
woman     to  have   been  caused   by  rape,  the 2nd
respondent has therefore refused to terminate the
18. However, the question that does arise for
consideration is whether the petitioner can approach
this Court and call upon this Court to invoke its
constitutional power and order for termination of her
pregnancy which is alleged to have been caused by
19. A three-Judge Bench of the Hon’ble Supreme
Court in the case of Suchita Srivastava and Ors. Vs.
Chandigarh Administration reported in (2009)9
“There is no doubt that a woman's right to make
reproductive choices is also a dimension of 'personal
liberty' as understood under Article 21 of the Constitution
of India. It is important to recognise that reproductive
choices can be exercised to procreate as well as to
abstain from procreating. The crucial consideration is that
a woman's right to privacy, dignity and bodily integrity
should be respected. This means that there should be no
restriction whatsoever on the exercise of reproductive
choices such as a woman's right to refuse participation in
sexual activity or alternatively the insistence on use of
contraceptive methods. Furthermore, women are also
free to choose birth-control methods such as undergoing
sterilisation procedures. Taken to their logical conclusion,
reproductive rights include a woman's entitlement to
carry a pregnancy to its full term, to give birth and to
subsequently raise children.”
20. It is therefore clear that the right of a woman
to exercise her reproductive choice is a dimension of
“personal liberty” as understood under Article 21 of the
Constitution of India and she has a sacrosanct right to
have her bodily integrity protected. The act of forcing a
woman to bear with an unwanted intrusion on her body
and endure the consequences of that intrusion would be
a clear transgression of her inviolable fundamental right
of “personal liberty” guaranteed under Article 21 of the
21. In the instant case, the petitioner, who is
aged just about 16 years is being forced to continue
with her pregnancy which has been caused because of
a crime perpetrated on her. It is to be borne in mind
that a minor may not even know that she has become
pregnant by the rape inflicted on her and may have
become aware of the pregnancy only at a late stage
due to visible physical changes on her body. In fact, the
visible changes may also not manifest itself within 20
weeks and even if it does manifest itself, a minor girl
may not understand it or may be scared of revealing
her state of affairs due to plain fear or possibility of
certain    social  repercussions    or   also  being   held
responsible for her status.
22. It should also be kept in mind that a minor
who has been raped and has become pregnant due to
it, will be forced not only to be a victim of the crime but
would also be compelled to bear with the burden of the
crime inflicted on her by forcing her to deliver a child,
the conception of which, was not due to the exercise of
her reproductive choice. In fact, the fate of the child if
delivered, may also be perilous and detrimental to its
own interest given the social stigma that would hover
around it.
23. Thus, in cases of rape inflicted on minor girls,
though there are certain statutory limitations prescribed
under    the  1971    Act,   they    would    essentially be
applicable only to medical practitioners. In such cases,
the requirement to terminate the pregnancy medically
would have to be considered and examined in an
altogether different light by the Constitutional Courts.
24. It cannot be in dispute that the statutory
limitations  imposed     in   a    statute   cannot   be  an
impediment     or  a   restriction    on   the   exercise of
Constitutional power of the High Courts. The exercise of
this constitutional power would obviously be exercised
rarely, sparingly and in exceptional circumstances and
would obviously rest on the facts of each case.
25. In fact, this is the view enunciated by the
constitution bench of the Apex Court in the case of
State of West Bengal Vs The Committee for
Protection of Democratic Rights, West Bengal and
ors reported in (2010) 3 SCC 571, wherein at
paragraph 44 (v), it has been held as follows:
“(v) Restriction on the Parliament by the
Constitution and restriction on the Executive by the
Parliament under an enactment, do not amount to
restriction on the power of the Judiciary under Article 32
and 226 of the Constitution.”
26. It may also be pertinent to state here that
the 1971 Act does not create an absolute bar for
termination of pregnancies that have traversed even
beyond the period of 24 weeks stipulated in Section
3(2) (b) of the Act. In fact, Section 3 (2B) of the Act
excludes the applicability of the time of the length of
pregnancies       by   the    medical      practitioner,     if the
termination is necessitated by the diagnosis of any
substantial foetal abnormalities diagnosed by a Board.
Thus, if the medical practitioner is of the view that
there is a substantial abnormality in the foetus, on a
diagnosis made by the Board, a pregnancy can be
terminated irrespective of the length of pregnancy. The
Board contemplated under this provision is required to
comprise of a Gynecologist, a Pediatrician, a Radiologist
or a Sonologist and such other number of members as
may be notified.
27. Another indicator that there is no absolute
bar for termination of the pregnancies even in respect
of pregnancies that are more than 24 weeks is the
existence of Section 5 in the Act. As per the said
Section, the provisions relating to the requirement of
conducting termination of pregnancies only at specified
places under Section 4 and the requirement of needing
the opinion of at least two medical practitioners under
Section 3(2) would not be necessary if the medical
practitioner is of the opinion, which is formed in good
faith, that the termination is immediately necessary so
as to save the life of the pregnant women.
28. Thus, essentially, the 1971 Act seeks to
provide   for  termination     of  pregnancy only under
specified conditions keeping in mind the injury that
would be caused to the pregnant woman and the
unborn child if the pregnancy is continued. The Act, in
fact, allows termination of pregnancy by a medical
practitioner, without reference to the length of the
pregnancy or without reference to the pre-conditions
requisite for conducting them, if the continuance of the
pregnancy constitutes a risk to the very survival of the
pregnant woman.
29. In this case, the petitioner is just 16 years of
age and her capability to deliver a child and foster it in
the social milieu that she exists will have to be kept in
mind while considering her request for terminating the
pregnancy. In the facts and circumstances of this case,
in my view, the capability of the petitioner to bear and
rear the child, would be in serious doubt given the fact
that she is just 16 years old, and her parents are not
possessed of means. The consequences of continuing
the pregnancy on the future life of the 16 year old
would be quite severe and detrimental to a dignified life
as contemplated under Article 21 of the Constitution.
30. However,     in   order  to  ascertain   and  be
satisfied as to whether the continuation of pregnancy
did constitute grave mental injury to the petitioner, an
interim order was passed on 16.11.2021 directing 2nd
respondent to constitute a Medical Board comprising of
a Gynecologist, a Pediatrician and a Radiologist or
Sonologist and directed the said Board to subject the
petitioner to a medical examination.
31. This order directing the constitution of a
Medical    Board  was     passed   keeping  in   view  the
qualifications prescribed for the members of the Board
in Section 3(2B) of the 1971 Act (which was inserted by
the Amending Act 8 of 2021).
32. Pursuant to the said order, a Medical Board
was constituted by the 2nd respondent comprising of the
33. The         Board      after     conducting    a   medical
examination         of  the     petitioner,      has  rendered  the
Pt.by Name xxxxxxxxx Age:16 year, IP No.202119743.
Admitted on 09.11.2021 at 01.12.56pm. The patient is a
Case of Sexual Assault with previous MLC dated
22.10.2021 with 5 months of Gestation admitted with
pain abdomen. Patient has come for MTP with consent
given by Mother. Further investigation were done, on
ultrasound it was 25 weeks + 3 days life pregnancy. As it
has crossed 24 weeks as per law it needs to be
terminated after obtaining legal permission by Court. The
anticipated complications during procedure may be as
•      Require surgical intervention
•      Excessive per vaginal bleeding and its
•      Infection and its consequences
If the procedure is not carried out it may affect her
mental health. She may deliver vaginally at term.
Continuing pregnancy may cause serious grave injuries to
mother physically & mental health as it is high risk
pregnancy (teenage pregnancy)
As of the opinion as per ultrasound report it is single live
intrauterine gestation of 25 weeks 3 days with no gross
congenital anomalies at present.
Since it’s a high-risk pregnancy (teenage mother) it may
have grave consequences on the fetus.
If the patient continues her pregnancy she can develop
anxiety, by extending anxiety can lead to depression
definitely it affects the mental health of the patient. After
delivery again social problems like unmarried delivery, &
social isolation problems. All above things affect the
mental health of the patient.
Opinion of the medical board is as follows:
The victim needs termination as continuing pregnancy
endangers the mother physically & mental health with
risk as explained by Gynecologist & Psychiatrist.”
34. Thus, in the considered opinion of the Medical
Board, the pregnancy of the petitioner needs to be
terminated as continuing pregnancy would endanger
the physical and mental health of the petitioner. The
Medical Board has also stated that the length of
pregnancy as on 17.11.2021 was 25 weeks and 3 days,
which would be beyond the period of 24 weeks by 1
week 3 days.
35. The Pediatrician, who was a part of the
Medical Board, has opined that it would be a case of
high-risk pregnancy as the petitioner was a teenage
mother and it would also pose a grave risk on the fetus.
The Psychiatrist has noted that if the pregnancy is
continued, the petitioner will develop anxiety and the
extending anxiety could lead to a definite depression
which would in turn have a bearing on the mental
health of the petitioner. He has also specifically
observed that social problems arising out of the
petitioner’s status would also have an affect on the
mental health of the petitioner.
36. In    my   view,     having regard    to   the
circumstances explained above and the specific opinion
rendered by the Medical Board, the petitioner has made
out a case for issuance of a direction to terminate the
37. In the result, the writ petition is disposed off
directing the 2nd respondent to ensure the medical
termination of pregnancy of the petitioner-Kumari ‘D’,
(the name of the petitioner is mentioned as ’D’ for the
sake of confidential) in accordance with the provisions
of   Medical  Termination    of  Pregnancy     Act,  1971
forthwith having regard to the opinion rendered by the
A copy of the operative portion of this order be
furnished to the learned HCGP forthwith.