Present:      Mr. Baldev Singh, Advocate for the petitioner.
The prayer in the present petition filed by Neha W/o Gaurav @
Sonu Kataria is for the grant of parole to her convict husband to enable them to
have conjugal relations for procreation with an alternative prayer to allow them
to procreate/maintain conjugal relation within the jail premises.
The brief facts of the case are that the husband of the petitioner
namely Gaurav @ Sonu Kataria was convicted in FIR No.298 dated 27.07.2016
registered under Sections 302, 307, 34 of IPC and Section 25 of the Arms Act at
Police Station Rajendra Park, Gurugram vide judgment dated 31.05.2018 and
sentenced to life imprisonment.
The said   Gaurav @ Sonu Kataria was also convicted in FIR
No.642 dated 16.07.2016 registered under Sections 392/34/120-B IPC and 25 of
Arms Act, at Police Station City Gurugram, District Gurugram vide judgment
dated 22.01.2020 and sentenced to life imprisonment till the remainder of his
life without remission.
The petitioner got married to the said Gaurav @ Sonu Kataria on
17.04.2016 and on 10.08.2016, the husband of the petitioner was arrested and
has been in custody ever since.
The application was moved for parole for consummation of the
matrimonial relationship on 19.11.2020 and the same was rejected by
respondent No.2 i.e. Jail Superintendent, District Jail, Gurugram vide order
dated 09.12.2020 (Annexure P-2). As per the impugned order, the husband of
the petitioner came under the hardcore criminal category and therefore was not
entitled to grant of parole in terms of The Haryana Good Conduct Prisoners
(Temporary Release) Amendment Act, 2013, keeping in view The Haryana
The petitioner has challenged the aforementioned order dated
09.12.2020 (Annexure P-2) by way of filing of the present petition.
The primary contention of the petitioner's counsel was that in terms
of the judgment of this Court in “Jasvir Singh & Anr. Vs. State of Punjab &
others, 2015 (1) RCR (Criminal) 509” a question was framed as to whether
penalogical interest of the State permits or ought to permit creation of facilities
for the exercise of right to procreation during incarceration and whether the said
right is termed as 'right to life' and 'personal liberty' guaranteed under Article 21
of the Constitution of India. The prima facie, opinion of this Court at the time
of preliminary hearing on 17.03.2021 was that the right to life and liberty under
Article 21 extended to the right of the petitioner to procreate through conjugal
relations with her convict husband. Therefore, notice of motion was issued on
17.03.2021, recording these reasons.
The matter was taken up from time to time and ultimately, a reply
was submitted by the Additional Chief Secretary to Government of Haryana,
Jails Department on 30.09.2021. The contention of the State was that the
husband of the petitioner being a hardcore prisoner with multiple convictions
and pending FIRs was not entitled to the relief as prayed for. The State further
contended that in terms of Para 93 of the judgment in Jasvir Singh's case
(supra), the right available for conjugal visit of a married and eligible convict
was subject to those conditions as prescribed under the Statute and that in terms
of the directions issued in Jasvir Singh's case (supra), the State of Haryana had
constituted a Jail Reforms Committee on 27.09.2021. Thus, it was contended
that the husband of the petitioner could avail parole for the purpose sought in
terms of Para 93 subject to the conditions of The Haryana Good Conduct
Prisoners (Temporary Release) Amendment Act, 2013 or he could await the
instructions to be issued by the Jail Reforms Committee and could thereafter
apply, if so eligible, as per the Scheme to be formulated by the Jail Reforms
Committee. Thus, the State contended that the right to maintain conjugal
relations by a convict was not an absolute right.
Before we proceed in the matter, it would be relevant to examine
the judgment of this Court in Jasvir Singh's case (supra). In the said case
(supra), the husband and wife were convicted for offences under Sections
302/364-A/201/120-B i.e. kidnapping and murder for which they were awarded
the death penalty, confirmed by this Court and the Supreme Court had also
dismissed their appeal but commuted the death sentence of the wife to life
imprisonment. The petitioners i.e. husband and wife sought enforcement of their
perceived right to have conjugal relations and procreate within the jail premises
for the sake of progeny. The relevant paragraphs of the said judgment are
reproduced hereinbelow:-
“(9) The following, amongst others, are the issues which have
emerged for determination:-
i. Whether the right to procreation survives incarceration, and
if so, whether such a right is traceable within our
Constitutional framework?
ii. Whether penalogical interest of the State permits or ought
to permit creation of facilities for the exercise of right to
procreation during incarceration?
iii. Whether ‘right to life’ and ‘personal liberty’ guaranteed
under Article 21 of the Constitution include the right of
convicts or jail inmates to have conjugal visits or artificial
insemination (in alternate)?
iv. If question No.(iii) is answered in the affirmative, whether
all categories of convicts are entitled to such right(s)?
(93) It is directed that until the State of Punjab effectively
addresses the issues either by way of appropriate legislation
or through policy framework, the expression “any other
sufficient cause” contained in Section 3(1)(d) of the 1962 Act
shall treat the conjugal visits of a married and eligible convict
as one of the valid and sufficient ground for the purpose of
his/her temporary release on ‘parole’ or ‘furlough’ though
subject to all those conditions as are prescribed under the
(95) For the reasons assigned above, I sum up my conclusions
and answer the questions as formulated in Para 9 of this
order, in the following terms.-
i. Question - (i) Whether the right to procreation survives
incarceration, and if so, whether such a right is traceable
within our Constitutional framework?
Yes, the right to procreation survives incarceration. Such a
right is traceable and squarely falls within the ambit of Article
21 of our Constitution read with the Universal Declaration of
ii. Whether penalogical interest of the State permits or ought
to permit creation of facilities for the exercise of right to
procreation during incarceration?
The penological interest of the State ought to permit the
creation of facilities for the exercise of right to procreation
during incarceration, may be in a phased manner, as there is
no inherent conflict between the right to procreate and
incarceration, however, the same is subject to reasonable
restrictions, social order and security concerns;
iii. Whether ‘right to life’ and ‘personal liberty’ guaranteed
under Article 21 of the Constitution include the right of
convicts or jail inmates to have conjugal visits or artificial
insemination (in alternate)?
‘Right to life’ and ‘personal liberty’ guaranteed under Article
21 of the Constitution include the right of convicts or jail
inmates to have conjugal visits or artificial insemination (in
alternate). However, the exercise of these rights are to be
regulated by procedure established by law, and are the sole
prerogative of the State.
iv. If question No.(iii) is answered in the affirmative, whether
all categories of convicts are entitled to such right(s)?
Ordinarily, all convicts, unless reasonably classified, are
entitled to the right to procreation while incarcerated. Such a
right, however, is to be regulated as per the policy established
by the State which may deny the same to a class or category of
convicts as the aforesaid right is not an absolute right and is
subject to the penological interests of the State.
(96) In the light of the above discussion, the instant writ
petition is disposed of with the following directions:-
i. the State of Punjab is directed to constitute the Jail Reforms
Committee to be headed by a former Judge of the High Court.
The other Members shall include a Social Scientist, an Expert
in Jail Reformation and Prison Management amongst others;
ii. the Jail Reforms Committee shall formulate a scheme for
creation of an environment for conjugal and family visits for
jail inmates and shall identify the categories of inmates
entitled to such visits, keeping in mind the beneficial nature
and reformatory goals of such facilities;
iii. the said Committee shall also evaluate options of
expanding the scope and reach of ‘open prisons’, where
certain categories of convicts and their families can stay
together for long periods, and recommend necessary
infrastructure for actualizing the same.
iv. the Jail Reforms Committee shall also consider making
recommendations to facilitate the process of visitations, by
considering best practices in the area of prison reforms from
across jurisdictions, with special emphasis on the goals of
reformation and rehabilitation of convicts and needs of the
families of the convicts;
v. the Jail Reforms Committee shall suggest ways and means
of enhancing the facilities for frequent linkage and
connectivity between the convict and his/her family members;
vi. the Jail Reforms Committee shall prepare a long-term plan
for modernization of the jail infrastructure consistent with the
reforms to be carried out in terms of this order coupled with
other necessary reforms;
vii. the Jail Reforms Committee shall also recommend the
desired amendments in the rules/policies to ensure the grant of
parole, furlough for conjugal visits and the eligibility
conditions for the grant of such relief;
viii. the Jail Reforms Committee shall also classify the
convicts who shall not be entitled to conjugal visits and
determine whether the husband and wife who both stand
convicted should, as a matter of policy be included in such a
list, keeping in view the risk and danger of law and security,
adverse social impact and multiple disadvantages to their
ix.    the    Jail      Reforms  Committee    shall    make    its
recommendations within one year after visiting the major jail
premises and it shall continue to monitor the infrastructural
and other changes to be carried out in the existing jails and in
the Prison Administration System as per its recommendations.
x. the Jail Reforms Committee shall be allowed to make use of
the services of the employees and officers of the State of
Punjab, who is further directed to provide the requisite funds
and infrastructure including proper office facilities, secretarial
services, travel allowances and all necessary amenities and
facilities, as required by the Jail Reforms Committee.”
[emphasis supplied]
In a somewhat similar situation Mr. Ankur Mittal, Additional
Advocate General, Haryana appearing for the respondents has brought to the
notice of this Court a Judgment dated 20.01.2022 of the Full Bench of the High
Court of Judicature at Madras in “Meheraj Vs. State of Tamil Nadu & others,
H.C.P. (MD) No.365 of 2018” of which the relevant paragraphs are reproduced
“A Division Bench passed an order on 25.2.2019 referring the
following two questions for consideration by a Larger Bench:
(i) Whether the denial of conjugal rights to a convict prisoner
would amount to denial of such a right to his/ her spouse and
thereby, violative of Article 21 of the Constitution of India?
(ii) Whether   the State can be directed to favourably consider
the request of a convict prisoner for emergency leave or
ordinary leave for the purpose of having conjugal relationship
with his/her spouse, though the Tamil Nadu Suspension of
Sentence Rules, 1982 do not envisage this?
20. The question for consideration would be as to whether the
wife of the convict can seek leave to enable her and the convict
husband undergo infertility treatment to beget a child and
whether it would fall under the category of extraordinary
reasons.
22. We find that the prayer of the petitioner to undergo
infertility treatment in a circumstance when the convict has no
child from the wedlock forms an extraordinary reason for
grant of leave. In view of the above, we find that the case of
the petitioner was falling under Rule 20(vii) of the 1982 Rules.
It is, however, necessary to clarify that the Rule aforesaid
cannot be invoked in all situations. It can be granted to
undergo infertility treatment, that too, for a convict having no
child from the wedlock. If the convict has child or children
from the wedlock, then to seek leave for infertility treatment or
on similar ground would not fall in the definition of
"extraordinary reasons". It is also that leave cannot be sought
repeatedly on one and the same ground under the category of
extraordinary        reasons.  If leave  for   having    conjugal
relationship is recognized to be a right under Article 21 of the
Constitution of India, the prayer of similar nature can be made
by the accused or his/her spouse time and again to have
conjugal relationship. The observation aforesaid has been
made in reference to the provisions of the Code of Criminal
Procedure as well as the Prisons Act, 1894. A convict cannot
enjoy all the liberties as are available to a common person,
otherwise there would no difference between a law-abiding
citizen and a law-violating prisoner. The aforesaid would not
that prisoners do not have any right or liberty, rather we
had recorded our finding that the 1982 Rules take care of
Article 21 of the Constitution of India. A word of caution in
regard to conjugal rights has been put so that the liberty, if
any, may not be misused by the convict or the spouse, rather it
is used for the purpose it is meant or required.
24. In view of the above, we need to answer the questions
framed by the Division Bench. A conjugal right in common
parlance is for maintaining marital status by husband and
wife. The leave for a specific purpose which may be for
undergoing infertility treatment, as such, may not be
considered for having conjugal relationship in common
parlance, but for extraordinary reason, thus we can safely
hold that the 1982 Rules itself protect the rights of the prisoner
guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution of India to the
extent it is required.
25. If we hold that deprivation of conjugal right to a convict
offends Article 21 of the Constitution of India, it would mean
to give right to a convict for conjugal right, which in common
parlance is for maintaining the marital relationship of
husband and wife in continuity with companionship. The same
cannot be permitted for a convict, as a difference has to be
made between the law abider and violator. If the case in hand
is also taken note of, the petitioner's first petition was allowed
with grant of leave for two weeks for undergoing infertility
treatment and immediately after availing it, the second petition
was filed in continuity. The facts aforesaid cannot be ignored
by the court because after the judgment by the court holding
conjugal right to be a fundamental right, the convict would
come out with an application to secure his fundamental rights
guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution of India
without any restraint and, therefore, we need to take a
cautious decision so that the ratio propounded by us is used
for the purpose and, accordingly, we answer the questions in
the following terms:
(i) The denial of conjugal relationship of the convict for
specific purpose may amount to denial of the fundamental
right guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
The specific purpose may be infertility treatment or some
similar reason, but it should not be construed to be a
fundamental right for having conjugal relationship as a
course. This would make a difference between the law abider
and violator in regard to rights guaranteed under Article 21 of
the Constitution of India.
(ii) The State can be directed to consider the request of convict
for emergency leave or ordinary leave for the purpose given
while answering the question No.(i). The emergency leave or
ordinary leave would be for the purpose given under the 1982
Rules and if any extraordinary reason exist, then the State
need to consider the aforesaid as and when a request is made
by the convict or his relative for grant of ordinary leave for
extraordinary reasons. The emergency leave or ordinary leave
cannot be claimed as a right for having conjugal relationship
without an exceptional reason. This demarcation is necessary
as the curtailment of some rights of a prisoner on account of
his conviction to the extent indicated above does not offend
Article 21 of the Constitution of India.”
[emphasis supplied]
Clearly, the State of Haryana has constituted the Jail Reforms
Committee on 27.09.2021 after notice had been issued by this Court and as such
the Committee would make its recommendation within one year after visiting
the major jail premises. However, Para 93 of the judgment in Jasvir Singh's case
(supra) makes it apparent that the right of a convict to have conjugal relations is
subject to all those conditions as prescribed under the Statute. Therefore, the
right is not an absolute one and is subject to 'reasonable restrictions', 'social
order', 'security concerns', 'good behaviour' in the jail etc.
The Full Bench of High Court of Judicature at Madras has also
quite categorically opined that the right to have conjugal relations is not an
absolute right and what is available to a convict is his right to obtain infertility
treatment. It has gone on to state that a convicted person cannot enjoy the same
rights those available to a common man because there must be a distinction
drawn between a law-abiding citizen and law-violating prisoner.
We may, however, add that the right of convict to avail parole
would be governed by Para 93 of the Judgment in Jasvir Singh's case (supra)
uptil the time the Jail Reforms Committee does not formulate a scheme for
creation of an environment for conjugal and family visit for jail inmates in the
light of the instructions dated 28.09.2021.
The petitioner/her husband are, therefore, at liberty to apply for
parole in terms of the instructions dated 28.09.2021 which, inturn, emanate from
Para 93 of Jasvir Singh's case (supra) and if, they so apply for the same, the
application shall be considered in accordance with the provisions contained in
Section 3(1)(d) of the 1962 Act subject to those conditions as prescribed under
the Statute. In the alternative, the petitioner or her convict husband could await
the formulation of a Policy by the Jail Reforms Committee, in terms of the order
dated 27.09.2021 (R-1) and apply thereafter. This we say in the light of the stand
taken by the State in their reply and the fact that the prayer for parole was
rejected by the authority on 09.12.2020 (Annexure P-2) which was prior to
issuance of instructions dated 28.09.2021 (Annexure R-3).
We may also add here that the Jail Reforms Committee may
consider the judgment of the Hon'ble Madras High Court (supra) while making
its recommendations.
We direct Shri Ankur Mittal, Additional Advocate General,
Haryana to provide the copy of judgment of the Hon'ble Madras High Court
(supra) to the Jail Reforms Committee as also to the Additional Chief Secretary
to Government of Haryana, Jails Department, Haryana Civil Secretariat,
Chandigarh for necessary action.
In view of the aforesaid discussion, we dismiss this petition with
the observations, as aforesaid.
Whether speaking/reasoned:- Yes/No