Mr.Abhijit Sarwate with Ms.Hardev Kaur and Mr.Rahul
Pardesi for the Petitioner.
Mr.Mayur Khandeparkar with Mr.Ajinkya Udane for the
1.       The present petition assail the order passed by the
learned Judge, Family Court No.5, Pune on 13/04/2022, on an
application fled by the petitioner/wife (Exh.12), seeking
permission to relocate and shift alongwith her minor daughter
to Krakow, Poland. By the very same order, the learned Judge
has       partly        allowed   the      application      fled      by       the
respondent/husband (Exh.18) seeking a restraint order
against the wife from taking the minor daughter, out of the
jurisdiction of the Court and further injuncting the mother
from changing the school of the daughter and for depositing
her passport with the Court during the pendency of the
The two applications were fled in P.D.No.31 of 2020 i.e. a
petition fled by the wife, seeking permanent custody of the
minor child.
2.       The     impugned      order  in the background          of     the
applications will have to be appreciated by introducing brief
The marriage between the petitioner and the respondent
was solemnized on 08/07/2010 as per the Hindu rites and
customs and without going into further details of their
premarital relationship, suffce it to say that a daughter was
born out of the wedlock on 08/07/2013.
The petitioner/wife allege that the respondent and his
family was always hostile towards her and she accused her
mother-in-law of commanding a dominant position in the
entire household, which resulted in harassment to the
petitioner, since she was required to engage in various
domestic activities. The petitioner claims to be an Engineer by
profession and prior to her marriage, she was gainfully
employed with TCS and according to her, she was graded as
Class I performer (Grade ‘A’).           However, since she was
overburdened with domestic work, she was not able to perform
and she was reverted to the lower grade of performance.
Attributing irretrievable breakdown of marriage between
the two, by referring to various specifc instances, the
petitioner/wife fled the petition for dissolution of marriage
before the Family Court, Pune on 14/11/2017, stating that
though she was residing with the respondent/husband and her
daughter in Delhi, on account of ill-treatment, disgrace and
humiliation suffered by her, she returned to Pune alongwith
her daughter and admitted her in a school, since her mother is
residing       in     Pune.    Pleading that the     marriage         had
irretrievably breakdown and the marital relationship has been
completely deteriorated on account of the conduct of the
respondent and expressing diffculty in continuing the
relationship on account of the mental cruelty and agony, she
sought dissolution of marriage under Section 13(1)(i) and (i-a)
of the Hindu Marriage Act.
3.       One more petition came to be fled by the petitioner/wife
under Sections 7 and 8 of the Guardian and Wards Act, which
was numbered as P.D. No.31 of 2020 and a relief was sought to
the effect that she shall be declared as sole guardian and
custodian of the minor child, aged about 7 years. The said
petition came to be fled on 25/11/2020, wherein she pleaded
that she had single handedly taken care of the daughter, since
her birth, without any assistance from the respondent or his
family and she was forced to leave the matrimonial home and
her parents have been supporting and assisting her in taking
care of her daughter. She also state that she as well as her
daughter are attached to her parents and who endevour their
co-operation in the activities of the minor child who is an
extremely brilliant girl and deserve a conducive and
affectionate environment. Pleading that she, as a mother, is
best suited to promote her child’s welfare and since, the child
has not spent a single day under the exclusive care of the
respondent, as he has prioritized his career and position in the
society over the interest of his family and has made a meager
contribution towards maintenance of the child, it was averred
that he is disqualifed from seeking her custody.
The petitions were contested by the respondent/husband
by fling various affdavits from time to time and the same are
pending for adjudication before the Family Court.
4.       In the proceedings of P.D.No.31 of 2020, the petitioner
fled an application on 09/02/2022, seeking permission of the
Court to relocate and travel to Krakow, Poland alongwith the
minor daughter in the interest of justice.
The said application was fled in the backdrop of the fact
that the petitioner is an Engineer by profession and is
employed in a private frm in Pune.          Having regard to her
excellent performance at work, she has been offered a senior
position in the establishment at         Krakow, Poland.             It is
specifcally averred that the said position has high visibility
amongst the topper of the company and she look at it as a
great opportunity for career advancement. It is also pleaded
that it will also provide Akshita, the daughter an excellent
opportunity and will ensure improvement in the standard of
their living.
Considering the above advantages, the petitioner states
that she decided to accept the position of Technical Business
Analyst (Equivalent to the rank, Association Director) with
UBS Business Solution, Krakow, Poland. It is also stated that
the said position was offered earlier, but it could not be
materialized on account of the Covid pandemic, but now she
has found this as a once in lifetime opportunity, to work on the
project since she has been nominated by her senior
5.       According to the petitioner, the date of joining in Polan
was scheduled as 01/03/2022 and, therefore, to complete all
the necessary formalities, including seeking admission for the
daughter in Krakow, she has already initiated various steps.
The petitioner also stated that she is likely to take her mother
alongwith her for necessary assistance and support and she
has searched for the schools in the close proximity of her offce
campus, which would ensure minimal commuting time for the
child.       Assuring that the child will not have diffculty in
adapting to the new environment and indeed, she will receive
exposure that will broaden her horizons,          she pleaded that
relocating in Krakow, Poland is benefcial for Akshita’s growth
and welfare.
She moved another application, supplementing her
prayer in the earlier application and seeking necessary
directions to the respondent and complete all formalities vis-a-
vis her daughter, so that she can avail the VISA for Poland,
since the formalities require his no-objection.
6.       The said application was strongly contested by the
respondent/husband             by  reiterating that     the    allegations
levelled against him are false and without any basis. The relief
sought was opposed on the ground that she is projecting the
said decision to relocate to Poland as a professional decision in
advancement of her career, but the real intention is to break
the bond between the father and the daughter, by denying him
the access and for harassing and torturing the minor daughter
as well as the husband. It is also pleaded that the daughter is
impacted by the trauma of losing touch with the family
members and friends on account of frequent shifting of
residence and school and now once again, she will be uprooted,
since she will have to face a completely alien culture,
surrounding, language, weather etc. The respondent has also
expressed an apprehension that if the child is moved away
from him, he will not get to see the child again, as the mother
may abscond and in any case, the relocation of the child is not
in her interest. An option is given to the effect that the wife
can move wherever she want, but let the child not accompany
her. Several reasons are projected being the crime rate/rape
rate in Poland as well as the present situation where nuclear
facilities right next to Poland are already being attacked every
day and it is stated that the entire Eastern European region is
currently the hotspot of a potentially nuclear war.                   The
economic stability as well as the physical security of the region
is in extreme turmoil and is suffering from unpredictable
situation is also projected as a ground, why it is not in interest
of child to shift to Poland.
Further more, the decision of the petitioner is criticized,
being the unilateral one, to satisfy her own ambition and
considering the deep bond of love between the child and the
father, it is urged that the child shall be left back in India so
that he alongwith his family will cater to her needs. The long
reply, running into 60 pages, seeks dismissal of the application
with costs.
7.       It is this application, which was adjudicated by the
learned Judge, Family Court, Pune and came to be rejected,
whereas the application fled by the respondent/husband was
partly allowed and the operative portion of the order dated
13/04/2022, reads as under :-
“1. The application Exh.12 fled by the petitioner-wife is
rejected whereas application Exh.18 of the respondent-
husband is partly allowed.
2. The petitioner-wife is hereby restrained from taking the
minor daughter Akshita out of India without the permission of
Court     during        the  pendency   of both     the    petitions
P.A.No.1347/2017 and P.D.No.31/2020.
3. The petitioner-wife is further restrained from changing the
present school of minor daughter Akshita i.e. Kalyani
International School, Pune to any other school without the
consent of respondent-husband and permission of this Court.”
8.       I have heard learned counsel Mr.Abhijit Sarwate for the
petitioner-wife and learned counsel Mr.Mayur Khandeparkar
with Advocate Mr.Ajinkya Udane for the respondent-husband.
9.       The     learned       counsel   Mr.Sarwate    has    invited        my
attention to the proceedings, which are instituted by the
petitioner/wife against the respondent/husband and he would
submit that on account of the incompatibility between the two
and for which the respondent has to be blamed, the
relationship was strained and it is the wife, who has fled the
proceedings for divorce. He would submit that the Family
Court has failed to consider the prospects available to the
petitioner and the order amounts to imposing fetters upon her,
despite she being found suitable for job and offered a higher
position, which is necessary for her career growth. He would
further submit that she is going for a limited period and he has
also fled an undertaking to that effect.
The submission of Mr.Sarwate is, her date for joining a
new posting in Poland has been postponed from time to time
and if no timely order is passed, she may lose the opportunity
forever. Apart from this, he would submit that in the affdavit
fled by the petitioner, she has assured access to the father and
by no means, she intends to give an impression to the
respondent, that in order to deprive him of meeting his child,
she is moving away. Mr.Sarwate would submit that the father
has failed to take up the responsibility fnancially, but in any
case, she will take care of her daughter.
He further submit that the Family Court has failed to
take into account the decision of the Hon’ble Supreme Court
placed before it and the application came to be rejected on a
flimsy and specious ground of welfare of the minor daughter.
Mr.Sarwate has also placed reliance upon a series of
judgments, where in such situation the Hon’ble Supreme Court
has ensured the autonomy in personhood of a woman and held
that it cannot be curtailed on the ground of prior order of
custody of the child. He submits that right to development is a
basic human right, which is recognised by the highest Court of
this country and, therefore, it cannot be denied to the
10.      Per contra, learned counsel Mr.Khandeparkar appearing
for the respondent has raised a serious objection to the
petitioner’s relocating the minor daughter Akshita to Krakow/
Poland and he would submit that the wife had made previous
attempts to alienate the child from him and his family under
the guise of her job prospects and the whole intention is to
severe the ties between the father and the daughter and once
she moves to Poland, his visitation right would be curtailed.
Apart from this, it is also submitted that the present
warlike situation prevailing in the Eastern             and Central
Europe is not suitable for the daughter to relocate in Poland.
The learned counsel has also express an apprehension that the
daughter will not be brought back. A serious objection is also
raised on the ground that the child would be uprooted from her
present environment and Mr.Khandeparkar has invited my
attention to various instances where it is alleged that the
access was denied to the respondent on one ground or the
other and he allege that she has blatantly refused to follow the
order and directions of the Court and now when she is moving
the daughter away from him, the respondent is seriously
apprehending that he may not get to see his daughter again.
Submitting that the welfare of the child is of the top
priority and not whims and ego of the parents, it is sought to
be argued that the child will face the language barrier, volatile
climate, which is diffcult to adjust and this may lead to a
feeling of loneliness and depression in her.           He would also
submit that the petitioner is assuring that her mother is
travelling with her, but she may not be able to have her
continuous presence during the period of two years and
submitting that his three generations are there to take care of
the child, the relocation is vehemently opposed.              It is even
sought to be argued that comparing the pay-scale of the
petitioner, there is no justifcation why she is going on a lesser
pay and it is then suggested that the only intention of the
petitioner is to take the daughter away from him.
Mr.Khandeparkar would thus request to uphold the
order passed by the Family Court, which has rightly refused
the permission to relocate the daughter, by considering her
own welfare.
11.      "There has never been, nor will there ever be, anything
quite so special as the love between the daughter and her
father".
The feeling of the respondent are somehow similar and he is
pained and anguished by the relocation of his daughter.
Every possibility is contemplated in opposing the
application, on the ground that the daughter shall be uprooted.
The father is apprehensive that the distance between the two
would widen the gap in the relationship, if she is moved to
Poland and is apprehensive that he may be permanently
deprived of the daughter’s company.
12.      The petitioner/wife, who has an excellent career graph,
however, is desperate to take        up the job, which has been
offered to her in Poland and she is of the opinion that it is going
to advance her career and the experience would fetch her
better prospects. She is, therefore, confronted with a choice
whether to take up the opportunity or refuse the same, since
her husband/respondent does not want the child to accompany
Needless to state that the custody of the minor girl is
with the mother, who is the natural guardian and considering
her age, the girl must accompany her mother, particularly
when it is the case the petitioner that she has single handedly
brought up the child, on being separated from the husband.
No doubt, the issue is very sensitive, considering the
deep love and affection of both the parents towards young
Akshita, who is likely to turn 9 in one or two days. The father
is enjoying the access of the child, virtually and physically at
defnite intervals. He is naturally concerned about the welfare
of the child and his only anxiety is that the bond between the
two shall be severed, if she is moved to Poland.
13.      In the conundrum so faced by the parties, I do not think
that the Court can refuse the job prospects to a mother, who is
inclined to take up the job and she cannot be deprived of this
The Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Vikram Vir
Vohra Vs. Shalini Bhalla1, while dealing with somehow similar
situation, has observed thus :-
23. Now coming to the question of the child being taken to
Australia and the consequent variations in the visitation rights
of the father, this Court fnds that the Respondent mother is
getting a better job opportunity in Australia. Her autonomy on
her personhood cannot be curtailed by Court on the ground of a
prior order of custody of the child. Every person has a right to
develop his or her potential. In fact a right to development is a
basic human right. The respondent-mother cannot be asked to
choose between her child and her career. It is clear that the
child is very dear to her and she will spare no pains to ensure
that the child gets proper education and training in order to
develop his faculties and ultimately to become a good citizen. If
the custody of the child is denied to her, she may not be able to
pursue her career in Australia and that may not be conducive
either to the development of her career or to the future
prospects of the child. Separating the child from his mother
will be disastrous to both.
24. Insofar as the father is concerned, he is already established
in India and he is also fnancially solvent. His visitation rights
have been ensured in the impugned orders of the High Court.
His rights have been varied but have not been totally ignored.
The appellant-father, for all these years, lived without the child
and got used to it.”
14.      Necessarily, a balance has to be drawn between the
interest of both the parties and by offering paramount
consideration to the welfare of the child, so as to ensure that
in the situation where the parents are in conflict, the child has
a sense of security and it is always in the interest of the child
to have presence of both the parents while he or she grows up,
but here is a situation when the parents are at loggerheads
and the child is with the mother with a limited access being
granted to the father, which he must avail qualitatively. The
petitioner is the mother of the child and has been continuously
with the child, since her birth and though a working woman,
has struck a balance between her work and care and affection
of the child and ensured that she enjoy an healthy upbringing.
The option suggested by the husband that the child should be
left with him and his family will take care of her is not a viable
one, as the little girl has always stayed with her mother,
barring for few hours, when she was exclusively in company of
her father or his family. One thing is clear that the girl cannot
be separated from the petitioner-mother.
However, at the same time, being conscious of the fact
that the child has developed a strong bond with the father and
the same is required to be nurtured and continued, even if the
child accompany her mother to Poland for her better
prospects, which she cannot be stopped from availing.
15.      The primary consideration must weigh in favour of the
welfare of the child.          The argument that the child will be
uprooted fails to convince me, since Akshita is a young child,
who can adopt a new environment and it is even good for her
to be in a new environment and I do not think that she will feel
uprooted, as the petitioner had assured that she will be taking
her own mother and has arranged for a school in English
medium. In any case, it is not uncommon for children to shift
alongwith their parents, who decide to go abroad and,
therefore, the apprehension that she will be uprooted is totally
unfounded. It is also not uncommon for working woman to
leave her child in a Day-Care, on account of her offce
responsibilities and here, the petitioner has specifcally
undertaken that her mother will be accompanying her so that
she can cater to the child while the petitioner is out for work.
Even at present, it is informed that, while in Pune, it is the
grandmother of Akshita, who is taking care of her while the
petitioner is discharging her duties.
16.      The interest of the respondent/father to be in touch with
his daughter can be kept intact by imposing certain conditions
and the petitioner has specifcally fled an affdavit, continuing
his access at regular intervals, when she is in Poland.
Though I am not inclined to accept the pleading in the
application that, Poland would serve a better environment
than India, as the applicant has glorifed the said country in
comparison to India, in any case, when the petitioner, by way
of affdavit, has specifcally stated that she is also restricting
her stay there for two years, to have the job experience. For
both, the mother and her daughter, the period of two years
cannot be said to be too long to presume that the child will be
completely disassociated either from the father or his family or
her country itself.
17.      The petitioner/wife has fled an undertaking/affdavit on
24/06/2022, where she has given the following undertaking as
regards her duration of work in Poland :-
“2. I hereby undertake that as per the agreement between me
and my company, namely UBS my joining date have been
extended from time to time and as per the recently received
extension letter my joining date is scheduled on 01/07/2022. I
hereby undertake to state that in the agreements received by
me till date, the company has not included/stated the time
period/duration of my work at Poland.          Hence, I hereby
undertake to come back to India after 2 years of me joining the
company at Poland.”
She has also assured in the said affdavit that the
proceedings which are fled by her and pending before the
Family Court, Pune as well as J.M.F.C., Pune will not be
postponed due to her non-availability and she has undertaken
that she shall attend the said proceedings, either physically or
virtually and assist the Court in its early disposal.
18.      As regards the access of the child is concerned, she has
stated that, as per the order dated 16/08/2021 (Exh.98),
virtual access is granted to the respondent on every Tuesday,
Thursday and Saturday for 15 minutes, either by phone call or
video call between 3 p.m. to 4 p.m.. She has undertaken that
the access shall be continued but shall be subject to the
adjustment as per the timings in Poland, since India is 03:30
hours ahead of Poland. She has assured that the virtual access
shall be continued.
19.      In the said affdavit, she has given the details about the
vacations for the schools in Poland and which is reproduced as
“6) Vacations to schools at Poland :
I state that as per the information available to me, daughter
Akshita will have school vacations in the month of :
A. December during her Winter holiday break (8 days), Dec. 23
to 31st Dec.
B. Spring break during the month of April (5 days), 14 th April
to 19th April.
C. Month of June-August during the Summer holidays (67
days). 25th June to 31st Aug.”
20.      About the physical access, she has undertaken to provide
the same in the manner set out in para 7, which reads as
“7) Physical Access: I state that vide consent terms dated
24/08/2018, in PA no. 1347/2017 the respondent is allowed to
meet the daughter at Child Care Centre, Pune on every 1 st and
3rd Saturday from 02.00pm to 05.00pm. Thus the total number
of hours of physical access granted to the respondent in a year
will come to 6 hours per month* 12 months = 72 hours in a
year.
As mentioned above that the Spring break is only for 5 days, it
will not be fnancially viable to spend around Rs. 1.5 lacs to
give access for merely 2 days. Thus I undertake and propose to
travel to India during every Christmas and Summer break as
mentioned above and given access as stated hereunder:
A) December - Winter break - 5 days* 5 hours = 25 hours.
Hence in total I state that I will provide the respondent access
of 85 hours in total which is more than what he is receiving as
of now of only 72 hours.”
21.      Apart from this, it is also indicated in the affdavit that if
the husband wants another physical access, he can visit
Poland during spring break. The affdavit contain a rider to
the effect that since the admission is not yet confrmed, her
vacation dates may change, but tentatively would be in the
same months, which are set out in paragraph 6 of the affdavit.
22.      It is to be noted that in Petition No.1347 of 2017 fled by
the petitioner, consent terms were fled by the parties for
availing access of the daughter in the wake of the fact that the
custody of the child is with the petitioner -mother.                      The
consent terms has recorded the schedule for access as under :-
“2. Respondent-father shall meet the daughter Akshita on
every 1st and 3rd Saturday of every month from 2 p.m. to 5.00
p.m. at Child Care Centre, of Family Court, Pune. The access
shall be unsupervised access. In the event of any change, the
parties will intimate each other. This access will start from
July 2018 till the next order of Honorable Court.”
The access is being availed in terms of the aforesaid terms,
though at present, due to intervention of Covid-19, physical
access for some period of time could not be availed.
23.      The Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Ritika Sharan
Vs. Sujoy Ghosh2, was dealing with the similar situation where
the parents of a 7 years old child, who shared serious
differences between them and were living apart.                          The
appellant/wife sought a direction to the respondent to hand
over the passport for the child on the ground that she was in
employment of a company, and was posted in Singapore.                    The
Family Court dismissed the application for child’s passport and
allowed the application fled by the respondent, restraining the
appellant from taking the child out of Bengaluru.
During the pendency of the writ petition, the child was
allowed to travel Singapore during Christmas vacation. The
High Court dismissed the Writ Petition fled instituted by the
appellant, challenging the validity of the order of the Family
Court, restraining her from taking the child out of Bengaluru.
While dealing with somehow similar situation and
confronted with similar arguments on behalf of the appellant-
mother, pleading that the custody of the child was with her,
since his birth and child was in her care all the while and the
appellant and her son, who hold Indian Passports are willing to
furnish an undertaking that the child will not be placed outside
the control and jurisdiction of the Court of Bengaluru. The
opposition of the father was also somehow on the similar lines,
where he pleaded that it is an attempt on part of the appellant
to ‘shift the goal-posts’ from time to time and the apprehension
expressed was that if the appellant is permitted to take the
child to Singapore, there is no guarantee that she will not
relocate elsewhere and take the child with her, effectively
placing the child outside the jurisdiction of the Indian Courts.
24.      Dealing with the aforesaid contention, Their Lordship of
the Supreme Court held that, the primary consideration that
must weigh with the Court is the welfare of the child. It was
admitted that since 2016, the appellant has taken the
responsibility for welfare of the child, though at earlier point of
time, the child was in care of both the parents. After
interacting with the child, where he expressed his desire to
live with the mother, the appellant was allowed to take the
child with her, but the arrangement of access came to be
modifed by ensuring that the father is entitled to have
adequate right of access and visitation. The Apex Court has
expressed itself in the following words :-
“A balance has to be drawn so as to ensure that in a situation
where the parents are in a conflict, the child has a sense of
security.     The interests of the child are best subserved by
ensuring that both the parents have a presence in his
upbringing.”
Though it was argued on behalf of the appellant that the
respondent had made no contribution in the maintenance of
the child, in the interest of the child, the appellant-mother was
allowed to take him with her to Singapore and certain
directions came to be issued in para 20 of the judgment, by
directing the appellant to make suitable arrangement to
facilitate the travel to and admission of the child in a school in
Singapore.        The respondent was directed to hand over the
passport of the child to the appellant.
25.      In order to facilitate the grant of access and the
visitation right, the arrangement was specifcally worked out
in supersession of the previous orders of the Family Court and
the High Court in the following manner :-
“(a)        The respondent would be at liberty to engage with
the child on a suitable video-conferencing platform for one
hour each on every Saturday and Sunday and for fve to ten
minutes on other days;
(b)Should the respondent desire to travel to Singapore during
the school vacations of Sattik, he would be entitled to have
visitation right over half of the vacation between 10 am and 6
pm. He may meet the child on any other day subject to the
mutual convenience of the parties and the child;
(c) The appellant will ensure the presence of the child in
Bengaluru during the course of the child’s summer vacations
in 2021 for a period of at least two weeks with prior
intimation to the respondent and during the course of the
visit, the respondent shall be entitled to meet the child and/or
take him out between 11:00 am and 7:00 p.m.
(d)The appellant shall bring the child to India at least twice a
year during which the respondent shall have access to and
visitation with the child on the terms set out in (c) above;
(e)The appellant shall fle an undertaking before this Court to
abide by the conditions imposed by this order.                    The
undertaking shall specifcally provide that the appellant shall
(i) not relocate the child to any other country, unless
permitted by this Court; (ii) ensure the presence of the child
during the summer vacations of 2021 unless prevented by the
travel restrictions imposed by the government of either
country; and (iii) furnish the contact details of the child in
Singapore to the respondent. Clarifed that (e)(i) above shall
not prevent the appellant from taking the child out for
holidays outside Singapore. A copy of the undertaking shall
be placed on the record of the Family Court.”
26.      An undertaking-cum-affdavit, somehow on the similar
lines, is already placed on record by the petitioner/wife.
However, I intend to modify the physical access to be availed
by the father during the vacations, in addition to virtual
access, which is already assured to the father in paragraph 5
of the affdavit, fled by the petitioner.
27.      It is indicated in the affdavit that there are going to be
three breaks for the child i.e. (A) December break (Winter
holiday)        from 21st December to 31st December (B) Spring
break in the month of April from 14 th April to 19th April for 5
days and (C) Summer break between June and August and
precisely from 25th June to 31st August for 67 days.
I do not agree that the arrangement of physical access,
which was continued in the wake of the consent terms, shall
continue to operate, particularly since the father will not be
able to avail the physical access as granted every month and
for some months, the father will not even get to have glimpse
of the child physically. Daughter Akshita is now 9 years’ old
and as I can see from the proceedings that some objections
were raised about the overnight/long duration access to the
effect, when the father was not be able to handle the child, for
example it is stated that she had her clothes soaked, but the
father did not remove it or he did not administer medicine,
though she was suffering form fever.
I do not think that this contingency will prevail as on
date when the child is 9 years’ old. The allegation that the
father did not properly care for the child was made when she
was approximately 4-5 years old, but now even the 9 years’
child is capable of taking care of herself. The absence of the
daughter from country can only be compensated by permitting
overnight access to the father, since ultimately it is not the
quantity of time spent with the children, but the quality time,
which assumes great signifcance to develop a Parental Bond.
Therefore, the access shall be availed by the father in the
following manner :-
A)       December/Winter break :- Father shall be granted three
hours access everyday, when the child shall be brought to
India on 23rd December and she shall continue to stay here till
31st December, 2022.           The father shall be entitled to avail
overnight access in the frst year i.e. December, 22 for two
B)       During April/Spring Break :- Father will be entitled to
avail overnight access of the child for four days and will be
entitled for access of fve hours for the remaining days.
C)       During June to August/Summer Break :- Father shall be
entitled for 25 days overnight access, which could be either
separated or continuous, as per the convenience of the parties.
He shall be entitled to have access for fve hours for the
remaining twenty-fve days.
28.      Since, the petitioner will be leaving the country
somewhere between July and August, for the year 2022, the
father shall not avail the access of Summer break, since the
petitioner is visiting Poland in July and August and it will take
time to settle her and the child. The frst access, therefore,
could be availed by the father only during the winter break,
which would fall in December.
For the year 2023 and, thereafter, the access shall be
availed in the following manner :-
(A)       December/Winter break :- Five days overnight access
(B)      During April/Spring Break :- Five days overnight access
(C)      During June to August/Summer Break :- Thirty days
overnight access.
Over and above, the respondent shall continue to avail
daily access for limited hours, similar to the one which has
been granted for the year 2022.
29.      With the aforesaid arrangement in place, it is also
necessary to clarify that the petitioner shall bring the child to
India on her own expenses, during all the three breaks so that
the respondent-father can avail the access.
30.      In addition to the above three visits to India, for availing
the access by the father, if the father is desirous of availing an
additional access, he is permitted to travel to Poland and avail
access. During his stay there, the access shall be unsupervised
and it shall be availed after taking into consideration her
school hours as well as hours for other activities. The father is
permitted to avail this access for the year 2022 in between
September to November and for the remaining years, as per
his choice and convenience, he can visit Poland and avail day
time access.
It is made clear that the petitioner, shall not deny the
access to the respondent, on being intimated 15 days prior of
31.      The petitioner has also submitted that the respondent
has failed to pay the maintenance amount and when,
particularly asked, learned counsel Mr.Khandeparkar for the
respondent would submit that he is arranging for the fees of
the child and presently, it is approximately Rs.12,000/- per
month          and,     therefore,    he is  paying      approximately
Rs.1,00,000/- year for the child. It is not clear as to what shall
be the expenses of the child in the new school to which she
shall be admitted in Poland, but since the mother has
undertaken to take up the job there by stating that there will
be hike in her earnings, the respondent is directed to continue
his contribution of Rs.12,000/- per month for the educational
expenses of the daughter.
32.      The petitioner has undertaken to come back to India
after two years in her affdavit-cum-undertaking                   fled on
24/06/2022, but she has also pose a rider in para 3 to the
following effect :-
“3. This I state subject to my rights to seek permission from
the Honourable Court to travel again, if needed on the
situation then.”
In the wake of the aforesaid statement, the apprehension
expressed by the respondent that she may continue her stay in
Poland cannot be said to be baseless.           However, in that
situation, if the petitioner intends to extend her stay in Poland
beyond two years from the date of her travel for the frst time
somewhere in July-August, 2022, the respondent-father shall
be entitled to fle appropriate application before the Family
Court, seeking modifcation in the order of custody of his
daughter and the Family Court shall then consider the
application in the background of the fact that earlier the wife
had intended to say in Poland only for two years, but is now
seeking an extension and it may pass an appropriate order.
33.      Since the permission is now granted to the petitioner to
travel to Poland alongwith the minor daughter and the
procedural formalities contemplate a no-objection, being
granted by the father, since the petitioner is not the only
custodian of the minor and the father is availing the right of
access, it is directed that the respondent, shall accord his no-
objection on the visa application, or any other documents,
which require his signature within a period of 3 days from the
date of the uploading of the order, which will facilitate the
petitioner to obtain visa for the daughter as well.
34.      With the aforesaid direction and on noticing that the
impugned order has failed to consider the important aspect of
right to development, being vested in the petitioner as she
cannot be asked to choose between her child and her career,
the impugned order is quashed and set aside.
The writ petition is allowed in the aforestated terms.