1.      Whether      a  Special  Court  constituted  under  the
National Investigation Agency Act, 2008 can invoke the
powers under Section 306 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
to     grant     pardon  to  an accused at  the post cognizance
stage, is the issue posed by the appellant in this appeal.
The incidental issue, which pops up, is whether pardon can
be granted at the post cognizance stage to a person, who
has not been arraigned as an accused in the final report.
2.      The appellant herein is presently the sixth accused
in S.C No.04/2021/NIA on the files of the Special Court
for Trial of NIA Cases, Ernakulam. In the instant appeal,
the appellant impugns the order dated 17.1.2022 in Crl.M.P
No.252/21, as per which, application filed by the N.I.A at
the investigation stage seeking grant of pardon to accused
nos.3, 8 and 14, has been taken up for consideration in
the      post   cognizance    stage,    overruling    the   objections
raised by the appellant/A6 and directed production of the
said accused persons before the court in the next posting
3.      The    prosecution    allegations    and    incidents,   which
culminated        in  the   impugned   order    are  narrated   herein
A     Sreelankan      fishing   boat    by   name    'Ravihansi'   was
intercepted by the Indian Coast Guard in the Arabian Sea,
which contained huge quantities of narcotic drugs, along
with 5 AK-47 riffles and 1000 nos of 9 mm ammunition. The
boat       was   seized   by   the   Narcotic    Control    Bureau  on
25.3.2021. A case, numbered as 2/2021, in respect of the
narcotic drug (Heroin) seized, was registered against the
six Sreelankan nationals, who travelled in the said boat
on     26.3.2021.    In   respect   of  the   other   items  found  in
possession of the accused persons, Crime No.498/2021 was
registered before the Vizhinjam Police Station on 5.4.2021
under Section 27 of the Arms Act, read with Section 34 of
the     Penal    Code   against   the  said    six  accused   persons.
Pursuant to a notification issued, the N.I.A took over the
investigation        and   the    case    was   re-registered  as
R.C.No.1/2021/NIA/KOC under Sections 7, read with 25(1AA)
of the Arms Act. After effecting formal arrest of the six
accused persons from the Central Jail, Poojappura, they
were produced before the Special Court, Kochi. In the
custodial interrogation of the accused persons, the role
of accused nos.7 (appellant herein) and 8 were revealed
and     they   were  arrested   on   2.8.2021.  According  to the
prosecution,       accused   nos.7    &  8  are   members  of the
proscribed organisation, Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam
(for short LTTE). Subsequently, offences under Sections
38, 39 and 40 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act
were also incorporated.
4.      On 27.9.2021, the National Investigation Agency filed
Crl.M.P No.177/2021 before the Special Court seeking to
record confession of accused nos.3, 8 and 14. The Special
Court directed the N.I.A to file necessary application
before the Chief Judicial Magistrate. As directed by the
Chief Judicial Magistrate, statements of accused nos.8, 3
and 14 under S.164 Cr.P.C were recorded by the Judicial
First       Class    Magistrate's    Court   No-III,   Ernakulam   on
20.10.2021, 24.11.2021 and 25.11.2021, respectively.
5.      On 4.12.2021, the N.I.A filed the subject Criminal
M.P     (Crl.M.P     No.252/2021)    seeking  tender  of   pardon  to
accused nos.3, 8 and 14. On 15.12.2021, the N.I.A filed
final report, wherein the above referred three persons
have neither been arraigned as accused persons, nor as
witnesses.        On   account   of  the  exclusion   of   the  third
accused        (one  among  the   three  proposed   approvers),   the
appellant, who was originally accused no.7, became accused
no.6 in the array. On 30.12.2021, the Special Court took
cognizance of the case.
6.      Thereafter, the Special Court proceeded to consider
Crl.M.P No.252/2021, whereupon the present appellant/A6
preferred        Annexure-4    objection.   However,   the   impugned
order        dated     17.1.2022    was   passed    overruling    the
appellant's         objection,   challenging   which,   the   instant
appeal is filed.
7.      Heard Smt. Sangeetha Lakshmana, learned counsel for
the       appellant/A6     and   Sri.S.Manu,    learned   Assistant
Solicitor General of India for the respondent/N.I.A.
8.      After taking us through Sections 306 and 307 of the
Code, learned counsel for the appellant contended that an
application         for   tender    of   pardon    filed   at    the
investigation        stage/pre-cognizance    stage  ought  to   have
been       proceeded    under   Section   306   of  the   Code,   by
forwarding the request for compliance to the concerned
Chief Judicial Magistrate, who alone has the power to
tender        pardon  under    Section  306.   The   Special  Court
seriously erred in considering such an application under
Section 307, Cr.P.C, after filing the final report and
after the Special Court taking cognizance of the case.
According to the learned counsel, the Special Court cannot
mix up the powers under Sections 306 and 307 of the Code.
That apart, in order to invoke the powers under Section
307 by the Special Court at the post cognizance stage,
accused nos.3, 8 and 14 ought to have been in the array of
accused in the final report filed by the N.I.A. The N.I.A
having failed to show the said accused persons in the
array, the Special Court lacks powers under Section 307
Cr.P.C to tender pardon to them. Learned counsel pointedly
invited our attention to the fact that the said accused
persons have not been arrayed even as witnesses in the
final report.
9.      Secondly,    learned   counsel   pointed  out   that   the
Special Court under the N.I.A Act, going by Section 16(3)
of the Act, is a Court of Session for all purposes and the
offences are liable to be tried as if the Special Court is
a Court of Session and in accordance with the procedure
prescribed       in   the   Code,    wherefore,  an   application
preferred      at   the  investigation   stage,  obviously   under
Section 306 of the Code, cannot be taken up by the Special
Judge at the post cognizance stage to pass orders under
Section 307 of the Code. Inasmuch as the Special Court has
not taken cognizance as against accused nos.3, 8 and 14
and has not issued summons to them, an application under
Section 307 also cannot be entertained by the Special
Court,       is  the   submission   of   the   learned  counsel   for
10. Since the revisional powers have not been conferred
on     the    Sessions  Court,   or  for   that  matter,   a  Special
Court, the impugned order cannot be revised or modified
and the only course open to the Special Court is to make a
reference under Section 395 Cr.P.C to the High Court and
to get the cognizance taken cancelled, by setting aside
the order dated 31.12.2021 to issue summons to the accused
11. Refuting         the    above    contentions,     learned    ASGI
submitted that the Special Court can invoke the powers
under Sections 306 and 307, both, in the matter of grant
of      pardon,    it   being   a   court    of   original   criminal
jurisdiction. The legal position in this regard is settled
by a catena of decisions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court. The
learned ASGI placed specific reliance upon the judgments
in P.C.Mishra v. State (CBI) and Ors. [(2014) 14 SCC 629],
Bangaru Laxman v. State (through CBI) and Ors. [(2012) 1
SCC      500]     and   Harshad    S.Mehta     and   Ors   v.    State   of
Maharashtra [(2001) 8 SCC 257] in support of the above
argument. Inasmuch as the powers under Sections 306 and
307     are     available    to  the   Special     Court,   there    is  no
procedural irregularity in the impugned order, contends
the learned ASGI. As regards non-arraignment of accused
nos.3,       8   and  14,    learned   ASGI    propounded    a   two   fold
argument,         one    based    on   facts     and    the    other,    on
interpretation of Sections 306 and 307 of the Code. On
facts,         learned    ASGI     submitted     that     it    has    been
specifically referred to, in the final report that the
application seeking pardon in respect of the said three
accused persons is pending and that N.I.A reserves its
right        to    file   supplementary       charge    sheet,     if   the
application is rejected for some reason or other. On law,
learned        ASGI   invited     our    attention     to  the    language
employed in Section 306, as also, Section 307 to point
out     that     the  word    'accused'    is  not   employed    in   these
two     Sections.      Instead,    the    language    employed    is   'any
person        supposed    to   have   been    directly    or   indirectly
concerned         in or privy to an offence'. Thus, according to
the learned ASGI, it is not the requirement of law that a
person in whose favour pardon is sought for under Section
306 should have been arraigned as an accused person. The
requirements are met, if the person who is sought to be
pardoned is supposed to have been directly or indirectly
concerned        in  or  privy   to   the   offence   concerned.   The
learned ASGI contended that a co-accused has no                  locus
standi to challenge a proceeding for grant of pardon to
another. The instant appeal is not maintainable is the
final argument of the learned ASGI, in as much the order
impugned is an interlocutory order, pure and simple.
12. Having heard the learned counsel appearing on both
sides, we will first examine the binding precedents on the
powers       of   a Special   Court    in  the  matter   of  grant  of
13. In         Commander  Pascal    Fernandes,    Lt.   v.   State  of
Maharashtra and Others [AIR 1968 SC 594], a three Judge
Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court, after discussing the
powers       under   Sections   327    and  338  of   the   old  Code,
corresponding to Sections 306 and 307 of the new Code,
held in paragraph no.11 that the powers of the Special
Judge are not circumscribed by any condition, except that
it must be with a view to obtaining the evidence of any
person       supposed to have been directly or  indirectly
concerned in, or privy to an offence. The Supreme Court
also held that the Special Judge can exercise such power
at any time after the case is received for trial, and
before its conclusion.
14. In A.Deivendran v. State of T.N. [(1997) 11 SCC 720],
a two Judge Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court held in
paragraph no.6 that after committal of the case, it is the
Court of Session which has the power to grant pardon under
Section 307 of the Code. The legal position was analysed
after juxtaposing Section 307 of the present Code with the
corresponding Section 338 of the old Code, to find that
the option available under Section 338 of the old Code to
order the committing Magistrate or the District Magistrate
to tender pardon is conspicuously absent in Section 307 of
the new code. The Hon'ble Supreme Court also held that a
pardon tendered by the Chief Judicial Magistrate after
committal proceedings is not a curable irregularity within
the ambit of Section 460(g) of the Code.
15. In         this   context,    it  is   apposite   to   extract  the
following         commentary     from   Sohoni's    Code   of  Criminal
Procedure (20th Edn.) on Sections 306 and 307 of the Code,
which are essentially based on the dictum laid down in
“14. Tender      of   Pardon   After    Commitment   to
There     is   a   difference    in   the   phraseology
employed in S.307 of the 1973 Code, and that
employed in the correspondent S.338 in the 1898
Code.     Under the scheme of the 1898 Code, the
court of session, after the commitment of the
case, had the power not only to grant pardon
itself, but could also to direct the committing
magistrate or the district magistrate to tender
pardon.      However, under S.307 of the Code of
1973, only the court to which the commitment is
made     is   competent     to    grant   pardon.   The
retention of the marginal heading of S.338 of
the    1898   Code,    'Power   to  direct   tender  of
pardon', without any change in S.307 of the
Code  of  Criminal   Procedure    1973,   may   appear
misleading.   However, the said marginal heading
cannot be used to imply anymore a power of the
court  of   session   to  direct    any  subordinate
magistrate to grant pardon, after the committal
of the case.
The tender of pardon by the chief judicial
magistrate, after the committal of the case is
illegal and beyond his powers, and the said
illegality can neither be cured under S.460(g)
Cr P.C., nor can S.465 Cr P.C. be applied to
such a patent error of jurisdiction.         A tender
of pardon by a magistrate in good faith but
without any authority may be curable, but a
magistrate   after  committing    the   case   to  the
court  of   session   lacks   the   jurisdiction    to
tender pardon. Under S.525(8) of the 1898 Code,
it   was   specifically     stated    that    if   any
magistrate   not   empowered    by   law   to   tender
pardon under ss.337 or 338 of the 1898 Code,
granted pardon, the same would not vitiate the
proceedings. In S.460 of the Code corresponding
to  S.525  of  the   1898   Code,   the  legislature
omitted   S.307   from   cl.(g),    and    thus   such
irregularity committed by a magistrate is no
longer curable.”
16. In Harshad S.Mehta and Ors v. State of Maharashtra
[(2001) 8 SCC 257], the Hon'ble Supreme Court examined the
powers of a Special Court established under the Special
Court       (Trial  of  Offences  Relating   to  Transactions  in
Securities) Act, 1992 in tendering pardon. Relying upon a
Constitution       Bench  decision   in  A.R.Antulay   v.  Ramdas
Sriniwas Nayak [(1984) 2 SCC 500], it was held that a
Special Court is a court of original criminal jurisdiction
and it has to function as such, not being bound by the
terminological status description of Magistrate's Court or
a Court of Session. Under the Code, a Special Court will
enjoy       all  powers  which  a  court  of   original  criminal
jurisdiction enjoys, save and except the ones specifically
denied. The Supreme Court went on to hold that a Special
Court has all the powers of a Court of Session and/or
Magistrate, as the case may be, and that the width of the
power of the Special Court will be same, whether trying
such cases as are instituted before it or transferred to
it. Being a court of original criminal jurisdiction, the
Special Court has all the powers of such a Court under the
Code, including those of Sections 306 to 308, the same not
having been excluded specifically or otherwise.
17. In Bangaru Laxman v. State (through CBI) and Ors.
[(2012) 1 SCC 500], the contention raised was that pardon
could not be granted by the Special Court prior to the
filing of charge sheet, that the power to grant pardon is
not an inherent power and the same has to be specifically
conferred and that the powers under Section 306 of the
Code having not been conferred, the Special Judge under
the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 ('P.C Act') could
not have exercised the same.       The contention was also that
Section 5(2) of the P.C Act specifically deemed the pardon
granted by the Special Court to be one under Section 307
and hence there is no question of the Special Court under
the P.C Act invoking Section 306 of the Code. To repel the
above contentions, at the outset, it was held that the
power       of the  Special  Judge    to  grant  pardon   is   an
unfettered     power,  subject  to   stipulation  made  in   that
section and that such power can be exercised at any stage.
The deeming provision under Section 5(2) was to enable
application of sub-sections (1) to (5) of Section 308 to a
pardon granted under Section 5(2) and not to exclude the
power under Section 306. The Hon'ble Supreme Court also
took stock of the dictum laid down in Harshad S.Mehta
(supra)        that  even  in the  absence    of  a  provision    like
Section        5(2)   in  the P.C   Act,   still   a  Special   Court
established         for   the  trial   of   offences    relating    to
transactions         in  securities,   is   a   court   of   original
criminal        jurisdiction  having   all   the  powers   under   the
Code, including those under Sections 306 and 308. Further,
reliance        was   placed  upon   the   judgment    in   State   of
Tamilnadu v. V.Krishnaswami Naidu and Another [(1979) 4
SCC 5] to find that a Special Judge has the power of
remand, since a Magistrate would include a Special Judge,
going by Section 3(32) of the General Clauses Act, 1897.
The Supreme Court concluded that a Special Judge under the
P.C Act has the dual power of a Session Judge as well as
that of a Magistrate and he conducts proceedings under the
Code, both prior to filing of the charge sheet as well as
after filing the charge sheet. On the strength of such
finding, the contention that a Special Court cannot grant
pardon at the investigation stage was repelled. Especially
when the Special Court is not hidebound by terminological
status descriptions of Magistrates or Courts of Session
and     are    empowered    to  function   as   a court   of  original
criminal jurisdiction.
18. In P.C.Mishra v. State (CBI) and Ors. [(2014) 14 SCC
629], another two Judge Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court
held that the powers under Section 306, Cr.P.C, can be
concurrently exercised by a Magistrate, as also, a Special
Judge       during    the   pre-committal    stage;   however,    after
committal,        the   power   to  grant   pardon   vests   with   the
Special Court only, to which the case was committed. In
this case also, the offences alleged were under the P.C
Act. The dictum laid down in A.Deivendran (supra) that
grant       of  pardon    after   committal    of  the  case   by   the
Magistrate        is    not   a   curable   irregularity     has   been
reiterated in P.C.Mishra (supra). As regards exercise of
jurisdiction        under    Section    306   of  the   Code   by   the
Magistrate, even after appointment of the Special Judge
under the P.C Act, the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that the
same       is   only    a   curable    irregularity,    incapable    of
vitiating the proceedings, more so when the Special Judge
himself had referred the application for grant of pardon
to the Chief Judicial Magistrate, since the case was under
19. In State through CBI, Chennai v. V.Arul Kumar [(2016)
11 SCC 733], the challenge was against an order of the
Metropolitan Magistrate granting pardon to five accused
persons in respect of offences under the P.C Act, on the
ground       that   the  Special   Judge   alone   has  the  power   to
tender pardon. The challenge was repelled by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court holding that Section 5(1) of the P.C Act
enabling the Special Judge to take cognizance, without the
accused being committed for trial, only waives the mandate
under       Section    193,   Cr.P.C,   and    the   same   cannot   be
understood to mean that the Special Court alone can take
cognizance. The normal procedure prescribed under Section
190, Cr.P.C, empowering the Magistrate to take cognizance
is     not     given  a   go  bye.   It   was   held   that  both   the
alternatives        are  available    and   if  the   charge-sheet   is
filed       before   the   Magistrate,    then   there   should   be  a
committal proceeding and prior to that, the Magistrate can
exercise the power under Section 306. In contrast, if the
Special Judge takes cognizance directly, then Section 306
gets bypassed and the Special Judge gets the power under
Section 307. The enabling provision under the P.C Act,
Section 5(1), bypassing the procedure under Section 190,
is akin to Section 16(3) of the N.I.A Act. In the present
case, there was no committal proceeding and hence the
Special Court could have exercised the power under Section
307 at any stage after cognizance is taken.
20. A Full Bench of this Court in Mastiguda Aboobacker
and Another v. National Investigation Agency (N.I.A) &
Others [2020 (6) KLT 522] held that the N.I.A Act does not
prescribe a special procedure for investigating, inquiring
into or trying the offences under the Act. The N.I.A Act
is intrinsically interlinked with the provisions of the
Code, in the matter of investigation and trial. The Full
Bench took stock of Sections 14 and 16 of the N.I.A Act,
of which the latter stipulates that a Special Court may
take cognizance of any offence without the accused being
committed to it for trial. After referring to the various
provisions, the Full Bench concluded that except for some
minor deviations, all other procedural aspects envisaged
by     the     Code   for   trial  of  a   Session   Case   are  made
applicable        in    the   trial   before    the   Special   Court
constituted under the N.I.A Act.
21. Having scanned the binding precedents, we will now
examine and analyse the statutory provisions, which govern
the topic. It is true that an enabling provision akin to
that of Section 5(2) of the P.C Act is not engrafted in
the N.I.A Act to grant pardon. However, Section 16(3)
specifically provides that a Special Court shall have all
the powers of a Court of Session for the purpose of trial
of any offence and shall try the offence, as if it were a
Court of Session, so far as may be in accordance with the
procedure prescribed in the Code for trial before a Court
of Session. Section 5(2), as has been held in Bangaru
Laxman (supra), only enables application of Section 308,
Cr.P.C,        in  cases  of   default  to   testify   after  getting
pardon       under   that   provision;  which   is  deemed   to be  a
pardon granted under Section 307. For offences, which are
punishable     with imprisonment  for a term not exceeding
three years or with fine, Section 16(2) provides that such
offences can be tried summarily, in accordance with the
procedure prescribed by the Code.
22. Having bestowed our conscious attention to Section
16(3) of the Act, we are of the definite opinion that the
said Section does not act as a fetter in resorting to any
of the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, but
in fact, is an enabling one. All powers of a Court of
Session is seen vested with a Special Court, with certain
modifications/exceptions, like the one provided in Section
16(1) of the N.I.A Act to take cognizance without the
accused being committed for trial. The obvious purpose is
to expedite the business transacted by the Special Court,
so as to ensure a speedy trial in respect of offences
falling under the N.I.A Act. Therefore, the absence of an
enabling provision to grant pardon, as the one available
in the P.C Act, would not fetter a Special Court under the
N.I.A Act, in any manner, inasmuch as it is stipulated
specifically that the Code will govern the procedure for
trial before the Special Court. We are also justified in
taking this view garnering support from the authoritative
pronouncement        in  A.R.Antulay    (supra),   that  is   to   say,
unless a Special Court is specifically denuded of a power,
the power should be deemed to be existing with such Court.
23. Now, coming to Sections 306 and 307, it is amply
clear from a perusal of the provisions that so far as
offences, which are triable exclusively by a Court of
Session or Special Court, the power under Section 306 is
to be exercised in the pre-committal stage, whereas the
power       under   Section  307   at   the  post   committal   stage.
A.Devaindran (supra) held in unmistakable terms that the
Chief Judicial Magistrate/Metropolitan Magistrate cannot
order grant of pardon, once a case has been committed to
the     Court    of   Session.  It  was    also  held  that  such    an
exercise is not a curable irregularity under Section 460,
Cr.P.C. However, in the case of a Special Court, there is
coalescence       of   the  powers   of   both  a  Magistrate    and  a
Special        Judge,   as   held   in    Bangaru   Laxman   (supra).
Therefore,        uninfluenced      by   the   stage   of   investigation,
inquiry        or   trial,     a  Special     Court   can    entertain    an
application for grant of pardon, since it has the powers
under Sections 306 and 307; both. Therefore, it cannot be
argued that an application preferred at the investigation
stage       cannot     be   considered/entertained       by   the   Special
Judge. It is the contention of the learned counsel for the
appellant        that    an   application     preferred    at   such   stage
ought to have been forwarded to the C.J.M for the purpose
of     grant     of   pardon;    and   having    failed   to   do  so,   the
Special Court cannot consider such an application under
Section 307 of the Code, since that Section contemplates
power only at the post committal stage. We are unable to
endorse        the    legal    position     canvassed    by   the   learned
counsel        for   the   appellant.      Being   a  court   of   original
criminal         jurisdiction      and      having   been     specifically
bestowed with the power to take congnizance, without a
formal       commitment      of   the    case,    a  Special     Court   can
exercise the powers to grant pardon, either under Section
306 or under Section 307, at any stage of the proceedings;
of course subject to the propriety, good faith and bona
fides of exercise of such power, which also has to be made
24. As regards the separation of authority regarding the
power to grant pardon as envisaged under Sections 306 and
307,      we   find  a   specific  logic,   which   we  may  indicate
herein. It is settled that the exercise of the power to
grant        pardon   is   a   judicial    act,   to   be   performed
judiciously with due application of mind. [See in this
regard 1). Ashok Kumar Aggarwal (supra) – paragraph 20 ;
and 2). Santhosh Kumar Satishbhushan Bariyar v State of
Maharashtra {(2009) 6 SCC              498}]. Several factors, as
referred to in Sections 306 and 307, are to be considered
and assessed by the Magistrate or the Sessions Judge, as
the      case    may   be.  It   follows   that   all  the   relevant
materials/records         should   be   available   with   the  Court
tendering pardon for a proper exercise of such power. At
the pre-committal stage, such records/materials are with
the Magistrate, whereas at the post committal stage, with
the Sessions Court. This explains the bifurcation of power
to grant pardon as between the two courts as envisaged
under Sections 306 and 307, separately. This precisely
would be the underlying logic in A.Deivendran (supra) that
the     Magistrate's     Court  does    not  have  power  to  grant
pardon,        once  the  case  is    committed  to  the  Court  of
Sessions.        In  the  touch  stone   of  the  above  elucidated
concept, we are of the opinion that it is always advisable
for a Special Court to consider an application for grant
of pardon by itself, albeit power being available to refer
the same to the C.J.M.; if cognizance is taken directly.
25. In the light of the above discussion, we repel the
first limb of the appellant's argument that a Special
Court       lacks   power  under   Section   306  of  the  Code  to
entertain an application for tender of pardon - preferred
during the investigation stage - after filing the charge
sheet and taking cognizance.
The second bone of contention of the appellant is that the
proceedings initiated to grant pardon to accused nos.3, 8
and 14, who have not been arraigned as accused in the
final report, is grossly illegal. In other words, the
person to whom pardon is being granted under Section 306,
or for that matter, Section 307, should necessarily be an
accused        person.   Learned   counsel     would   also   attach
infirmity to the final report, inasmuch as the said three
persons were not shown as witnesses either.
27. For        a correct   understanding   of   this  issue,  it  is
necessary to have a closer look at Sections 306(1) and
307, which are extracted herein below:-
“306. Tender of pardon to accomplice.—
(1) With a view to obtaining the evidence
directly   or   indirectly   concerned    in   or
privy to an offence to which this section
applies, the Chief Judicial Magistrate or a
Metropolitan Magistrate at any stage of the
investigation or inquiry into, or the trial
of, the offence, and the Magistrate of the
first class inquiring into or trying the
offence, at any stage of the inquiry or
trial, may tender a pardon to such person
on condition of his making a full and true
circumstances within his knowledge relative
to the offence and to every other person
concerned, whether as principal or abettor,
in the commission thereof.
307. Power to direct tender of pardon.— At
any time after commitment of a case but
before  judgment  is  passed,  the   Court  to
which the commitment is made may, with a
view to obtaining at the trial the evidence
directly  or  indirectly  concerned    in,  or
privy to, any such offence, tender a pardon
on the same condition to such person.”
28. We notice, at the outset, that the language employed
in Section 306, as also, Section 307 is not “an accused
person”, but “any person” supposed to have been directly
or indirectly concerned in or privy to an offence, to
which Section 306 applies. Thus, pardon can be tendered to
“any person”, who would satisfy the above requirements;
he neither has to be an accused person nor requires to be
arraigned as an accused in the final report. A conscious
non-employment of the term “accused person” in Sections
306 and 307 abundantly answers the appellant's contention
afore referred. We take note of the expression “supposed
to have been”. Referring to Continental Casualty Co v.
Edition) defines the term “supposition” thus:
“Something regarded as true, without proof.
In the law of evidence, an inference is a
deduction from the facts proved and differs
widely from “a supposition”, which requires
no such premise for its justification.”
29. It could thus be seen that the person in whose favour
pardon is sought to be tendered should be supposed or
considered        to  have  been   concerned  in   or  privy   to  the
offence. The expression 'supposed to have been' is an
elastic one, providing ample room for the person concerned
to have a lessor role.
30. Again, the person to whom pardon is to be tendered,
need only be “directly or indirectly concerned in or privy
to” the offence. The expression “directly or indirectly”
indicates the nature of such person's involvement in the
crime,         of   which,    the   latter   tends     to   be    less
incriminating. Relying upon R.Dalmia v. Commissioner of
Edn.) defines the term “concern” as follows:
“The word 'concern' is not a term of art,
having   a   precise,   fixed    meaning.   It  has
several    nuances,   and   is    used  to   convey
diverse    shades   of   meaning     over  a   wide
spectrum. It may mean “to have a relation
importance” or “to have an anxiety, worry.”
“Concerned”     as   an    adjective     may   mean
The term “privy” is defined in Wharton's Law Lexicon (15 th
“Privy – Having participation in some act,
so as to be bound thereby. (Woodhouse v.
It     could    thus   be  seen  that    the   expression   “privy  to”
indicates a larger, active and direct participation in the
crime. The same language, as employed in Section 306, is
employed       in  Section    307,   insofar    as  the   recipient  of
pardon is concerned.
31. We, therefore, conclude on the basis of the above
discussion        and  having   regard    to   the   terminology  and
expressions employed in Sections 306 and 307 that the
person        to  whom   pardon   is   to   be   tendered   need  not
necessarily be an accused; rather it is not a sine qua
non. The fact that in many an occasion, pardon is being
granted        to an  accused   person,   is   no  indication  for  a
conclusion that such person should always be arraigned as
an accused person. In adopting the above interpretation,
we are fortified by the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in Commander Pascal Fernandes (supra), the relevant
findings of which are extracted below :
“12.There can be no doubt that the section is
enabling   and  its   terms   are   wide  enough  to
enable the Special Judge to tender pardon to
any   person   who  is   supposed    to   have  been
directly or indirectly concerned in, or privy
to an offence. This must necessarily include
a person arraigned before him. But it may be
possible to tender pardon to a person not so
arraigned.” (underlined by us for emphasis)
A Division Bench of the Orissa High Court in Rabi Das &
Ors v. State [1976 Crl.LJ 2004] and the Bombay High Court
in     Makbool     Abdulrazzak     v.   State  of   Maharashtra   [LAWS
(BOM)-2004-8-141]          took   a  similar   view,   with   which  we
respectfully agree.
32. That         apart,   N.I.A   has   satisfactory   explanation   on
facts      as    well  to   this   issue   raised  by  the  appellant.
Firstly, accused nos.3, 8 and 14, in whose favour tender
of pardon is sought for, have been arraigned as accused in
the F.I.R. Secondly, in the final report filed, it is
indicated that the application for tender of pardon to the
accused        aforereferred     is   pending   and   that  the   N.I.A
reserves its right to file a supplementary charge sheet,
in case the pardon sought for is declined. We are of the
view      that    the   above   factual    premise   affords   adequate
explanation to the non-inclusion of the said three accused
persons        in  the  array    of  accused   persons   in  the  final
report. Nonetheless, we may also observe that, in the
fitness of things, they should have been shown in the
final report in the array of accused, with a rider -
proposed         approver     -   and    it   amounts    to   a   minor
irregularity in excluding the said accused person from the
party array, on the expectation that the pardon sought for
will be allowed. However, this minor irregularity is a
curable one by filing a supplementary charge sheet, or an
additional list of witnesses, depending upon the outcome
of the tender of pardon sought for. The following excerpts
from a Privy Council decision in Faquir Singh v. Emperor
“If  the   manner   in  which  the  tender  of
pardon is made, follows in substance the
method prescribed in Section 337, then, the
Section must apply. Minor and immaterial
irregularities    or   variations  cannot   be
taken  to    affect   the  operation   of  the
Point concluded accordingly.
33. Before leaving this judgment, we are also persuaded
to     consider    the   issue   whether  the  appellant   in  his
capacity as a co-accused can assail, an order/proceeding
of the Special Court purporting to consider an application
for      tender   of   pardon   preferred  by  the   investigating
officer. The contention of the N.I.A in this regard that
the appellant herein has no locus to challenge an order to
consider the tender of pardon sought for, was accepted by
the learned Special Judge in the order impugned.
34. We notice the judgment of the Honourable Supreme Court
in CBI v. Ashok Kumar Aggarwal and Another [2014(14) SCC
295] wherein, it was held that the Magistrate tendering
pardon is bound to consider the consequence of grant of
pardon, taking into consideration the policy of the State
and to certain extent, compare the culpability of the
person seeking pardon, qua the other co-accused. Inasmuch
as the grant of pardon is likely to visit the co-accused
with adverse consequences, one will be persuaded to think
in favour of recognising the right of accused to challenge
the     same    by  virtue  of  the  above  observation  of  the
Honourable Supreme Court. However, in the same judgment,
the Supreme Court in paragraph no.26, clarifies that a co-
accused has no legal right to raise any grievance in the
matter of tender of pardon, particularly in view of the
law laid down in Ranadhir Basu v. State of West Bengal
[(2000) 3 SCC 161].        Nevertheless, the Supreme Court held
that       revisional  powers  under   Sections  397,  r/w  401,
Cr.P.C, can be exercised by the Court suo moto.
35. In Ranadhir Basu v. State of West Bengal [(2000) 3
SCC     161],     the  Hon'ble  Supreme    Court   distinguished    the
judgment in Suresh Chandra Bahri v. State of Bihar [(1995)
Supp. 1 SCC 80] to hold that examination of the person to
whom pardon was tendered in the Court of Magistrate taking
cognizance as contemplated in Section 306(4) need not be
in the presence of the accused. The Supreme Court held
that examination of a witness does not necessarily include
cross-examination         of   the    witness    and   the    type   of
examination contemplated would depend upon the object and
purpose        of  that  provision.    Section   202,  Cr.    P.C,  was
relied       upon   to  point  out   that   examination    of   witness
stipulated therein is at a stage where the accused has no
locus standi, having regard to the object and purpose of
36. Taking stock of           Ashok Kumar Aggarwal       and Ranadhir
Basu      (supra), we hold that a co-accused has no               locus
standi to challenge an order for considering the tender of
pardon sought for by the investigating agency. Of course,
a co-accused gets a substantive right to assail the truth
of     the     facts  confessed   by   the  approver,   when   he is
examined during the course of trial. Point concluded as
37. Lastly, we also notice that the instant appeal is
liable to be dismissed on the question of maintainability
as well. Sections 21(1) and 21(3) of the N.I.A Act as
relevant in this context are extracted herein below:
“21(1)     Notwithstanding anything contained in
the    Code,  an   appeal   shall   lie   from  any
judgment,    sentence  or   order,   not  being   an
interlocutory order, of a Special Court to the
High Court both on facts and on law.
(3)      Except  as  aforesaid,    no  appeal   or
revision shall lie to any Court from judgment,
sentence or order including an interlocutory
order of a Special Court.”
The order impugned before us only rejected the objections
of the appellant as regards the legality in invoking the
powers under Sections 306 and 307, Cr.P.C, having regard
to the stage at which it was sought to be done. The order
impugned       has   not  considered  as  to  whether  the  pardon
sought for should be tendered or not. After rejecting the
objections, the Special Court merely directed the accused
persons to be produced in the next posting date, as per
the impugned order. This is, for sure, an interlocutory
order and therefore, the appeal is not maintainable in
view of Section 21(1) of the Act. As regards the scope of
a revision under Sections 397, read with 401 Cr.P.C, we
are bound to notice the mandate under Section 21(3) of the
N.I.A       Act,   specifically   barring  a  revision   from   any
judgment, sentence or order of the Sub Court, including an
interlocutory order.         We, therefore find that the instant
appeal       is  not    maintainable.  However,  since   we   spent
considerable time on the issue raised by the appellant and
that clarity as regards the procedure is warranted for
future guidance, we thought it appropriate to address the
issues on merits as well.
38. We, therefore, reject this appeal. However, we make
it clear that we have not expressed any opinion as regards
the merits of the application seeking tender of pardon in
favour of accused nos.3, 8 and 14. The learned Special
Judge will consider the said application on merits in
accordance     with law, taking  stock  of   the statutory
provisions and binding precedents, untrammeled by any of
the observations made by us in this judgment.