A batch of seven cases have come up in relation to
the alienation of properties purportedly                       belonging to
Syro      Malabar       Church          viz,      Crl.M.C.Nos.8936/2019,
205/2020, 1409/2020, 1414/2020, 2136/2020, 2138/2020 and
2.    One    Joshy    Varghese       had   filed    a   complaint      in
C.M.P.No.5003/2018           before      the    Judicial       First     Class
Magistrate,       Kakkanad      alleging       commission      of    offences
468    and   34   IPC    against     the    Major    Archbishop      of    Syro
Malabar Church and another.               After preliminary enquiry in
terms     of    Section      202    Cr.P.C.,       the    Magistrate       took
cognizance under Annexure A2 order and issued summons to
the petitioner         for the offences coming under the purview
of Section 120 B, 406, 423 r/w Section 34 IPC. A revision
was    preferred       against     Annexure      A2    order     before     the
Sessions Court, Ernakulam under Section 397 Cr.P.C. in
Crl.R.P.No.20/2019.           The learned Sessions Judge dismissed
the    revision under Annexure A3 order.                It is against the
aforesaid two orders and to quash the entire proceedings,
the petitioner Cardinal Mar George Alencherry, the Major
Archbishop       of    Syro     Malabar      Church     challenged       under
Section 482       Cr.P.C. in Crl.M.C.No.8936/2019.
2136/2020 and 2138/2020 were filed by Cardinal Mar George
Alencherry with respect to the complaints in which he is
the accused. It is submitted that the first complaint at
Maradu      was    numbered      as    C.M.P.No.2/2018         wherein      the
learned      Magistrate       had    directed       the    complainant       to
examine further witnesses on his behalf and this was
challenged by the complainant before this court and the
same ended in dismissal. The said matter is still pending
consideration before the Magistrate.
4.    It is submitted that the complaint preferred by
Sri.    Joshy     Varghese      before     the    Judicial      First    Class
Magistrate Court, Kakkanad, is by concealing the                      earlier
complaint      before     the    Judicial      First     Class    Magistrate
Court, Maradu, in C.M.P.No.2/2018 on the same set of
facts     and    cause    of    action     which     is      still    pending
5.    One Mr. Polachan Puthupara had approached the
Chief Judicial Magistrate, Ernakulam, based on the very
same set of facts and allegation as per                        Annexure -10
complaint,       which    was    dismissed      by   the    Chief    Judicial
Magistrate,       Ernakulam,       on   the    ground     that    the    issue
involved is of civil nature by Annexure A6 order.
6.    Yet another complaint was filed before the Chief
Judicial       Magistrate        Court,      Ernakulam,        in    Crl.M.P.
No.820/2010 by one Pappachan Varghese predicted on the
same set of facts which was referred under Section 156(3)
Cr.P.C. Consequently a crime was registered. But it was
referred by the police on the ground of mistake of facts.
launched       a   thorough       investigation        by     examining      83
witnesses      including      the    36   persons     who    had    purchased
various      properties        and    concluded       the     investigation
stating that internal rules governing the administration
of    diocese      were    duly     complied      with     both    by    their
Financial Committee and Consulters Forum at each stage of
transaction        and    a    closure      report      Annexure      A7    was
8.    One Shine Varghese had approached the Central
Police Station, Ernakulam, directly by filing a complaint
based on the same set of allegations and approached this
court seeking a mandamus for registration of crime in
which a direction was issued by this court, but it was
reversed      in   appeal     based     on    which    investigation        was
conducted      and    a   closure     report     was    submitted      by   the
9.    The dispute pertains to the execution of various
sale deeds in respect of properties held by the Syro
Malabar      Church,       a   religious       congregation         allegedly
without compliance of the requirements as per the byelaws
of   the    Church     causing     heavy     financial      losses     to   the
church and its parishioners.                 Inter alia, it has been
contended that all these sale deeds are the result of
criminal      conspiracy      hatched     between     the    petitioner      in
collusion      with     his   henchmen      and   the    persons     who    had
purchased the properties. He had also availed a loan of
Rs.58.2 crores from South Indian Bank without initiating
any discussion or arriving at any decision as per the
provisions of Canon law            and the law in force.
10. The petitioner came up to quash the complaint
and Annexure A2 and A3 orders mainly on the reason that,
what is involved is only a civil dispute and no criminal
liability       can    be    superimposed        and     that     earlier     a
complaint had been lodged before the Judicial First Class
Magistrate, Maradu and as such, it is not permissible to
file another complaint (Annexure A4) for the very same
subject      matter     and    that     too,    without      revealing      the
earlier one.
11. Crl.M.C.No.9115/2019             is     filed     by     one     Saju
Varghese,      accused      No.3    in    the   abovesaid       case.       The
contentions raised are similar and analogous in nature.
12. Crl.M.C.No.2138/2020 was filed by the Cardinal
Mar George Alencherry under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to quash
the order dated 13/2/2020 in Crl.M.P.No.5015/2018 (C.C.
No.94/2020 of the JFCM, Kakkanad, Ernakulam District),
where      the     very      same      questions       were      taken      up.
Crl.M.C.No.2136/2020 is against the order dated 13/2/2020
in    Crl.M.P.No.5009/2018           (C.C.No.93/2020          of   the     same
court). Crl.M.C.No.1414/2020 is against the order dated
20/1/2020      in    Crl.M.P.No.5011/2018          of    the    same    Court.
Crl.M.C.No.1409/2020 is against the order dated 20/1/2020
in      Crl.M.P.No.5013/2018              of       the       same       court.
Crl.M.C.No.205/2020 is against the order dated 5/11/2019
in Crl.M.P.No.5005/2018            (C.C.No.1886/2019 again             of the
same court).
13. For       the     sake      of    convenience,         Crl.M.C.No.
8936/2019      is   taken     as   the    leading     case.     The   dispute
pertains to the alienation of properties belonging to
Syro Malabar Church. It is an indubitable and undeniable
fact    that     the    Syro    Malabar      Church     is    an    Episcopal
Institution and not a Congregational Institution and as
such the Bishop of Archdiocese has the right to alienate
and dispose of its properties subject to the restrictions
imposed      under     their     byelaw(s).       Inter     alia,     it    was
contended that even the restriction imposed under the
byelaw was not complied with and the properties were
alienated for a pittance and in one case, a fraudulent
device was used so as to give a veneer                     that the entire
consideration        was    paid    though     what    was    actually      was
barely     1/10th    of   the    agreed     amount.       It    was   further
contended that the properties held by the Syro Malabar
Church through their Archdiocese Bishop, the petitioner
herein, was for the benefit of all parishioners.
14. Paragraphs         13,    16    and    17    of   the     complaint
brought to the notice of this court in support of the
argument that the complainant had full knowledge about
the properties and the number of documents executed while
preferring seven separate complaints before the Judicial
First Class Magistrate Court, Kakkanad, by segregating
the    properties       into     seven     for     maintaining       separate
complaints by taking shelter under Section 219 Cr.P.C.
and in derogation of Section 178(d) Cr.P.C.
15.   It is submitted that the complaint filed in the
Court at Kakkanad is with respect to the allegation of
sale of two properties under two sale deeds viz. Sale
Deed     No.3376/2016,        dated      31.10.2016       and     Sale     Deed
No.2180/2017,        dated    23.08.2017      and    a   second     complaint
based on the same set of facts and transactions is not
maintainable and took substantiation from two decisions
of Supreme Court – Hira Lal & Others vs. State of Uttar
another v. State of Madhya Pradesh & another [2020 (5)
SCC 378, Pramatha Nath Talukdar v. Saroj Ranjan Sarkar
( AIR 1962 SC 876) and Mahesh Chand v. B.Janardhan Reddy
&   another      [(2003)     1   SCC    734].     It   has    been     further
submitted that a second complaint really amounts to forum
shopping based          on the decisions of the Apex Court in
Rajiv Bhatia v. Govt. of NCT of Delhi and others [(1999)
8 SCC 525], Arathi Bandi v. Bandi Jagadrakshak Rao &
Tanker     Carrier     Corporation.        v.   SNP    Shipping      Services
(P)Ltd and others [(1998) 5 SCC 310], Ambica Industries
v.   Commissioner        of   Central     Excise[(2007)        6   SCC   769],
Jagmohan Bahl and another v. State (NCT of Delhi) and
Udyami Evam Khadi Gramodyog Welfare Sanstha and another
v. State of U.P.and others[(2008) 1 SCC 560 : (2008) 1
SCC (Civ) 359]         and in Supreme Court Advocates-on-Record
Association       and    another     v.   Union     of   India     (  Recusal
alia, it was contended that the Archbishop should be
considered as the          “corporation sole” and the             real owner
and not a mere trustee in regard to the property of
diocese, relying on the decisions of the Madras High
Court in Muthusamier and others v. Sree Sree Methanithi
Swamiyar Avergal and others [ (1913) SCC Online Mad 233 :
LJ 393].        Yet another argument was also advanced that
when money or property is entrusted with a person, it
would carry an implied authority making him the owner of
the property and relied on the decision of the Apex Court
in State of Gujarat v. Jaswantlal Nathalal (AIR 1968 SC
700).     Reliance was also placed on Urmila Devi v. Yudhvir
Singh [(2013) 15 SCC 624] in support of the argument that
revisionary jurisdiction under Section 397 Cr.P.C. can be
exercised when Magistrate decides to take cognizance for
the offence alleged and to issue summons under Section
204 Cr.P.C., which would be an order intermediary or
quasi final in nature and not interlocutory. Mehmood Ul
Rehman v. Khazir Mohammad Tunda and Others [(2015) 12 SCC
420] and National Bank of Oman v. Barakara Abdul Aziz and
another [(2013) 2 SCC 488) were also cited regarding the
application       of    mind    by    the    Magistrate       while     taking
cognizance       and    prima      facie     satisfaction,        for    which
another decision of the Apex Court in Chandra Deo Singh
v. Prokash Chandra Bose & others[(1964)(1) SCR 639] was
also quoted.         The facts involved in Hiralal's case and
Samta Naidu's case (supra) are entirely different from
that of the issue involved in the instant case,wherein
there     are   different      transactions       with     respect     to   the
properties       situated      within      the    jurisdiction        of    two
courts, i.e Judicial First Class Magistrate at Maradu and
Kakkanad. The mere fact that there is a disclosure of
similar     transaction       in    consonance      with    the   allegation
levelled in a complaint with respect to                       certain other
properties may not by itself be a bar in maintaining an
action     based     on    a   similar      transaction.       Section      178
Cr.P.C. is an enabling provision to try or enquire into a
complaint when the alleged offences were committed in
several local areas fall under different jurisdiction and
it can be enquired into and tried by the court having
jurisdiction over any of such local areas. Section 178
Cr.P.C.      is     not    an    embargo       to    maintain       different
complaints at different areas. On the other hand, Section
219 Cr.P.C. is a restriction in trying more than three
cases in one trial provided that it should be within a
period     of   twelve      months.     Necessarily,       three     separate
cases alone can be tried together, if it is within a
period of one year in single trial.                   A conjoint reading
of Sections 219 and 178(d) Cr.P.C. would show that it is
permissible to maintain different complaints with respect
to separate cases spanning over                    one year. The cases
involved      covered      by    the    different       complaints       would
sufficiently       show    that    it    was    committed     at    different
occasions spanning over            more than one year. The decision
rendered by the Apex Court in                   Hiralal's case (supra)
pertains      to    submission       of   a    second     complaint      under
Section 156(3) Cr.P.C. after the culmination of earlier
one which was rejected by a reasoned order, and confirmed
by way of a revision.               The factual and legal scenario
involved      in    Hiralal's      case     (supra)     hence     cannot    be
applied in the present case.              In fact, a second complaint
is not completely barred in law.                      The Apex Court in
Mahesh Chand v. B.Janardhan Reddy and another((2003) 1
SCC    734)    laid    down    the   legal     position     that    a   second
complaint can be maintained only on fresh facts and/or if
a special case is made out therefor, thus :-
K“eeping    in   view     the    settled   legal
principles, we are of the opinion that the
High Court was not correct in holding that
the second complaint was completely barred.
It is settled law that there is no statutory
bar in filing a second complaint on the same
facts.   In a case where a previous complaint
is dismissed without assigning any reasons,
the Magistrate under Section 204 Cr.P.C. may
take   cognizance     of   an   offence    and   issue
process if there is sufficient ground for
proceeding.       As    held     in   Pramatha    Nath
Talukdar    Case    (AIR   1962     SC   876)   second
complaint     could     be    dismissed      after   a
decision     has     been    given      against    the
complainant in previous matter upon a full
consideration of his case.           Further, second
complaint     on   the    same     facts    could   be
entertained         only         in       exceptional
circumstances,     namely,     where    the   previous
order was passed on an incomplete record or
on   a  misunderstanding       of    the   nature   of
complaint    or    it    was   manifestly      absurd,
unjust or where new facts which could not,
with reasonable diligence, have been brought
on record in the previous proceedings, have
been    adduced.           In     the     facts    and
circumstances     of   this     case,    the   matter,
therefore, should have been remitted back to
the learned Magistrate for the purpose of
arriving at a finding as to whether any case
for cognizance of the alleged offence had
been made out or not.”
16. The very same view was taken by another Bench of
the Apex Court in Samta Naidu's case (supra), wherein it
was held that            the dismissal of a complaint, or the
discharge of the accused, is not an acquittal for the
purposes of Section 300 Cr.P.C., which debars trial of a
person     who    has    been    tried     by   a   court     of    competent
jurisdiction for an offence and convicted or acquitted of
such an offence. Section 300 Cr.P.C. has no application
in   the    present      case    and    as    such,    though     the    legal
position settled in tune with what is held in Mahesh
Chand's case (supra) is standing on different pedestals
governing different areas of litigation. The bar under
Section 300 Cr.P.C. comes into play only when there is
culmination of trial by a competent court resulting in
acquittal or conviction.
17. There is not much dispute with respect to the
fact    that     the    Syro    Malabar      Church     is    an    Episcopal
Institution        headed      by    Bishop      of     Archdiocese,        the
petitioner herein and as such it was argued that the
Bishop of the Archdiocese will have all authority over
all    spiritual       and    temporal       affairs      concerning       Syro
Malabar Church and that they are governed by Canon law
and    their    constitution       (byelaw)even        in   the    matter    of
alienation        of    immovable        properties        and     that     the
parishioners will not get any authority or locus standi
to challenge any such alienation and transfer and cannot
maintain any criminal action pertaining to those matters
and hence all the criminal complaints amount to abuse of
process of the court and are liable to be quashed.
18. To resolve the abovesaid issue pertaining to the
authority to deal with the property and exclusive right
claimed challenging even the status of complainant and
competency to maintain complaints of this nature, it is
necessary      to    go    into    the    alleged      authority      of    the
Archbishop, though at the most the same would constitute
either a civil wrong with its legal consequences and
repercussions and there should be an understanding of
what actually amounts to spiritual and temporal matters
in   relation      to    Episcopal      church     and    the    concept     of
“Government of temporalities of the church” in relation
to spiritual, ecclesiastical and temporal affairs of the
church and whether the execution of the various sale
deeds by the petitioner Archdiocese Bishop would come
within the ambit of either spiritual or ecclesiastical or
temporal affairs of the church in relation to the Canon
law    and   the    theory     of   apostolic       succession      of   Jesus
Christ. The Apex Court had considered the application of
'Canon' law in         Most Rev.P.M.A.Metropolitan and others v.
Moran Mar Marthoma and Another (1995 Supp (4) SCC 286)
and laid down as under:
“ Canon is explained in Black's Law
Dictionary as under :
A    rule      of     doctrine      or
Canon means both a norm and attribute
of the scripture.      The term 'Canon law' is
explained in the Encyclopedia of Religion,
Vol. 3, as under:
straight rod or bar, especially
one used to keep something else
straight, canon came to mean
something that is fixed, a rule
or norm.      The term has several
usage:the canon of scripture,
or that fixed list of books
to sacred scripture;the canon
of the Mass, the fixed portion
of the eucharistic prayer; the
process of declaring a deceased
person to be among the fixed
century, directives for church
living and norms for church
structures and procedures have
been issued as canons.
imperial nomos (leges in Latin)
or laws. Church norms have also
been known as sacred or divine,
to distinguish them from civil
or human laws.         At times they
order'. The term ecclesiastical
law is used synonymously with
ecclesiastical law also refers
to the civil law adopted in
church affairs. The term Canon
law    is   used     in    the   Roman
and various decisions of church
bodies and individual church
Canons     are    thus     the    principal
scriptural      bases    for     the    religious
practices observed in a Church.”
19. Thus, there cannot be any difference of opinion
with    respect      to    application       of   Canon    law,     which    is
limited to religious practices observed in a church. A
Division      Bench      of    the    Apex     Court     in    Varghese      v.
261     (SC))      followed       by     the     judgment           in     Most
Rev.P.M.A.Metropolitan's case (supra) had drawn a clear
distinction         between       an     Episcopal        church      and     a
Congregational          church      regarding       the     spiritual       and
temporal affairs and laid down the legal position thus:
“The   essential   features    of   congregationalism
are stated to be the autonomy or independence of
the individual churches or organisations, though in
matters    in    which   the    individual     charges    are
interested as a whole and in order to enable the
churches       to       effectively        fulfil       their
responsibilities,      they    may   enter    into   unions.
Congregationalism is stated to be the opposite of
Episcopacy which means Government of the Church by
the Bishops on the theory of apostolic succession.
In other words, the Bishops are supposed to be the
successors    of   the  apostles    of  the   Christ.     The
congregationalists believe that every Christian has
the right to perform all functions pertaining to
the   priestly    office   and   permits    the   laymen   to
celebrate sacraments whereas in Episcopal Churches
only     the     ordained      priests     can     celebrate
sacraments.”
20. The Apex Court has gone through the                         words
“spiritual”        and    “temporal”        while     dealing      with     the
authority of        Episcopal and         Congregational Institutions
and took references from various tests such as Bhagavat
Gita, Ishopanishad etc. in reference to the application
of Articles 25 and 26 of the Constitution of India and
the     protection       thereunder.        In    Sardar      Syedna     Taher
Saifuddin      Saheb     v.   The    State    of   Bombay      [(1962)     Supp
(2)SCR 496] it is held that the protection of Articles 25
and 26 is not limited to the matters of doctrine, but
extends      to   acts     done    in    pursuance      of    religion      and
therefore contains a guarantee for rituals, observances
and ceremonies and modes of worships, which are integral
parts of religion. There is no dispute with respect to
the aforesaid proposition, but the said guarantee does
not    extend     to   appointment        of   Vicars/priests,        deacons
21. One of the questions that came up before the
Apex Court in          Varghese's case (supra) is whether the
Malankara Orthodox Church is an Episcopal church governed
by its 1934 constitution and whether a scheme has to be
framed for its management.                The distinction between an
Episcopal church and Congregational church was taken into
consideration         and    it   was     found     that    the     spiritual
supremacy of patriarch or apostolic succession in the
appointment         of     vicars/priests,           deacons       etc.      in
contravention of 1934 constitution is not permissible,
but nonetheless recognized its over all supremacy. Being
an    Episcopal        church,      it    was     held     that     Malankara
Metropolitan         has    the      prime     jurisdiction         regarding
temporal, ecclesiastical and spiritual administration of
the church, subject to the riders provided in the 1934
22. By relying on the legal position settled by the
Supreme Court, it was submitted that the Bishop of the
Archdiocese of Syro Malabar Church, who is governed by
their own constitution, the byelaw, has the right to
alienate      the    property      belonging       to   the    church,      but
subject      to   the    caveat      provided      in   the    byelaw      (its
constitution).        Under     Section     482    Cr.P.C.,      this    Court
cannot conduct a roving enquiry with respect to disputed
matters.       But at the same time, based on the admitted
facts, it is within the jurisdiction of this court to go
into the acts of the              petitioner and whether it would
prima facie satisfy the commission of offence alleged in
the complaint, for which, it is necessary to find out
what are the powers, authorities and the rights of the
Bishop of        Archdiocese over the properties held by the
church and what makes the difference in the authority, if
any, between Congregational and Episcopal church in its
spiritual, ecclesiastical and temporal rights in contrast
with the right of alienation and transfer of immovable
property, what would be the legal position when there is
provision      in    the    bye-law     or    its   constitution        to   be
complied with for effecting an alienation and transfer of
immovable properties, what would be the application of
Canon law in those matters and whether there is creation
of implied public trust with respect to the properties
held by the church.
23. Going by the decision rendered by the Apex Court
in   the    abovesaid      two   cases,     it    is   clear    that    in   an
Episcopal church, the prime authority is vested with the
spiritual      head,     the    Bishop      of   Archdiocese        regarding
temporal and spiritual affairs of the church and they are
governed by the ecclesiastical law viz.,the Canon law to
the    extent     of   spiritual      and    temporal     affairs      of   the
church based on the theory of apostolic succession of
Jesus Christ. When the words “spiritual”, “temporal” and
“ecclesiastical” as understood by the Apex Court in the
abovesaid decision are taken into consideration, it is
clear that it will not include the right to alienate the
property      vested    in    endowment.      The    religious      supremacy
vested with the Bishop or apostolic succession should be
understood confined to religious matters both temporal
and spiritual governed by ecclesiastical law viz., the
Canon law.
24. The        expression        “temporal”        shall       not     be
misunderstood so as to include a right of alienation of
an immovable property held by the church, though its
constitution provides provision for its alienation. Those
clauses      and     provisions       which     would      satisfy      either
temporal or spiritual affairs of the church in consonance
with the divine Canon law                and the theory of apostolic
succession alone can be considered within the supremacy
of    the    Bishop     of    an   Episcopal       church,     governed      by
ecclesiastical law viz., Canon law.                    The other clauses
included        in      their       constitution/byelaw             governing
alienation of immovable properties, will not                      come under
either spiritual or temporal rights based on the theory
of apostolic succession and hence the ecclesiastical law-
Canon       law    cannot      be   applied     in    derogation       of   the
requirement of the general law, when the property held is
either in endowment or in trust.
25.     The user of the words “vesting in endowment
with     respect      to    property       of    church      and     not    the
parishioners”         by    the     Apex     Court      in        Most     Rev.
P.M.A.Metropolitan's case (supra)while dealing with the
distinction between Episcopal church and Congregational
church should        be understood in relation to the religious
supremacy      vested     on    the   religious      head    based     on   the
theory     of    apostolic       succession      of    Jesus     Christ     and
confined       to    spiritual,       ecclesiastical         and     temporal
affairs      of    the    church.      This     would      show    that     the
expression “vesting in endowment” is not a vesting of
property in contra distinction with that of a private
person, but should be understood as the vesting of the
property in endowment based on the theory of apostolic
succession       and     would     confine      itself      to    spiritual,
ecclesiastical and temporal affairs of the church. If
that be so, it must be the property available with or
held by the church in connection with their religious
rituals, observances, ceremonies and places of worship,
which      would      form     an    integral       part     of     religious
observances based on the theory of apostolic succession.
This    would     make    the    legal     position      clear    that     such
property      cannot     be   alienated      or   transferred       and    even
cannot be encumbered since the same forms an integral
part    of    the    religious      faith     and   observances.        Hence,
“vesting      in    endowment”       has    only     a    limited     meaning
concerning holding of authority over the properties held
by the Church for the purpose of religious observances
and worship, which would form an integral part of the
religious      faith     and   beliefs.      So   there     cannot     be   any
question regarding sale or alienation of any immovable
property, which is the subject of religious rituals and
observances and place of worship. Necessarily, it must be
understood that the            right to alienate the property or
transfer      of   property      would    not    arise    in    relation     to
observances        and     worship       connected       with     spiritual,
ecclesiastical and temporal affairs of the church and the
“vesting in endowment” must be understood as related to
within        the      contours         of      abovesaid         spiritual,
ecclesiastical and temporal affairs of the church. The
appellation “endowment” always tends to refer to a trust
either for a public charity or a private trust. A trust
and    an    endowment      are    different       concepts      altogether.
Trust is an obligation annexed to ownership. The word
'trust'     is    defined     in    Underhill's       Law    of   Trust     and
Trustees, to mean equitable obligation binding a person
to deal with property, for which he has control for the
benefit of persons for whom he                himself may be one.           The
word    'endowment'          defined     in   the    Legal    Thesaurus      as
aid,allotment,allowance,            protection,       assistance,       award,
benefit, bestowment, contribution, presentation and the
like. The Apex Court in Pratapsinghji N Desai v. Deputy
Charity Commissioner, Gujarat and others (AIR 1987 SC
2064) held that endowment is dedication of property for
purpose of religion or charity having both the subject
and object as certain and capable of assessment.
26. The      expression       “vest”     must    be    understood      in
relation to a right or an interest in the property when
it is secured. This would make the meaning of the word
“vesting in endowment” which would stand for securing the
property for specific purpose for which it was endowed
and in the case of Episcopal church, this can only be
treated     as    securing     the    property      for   the    purpose     of
spiritual,      ecclesiastical         and   temporal      affairs     of   the
church based on the theory of apostolic succession. That
does not mean that they              have the right to alienate the
property      in   derogation       of   the    purpose     for    which    the
property       was    endowed.       Necessarily,        the    purpose      of
Episcopal church should and must be understood confined
to the spiritual and temporal affairs of the church based
on the theory of apostolic succession and observance of
religious rites. It does not include a right to alienate
the property or to use the same for any other purpose,
other than the purpose based on the                  theory of apostolic
succession, both spiritual and temporal affairs of the
church. The word “temporal” has only a limited meaning in
the    case     of    church      based     on    theory      of    apostolic
succession and it must be understood as an inseparable
part, an affair of the church in the administration of
religious observances and spiritual affairs. In all other
matters,      especially        in    the    matter      of    transfer      or
alienation of immovable property, it would stand outside
the    scope    of    spiritual,       ecclesiastical        and    connected
temporal affairs.
27. Regarding        the    legal     and    jural     status,     there
cannot     be   any    separate     legal     or   jural    entity     to   the
observances of spiritual and ecclesiastical matters based
on the theory of apostolic succession of Jesus Christ
viz., the Bishop of the Archdiocese and those who follow
the faith and its theory. It is perfectly spiritual and
ecclesiastical in its nature and what is vested with the
Bishop     of    the    Archdiocese        based     on    the    theory     of
apostolic succession is the supremacy of faith, belief,
religious      observances        based     on   the    said     theory     and
control,supervision and administration of its own affairs
pertaining      to    apostolic      succession,      faith,     belief     and
religious      observances        and   it    would    include      even    the
appointment,control            and     administration          of     priest,
deacons, vicars and those who are involved in and are
closely       connected         with      spiritual        and      religious
observances and maintenance, protection, upkeep of places
of worship under the said theory. It is purely spiritual
and    ecclesiastical         concept      based     on    the    theory     of
apostolic      succession        and   as    such,     the    same    is    not
governed by any general law, but purely by the personal
law viz., the provisions of Canon law. In so far as the
other properties are concerned, either held or possessed
by the church, which is not the subject of any religious
observances or places of worship based on the theory of
apostolic succession and the concept thereof, it must be
understood that the             possession, right, title over the
properties would stand governed by the general law and
not by the Canon law, for which, a separate legal entity
to the person who holds the property has to be recognized
in relation to the general law applicable. The theory of
apostolic succession does not permit sale or transfer of
immovable property, presumably for the reason that there
cannot be any sale or transfer of a place of worship. If
any property is subjected to a sale or transfer, it would
stand     outside      the    scope     of    religious       or    spiritual
observances       or   a   place    of    worship     and   the    theory   of
apostolic succession and religious supremacy cannot be
applied as such. Hence there would be an implied creation
of a public trust regarding the other properties which
are    not     the    subject      of     religious      faith,belief       or
observances or the place of worship for the benefit of
parishioners, since a section of people would also come
under the ambit of term “public”.                Thus, it is the nature
of the property that validates and decides the legal
status of the property and the person, who is holding
possession or title of the property. The Canon law or the
Constitution,        which    was    either     adopted     or   evolved    in
course of time in the administration and observance of
spiritual,        religious,         ecclesiastical          and     temporal
affairs, hence cannot be applied to                  matters which stand
outside its purview. Necessarily, those properties held
in   public      trust    would     stand     amenable     to    Section     92
C.P.C., except clauses (a) to (c) and (cc) to sub-section
(1) dealing with temporal affairs. The remaining part
i.e. (d) to (h) of Section 92(1) C.P.C. dealing with
“corporeal” rights will retain its application.
28. In the case of religious endowments of a public
nature, to which the Religious Endowments Act applies, a
suit charging the trustee, manager, superintendent or a
member of a committee of a mosque,temple or religious
establishment        with     misfeasance,        breach     of    trust     or
neglect of duty, may be brought under the provisions of
that Act or it may be brought under the provisions of the
Code     as provided by Section 92 of the Code. This would
make    the    legal    position      amply     clear    that    Section     92
C.P.C. would come into the picture in the absence of a
parallel provision covered by any Endowment Act.                            The
Canon     law   being     the   law    pertaining       to   spiritual      and
ecclesiastical matters cannot be supplanted in                       place of
an endowment legislation so as to exclude the application
of Section 92 C.P.C. or in substitution of that section.
It is so unfortunate that no endowment legislation so far
enacted to address the various issues connected with the
legal     status    of    church    authorities       in   so   far    as   the
properties which are held not as part of their religious
belief, faith or observances and to even                        address the
legal     status    of    a   charitable      institution       run    by   the
church authorities.
29. By     taking      support     from     the    decision     of    the
Constitution Bench of the Apex Court in Chairman Madappa
v. M.N.Mahanthadevaru and others [(1966) 2 SCR 151 : AIR
1966 SC 878], it was argued that Section 92 C.P.C. is an
enabling provision and not a compulsory requirement for
effectuating any sale or transfer of property held in
trust. What was considered and held by the Apex Court
regarding the application of clause (f) to Section 92(1)
C.P.C.     are     the    practical       difficulties        that    may    be
encountered,       if    it   is   strictly      complied      with    in   the
management of trust and its requirements and it was held
that when there is no prohibition to sell, mortgage or
exchange it in the trust deed relating to a public trust,
it will not circumscribe the powers of trustees to carry
on ordinary administration of trust property and to deal
with it in such manner as they think best for the benefit
of the trust. But there may be other situations where it
might be necessary to alienate trust property which may
require        sanction      of   the    court    under     clause     (f)  of
Section 92(1) C.P.C.. But in the instant case, even the
petitioner has no case that they themselves constitute a
trust of public nature or religious nature.                    On the other
hand, the firm stand taken by the petitioner is that
being the spiritual head, he is bound by Canon law alone
and    not    the    general      law    with    respect      to    right   of
alienation or transfer of immovable properties held by
the church. But as adumbrated above, the properties which
were held in trust by the church for the parishioners
would constitute a public trust, for which there is no
written trust deed or any specific understanding to that
effect     except      their    constitution        and    the    provisions
contained in the Canon law.                   Interestingly, in their
constitution       (byelaw),       nothing     has    been    mentioned     or
recognized regarding any trust presumably for the reason
that it was codified only for the purpose of meeting the
spiritual,      ecclesiastical        and    temporal      affairs     of   the
church and not to deal with any public trust or trust
property.       There is no provision anywhere in the byelaw
authorising or empowering any person to hold any property
in trust. In the instant case, since there is no written
constitution       dealing      with    affairs     of   public     trust    or
trustees,      but    only    presupposes      albeit     tangentially       an
implied public trust, without conferring any authority to
any particular person either as a trustee or otherwise,
the legal position settled by the Constitution Bench of
the Apex Court in Chairman Madappa v. M.N.Mahanthadevaru
and others [(1966) 2 SCR 151 : AIR 1966 SC 878] cannot be
applied, firstly on the reason that all these sale deeds
were executed deviating from the scope and purpose of the
Episcopal      church     by   ostensibly      establishing        a  Medical
College     Hospital      with     the    objective      of   a   charitable
intent.      Secondly on the ground that there is no written
trust      deed     either       appointing       or     authorising        any
particular person as trustee or recognizing its powers
and authorities over its assets.
30.     The right to alienate the property shall not be
allowed      to   be    misconstrued        as   the    authority       or  be
regarded as an offshoot of the right to hold, possess and
administer the property. The expression “temporal” may
include the authority to hold, possess and administer the
property, but not to alienate the same.                     The expression
“corporeal” must be understood in relation to “temporal”
and “spiritual” right in contra.                   The word “corporeal”
stands for “that can be touched, physical, rather than
31. The      word    “corporeal”,        “corporal      hereditament”
and corporeal property are defined in P.Ramanatha Aiyar's
Advanced Law Lexicon 4th edition as follows:
“”corporeal” - Things which may
be   seen    and   touched;material       (as)
corporeal hereditaments
CORPOREAL       distinguished       from
CORPORAL.            Corporeal           means
possessing a body, that is tangible,
physical, material; corporeal means
relating to or affecting a body that
is    bodily     external.          Corporeal
denotes      the    nature     or    physical
existence      of    a    body,     corporeal
denotes     it    exterior     or    the    co-
ordination     of    it   with    some  other.
Hence      we     speak      of     'corporeal
hereditaments'         but      of    corporal
punishment.
consists     whole     or   substantial     and
permanent objects, all which may be
comprehended        under       the    general
denomination of land only.
material     object     in   contrast     to  a
right.         It     may    include      land,
affects the senses, and may be seen
and      handled        as      opposed      to
incorporeal      property,      which   cannot
be seen or handled and exist only in
contemplation.           Thus    a   house   is
corporeal,       but     the     annual    rent
payable      for     its     occupation      is
incorporeal.       Corporeal property is,
if     movable,      capable       of   manual
transfer:     immovable,      possession     of
it    may    be    delivered       up.      But
incorporeal      property      cannot   be   so
transferred,       but    some    other   means
must be adopted for its transfer, of
which      the     most      usual     is    an
Property     which    has   a  physical
existence, such as land or goods.”
32. The      right to transfer a property asseverated by
the church has not come up for consideration before the
Apex Court in         Varghese v. St.Peter's & Paul's Syrian
Orthodox      Church     (2017     3   KLT    261    (SC))    and    in    Most
Rev.P.M.A.Metropolitan and others v. Moran Mar Marthoma
and Another (1995 Supp (4) SCC 286). In that case, though
the Apex Court upheld Malankara Orthodox Church as an
Episcopal      church,     nothing     was    mentioned      suggesting      an
exclusion       of the application of Section 92 C.P.C. and
the relief of settling a scheme was not granted as there
was sufficient provision in their 1934 constitution for
the proper administration.               That does not however imply
that Section 92 C.P.C. stands excluded.
33. There        cannot       be     any      tinkering        of     the
constitution or byelaw regarding any public, charitable
or   religious      trust     either     constructive       or   express     in
substitution of         clause (d) to (g) of sub-section (1) of
Section 92 C.P.C., unless the institution is excluded by
the reason of its character as an endowment covered by
other parallel legislations viz. various Endowment Acts.
The observation made by the Apex court in Varghese's case
(supra) has to be considered so as to have a better
understanding        of   the    scope    and    impact     of    Section   92
C.P.C. even in the case of Episcopal institutions. The
relevant portions of the judgment run as follows:
We    are   also     not    impressed     by    the
submission that the court should direct framing
of  a   scheme   under   S.92   CPC   in  view   of  the
decision of the Privy Council in Mohd. Ismile
Ariff v. Ahmed Moolla Dowood ( 43 IA 127 (PC))
in which it has been held that the court has
the power to give direction and lay down rules
that may facilitate the work of management and
the appointment of trustees in the future.            The
primary duty of the Court is to consider the
interest of the general body of the public for
whose benefit the trust is created.             Reliance
has been placed by Shri S.Divan, learned senior
counsel    on   Acharya    Shri   Shreepati     Prasadji
Barot    Laxmidas    33   CWN   352    (PC)   that    the
institutional trust must be respected by the
sect   and   the  body   of   worshippers    for   whose
benefit it was set up to have the protection of
the court against their property being subject
to abuse speculation and waste.           Reliance was
also placed on Ram Dularey v. Ram Lal (AIR 1946
PC 34) in which it has been laid down thus:
“Even     if     there       were      an
inconsistency      in    that      judgment,
their Lordships would be very slow
to disturb the safeguards which are
provided in that scheme, if their
Lordships found it necessary to
reconsider the scheme:but in their
view the scheme has been definitely
approved by the Chief Court and they
see no reason for interfering with
the     judgment.       It     has     to   be
remembered that in these cases the
Court has a duty, once it finds that
it is a trust for public purposes to
consider     what    is     best     in    the
interests of the public.             That is
made     abundantly        clear     by    the
judgment of this Board, delivered by
Mr.Ameer Ali, in Mahomed Ismail
Ariff      and     others        v.      Ahmed
MoollaDawood and another ( 43 IA
In   our    opinion   there    is    no   necessity    of
framing any scheme under S.92.          There are adequate
provisions    and   safeguards    provided      in   S.92  for
managing the Malankara Church and its properties.
There is no dispute with the proposition laid down
in the aforesaid decisions but we find no such
necessity for framing such scheme under S.92 CPC in
view   of   detailed    wholesome     provisions      of  1934
34. Even going through the constitution of the Syro
Malabar     Church,      it   is   clear     that      it    evolved,   gained
acceptance and was           adopted canonically. It                is evident
from the preamble attached to their constitution. The
sources of the present code are stated to be many and
varied and there is ample recognition to “yogam” in its
triadic forms – potuyogam, desiyayogam and edavakayogam
as   the    system     of   administration        in    Section    2   of   its
preamble, which would prima facie satisfy the existence
of a system of administration in its triadic form of
three     yogams      apart      from     the     theory     of     apostolic
succession,       which     manifests         existence     of   an   implied
trust within the congregation presumably for managing and
dealing      with     “corporeal       right”       attached.      The     only
provision remotely connected with the right to alienate
or transfer any immovable property is included in title
XIV of Article 214, which is a restriction imposed and
not with respect to any “authority” given to any of its
apostolic custodians in the hierarchy.                      Article 214 is
extracted below for reference:
“Article      214.   Alienation       of   property
exceeding     an   amount  of    Rupees    ten  lakhs/one
million      (Rs.10,00,000)       up    to    twenty-five
crores/two        hundred      and      fifty     million
(Rs.25,00,00,000) is to be done only with the
consent of the finance council and the college
of eparchial consultors.        Alienation of property
that   exceeds    an  amount    of   Rupees   twenty-five
crores/two        hundred      and      fifty     million
(Rs.25,00,00,000)          upto        fifty       crores
(Rs.50,00,00,000) needs the consent of the major
archbishop who in turn needs the consent of the
permanent synod.       Alienation of property above
Rupees    fifty   crores   (Rs.50,00,00,000)      can   be
done only with the consent of major archbishop
who in turn needs the consent of the synod of
bishops.”
35. A mere perusal of Article 214 would clearly show
that it is an additional requirement to be complied with
for effectuating a valid sale or transfer of immovable
property. No where           it is stated with whom the ownership
or title of immovable property would exclusively vest
with, presumably for the simple reason that they are
bound by the general law regarding “corporeal” rights.
36. Establishment          of    a    Medical      College      or    any
educational institution though falling under the broad
spectrum of charity does not by itself qualify for any
diversion      of    funds    or    property      for      establishing       a
charitable institution without satisfaction of conditions
enumerated in Section 92(3)C.P.C., which are extracted
below for reference:
“(a) where the original purposes of the trust,
in whole or in part -
(ii) cannot be carried out at all, or
cannot    be  carried     out   according    to
the      directions       given      in     the
instrument     creating     the    trust    or,
where    there   is   no   such   instrument,
according to the spirit of the trust;
(b)    where the original purposes of the trust
provide a use for a part only of the property
available by virtue of the trust; or
(c)   where the property available by virtue of
the   trust   and   other   property     applicable     for
similar purposes can be more effectively used
in   conjunction     with,    and    to   that    end   can
suitably    be    made   applicable      to    any    other
purpose, regard being had to the           spirit of the
trust and its applicability to common purposes;
(d)where the original purposes in whole or in
part, were laid down by reference to an area
which then was, but has since ceased to be, a
unit for such purposes; or
(e)   where the original purposes, in whole or
in part, have, since they were laid            down -
(I)   been   adequately     provided    for    by
other means, or
(II) ceased,      as    being     useless      or
harmful to the community, or
(IV) ceased in any other way to provide
a   suitable    and  effective      method     of
using the property available by virtue
of the trust, regard being had to the
spirit of the trust.”
37. The abovesaid requirement has to be satisfied so
as to divert any fund or property for establishing or
maintaining       any    educational       institution       or   charitable
organization deviating from the purpose for which the
church was consecrated. This question had never come up
before         the       Apex        Court         either        in        Most
Rev.P.M.A.Metropolitan's case, in Varghese's case or in
Chairman, Madappa's case (supra). Hence, the requirement
to    be   complied      with     under     Section     92(3)     C.P.C.     is
independent in its nature, though it was incorporated by
way of sub-section(3) and cannot be avoided.
38. This      Court     in    Major    Archbishop       Angamaly      and
Others v. P.A.Lalan Tharakan and Others(2016(3) KHC 359 =
2016(2)     KLT    791)    has    not    gone    into    the    question     of
creation of a public religious trust or endowment, but
has only considered the relevant aspect of spiritual and
temporal affairs among the Roman Catholics. The decision
arrived at by the Madras High Court in Muthusamier and
others v. Sree Sree Methanithi                    Swamiyar Avergal and
ILR (1915) 38 Mad 356 : (1913) 25 Mad LJ 393] is not
applicable in the instant case as what was considered in
that decision is with respect to the “the properties
belonging      to   an    “English     Bishop”      (a   corporation       sole
under the English Law) “including his savings from the
revenue      of     the     benefic,       devolve      upon     his     legal
representatives or heirs” and not with respect to the
property held by the church.
39. Hence, the petitioner, who has sold the property
without the compliance of Section 92 and 92(3) C.P.C.
cannot      seek     shelter      under      the     umbrella      of    their
constitution (byelaw) or the provisions contained in the
Canon law. The various sale deeds executed unilaterally
and arbitrarily transgressing Section 92 and 92(3) C.P.C.
would     render    his    stand     invalid     and    untenable      at   the
option of any of the parishioners to whom no notice was
given and no consent was obtained, since the property
sold is not a property of place of worship or religious
or spiritual observances.               There is a clear breach of
trust by the petitioner in the execution of                       sale deeds
in   favour      of   various      persons.     The    persons,      who    had
purchased the property, cannot take sanctuary pleading
ignorance of law when they had opted to purchase the said
40. The criminal conspiracy between the petitioner
in connivance with the cohorts and those who purchased
the property further becomes more starkly evident from
the fact that there is no semblance of any transparency
in the alleged sales, though pertains to the property of
church. The sale deeds were executed without conducting a
public     auction      or    public      sale    with     notice     to    all
concerned including the parishioners and those intending
to purchase the property and thereby curtailed the right
to derive       maximum consideration for the coffers of the
church      solely for the purpose of giving the property to
certain      selected       persons       at    a    throw      away     price
capriciously        and    at    the    whims     and    fancies      of    the
petitioner.         This court can take judicial notice with
respect to the prevailing land value and market value of
prime lands of vantage points having road frontage and
national highway direct access. This would certainly show
the    extent     of    criminal      conspiracy       hatched      with    the
purchasers of the property.
41. Yet another fact was also brought to the notice
of this court so as to show the criminal conspiracy in
one particular sale deed (No.3373/1/2016 Annexure A1 in
Crl.M.C.No.8936/2019)           wherein      the   entire     consideration
Lakhs Seventy thousand)stated to be received by virtue of
transfer       through       a     bank     account,        but     no     such
consideration        was   passed     or    tendered     on    the    date   of
execution and registration of the said sale deed.                           But
the amounts were given in piecemeal, that too, when it
was taken up by the complainant.
42. Another interesting fact also came to the notice
of this court with respect to the property obtained under
a   settlement       No.4950      dated     21.9.2007(Annexure          A1   in
Crl.M.C.No.8936/2019).            The     settlement       deed      is    seen
executed by a Religious Congregation of Brothers of the
Kara, Karukutty village, Aluva Taluk, represented by its
duly constituted Power of Attorney Holder, Fr.Sebastian
Vadakumpadan, as per General Power of Attorney registered
as No.177 of 2006 in Book IV Volume 132 at pages 21 and
22 of the Sreemoolanagaram Sub Registry. It seems to be
strange      and    unfortunately        odd    that     the   document      of
acquisition       of    title    over    the    property     has    not    been
mentioned or even hinted anywhere in the document and was
kept in total darkness.               On the other hand, they have
given     a declaration that the property is free from all
encumbrances and liabilities and the settler has full and
absolute title and possession of the property without
divulging the acquisition of right, title or interest
over the property.           A title or ownership over a property
can be obtained either (1) by voluntary action of the
owners (2) by virtue of decrees of civil court or by
revenue      sales     or    (3)   by    succession.       The    very     same
requirement is mentioned under Section 2 of Transfer of
Registry Rules, 1966 for effecting transfer of title in
revenue Registry.          But nothing has been mentioned in the
settlement         deed       of    the      year       2007,      how      the
settler/executant acquired title or ownership over the
property      either      by   means     of   a    decree     of    court    or
voluntary      action     of    its    owners     such    as    sale,    gift,
settlement, will etc. or by succession.                   A declaration to
the    effect     that     they    have     full    absolute      title     and
possession over the property is not sufficient to create
any title or ownership of the property.                     Suppression of
material facts regarding the title and interest over the
property hence looms large and causes a reasonable doubt
whether it is a property owned by the public or the
Government        or    it     is         a    puramboke       land     or    a
no-man's land. It raises a reasonable doubt as to whether
it is the property of Government or a puramboke land and
whether the said settlement deed was created with the aim
to manipulate a document of title over the Government
land. If it is          a property owned by the public at large
or the government or             a puramboke land, it would cause
very serious legal repercussions especially, when there
are provisions in the Land Conservancy Act. All the sale
deeds were executed by the petitioner based on a self
declared      title     under      the    abovesaid       settlement       deed
without disclosing how right, title or interest over the
property has been acquired. Even during the course of
argument, the learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner
Sri.George       Poonthottam        even    went     to    the    extent    of
advancing      an    argument      that    it   was    not    the    property
belonged to the settler. There would arise yet another
doubt whether the said religious congregation is within
the    religious       supremacy       of   the     petitioner       -   Major
Archbishop and the legal fiction in the execution of a
settlement      deed     in   his    favour,     when    the    property    is
otherwise       vested      in    him,     based      on    the     apostolic
succession or held by him in trust. In the document, the
legal status of settler has not been mentioned. It is not
mentioned anywhere in the document whether the property
was mutated in the name of the executant of that document
and whether they were paying basic tax in respect of the
property.        In short, the settlement deed No.4950 dated
21/09/2007        prima     facie     appears      to    be    executed     to
perpetuate encroachment over the Government or puramboke
land and to manipulate title over it.                      It is also not
permissible to accord sanctity to the encroachment by
assigning re-survey number in the name of the encroacher.
43. It is quite impermissible and illegitimate to
convert a property of State Government or puramboke land
or public land to a private property based on possession
during the course of re-survey. Earlier,this court in
Cheriyanad Grama Panchayath v. State of Kerala and Others
(2019 (5) KHC 699) had gone into the said question and
the power of re-survey authorities to refix or fix any
boundary      of   landed      property     based     on    possession      and
settled the legal position             as follows:
“It is neither permissible nor advisable for
the   resurvey    authorities    to  refix    the   boundary
line   of   particular    survey    under   the    guise  of
resurvey based on possession.          No such power can
be vested with the resurvey authority and hence
what   is   done   by  them   by  refixing    the   boundary
based   on   possession    can   only   be  considered    as
without any authority or exceeding the authority
vested with them.        The resurvey authority cannot
exercise the jurisdiction of a Civil Court to fix
any boundary based on possession.           The possession
is really a matter to be decided by a Civil Court.
The power vested with the survey authority under
Section 9 and Section 10 of the Act is relating to
record an undisputed boundary or to determine any
dispute of boundary with reasons.”
44.Hence it requires a proper and detailed enquiry
by the State Government and the investigating agencies
thereunder and this court               cannot shut its eyes to the
abovesaid      facts,     which     could     even     be   the   tip   of   an
iceberg. Special mention is required at this juncture to
Section     7    of   the    Land    Conservancy         Act   dealing     with
punishment for unauthorisedly occupying the property of
the Government, which is extracted below:
“7.     Punishment       for     unauthorisedly
occupying    land   which     is   the   property   of
Government.—        Notwithstanding           anything
contained in this Act,—
(a) whoever with the intention of using or
holding any land which is the property of
Government, whether poramboke or not, for any
non-Governmental     purpose,     unlawfully    enters
or  occupies    such   land    shall   be   punishable
with imprisonment of either description for a
term which shall not be less than three years
but which may extend to five years and shall
also be liable to pay a fine which shall not
be less than fifty thousand rupees, but which
may extend to two lakhs rupees:
Provided that a person who is occupying any
Government land not exceeding 5 cents as on
the date of commencement of this Act and is
not having any other land in his name or in
the name of his family members and is having
any of the following documents in order to
prove that he was residing therein, namely,
record   of   rights   or   a   ration    card  or  an
electoral identity card issued in the address
of   such   Government     land   which   he   is   so
occupying    or   a   proceeding    assigning   house
number to a building in such property or an
electric connection or a water connection,
issued by the competent authorities of the
Government     or    the   Local   Self   Government
Institutions      or   the    respective   statutory
bodies, as the case may be, shall not be
considered as an unlawful occupant for the
purpose of imposing punishment;
(b)   whoever,    for   the   purpose  of  effecting
transfer of any land which is the property of
Government for consideration or otherwise—
(i)   commits     the    offence   of   cheating    by
fraudulently        or      dishonestly      creating
(ii) makes or creates any forged document in
support of any claim or title to such land
shall    be  punishable      with  imprisonment     of
either description for a term which shall not
be less than five years but which may extend
to seven years and shall also be liable to
pay a fine which shall not be less than fifty
thousand rupees, but which may extend to two
(c) Whoever being an officer entrusted with
the    responsibility      of   reporting    unlawful
occupation of land which is the property of
Government or of initiating action to remove
such unauthorised occupation fails to report
or to initiate action to remove such unlawful
occupation,       shall     be    punishable      with
imprisonment of either description for a term
which shall not be less than three years but
which may extend to five years and shall also
be liable to pay a fine which shall not be
less than fifty thousand rupees, but which
may extend to two lakhs rupees;
(d) Whoever erects or causes to erect any
wall, fence or building or puts up or causes
to   put   up   any    overhanging    structure     or
projection,     whether     on   a    temporary     or
permanent    basis    in  contravention     of   sub-
section (2) of section 5, shall be punishable
with imprisonment of either description for a
term which shall not be less than one year
but which may extend to two years and shall
also be liable to pay a fine which shall not
be less than ten thousand rupees, but which
may extend to twenty five thousand rupees and
in the case of a continuing contravention,
such additional fine which may extend to five
hundred rupees for each day during which the
contravention continues after conviction for
the first such contravention.”
(emphasis supplied)
45. The earlier provision before its amendment by
Act 29 of 2009 w.e.f 08/11/2008 is as follows:
“7.    Punishment     for     unauthorisdely
occupying    land   which   is  the   property    of
Government (1) Whoever occupies a land which
is  the property      of Government,     whether a
poramboke or not,contrary to section 5 shall
be liable to pay-
(a) such fine not exceeding two hundred
(b)    in   the    case     of   a    continuing
contravention      such      additional     fine     not
exceeding two hundred rupees for every day
during    which   such    contravention      continues
after fine has been imposed for the first
such contravention as may be imposed by the
Provided that a person unauthorisedly
occupying a land which is available for
assignment     under     the    Kerala    Government
Land Assignment Act, 1960, shall not be
liable to pay any fine under sub-section
(i)    he is    eligible under the rules
made under that Act for assignment of
such land without auction; and
(ii) he applies under those rules for
the assignment of such land in his
favour,    either     on   registry     or   on
lease.
(2)   Without    prejudice     to   any   liability
under     sub-section(1),       any    person    who
erects or causes to erect any wall,fence
or building or puts up or causes to put
up     any     overhanging         structure       or
projection     (whether     on   a   temporary     or
permanent basis) in contravention of sub-
section(2) of section 5 shall be liable,
on   conviction     by    a  magistrate,      to   be
punished with fine which may extent to
two hundred rupees and in the case of a
continuing      contravention,        with     an
additional fine which may extent to two
hundred rupees for every day during which
such     contravention       continues      after
conviction       for      the     first      such
Explanation– A tenant unauthorisedly
holding over after the expiry of his term
of lease is liable to a fine under this
section.”
46. To sum up, going by the earlier provision, it
would appear that anyone can encroach the Government land
at the risk of Rs.200/-.             This would prima facie show the
lack of proper protective measure by way of legislation
against encroachment over Government land. Only by way of
Act 29 of 2009, stringent provisions were incorporated
under Section 7 to deal with unauthorised occupants over
the Government land.
47. It      was     submitted       that     the     above     question
regarding      nature      of   the    property,       whether      it   is   a
Government land or not is not within the scope of this
court under Section 482 Cr.P.C. and at the most it would
come      under     the     purview       of    Article       226     of    the
Constitution.        I   am   afraid     Section     482    Cr.P.C.     though
incorporated under Code of Criminal Procedure, by its
nature     is    an   independent       provision      dealing      with    the
inherent      power     of    the    High    Court     within     the    three
contours of that section namely, to give effect to any
order under the         Code or to prevent abuse of the process
of any Court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice.
When a glaring illegality has come to the notice, it
would be remiss on the part of court to remain a silent
spectator        simply      because       nobody      has      raised      the
manipulation       by   initiating       legal    proceedings       and    this
court can exercise the plenary powers under Section 482
Cr.P.C., lest it would perpetuate an illegality.                            The
scope of Section 482 Cr.P.C. in that behalf                    was taken up
and settled by the             High Court of Rajasthan in Likhama
Ram v. State of Rajasthan [1998 Cr LJ 2635 (Raj].                           The
Apex Court in Popular Muthiah v. State of represented by
Inspector of Police (2006(6) SCALE 417) had settled the
legal position that the power under Section 482 Cr.P.C.
can    be   exercised       even    suo    motu    in    the    interest     of
justice, for which no formal application is required. It
acts 'ex debito justitiae'.                It can, thus, do real and
substantial justice for which alone it exists.                           It is
true that no one came up with any such allegation either
under     Article      226    of   the     Constitution       or    otherwise
pertaining        to    large      scale      encroachment         over     the
Government      land    by    organized      encroachers.       Even    proper
protective measures were not taken by way of legislation
prior to the amendment of Land Conservancy Act.
48. If it is pertaining to the Government property
as defined under Section 3 or a puramboke land as defined
under Section 4 of the Act, necessarily, the offence of
cheating and creation of forged document made mentioned
in   clause     (b)    of   Section      7   would    come    into    effect,
besides the offence under the said section as against the
officers, who failed to report unlawful occupation of
land.     The    non-mention       of   title     or   interest,       or   its
acquisition       or    document      of    acquisition       of    title    or
interest      over the property covered by the said document
raises     a   reasonable       doubt     as   to    the   nature      of   the
property and hence the inherent power under Section 482
Cr.P.C. can be exercised to secure the ends of justice,
when it is not dealt with under the provisions of the law
by the Government or the competent authority thereof.
Hence, it is ordered that the Government shall conduct an
investigation into the matter through its investigating
agencies so as to satisfy itself whether the settlement
deed of the year 2007 was executed with respect to any
Government land or puramboke land and whether it was a
Government land or a puramboke land at any point of time
and    also    the    non-action/inaction          on   the    part    of   the
concerned officials, who are bound by the provisions of
law including Land Conservancy Act, for which, a team of
officers possessing adequate knowledge in the Civil and
Criminal Laws has to be selected.
49. From the discussion, the Criminal Miscellaneous
Cases filed by the petitioners under Section 482 Cr.P.C.
deserve only        dismissal.
All the Crl.M.Cs. are dismissed with the abovesaid
directions to the first respondent-State Government.                        For
compliance report, post on 25/10/2021.
ANNEXURE R2(A)            TRUE COPY OF THE ABOVE DOCUMENT i.e.. SALE
ANNEXURE R2(B)            TRUE COPY OF DOCUMENT i.e. SALE DEED