1. This matter is taken up by hybrid mode.
2. Heard learned counsel for the Petitioner and
learned Counsel for the Opposite Parties.
3. The petitioner has filed this application challenging
the legality and propriety of order passed by O.P.
No.2 vide No.533/PSC, dated 17.01.2022 having
rejected the candidatures of the petitioner who had
applied for the post of Assistant Professor, Geology
in University with unreasonable grounds.
4. Shorn of unnecessary details, the substratum of
the matter presented before this court remain that
the Odisha Public Service Commission (herein
after called "OPSC") made an advertisement vide
No.08/ 2020-21 for recruitment to the post of
Assistant   Professor   in   different  state    public
universities under the administrative control of the
Higher      Education      Department     In     such
advertisement clause-4 has prescribed educational
qualification for the aforesaid posts. The petitioner
having gone through details of advertisement and
understand the same filled up application in online
portal of OPSC. In his educational qualification he
clearly mentioned that he has M.Sc. and Ph.D dual
degree    passed    out  from    IIT, Bombay.      His
application form was accepted and the petitioner
was called for document verification on the basis of
his educational qualification and rules of selection
prescribed by the OPSC. The said verification of
original documents was done vide notice No.
6974/ PSC dated 29.09.2021. The petitioner has
dual degree (M.Sc. & PhD) and one certificate
issued by the institute without segregating marks
of M.Sc and PhD, so he uploaded the same. The
same was accepted and the petitioner was called
for interview, but at the time of verification his
candidature was rejected without giving him an
opportunity to clarify his standpoint in respect of
his educational qualification.
5. Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that
after the rejection notice was published, the
petitioner approached and tried to convince the
O.P. No.2 regarding dual degree qualification and
segregation of marks as per rule of the institute.
However, the O.P. No.2 did not consider the
certificate nor did they allow the petitioner for
interview. There was no rule prescribed to provide
certificate        for   segregation      of   marks   where
candidates possesses dual degree and also no
chance         to    upload     such.      Furthermore,     no
opportunity has been given to the petitioner to
clarify his stand in respect of dual degree which
violates principle of natural justice. There is no
suppression           of   facts      regarding  educational
certificate and the dual degree also approved by
the OPSC for selection of the aforesaid post.
6. Indisputably, in the case at hand, this Court is of
the opinion that in the matters of appointment, the
rules provided by the appointing committee has to
be strictly followed. In the present case, OPSC has
not provided any instructions for candidates
holding dual degrees. Even though this can be
considered as a distinctive case, however it is
arbitrary to out-rightly reject the candidature of
the petitioner.
7. The      appointment         of candidates holding        dual
degrees has been acknowledged by several High
Courts including Madras High Court in the case of
The Secretary vs The State Of Tamil Nadu1:
W.P.(MD)No.12639 of 2016.
“20. Hence, this Court is able to see in this
case the fate of a poor teacher to suffer an
order of rejection of approval only on
account of delay in considering the
proposal for approval for no bona fide
reasons. The teacher was eligible at the
time of her appointment as several
appointments were approved at the time of
her appointment and none of them with
dual degree and got appointment earlier
were disturbed. The teacher was never at
fault. This Court is of the view that the
teacher concerned who was in service for
more than six years without getting salary
need not be disturbed after this length of
time on the basis of the eligibility, due to
changed circumstances later in point of
time. Added feature in this case is the
admitted position that the appointment of a
teacher with dual degree which was prior
to the judgment of this Court in
Thirnavukarasu's case was not disturbed
in any other case by cancelling the
appointment or by terminating the service.
The teacher's eligibility should also be
considered by applying the equitable
principles because of the facts that the
delay in approval was for on valid reason
and that the teacher concerned was in
service for several years.”
8. To deal the issue involved in the present case it
would be necessary to consider very important
aspects in the interest of justice, rule of law and in
the greater interest of public, when any particular
process or selection or appointment has suffered
from       legal   and    procedural       improprieties,
deficiencies, irregularities or illegalities. The settled
legal proposition is that principles of natural
justice are in built in the statutory rules and
require      observance   unless    the     same    stand
excluded by the rules itself. The adjudicating
authority must be impartial and without any
interest or bias of any type; where the Adjudication
Authority is exercising judicial or quasi-judicial
power, the order must be made by that authority
and that power cannot be delegated or sub-
delegated to any other offices the adjudicating
authority must give full opportunity to the affected
person to produce all the relevant evidence in
9. In K.L. Tripathi v. State Bank of India2, the
Supreme Court observed as under:-
"It is not possible to lay down rigid rules,
as to when the principles of natural justice
are to apply, nor as to their scope and
extent....there must also have been some
real prejudice to the complainant; there is
no such thing as a merely technical
infringement of natural justice. The
requirement of natural justice must depend
on the facts and circumstances of the case,
the nature of the enquiry, the rules under
which the Tribunal is, acting, the subject
matter to be dealt with, and so on so forth."
10. The Supreme Court has reiterated, time and
again, that the doctrine of natural justice cannot
be imprisoned within the strait-jacket or rigid
formula and its application would depend on the
scheme and policy of the statute and relevant
circumstances involved in a particular case. In the
present case, considering the lack of provisions
regarding the candidature or individuals holding
dual degrees, the petitioner should have been
provided a hearing to clarify his standpoint
regarding the segregation of marks.
11. Having   considered    the     matter in   aforesaid
perspective and guided by the precedents cited
hereinabove, this Court allows the petition. It is,
however, made clear at this stage that the clock
cannot be reversed as the selection process has
already been over. However, it is imperative that
the OPSC should clearly mention the centrality of
the issue involved herein in clearer terms so that
many meritorious candidates who are similarly
placed with the present petitioners should not be
deprived of the opportunity of participating in the
selection of process.
12. The Writ Petition is, accordingly, disposed of in
terms of the above directions. There shall be no
order as to costs.
13. Urgent certified copy of this order be granted on
proper application.