This criminal appeal has been filed against the judgment of
conviction dated 23.04.2021 passed in Spl.C.C.No.96 of 2019 on the file of
the learned Sessions Judge, Special Court for Exclusive Trial of Cases
2     The respondent police registered a case in Cr.No.08 of 2019
against the appellant for the offence under Sections 9(m), 9(n) r/w 10, 11(i)
r/w 12 of Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 (in short
“the POCSO Act). After completing investigation, the respondent police
laid a charge sheet before the Magalir Neethimandram (Mahila Court),
Coimbatore, which was taken on file in Spl.C.C.No.104 of 2049 and
subsequently the case was transferred to the learned Sessions Judge, Special
Court for Exclusive Trial of Cases under POCSO Act, Coimbatore. The
learned Sessions Judge taken the case on file in Spl.C.C.No.96 of 2019 and
after hearing both the accused and the prosecution and after perusing the
records, since there is prima facie case, framed charges against the
appellant/accused for the offence under Section 9(m), 9(n) punishable under
Section 10 and 11(i) punishable under Section 12 of the POCSO Act.
3      Before the trial Court, in order to substantiate the charges,
prosecution has examined as many as 13 witnesses as P.Ws.1 to 15 and
Exs.P1 to P11 were marked and no material object was exhibited. After
completing examination of prosecution witnesses, when incriminating
circumstances culled out from the evidence of prosecution witnesses were
put before the accused by questioning under Section 313 Cr.P.C., he denied
the same as false and pleaded not guilty. On the side of the defence, D.Ws.1
to 5 were examined and Exs.D1 to D7 were marked besides one Court
document as Ex.C1.
4      The learned Sessions Judge, on completion of trial and hearing
arguments advanced on either side, by judgment dated 23.04.2021 convicted
the appellant/accused and sentenced him to undergo rigorous imprisonment
for a period of seven years with fine of Rs.5,000/-, in default, to undergo
rigorous imprisonment for a period of one year for the offence under
Section 9(m), 9(n) punishable under Section 10 of the POCSO Act and
sentenced him to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of three years
with fine of Rs.5,000/-, in default to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a
period of one year for the offence under Section 11(i) punishable under
Section 12 of POCSO Act and further ordered compensation of
Rs.2,00,000/- for the victim girl. Aggrieved against the said judgment of
conviction and sentence, the accused has preferred this criminal appeal.
5     The learned counsel appearing for the appellant/accused would
submit that there are many contradictions in the evidence of P.W.2 the
victim girl and there is inordinate delay in filing the complaint and the same
has not been explained by the prosecution and hence unexplained delay is
fatal to the case of the prosecution. The victim girl has not stated any
specific dates while recording statement under Section 164 of Cr.P.C. but
during examination as witness before the Court, she has mentioned the
occurrence date as 23.05.2019 to 25.05.2019 and therefore there are
material contradictions and improvements, which would affect the case of
the prosecution. There is no independent witness to corroborate the alleged
occurrence as projected by the prosecution. Even though, the place, where
the occurrence is said to have taken place is a very busy area, prosecution
has failed to examine any independent witness and all the witnesses are
interested witnesses. The victim girl in her evidence stated that she used the
call the appellant as “Appa”, whereas both the victim girl and the appellant
are not belongs to the same community, which creates doubt and the
medical evidence also does not support the case of the prosecution.
5.1   The learned counsel further vehemently contended that the
appellant was not in the place of occurrence on the dates, on which the
alleged occurrence said to have taken place. The appellant is a Driver and
having own vehicle and through the same he used to carry persons to one
place to another place like wise one Murugan, who was examined as D.W.1
approached the appellant to carry him and his relatives from Valparai to
Palani to see his father, who was in serious condition. Therefore, on
23.05.2019, the appellant took D.W.1 and 10 others to Palani and they all
stayed there on the next day also i.e. 24.05.2019, since the said Murugan's
father died. After attending the funeral ceremony, the appellant returned to
Valparai in the afternoon of 25.05.2019. In order to prove the defence of
plea of alibi, D.Ws.1 to 5 were examined and the witnesses have
categorically stated that on 23.05.2019 the appellant took them to Palani to
see the father of D.W.1 and they attended the funeral ceremony also and
returned only in the afternoon of 25.05.2019. Therefore, the alleged
occurrence could not have taken place as projected by the prosecution.
Therefore, the appellant has clearly established his plea of alibi and the trial
Court without appreciating the same, has erroneously convicted the
appellant by drawing presumption under Section 29 of the POCSO Act.
5.2    The learned counsel further contended that the trial Court erred
in not appreciating the fact that the prosecution has miserably failed to
prove the allegation of the sexual assault on the victim child. It is settled
proposition of law that prosecution should prove its case beyond all
reasonable doubts and there is presumption under Section 29 of POCSO
Act, which is rebuttable. When prosecution has proved its case beyond all
reasonable doubt thereafter only the onus will shift on the accused and the
accused can establish his defence through preponderance of probabilities. In
this case, the prosecution has failed to prove its case beyond all reasonable
doubts and the appellant/accused has examined D.Ws.1 to 5 to establish his
defence. The trial Court has failed to appreciate the evidence let in by the
appellant and defence taken by him and erroneously convicted the appellant
based on the presumption under Section 29 of the POCSO Act and
sympathy. Hence the judgment of conviction and sentence passed by the
trial Court warrants interference of this Court.
6      The learned Government Advocate (Crl.Side) appearing for the
respondent police would submit that during the relevant point of time in the
year 2019, the victim girl was studying 5th standard and in the month of
May, during summer holidays, the parents of the victim went outside for job
and the victim was alone in the house. At that time, the appellant went there
and called the victim child and the victim child refused to go with him and
thereafter on the next day also the appellant went there in nude and called
the victim child and when the victim child shouted the appellant ran away.
Thereafter on 25.05.2019 the appellant entered into the house of the victim
child called the victim child by pulling her hand by showing his private
parts and when the victim raised alarm by shouting, the appellant/accused
ran away from the house. Thereafter, when P.W.1 the mother of the victim
child came, P.W.2 the victim narrated the entire incidents and P.W.1
informed the same to P.W.3 father of the victim child. On hearing the same
P.W.3 along with P.W.1 and P.W.2 went to the house of the appellant and
enquired, for which the appellant behaved rudely and hence thereafter only
complaint was lodged against the appellant.
6.1   Even though, the appellant took a plea of alibi, it has not been
substantiated through any documentary proof and the witnesses examined
by the appellant on his side are all very close to him and in order to
safeguard the appellant, they all deposed before the Court supporting the
appellant in a parrot version. The victim girl, who was aged about 11 years
at the time of occurrence, was examined as P.W.2 and she has clearly
narrated the incident and the sexual assault committed by the appellant on
her, which offence comes under Section 9(m), 9(n) punishable under
Section 10 of the POCSO Act and also Section 11(i) punishable under
Section 12 of the POCSO Act.
6.2    Further, it is not the case of prosecution that the appellant had
committed aggravated penetrative sexual assault and the victim had
sustained injuries and hence it is not necessary for the prosecution to prove
its case with the support of the medical evidence. Prosecution has proved its
case beyond all reasonable doubt by examining the witnesses P.W.1 to
P.W.15 and once prosecution established its initial burden, presumption
under Section 29 and 30 of the POCSO Act would come into play and it is
for the appellant/accused to rebut the same. In this case the
appellant/accused has failed to rebut the same by producing a valid
documentary proof. Hence trial Court has rightly framed the charges and
convicted the appellant, which does not call for any interference of this
7      Heard the learned counsel for the appellant and the learned
Government Advocate (Crl.Side) appearing for respondent police and
perused the materials available on record.
8      Case of the prosecution is that the victim girl P.W.2, who was
aged about 11 years and was studying 5th standard and she was residing with
her parents P.Ws.1 & 3. P.W.2. The appellant/accused was residing near the
victim girl's house and was running a Travels and also owned a vehicle
namely Tavera Car and he used to drive the same for rent. The victim girl
used to call him as “Appa”. On 23.05.2019 at 11.00 a.m. when the victim
girl was alone in her house, the appellant/accused with an devil intend to
commit sexual offence on her, called the victim child to come to a vacant
place near her house and since the victim shouted, the appellant ran away
from the place. Thereafter on 25.05.2019, when the victim girl was alone in
her house, the appellant entered into the house and called her by pulling her
hand forcibly and by showing his private parts and since the victim child
raised alarm, the appellant ran away from the place. Therefore the present
case was registered against the appellant for the offence under the POCSO
9      This Court, being an Appellate Court, is a final Court of fact
finding, which has to necessarily re-appreciate the entire evidence and give
an independent finding. Accordingly, this Court has re-appreciated the
entire oral and documentary evidence produced before this Court.
10     The victim girl, who was examined as P.W.2 has clearly
spoken about the offence committed by the appellant, which corroborated
with the evidence of P.Ws.1 and 3, who are mother and father of the victim
child. The victim girl, while producing before the Magistrate for recording
statement under Section 164 of Cr.P.C. has clearly narrated the entire
incident as stated in the complaint and the statement is marked as Ex.P.3.
Ex.P2 is the Birth Certificate of the victim child and as per Ex.P2 age of the
victim child at the time of occurrence is 11 years and hence the victim is a
child comes under the definition of 2(1)(d) of the POCSO Act. The victim
child, while recording the statement under Section 164 of Cr.P.C. even
though has not stated any dates, has stated the chain of occurrence clearly
that one day when she was alone in the house, the appellant came and called
her and due to fear she refused to go and next day also he came in nude and
called her and thereafter again he came in nude and pulled her hand.
Further, when the victim girl was produced before the Doctor/P.W.10, she
has clearly stated that one known person sexually assaulted her and the
Doctor also clearly mentioned the same in the Accident Register/Ex.P10 and
while examining before the Court also the victim girl reiterated the same.
Therefore, in all the stages the victim girl has clearly narrated the entire
events and the offence committed by the appellant.
11    It is seen that prosecution has proved the fact that the appellant
is a neighbour of the victim child and also very close to the family of the
victim child. P.Ws.1 to 3 have categorically deposed before the Court
below that the accused has committed the sexual offence as stated by the
victim child and when P.Ws.1 and 3 questioned the same, the
appellant/accused behaved in a rude manner and hence complaint has been
lodged against the appellant.
12     The main defence taken by the appellant/accused is plea of
alibi and he also examined D.Ws.1 to 5 to substantiate his plea of alibi. But,
it is seen that the appellant has failed to produce any valid documentary
proof to prove his defence. Even though he has stated that on 23.05.2019 he
went to Palani and on 25.05.2019 only he returned to Valparai, the appellant
has failed to produce any valid trip sheet or any entry in Check Post, located
between Valparai and Palani. Therefore, if at all the appellant/accused was
not in Valparai at the relevant point of time, he should have produced any
valid documentary proof to sustain his defence, since he took a specific
defence of plea of alibi and he failed to do the same. Therefore, the defence
of plea of alibi taken by the appellant/accused is not acceptable, since the
same is not proved in the manner known to law.
13     The learned counsel also contended that no independent
witness has been examined to corroborate the evidence of the victim child
and also medical evidence does not support the case of the prosecution. In a
cases of this nature, we cannot expect any eye witness or independent
witness. The culprit will take a chance of the loneliness of the child and will
commit the offence by trying to exploit the innocence of age of the children.
It is settled proposition of law that when the evidence of prosecutrix is
cogent, consistent and trust worthy and inspires confidence of the Court,
conviction can be recorded solely based on the evidence of the victim,
unless there is a reason to discord or disbelieve the evidence of the sole
witness. The contention of the learned counsel for the appellant that the
victim stated that she used to call the appellant as “Appa”, but both are not
belongs to the same community is not acceptable, since normally in the
Village, people used to call all the known persons by some relation.
Therefore it is not necessary that the victim and the appellant should
belongs to the same community.
14     In the present case on hand, there is no eye witness except the
victim child, who was 11 years at the time of occurrence and she has clearly
spoken about the incident and the manner in which the offence committed
by the appellant, which is cogent, consistent and trustworthy and this Court
does not finds any reason to disbelieve or discord the evidence of the victim
child. In the absence of any compelled circumstances to disbelieve the
evidence of the victim, this Court finds that the evidence of the victim child
inspires the confidence of the Court. On a careful reading of the evidence of
the victim child, this Court finds no reason to disbelieve the same. On
reading of the entire materials, this Court is of the view that the prosecution
has proved its case beyond all reasonable doubt. Further there is no injury
on the body of the victim child and no penetrative sexual assault and
therefore the contention that the medical evidence does not support the case
of the prosecution is not acceptable.
15     On a combined reading of evidence of P.Ws.1 to 10 and Exs.P1
to P3 and P10, this Court is of the considered view that prosecution has
proved its case beyond all reasonable doubt and the accused has failed to
rebut the presumption under Section 29 and 30 of the POCSO Act. Trial
Court has rightly appreciated the evidence of prosecution and come to the
conclusion that the appellant/accused committed offence under Section
9(m), 9(n) punishable under Section 10 and Section 11(i) punishable under
Section 12 of the POCSO Act.
16     In fine, this Court come to the conclusion that there is no merit
in the appeal and there is no sound reason to interfere with the judgment of
conviction and sentence. Accordingly, this criminal appeal is dismissed. The
trial Court is directed to secure the appellant/accused to serve remaining
period of imprisonment, if any. Consequently connected miscellaneous
petition is closed.
1. The Sessions Judge, Special Court for Exclusive trial of
Cases under the POCSO Act, Coimbatore.
3. The Public Prosecutor, High Court of Madras.