Appellants have assailed the judgement and order dated 07.05.2018
and 08.05.2018 passed by the learned Additional District and Sessions
Judge, Fast Track Court, Bankura in Sessions Trial No. 08(01)2017 arising
out of Sessions Case No. 01(11)2016 convicting the appellants for
commission of offence punishable under Sections 498A/304B of the Indian
Penal Code and sentencing them to suffer rigorous imprisonment for ten
years for the offence punishable under Section 304B of the Indian Penal
Code and to suffer simple imprisonment for one year and to pay fine of
Rs.1,000/- each, in default, of payment of fine, to suffer simple
imprisonment for three months more for the offence punishable under
Section 498A of the Indian Penal Code; both the sentences to run
Barely 72 days after her marriage to Raju Mitra (appellant No. 1)
Ganga was compelled to commit suicide at her matrimonial house. At the
time of marriage, as per demand of the appellants, Rs.20,000/- out of
Rs.35,000/- had been given along with gold ornaments as dowry. A sum of
Rs.15,000/- was outstanding. About a month after the marriage over
demands of outstanding dowry appellants being the husband, father-in-law
and mother-in-law of the housewife subjected her to mental and physical
torture. Two days prior to the incident on 22.02.2016 at 12 noon Ganga
made a frantic phone call to her father complaining the appellants were
beating her. Her father, Asim Dutta, rushed to the matrimonial home and
requested the appellants not to torture his daughter. On the next day, he
returned home. In the evening of that day Ganga again complained of
torture over demand of dowry. On 24.02.2016, Raju, husband of Ganga,
informed her father that his daughter had passed away. He rushed to her
matrimonial home and was informed that Ganga had been taken to
Ramsagar hospital. At the hospital, he noted marks of injuries on the body
of her daughter.    He lodged complaint against the appellants and one
Soumen Mitra @ Gaju (brother-in-law of the deceased) alleging commission
of offences punishable under Section 498A/304B/34 of the Indian Penal
Code. In conclusion of investigation, charge-sheet was filed against the
appellants and the aforesaid Soumen Mitra @ Gaju. Charges were framed
against the appellants under Sections 498A/304B/34 of the Indian Penal
Code read with section 3/4 Dowry Prohibition Act and under Section 498A
of the Indian Penal Code read with Section 3/4 of the Dowry Prohibition
Act against Soumen Mitra @ Gaju. Accused persons pleaded not guilty and
claimed to be tried. In the course of trial, prosecution examined sixteen
witnesses and exhibited a number of documents. Defence of the appellants
was one of innocence and false implication. It was the specific defence of
the appellants that Ganga was an emotional lady. She was unhappy with
the financial status of her husband.      Out of depression she committed
suicide. To probabilise their defence, appellants examined two witnesses
namely Dharani Majhi and Uday Majhi (D.W. 1 and D.W. 2). Upon
appreciation of the evidence on record, learned trial Judge by the
impugned judgment and order dated 07.05.2018 and 08.05.2018 convicted
and sentenced the appellants, as aforesaid. Soumen Mitra @ Gaju was
acquitted of the charges levelled against him.
Mr. Bakshi, learned Counsel appearing for the appellants, submits
no independent witness has deposed regarding torture upon the victim
housewife. Only family members spoke about torture. On the other hand,
D.W. 1 and D.W. 2, neighbours of the appellants, deposed there was good
relation in the family. Hence, torture on the housewife over demand of
dowry is not proved. It is also argued victim was an emotional lady.
Financial status of the appellant husband was weak. She was unwilling to
marry him. Out of depression, she committed suicide. Evidence against
appellant Nos. 2 and 3 (parents-in-law of the deceased) are general and
omnibus. They stand on the same footing with the acquitted accused
Soumen Mitra @ Gaju. Hence, appellants are entitled to an order of
Mr. Das along with Mrs. Roy for the State, argue parents of the
victim and other relations are the best witnesses to the hostile atmosphere
prevailing in the matrimonial home of the victim. All of them deposed that
the housewife was relentlessly tortured at her matrimonial home. Live link
between torture over demands of dowry and her unnatural death has fully
established. Evidence of the defence witnesses are vague and artificial in
nature. They appear to have been tutored. Swelling on the head and bruise
marks on the palm of the victim were noted in the inquest report prepared
by the learned Magistrate, (P.W. 14) as well as investigating officer (P.W.
16). These findings corroborate the allegation of physical torture on the
victim which compelled her to commit suicide. Hence, prosecution case has
been proved beyond reasonable doubt.
P.Ws 1 and 3 (Asim Dutta and Subhadra Dutta) are the parents of
unfortunate victim.
P.W. 1 (Asim Dutta) is her father and the informant. He deposed
victim was married to Raju Mitra through negotiations. As per demand of
the appellants Rs.20,000/- out of Rs.35,000/- was paid at the time of
marriage along with gold ornaments. Initially appellants treated their
daughter well. After a month, as remaining Rs.15,000/- was not paid, she
was subjected to ill treatment and torture. Husband and other inmates
used to pick up quarrel with his daughter. On 22.02.2016 at about 12
noon her daughter informed him over phone that her husband, parents-in-
law and brother-in-law inflicted torture upon her. He came to the
matrimonial home of her daughter and settled the dispute. On the next day
he returned home. That day in the evening he again received phone call
from his daughter informing him if he did not pay the remaining cash,
husband and other in-laws would kill her. On the next day, i.e.,
24.02.2016 his son-in-law informed him Ganga had died and asked him to
come to Ramsagar B.P.H.C. He along with others went to the hospital. He
noticed injury marks on the head and body of his daughter. Police held
inquest over the dead body. He signed on the inquest report. He also
signed on the magisterial inquest. He lodged written complaint with
Officer-in-Charge of Onda Police Station which was scribed by Santosh
Nandi. He proved the written complaint.
In cross-examination,    though   he admitted   his  daughter was
emotional he denied suggestion that she had committed suicide as she was
not happy with the financial status of her husband.
PW 3 Subhadra Dutta, mother of the victim girl corroborated her
husband with regard to physical torture upon her daughter by the
appellants. She stated one day before the incident her husband had gone
to the matrimonial home of her daughter. On the following day, she was
again physically tortured. In cross-examination, she admitted she had not
visited the matrimonial home of her daughter.
PWs 2, 4, 5, 6 and 7 are other relations of Ganga. All of them
corroborated the parents of the unfortunate housewife and stated she had
been subjected to torture by her husband and in laws over non-payment of
Rs. 15,000/- as dowry. On receiving news of death of Ganga, they had
accompanied PW 1 to Ramsagar BPHC and had seen the dead body of
PW 11 Dr. Mousumi Mondal was the medical officer who was posted
at Ramsagar BPHC at the relevant point of time. On 24.2.2016 she
examined Ganga Mitra who was brought to the primary health centre and
declared her dead.
PW   14    Subhankar    Bhattacharjee,   Deputy     Magistrate    held
magisterial inquest over the body of Ganga. He proved the inquest report.
He found swelling on the head of deceased. He also noted bruises on her
left palm and ligature mark around her throat.
PW 13 Dr. Tanoy Mahanto held post mortem over the body of the
deceased. He opined death was due to asphyxia as a result of ante mortem
hanging. He proved the post mortem report (Exhibit 2). Post mortem doctor
also noted clotted blood and product of conception (gestation sack) in the
uterus of the deceased indicating the deceased had conceived prior to her
PW 16 Shyamal Kumar Chakraborty is the investigating officer. He
held inquest over the body of the deceased. In addition to the ligature mark
around the neck of the deceased, he found swelling at the back of her
head, bruises on her left palm and on the back of her body. He collected
post mortem report and submitted charge sheet.
Appellants examined two witnesses who claimed to be their
neighbours. Both the witnesses deposed on similar lines. They stated they
had not heard about quarrel between Ganga and the accused persons.
Asim had visited the matrimonial home of his daughter 20/25 days prior
to the incident.
Mr. Bakshi contends evidence of parents of the deceased and other
relations regarding torture over demand of dowry ought not to be believed
in the light of evidence of neighbours of the appellants.
Victim suffered unnatural death at the matrimonial home barely two
and half months after marriage. Inquest reports prepared by Investigating
Officer (PW 16) and Deputy Magistrate (PW 14) show marks of injury on
the body of the deceased. In addition to ligature mark, both the officers
noted swelling on the back of the head and bruise marks on the left palm
of the deceased. These injuries show victim housewife had been subjected
to physical assault immediately prior to her death probabilising the saga of
torture as narrated by her relations. When a housewife is tortured within
four corners of the matrimonial home, persons to whom she would
ordinarily confide are her parents and close relations. It is highly unlikely
she would narrate her misfortune to outsiders including neighbours.
Analysing the evidence on record from this perspective, I am of the opinion
evidence of parents and other relations of the victim girl with regard to
torture meted out to her over further demand of money are wholly reliable.
Evidence of the defence witnesses appear to be tutored. None of the
witnesses were privy to the household affairs of the appellants. Hence, it is
impossible for them to state whether victim housewife was tortured within
the four corners of the matrimonial home or not. Even with regard to visit
of PW 1 at the matrimonial home of her daughter these witnesses cannot
be relied. They are not inmates in the household of the appellants. Hence,
it is impossible for them to state when PW 1 had last visited the house of
the appellants. For these reasons I am of the opinion defence witnesses are
untrustworthy and their versions were rightly rejected by the trial Court.
Post mortem doctor found ligature mark the neck of the victim and
opined death was due to asphyxia arising out of ante mortem hanging. He
also noted clotted blood and product of conception (gestational sac) in the
uterus. From these findings it appears that the victim housewife who was
pregnant had been subjected to torture over demands of dowry and was
brutally assaulted at the matrimonial home prior to her death. Unable to
bear such torture, she committed suicide.
Desperate plea that the victim committed suicide as she was
unhappy with the financial status of her husband is patently absurd.
Consistent evidence on record show she was physically and mentally
tortured at the matrimonial home over further demands of dowry. Notings
in the inquest reports indicate marks of injury on her body immediately
prior to her commission of suicide. These circumstances wholly rule out
the fanciful plea of suicide by an over-emotional lady who was unhappy
with her unsuccessful husband.
The next question which arises for consideration is who are
responsible for the torture upon the housewife?
Evidence on record show Rs. 20,000/- out of Rs. 35,000/- was paid
as dowry. Rs 15000/- was outstanding. Appellant/husband who was
under financial stress subjected the housewife to torture over further
demand of dowry. Two days prior to the incident, victim housewife
complained over telephone to her father (PW 1) that her husband and
other in laws were subjecting her to torture. PW 1 tried to settle the matter
but failed. In the evening of 23.2.2016 the housewife again complained of
torture by her husband and other in laws. Finally, on the next day i.e.
24.2.2016 unable to bear torture she committed suicide. Prosecution case
unequivocally points to the role of appellant No. 1 Raju Mitra in the torture
of his wife over demands of dowry. But there is no specific overt act
attributed either to the father in law or mother in-law regarding torture on
the victim housewife over further demands of dowry. It may not be out of
place to note brother-in-law of the housewife i.e Gaju Mitra was tried and
acquitted in the instant case. Evidence against the parents in law of the
housewife is on par with the brother-in-law, Gaju Mitra who has been
acquitted. In the absence of specific overt acts of torture attributed to the
parents-in-law of the victim housewife i.e appellant nos. 2 and 3 herein
and as co-accused Gaju Mitra (against whom similar evidence was led by
the prosecution) stands acquitted, I am of the opinion it would not be
proper to come to a finding of guilt against the appellant Nos. 2 and 3 viz
Sudhir Mitra and Nupur Mitra @ Nepi.
In the light of the aforesaid discussion, while upholding the
conviction and sentence of the appellant No. 1 Raju Mitra, I acquit the
appellant Nos. 2 and 3 viz Sudhir Mitra and Nupur Mitra @ Nepi of the
charges leveled against them.
Appellant Nos. 2 and 3 viz Sudhir Mitra and Nupur Mitra @ Nepi
shall be released from custody, if not wanted in any other case, upon
execution of a bond to the satisfaction of the trial court which shall remain
in force for a period of six months in terms of section 437A of the Code of
Period of detention suffered by the appellant No. 1 Raju Mitra during
investigation, enquiry and trial shall be set off from the substantive
sentence imposed upon the appellant in terms of Section 428 of the Code
Lower court records along with copies of this judgment be sent down
at once to the learned trial Court as well as the Superintendent of
Correctional Home for necessary compliance.
Photostat certified copy of this order, if applied for, be given to the
parties on priority basis on compliance of all formalities.
I agree.