1.               Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment and
order passed by the National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission,
New Delhi (hereinafter referred to as the ‘National Commission’) dated
25.11.2019 in Revision Petition No. 380/2019 and order dated 07.01.2020
passed by the learned National Commission in Review Application No.
348/2019 in Revision Petition No. 380/2019, by which the learned National
Commission has dismissed the said revision petition and has confirmed the
orders passed by the Rajasthan State Consumer Disputes Redressal
Commission, Jaipur (hereinafter referred to as the ‘State Commission’) and
the              District Consumer   Disputes    Redressal  Commission,  Pratapgarh
(hereinafter referred to as the ‘District Forum’) dismissing the complaint of the
petitioner, the original complainant has preferred the present special leave
2.     We have heard Shri Viraat Tripathi, learned Advocate appearing on
behalf of the petitioner.
2.1    At the outset, it is required to be noted that as such there is a huge delay
of 593 days in preferring the special leave petition against order dated
25.11.2019. Still, we have considered the special leave petitions on merits
3.     That the petitioner herein filed three complaints being complaint Nos.
101/2014, 102/2014 and 01/2015 before the District Forum through his three
advocates against BSNL. All the three complaints came to be dismissed by
the District Forum on merits.         That after dismissal of the complaints, the
petitioner herein filed a complaint against the three advocates who appeared
on behalf of the petitioner in the aforesaid three complaints alleging deficiency
in service on their part in contesting his cases before the District Forum.
3.1    It was alleged that all the three advocates have not performed their
duties properly. The said complaints were also filed with delay of 365 to 630
days. The petitioner herein claimed for a compensation of Rs.15 lakhs from
the advocates alleging deficiency in service in contesting the three complaints
which were dismissed. The said complaint filed against the three advocates
came to be dismissed by the District Forum. The appeal preferred by the
petitioner herein before the State Commission also came to be dismissed,
which was the subject matter of the revision petition before the National
judgment and order(s), the learned National
Commission has dismissed the said revision petition, as also, the review
4.     Having heard Shri Viraat Tripathi, learned Advocate appearing on behalf
of the petitioner and having gone through the impugned judgment and order
passed by the learned National Commission and even the order passed by
the District Forum dated 30.06.2016 passed in original complaint nos.
101/2014, 102/2014 and 01/2015, we are of the firm opinion that the District
Forum, the State Commission and the National Commission have rightly
dismissed the complaint filed by the petitioner herein filed against the three
advocates who appeared on behalf of the petitioner in the aforesaid three
complaints, which as such were dismissed on merits.              There are no
observations by the District Forum against the advocates that there was any
negligence on the part of the advocates in prosecuting and/or conducting the
complaints. In the common order, it has been specifically observed by the
District Forum that the allegations in the complaints are not proved and due to
which all the three complaints are liable to be dismissed. Once the complaints
came to be dismissed on merits and there was no negligence on the part of
the advocates at all, it cannot be said that there was any deficiency in service
on the part of the advocates who appeared on behalf of the complainant and
lost on merits.
4.1    Once it is found and held that there was no deficiency in service on the
complaint filed by the petitioner – complainant
against the three advocates was liable to be dismissed and is rightly
dismissed by the District Forum and the same has been rightly confirmed by
the State Commission and thereafter by the National Commission. Only in a
case where it is found that there was any deficiency in service by the
advocate, there may be some case. In each and every case where a litigant
has lost on merits and there is no negligence on the part of the advocate/s, it
cannot be said that there was any deficiency in service by the advocate/s. If
the submission advanced on behalf of the petitioner is accepted, in that case,
in each and every case where a litigant has lost on merits and his case is
dismissed, he will approach the consumer fora and pray for compensation
alleging deficiency in service. Losing the case on merits after the advocate
argued the matter cannot be said to be deficiency in service on the part of the
advocate. In every litigation, either of the party is bound to lose and in such a
situation either of the party who will lose in the litigation may approach the
consumer fora for compensation alleging deficiency in service, which is not
permissible at all.
5.     Under the circumstances, the District Forum, the State Commission and
the National Commission have rightly dismissed the complaint filed by the
petitioner herein against the three advocates who appeared on behalf of the
petitioner in the aforesaid three complaints which came to be dismissed on
merits. There is no substance in the present special leave petitions. We
special leave petitions with exemplary costs,
however, as the present proceedings arise out of the order passed by the
consumer forum, we refrain from imposing any exemplary costs while
dismissing the present special leave petitions.
6.   The special leave petitions are dismissed on the ground of delay as well
as on merits. Pending applications, if any, also stand disposed of.
(Arising out of impugned final judgment and order dated 25-11-2019
in RP No. 380/2019 and 07-01-2020 in RA No. 348/2019 in RP/
380/2019 passed by the National Consumers Disputes Redressal
(FOR ADMISSION and I.R. and IA No.139727/2021-CONDONATION OF DELAY
IN FILING and IA No.139730/2021-EXEMPTION FROM FILING C/C OF THE
Date : 08-11-2021 This petition was called on for hearing today.
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
The Special Leave Petitions are dismissed on the ground of
delay as well as on merits in terms of the signed reportable order.
Pending applications shall stand disposed of.
(signed reportable order is placed on the file)