I, Ashutosh Anand S/o Shri Ashok Kumar Pathak, aged 45 years
presently working as Under Secretary in the Ministry of Home Affairs,
Government of India, do hereby solemnly affirm and state as follows:
1.     That in my official capacity I am acquainted with the facts of these
cases, I have perused the record and am competent and authorized to swear
this affidavit on behalf of the Union of India.
2.     I state and submit that since I am filing this affidavit in reply as is
necessary for the purpose of opposing, entertaining and grant of any interim
order. I reserve liberty to file a further and a detailed affidavit hereinafter as
and when I am so advised.
3.     I hereby deny and dispute all the facts stated, contentions raised and
grounds urged in the I.A. except those which are specifically and
unequivocally admitted in this reply.
4.     It is submitted that the WP(C) no. 1470/2019 was regarding a challenge
to the validity of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019 (CAA). The instant
IA No. 65534 of 2021 in Writ Petition 1470/2019, preferred by the Petitioner is
concerning the notification dated 28 May 2021 which is concerning the mere
delegation of power vested with the Central Government. It is submitted that
the notification dated 28 May 2021 has no relation whatsoever with the CAA
and it is inconceivable that the present IA can be moved in the W.P. 1470 of
5.     It is submitted that the notification dated 28 May 2021 seeks to merely
delegate the power of the Central Government to the local authorities in
particular cases. The said notification does not provide for any relaxations to
the foreigners and applies only to foreigner who have entered the country
legally as the Central Government used its authority under Section 16 of the
Citizenship Act and delegated its powers to grant citizenship by Registration
or Naturalisation to District Collectors. It is submitted that it is merely an
administrative delegation of power without any specific classification or
6.     It is submitted that a brief analysis of the historical issuances of
delegation of power notifications, as has been done in the present case, would
be relevant in the present context. It is submitted that the Citizenship Act,
1955 was enacted in December 1955. Sections 5 and 6 provided for grant of
citizenship to foreigners by way of Registration and Naturalisation. In the Act
of 1955, the citizenship by Registration was to be granted by the “prescribed
authority” whereas the citizenship by Naturalisation was to be granted by the
“Central Government”. It is further submitted that the citizenship by
Registration was to be granted to foreigners of following categories:-
(i)    Persons of Indian origin -under sections 5(1)(a) and 5(1)(b)
(ii)   Women married to Indian citizens -under section 5(1)(c)
(iii)  Minor children of Indian citizens -under section 5(1)(d).
(iv)   Person who is citizen of country specified in the First Schedule of the
A copy of the Section 5 and 6 of the Citizenship Act, 1955 is attached herewith
and marked as Annexure – R 1.
7.     It is submitted that as per the Citizenship Rules, 1956, the “prescribed
authority” to grant citizenship by Registration to persons of Indian origin
[under section 5(1)(a)] or to minor children under section 5(1)(d) was
“District Collector”. For other categories under section 5 or all categories
under Section 6, the granting authority was the Central Govt. A copy of the
relevant pages of the Citizenship Rules, 1956 is attached herewith and marked
8.     It is submitted that the said legal framework continued till the year
1985. It is submitted that consequent to the decisions taken in the Assam
Accord of 1985, the Citizenship Rules, 1956 were amended through the
notification dated 01/04/1986.A copy of the notification dated 01/04/1986 is
attached herewith and marked as Annexure – R 3. In the amended rule 8,
the authority to grant citizenship by Registration under sections 5(1) (a) and
5(1) (d) was prescribed as the Central Government (in place of the District
Collector). Subsequently, through the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2003,
Section 5 was amended and the authority to grant citizenship was provided
as the “Central Government” in place of the “prescribed authority”. A copy of
the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2003 is attached herewith and marked as
9.      It is submitted that Section 18 of The Citizenship Act, 1955 confers on
Central Government powers to make appropriate rules to carry out the
provisions of this Act. In the year 2004, the Central Government notified the
Citizenship (Amendment) Rules, 2004. A copy of the Citizenship
(Amendment) Rules, 2004 is attached herewith and marked as Annexure –
R 5. The said Rules delegated the power to grant the citizenship by
Registration under Section 5, in respect of Pakistani nationals of minority
Hindu community, to four District Collectors of Gujarat and to the Home
Secretary, Gujarat if such Pakistani nationals of minority Hindu community
lived in other Districts of Gujarat. In the same notification, the Central
Government also enabled Collectors of Barmer and Jaisalmer Districts to
register as citizens of India “Pak nationals of minority Hindu community”
displaced due to 1965 and 1971 wars. It may be noted that the same was also
merely a delegation of the power for a specified community and not any
relaxation in the requirements of citizenship.
10.     It is submitted that such citizenship-granting power, in effect
delegation of power, in respect of “minority Hindus with Pakistani
citizenship” who had migrated to India five years back was also delegated to
Collectors of all the Districts in the State of Rajasthan. It is submitted that
initially, this delegation of powers of Central Government to District
Collectors of Rajasthan, Gujarat and Home Secretary of Gujarat State was
only for one year. It facilitated faster disposal of citizenship applications of
the specific community from Pakistan at the local level where they were
11.    It is submitted that on February 22, 2005 the Central Government
extended the delegation of its power by another year. It is submitted that
thereafter, vide Gazette notification dated 12th July, 2006, such powers were
extended again by Central Government for one more year. A copy each of the
Gazette notifications dated 22nd February, 2005 and 12th July, 2006 is attached
herewith and marked as Annexure – R 6. The chronology, which is
illustrative of the measures taken, which led to the amendment of the said
06.03.2002    After considering the representation of refugees/displaced
persons belonging to minority communities of Pakistan, the
then Chief Minister of Rajasthan requests the Deputy Prime
Minister (who was also the Home Minister) to issue statutory
instructions eg. delegation of powers to SDM etc. to resolve
the difficulties faced by Pakistan Hindu minority migrants
for grant of visa and citizenship The letter specifically deals
with the issue that most of these hapless migrants belong to
Scheduled Casts (SCs) of Hindus and that the National
for SCs and STs in its meeting held on 19 th July, 2001 had
discussed this matter in detail so that these migrants can be
granted Indian citizenship expeditiously .
04/02/2004 The Chief Minister of Rajasthan requests the Minister of
State in MHA to resolve the issue of grant of Indian
citizenship to migrants of minority communities (Hindu) of
Pakistan who have migrated to India due to persecution on
religious grounds.
01/03/2004 Vide    Notification   dated    28/02/2004     published    on
01/03/2004, the Citizenship (Amendment) Rules, 2004 came
into force delegating power to grant citizenship through
registration mode to District Collectors of Rajasthan and 4
Districts Collectors of Gujarat and to the Government of
Gujarat for other districts in Gujarat, in respect of Pakistan
nationals of minority Hindu community.
13/07/2004 Shri Ashok Gehlot, the then MLA requests, the Minister of
State in MHA to consider delegation of powers to collectors
for speedy granting of citizenship to minority migrants from
Pakistan who were forced to come to India due to
persecution on religious grounds.
15/09/2004 Shri Ashok Gehlot, the then General Secretary, AICC
requests the then Home Minister to implement the
notification published on 1/03/2004 regarding delegation of
powers to collectors for speedy grant of citizenship to Hindu
minority migrants from Pakistan who were forced to come
to India due to persecution on religious ground.
12.10.2004 The Minister of State in the MHA acknowledges letter dated
13th September, 2004 of Shri Ashok Gehlot, MLA regarding
delegation of special powers to the collectors of some
Districts in Rajasthan and Gujarat for grant of Indian
citizenship to Hindu migrants of Indo-Pak wars living
illegally in those areas since decades. The Minister replies
that appropriate notifications to amend the Citizenship
Rules, 1956 have been issued.
10/12/2004 Shri Ashok Gehlot, the General Secretary, AICC requests the
Home Minister to waive all kind of fees for visa extension
and grant of citizenship in respect of migrants of Hindu
minority community of Pakistan most of whom belong to
the lower strata of society.
22/02/2005 The Citizenship (Amendment) Rules, 2005 come into force
extending the provisions of the Citizenship (Amendment)
Rules, 2004 notified on 01/03/2004 to two years instead of
one year.
12/07/2006 The Citizenship (Amendment) Rules, 2006 come into force
extending the provisions of the Citizenship (Amendment)
Rules, 2004 notified on 01/03/2004 to three years instead of
one year.
08.04.2009 Shri Ashok Gehlot, the Chief Minister of Rajasthan writes to
the Home Minister regarding “outstanding issues of large
number of Pak oustees from Hindu/Sikh communities”. He
argues that delegation of authority once again to grant
citizenship, as done by aforementioned notifications could
be considered for addressing the problems of the remaining
Pak oustees who are illiterate and belong to SCs/STs and
weaker sections of society.
A copy of the documents mentioned in the above table regarding
amendment of Citizenship Rules is attached herewith and marked as
12.    It is submitted that Section 16 of The Citizenship Act, 1955 confers
powers on Central Government to delegate some of its citizenship – granting
powers to such officer or authority as may be specified. In year 2016, Central
Government used its authority under Section 16 of the Citizenship Act and
delegated its powers to grant citizenship by Registration or Naturalisation to
District Collectors of 16 districts and Home Secretaries of Governments of 7
States in respect of migrants belonging to six specified minority communities
of Afghanistan, Pakistan and Bangladesh, for a period of two years. A copy of
the 2016 notification is attached herewith and marked as Annexure – R 8. It
is submitted thatthis was done to fast track the decision on citizenship
applications of this category of foreigners. In 2018, this delegation of power
was extended until further orders. A copy of the 2018 notification is attached
herewith and marked as Annexure – R 9.
13.    It is also submitted that in the meantime Central Government received
several representations to delegate its power to grant citizenship in respect
of the aforesaid legal migrants to some more districts/ States also where
sizeable population of such migrants has been residing.Therefore, Central
Government has by notification dated 28/05/2021 further delegated its power
to grant citizenship in such cases to the Collectors of 13 more districts i.e.
Morbi, Rajkot, Patan and Vadodara in Gujarat, Jalore, Udaipur, Pali, Barmer
and Sirohi in Rajasthan, Durg and Balodabazar in Chhattisgarh, Faridabad in
Haryana and Jalandhar in Punjab and to The Home Secretaries of two more
States i.e. Haryana and Punjab. Therefore, now District Collectors of 29
districts and Home Secretaries of 9 States will exercise powers of Central
Government to grant citizenship to the specified category of foreigners. The
Central Government has also retained its right to simultaneously use these
powers any time.A copy of the notification dated 28/05/2021 is attached
herewith and marked as Annexure – R 10.
14.     It is submitted that the said measure has been taken on numerous
occasion previously and is largely a function of the administrative exigencies
of the situation. The delegation of power vide notification dated 28/05/2021
is in respect of those foreign applicants who fulfil the eligibility criteria and
who are in possession of valid documents like passports and Indian visa.
These documents are mandatory as per provisions of sections 5, 6 and 2(1)(b)
of the Citizenship Act, 1955. The statutory Form II to Form VIII appended to
the Schedule-I of the Citizenship Rules, 2009 prescribed in rules 4 to 10 of the
Citizenship Rules, 2009 require that copies of valid passport and valid
residential permit are needed to be submitted alongwith the citizenship
application Forms. It is submitted that the same would not be relatable to the
legislative steps taken through the CAA which provide for a classification
with a rational nexus and intelligible differentia as has been explained in
detailed in the Counter Affidavit of the Central Government.
15.     It is submitted that the notification dated 28 may 2021 is merely a
process of decentralisation of decision making aimed at speedy disposal of
the citizenship applications of such foreigners as the decision will now be
taken at the District or State level itself after examining each case. It is
submitted that no relaxation whatsoever has been made in respect of the
eligibility criteria between different foreign nationals which are laid down in
the Citizenship Act, 1955 and rules made thereunder. Hence, the question of
violation of Article 14 in making the certain classification does not arise.
16.     It is further submitted that the existing law and procedure for
acquiring citizenship of India is in no way sought to be amended through the
impugned notification. It is submitted that any foreigner of any faith can
apply for citizenship of India at any time. The Central Government shall
decide that application as per law and rules.
17.     It is submitted that the delegation of power vide notification dated
28/05/2021 is in respect of those foreign applicants who fulfil the eligibility
criteria and who are in possession of valid documents like passports and
Indian visa. As broughtout in earlier paragraphs, similar delegation of power
has been permitted by Central Government in 2004, 2005, 206, 2016 and 2018
also. It is submitted that the notification dated 28/05/2021 does not relate to
the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019 (CAA) which has been inserted into
the Act as section 6B.
18.     It is submitted that the notification dated 28 May 2021 is about
extending the delegation of power to grant citizenship to collectors of more
districts and Home Secretaries of more Sates. It is submitted that similar
notifications dated 23 Dec 2016, 23 Oct 2018, 28 Feb 2004, 22 Feb 2005 and 12
July 2006 regarding delegation of power to grant citizenship have been
brought out in this Ministry’s counter affidavit dated 11 March 2020
submitted in Hon’ble Supreme Court in WP(C) no. 1470/2019. The present
notification is similar to above notifications which have been already brought
out by this Ministry in the counter affidavit which is available with the
petitioner since March 2020. Hence, it is submitted that there is no urgency
in the instant IA as has been pleaded by the Applicant.
19.    In light of the above, it is submitted that the applications are liable to
be dismissed by this Hon’ble Court. I further submit that the Union of India
reserves the right to file a more detailed affidavit with the leave of this
Hon’ble Court, if necessary, at a later stage.
20.    The present affidavit is bona fide and in the interest of justice.
Verified at New Delhi on this 14thday of June, 2021, that the contents of the
above affidavit are true and correct to my knowledge and belief derived from
the official records. No part of the above affidavit is false and nothing material
has been concealed there from.
'(b) “illegal migrant" means a foreigner who has entered into India
(/) without a valid passport or other travel documents and .such—
other document or authority as may be prescribed fay or under any law ir»
O'O with a valid passport or other travel documents and such other
document or authority as may be prescribed by or under any law in that
behalf but remains therein beyond fee permitted period of time;’;
(I'O after clause (e), the following clause shall be inserted, namely.*—
'lee) “overseas citizen of India” means a person who-
(0 is of Indian origin being a citizen of a specified country, or
(JO was a citizen of India immediately before becoming a citizen of a
and is registered as an overseas citizen of India by the Central Government
Oit) after clause tg), the following clause shall be inserted, namely;
‘(gg) “specified country" means a country specified in the Fourth
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification in fee Official
Gazette, amend the said Schedule by way of addition or omission of any entry
Provided further that every notification issued under this clause shall, as
soon as may be, after it is made, be laid before each House ofParijaftQKit;* ,
Substitution          3. For section 3 of the principal Act, the followingsection shall be substituted, namely:—
for section 3.
Citizenship by                “3. (/} Except as provided in sub-section (2), every person bom in India—
(a) on or after the 26th day of January, 1950, but before the 1st day of July,
(&) on or after the 1st day of July, 1987, but before the commencement of
the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2003 and either of whose parents is a citizen
c on or after the commencement of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act,
Ifpboth of his parents are citizens oflndia; or
(JV) one of whose parents is a citizen of India and the other is not an
shall be a citizen oflndia by birth.
C?) A person shall not be a citizen oflndia by virtue of thissection if at the time
(a) either his father or mother possesses such immunity from suits and
legal process as is accorded to an envoy of a foreign sovereign power accredited
to the President oflndia and he or she, as the case may be, is not a citizen of
(b) his father or mother is an enemy -alien and the birth ©scars in a place
then under occupation by the enemy.”.
4. In section 4 of fee principal Act, for sub-section (/), the following sub-sections shall
"(O A person bom outside India sitall be a citizen of India by descent,       —
(a) on or after the 26fe day of January; 1950, but before the 10th day of
December, 1 992, if his father is a citizen oflndia at fee time of his birth; or
jftLVªh laö Mhö ,yö&33004@99                                                           REGD. NO. D. L.-33004/99
la- 3022]                          ubZ fnYyh] 'kqØokj] fnlEcj 23] 2016@ikS"k 2] 1938
S.O. 4132(E).—In exercise of the powers conferred by section 16 of the Citizenship Act, 1955 (57 of 1955), the Central
Government hereby directs that powers exercisable by it, for registration as a citizen of India under section 5 or for grant of certificate
of naturalisation under section 6 of the Citizenship Act, 1955, in respect of any person belonging to minority community in
Afghanistan, Bangladesh and Pakistan, namely, Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists, Jains, Parsis and Christians (herein this Order referred to as
“the applicant”), residing in the States of Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh and Union
territory of Delhi, shall also be exercisable by—
(a) the Collector, within whose jurisdiction the applicant is ordinarily resident, in relation to the districts of—
(ii) Ahemdabad, Gandhinagar and Kutch in the State of Gujarat;
(iii) Bhopal and Indore in the State of Madhya Pradesh;
(iv) Nagpur, Mumbai, Pune and Thane in the State of Maharashtra;
(v) Jodhpur, Jaisalmer and Jaipur in the State of Rajasthan;
(vi) Lucknow in the State of Uttar Pradesh; and
(vii) West Delhi and South Delhi in the Union territory of Delhi; and
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(ii)º                                    Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k                                                           3
(b) the Secretary of the Department of Home of the State or the Union territory, as the case may be, within whose
jurisdiction the applicant is ordinarily resident, in relation to districts not covered under clause (a),
in accordance with the provisions of the Citizenship Rules, 2009 (hereinafter referred to as the said rules), subject to the following
(A) the application for registration as citizen of India or grant of certificate of naturalisation as citizen of India under the
(B) the verification of the application is done simultaneously by the Collector or the Secretary, as the case may be, at the
district level and the State level and the application and the reports thereon shall be made accessible simultaneously to the
(C) the Collector or the Secretary, as the case may be, makes such inquiry as he considers necessary for ascertaining the
suitability of the applicant and for that purpose forward the application online to such agencies for verification and comments as
may be required under the instructions issued by the Central Government in this regard;
(D) the comments of the agencies referred to in clause (C) are uploaded online by such agencies and accessible to the
Collector or the Secretary, as the case may be, and the Central Government;
(E) the Collector or the Secretary, as the case may be, on being satisfied with the suitability of the applicant, grant him
the citizenship of India by registration or naturalisation and issue a certificate of registration or naturalisation, as the case may be,
signed by the Collector or the Secretary, as the case may be, in the Form as prescribed in the said rules; and
(F) the Collector and the Secretary shall maintain a register, in accordance with the said rules, containing the details of
persons so registered or naturalised as a citizen of India and furnish a copy thereof to the Central Government within seven days
of such registration or naturalisation.
2. All applications for citizenship of India in respect of persons referred to in this Order, which is pending before the Central
Government immediately before the publication of this Order in the Official Gazette, shall be transferred by the Central Government to
the Collector or the Secretary, as the case may be.
3. This Order shall be in force for a period of two years from the date of the publication of this Order in the Official Gazette.
Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-110064
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-110054.
jftLVªh laö Mhö ,yö&33004@99                                                       REGD. NO. D. L.-33004/99
la- 4172]                         ubZ fnYyh] cq/okj] vDrwcj 24] 2018@dk£rd 2] 1940
bयौरा होगा तथा उस रिज4टर क! एक $ित ऐसे रिज4Nीकरण अथवा देशीयकरण के सात दन क! अविध के
S.O. 5377(E).—In exercise of the powers conferred by section 16 of the Citizenship Act, 1955 (57 of
1955), the Central Government hereby directs that powers exercisable by it, for registration as a citizen of
India under section 5 or for grant of certificate of naturalisation under section 6 of the Citizenship Act, 1955,
in respect of any person belonging to minority community in Afghanistan, Bangladesh and Pakistan, namely,
Hindus, Sikhs, Buddhists, Jains, Parsis and Christians(herein this Order referred to as “the applicant”),
residing in the States of Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Mahahrashtra, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and
Union Territory of Delhi, shall also be exercisable by-
(a)     the Collector, within whose jurisdiction the applicant is ordinarily resident, in relation to the districts
(ii) Ahemdabad, Gandhinagar and Kutch in the State of Gujarat;
(iii) Bhopal and Indore in the State of Madhya Pradesh;
(iv) Nagpur, Mumbai, Pune and Thane in the State of Maharashtra;
(v)   Jodhpur, Jaisalmer and Jaipur in the State of Rajasthan;
(vi) Lucknow in the State of Uttar Pradesh; and
(vii) West Delhi and South Delhi in the Union territory of Delhi; and
¹Hkkx IIµ[k.M 3(ii)º                              Hkkjr dk jkti=k % vlk/kj.k                                            3
(b)      the Secretary of the Department of Home of the State or the Union territory, as the case may be,
within whose jurisdiction the applicant is ordinarily resident, in relation to districts not covered under
clause (a), in accordance with the provisions of the Citizenship Rules, 2009 (hereinafter referred to as
the said rules), subject to the following conditions, namely:-
(A) the application for registration as citizen of India or grant of certificate of naturalisation as
citizen of India under the said rules is made by the applicant online;
(B) the verification of the application is done simultaneously by the Collector or the Secretary, as the
case may be, at the district level and the State level and the application and the reports thereon
shall be made accessible simultaneously to the Central Government on online portal;
(C) the Collector or the Secretary, as the case may be, makes such inquiry as he considers necessary
for ascertaining the suitability of the applicant and for that purpose forwards the application
online to such agencies for verification and comments as may be required for completing such
an inquiry and the instructions issued by the Central Government from time to time in this
regard shall be strictly complied with by the State or Union Territory and District concerned.
(D) the comments of the agencies referred to in clause (C) are uploaded online by such agencies and
accessible to the Collector or the Secretary, as the case may be, and the Central Government;
(E) the Collector or the Secretary, as the case may be, on being satisfied with the suitability of the
applicant, grants him/her the citizenship of India by registration or naturalisation and issue a
certificate of registration or naturalisation, as the case may be, duly printed from online portal
and signed by the Collector or the Secretary, as the case may be, in the Form as prescribed in the
(F) the Collector and the Secretary shall maintain an online/digital as well as physical register, in
accordance with the said rules, containing the details of persons so registered or naturalised as a
citizen of India and furnish a copy thereof to the Central Government within seven days of such
registration or naturalization.
2.       This Order shall come into force with effect from the 22nd December, 2018 and shall remain in force
until further order.
Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-110064
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-110054.