The Delhi Government has told Delhi High Court that prisoners are being treated equally in jails in the national capital and parole or furlough is extended to them without any discrimination.
A division bench of Chief Justice Satish Chandra Sharma and Justice Subramonium Prasad closed proceedings in a suo moto case initiated in 2015 on the issue of preferential treatment given to certain prisoners in jails. 
The court had taken cognizance of two articles published in Hindustan Times titled “Loners, 'Gandhi', fusspots: VIPs spice up jails” and “Inside the world of celebrity prisoners.”
In a latest status report filed on February 10, the Delhi government submitted that the prisoners are provided with adequate bedding and that inmates undergoing medical treatment are provided with wooden bed on the recommendation of medical officer.
“That it is submitted that there is no discrimination among the prisoners in Delhi Prisons being meted out on the basis of gender, caste, creed, religion, social status, financial status, educational status, nationality etc,” the status report read. 
It further stated that the concerned department is under the process of establishing Semi Open Jail for women prisoners. Such type of jail is already in place for male prisoners. 
“In the new Prison Rules the concern of equality and human dignity are imperative. It may also be mentioned here that labour/vocational training in accordance to the changes in terms of development in the society have also been considered and best efforts are being made to reform/train the prisoners according to such needs in order to enable them to reintegrate with the society after their release from prison,” the government submitted. 
Taking note of the status report, the court disposed of the matter observing that no further orders are required to be passed. 
The bench appreciated the efforts put in by amicus curiae Senior Advocate Dayan Krishnan. 
“In light of the aforesaid, this Court is of the opinion that no further directions are necessary in the instant Writ Petition. Accordingly, the Writ Petition is disposed of along with the pending application(s), if any,” the court said. 
Title: COURT ON ITS OWN MOTION v. CENTRAL GOVERNMENT THROUGH SECRETARY, MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS & ORS



