Digitally Signed        W.P.(C) 1482/2015                                             Page 1 of 7
1.     1.     This Court, vide Order dated 06.02.2015 in CRL.REV.P.
No.369/2008, while taking note of publications in the 07th December, 2014
edition of the Hindustan Times, captioned as “Loners, „Gandhi‟, fusspots:
VIPs spice up jails” and “Inside the world of celebrity prisoners” which
highlighted the issue of certain prisoners being treated unequally than others
and prison rules not being followed for certain prisoners who are being
given preferential treatment, has directed for registration of the present
petition in public interest.
2.     Notices were issued to the Central Government through Secretary,
Ministry of Home Affairs; Central Government through Secretary, Ministry
of Law and Justice; and Central Jail, Tihar through Director General
(Prisons). Mr. Dayan Krishnan, learned Senior Counsel, was appointed
Amicus Curiae to assist this Court. Status Reports have been filed in the
matter from time to time. The latest Status Report which has been filed by
the State on 10.02.2023 reads as under:
“1. In compliance of order dated 07/09/2022 passed by
Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in Writ Petition (Cr1.)
No. 1482 of 2015 directing therein to file a report with
regard to several issues and also about steps taken to
ensure equal treatment and non discrimination to
prisoners especially premised on gender.
2. That it is to submit that the prisoners are provided
adequate bedding i.e. Dari, Blankets, Bed sheets
(dasuti) to the prisoners. The Barracks / Cells are
constructed in such a manner that it is over and above
the ground level of the outside area of Ward with
sufficient corridor. The provided material of beddings
is no doubt used on the floor of the Barrack/Cell and
till date no complaints have been reported by the
inmates in this regard. It is pertinent to mention here
Digitally Signed        W.P.(C) 1482/2015                                                 Page 2 of 7
that those inmates who are undergoing medical
treatment and are in need of any wooden bed (Takht)
then he/she is provided immediately on the
recommendation of the medical officer. It may be
mentioned here that all the senior citizen inmates are
provided with Takht. Further, each Dispensary has one
Medical Inspection Room where 81O beds are
available for convenience of the reported patient
inmates. It is further submitted that there is a 240
bedded hospital including Drug De-Addiction Centre
in Central Jail No.3, Tihar, to augment the necessary
facilities to the needy patient inmates. It is pertinent to
mention that the provision of Cemented Bed / Berth for
all prisoners have been duly considered in the new
Delhi Prison Rules 2018 in chapter no2 (going to be
notified soon) and it will be ensured that in all new
construction of jail, this facility is provided. However,
it is ensured that each and every prisoner is provided
with sufficient number of blankets & cotton dan/bed
sheets to be used as cushioned bedding for sleeping
protecting them from heat or cold as per the seasonal
requirement. Evey prisoner is bound to keep himself,
his Ward and yards neat and clean. It is further
submitted that each jail is visited by learned Jail
Visiting Judge on almost within a month to see the
grievances of the prisoners and for their amicable
resolution.
3. That it is submitted that there is no discrimination
among the prisoners in Delhi Prisons being meted out
on the basis of gender, caste, creed, religion, social
status, financial status, educational status, nationality
4. That as male prisoners are busy in making Bakery
items similarly female/women prisoners are occupied
in business of making a variety of Namkeens, Sweets,
pickles and their skills may help them earn their
Digitally Signed        W.P.(C) 1482/2015                                                 Page 3 of 7
livelihood after their release as such items are always
in great demands. Further, the following facilities are
extended to the women prisoners:-
Various Vocational Courses organized by Jail
Administration with the help of NGOs
• Fashion designing classes • Painting
• Gems & Jewelry Hand Sketch designing
• Pottery making
• Flower assembling unit • Fashion Jewelry
That women prisoners may also fetch good income by
utilizing above professional skills learnt at the prison
and therefore are not discriminated with male
prisoners as far as to the extent of post release
prospects.
That parole/furlough facilities are extended without
any discrimination of gender. Just like establishment of
Semi Open Jail for male prisoners, department is
already under process to establish Semi Open Jail for
the female/women prisoners which will provide free
environment to live and work before their permanent
release. Thus, there exists 'complete equality'
promoting mental and physical well beings of both
male and female prisoners.
Digitally Signed        W.P.(C) 1482/2015                                               Page 4 of 7
5. That it is submitted that sentence is implemented
strictly as per Delhi Prison Rules/Orders/Circulars. It
is ensured that hard labour Is allotted to every convict
undergoing rigorous imprisonment irrespective of any
discrimination. However, the factors like existing skill
of a prisoner due to previous experiences in any
trade/occupation etc. are taken into account while
allotting them labour for getting better output. It may
be mentioned here that the Sewadars/Labours are
reshuffled at regular interval of time. Thus, the labours
are       offered    to     the      convicts     without
discrimination/undue favor. Maximum labour is
occupied in factories and jail kitchens where hard
work is done by the deployed convicts. There is
exclusive women prisons in Delhi (Central Jail No6,
Tihar and Central Jail No.16, Mandoli) and therefore
all such labours are performed by women prisoners
also as performed by the male prisoners in their
respective jails.
Further, labour is not allotted to the High Security /
Dangerous prisoners and their lodging is rotated from
one jail to another after an interval of every three to
four months. Further, it is assured that labour to be
allotted will also be proportionate to the severity of
crime for which the convicts are convicted/ sentenced.
6. That it is submitted that new Delhi Prison Rules
2018 have been enforced we.f. 01/01/2019 The aspects
observed by the Hon'ble Court have been duly
considered and covered in the new Rules specifically in
following chapters:
(i) Chapter No6-- Maintenance of Prisoners
(iii) Chapter No.14—Education of Prisoners
Digitally Signed        W.P.(C) 1482/2015                                                Page 5 of 7
(vi) Chapter No.17—Welfare of Prisoners
(vii) Chapter No.18-- Maintenance of Prisoners
(ix) Chapter No.35—Differently able Prisoners
(x) Chapter No.36—Mental Health of Prisoners
In the new Prison Rules the concern of equality and
human dignity are imperative. It may also be
mentioned here that labour/vocational training in
accordance to the changes in terms of development in
the society have also been considered and best efforts
are being made to reform/train the prisoners according
to such needs in order to enable them to reintegrate
with the society after their release from prison.”
3.     A perusal of the Status Report shows that all the prisoners are being
treated equally. It is stated in the Status Report that the prisoners are being
provided with adequate bedding material and for elderly inmates wooden
beds are being provided. It is also stated that those inmates who are
undergoing medical treatment and are in need of wooden beds, are being
provided with wooden beds on the recommendation of Medical Officer. It is
further stated in the Status Report that there is no discrimination among the
prisoners on the basis of gender, caste, creed, religion, social status,
financial status, educational status or nationality, etc. and a number of
vocational courses are being organized by the jail authorities with the help
of NGOs to keep the prisoners occupied and to give them an opportunity to
hone their skills so that they can earn their livelihood after being released
from jail and thus, be rehabilitated in society. The Status Report also reveals
that parole/furlough facilities are being extended to all the prisoners without
any discrimination. It is further stated that semi-open jails have been
Digitally Signed        W.P.(C) 1482/2015                                                   Page 6 of 7
established for male prisoners and work is under progress to establish semi-
open jail for the female prisoners as well to provide them a free environment
to live and work before their permanent release. It is further stated that the
sentence is implemented strictly as per Delhi Prison Rules/Orders/Circulars
and it is ensured that hard labour is allotted to every convict undergoing
rigorous imprisonment irrespective of any discrimination, however, factors
like existing skill of a prisoner due to previous experiences in any
trade/occupation etc. are taken into account while allotting them labour for
getting better output.
4.     This Court appreciates the efforts put in by Mr. Dayan Krishnan,
learned Senior Advocate (Amicus Curiae) in assisting the Court.
5.     In light of the aforesaid, this Court is of the opinion that no further
directions are necessary in the instant Writ Petition.
6.     Accordingly, the Writ Petition is disposed of along with the pending
application(s), if any.
Digitally Signed        W.P.(C) 1482/2015                                                  Page 7 of 7