Petitioner had filed original application before the Himachal
Pradesh State Administrative Tribunal at Shimla. After abolition of the
Tribunal, the original application was transferred to this Court.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that the
father of the petitioner was working as a T-Mate with the respondent-
approaching       the
department and had died while in service, on 03.03.2007. Petitioner by
respondents,       had    sought       appointment           on
compassionate basis. However, the case of the petitioner has been
wrongly rejected on the ground that since the mother of the petitioner
was already serving in Himachal Pradesh Public Works Department,
therefore, he was not entitled for appointment on compassionate basis.
3.           Learned counsel for the respondents has submitted that as
per Clause-5 (c) of the Policy (Annexure R/A-1), dated 18.1.1990, case
H   of the petitioner has been rightly rejected as the mother of the
petitioner was already in a Government job.
4.            It has been held by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in State of
Himachal Pradesh & another Versus Shashi Kumar, (2019) 3, SCC
653, as under:-
“While considering the rival submissions, it is
necessary to bear in mind that compassionate
appointment is an exception to the general rule that
appointment to any public post in the service of the
State has to be made on the basis of principles which
accord with Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Dependants of a deceased employee of the State are
made    eligible   by   virtue    of
compassionate appointment. The basis of the policy
is that it recognizes that a family of a deceased
employee may be placed in a position of financial
hardship upon the untimely death of the employee
while in service. It is the immediacy of the need which
furnishes the basis for the State to allow the benefit of
compassionate appointment. Where the authority
finds that the financial and other circumstances of the
family are such that in the absence of immediate
assistance, it would be reduced to being indigent, an
application from a dependant member of the family
could be considered. The terms on which such
ig  happlications would be considered are subject to the
policy which is framed by the State and must fulfill the
terms of the Policy. In that sense, it is a well-settled
H    principle of law that there is no right to compassionate
appointment. But, where there is a policy, a
dependant member of the family of a deceased
employee is entitled to apply for compassionate
appointment and to seek consideration of the
application in accordance with the terms and
conditions which are prescribed by the State.”
5.          Respondents have placed on record policy framed by them
dated 18.01.1990, for appointment of sons/daughters/near relations of
a Government servant who dies in harness leaving his family in
immediate need of assistance. Clause 5 (c) of the said policy reads as
“In all cases where one or more members of the
family are already in Govt. Service or in employment
of Autonomous Bodies/Boards/Corporation etc., of
the   State/Central        Govt.    employment         assistance
should not under any circumstances be provided to
C the second or third member of the family. In cases,
however, where the widow of the deceased Govt.
Servant represents or claims that her employed sons/
daughters are not supporting her, the request of
employment assistance should be considered only in
respect       of     the   widow.     Even       for     allowing
ig  h           compassionate appointment to the widow in such
cases the opinion of the department of Personnel and
Finance Department should specifically be sought
H               and the matter finally decided by the Council of
6.          Thus, the petitioner was not entitled for appointment on
compassionate basis in view of Clause-5(c) of the relevant policy as his
mother was already in a government job. Hence, the respondents have
rightly rejected the case of the petitioner for his appointment on
compassionate basis.           Therefore, no ground for interference, while
exercising extraordinary writ jurisdiction under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India, is made out.        Accordingly, the petition is
dismissed. Pending application(s), if any, also stand disposed of.