1.     A seminal issue arises for consideration in the present case.
2.     The plaintiff is a company incorporated in India. Though the
plaint avers that documents showing involvement of the plaintiff, its
subsidiaries and group companies in financial services including
crypto currency, have been filed with the plaint, the documents with
the plaint do not indicate that the plaintiff is itself dealing in crypto
currency under any brand name or trade mark. They do indicate,
however, that the plaintiff is, under its well-known brand
name/trademark “TATA”, providing a platform for trading in crypto
currency.
3.     Defendants 1 and 2 are situated in the U.K. and the U.S.
respectively. They deal in crypto currency, under the name “TATA
coin/$TATA”. None of the defendants has any outlets in India, and it
is not the case of the plaintiff that the defendants are carrying out any
overt manufacturing or marketing activities within India.
4.     The plaintiff seeks a permanent injunction, restraining the
defendants from using the trademark “TATA”, as part of the name
under which their crypto currency is made available to the public, or
as part of their corporate name or domain name.
5.     Admittedly, the defendants’ mark “TATA coin/$TATA” is not
registered in India. The first question that arises for consideration is,
therefore, whether the plaintiff can seek an injunction against the
defendants’ mark, the defendants being located outside the sovereign
borders of India and, therefore, statutorily outside the reach of the
Trademarks Act, 1999, as well as the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
6.     Mr. Pravin Anand, learned counsel for the plaintiff, asserts the
existence of territorial jurisdiction of this Court, over the defendants,
(a)    The defendants’ crypto currency can be purchased by any
person in India, from the defendants’ website.
(b)    There is an admission, in the “White Paper” of Defendant
1, that it was involved in financial activities relating to India.
(c)    Various persons from India had posted queries on the
Twitter page of Defendant 1, regarding the modality for
purchase of its “TATA coin/$ TATA” currency.
(d)    Defendant 1’s website www.hakunamatata.finance had
50 visitors from India each day.
(e)    India was second in the list of countries with highest
internet traffic to the www.hakunamatata.finance website.
(f)    The Telegram page of Defendant 1 indicated that it had
several Indian followers/members.
(g)    These facts indicated that, there was “purposeful
availment” by the defendants, of the jurisdiction of this Court,
and they had made their crypto currency, under the infringing
mark, available for purchase to customers in India and
specifically in Delhi. Reliance was particularly placed on the
webpage of Defendant 1 which contained a QR Code and
instructions on how to purchase the crypto currency of
Defendant 1 under the name “TATA coin/$TATA”.
(h)    The requisite “connection” between the activities of the
defendants and prejudice caused to the plaintiff and customers
in India undoubtedly existed.
(i)    The “effect” of the defendants infringing activity was
also felt within the jurisdiction of this Court, as the defendants’
crypto currency could be purchased online by anyone located
within such jurisdiction. Additionally, the availability of the
defendants’ crypto currency, under the allegedly infringing
marks “TATA coin/$TATA” had adversely affected the
plaintiff’s business and had resulted in dilution of its goodwill.
This, too, contributed to the “effect”, felt within the jurisdiction
of this Court, of the defendants’ activities.
(j)    The “whois” link on the defendants’ website did not
reveal any data on the basis of which the defendants could be
identified.    They had, therefore, completely masked their
identity. In this connection, paras 35 and 36 of the plaint aver
“35. Any person, including persons located within
the territorial jurisdiction of this Hon'ble Court can
visit the website of the Defendants at
www.tatabonus.com to sell and purchase the crypto
currency by the name of TATA Coin by scanning the
QR Code given on the said website and following the
instructions stipulated therein. Interestingly, the
domain www.tatabonus.com was created/registered on
36.    Further investigations conducted on the internet
revealed that the Defendant No. 1 i.e. M/
HakunaMatata $TATA Founders is the entity that is
the source of the TATA Coin cryptocurrency. The said
www.hakunamatata.finance, which domain was
created and registered on 1st May, 2021.”
(k)      The three conditions requiring fulfilment for this Court to
exercise territorial jurisdiction in the present matter are (a)
purposeful availment, by the defendants, of the jurisdiction of
this Court, (b) arising of the cause of action, from the activities
of the defendants, within the jurisdiction of this Court and (c)
substantial connection between the acts of the defendants or
their consequences and the jurisdiction of this Court. All these
criteria stood satisfied in the present case.
(l)      The principle of private international law, which requires
a foreign defendant to be either residing or carrying on business
in India, for courts in India to exercise jurisdiction over the
defendant, was subject to municipal law constraints, which
includes Section 20 of the CPC. Reliance has been placed, for
this purpose, on the judgment of the Supreme Court in
Gramphone Company of India Ltd. v. Birendra Bahadur
Pandey1 and of the High Court of Karnataka in Air Bus
Industries v. Laura Howell Linton2.
(m)      Defendant 1 is also selling apparel such as T-shirts,
bearing       the     “TATA”        logo      on     its    website
www.hakunamatata.finance.
(n)      There was, therefore, a clear intent, on the part of the
defendants, to target India as a customer base.
(o)       Any order of injunction, passed by this Court in terms of
the prayers in the suit, was capable of being implemented, as all
domain name registrars are before this Court.
(p)       In these circumstances, this Court is the most convenient
and appropriate forum, for the plaintiff to ventilate its
grievances and agitate its cause of action.
(q)       Indeed, if this Court were to decline to exercise
jurisdiction, the plaintiff would not have any forum before
which it could agitate its cause of action.
In support of his submissions, Mr. Pravin Anand relied, further, on
(India TV) Independent News Services Pvt. Ltd. v. India
Broadcast Live LLC3, World Wrestling Entertainment v. Reshma
Collections4, Juggernaut Books Pvt. Ltd. v. Ink Mango Inc5,
Banyan Tree Holdings (P) Ltd. v. A Murali Krishna Reddy6,
Millennium & Copthorne International Ltd. v. Aryans Plaza
Services Pvt. Ltd.7 and Exxon Mobil Corporation v. Exon Corp
7.        Sub-section (1) of Section 134 of the Trademarks Act, 1999
Order dated 9th August, 2019 in CS(COMM) 421/2019
“134. Suit for infringement, etc., to be instituted before
(a)     for the infringement of a registered trade
(b)     relating to any right in a registered trade
(c)     for passing off arising out of the use by
the defendant of any trade mark which is
identical with or deceptively similar to the
plaintiff’s trade mark, whether registered or
shall be instituted in any court inferior to a District
Court having jurisdiction to try the suit.”
8.     A suit for infringement of a registered trademark, or for passing
off, by any person, of its goods or services as the goods or services of
the plaintiff, can be instituted only in a district court, or a court
superior thereto, “having jurisdiction to try the suit”. The issue of
whether the court has jurisdiction to try the suit, or not, would have to
be reckoned on the anvil of Section 20 of the CPC.
9.     Sub-section (2) of Section 134 expands the provinces of the
jurisdiction otherwise available under Section 20 of the CPC read with
Section 13(1) of the Trademarks Act, 1999 by also conferring
jurisdiction, to try the suit, by a court, within whose territorial limits
the plaintiff resides or carries on business or personally works for
gain.
10.       Section 20 of the CPC reads as under:
“20. Other suits to be instituted where defendants reside
Subject to the limitations aforesaid, every suit shall be
instituted in a Court within the local limits of whose
(a)    the defendant, or each of the defendants where
there are more than one, at the time of the
commencement of the suit, actually and voluntarily
resides, or carries on business, or personally works for
(b)    any of the defendants, where there are more
than one, at the time of the commencement of the suit,
actually and voluntarily resides, or carries on business,
or personally works for gain, provided that in such
case either the leave of the Court is given, or the
defendants who do not reside, or carry on business, or
personally works for gain, as aforesaid, acquiesce in
(c)    the cause of action, wholly or in part, arises.
Explanation. – A corporation shall be deemed to carry
on business at its sole or principal office in India or, in
respect of any cause of action arising at any place
where it has also a subordinate office, at such place.”
11.       The Supreme Court, in Indian Performing Rights Society
Ltd. v. Sanjay Dalia9 has clarified that a plaintiff is entitled to
institute a suit for infringement of its trademark, or for passing off,
within any court which would be competent to adjudicate on the suit,
as envisaged by Section 134 of the Trademarks Act, 1999 or Section
20 of the CPC. In addition, therefore, to a court within whose
jurisdiction the plaintiff resides or voluntarily works for gain, a suit
may also be instituted, by virtue of Section 20, CPC, in a court within
whose jurisdiction the defendant resides or carries on business or
personally works for gain, or where the cause of action arose, wholly
or in part.
12.    In substance, therefore, a suit can be instituted where either (i)
the plaintiff resides or voluntarily works for gain or (ii) the defendant
resides or voluntarily works for gain or (iii) the cause of action arose
wholly or in part.
13.    That is not, however, the issue in controversy.
14.    The plaintiff has provided its business address in Delhi. That
the plaintiff is entitled to institute the present suit in Delhi, cannot,
therefore, be gainsaid, in view of Section 134(2) of the Trademarks
Act, 1999. The moot question is whether this court has the territorial
jurisdiction to issue any injunctive direction to the defendants, who
are both located outside India with, admittedly, no physical Indian
presence, or injunct the use, by them, of their “Tata Coin/$TATA”
mark.
15.    In my considered opinion, it does not.
16.1 Mr. Pravin Anand placed reliance on the judgment of a Single
Bench of this Court, authored by Hon’ble Mr. Justice Sanjay Kishan
Kaul (as he then was) in India TV3. The issue, therein, was similar.
The plaintiff, India TV (“ITV”, in short) claimed to have been using
the mark “India TV” continuously and extensively since 1 st
December, 2002.                ITV claimed to be aggrieved by the
“www.indiatvlive.com” domain name of the website of Defendants 1
and 2 in the said case (who would be also be collectively referred to,
hereinafter, in the context of this decision, as “the defendants”). The
defendants, in their written statement, claimed to have been “in
business since the year 2006 and have a global presence including in
India”10. This Court granted an ex parte ad interim injunction,
restraining the defendants from using any domain name containing
combination of the words ‘India’ and ‘TV’.
16.2 The defendants filed an application, under Order XXXIX Rule
4 CPC, for vacation of the injunction. One of the contentions
advanced by the defendants was that they were companies in the US
and the UK with no Indian presence. As such, the authority of this
Court to issue any interlocutory injunction against the defendants was
contested.
16.3 This Court examined the position of law, as it emanated from
decisions passed in other overseas jurisdictions. Thereafter, it went on
to hold thus, in paras 49, 50, 51 and 52 of the report:
“49. As regards the exercise of personal jurisdiction in
cases involving Internet activities, the position appears to be
that mere ‘passive’ posting of a website does not give
jurisdiction to the Court within whose jurisdiction, the
complainant company is present. Thus, personal jurisdiction
cannot be exercised over non-residents merely because their
website is accessible within the jurisdiction of the Court.
There has to be something more to indicate purposeful
direction of activity to the forum state in a substantial way.
In Cybersell Inc. case11 (supra) limited interactivity of the
website restricted to received browser’s name and expression
of interest but not signing up for the services provided was
not considered to be sufficient for the exercise of jurisdiction.
50.     Insofar as the position in this country is concerned,
there is no long arm’ statute as such which deals with
jurisdiction as regards non-resident defendants. Thus, it
would have to be seen whether the defendant's activities have
a sufficient connection with the forum state (India); whether
the cause of action arises out of the defendant's activities
within the forum and whether the exercise of jurisdiction
would be reasonable.
51.     I am in agreement with the proposition that the mere
fact that a website is accessible in a particular place may not
itself be sufficient for the Courts of that place to exercise
personal jurisdiction over the owners of the website.
However, where the website is not merely ‘passive’ but is
interactive permitting the browsers to not only access the
contents thereof but also subscribe to the services provided by
the owners/operators, the position would be different.
However, as noticed in the judgment in CyberSell Inc.
Case11 (supra), even where a website is interactive, the level
of interactivity would be relevant and limited interactivity
may also not be sufficient for a Court to exercise jurisdiction.
In Panavision International LP case12 (supra), it was found
that the registration of the plaintiff’s mark as a domain name
by the defendant had the effect of injuring the plaintiff in
California and therefore the Court had jurisdiction.
In CompuServe case13 (supra) again it was found that the
defendant had contacted Ohio to sell his computer softwares
on the plaintiffs Ohio based systems and sent his goods to
Ohio further for their ultimate sale and thus those Courts had
jurisdiction.
52.     In the present case, the website ‘indiatvlive.com’ of
defendant No. 1 is not wholly of a ‘passive’ character. It has
a specific Section for subscription to its services and the
options (provided on the website itself) for the countries
whose residents can subscribe to the services include India.
The services provided by defendant No. 1 can thus be
subscribed to and availed of in Delhi (India) i.e. within the
jurisdiction of this Court. It may also be noticed that an
article entitled ‘Archer Entertainment Joins India Minister for
Overseas Affairs in Launching IndiaTvLive.com’ (http:///in-
sys-con.com/read/243792.htm; http://www.archeremc.com/
Me-dia-Center/Company-News/‘sp : 2 0060705 quotes IBL
CEO Abhesh Verma as saying that ‘The platform provides us
the extremely lucrative opportunity to reach both inside and
outside of India. Overseas Indians represent the most affluent
ethnic consumers of any expatriate group. Within India, we
will target a whopping 500 million consumer class with a
steadily rising broadband connectivity.’ Another article
‘Archer launches IPTV Platform for Indian content in the US’
again filed by defendant No. 1 contains a similar statement.
This indicates that defendant No. 1 intended to target
expatriate Indians as well as Indians within the country.
Further the stand taken by defendant No. 1 in its written
statement is that defendant No. 1 company has a global
presence including in India. Defendant No. 1 also claims to
be the first IPTV delivery system of Indian content from India.
The website of defendant No. 1 was launched in India as well
as in Los Angeles. Thus, defendant No. 1 company has
sufficient connection with India.”
16.4 The position that emerges from the aforesaid decision is,
(i)     the accessibility of the website of the defendant to
persons within the jurisdiction of this Court would not, by itself,
empower this Court to exercise jurisdiction over the defendant,
(ii)    something more substantial, indicating purposefully
directed activity, by the defendants to persons located within
the territorial jurisdiction of this Court, is necessary,
(iii)  Indian Courts do not possess long arm jurisdiction, to act
(iv)   orders which would operate to the prejudice of non-
resident defendants (i.e. defendants located outside India) can,
therefore, be passed by Indian Courts only if
(a)    the defendants’ activities         have a sufficient
(b)    the cause of action, for the plaintiff, arises out of
(c)    the exercise of jurisdiction would be reasonable,
(v)    the fact that the defendants’ website is interactive and is
accessible to persons located within the jurisdiction of this
Court, is undoubtedly a relevant factor, and
(vi)   mere     interactivity   or    accessibility,   however,       is
insufficient; the level of interactivity is also relevant.
16.5 Para 52 of the report in India TV3 highlights the circumstances
which influenced this Court to hold that it could exercise jurisdiction
over the defendants. Firstly, the website of the defendants contained a
specific section for subscription to its services, and India was
expressly mentioned as one of the countries whose residents could
subscribe to the services provided by the defendants. Secondly, the
CEO of IBL made a public statement, asserting the opportunity
provided by the defendants’ platform to reach both inside and outside
of India and further acknowledging that, within India, the defendants
would target “a whopping 500 million consumer class”.                    This
statement, it was found, clearly indicated the intent of the defendants
to target expatriate Indians as well as Indians within India. Thirdly,
Defendant 1 (in that case) had, in its written statement, acknowledged
that it had a global presence including in India.          Fourthly, the
defendants claimed to be the first IPTV delivery system of Indian
content from India.      Fifthly, the website of the defendants was
launched in India as well as Los Angeles. These factors, it was found,
intended the existence of sufficient connection between the defendants
and India, for courts in India to be empowered to exercise injunctive
jurisdiction over the defendants and their activities.
17.    Mr. Pravin Anand has also relied on an interlocutory order
passed by a Coordinate Single Bench in Juggernaut Books5. As an
interlocutory order, the precedential value of the said decision is
limited; nonetheless, in the interests of maintaining consistency of
approach, I have perused the said order. In para 19 of the order, this
Court has noted the fact that the articles published by the defendants
in that case had a connection with India, Indian authors, Indian movies
and Indian actors.      Additionally, the Court relied on an e-mail
addressed by the defendants to Mr. William Dalrymple, a famous
historian, as indicating that the defendants were targeting customers
based in India. It is in these circumstances that the defendants were,
prima facie, found to be amenable to the injunctive jurisdiction of this
18.    Such indicators, of a conscious attempt by the defendants to
target the Indian market are, in my view, absent in the present case.
Juggernaut5 does not, therefore, live up to its name, so far as
buttressing the case canvassed by Mr. Pravin Anand is concerned.
19.    The position that emerges: The resultant legal position is that,
where the defendants are located outside India, this Court can issue
directions against such defendants, if the defendants are carrying out
their infringing activities within the jurisdiction of this Court. Where
the activity is physically carried out, the question of whether this
requirement is, or is not, met, is easily answered. A somewhat more
incisive approach is, however, required where the activity is carried
out over the internet, as in the present case. A discernable line does
exist, in such cases, between activities which would expose the
defendants to the jurisdiction of this Court, and those which would
not. Mere accessibility of the website of the overseas defendants, by
persons located within the jurisdiction of this Court, is not sufficient
to clothe this Court with jurisdiction to act against the defendants.
Interactivity of the website is, in such a case, essential. The extent to
which the website would be interactive is also, however, relevant;
mere interactivity would not suffice.       The decision in India TV3
dovetails, in this context, the considerations of website interactivity
and of “purposeful targeting” of Indian customers, by the defendants
located abroad. The interactivity should, therefore, be coupled with
an overt intent, of the defendants, to target customers in India. (In
India TV3, it was found that India was expressly mentioned on IBL’s
website as one of the countries from where customers could access the
services provided by IBL.) It would also be relevant to examine
whether any collateral evidence of purposeful targeting of the Indian
market, by the foreign defendants, is, or is not, available. Where such
evidence exists – as in the case of India TV3 – that would support the
inference of amenability of the defendants to the jurisdiction of Indian
Courts. At the end of the day, the two considerations which would
pre-eminently decide the issue would be whether the website of the
defendants is interactive and whether it discloses an overt intent to
target the Indian market. “Intent to target” appears, at any rate, to be a
mandatory governing consideration, the satisfaction of which is a sine
qua non for this Court to exercise jurisdiction.
20.    What remains is for the Court to examine whether the factors,
on which Mr. Pravin Anand has placed reliance, are sufficient to
satisfy these requirements, so as to enable this Court to grant
injunction as sought in the plaint. One may proceed to deal with these
aspects seriatim.
21.    Mr. Pravin Anand has relied on the following recitals, contained
in the “White Paper” issued by the defendant:
Given that HakunaMatata is a community-based token in
terms of decision making, charities targeted will incorporated
a community collective efforts to ensure that a diverse group
of charities can and are targeted away from prejudice and
unconscious charity exclusions that are part of the human
nature. Only in that way can HakunaMatata become a real
leader in the crypto currency charity mandate through
standing by the motto is will always hold “No Worries”, and
this applies to the token transparency, token dynamics,
community trust, and charitable objectives. To mention a few
of the charities already contacted and that are to be contacted,
below is a list of the nature or charitable focus that will be
adopted initially. With a special focus on disaster relief, our
Charity Pool is keep to act as a first responder to aid relief
groups and alleviate disaster impact.
22.    This paragraph, in my view, cannot indicate that the defendants
are, in any manner, targeting the Indian market. All it refers to are the
programmes included in the charity pool of the defendants. One of
the programmes happens to be “India Development and Relief Fund”.
The paragraph does not even indicate that the said fund is located in
India. The mere fact that the “India Development and Relief Fund”
happens to be one of the charities which the defendants intended to
contact, to aid relief groups and alleviate disaster impact, can hardly
constitute a basis to indicate targeting of India, by the defendants, as a
customer base for its crypto currency market.
23.    Mr. Anand has also pointed out that, on the Twitter Page of
Defendant 1, various persons from India posted queries regarding the
process to be followed, to purchase the defendants’ crypto currency.
It is not the case of the plaintiff that the defendants responded to these
queries and invited customers from India to purchase its product. The
website of the defendants is accessible across the world and, therefore,
interested persons across the world could post queries on the website.
The mere fact that some queries happen to be posted by persons in
India, again, cannot indicate, any intent on the part of the defendants
to target the Indian market.
24.    For the same reason, the fact that the defendants’ website has
50 visitors from India every day (which, incidentally, is a remarkably
small number) and that there was considerable internet traffic from
India to the website of Defendant 1 can also not constitute a basis to
indicate that Defendant 1 was selling its crypto currency in India or
was intentionally targeting India.
25.    Again, the reference, to the Telegram Page of Defendant 1, is
neither here nor there.      The defendants have merely annexed a
screenshot of one page from the Telegram account of Defendant 1
which indicates that certain persons, who appear by name to be
Indian, had accessed the webpage.           In view of the principles
enunciated in India TV3, on which Mr. Anand himself placed
reliance, mere accessing of the webpage of Defendant 1 cannot
constitute a ground for this Court to exercise jurisdiction over the
defendants. Besides, there is nothing to indicate that these persons
had accessed the webpage from India.
26.    Mr. Anand has also sought to press into service the “harmful
effect” principle. It is contended that, as consumers in India could
purchase the defendants’ crypto currency online from India, and that,
as a consequence, the plaintiff’s market had been affected and diluted,
the effect of the defendants’ activities were being felt in India, thereby
clothing this Court with jurisdiction to act in the matter. With respect,
I am unable to agree. One may take a much simpler example, to
examine the correctness of this submission. ‘Raymond’ happens to be
a well-known brand of apparel in India. An entity X, located in the
US commences marketing and manufacturing of apparel under the
name ‘Raymond’. X has no presence in India.            The website of X
does not target customers in India. There is nothing to indicate that X
had any overt or covert intention to market its product in India. At the
same time, as X’s products are available online, customers in India are
in a position to purchase X’s ‘Raymond’ line of apparel while sitting
in India. As a result of the activities of X, the brand value of the
Indian ‘Raymonds’ brand gets diluted. Can it be said, in such a
situation, that an Indian Court could pass injunctive orders against the
‘Raymond’ mark of X, located in the US? The answer, in my view,
has unequivocally to be in the negative.         The mere fact that the
defendants’ crypto currency can be purchased by customers located in
India and that, as a result, the plaintiff’s brand value may be diluted,
even seeing cumulatively, cannot, therefore, in my view, justify this
Court interfering with the defendants’ activities, or with its brand or
mark. In fact, the very applicability of the “effect” doctrine across
sovereign boundaries may itself be a matter for debate; I do not,
however, propose to tread that path in the present case.
27.    Mr. Anand has also relied on the defendants’ website which
contains a QR Code with instructions on how to purchase the
defendants’ “TATA Coin/$TATA” crypto currency.               Unlike the
position, which is obtained in India TV3, there is no specific reference
to India, on the website of the defendants, as one of the preferred
markets from where the defendants’ crypto currency could be
purchased.       No conscious targeting of India, therefore, exists.
Apparently, the defendants’ crypto currency could be purchased, using
the QR Code and the methodology indicated on the defendants’
website, by a customer located anywhere in the world. This factor,
therefore, too, cannot indicate any conscious targeting of the Indian
customer base by the defendants.
28.     Mr.     Pravin     Anand      also    took   me    through      the
www.hakunamatata.finance and www.tatabonus.com web-pages of
Defendants 1 and 2, as well as the Facebook, Twitter, Instagram,
YouTube, Telegram, Reddit and Discord accounts of Defendant 1. It
is sought to be submitted that, from these pages, the intent of
Defendant 1 to target customers across the globe and in particular
customers located in Delhi, is apparent. I am unable to agree. I do not
find, in the aforesaid pages on the various social media accounts of
Defendant 1, any intent, covert or overt, to target customers in Delhi.
If at all they target customers, they target customers across the world.
There is no “purposeful availment” by the defendants, of their
activities, of the jurisdiction of this Court.
29.     Mr. Anand has also sought to submit that, as the “whois” details
on the defendants’ website are masked, India is the most appropriate
country to sue Defendant 1.          Having itself adopted a stand that
Defendants        1     and     2     are    operating   the    websites
www.hakunamatata.finance and www.tatabonus.com over which the
defendants’ products are being sold, this argument may not be
available to the plaintiff at all. Even otherwise, the mere fact that the
defendants’ identity may not be readily available from its website
cannot empower this Court to exercise jurisdiction over the
defendants, who are admittedly located outside India.
30.    The operation of the Trademarks Act and the CPC statutorily
extend only to the boundaries of India.          In the case of internet
infringements, no doubt, the decision of the Court may, at times,
operate against entities located outside India. That, too, however,
would be subject to existence of the necessary connection between the
activity of the foreign-seated defendants and India. More specifically,
intent, of the defendants, to target India, must be established.
31.    The submissions of Mr. Pravin Anand do not, in my considered
view, make out the existence of the requisite “connection” between
the defendants’ activities and India.
32.    As a result, I am of the prima facie opinion that this Court
cannot issue directions, as sought, to the defendants as they are
outside the territorial reach of this Court.
33.    As this is a prima facie view, let the plaint be registered as a
suit and summons to be issued thereon, returnable before the Joint
Registrar on 21st December, 2021. Pleadings be completed before the
Joint Registrar, and admission and denial of documents carried out, in
accordance with the provisions of the CPC read with the Delhi High
Court (Original Side) Rules, 2018 and the Commercial Courts Act,
34.    The prayer for interim relief is declined. IA 8000/2021 is
dismissed.