1.     By this petition, petitioner is seeking bail in FIR No. 51/2020, under
registered at police station Jaffrabad, Delhi.
2.     On 26.02.2020, statement of Head Constable Deepak Dahiya, who
was deputed to maintain law and order with other members of his team in
the area between Jaffrabad Metro Station and Maujpur Chowk, where a
clash between two groups took place on 24.02.2020, was recorded. In his
statement, he had stated that one person, leading the agitated crowd and
brandishing pistol in his hand, came running towards him and fired 3-4
rounds of shots towards other people. The said person did not hear to his
warnings, and continued to walk to approach him and while he was at a
distance of 9 to 10 feet, he aimed the pistol at his head and shot the pistol
fire. Head Constable Deepak Dahiya further stated that he dodged his head
and saved his life and tried to calm down the said person, but he pushed him
with his left hand and he again fired at the public. On his complaint, the FIR
in question was registered.
3.     The incident was captured by a Journalist in his mobile phone and the
person brandishing and firing from pistol was identified as Shahrukh i.e. the
petitioner herein. Efforts were made to apprehend him and he was
intercepted and detained on 03.03.2020. Pursuant to a sustained
interrogation, petitioner voluntarily disclosed his involvement in the alleged
incident and he was arrested in this case and is behind bars since then.
4.     At the hearing, learned counsel for petitioner submitted that the
alleged incident had taken place on 24.02.2020 and the FIR in question was
registered on 26.02.2020 and so, there is 50 hours delay in registration of the
FIR. Reliance was placed upon decision of this Court in Thulia Kali Vs.
State of T.N. (1972) 3 SCC 393 to submit that delay in lodging the FIR is an
afterthought and results in embellishment.
5.     It was further submitted that merely because petitioner was
apprehended from Shamli, Uttar Pradesh, he cannot be said to be an
absconder until and unless declared by the court, especially when no notice
was issued against him to appear before the authorities. Further submitted
that petitioner has been made a scapegoat/ poster boy of the riots and
complainant has become the symbol of bravery before the media persons,
which is against fundamental rights of the petitioner.
6.     Learned counsel further submitted that on the basis of complaint of
Head Constable Deepak Dahiya, Section 307 IPC has been invoked against
the petitioner, whereas the petitioner had only shot in the side and not
towards him and so he had no intention to kill him. During the course of
hearing, learned counsel for petitioner placed reliance upon various
interview clippings of complainant- Deepak Dahiya with media persons and
broadcasting channels, in support of above submissions.
7.     Reliance was also placed upon decision of Hon’ble Supreme Court in
State of Kerala Vs. Raneef (2011) 1 SCC 784 to submit that while deciding
the bail application, the court has to bear in mind the delay in concluding the
trial. It was also submitted that irrespective of how many criminal cases are
pending against an accused, it cannot form the basis to refuse the bail.
8.      Lastly, it was submitted that the learned trial court while refusing to
grant bail to petitioner has not considered material factual aspects and has
mechanically held that the allegations levelled against him are grave. He
submitted that petitioner cannot be made to languish behind the jail for an
indefinite long period and therefore, this petition deserves to be allowed.
9.       On the other hand, learned Special Public Prosecutor has opposed the
present petition while submitting that the FIR in question has been
registered at the instance of a responsible police officer, who was on duty on
the fateful day of riots and there are specific allegations of petitioner
heading a pistol towards Head Constable Deepak Dahiya with an intention
to kill him. Learned Special Public Prosecutor has played before this Court a
video clip as well as a few photographs showing petitioner heading the
group of mobs, holding his pistol in hand and walking towards the
complainant and also firing the pistol shots.
10.     Learned Special Public Prosecutor further submitted that petitioner
had absconded since the day of alleged incident and he could be intercepted
only on 03.03.2020 and at his instance, the illegal weapon used by him on
24.02.2020 with 02 live cartridges and the shirt worn by him at the time of
incident, were recovered from his house. Further submitted that after
dispersal of the rioters, three empty cartridges bearing the mark KF 7.65
were recovered from the spot by SI Naresh Kumar, Jaffrabad Police Station
and during interrogation, petitioner has admitted of having purchased the
illegal weapon from Merrut for a sum of Rs.35,000/- and as per FSL report,
the cartridges seized from the spot have been fired from the weapon of
11.     It was also submitted that the call detail record and video footage
analysis clearly show petitioner’s involvement in the alleged incident of
riots. It was submitted that charge sheet in this case has already been filed
and trial is in progress. It is, therefore, urged that no leniency is required to
be shown towards the petitioner and this petition deserves to be dismissed.
12.     The arguments heard by both the sides were heard at length and
material placed on record is perused.
13.     Before coming to the facts and rendering an opinion in the present
case, this Court takes a serious view to the contents of paragraphs No. 14 to
16 of this petition, which are not worth disclosing. Highly derogatory and
serious allegations have been made against the Government of India,
Ministers and Judge of this Court, which is deprecated and the Bar is
suggested to not make such claims until and unless supported with factual
and material evidence in a particular case.
14.    Pertinently, the allegations levelled against the petitioner in the
present case are that in the unfortunate incident of riots which occurred on
24.02.2020 at the road between Jaffrabad Metro Station and Maujpur
Chowk amongst people of different communities, petitioner was a party to
the huge crowd which had unauthorizedly gathered and pelted stones, petrol
bombs and fired gun/pistol shots.
15.    The role attributed to the petitioner is not confined to participation in
the mob of rioters but of heading the large crowd, holding a pistol in hand
and releasing open fire shots. The video clipping and pictures played before
this Court have shaken the conscience of this Court how petitioner could
take law and order in his hands. Whether or not petitioner had intention to
kill the complainant or any person present in the public with his open air
pistol shots, but it is hard to believe that he had no knowledge that his act
may harm anyone present at the spot. The worthiness of complainant’s
statement recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C. and petitioner’s claim that he
had not aimed pistol to shot at the complainant, shall be tested at trial.
16.    Moreover, it is not the case of petitioner that he was not involved in
the alleged incident. In the opinion of this Court, the learned trial court has
rightly held that the petitioner is alleged to have participated in riots and his
picture speaks a volume about his involvement.
17.    Keeping in mind the gravity of offence committed by the petitioner as
also the facts of the present case, I am not inclined to grant bail to the
18.    The petition is accordingly dismissed while refraining to comment
upon the merits of the prosecution case.