Dated this the 30th day of January, 2023
A Local Self Government Institution and its
Secretary have approached this Court challenging
Ext.P7 order of the Kerala State Human Rights
Commission (hereinafter referred to as, 'Human
Rights     Commission')      directing   payment   of
compensation of Rs.50,000/- to the 3 rd respondent,
a street vendor for summarily evicting him and
taking away the articles kept for sale.
2.   The 3rd respondent, who claims to be a
vendor of clothes and garments on the side of
Modern Hotel, off the pavement at K.K. road,
Kottayam since 08.07.1984, approached the Human
Rights Commission by Ext. P4 complaint alleging
that,   on 14.05.2015, at around 12.15 P.M, a
sanitation worker from the Municipality asked him to
remove a waste kit placed near his vending place
and when told that he has not kept the waste kit
there, the worker abused him and later, when he left
the vending place to buy medicine, about 15
employees of the Municipality came in a garbage
collection vehicle and took away all the clothes kept
by him for sale. He contended that his source of
livelihood has been affected and he is not in a
position to repay the loans and he sustained a loss
of Rs.2,34,000/- and has to be compensated by the
3.   The Municipality filed a report before the
Human Rights Commission stating that the 3 rd
respondent was summarily evicted pursuant to
Ext.P1 order dated 14.05.2015 and in exercise of
powers    under   Section  367    (3) of  the  Kerala
Municipality Act, 1994 since there were reports
regarding obstruction to vehicular and pedestrian
traffic in K.K road and M.L road due to street
vending and the 3rd respondent was occupying ¾
portion of the pavement and was littering the area
causing blockage of the drain.
4.  The Human Rights Commission visited the
premises of the Municipality and recorded that only
one box and a few items could be seen and no
details of the items seized were recorded in the
mahazar.
5.  In   Ext.P7   order,  the  Human       Rights
Commission observed that though several persons
were vending at the side of the road, only the 3 rd
respondent was evicted and it is evident that the 3 rd
respondent was evicted at the behest of the owner
of the hotel near the place where the 3 rd respondent
is vending. The Commission found that the action of
the Municipality in picking and choosing the 3 rd
respondent    for   the    purpose  of    eviction   is
discriminatory. The Commission also found that the
eviction of the 3rd respondent without notice from
the place where he is doing business for a quarter
century is inhumane and is in violation of natural
justice, his human rights and right to life and the
directions of the Honb'le Supreme Court and the
Government Policies. Taking note of the entire facts
and circumstances of the case, the loss of income,
infringement of human rights and right to life and
mental agony suffered by the 3rd respondent,        the
Human Rights Commission directed the Municipality
to pay an amount of Rs.50,000/- as compensation to
him and further directed to provide facility to him to
re-allocate, once place is available.
6.    Ext.P7   order   is   challenged  by    the
petitioners contending that there is no violation of
human      rights   and  the    1st  respondent   lacks
jurisdiction to entertain the complaint of the 3 rd
respondent.       It is further contended that the
Municipality can summarily evict the encroachers
under Sections 367 (3) and 372 of the Kerala
Municipality Act, 1994 and the officers of the
Municipality   have   performed     the   said  duty   in
implementation     of  Ext.P1   order   issued   by  the
Secretary and execution of lawful orders cannot be
treated as violation of any rights, less human rights.
It  is   also  contended    that   the   Human    Rights
Commission cannot order payment of compensation
and can make only recommendation to the Authority
under Section 18 of the Protection of Human Rights
Act, 1993.      Accordingly, the petitioners pray for
direction to quash Ext.P7 and to declare that the 1st
respondent    has    no   jurisdiction   to  direct  the
petitioners to pay compensation.
7.    A counter affidavit is filed by the 3rd
respondent wherein it is stated that he is entitled for
protection from eviction under the Street Vendors
(Protection of Livelihood and Regulation of Street
Vending) Act, 2014 and is entitled for re-allocation
under the Act and that the action of the petitioners
in evicting him without notice and by destroying
articles amounts to great injustice and violation of
human rights and the 1st respondent has jurisdiction
to    entertain  the    complaint    and    to  order
compensation. It is further contended that, having
subject to the jurisdiction of the 1st respondent and
having not raised the issue of maintainability of the
complaint before the 1st respondent at the first
instance, the petitioners are estopped from raising
any objection as to the maintainability of the
complaint and the jurisdiction of the 1 st respondent
in awarding compensation.
8.   Heard Sri.Ajith Joy, the learned Standing
Counsel for the petitioners, Smt.Thushara James,
the learned counsel for respondents 1 and 2,
Sri.Kaleeswaram Raj, the learned counsel for the 3 rd
respondent and Sri. K.P.Harish, the learned Senior
Government Pleader for the 6th respondent.
9.   The Human Rights Commission found that
the 3rd respondent has been doing garment business
on the side of K.K Road for over a quarter century
and he alone was evicted by the employees of the
Municipality though others were also doing street
vending at the same place. The Human Rights
Commission further found that the eviction was
without notice and the 3rd respondent was not given
time to remove his articles and the same is in
violation  of  the  principles  of   natural justice,
infringement of rights relating to life and equality.
The Commission also observed that the eviction was
at the behest of the owner of the Hotel near the
place where the 3rd respondent was vending. From
the pleadings before the Human Rights Commission,
it is seen that there was an altercation between a
sanitation worker of the Municipality and the 3rd
respondent before the articles were removed in
garbage collection vehicle. The Commission found
that there was no proper mahazar with regard to the
articles seized from the 3rd respondent.
10. Section 367 of the Kerala Municipality Act,
1994 deals with removal of encroachments and
reads as follows:-
Secretary may, by notice, require the owner or
occupier of any premises to remove or alter any
projection. Encroachment or obstruction other than
a door, gate, bar or ground floor window situated
against or in front of such premises and in or over
any street.
(2) Where the owner or occupier of the premises
proves that any such projection, encroachment or
obstruction has existed for a period sufficient under
the   law   of  limitation to  give   any   person  a
prescriptive title thereto or that it was erected or
may with the permission or licence of any authority
duly empowered in that behalf, and that the
period, if any, for which the permission or licence,
is valid has not expired, the Municipality shall make
reasonable compensation to every person who
suffers damage by the removal or alteration of the
same.
(3) Where the Secretary is satisfied that any road
or public street including footpath, if any, thereof
belonging to the Municipality or vested in it or
otherwise is encroached upon by any person in any
form, either temporarily or permanently so as to
cause obstruction or hindrance or inconvenience to
traffic and users of the street, the Secretary may
summarily evict such encroachments and may
seize and dispose of any belonging or article that
may be found on such road or street and no person
shall be entitled to claim compensation for any
action taken by the Secretary in this behalf.”
(emphasis supplied)
11. Section 372 of the Kerala Municipality Act,
1994 reads as follows:
ENCROACHMENT.—            Notwithstanding       anything
contained in this Act, the Secretary may, without
notice, cause to be removed- (a) Any wall, fence, rail,
step, booth, or other structure or fixture which is
erected or set up in contravention of the provisions of
(b) Any stall, chair, bench, box, ladder, bale, or any
other    thing whatsoever, placed     or  deposited     in
contravention of section 370;
(c) Any article, whatsoever, hawked or exposed for
sale in any public place or in any public street in
contravention   of   section  371    and  any    vehicle,
package, box, board, shelf or any other thing in or on
which such article placed or kept for the purpose of
While Section 367 (1) of the Municipality Act
provides for notice for removal of encroachment in
or over any street (which includes a footway going
by the definition of 'public street' under Section 2
(34) (b)), sub-section (3) thereof empowers the
Secretary to summarily evict encroachments on any
road or public street, including footpath where the
Secretary is satisfied that such road or public street
including footpath is encroached upon by any person
in any form, either temporarily or permanently so as
to cause obstruction or hindrance or inconvenience
to traffic and users of the street. Summary eviction
of encroachment from public street or footpath can
be   done,    if the   Secretary   is 'satisfied' that
'encroachment causes obstruction or hindrance or
inconvenience to traffic and users of the street'. A
reading of Section 367 (3) shows that the power
vested    in   the    Secretary    to   summarily     evict
encroachments       is  discretionary     and   shall   be
exercised judicially and reasonably. The power of
summary      eviction   shall   be    exercised  by    the
Secretary in cases of urgency which brooks no delay.
In other cases, the Secretary may, by notice, require
removal of encroachment. In the light of the fact the
3rd respondent had been engaged in vending at the
place for long, notice should have been issued to the
3rd respondent before eviction, so that he could have
offered his explanation or could have taken away the
articles kept for sale.
12. The 3rd respondent alone was evicted by
the Municipality though others were also doing street
vending at the same place. The Municipality cannot
follow pick and choose policy and there cannot be
any discrimination in the matter of eviction of street
vendors. The action of the Municipality has infringed
the fundamental right to equality guaranteed to the
3rd respondent under Article 14 of the Constitution of
13. The right of the 3rd respondent to carry on
vending on street guaranteed by the Constitution is
subject to the restrictions imposed by the Kerala
Municipality Act, 1994. However, we find that the
power of removal of encroachers vested in the
Secretary under the Municipality Act is not exercised
judicially and reasonably. The 3rd respondent's right
to livelihood has been deprived otherwise than in
accordance     with   a     just   and    fair   procedure
established by law. Consequently, it follows that the
Municipality has infringed the fundamental rights of
the   3rd   respondent     under    Article    21  of  the
14. Section 2(d) of the Protection of Human
Rights Act, 1993 defines "Human Rights" to mean
the rights relating to life, liberty, equality and dignity
of the individual guaranteed by the Constitution or
embodied     in    the  International   Covenants    and
enforceable by courts in India. We have found that
the action of the Municipality and its officers in
evicting the 3rd respondent has infringed his rights
relating to life and equality guaranteed by the
Constitution. Violation of rights relating to life and
equality guaranteed by the Constitution amounts to
violation of human rights.
15. It is contended by the petitioners that the
Human Rights Commission cannot order payment of
compensation and can make only recommendation
to the Authority under Section 18 of the Protection
of Human Rights Act, 1993. Section 18(a) (i)
provides   that     where   the  inquiry  discloses  the
commission      of   violation  of  human     rights  or
negligence in the prevention of violation of human
rights or abatement thereof by a public servant, it
may recommend to the concerned Government or
authority to make payment of compensation or
damages to the complainant as the Commission may
consider necessary. A Division Bench of this Court in
State of Kerala and another v. Human Rights
Commission and others [2015 (1) KHC 391: 2015
(1) KLT 239] held that, when the Human Rights
Commission         recommends        to    the    concerned
Government or Authority to make payment of
compensation or damages, it is with the intend to
make payment by the said authority. This Court held
“15.   When the Commission has specific power
under S.18(a)(i) that it may recommend to the
concerned    Government or authority to      make
payment of compensation or damages, we cannot
accept the submission of the learned Government
Pleader that the Commission under S.18(a)(i)
cannot direct payment of compensation. When the
Commission      recommends    to   the   concerned
Government or Authority to make payment of
compensation or damages, it is with the intend to
make payment by the said authority. The use of
the word “recommend” in S.18(a)(i) does not take
away the effectiveness or competency of the order
for issuing direction for payment of compensation.
We thus do not accept the submission that there is
lack of jurisdiction for the Commission in directing
payment of compensation.”
In the light of the said decision, we hold that
the Human Rights Commission has jurisdiction to
direct    payment        of   compensation      to   the   3rd
respondent for violation of his human rights. We do
not find any illegality or irregularity or lack of
jurisdiction in Ext. P7 order passed by the Human
Rights Commission. The writ petition fails and is,
accordingly, dismissed. The petitioners are granted
two months' time from today to make payment of
the amount ordered in Ext. P7.