Heard learned counsel for the revisionist, learned A.G.A for the
State and also perused the record.
This criminal revision has been preferred by the revisionist
against the order dated 18.04.2022 passed by Additional District
and Sessions Judge, Court No.8, District Allahabad in Sessions
Trial No.2297 of 2021 (State vs. Oyas @ Avesh), arising out of
Case Crime No.225 of 2014, under Sections 326-A, 504, 506
IPC, rejecting the discharge application of the revisionist under
The main submission of the learned counsel for the revisionist
is that prima facie charges under Section 326A IPC is not made
out against the revisionist. There is no grievous injury on the
body of the victim. From the perusal of prosecution papers,
offence under Section 326A IPC is not disclosed. Injured ladies
were medically
examined on 19.05.2014 at SRN Hospital, Allahabad by Dr.
Nisar Ahmad at about 09:10 am and 09:20 pm, who were
brought by their mother namely, . There is no
permanent or partial damage or deformity to or burns or maims
or disfigures or disables, any part or parts of the body, so charge
under Section 326A or 326B is not made out. Applicant is in
judicial custody since 19.03.2019.
Learned AGA objected the prayer and submitted that from the
perusal of order, it reveals that initially revisionist absconded.
Thereafter, proceedings was initiated against the revisionist
under Section 83 Cr.P.C., then, he surrendered before the court
below on 19.03.2019. On 16.12.2021, case was committed to
Court of Sessions and is pending at the stage of framing of the
charge. It is also submitted that there is prima facie material to
frame charge under Section 326A IPC against the revisionist.
One co-accused Jamaluddin @ Raju has been convicted under
imprisonment for 10 years has been awarded to the co-accused.
Section 326A IPC lays down that "whoever causes permanent or
partial damage or deformity to, or burns or maims or disfigures or
disables, any part or parts of the body of a person or causes grievous hurt
by throwing acid on or by administering acid to that person, shall be
punished with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten
years but which may extend to life imprisonment."
Learned counsel for the revisionist emphasizes only on the
point that as there is no grievous hurt on the body of the victims
so charge under Section 326A IPC is not made out. But from
the reading of the Section 326-A IPC, it reveals that nine "OR"
has been used which shows that for the charge under Section
326A IPC can be framed without grievous hurt to the victim.
But grievous hurt to acid burn victim, is not mandatory in each
case. Nine "OR" has been used to show that in case of
permanent or partial damage, deformity, burns, maims,
disfigures, disables any part of the body of the person, or by
administering acid to that person, charge under Section 326A
IPC should be framed in such situation. Thus, the submission of
the learned counsel for the revisionist has no force.
The injury report of the victim shows that there
are following injuries on the body of victim dated 19.05.2014 :
1. Reddish black injury over It. cheek 2x2cm, 2cm medial to lt. ear.
2. Reddish black injury in the area of lateral surface of it. forearm in the
area of 10cmx6cm.
3. Burning sensation over lt. side of chest (in bra region)
Above injuries are caused by acid burn. Duration fresh
informed police.
Smt.                                    18 years female has received following
1. Reddish black burn injury over face and neck. Burn sensation present.
2. Reddish black burn injuries and on the medial side of lt. upper arm in
the area of 8cm.
Above injuries caused by acid burn. Duration fresh informed
police. From the medical report, it appears that injured had
sustained burn acid injury.
The provisions relating to charge are intended to provide that
the charge shall give the accused full notice of offence charged
person as precisely and concisely as possible of the matter with
which he is charged and must convey to him with sufficient
clearness and certainty, what the prosecution intended to prove
against him. At the time of framing of charge, the court is not
required to screen evidence or to apply the standard whether the
prosecution will be able to prove the case against the accused at
the trial. The Court shall consider only the material placed
before it by the Investigating Agency. Court has to see only
prima facie case against the accused. Charge can be framed
even on the basis of strong suspicion founded on material
before the Court.
On the basis of above discussion, this Court is of the view that
trial court has passed a legal order, there is not manifest error or
material irregularity in the impugned order. There is prima facie
evidence material against the revisionist to frame charge against
the revisionist under Section 326A IPC also and in such
circumstances applicant is not liable to be discharged.
Thus, this criminal revision has no force and is dismissed,
Learned Trial Court is directed to frame charge against the
revisionist and make endeavor to conclude the trial
expeditiously, if there is no legal impediment.