Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Ran Vijay Singh,Sridhar
Heard Shri Sandeep Dixit, learned Senior Advocate, assisted by
Shri Ashok Kumar Singh for the appellant, Shri Ran Vijay
Singh, learned Additional Chief Standing Counsel for the State-
respondents and Shri Sudeep Seth, learned Senior Advocate,
assisted by Shri Sridhar Awasthi for respondent nos.6 to 11.
By means of this intra-court appeal, the appellant has sought to
impeach an interim order dated 27.01.2022 passed by the
learned Single Judge in Writ-A No.323 of 2022 filed by the
respondent nos.6 to 11, whereby it has been ordered that in no
circumstances, candidates in excess of 69000 vacancies which
were advertised on 01.12.2018 (Assistant Teacher Recruitment
Examination 2019)) shall be appointed and unadvertised
vacancies shall not be filled in without being advertised and
selection being held in respect thereof.
Submission of Shri Sandeep Dixit, learned Senior Advocate
representing the appellant, who is arrayed as respondent no.9 in
the writ petition, is that the learned Single Judge has
erroneously entertained the writ petition filed by the respondent
nos.6 to 11, though these respondents do not have any locus to
file the writ petition for the reason that they cannot be said to be
aggrieved by the decision of the State Government, dated
05.01.2022 whereby it has been decided to issue an additional
select list of 6800 candidates by revising the selection process
held pursuant to the advertisement/government order dated
01.12.2018. Further submission on behalf of the appellant is
that these respondents also do not have any locus to challenge
the select list dated 05.01.2022 which relates to selection of
6800 reserved category candidates pursuant to the selection
held for 69000 posts of Assistant Teachers which were directed
to be filled in by the Government Order dated 01.12.2018 for
the reason that these respondents do not have any claim so far
as the selection held against 69000 vacancies is concerned.
Shri Dixit, learned Senior Advocate representing the appellant
has also argued that in the writ petition before the learned
Single Judge the respondent nos.6 to 11 herein, who are
petitioners, had failed to establish infringement of any legal,
statutory or constitutional right, which can be said to have
occurred on account of the decision of the State Government,
dated 05.01.2022 issuing additional select list of 6800
candidates. In this regard, it has been submitted that the writ
petition was not maintainable at the behest of these respondents
as they can only be said to be prospective applicants in case in
future any selection against any vacancy takes places. He has
further argued that no law confers any right of appointments on
a candidate; it is only the right of consideration which is
available to the candidates/prospective candidates but such right
is exercisable only once the employer decides to undertake any
selection process. In this view, submission is that at the behest
of prospective applicants/candidates the writ petition in which
the order under appeal herein has been passed was not
Opposing the submissions and prayers made by the learned
counsel representing the appellant, Shri Sudeep Seth, learned
Senior Advocate representing the respondent nos.6 to 11 has
submitted that the order dated 27.01.2022 which is under appeal
herein is, admittedly, interim in nature and since by the said
interim order no issue or lis between the parties has
conclusively been decided by the learned Single Judge, the
instant special appeal is not maintainable. It has further been
argued that the learned Single Judge has only provided as an
interim measure that 6800 vacancies are since in excess of
69000 vacancies which were advertised pursuant to the
Government Order dated 01.12.2018 as such no appointment
should be made against these 6800 vacancies which are in
excess of number of vacancies advertised. Thus, the submission
is that against such an interim order provided by the learned
Single Judge, this special appeal is not maintainable.
It has further been argued on behalf of the respondent nos.6 to
11 that the learned Single Judge has considered the issue
relating to locus of these respondents who have filed the writ
petition and has held that no law permits for making
appointment in excess of vacancies advertised and in case
vacancies are filled in without being advertised and without
subjecting them to selection process, the same would clearly
amount to infringement of fundamental rights of these
respondents-petitioners of consideration for appointment in
public employment.
Thus,the submission is that the interim order dated 27.01.2022
passed by the learned Single Judge even on merit does not
suffer from any illegality or error so as to call for any
interference by this Court in this special appeal.
We have considered the rival submissions made by the learned
counsel representing the respective parties and have also
perused the records available before us on this special appeal.
From the facts, which can be culled out from the records
available before us, it is apparent that the learned Single Judge
while passing the interim order dated 27.01.2022 has concluded
that the select list of 6800 candidates is in excess of 69000
vacancies which were advertised. Learned Single Judge has
thus, relied upon a well settled principle of law that no
appointment can be permitted to be made in excess of number
of vacancies advertised and without subjecting such vacancies
to selection. The said finding recorded by the learned Single
Judge, in our considered opinion, cannot be said to be erroneous
in law. If the State or its instrumentalities are allowed to make
appointment against the vacancies which are in excess of the
number of vacancies advertised, in our considered opinion, the
same would be in clear violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the
Constitution of India.
Article 16 of the Constitution of India guarantees equal
opportunities to all in the matters relating to employment under
the State or its instrumentalities. It is thus obvious that if
equality of opportunity in relation to appointment is to be made
meaningful and effective, no appointment can be permitted to
be made under the State or its instrumentalities where equal
opportunity is denied to the candidates. At this juncture, we
may notice that if any appointment is sought to be made
without advertising the vacancies or without subjecting such
vacancies to selection, the same would necessarily result in
denial of equal opportunity as enshrined in Article 16 of the
Constitution of India. If vacancies are advertised, there would
not be any breach of Article 16 of the Constitution of India
because every one who is eligible, in view of the conditions of
service, would be considered for employment under the State or
its instrumentalities, however, in case any attempt is made to
fill in vacancies without advertising the same, that would
unambiguously infringe the fundamental right of consideration
for public employment as enshrined under Article 16 of the
Constitution of India.
In the instant case, it has vehemently been argued by the
learned Senior Advocate representing the appellant that the
respondents nos.6 to 11 does not have any locus to file the writ
petition challenging the decision of the State Government
issuing additional select list of 6800 candidates and preparing
the select list for the said purpose. Such submission, in our
considered opinion, is fallacious for the reason that whether or
not these respondents-petitioners succeed in the earlier
litigation, they would still be deprived of their right of
consideration against these 6800 vacancies. By taking the
decision to fill up in 6800 vacancies which are admittedly in
excess of 69000 vacancies which were advertised, these
vacancies would never be either advertised or subjected to any
selection which would clearly infringed upon the right of these
respondents to participate in the selection. It is true that mere
availability of vacancy does not confer any right of even
consideration unless the employer intends to make recruitment
against such vacancies, however, in this case, it is not that
against 6800 vacancies recruitment/appointment is not being
made, rather appointments are being made by the action which
is impugned in this writ petition, that too, without advertising
the vacancies. In our considered opinion, thus, the petitioners of
the writ petition are entitled to appear for selection against these
6800 vacancies as and when the same are advertised or a
decision is taken to fill up the same in future, of course, subject
to their fulfillment of eligibility criteria at the relevant point of
time. By not subjecting these 6800 vacancies to any selection
and by simultaneously deciding to fill them up, certainly results
in denial of right of consideration of the petitioners of the writ
petition. In this view, we are of the considered opinion that the
respondent nos.6 to 11, who were petitioners in the writ
petition, have locus to file the writ petition. The submissions
made to the contrary by the learned Senior Advocate
representing the appellant, thus, merits rejection which is
hereby rejected.
Apart from the merit of this special appeal which has been
discussed herein above, we may also notice that the instant
special appeal challenges only an interim order passed by the
learned Single Judge it has been ordered that no candidate in
excess of 69000 vacancies shall be appointed and that
unadvertised vacancies shall not be filled up without being
advertised and selection being held in respect thereof. Such a
direction in our opinion is nothing but only reiteration of well
established law that no appointment can be made in excess of
number of vacancies advertised. It, substantively, does not
decide any issue between the parties and in this view of the
matter as well we find that this special appeal would not be
maintainable against such an interim order.
For the discussion made and reasons given above, we find that
the order under appeal dated 27.01.2022 passed by the learned
Single Judge does not suffer from any error or illegality which
may warrant any interference in this special appeal.
Having observed as above, considering the fact that the matter
relates to large number of candidates who are waiting for their
fate relating to their respective claims of appointment, we
request the learned Single Judge that the proceedings of Writ-A
No.323 of 2022 and other connected matters shall be expedited
and concluded as early as possible. We also expect that the
parties to the proceedings pending before the learned Single
Judge shall complete their pleadings at the earliest and shall
make all possible endeavour to get the writ petition pending
before the learned Single Judge, decided at the earliest.
The special appeal is, thus, disposed of in the aforesaid terms.
No order as to costs.