for the petitioner.
for respondents No.1 & 3.
for respondent No.2.
Petitioner has preferred this writ petition for the
issuance of an appropriate writ in the nature of mandamus
directing respondent No.2 to conduct surgery of renal transplant
of husband of the petitioner by receiving the organ from the
petitioner-wife without any further delay.
Marriage of the petitioner was solemnized with Surjit
Singh on 12.12.2021 according to Anand Karaj ceremony. After
the marriage, the health of Surjit Singh started deteriorating and
he was diagnosed to be suffering from both kidneys failure. He
was advised to undergo kidney transplantation by respondent
Admittedly, condition of Surjit Singh is very serious as
of now. Petitioner being wife of Surjit Singh came forward to
donate one of her kidneys for her husband. Petitioner and her
husband have been subjected to all necessary medical tests as
advised by respondent No.2. In all the tests, it has been found
by respondent No.2 that the petitioner is fit enough to donate
kidney to her husband to save his life. Petitioner is also satisfied
that a person with one kidney may lead normal and healthy life,
therefore, she took this stand to save life of her husband.
After all the medical tests, respondent No.2 has also
verified the physical as well as mental state of health of the
petitioner. Even counselling of the petitioner was conducted by
psychiatrist to verify the mental state of health of the petitioner.
As per opinion of the psychiatrist, the petitioner does not suffer
from    any    psychiatric     ailment.    Respondent   No.2-Hospital
constituted a competent authority, comprising of four members
for the purpose of authorization of kidney transplantation
between near relatives. The case of the petitioner was placed
before the aforesaid authorization committee and the committee
has rejected the same on the ground of short duration of
Notice of motion was issued on 17.03.2022. In
pursuance of the notice, respondents have appeared.
On      a  pointed       query,   learned      counsel for the
respondents could not show any such bar under the rules that a
newly wedded wife like the petitioner cannot donate one of her
kidneys to her ailing husband. Respondent No.2 has not pointed
any foul play at the behest of donor or donee in order to
circumvent any provision of law or for any extraneous
consideration or commercial transaction between the parties in
any manner.
Admittedly condition of husband of the petitioner is very
serious, who is already on dialysis on day to day basis since
long. The identity and consent of the petitioner as required
under rule 22 of the Transplantation of Human Organs Rules,
2014 have already been verified by the respondents. No other
consent of any parents or siblings of donor is required to be
obtained in view of Karamjit Kaur vs. State of Punjab and
others CRWP No.1845 of 2019 decided on 15.06.2020.
Police verification in the present case shows that there
is no element of greed or any kind of pressure being exerted
upon the petitioner to donate her kidney. In Jaswinder Singh
vs. State of Punjab and others, 2008(3) R.C.R. (Criminal) 93
the rejection of donation of kidney by a person, who was not
even a relative of the recipient was set aside being not having
any conclusive material. The apprehension alone in respect of
monetary transaction was held not sufficient and it was held that
human conduct in such like situation cannot be measured in any
mathematical terms and approval cannot be denied on mere
In the instant case, petitioner is wife of the recipient.
The statutory provisions have been promulgated to prevent
trafficking and commercial practices. Every care/caution has to
be taken to prevent exploitation of any kind. Petitioner is legally
wedded wife of the recipient. There is no material on record to
indicate any malpractice or any element of greed or pressure
being exerted upon the petitioner. The condition of husband of
the petitioner is very serious.
Learned counsel for respondent No.2 very fairly
submits that there is no disqualification attached to the
petitioner for donating her one of the kidneys to her husband,
who is in dire need of the same. There is no legal bar to the
aforesaid course.
Admittedly, petitioner and her husband are not foreign
nationals. The authorization committee has only rejected the
case of the petitioner for kidney transplantation due to short
duration of marriage. Evidently, the duration of marriage is not a
ground to discard the willingness of one of the spouse, to
donate kidney in favour of other spouse, particularly when the
case of the petitioner has been verified on all legal parameters.
Marriage has already been registered with the Marriage
Registrar and a marriage certificate has been duly issued in
favour of the couple.
Keeping in view the aforesaid facts and circumstances,
the competent authority is directed to conclusively decide the
application submitted by the petitioner for donation of kidney by
the petitioner to the recipient i.e. her husband and allow
transplantation of the same to be done by respondent No.2 at
the earliest, keeping in view the medical state of health of Surjit
Singh (husband of the petitioner).
With the aforesaid direction, this petition is disposed of.
Whether speaking/reasoned                Yes/No