2.   The challenge in these appeals is to the judgment
and order dated 25.11.2019 of the Division Bench of the
High Court of Calcutta, whereby the decision of the
Single Judge dismissing the suit i.e. CS No. 79/2006 of
M/s. SIBCO Investment Pvt Ltd (for short SIBCO) was
reversed.    The suit was filed against Small Industries
Development Bank of India (SIDBI) seeking interest on
the   alleged   belated  payment       of  principal   sum   and
accrued interest to the plaintiff for the Bonds issued
3.   The question to be answered in this case is whether
plaintiff has set forth a just claim, based on the
Bonds issued by the defendant or is it a case of that
trial   in Shakespeare’s    The Merchant      of Venice    where
Shylock is claiming the promised pound of flesh in the
form   of  interest   on  delayed      payment  on   the   Bonds
purchased by the plaintiff.          The 41 Bonds related to
this case were initially issued by SIDBI to M/s. CRB
Capital Markets Ltd.       (Hereinafter referred to as “CRB
Capital”) in 1993.       Those Bonds were then sold by CRB
Capital to one Shankar Lal Saraf in February, 1997 and
those in turn were then sold on 1.7.1998 to SIBCO – the
plaintiff and the respondent herein. In the meantime,
CRB   Capital    faced    winding      up   proceedings     at  the
instance of the RBI in the Delhi High Court.               The said
proceeding will have a bearing on this case.
4.      The   following     relevant       facts    necessary   for
consideration    of this     appeal are       broadly culled    out
from the judgment of the Calcutta High Court:-
4.1    The Plaintiff SIBCO purchased the Bonds in the
form of promissory notes issued by the defendant SIDBI.
These   are   termed   as   SIDBI     Bonds    2003   (4th  Series)
carrying    13.50%  interest     and     SIDBI   Bonds   2004  (5th
Series) generating interest at the rate of 12.50%, from
one Shankar Lal Saraf on 1st July, 1998.               The interest
is payable on a half-yearly basis on/or before 21st day
of June and 21st day of December of every year.             The 5th
series   Bonds    were    agreed     to    be   redeemed    on  21 st
December, 2004 whereas the 4th series Bonds were to be
redeemed on 21st December, 2003.         The Bonds are freely
tradable in the market.      M/s. SIBCO purchased 15 Bonds
(interest  payable  @   13.50%)     and   26   Bonds  (interest
payable @12.50%) of face value of ten lakhs each for an
aggregate price of Rs. 3.69 crores on 1st July, 1998 by
M/s. SIBCO from the said Shankar Lal Saraf.          The Bonds
were deposited with M/s. SIDBI (defendant) on July 2,
1998  with  the  request    to   endorse     the  name  of  the
Plaintiff-purchaser on the said Bonds.           On refusal to
register and/or record the name of the SIBCO by the
defendant on the ground that CRB Capital had gone into
involuntary liquidation proceedings at the instance of
the RBI.    At first the Plaintiff filed the W.P. No.
1456 of 1998 before the Calcutta High Court seeking a
mandamus upon defendant to transfer the aforesaid Bonds
in favour of the plaintiff and also to pay the interest
accrued on them.
4.2   The Calcutta High Court on 09.01.2001 held that
writ court is not the proper forum and permitted the
petitioner  to approach    the Company       Court, being   the
High  Court   at  Delhi,    seeking     intervention    in  the
liquidation proceeding initiated against CRB Capital.
Though an intra-court appeal was preferred against the
said order but it was not proceeded with.                On the
request of the plaintiff, the Shankar Lal Saraf (the
plaintiff’s     predecessor-in-interest)           filed      an
interlocutory  application    in    the   pending   liquidation
proceeding before the Company-Court, claiming that the
aforesaid transactions should be treated as outside the
purview  of   the  liquidation        proceeding,    under   the
4.3   By  a  judgment   dated    17th    December,    2004,  the
Learned Company Court held that the subject Bonds are
beyond the purview of the liquidation proceeding and
directed Shankar Lal Saraf to put up the matter before
the  defendant.    On   17th    February,     2005   the   above
judgment of the Company Court was communicated and the
Bonds were presented to the defendant.           Then on 21st
February, 2005 the defendant made the payment of the
principal amount together with the interest calculated
up to the date, as promised in the said Bond to M/s
SIBCO with TDS deduction at around 20%.            By a letter
dated  24th   February,   2005,     the  Plaintiff  raised   an
objection over the rate on which the TDS was deducted,
which was accepted by the defendant as it issued a
further warrant covering a sum of Rs. 58,86,833/- on
account of excess TDS deductions.
4.4 The case projected in the plaint in the CS No.
79/2006,   was  that  the   defendant     during  their   audit
detected that the interest was calculated up to 31st
October,   2005  and  demand    was    raised  on  account   of
interest on delayed payment of the principal amount and
the interest on Bonds through a letter dated November
10,  2005.     The defendant     refused   to  accede   to  the
demand made by the plaintiff in its reply letter dated
November 23, 2005.    Aggrieved by the refusal, M/s SIBCO
filed the CS No. 79/2006 for a sum of Rs. 3,25,54,483/-
4.5   The defendant disputed the claim on account of
delayed payment or in other words, delayed redemption
of the aforesaid Bonds.       It was categorically pleaded
that a liquidation proceeding was initiated against CRB
Capital, who at one point of time was the holder of the
aforesaid Bonds and sold it to the said Shankar Lal
Saraf on February 20, 1997 and on April 7, 1997.           The
RBI issued a facsimile dated June 9, 1997 advising the
defendant not to affect any transfer, register any lien
or otherwise deal with such security invested by CRB
Capital   and    its   Group     Companies,    without   prior
permission of the Official Liquidator appointed by the
Company Court at Delhi.        Since Shankar Lal Saraf as
well as the plaintiff were pressing hard for enfacing
their  name   on  the  said    Bonds,    a  clarification  was
sought on December 23, 1997 by the defendant from the
RBI seeking advice for further action in the matter on
January 29, 1998.      The RBI advised the defendant to
take up the matter with the Official Liquidator which
was accordingly done on April 3, 1998.
4.6    The   defendant    stated      that  despite   multiple
reminders till July 18, 2001 no reply was received from
the Official Liquidator in this regard.           The specific
stand is that due to the embargo imposed by RBI, the
defendant   couldn’t    act   in     defiance  of   the  RBI’s
directions.    It is further stated that because of the
pendency of the writ petition before the Calcutta High
Court,  the  matter  was   not   taken   up  and,  therefore,
neither  the   interest  nor    the   redemption   was  paid.
According  to the   defendant, after      the Company   Court
order in the liquidation proceeding, the plaintiff’s
name was put down upon the said Bonds and the holder
was paid the principal, as well as the interest up to
the date of redemption. As such there is no latches,
negligence and delay on the part of the defendant to
honour the Bonds to the plaintiff.
4.7 The central case projected by the plaintiff was
that the amount, both principal and interest, were paid
beyond   the   maturity    period     and,   therefore,   the
defendant is liable to pay the interest for delayed
payment. According to the plaintiff, the defendant has
unreasonably  withheld   the   said    amount,  whereas,  the
defendant   says   that   because     of   the  embargo   and
restriction by the RBI and the pending proceedings, the
maturity amount was not paid on the date of maturity.
The reliance appeared to have been placed by both the
sides on the facsimile dated 9th June, 1997 issued by
5.   The learned Trial Judge in his judgment noted that
there   is   a   clear    stipulation       against  affecting    any
transfer, register any lien or otherwise deal with, the
securities of CRB Capital with further stipulation that
it   should    not   part   with    the     interest,   dividend   or
principal     without     the    permission      of   the   Official
Liquidator.     Additionally      it     appears   from   the  order
passed    by    the    Company      Court     that   there    was   a
notification issued on 10th April 1997 under Section 45-
MB of the RBI (Amendment) Act, 1997 directing the said
Company    not    to    sell,    transfer,      create    charge   or
mortgage or deal in any manner with any of its profits
and assets without the permission of the RBI for a
period   of    six    months    from      the  date   of   the   said
notification. The Official Liquidator was appointed on
22nd  May,   1997    who   subsequently       treated   the  subject
Bonds as fraudulent preference under Section 531 of the
Companies Act, 1956.        Though it was held by the Company
Court    vide     its  judgment    dated     17.12.2004,    that  the
transactions       are  genuine     and    cannot  be   declared   as
fraudulent preference at the instance of the Official
Liquidator, the fact remains that there was some claim
over the subject Bonds.
5.1 The RBI is found to be empowered to control the
management of the Banking Company in certain situations
and    can    lay    down  the    parameters      enabling    Banking
Companies to expand business and regulate the paid up
capital,      reserve    funds,    cash     funds   and   above   all
policies in the matter of advances to be made by the
Banking Companies and allocation of resources etc.                The
RBI is authorized by the Parliament to enact the policy
and to issue directions/guidelines which have statutory
force, as held in case of ICICI Bank Ltd. Vs. Official
Liquidator of APS Star Industries Ltd.1              In support for
the aforesaid proposition, the Trial Court also relied
on   the    ratio   in  Sudhir    Shantilal     Mehta   Vs.   Central
Bureau of India2 to comment on the Regulatory role of
the   RBI   vis-à-vis     the      business      of    the    banking
5.2      This   suggests     that    once    the   RBI    has  issued
directions, any action contrary thereto, may not only
attract   the  civil    liability       but    might    also   invite
criminal breach of trust.         According to the Trial Court
the  defendant     was    not     sitting      in    slumber    after
receiving   the    RBI   instructions         but    sought    advice
immediately thereafter and was directed to approach the
Official     Liquidator.             The      defendants       sought
clarification from the Official Liquidator but did not
receive any reply.      Ultimately on 17 th December, 2004,
the  application     of    Shankar       Lal   Saraf     before   the
Company-Court    succeeded     and    within     a  short    span  of
time, the redemption value along with interest was paid
to the plaintiff.        The Learned Trial Judge did not
agree with the submission of the plaintiff that there
was any deliberate attempt to delay the payment of the
maturity amount by the defendant.               It would be worth
noting  that   the   Trial     Court      relied    on   defendants’
witness    to    hold    that     the      accrued    interest    was
transferred      to    the    accrued       interest     head    and,
therefore,    it   was   not   utilized      nor   any  benefit   was
taken therefrom.
5.3 As can be seen, the Suit was dismissed primarily on
(A) The bonds in question could not be transferred
by the petitioner since the RBI had initiated winding
up  proceedings against        CRB Capital        before the   Delhi
High Court, whereafter the RBI has issued a directive
dated 9.6.1997 to the petitioner herein directing not
to   register     transfer     of     CRB    Capital’s     Bonds   in
question, or to part with any payment pertaining to the
said Bonds, without consent of the Official Liquidator.
The learned Judge therefore found that the petitioner
had acted entirely in accordance with the directive of
the  RBI, by     requesting permission          from the    Official
Liquidator, and thereby promptly making the payment of
the   amounts    due   under    the     Bonds    after   appropriate
orders   were    passed    by   the     Delhi    High   Court  where
winding     up    proceedings    were     going   on.    Hence,  the
defendant      could   not  be   held     liable   for  the  delayed
(B) The learned Trial Judge also noted the conduct
of the plaintiff, in accepting the payment under the
Bonds,     including     interest,      without    any   protest  in
February, 2005.         The plaintiff thereafter slept over
this issue for almost 8 months, and for the first time
claimed     interest for     the delayed        payment in   October
2005.        The    court  therefore        found  that   since  the
plaintiff had accepted the encashment without protest
the law laid down by this Court in                  Bhagwati Prasad
Pawan Kumar v. Union of India3 would apply, since there
was acceptance by conduct.           In Bhagwati Prasad (supra),
“19. It is well settled that an offer may
accepted by conduct. But conduct would only
amount to acceptance if it is clear that the
offeree did the act with the intention
(actual or apparent) of accepting the offer.
The decision which we have noticed above also
proceed on this principle. Each case must
rest on its own facts.              The courts examine
the evidence to find out whether in the fact
and circumstances of the case the conduct of
the “offeree” was such an amounted to an
unequivocal acceptance of the offer made. If
the facts of the case disclose that there was
no reservation in signifying acceptance by
conduct. On the other hand, if the evidence
discloses that the “offeree” had reservation
in accepting the offer, his conduct may not
amount to acceptance of the offer in terms of
Section 8 of the Contract Act.”
6.    Aggrieved by the order of the learned Trial Judge
of the Calcutta High Court, the plaintiff preferred an
intra-court appeal which was numbered as APD 291/2015.
allowed    the  plaintiff’s    appeal,     and   set-aside   the
judgment    favoring  the    defendant.        The  High   Court
observed    in  the  appeal    that,     even   after  the   RBI
communication dated 09th June 1997, the defendant had
paid interest accruing in June, 1997 to the plaintiff’s
predecessor-in-interest, Shankar Lal Saraf.           The court
relied on a letter issued by the defendant to RBI dated
23rd December 1997, wherein the defendant had admitted
that   it was   impossible to     withhold payment     forever.
Based on these observations, the learned Division bench
held that the RBI communication dated 09th June, 1997
was merely a suggestion to the defendant and not an
order   passed    by   the   RBI     exercising     its   statutory
authority.        Hence,    the    defendant      was   without   a
reasonable    cause, when     it chose       to withheld    payment
duly accrued to the respondent.
6.1  It   was   accordingly     held    that   the   suit  was  not
barred    either    by   accord      or    satisfaction     as  the
plaintiff gave no acknowledgment that all claims stood
satisfied at the time of receiving the payment warrants
on 21st February 2005.          Hence, the plaintiff was at
liberty to raise further demands including demand for
interest   on   delayed    payment.        The   Learned   Division
Bench further held that reliance on               Bhagwati Prasad
(Supra) by the trial judge was misplaced as it was not
cited   by  either    parties    and     was   relied   on  without
giving the parties a chance to rebut it.             The defendant
was accordingly directed to pay simple interest @ 6%
per annum on interest, from date of accrual and 8%
simple interest per annum on principal amount from date
of maturity of respective Bonds by 29.02.2020.
7.   The present appeals are filed impugning the above
judgment of the Division Bench of the Calcutta High
Court.   The defendant seeks relief of setting aside the
judgment of the Division Bench in toto.           Whereas, the
plaintiff seeks pendente lite interest over and above
the interest already awarded, and is disputing the rate
of interest awarded by the Learned Division bench on
interest and Principal amount.
7.1 Assailing   the   legality     of   the  judgment   of the
appellate Bench of the Calcutta High Court, Mr K V
Viswanathan, learned Senior Counsel for the defendant
makes the following arguments:-
(i) SIDBI acted entirely in accordance
with  the  directives      issued  by  the
RBI,   as    any     prudent    financial
(ii) Withholding    of    payment      under   the
Bonds in question, was justified in
light of possibility of transfer of
the  Bonds   by   CRB    Capital     being  a
Fraudulent Preference under S. 531
(iii) SIBCO bought the bonds in question
knowledge that two installments of
interest   had   accrued      and   not  been
paid; not established that he is a
“holder in due course”; there is a
(iv) Petitioner     acted       proactively     by
preferring     numerous        letters     to
RBI/Official      Liquidator;         amounts
(v) Neither    Saraf     nor     SIBCO     claimed
interest    for    delayed       payment   of
interest   or    the    maturity      amounts
litigation;    barred      by  constructive
(vi) The payments made were accepted by
Respondent     without        protest     and
amount to accord and satisfaction;
(vii) The  Respondent/SIBCO’s          claim   for
interest   pendente      lite   is   a  clear
after-thought, and in any event, not
7.2 Per    contra,  Mr.    Sabyasachi        Chaudhury,    learned
Senior Counsel representing the plaintiff (respondent)
(i)  The  RBI   merely     issued     an   advice
which pertained to assets held by
CRB Capital and was inapplicable to
the Bonds in question, which were
owned by plaintiff when the advice
(ii) SIDBI’s    action        of    withholding
fraudulent preference by M/s. CRB
absence   of   any    objection     by the
judicata   from     arguing     fraudulent
settled by the judgment of Company
Court dated 17th December, 2004;
(iv) The payment was made in furtherance
of  promissory       notes,     which  are
unconditional undertakings, and not
in  pursuance      of     any   reciprocal
‘accord    and   satisfaction’     doesn’t
(v)  Plaintiff      has     claimed    interest
pendente      lite      consistently      at
trial, as well as appellate level.
8.    In   order   to  ascertain       the  effect   of   the  RBI
Communication    on  the  Bonds     in   question,   it   will  be
beneficial to examine the statutory provisions which
empower   the  RBI.      For    efficient     discharge    of  its
functions, the RBI has been granted special powers for
controlling      and     regulating         various      financial
institutions, as is clear from different provisions of
The RBI Act, 1934 and The Banking Regulation Act, 1949.
As per the RBI Act, 1934, we find that the RBI has wide
supervisory jurisdiction over all Banking Institutions
in the country.     This court speaking through Justice V.
Ramasubramaniyan, in the case of Internet and Mobile
Association        of  India   vs.     RBI4,   elucidated   on the
position of the RBI as a statutory body, with immense
power in financial/ monetary field:
“190. But given the scheme of the
Regulation Act, 1949, the above
argument appears only to belittle
the role of RBI. RBI is not just
like   any     other      statutory   body
created by an Act of legislature.
It is a creature, created with a
mandate to get liberated even from
its creator…Therefore, RBI cannot
be equated to any other statutory
body that merely serves its master.
It is specifically empowered to do
certain things to the exclusion of
even    the      Central       Government.
Therefore, to place its decisions
at a pedestal lower than that of
even an executive decision, would
do violence to the scheme of the
8.1 Through Chapter IIIB of The RBI Act, 1934, the RBI
is empowered to regulate and also monitor the conduct
of every Non-Banking Financial Institutions (NBFC) in
India.      Under S. 45-JA of the RBI Act, 1934, the RBI is
empowered,       in   public    interest      or   to  protect the
interests   of   the    depositors       or  to    regulate  the
financial  system    of   the    country,    to   determine  the
policy and issue directions to NBFCs.            S. 45-K grants
authority to the RBI to collect information pertaining
to  the  NBFCs   and  to    give    directions    pertaining  to
deposits  to   them.     Whereas,      under  S.  45-L,  general
powers are conferred on the RBI to call for information
from the Financial Institution and issue directions to
regulate the credit system of the country.            S. 45-M of
the RBI Act, 1934 casts an obligation upon the NBFCs,
to furnish all information and details as required by
the RBI and to comply with RBI’s direction given under
Chapter IIIB of the RBI Act.
8.2 Similar powers are granted to the RBI in respect of
Banks under the Banking Regulation Act, 1949.             In the
case at hand, we are concerned with S. 35-A of the
Banking Regulation Act, 1949 which enables the RBI to
give directions to banking companies: -
“35A. Power of the Reserve Bank to
(a) in the public interest; or
(aa) in the interest of banking
(b) to prevent the affairs of any
banking company being conducted in
interests of the depositors or in
interests of the banking company;
management of any banking company
generally, it is necessary to
companies generally or to any
banking company in particular, it
may, from time to time, issue such
directions as it deems fit, and
banking company, as the case may
be, shall be bound to comply with
such directions.”
8.3  The Section S. 45-MB of the RBI Act, 1934 being
relevant in the above context which empowers the RBI,
to inter alia prohibit the acceptance of deposit and
alienation    of    assets      by     Non-Banking    Financial
Companies,    when    they    fail     to   comply  with   RBIs
direction or infringe any statutory provisions, is
extracted for ready reference as under:
“45MB. Power of Bank to prohibit
acceptance of deposit and alienation
(1) If any non-banking financial
company violates the provisions of
any section or fails to comply with
any direction or order given by the
Bank under any of the provisions of
this Chapter, the Bank may prohibit
the non-banking financial company
from accepting any deposit.
(2) Notwithstanding anything to the
contrary contained in any agreement
or instrument or any law for the
time being in force, the Bank, on
being satisfied that it is necessary
so to do in the public interest or
in the interest of the depositors,
financial company against which an
order prohibiting from accepting
deposit has been issued, not to
sell, transfer, create charge or
mortgage or deal in any manner with
its property and assets without
prior written permission of the Bank
for such period not exceeding six
months from the date of the order.”
8.4 At this juncture, it is pertinent to extract the
exact   wordings   of   the     RBI   communication dated
09.06.1997 addressed to the defendant:
“We understand that M/s. CRB Capital
Markets Ltd. and its associates have
invested   in    the     shares/bonds/other
securities of your institution. As you
are aware, RBI has filed a petition for
the winding up of the said company in
the High Court, Delhi. We, therefore,
advise you not to effect any transfer,
register any lien, or otherwise deal
with such securities and also not to
part with the interest/dividends or
principal without the permission of the
Official Liquidator, appointed by the
High Court of Delhi. Please confirm and
advise the amount of investments so held
by    the   company/companies        with    your
institution.”
8.5   As   is   apparent    from    above,     the   RBI   in   its
communication     has  informed     SIBCO    of  the   winding   up
proceedings      initiated     against       CRB    Capital     and
categorically     prohibited    the      defendant   from,    inter
alia,    parting    with    the     interest     on    securities.
However, the RBI has not mentioned any provision under
which   the   above-mentioned      communication      was  issued.
This   has    encouraged    the    Learned     Counsel    for   the
plaintiff to argue that it is merely an ‘advice’ from
RBI, and not a statutorily enforceable directive.
8.6     In    the   case   at    hand,      vide    the   previous
Notification dated 10.04.1997, the RBI restrained CRB
Capital (an NBFC), from alienating or creating charge
over their assets in ‘public interest’, and through the
consequential directive dated 09.06.1997 has restrained
the defendant from parting with any money in relation
to securities held by the said NBFC.                             Even though, on
the      date        of    the      prohibitory           Notification             dated
10.04.1997,           the    Bonds       were     in    Shankar       Lal      Saraf’s
ownership,            and     not       held      by      CRB      Capital,           the
Notification and subsequent directive dated 09.06.1997
was still applicable as there was a clear shadow over
the Shankar Lal Saraf’s title.
8.7     A    conjoint       reading        of    the    statutory          provisions
mentioned         above, makes           it abundantly           clear that           for
‘public interest’ the RBI is empowered to issue any
directive to any banking institution, and to prohibit
alienation of an NBFC’s property.                             The term ‘Public
interest’         has     no    rigid      definition.            It     has     to    be
understood and interpreted in reference to the context
in which it is used.                   The concept derives its meaning
from      the     statute       where       it    occurs,       the     transaction
involved, the state of society and its needs.5                                 Justice
V. Ramasubramanian, speaking for a three judges Bench
5 Bihar Public Service Commission vs. Saiyed Hussain Abbas Rizwi and Anr.; (2012) 13 SCC
in Internet and Mobile Association of India6, (Supra),
gave a wide meaning to ‘public interest’, in context of
S. 35-A of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949:
“176.     ………As     we      have    indicated
elsewhere, the power under Section 35-
exercised under four contingencies,
namely, (i) public interest, (ii)
interest of banking policy, (iii)
interest of the depositors and (iv)
interest of the banking company. The
expression “banking policy” is defined
in Section 5(ca) to mean any policy
specified by RBI (i) in the interest
of the banking system, (ii) in the
interest of monetary stability and
(iii) sound economic growth. Public
interest permeates all these areas…”
8.8 On      the    omission   to    advert     to   the   statutory
provisions on the basis of which the RBI acted, we can
seek     guidance    from   the    ratio    in   Peerless   General
Finance and Investment Co. Ltd. Vs. RBI7 where this
court, speaking through Justice N. M. Kasliwal, held
“71. It is settled law that so long as
the power is traceable to the statute,
mere omission to recite the provision
does not denude the power of the
6 Supra at 4.
legislature or rule making authority
considered without authority of law.
Section 114(e) of the Evidence Act
draws a statutory presumption that
official acts are regularly performed
and     reached       satisfactorily      on
consideration of relevant facts. The
absence of reiteration of objective
satisfaction in the preamble as of one
under Section 45-L does not denude the
powers, the RBI admittedly has under
Section 45-L, to justify the actions.
Though    Section     45-L     was   neither
expressly stated nor mentioned in the
preamble of the Directions of the
required recitation of satisfaction of
directions     from      the     facts   and
circumstances it is demonstrated that
the RBI had such satisfaction in its
consideration     of    its    power   under
Section 45-L, when the Directions were
issued. Even otherwise Section 45-K(3)
itself is sufficient to uphold the
directions.” (Emphasis added)
8.9 The above makes it clear that, it is not necessary
for RBI to mention a specific provision before issuing
directions, for it to have statutory consequences.    All
that is required is the authority under the law, to
issue such direction.
8.10 The learned Senior Counsel for the defendant in
our estimation is correct in his submission that RBI
directives carry statutory force, gathering authority
from the provisions of both the RBI Act, 1934 and the
Finance (I)8, in the context of S. 45-K and S. 45-L of
the RBI Act, 1934 this court, speaking through Justice
N M Kasliwal, relied on State of U.P. Vs. Babu Ram
Upadhya9,      and  D.K.V.    Prasada      Rao  vs.  Government  of
A.P.10 to significantly pronounce that directions issued
by RBI, are incorporated and become a part of the act
and must therefore be governed by the same principles
as the statute itself.          This view was further affirmed
by     this     court  in    case     of     Internet   and  Mobile
Association of India11 (Supra).             Hence, it is undisputed
that     any    direction   by   the     RBI,   is  compelling  and
enforceable similarly like the provisions of the RBI
Act by its very nature.
Sinha interpreting the implications of actions under S.
35-A of the Banking Regulation, 1949 and the intention
8 ibid.
11 Supra at 4.
12 Supra at 2.
of legislature, rightly observed that the directions
under  the  said   provision     are    binding   upon banking
“57. The distinction between exercise
of jurisdiction under the enabling
provisions contained in Section 36(1)
and the ones under Sections 21 and 35-
A of the Banking Regulation Act and
the provisions contained in Section
45-L of the Reserve Bank of India,
unambiguous. In terms of Section 36,
Reserve Bank of India may caution or
prohibit the banking companies but in
terms of Sections 21 and 35-A of the
58. Whether a circular letter issued
by a statutory authority would be
binding or not or whether the same has
a statutory force, would depend upon
the nature of the statute. For the
said purpose, the intention of the
legislature must be considered. Having
regard to the fact the Reserve Bank of
India   exercised     control      over   the
banking companies, we are of the
opinion that the said circular letter
was binding on the banking companies.
The officials of UCO Bank were,
therefore, bound by the said circular
8.12  Justice S. C. Agarwal, speaking for this Court in
RBI vs. Peerless General Finance and Investment Co.
Ltd. (II)13 held in the context of S. 45-K of the RBI
Act, 1934, that RBI has the authority to issue any
directions for ensuring effective implementation of its
orders, and to achieve the object of the Act:
“27. …In the matter of construction of
enabling   statutes        the    principle
applicable is that if the Legislature
enables something to be done, it gives
power at the same time, by necessary
implication, to do everything which is
indispensable   for     the    purpose   of
carrying out the purpose in view.
(See Craies on Statutes, 7th Edn. p.
258.) It has been held that the power
to make a law with respect to any
subject carries with it all the
ancillary and incidental powers to
make the law effective and workable
and to prevent evasion.”
8.13 For ensuring effective implementation of relevant
directions, RBI as was declared is not only vested with
curative powers but also preventive powers, as was held
in Ganesh Bank of Kurundwad Ltd. Vs. Union of India. 14
Hence, it is not necessary for the bank to wait for a
direction to be violated, and then launch penal actions
against the offenders.         But the RBI can also issue
directions      to     ensure         that       the       relevant
orders/directions are effectively followed.
8.14 Based on the discussion above, the RBI under Ss.
45-MB of the RBI Act, 1934 and 35-A of the Banking
Regulation   Act,   1949   in    our    understanding      has  the
requisite authority to issue the communication dated
09th June, 1997. The omission by the RBI to mention any
enabling   provision,    doesn’t      change    the    nature   and
status of the direction.      The statutory arrangement and
interpretation    as  above     persuade     us    to   hold   that
actions in furtherance of grounds of ‘public policy’ by
the  RBI was   justified, for       issuing the       Notification
dated   10.04.1997.     The    notification       itself    clearly
mentioned   that   it   is   issued      for   the     benefit   of
depositors and creditors of CRB Capital.                 The RBI’s
communication dated 09.06.1997 was in fact a direction,
with the appropriate statutory backing traceable to S.
45-MB of the RBI Act as well as S. 35-A of the Banking
Regulation Act.      The Learned Senior Counsel for the
defendant   is  therefore    correct      in  saying      that  the
09.06.1997 direction was issued, in furtherance of and
to  effectively   implement     the     10.04.1997    notification
issued   earlier   by    the    RBI.       As   such    the   RBI’s
09.06.1997 Notification was definitely binding on the
defendant   which    as    noted      earlier,    is    a   banking
8.15   Situated  thus,    the    actual     status    of  the   RBI
Notification would have a bearing on the claim against
the defendant in the suit and the later proceeding.
The plaintiff, as can be noted, always had the option
of   challenging   its    legality       but  they     have   never
specifically challenged those in the Suit.              Therefore,
when the legality of the RBI Notification is not under
challenge, relief can’t be granted in the Suit without
determining its legality.         This in our perception can
by itself, put a quietus on the issue at hand.
8.16   That  apart,   when     the     claim   in   the   Suit   is
relatable to the embargo by the RBI, it was necessary
to  implead  RBI   in   the   litigation,     for    getting   more
clarity on the issue.       The plaintiff omitted to do so
at their own peril despite the defense set out on this
basis. Here we need to observe that the plaintiff is
dominus litus, and they cannot be compelled to seek
relief against anyone.
8.17 According to us, the plaintiff cannot be granted
parity    with  its  predecessor-in-interest,         Shankar  Lal
Saraf, who was paid interest which accrued in July,
1997   despite   the  RBI   directive       of  09.06.1997.    The
defendant has explained this aberration by clarifying
that the payment to Shankar Lal Saraf was made before
the   defendant   was  in   receipt      of   the  RBI  directive.
Hence,   the plaintiff    cannot claim         any advantage   for
themselves or parity with its predecessor-in-interest,
on this cause.
9. The S. 531 of the Companies Act, 1956 (Corresponding
Ss.   328   and  329  of  the    Companies      Act,  2013)  being
relevant for the question, is extracted:
(1) Any transfer of property, movable
or   immovable,    delivery        of   goods,
payment,   execution        or     other   act
relating to property made, taken or
done by or against a company within
six months before the commencement of
its winding up which, had it been
made, taken or done by or against an
individual within three months before
the presentation of an insolvency
petition on which he is adjudged
insolvent, would be deemed in his
insolvency a fraudulent preference,
shall in the event of the company
being wound up, be deemed a fraudulent
preference of its creditors and be
invalid accordingly… ”(Emphasis added)
9.1 S. 441(2) of the Companies Act, 1956 reveals that
winding-up proceedings other than voluntary winding-up,
are   said   to   have   commenced        from    the    date of
presentation of petition.      For quick reference, S. 441
of the Companies Act, 1956 is extracted herein:
“441. Commencement      of    winding   up   by
(1) Where, before the presentation of
a petition for the winding up of a
company by the Tribunal, a resolution
has been passed by the company for
voluntary winding up, the winding up
of the company shall be deemed to have
commenced at the time of the passing
of the resolution, and unless the
Tribunal,   on    proof       of    fraud    or
mistake,    thinks      fit       to    direct
otherwise, all proceedings taken in
the voluntary winding up shall be
deemed to have been validly taken.
(2) In any other case, the winding up
of a company by the Tribunal shall be
deemed to commence at the time of the
presentation of the petition for the
winding up.”
9.2 A conjoint reading of Ss. 531 and 441(2) of the
Companies       Act,    1956  prima      facie     reveals   that   any
transfer      of    property    by    or     against   a   company   in
involuntary winding up, the suspect spell for deemed
fraudulent         transaction       is       six     months    before
presentation        of   the  winding      up    petition.     In   the
present case, the petition for winding-up was submitted
by RBI on 22.05.1997 and admittedly, the transfer in
Shankar     Lal Saraf’s      favor was        executed in    February,
1997.       Hence,     the defendant’s        prima   facie  suspicion
that    the    transfer    during    the     suspect   spell,  may   be
deemed     fraudulent, is       not misplaced.          Relevant   here
would be to note that in 2019, a Division bench of this
court speaking through Justice Mohan Shantanagoudar in
the case of IDBI vs. Official Liquidator15 clarified
that     two    conditions     need     to     be   satisfied   for   a
transaction to be qualified as fraudulent preference:
First, Company’s dominant motive to prefer a particular
creditor; Second, transfer executed within six month,
preceding filing of winding-up petition.             The issue of
fraudulent     preference     is   therefore      no  longer    res
integra, and it is unnecessary to labour on the issue
any further.
9.3   The suspicion harboured by the defendant is during
the suspect spell as supported by the Calcutta High
Court in its order dated 09.01.2001, where the Writ
Court   refused   to  interfere      on    the  grounds  that   the
issue was in the teeth of the litigation pending in the
9.4 Significantly it has been admitted by Shankar Lal
Saraf in his Application (CA 1380/1998) to the Delhi
Company Court that the defendant was acting under the
advice of RBI, which treated the transfer of Bonds as
fraudulent.     Additionally, the Learned Single Judge of
the   Calcutta     High   Court,       in   his   judgment    dated
13.03.2015 recorded a finding that initially both, RBI
and the Official Liquidator, treated the transfer in
Shankar    Lal   Saraf’s     favor,      as   fraudulent   in   the
“…On a winding up petition having
moved on 22nd May, 1997, the Company
Court    appointed         a      Professional
Liquidator. The RBI issued a letter to
the bank not to deal with the subject
bonds as the liquidator has treated
the same as fraudulent preference
transactions are genuine and cannot be
declared as fraudulent preference at
Liquidator, but the fact remains that
there was some claim over the subject
bonds…”
9.5 While the Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court
has set-aside the order of the Learned Single Judge,
the finding mentioned above at the relevant time, is
not refuted by the contesting party.
9.6 The cloud over the issue was cleared by the Company
Court   judgment  (17.12.2004)       wherein,     the   defendant’s
claim that the transfer in Shankar Lal Saraf’s favor
was      ‘fraudulent      preference’,           was      rejected.
Significantly as soon as this decision was communicated
to  the   defendant,   payment     was    promptly    made  by  the
defendant to the plaintiff, without hesitation.
9.7 At this juncture it is apposite to mention, that
the  validity    of   the   Company      Court   judgment   dated
17.12.2004   has not    been challenged       by either    party.
Hence, the judgment has attained finality and the issue
whether the transfer in Shankar Lal Saraf’s favor was
fraudulent, is therefore put to rest.
9.8 Based on the above discussion, it is clear that the
defendant’s impression that the transfer in favour of
Shankar Lal Saraf was not legitimate, was a reasonable
opinion,  shared    by  many,    including     the  RBI  and  the
Official Liquidator.      The defendant was in receipt of
the RBI’s directions, not to part with payment as the
Official  Liquidator     had    treated    the   transaction   as
fraudulent.    This had clearly placed a shadow over the
plaintiff’s title to the Bonds and consequences must
flow therefrom.
10.   Assuming    ad   arguendo,      that  the  RBI  directions
could be disregarded yet the Bonds and the interest
accrued thereon, were in the teeth of the litigation,
pending   in    the    Company      Court.       The    defendant
proactively  applied   to    the     Official    Liquidator   on
multiple  occasions  seeking     clarification      on interest
payment. But, the Official Liquidator did not respond.
Hence, it is clear that despite the defendant’s best
intentions and proactive efforts, it would be imprudent
for the defendant to release the payment accrued on the
suspect  Bonds.    When   the    Bonds    were   released   from
dispute pending before the Company Court, the defendant
promptly complied with the order of the Learned Company
10.1 The Learned Counsel for the plaintiff has failed
to show how the defendant derived any undue benefit by
withholding  the  payment    accrued     on  the   Bonds.    The
amount due on the Bonds was immediately transferred to
the ‘Accrued Interest’ head and was not used by the
defendant for their business.          Hence, the plaintiff’s
contention that the defendant’s actions of withholding
payment were mala fide, is not acceptable to us.
10.2 The plaintiff also argues that the Company Court
judgment  (17.12.2004)   has    attained    finality    and  the
defendant is barred by res judicata from raising the
issue   of    fraudulent     preference.        The   issue   of
fraudulent preference is no longer res integra and none
sought to challenge the Company Court’s judgment and
re-agitate the issue.       Hence, this contention will be
of no advantage for the plaintiff.
11.   S. 8 of the Negotiable Instruments Act defines a
‘Holder’ of promissory note as any person who in his
own name is entitled to the possession of the note and
to recovery of due amount, pursuant to the said note.
For   ready    reference,    the     relevant   S.  9   of   the
Negotiable    Instruments     Act,     1881  which   defines   a
‘holder in due course’ is extracted as under:
“Holder in due course” means any
person who for consideration became
the possessor of a promissory note,
bill of exchange or cheque if payable
to bearer, or the payee or indorsee
thereof, if payable to order, before
the amount mentioned in it became
payable, and without having sufficient
cause to believe that any defect
existed in the title of the person
from whom he derived his title.”
11.1 This court speaking through Justice K Jayachandra
Reddy in the context of a cheque in the case of U.
Ltd.     and    Ors.16  juxtaposed      the  Indian   position on
‘holder in due course’ with the position in English Law
“17…Under the Indian law a holder, to
be a holder in due course, must not
only have acquired the bill, note of
cheque for valid consideration but
should     have    acquired      the   cheque
without having sufficient cause to
believe that any defect existed in the
title of the person from whom he
derived his title. This condition
required that he should act in good
faith and with reasonable caution.
However, mere failure to prove bona
fide or absence of negligence on his
part would not negative his claim.
But, in a given case it is left to the
Court to decide whether the negligence
on part of the holder is so gross and
extraordinary as to presume that he
had sufficient cause to believe that
such title was defective…”(Emphasis
11.2    The    principles   stated     above  in  the  context of
cheques     can be     extrapolated for      promissory notes  as
well.    Resultantly an obligation has been imposed on
the transferee of the promissory notes, to be deemed to
be a ‘Holder in due course’, that the notes should have
been    acquired    in    good     faith;      after    exercising
reasonable care and caution about the holder’s title.
In  the   present   case,   while     the  Shankar    Lal  Saraf’s
(holder) title over the Bonds/Promissory Notes is not
in   dispute   but   as   discussed      earlier,     Shankar   Lal
Saraf’s holding stood cleared by the Company Court only
on 17.12.2004 but before the said judgment, there was a
cloud over his title.         Consequently, the plaintiff’s
status as ‘holder in due course’ was suspect at the
relevant point of time.
11.3   The  defendant    bank   was     therefore    justified   in
withholding    payment    till    conclusion      of   dispute   in
Company Court, even though the relief claimed was in
respect   of  an   ‘unconditional       undertaking’,    as   there
were   reasonable    legal   concerns      for   the   transaction
during the suspect spell, for making such payments.
12.    It    flows    from   the    above     discussion,   that  the
defendant      was    justified     in    withholding    the  accrued
dues.     The     actions    of   SIDBI      were   bona   fides,  in
furtherance       of RBI    directives, which        were issued   in
public interest.        In the case of Clariant International
Ltd. Vs. SEBI17, this court speaking through Justice S B
Sinha held that two conditions need to be satisfied
before awarding interest.            First, that money should be
wrongfully withheld from the rightful owners; Second,
that     there     should   be    equitable      considerations   for
awarding said interest.            In the case at hand, neither
of these conditions are found to be satisfied.
12.1 As per S. 34 of the Code of Civil Procedure (CPC),
award of interest is a discretionary exercise, steeped
in equitable considerations.               Interest is payable for
different purposes such as compensatory, penal, etc.
but these are not the situations in the case before us.
Here      firstly,      the     defendant       was   justified    in
withholding payment, as they were under RBI’s direction
to do so; secondly, the defendant hasn’t derived any
undue benefit by their act and; thirdly, due payment
was promptly made to the plaintiffs upon settlement of
rights   by   the  court.         Moreover,   the   concerned
transactions were during the “suspect spell”.         This in
our view shows that the defendant acted bona fide and
there was no undue delay on their part, to remit the
12.2 The plaintiff did pray for pendente lite interest
in the Trial Court but neither did the trial court
frame any issue in this regard, nor were any arguments
recorded.   This shows that such claim was not pressed
by the plaintiff.    Further, no ground is urged in the
appeal memo, that such an issue ought to have been
framed.   Hence, it is clear that the plaintiff is not
serious on its claim for pendente lite interest.          The
issue is rested accordingly.
13.  It  is  evident  from    the     record, that  when  the
payment  warrants were    received by      the plaintiff,  it
effaced the warrants by handwritten remark ‘Received’.
Pertinently, in the first instance, protest was only
raised in reference to excessive TDS deduction by the
defendant while remitting the dues.           The demand for
interest on delayed payment, was raised after passage
of 7 months, when the books of SIBCO were allegedly
audited.    This  justification      does  not  appear to  be
reasonable.   In fact, as has been stated previously in
this  judgment, the   plaintiff was       entitled to  demand
interest for delayed payment in its writ petition as
well.   But SIBCO has consistently failed to raise this
demand   at  every  stage    including     at  the  stage  of
accepting the sum tendered by the defendant, without
any protest.
13.1 Hence, it is clear that the plaintiff accepted the
payment from the defendant as due settlement of its
claims.    SIBCO’s failure to raise protest and demand
for interest at the earliest possible stage, amounted
to sub-silencio acceptance.       Accordingly, the plaintiff
is barred from raising this demand after several months
applying the principle of waiver/acquiescence.
14.  The   defendant    has   argued      that   the  principle  of
constructive     res   judicata       would     also    offset  the
plaintiff’s    claim.      Pertinently,        the   previous  Bond
holder   Shankar    Lal   Saraf      could    not    possibly  have
claimed interest on delayed payment before the Company
Court   for  it   lacked    the   jurisdiction       to  adjudicate
claims    unrelated    to     the     liquidation      proceedings,
against CRB Capital.         But, the successor Bond holder
i.e.   the  plaintiff     could     have    claimed    interest  on
delayed    payment    from     the     writ     court.      SIBCO’s
submission is not acceptable that the cause of action
arose only on 23.11.2005, when the defendant refused to
heed to the demand of interest on delayed payment.              The
cause of action for the plaintiff accrued the first
time, when the defendant allegedly failed to pay timely
interest.     Since such a claim was not raised in the
writ court, the subsequent Suit of SIBCO in our view,
is   barred    by   the    principle       of    Constructive   Res
15.    It is clear from the discussion above, that the
RBI    has   wide     supervisory       powers    over   financial
institutions like SIDBI, in furtherance of which, any
direction issued by the RBI, deriving power from the
RBI Act or the Banking Regulation Act is statutorily
binding on the defendant.          Admittedly, the RBI issued
Notification dated 10.04.1997, deriving power from S.
45-MB(2) of the RBI Act.           Thereby, the RBI froze the
assets of CRB Capital on the grounds of public policy,
for the purpose of protecting interests of creditors
and depositors of CRB Capital.
15.1   The   RBI    did  not    cite      any  provision   in   its
Direction dated 09.06.1997 to the defendant, as it was
not under any compulsion to do so.              It was sufficient
that the RBI’s power to issue such a direction could be
traced to either S.45-MB(2) of the RBI Act, or S. 35-A
of   the   Banking    Regulation      Act.      Hence,   the   said
direction    was   statutorily     binding    on   the defendant.
Without    the   said   direction,      the   Notification    dated
10.04.1997, would have been rendered toothless, causing
irreparable harm to the creditors and depositors of CRB
Capital.     In   reference     to    the   Directive   dated
09.06.1997,  the  defendant     proactively    sought  advice
from the Official Liquidator in regards to the payment
of interest income to the defendant.         But, in absence
of the Official Liquidator’s consent and guidance, the
defendant  could  not  have     made   the   payment  without
inviting onerous consequences for itself.          Hence, it
can be said that the defendant acted prudently, being
conscious  of the  legal obligation,       to withhold   such
payment to the plaintiff.
15.2 Further, in reference to S. 531 of Companies Act,
1956 read with S. 441(2) of the same act, it cannot be
denied that there was a suspicion over the title of the
plaintiff’s predecessor-in-interest.        Ipso facto, the
plaintiff’s title with transaction during the “suspect
spell” was also under a cloud.         It is clear from the
discussion above that such suspicion was not misplaced,
as it was shared by the RBI as well as the Official
Liquidator.   Immediately after the Company Court vide
its decision (17.12.2004), clarified the position that
the  plaintiff    was   in   the    clear    for   the   concerned
transactions, the defendant has duly ensured compliance
with the said order.          Hence, it is clear that the
defendant acted bona fide in withholding the payment.
15.3  The  elements     that    could     have   weighed   on  the
defendant   for   not   making     timely     payments    are:  I)
Contravention of the RBI Directives; II) Issue being
related to the ongoing litigation in the Delhi Company
Court; III) Concerns with the defendant’s title over
the   Bonds/promissory      notes      transacted     during   the
“suspect spell” and these perturbing elements can’t be
brushed aside as not relevant.           We are therefore of the
view  that   even   though    the    payment    was  demanded   in
furtherance    of  an   unconditional       undertaking    in  the
Bonds, the defendant was not entitled to it till the
Company Court’s order dated 17.12.2004.
15.4 The plaintiff’s transaction of Bonds with Shankar
Lal  Saraf    does   not    sound     right    in   this   court’s
estimation,    with   purchase       being    made    during   the
“suspect spell” and concurrent alarm bells rung by the
RBI,   and  the   Court    in    that     duration.   When   SIBCO
approached       the      Writ      Court      to    validate      their
transaction, they failed to put forth any claim for
interest on delayed payment.               Curiously, the plaintiff
chose not to approach the Company Court directly and
instead     relied    upon    Shankar      Lal   Saraf    to   secure  a
favourable verdict on the issue.                 They even chose to
forgo    the    very     first     opportunity       that    arose   for
claiming      interest      on     delayed      payment,      when   the
defendant was remitting the amount due to the plaintiff
while     complying      with     the     Company     Court     verdict.
Pertinently the payment was accepted without protest
and only after about 7 months, additional sums were
demanded on the Bonds.            Despite all these disquieting
factors,      the     plaintiffs,        like     the     Shakespearean
character of Shylock, have raised the demand “I’ll have
my bond.      Speak not against my bond.”18              As we see the
situation, the holder of the Bond has received their
‘pound     of    flesh’,     but     they    seem     to    want   more.
Additional     sum    in   our   estimation       is  not    merited  as
SIBCO has already received their just entitlement and
burdening the defendant with any further amount towards
18 Act 3 Scene 3 – The Merchant of Venice
interest  would  be  akin   to    Shylockian  extraction  of
blood  from  the  defendant.        Therefore  the  question
formulated in paragraph 3 of this judgment is answered
accordingly against the plaintiff.
15.5 In view of the forgoing, the defendant’s appeal
against the impugned judgment is allowed by restoring
the judgment of the Trial Court. The plaintiff’s cross-
appeal is however rejected.
15.6     With all the legal consequences flowing from
the above order, the appeals stand disposed of without
any order on cost.