The matter is convened through Video Conferencing.
The present petition instituted under Section 25 of the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 originates from a matrimonial
dispute            between  the  parties.   The respondent-husband  had
instituted a petition for dissolution of marriage under
Section 13(1) (ia) of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 in the
Family Court at Pune, Maharashtra. The said petition for
dissolution of the marriage of the parties was registered
as P.A. No. 151/2019.               In the present petition the main
prayer            of  the  petitioner-wife   is for  transfer  of  that
divorce petition from the Family Court, Pune, Maharashtra
to the Principal Judge, Family Court, Gautam Budh Nagar,
Uttar Pradesh.              It has been pleaded in the petition that
Rachna   the parental home of the petitioner is at NOIDA and she is
undergoing treatment for certain ailment there.               For these
reasons, she would be unable to travel to Pune to defend
the divorce petition.     Moreover, the petitioner has filed a
petition  for   restitution    of   conjugal   rights  before  the
2.  On 8th May, 2019, notice was issued in this petition by
a Bench consisting of two Hon’ble Judges of this Court and
this Court also stayed further proceedings of P.A. No. 151
of 2019.   The matter was called on for hearing again on 21 st
January, 2020.    On that date, learned counsel appearing for
the parties agreed before the Court that the matter could
be   settled   through     mediation.        The   parties   were,
accordingly, directed to appear before the Co-ordinator,
Supreme Court Mediation Centre.        The mediation process was
successful and a settlement agreement has been arrived at
on 15th February, 2021.       This settlement agreement forms
part of records.     The key terms of the settlement include
withdrawal or quashing of three pending proceedings between
the parties, as also filing of a joint application, inter-
alia, for decree of divorce by mutual consent before this
Court, invoking this Court’s jurisdiction under Article 142
of  the  Constitution    of   India.    There   is  provision  for
payment of a lumpsum amount to the petitioner-wife in the
settlement   agreement   in   case   the  decree   of  divorce  by
mutual consent is granted by this Court. The parties agreed
to  apply   before   this   Court    for   dissolution   of  their
marriage and have agreed to withdraw all remaining cases
involving the parties on their family members.
3.  The parties have subsequently filed a joint application
for  divorce  by  mutual  consent  of  the   parties  invoking
Article 142 of the Constitution of India.     This application
has been registered as I.A. No. 30625 of 2021.      One of the
main clauses of the settlement agreement stipulates:-
“They shall file a petition jointly
for decree of divorce and withdrawal
of the aforesaid cases before Hon’ble
Supreme Court invoking the inherent
power under Article 142 of the
Constitution of India for grant of
divorce by mutual consent and for
withdrawal/quashing/disposal of all
pending case/complaints between the
parties.”
4.  The question which I shall address now is as to whether
in exercising my jurisdiction sitting singly, I can pass a
decree for dissolving a marriage by mutual consent to which
Hindu  Marriage  Act,  1955   applies  in   exercise  of  this
Court’s jurisdiction under Article 142 of the Constitution
of India, by dispensing with the compliance of some of the
procedural formalities and timeline contemplated in Section
13B of the 1955 Act.   The Constitution of India vests this
Court with the jurisdiction to pass any order or decree for
doing  complete  justice  in  any  cause   or  matter  pending
before it.   The Constitution of India does not specify the
composition or strength of a Bench which could exercise
such jurisdiction.  This Court, however, has been conferred
power under Article 145(2) of the Constitution of India for
making rules for fixing the minimum number of Judges who
are to sit for any purpose.
5.  Article 145 of the Constitution of India lays down:-
“145. Rules of Court, etc.- (1) Subject
to the provisions of any law made by
Parliament, the Supreme Court may from
time to time, with the approval of the
President, make rules for regulating
generally the practice and procedures of
(a) rules as to the persons practising
(b) rules as to the procedure for hearing
appeals and other matters pertaining to
appeals including the time within which
appeals to the Court are to be entered;
(c) rules as to the proceedings in the
Court for the enforcement of any of the
rights conferred by Part III;
(cc) rules as to the proceedings in the
(d) rules as to the entertainment of
appeals under sub-clause (c) of clause
(e) rules as to the conditions subject to
which any judgment pronounced or order
made by the Court may be reviewed and the
procedure for such review including the
time within which applications to the
Court for such review are to be entered;
(f) rules as to the costs of and
incidental to any proceedings in the
Court and as to the fees to be charged in
respect of proceedings therein;
(g) rules as to the granting of bail;
(h) rules as to stay of proceedings;
(i) rules providing for the summary
determination of any appeal which appears
to the Court to be frivolous or vexatious
or brought for the purpose of delay;
(j) rules as to the procedure for
inquiries    referred to in clause (1) of
article 317.
(2)   Subject     to   the    provisions    of
clause(3), rules made under this article
may fix the minimum number of Judges who
are to sit for any purpose, and may
provide for the powers of single Judges
and Division Courts.
(3) The minimum number of Judges who are
to sit for the purpose of deciding any
case involving a substantial question of
law as to the interpretation of this
Constitution    or   for    the   purpose   of
hearing any reference under article 143
Provided     that,    where    the   Court
hearing an appeal under any of the
provisions of this Chapter other than
article 132 consists of less than five
Judges and in the course of the hearing
of the appeal the Court is satisfied that
the    appeal    involves     a    substantial
question of law as to the interpretation
of this Constitution the determination of
which is necessary for the disposal of
the appeal, such Court shall refer the
question    for    opinion     to    a   Court
constituted as required by this clause
for the purpose of deciding any case
involving such a question and shall on
receipt of the opinion dispose of the
appeal in conformity with such opinion.
(4) No judgment shall be delivered by the
Supreme Court save in open Court, and no
report shall be made under article 143
save in accordance with an opinion also
delivered in open Court.
(5) No judgment and no such opinion shall
be delivered by the Supreme Court save
with the concurrence of a majority of the
Judges present at the hearing of the
case, but nothing in this clause shall be
deemed to prevent a Judge who does not
concur    from   delivering     a   dissenting
judgment or opinion.”
6.  Order VI Rule (1) of the Supreme Court Rules, 2013
specifies that subject to other provisions of the Rules
every cause, appeal or matter is to be heard by a Bench
consisting of not less than two Judges nominated by the
Hon’ble the Chief Justice of India.        Four categories of
cases, however, have been stipulated which could be heard
and  disposed   of  finally   by   a  Judge   sitting  singly,
nominated by the Hon’ble the Chief Justice. Order VI Rule
(1) of the 2013, Rules reads:-
“1. Subject to the other provisions of these
rules every cause, appeal or matter shall be
heard by a Bench consisting of not less than
two Judges nominated by the Chief Justice:
Provided that the following categories
of matters may be heard and disposed of
finally by a Judge sitting singly
nominated by the Chief Justice:
(i) Special leave petitions arising out
of grant, dismissal or rejection of Bail
Application     or     Anticipatory    Bail
Application in the matters filed against
the order passed under section 437,
section 438 or section 439 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)
involving the offences punishable with
sentence up to seven years imprisonment;
(ii) Applications for transfer of cases
under section 406 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974);
(iii) Application of an urgent nature
for transfer of cases under section 25
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5
(iv)   Any   other    category   of   cases
notified by the Chief Justice from time
to time, which may be heard and disposed
of finally by a Judge sitting singly
nominated by him.”
7.   It would be evident from sub Clause (2) of Article
145  that  subject   to  the   provisions  of  Clause  (3)
thereof, rules made under the said Article may fix the
minimum number of Judges who are to sit for any purpose
and such rules may provide for the powers of Single
Judges and Division Courts.     The power or jurisdiction
of a Single Judge is derived from the proviso to Order
VI Rule (1) of the Supreme Court Rules, 2013. I have
reproduced the said Rule in the preceding paragraph.
The  present  petition  for   transfer  comes  within  the
domain or jurisdiction of the Judge sitting singly.
Since the provisions of Article 142 of the Constitution
of India vests this Court with the jurisdiction to pass
any order or decree to do complete justice in any cause
or matter pending before it, a Judge sitting singly has
the  power  and  jurisdiction   to  issue orders   or pass
decrees as specified in the said Article.         There is
precedent for this proposition of law.       A Co-ordinate
Bench of this Court in a decision delivered in Transfer
Petition (Crl.) No. 225 of 2020 (Rhea Chakraborty vs.
State of Bihar & Ors.) decided on 19th August, 2020 has
passed an order exercising this Court’s jurisdiction
vested under Article 142 of the Constitution of India.
8.   Turning back to the subject-matter arising in this
proceeding,   the    parties    in   their   memorandum    of
compromise want this Court to annul their marriage by
mutual  consent,   but  not   adhering   completely  to   the
procedure specified in Section 13B of the 1955 Act.
Main prayer in the joint application is in that regard.
The statutory provisions for obtaining a decree for
dissolution of marriage specifies observance of certain
timeline by the parties.     In the joint application, the
parties in substance seek deviation from such statute
laid procedure. But in my opinion, while a Single Judge
of this Court can exercise jurisdiction under Article
142  of  the   Constitution    of   India,  this   power   or
jurisdiction has to be confined to the four categories
of cases referred to in the proviso to Order VI Rule
(1) of the 2013 Rules only, or on subjects ancillary or
directly relatable to them.       Referring a case forming
the core dispute in a transfer petition to mediation
obviously comes within the subjects relatable to the
lis pending before the Court. Annulment of marriage,
however,  in  my  view,   cannot   come  within  these   four
categories.  I am of the view that while sitting singly
this Court does not have the jurisdiction to take a
decision on that plea made in the joint application.
One of the preconditions for exercise of jurisdiction
under   Article   142   of   the    Constitution   of   India  in
passing order or decree for doing complete justice is
that the cause or the matter in which the Court intends
to invoke the provisions thereof must be pending before
it. Annulment of marriage cannot be linked to any cause
or matter pending before this Court in the facts of the
given   case.      The   transfer     petition   arose    out  of
matrimonial    dispute     between     the   parties,    but  the
expression ‘cause or matter pending before it’ cannot
be stretched to cover all disputes originating from
such matrimonial problem that can be resolved by this
Court,    sitting    singly,      while   hearing   a    transfer
petition.     I   am   not    expressing    any   doubt   on  the
jurisdiction of this Court under Article 142 of the
Constitution   of   India    to   pass   decree  to  dissolve   a
marriage on consent of the parties without adhering to
the    timeline     and     other     procedural     formalities
stipulated in Section 13B of the 1955 Act.              But I do
not think that while sitting singly, such a decree can
be  passed   having    regard     to   the  provisions    of  the
9.   In such circumstances, I am of the opinion that
the joint application ought to be dealt with by a Bench
comprising of two or more Hon’ble Judges as the Hon’ble
Chief Justice of India may consider appropriate. Since
the parties to the present proceeding have otherwise
settled their dispute through the process of mediation,
the transfer petition has lost its utility and stands
disposed of. Let the file be placed before Hon’ble the
Chief Justice of India for appropriate directions for
giving effect to the terms of settlement entered into
by and between the parties and broadly reflected in the
joint application.
Date : 01-03-2021 These matters were called on for hearing today.
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
The matter is convened through Video Conferencing.
The transfer petition stands disposed of in terms of signed
order.
Pending application(s), if any, stand disposed of.
(Signed order is placed on the file)