1.          This decision on Sentencing will be in continuation of our
judgment           dated    11.07.2022        by      which       Perry    Kansagra
(hereinafter referred to as the ‘contemnor’) was convicted for acts
of civil as well as criminal contempt of this Court. For passing
the consequential order of Sentence, we adjourned the case
several         times1   and    after     being      satisfied      that    sufficient
opportunity was given to the contemnor, we proceeded to hear
the learned Senior Counsel Ms. Sonia Mathur for Smriti
Kansagra (wife of the contemnor and mother of their son Aditya)
and the Additional Solicitor General and reserved the case for
1 After the judgment dated 11.07.2002 the case was listed on 22.07.2022, 27.09.2022,
30.09.2022, 17.10.2022 and 21.10.2022.
orders. By this judgment, we will consider and pass appropriate
orders of Sentence.
2.    The facts necessary for the disposal of this order may
briefly be stated as under. The contemnor married Smriti, an
Indian citizen, on 29.07.2007 in New Delhi. Initially, the couple
stayed in Nairobi, Kenya but Smriti returned to India in 2009,
and the couple was blessed with a son ­ Aditya, on 02.12.2009
in New Delhi. Except for a brief period, when the couple went to
Kenya in 2012, Aditya always stayed with Smriti in Delhi. We
may mention here itself that this position continued till the
custody of Aditya was handed over to the contemnor for moving
him to Kenya as per the orders of this Court. The subsequent
incidents that led to the recall of the orders of this Court and the
judgment of conviction for contempt are all part of the Court
proceedings, which unfolded as follows.
3.    A Guardianship Petition No. 53 of 2012 was filed by the
contemnor before the District Court, Saket, for declaration of
legal guardianship. After the contest, the petition came to be
allowed by order dated 12.01.2018. Smriti challenged the said
order before the High Court of Delhi. By its judgment dated
25.02.2020, the High Court affirmed the decision of the District
Court granting custody of Aditya to his father, the contemnor.
By a separate order passed on the same date, the High Court
recorded the willingness of the contemnor and his mother,
holding an Indian passport, to ensure compliance with the order
of the Family Court granting continued access and visitation
rights to Smriti. The direction of the High Court that the
contemnor shall also file an undertaking before the Indian
Embassy that he would submit to the jurisdiction of the Indian
Courts was complied with, and it is part of the court record.
4.   Smriti challenged the decision of the High Court before this
Court in Civil Appeal No. 3559 of 2020. The majority decision of
this Court, while affirming the findings of the High Court,
disposed of the Civil Appeal on 28.10.2020 with the following
“(a) To safeguard the rights and interest of Smriti,
we have considered it necessary to direct Perry to
obtain a mirror order from the concerned court in
Nairobi, which would reflect the directions
contained in this Judgment.
(b) Given the large number of cases arising from
transnational parental abduction in inter­country
marriages, the English courts have issued protective
measures which take the form of undertakings,
mirror orders, and safe harbour orders, since there
is no accepted international mechanism to achieve
protective measures. Such orders are passed to
safeguard the interest of the child who is in transit
from one jurisdiction to another. The courts have
found mirror orders to be the most effective way of
achieving protective measures.
(c) The primary jurisdiction is exercised by the court
where the child has been ordinarily residing for a
substantial period of time, and has conducted an
elaborate enquiry on the issue of custody. The court
may direct the parties to obtain a “mirror order”
from the court where the custody of the child is
being shifted. Such an order is ancillary or auxiliary
in character, and supportive of the order passed by
the court which has exercised primary jurisdiction
over the custody of the child. In International
Family Law, it is necessary that jurisdiction is
exercised by only one court at a time. It would avoid
a situation where conflicting orders may be passed
by courts in two different jurisdictions on the same
issue of custody of the minor child. These orders
are passed keeping in mind the principle of comity
of courts and public policy. The object of a mirror
order is to safeguard the interest of the minor child
in transit from one jurisdiction to another, and to
ensure that both parents are equally bound in each
The mirror order is passed to ensure that the courts
of the country where the child is being shifted are
aware of the arrangements which were made in the
country where he had ordinarily been residing.
Such an order would also safeguard the interest of
the parent who is losing custody, so that the rights
of visitation and temporary custody are not
impaired.”
The Court, further directed as follows: ­
“(a) We direct Perry Kansagra to obtain mirror order
from the concerned court in Nairobi to reflect the
directions contained in this judgement, within a
period of 2 weeks from the date of this judgment. A
copy of the Order passed by the court in Nairobi
must be filed before this Court;
(b) After the mirror order is filed before this Court,
Perry shall deposit a sum of INR 1 Crore in the
Registry of this Court, which shall be kept in an
interest­bearing fixed deposit account (on auto­
renewal basis), for a period of two years to ensure
compliance with the directions contained in this
judgment.
If this Court is satisfied that Perry has discharged
all his obligations in terms of the aforesaid
directions of this Court, the aforesaid amount shall
be returned with interest accrued, thereon to the
(c) Perry will apply and obtain a fresh Kenyan
passport for Aditya, Smriti will provide full co­
operation, and not cause any obstruction in this
(d) Within a week of the mirror order being filed
before this Court, Smriti shall provide the Birth
Certificate and the Transfer Certificate from Delhi
Public School, to enable Perry to secure admission
of Aditya to a School in Kenya;
(e) Smriti will be at liberty to engage with Aditya on
a suitable video­conferencing platform for one hour
over the weekends; further, Aditya is a liberty to
speak to his mother as and when he desires to do
(f) Smriti would be provided with access and
visitation rights for 50% once in a year during the
annual vacations of Aditya, either in New Delhi or
Kenya, wherever she likes, after due intimation
(g) Perry will bear the cost of one trip in a year for a
period of one week to Smriti and her mother to visit
Aditya in Kenya during his vacations. The costs will
cover the air fare and expenses for stay in Kenya;
(h) Smriti will not be entitled to take Aditya out of
Nairobi, Kenya without the consent of Perry;
(i) We direct Perry and Smriti to file Undertakings
before this Court, stating that they would abide and
comply with the directions passed by this Court
without demur, within a period of one week from
the date of this judgement.
21. As an interim measure, we direct that till such
time that Perry is granted full custody of the child,
he will be entitled to unsupervised visitation with
overnight access during weekends when he visits
India, so that the studies of Aditya are not
disturbed. Perry and his parents would be required
to deposit their passports before the Registrar of
this Court during such period of visitation. After the
visitation is over, the passports shall be returned to
them forthwith.
22. This appeal shall be listed before the Court after
a period of four weeks to ensure compliance with
the aforesaid directions, and on being satisfied that
all the afore­stated directions are duly complied
with, the custody of Aditya Vikram Kansagra shall
be handed over by his mother Smriti Kansagra to
the father Perry Kansagra.”
5.    Taking note of certain specific requirements and also to
ensure smooth transition of Aditya’s custody in favour of the
contemnor, yet another order was passed on 08.12.2020 with
the following directions: ­
“A) Except for direction issued earlier in paragraph
20 of this Order, and matters accepted by the
learned counsel for the respondent, no orders are
called for in respect of any of the directions sought
for by the appellant.
B) All the directions issued in paragraph 20 of the
Judgment hold good, with the addition of the one
issued in paragraph 20 of this Order.
C) A further affidavit shall be filed by the
respondent within three days of this Order, that he
shall abide by this Order and the additional
direction issued in paragraph 20 of this Order.
D) The respondent is not required to obtain any
fresh Mirror Order in respect of the aforesaid
additional direction, before Aditya is taken to
Kenya, and it shall be sufficient if an appropriate
application to have this Order registered, in the
same manner as the Judgment was registered, is
preferred within two weeks of Aditya reaching
Kenya, and the copy of such registration is
thereafter filed in this Court at the earliest.
E) After filing of the further affidavit as stated
above, the respondent shall be at liberty to take
Aditya to Kenya        as   directed earlier in  the
6.   After the above­referred orders dated 28.10.2020 and
08.12.2020, followed by custody of Aditya to the contemnor,
what really transpired came to light with the filing of M.A. No.
1167 of 2012 by Smriti complaining of total and absolute
disobedience of this Court’s Orders.
7.   Having considered the matter in detail, this Court, by its
judgment dated 07.10.2021, recalled its earlier orders dated
20.08.2020 and 08.12.2020. The relevant portion of the order is
“34. The documents and the developments referred
to hereinabove show:­
(i) Perry had given an unequivocal undertaking to
the High Court that he would submit to the
jurisdiction of the Indian Courts. He had also given
a solemn undertaking to this Court that he would
comply with the Order dated 28.10.2020 in
addition to the Judgment dated 28.10.2020.
(ii) In response to a specific submission raised in
Miscellaneous Application No. 2140 of 2020 (quoted
in paragraph 16 hereinabove), it was submitted
by Perry that he had subjected himself to the
jurisdiction of this Court. While dealing with the
rival submissions in the Order dated 8.12.2020,
this Court made it clear that the undertaking given
by Perry to the High Court would continue to be
operative, in addition to the undertaking given to
(iii) The Judgment dated 28.10.2020 had called
upon Perry to obtain a ‘Mirror Order’ from the
concerned Court in Nairobi to reflect the directions
contained in the Judgment dated 28.10.2020.
Thereafter, the Order dated 9.11.2020 passed by
the High Court of Kenya at Nairobi along with the
relevant    application   moved    by Perry seeking
registration of the Judgment dated 28.10.2020,
was filed in this Court.
(iv) There was a dispute whether the registration
granted vide order dated 9.11.2020 by the High
Court of Kenya at Nairobi amounted to fulfilling the
requirement of a “Mirror Order”. The submissions on
the point were dealt with in paragraphs 8 and 9 of
the Order dated 8.12.2020. The learned counsel
appearing for Perry had relied upon the opinion
given by M/s. GMC Advocates which in turn had
relied upon the decision of the High Court of Kenya
at Nairobi in Re : Matter of I W P (Infant) [2013]
eKLR to submit that the registration itself was a
“Mirror Order” in compliance of the requirements of
the Judgment dated 28.10.2020.
Relying on the submissions so advanced on behalf
of Perry and in deference to the Order dated
9.11.2020 passed by the High Court of Kenya at
Nairobi, in paragraph 10 of the Order dated
8.12.2020, this Court observed that the registration
of the Judgment of this Court by the High Court of
Kenya at Nairobi was sufficient compliance of the
directions to obtain a “Mirror Order” issued from a
Competent Court in Kenya.
(v) The Judgment dated 28.10.2020 and the Order
dated 8.12.2020 passed by this Court were thus
premised on the submission that the Order dated
9.11.2020 passed by the High Court of Kenya at
Nairobi while registering the Judgment dated
28.10.2020 passed by this Court was in fact the
(vi) It now transpires that by a subsequent Order
dated 21.5.2021, the High Court of Kenya at
Nairobi in Paragraph 13 of its order observed that
the judgment of this Court was not registrable and
dismissed the Originating Summons dated
30.10.2020 filed by Perry.
(vii) At no stage Perry brought this development to
the notice of this Court that the Originating
Summons moved by him seeking registration of the
Judgment dated 28.10.2020 passed by this Court
was dismissed by the High Court of Kenya at
Nairobi on 21.5.2021. Having submitted to the
jurisdiction of the Indian Courts it was the bounden
duty of Perry to keep this Court appraised of all the
developments particularly when the “Mirror Order”
was the fulcrum on the basis of which this Court
handed over to him the custody of Aditya.
(viii) This infraction gets more pronounced in the
light of the stand taken in his Affidavit dated
5.8.2021 filed in this Court and referred to in
Paragraph        22      hereinabove.      In    that
affidavit Perry unequivocally stated that he had not
even the remotest intention to disobey the Order
passed by this Court including the Judgment dated
28.10.2020. Yet, something as basic and
fundamental like the Order dated 21.05.2021 was
not brought to the notice of this Court.
Logically, Perry should have brought back Aditya to
this country so that status quo ante could be
restored and appropriate orders could thereafter be
passed by this Court.
(ix) Miscellaneous Application No. 1167 of 2021
filed by Smriti had annexed e­mails exchanged
between her and Perry and prayed that Perry be
directed to comply with directions regarding
vacation access. In response, apart from stating
that he had no intentions to disobey the orders
passed by this Court, Perry voiced concern about
sending Aditya to India. Being well aware of the
conditions in this Country, a solution was devised
by this Court in its Order dated 11.08.2021 and
certain directions to facilitate the entry of Aditya
into and his exit from India in a safe manner were
issued. Pertinently on 11.08.2021, the attention of
this Court was not invited to the fact that the
Situational Report dated 09.08.2021 as referred to
hereinabove was made or that the matter was
being looked into by the concerned authorities in
(X) Despite clear directions issued in the Order
dated 11.08.2021 Perry had not taken any steps to
comply with the Order. As a matter of fact, by the
time the matter was taken up for further hearing on
16.08.2021, Perry      sought    to  withdraw    the
authorization in favour of the learned counsel who
were all the while representing him before this
(XI) As disclosed in I.A. 100550 of 2021 week­end
Skype meetings between Smriti and Aditya were
not facilitated from the week­end of 14.08.2021
and 15.08.2021. Perry also blocked all means of
communications with Smriti. Though in law the
learned advocates who had entered appearance on
behalf of Perry would continue to represent him,
notice was additionally directed to be served
on Perry through Indian embassy of Nairobi.
(XII) In the light of the defiant attitude exhibited
by Perry and his refusal to abide by the Orders
passed by this court, ad­interim relief in terms of
prayers (d)(e) and (f) made by Smriti in her I.A. No.
100550 of 2021 was granted by this Court vide its
order dated 17.08.2021.
(XIII) Finally, Petition No. E301 of 2021 and ­ Notice
of Motion were moved on behalf of Perry, filed in the
High Court of Kenya at Nairobi on 26.08.2021. The
stand taken by Perry in said Petition and Notice of
Motion is that it would be humiliating to compel
Aditya to take OCI Card; that wishes of Aditya
were not ascertained by this Court; that there was
no valid Mirror Order and that the orders passed by
this Court were without jurisdiction. He has prayed
for declaration that there existed no valid “Mirror
Order” and in the circumstances the orders passed
by this Court are incapable of compliance and/or
35. These developments not only show the defiant
and contumacious posture now adopted by Perry
but prima facie support the submissions of Smriti
made in Interim Applications referred to in
paragraphs 25, 27, and 28 herein above. There
appears to be concrete material and reason to
believe that it was a well­planned conspiracy on
part of Perry to persuade this Court to pass orders
in his favour and allow him the custody of Aditya
and then turn around and defy the Orders of this
36. It is fundamental that a party approaching the
Court must come with clean hands, more so in child
custody matters. Any fraudulent conduct based on
which the custody of a minor is obtained under the
orders of the Court, would negate and nullify the
element of trust reposed by the Court in the
concerned person. Wherever the custody of a minor
is a matter of dispute between the parents or the
concerned parties, the primary custody of the minor,
in parens patriae jurisdiction, is with the Court
which may then hand over the custody to the
person who in the eyes of the Court, would be the
most suitable person. Any action initiated to obtain
such custody from the Court with fraudulent
conduct and design would be a fraud on the
process of the Court.
39. Though, at every juncture solemn undertakings
were given by Perry to the High Court and this
Court, such undertakings were not only flagrantly
violated but a stand is now taken challenging the
very jurisdiction of the Indian Courts, despite
having submitted himself to the jurisdiction of the
Indian Courts. Such conduct, prime facie, can
certainly be said to be contumacious calling for an
action in contempt jurisdiction. Moreover, the non­
disclosure of material facts by Perry at the relevant
junctures also shows that he approached the Indian
Courts with unclean hands.
40. It was only on the basis of the solemn
undertakings given by Perry and the order dated
09.11.2020 passed by the High Court of Kenya at
Nairobi which was projected to be a “Mirror Order”
in compliance of the directions issued by this Court,
that the custody of Aditya was directed to be
handed over to Perry. Since the false and
fraudulent representations made by Perry were the
foundation, on the basis of which this Court was
persuaded to handover custody of Aditya to him, it
shall be the duty of this Court to nullify, in every
way, the effect and impact of the orders which were
obtained by playing fraud upon the Court. All the
decisions referred to hereinabove point in that
direction. This Court would therefore be well within
its power and justified to recall all the orders and
continue to assume jurisdiction to ensure that the
situation as it prevailed prior to the passing of the
orders by the Trial Court, the High Court and this
Court, gets restored, whereafter appropriate
decision       can       be      taken      in parens
Finally, the Court directed as under: ­
“42. In the premises, we pass following directions:
(A) The Judgment dated 28.10.2020 and the Order
dated 08.12.2020 passed by this Court are
recalled.
(B) The Guardianship Petition No. 53 of 2012 filed
by Perry in the District Court, Saket, New Delhi
seeking permanent custody of Aditya and the
resultant proceedings arising therefrom including
MAT APP (F.C.) No. 30 of 2018 filed in the High
Court, are dismissed.
(C) The Orders granting custody having been
recalled, the custody of Aditya with Perry is
declared to be illegal and ab initio void.
(D) Issue notice to Perry as to why proceedings in
contempt jurisdiction be not initiated against him for
having violated the solemn undertakings given to
this Court, returnable on 16th November, 2021. The
Registry is directed to register Suo Motu Contempt
Case and proceed accordingly.
(E) The notice shall additionally be served through
e­mail directed at the e­mail id used by Perry in
communicating with Smriti. The details in that
behalf shall be furnished to the Registry by Smriti
within two days.
(F) The Central Bureau of Investigation, New Delhi
through its Director is directed to initiate
appropriate proceedings by registering criminal
proceedings against Perry and to secure and
entrust the custody of Aditya to Smriti.
(G) The Secretary, Ministry of External Affairs,
Government of India, New Delhi and the Indian
Embassy in Kenya are directed to ensure that all
possible assistance and logistical support is
extended to Smriti in securing the custody of
(H) From and out of the amount of Rs. 1 crore
deposited by Perry in this Court, at this stage, an
amount of Rs. 25 lakhs be handed over to Smriti
towards legal expense incurred or required to be
incurred hereafter. Rest of the money shall continue
to be kept in deposit with the Registry till further
orders.”
8.   On 25.01.2022, following the suo­moto notice for contempt
of Court, this Court framed charges and issued notice to the
contemnor. The matter was adjourned from time to time to give
further opportunities to the contemnor. Finally, by its judgment
dated 11.07.2022, this Court convicted the contemnor for
having committed civil and criminal contempt of this Court’s
orders. The relevant portion of the order is as follows:
“15. It is thus well settled that a person who
makes a false statement before the Court and
makes an attempt to deceive the Court, interfered
with the administration of justice and is guilty of
contempt of Court. The extracted portion above
clearly shows that in such circumstances, the Court
not only has the inherent power but it would be
failing in its duty if the alleged contemnor is not
dealt with in contempt jurisdiction for abusing the
process of the Court.
16. The essential features of the matter as culled
out in paragraph 34 of the Order dated 07.10.2021
were relied upon to arrive at a prime facie
observation that Perry was guilty of contempt of
Court. Though notice was issued to Perry, no
response has been tendered. We find that the
material on record clearly shows violation on part of
Perry. The observations made in paragraph 34 of
the order dated 07.10.2021 were on the basis of
record.    Having considered the entirety of the
matter, in our view, Perry is guilty of having
committed criminal contempt of Court part from the
contempt for violating express undertakings given to
the Courts, including this Court. We accordingly
hold Perry guilty under the Contempt of Courts Act,
17. Though the instant proceedings can be taken
to logical conclusion and order of sentence can be
awarded even in the absence of Perry, we give final
opportunity to Perry to present himself before this
Court on 22.07.2022 at 3.00 pm along with Aditya.
He shall then have an opportunity to advance
appropriate submissions on the issue of
punishment to be awarded to him. It shall also be
open to Perry to purge himself of contempt in which
case a sympathetic view may be taken in the
Let copy of this Order be served upon Perry
through email ID used by him in serving process
upon Smriti. Additionally, a copy shall be given to
Mr. P.K. Manohar, learned Advocate.”
9.   It is in the above­referred background that the present
proceedings for imposition of sentence are being taken up. These
proceedings for sentence were spread over three months. During
this period, the case was listed on 22.07.2022, 27.09.2022,
30.09.2022 and 17.10.2022. It was finally heard on 21.10.2022
when it was decided that sufficient opportunity had been
granted to the contemnor to appear and explain his actions or to
purge his conduct. However, he continued to be defiant & did
not enter appearance personally or through counsel.
10.  We heard Ms. Sonia Mathur, Sr. Advocate on behalf of
Smriti Kansagra, and also heard Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, learned
ASG, who assisted the Court as per our request on 30.09.2022.
Having examined the merit in detail, we hold that:
10.1 The contemnor had given an unequivocal undertaking to
the High Court that he would submit to the jurisdiction of the
Indian   Courts.  In  response    to    a submission  raised  in
Miscellaneous Application No. 2140 of 2020, he specifically
stated that he had subjected himself to the jurisdiction of this
Court. In its Order dated 08.12.2020, this Court made it clear
that the undertaking given by him to the High Court would
continue to be operative in addition to the undertaking given to
this Court. The contemnor blatantly breached the undertaking.
This is a deliberate disobedience of Courts order.
10.2 The contemnor gave a solemn undertaking to this Court
that he would comply with the judgment dated 28.10.2020 and
the   order   dated  08.12.2020.    However,  he   breached this
undertaking also. It had become evident that the contemnor
has, in his well­calculated and deliberate scheme of things,
given assurances and undertakings to mislead the Courts in
India, including this Court, when he had no intention to comply
or abide by any of his assurances. The following acts would
demonstrate that they are not only willful disobedience of the
judgment of this Court but are calculated to obstruct the
administration of Justice and interfere with the due course of
judicial proceedings. They had the clear effect of lowering the
authority of the Court.
10.3 The judgment dated 28.10.2020 called upon the contemnor
to obtain a Mirror Order from the concerned Court in Nairobi to
reflect   the directions  contained     in the judgment     dated
28.10.2020. Following this, the order dated 09.11.2020 passed
by the High Court of Kenya at Nairobi along with the relevant
application moved by the contemnor seeking registration of the
judgment dated 28.10.2020, was filed in this Court. There was a
dispute whether the registration granted vide order dated
09.11.2020 by the High Court of Kenya at Nairobi amounted to
fulfilling the requirement of a Mirror Order. The counsel
appearing for the contemnor relied upon the opinion given by
M/s GMC Advocates which in turn had relied upon the decision
of the High Court of Kenya at Nairobi in Re: Matter of I W P
(Infant) [2013] eKLR to submit that the registration itself was a
“Mirror Order” in compliance of the requirements of the
Judgment dated 28.10.2020. Through submissions advanced on
behalf of the contemnor based on the order dated 09.11.2020
passed by the High Court of Kenya at Nairobi, this Court was
persuaded to believe that registration of the judgment of this
Court by the High Court of Kenya at Nairobi was sufficient
compliance of the directions to obtain a “Mirror Order”. It now
transpires that the High Court of Kenya at Nairobi by its order
dated 21.05.2021 held that the judgment of this Court was not
registrable and dismissed the Originating Summons.
10.4 The proceedings and the order of the High Court of Kenya
at Nairobi were suppressed. The contemnor deliberately and
with the clear intention to defeat the judgment and order of this
Court did not bring these facts to the notice of this Court.
Having submitted to the jurisdiction of the Indian Courts it was
the bounden duty of the contemnor to keep this Court appraised
of all the developments particularly when the “Mirror Order” was
the fulcrum on the basis of which this Court handed over to him
the custody of Aditya. This act has clearly lowered the authority
of this Court.
10.5 This infraction gets more pronounced in the light of the
stand taken in his Affidavit dated 05.08.2021 filed in this Court,
where the contemnor unequivocally stated that he had not even
the remotest intention to disobey the Order passed by this Court
including the Judgment dated 28.10.2020. These equivocal and
contradictory acts clearly demonstrate that the contemnor was
acting with a design and a clear intention to defeat the orders of
this Court. He obstructed the course of Justice.
10.6 Being well aware of the procedure devised by this Court in
its Order dated 11.08.2021 to facilitate the safe entry and exit of
Aditya into India, the contemnor did not inform this Court about
the fact that a Situational Report dated 09.08.2021 was made or
that the concerned authorities were looking into the matter in
Kenya. All these acts were done and contrary steps were taken
even while the contemnor was assuring this Court that he had
no intention to disobey the orders passed by this Court. All this
demonstrates a clear intention to mislead this Court.
10.7 Despite    clear  directions  issued  in  the   Order   dated
11.08.2021 Perry had not taken any steps to comply with the
Order. He failed to renew OCI and failed to have Aditya board
the flight on 13.08.2021. Weekend Skype meetings between
Smriti and Aditya were not facilitated from the weekend of
14.08.2021. In total and complete disregard for all orders, the
contemnor blocked all means of communication with Smriti.
10.8 Though in law the learned advocates appearing on behalf of
the contemnor would, as per our orders, continue to represent
him, we have additionally directed that notice be served on him
through Indian embassy of Nairobi. Contemnor has failed to
appear since 16.08.2021 despite repeated directions. As a
matter of fact, by the time the case was taken up for further
hearing on 16.08.2021, the contemnor sought to withdraw the
authorization in favour of the learned counsel who were all the
while representing him before this Court. By this deliberate and
well   thought    out   actions,    contemnor   obstructed    the
administration of justice.
10.9 In Petition No. E301 of 2021 and Notice of Motion before
the High Court of Kenya at Nairobi on 26.08.2021, the
contemnor submitted that it would be humiliating to compel
Aditya to take OCI Card. He also stated that the wishes of Aditya
were not ascertained by this Court. He further pleaded that
there was no valid Mirror Order and that the orders passed by
this Court were without jurisdiction. He specifically prayed for
declaration that there existed no valid “Mirror Order” and in the
circumstances the orders passed by this Court are incapable of
compliance and/or enforcement. This is the most egregious part
of the contumacious acts committed by the contemnor. The
statements made by him were false, and in fact, being fully
aware that these were false statements, he proceeded to invoke
the jurisdiction of the Kenya High Court to hold that Judgments
and Orders passed by Indian Courts were unenforceable.
10.10 These developments show the defiant and contumacious
posture now adopted by the contemnor. There is concrete
material and reason to believe that it was a well­planned
conspiracy on part of Perry to persuade this Court to pass
orders in his favour and allow him the custody of Aditya and
then turn around and defy the orders of this Court.
11.     Article 129 of the Constitution of India empowering this
Court to punish for contempt of self is as follows: ­
“129. Supreme Court to be a court of record.­
The Supreme Court shall be a court of record and
shall have all the powers of such a court including
the power to punish for contempt of itself.”
12.     It is now well settled that the power of the Supreme Court
to punish for contempt is not confined to the procedure under
the Contempt of Courts Act2. In Pallav Sheth v. Custodian and
Others3, this Court held that: ­
“30. There can be no doubt that both this Court and
High Courts are courts of record and the
Constitution has given them the powers to punish
for contempt. The decisions of this Court clearly
show that this power cannot be abrogated or
stultified. But if the power under Article 129 and
Article 215 is absolute, can there by any legislation
indicating the manner and to the extent that the
power can be exercised? If there is any provision of
the law which stultifies or abrogates the power
2 “12. Punishment for contempt of court.­
(1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act or in any other law, a
contempt of court may be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may
extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, or with both:
Provided that the accused may be discharged or the punishment awarded
may be remitted on apology being made to the satisfaction of the Court.
Explanation.—An apology shall not be rejected merely on the ground that it
is qualified or conditional if the accused makes it bona fide.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in
force, no court shall impose a sentence in excess of that specified in sub­section (1) for any
contempt either in respect of itself or of a court subordinate to it.”
under Article 129 and/or Article 215, there can be
little doubt that such law would not be regarded as
having been validly enacted. It, however, appears
to us that providing for the quantum of punishment
or what may or may not be regarded as acts of
contempt or even providing for a period of limitation
for initiating proceedings for contempt cannot be
taken to be a provision which abrogates or stultifies
the contempt jurisdiction under Article 129 or Article
215 of the Constitution.”
13.    The above said principle is followed in Re: Vijay Kurle and
Ors.4, where this Court reiterated the above referred principle
and held as under: ­
“38. The aforesaid finding clearly indicates that the
Court held that any law which stultifies or
abrogates the power of the Supreme Court under
Article 129 of the Constitution or of the High Courts
under Article 215 of the Constitution, could not be
said to be validly enacted. It however, went on to
hold that providing the quantum of punishment or a
period of limitation would not mean that the powers
of the Court under Article 129 have been stultified
or abrogated. We are not going into the correctness
or otherwise of this judgment but it is clear that this
judgment only dealt with the issue whether the
Parliament could fix a period of limitation to initiate
the proceedings under the Act. Without commenting
one way or the other on Pallav Seth's case (supra) it
is clear that the same has not dealt with the powers
of this Court to issue suo motu notice of contempt.
39. In view of the above discussion we are clearly
of the view that the powers of the Supreme Court to
initiate contempt are not in any manner limited by
4 (2020) SCC online SC 407.
the provisions of the Act. This Court is vested with
the constitutional powers to deal with the contempt.
Section 15 is not the source of the power to issue
notice for contempt. It only provides the procedure
in which such contempt is to be initiated and this
procedure provides that there are three ways of
initiating a contempt ­ (i) suo motu (ii) on the motion
by the Advocate General/Attorney General/Solicitor
General and (iii) on the basis of a petition filed by
any other person with the consent in writing of the
General. As far as suo motu petitions are
concerned, there is no requirement for taking
consent of anybody because the Court is exercising
its inherent powers to issue notice for contempt.
This is not only clear from the provisions of the Act
but also clear from the Rules laid down by this
14.    It is within the constitutional power of this Court to
consider the contumacious acts of a contemnor and to punish
him/her for the same. It is in exercise of such a power,
unrestricted by the Contempt of Court Act that this Court had
imposed a sentence of more than six months and also directed
in some cases that the contemnor shall undergo rigorous
5 Zahira Habibullah Sheikh and Anr. v. State of Gujarat and Ors, (2006) 3 SCC 374; and
Afzal and Anr. v. State of Haryana and Ors, (1996) 7 SCC 397.
15.  We are of the view that the contemnor had deliberately,
and with a clear design, made it appear as if he was willing to
comply with the Judgment and direction of the Indian Courts.
The repeated statements and affidavits affirming to comply with
the directions of this Court were given only to ensure that the
custody of Aditya is given to him. We are of the clear opinion
that the contemnor had no intention to comply with the
directions of the Court even while he gave the undertaking, filed
solemn affidavit or even instructed his lawyer to so represent on
his behalf.
16.  The subsequent conduct of the contemnor after taking
Aditya out of India leaves no doubt in our mind that the entire
proceedings were conducted with the deliberate and mala­fide
intention to mislead the Supreme Court in permitting the
contemnor to shift Aditya out of India.
17.    This Court in Subrata Roy Sahara v. Union of India and
ors.6 while articulating the powers under Article 129 held as
“19. …It is therefore that Article 142 of the
Constitution of India mandates that this Court
“… in the exercise of its jurisdiction may pass such
decree or make such order as is necessary for doing
complete justice in any cause or matter pending
before it, and any decree so passed or order so
made shall be enforceable throughout the territory
of India …”.
And it is also inter alia for the above enforcement,
that Article 129 of the Constitution of India, vests in
the Supreme Court the power, amongst other things,
to enforce compliance with the Court directions. The
Supreme Court has the jurisdiction and power to
punish for its contempt. It is this dispensation
which authorises the Supreme Court to enforce
compliance with its orders. For, the power to punish
would serve no purpose if the power to enforce
compliance was lacking. It was, therefore, that this
Court in Maninderjit Singh Bitta v. Union of India
SCC (Cri) 528 : (2012) 1 SCC (L&S) 83] with
reference to its contempt jurisdiction observed,
thus : (SCC pp. 282­85, paras 26­27 & 34)
“26. It is also of some relevance to note that
disobedience of court orders by positive or active
contribution or non­obedience by a passive and
dormant conduct leads to the same result.
Also see: Supreme Court Bar Association v. Union of India and anr. (1998) 4 SCC
409, para 38.
Disobedience of orders of the court strikes at the
very root of the rule of law on which the judicial
system rests. The rule of law is the foundation of a
democratic society. Judiciary is the guardian of the
rule of law. If the judiciary is to perform its duties
and functions effectively and remain true to the
spirit with which they are sacredly entrusted, the
dignity and authority of the courts have to be
respected and protected at all costs (refer T.N.
Godavarman Thirumulpad (102) v. Ashok Khot
[(2006) 5 SCC 1] , SCC p. 6, para 5)...
130. ...The scope of the instant contempt jurisdiction
extends to punishing contemnors for violating the
Court's orders; punishing contemnors for disobeying
the Court's orders; punishing contemnors for breach
of undertakings given to the Courts. It also extends
to enforcement of the Court's orders. The contempt
jurisdiction even extends to punishing those who
scandalise (or lower the authority of) any court;
punishing those who interfere in due course of
judicial proceedings; and punishing those who
obstruct the administration of justice...”
18.   We have already convicted Perry Kansagra for contempt.
The above referred facts are mentioned only to demonstrate that
the contemnor has deliberately and with a clear intention
committed egregious acts of contempt. These acts constitute
willful disobedience of the judgment, direction and order of this
Court coupled with willful breach of the undertaking given by the
Court which constitute civil contempt. The contemnor has falsely
represented before the foreign jurisdiction that Indian Courts
have not sought the consent of Aditya and that the decision of
the Supreme Court of India is unenforceable. These acts clearly
lower the authority of this Court. We have also indicated that the
contemnor has interfered with the due course of judicial
proceedings and obstructed the administration of justice which is
a clear case of criminal contempt.
19.    In the circumstances and in order to mention the majesty
of law, we must impose upon adequate punishment on the
contemnor. We have also noted that the contemnor never
showed any remorse or tender any apology for his conduct.
20.    For the reasons stated above, we direct that the contemnor
a)    Punished with simple imprisonment for a term of six
months for civil contempt of Court for his acts of deliberate
and willful disobedience of the orders passed by this Court
and to pay a fine of Rs. 12,50,000/­ (Twelve Lakhs Fifty
Thousand), in default he shall further undergo simple
imprisonment for one month.
b)    Punished with simple imprisonment for a term of six
months for criminal contempt of Court for obstructing the
administration of Justice and lowering the authority of this
Court and to pay a fine of Rs. 12,50,000/­ (Twelve Lakhs
Fifty Thousand), in default he shall further undergo simple
imprisonment for one month.
21.  In view of the egregious acts of civil as well as criminal
contempt, we further direct that the sentences shall be served
22.  We further direct that the total fine of Rs. 25,00,000/­
(Twenty­Five Lakhs) as indicated above, to be deposited by the
contemnor in the Registry of this Court within four weeks from
today and the same shall be released to Smriti Kansagra upon
an application filed by her.
23.  We also direct the Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of
India to secure the presence of the contemnor to undergo the
imprisonment imposed upon him. Needless to say, Government
of India including the Ministry of External Affairs and other
agencies or instrumentalities shall carry out the directions
issued by the Court with due diligence and utmost expediency.
Compliance report shall be filed in the Registry of this Court by
24.  We further direct the case to be listed for hearing for
further orders on 15.12.2022.