The petitioners, who are accused 1 and 2 in Crime
No.703/2022 of Kozhikode Town Police Station, seek anticipatory
bail in this matter by resorting to Section 438 of the Code of
2.     Heard the learned counsel for the petitioners as well as
the learned Public Prosecutor.
3.     Precisely the allegation of the prosecution is that
accused 1 and 2 herein committed offence punishable under
Section 63 of the Copyright Act by using the music of
`NAVARASAM', which was exhibited in `KAPPA' T.V owned by
Mathrubhumi Printing and Publishing Co. Ltd., performed by
Thaikkudam Bridge band by including the same music
`VARAHAROOPAM',           in   a   Kannada     movie     `KANTARA’,
produced by the 1st accused and directed and acted by the 2nd
accused, who have thereby violated the copy right.
4.    While arguing for anticipatory bail, it is submitted by
the learned counsel for the petitioners that the entire allegations are
false.    According to him, the defacto complainant as well as
Thaikkudam Bridge Band filed 2 separate suits before the District
Court, Kozhikode alleging copyright violation and when the
petitioners herein challenged the maintainability of the above suits,
the District Court found that the suits were not maintainable before
the District Court and were directed to be presented before the
commercial court having jurisdiction to decide the issue.
Challenging one out of the order, FAO.No.147/2022 has been filed
before this Court and the same was posted for judgment by this
Court. According to the learned counsel for the petitioners, the
petitioners never exhibited the song `NAVARASAM' in the movie
`KANTARA' in the name `VARAHAROOPAM' in any form. The
song `VARAHAROOPAM' is an independent creation and the
same did not have any connection with `NAVARASAM'. Further,
the entire allegation is within the ambit of a civil suit.
5.     The learned counsel for the petitioners submitted further
that even the prosecution did not collect any materials to prove that
the `VARAHAROOPAM', an independent creation at the instance
of the petitioners, is having similarity or the same is deceptively
similar in any manner and the prosecution relied on to hold so,
prima facie, on the premise that somebody who saw `KANTARA'
film as well as `NAVARASAM' opined similarity. The learned
counsel for the petitioners would submit that the petitioners are
ready to co-operate with the investigation by subjecting themselves
for interrogation and other purposes. Therefore, in the background
facts, as submitted, the learned counsel for the petitioners pressed
for grant of anticipatory bail.
6.     Whereas the learned Public prosecutor vehemently
opposed anticipatory bail plea at the instance of the petitioners on
the submission that the same would hamper the investigation. It is
submitted by the learned Public Prosecutor that as per the report of
the Investigating Officer and as could be read out from the case
diary, the statements of the Senior Manager of Mathrubhumi
KAPPA T.V staff, Assistant Manager DIVO Company, who are the
distributors of `NAVARASAM' & `VARAHAROOPAM' revealed
that they have noticed similarity of music `NAVARASAM' &
`VARAHAROOPAM' only after the same was intimated by the
DIVO Company. Further, the Assistant Manager of DIVO
Company after noticing similarity of the music, the same was
shared with both parties and they had even participated at a Google
meet to settle the matter amicably. Further, the investigation also
would reveal similarities, as contended by the defacto complainant
in between `NAVARASAM' & `VARAHAROOPAM' and prima
facie an offence punishable under Section 63 of the Copy Right Act
is made out. In such a case, the arrest and interrogation of the
petitioners are necessary to accomplish meaningful investigation
and successful prosecution.
7.     Before discussing merits of the case and truth of
allegations, prima facie, it is worthwhile to decide a question as to
whether offence under Section 63 of the Copy Right Act is a non
bailable or bailable offence? In this connection, it is pertinent to
refer the judgment in Crl.Appeal No.807/2022 dated 20.05.2022
rendered by the Apex Court, wherein exactly the question was
considered. In paragraph 7 of the above judgment, the Apex Court held
that offence under Section 63 of the Copyright Act is a cognizable and
non-bailable offence, while setting aside the finding entered into by
the High Court holding the view that the same is a non cognizable
and bailable offence. Therefore, the legal position is well settled
that an offence under Section 63 of the Copyright Act is non
bailable and cognizable.
8.     It is true that on noticing plagiarization of the work done
by Thaikkudam Bridge band under the auspicious KAPPA T.V by
name `NAVARASAM', in `KANTARA’ film under the name and
style `VARAHAROOPAM', civil suits were instituted by the
complainant M/s.Mathrubhumi owning KAPPA T.V. It is true that
on hearing the above suits, the District Court found that the suits
are not maintainable before the District Court, since the transaction
is commercial in nature so that the jurisdiction is vested with the
Commercial Court and the legal issue will be decided by this Court
in F.A.O.No.147/2022. No doubt, the Copyright Act, 1957 has
been enacted with a view to protect Copyright secured by a person
or a firm, as the case may be, without being infringed by third
parties or any others. Section 63 of the Copyright Act, 1957 makes
infringement of copyright or other rights conferred by the
Copyrights Act as an offence. Section 63 is to the following effect:
“63. Office of infringement of copyright or other rights
conferred by this Act:- Any person who knowingly infringes or
abets the infringement of -
(b)   any other right conferred by this Act, except the
right conferred by section 53A except the right conferred by
section 53A shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than six months but which may extend
to three years and with fine which shall not be less than fifty
thousand rupees but which may extend to two lakh rupees:
Provided that where the infringement has not been made for
gain in the course of trade or business the court may, for
adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment,
impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than six
months or a fine of less than fifty thousand rupees.”
9.     So, the prime question to be considered herein is
whether there are prima facie materials in this case to see that there
is infringement of copyrights in so far as `NAVARASAM', for
which copyright was secured by KAPPA T.V owned by
Mathrubhumi, by including the same in `KANTARA' cinema under
the name and style `VARAHAROOPAM'. In this connection it is
to be noted that initially, as admitted by both sides, the District
Court granted stay in exhibiting the film `KANTARA' with the
above song and later when the civil suits were returned for filing
before the proper court, the interim injunction initially granted by
the District Court on the finding that there is prima facie copyright
violation, stands vacated. Prima facie the opinion collected by the
Investigating Officer is to the effect that there is similarity between
`VARAHAROOPAM' and `NAVARASAM'. In addition to that the
Investigating Officer, on gathering opinion from expert, reported
that `VARAHAROOPAM' is, the plagiarized and pirated version of
`NAVARASAM'. If so, the violation of copyright alleged by the
defacto complainant could be discernible from the prosecution
materials, prima facie.     Thus detailed and fair investigation is
absolutely necessary in this regard. Therefore, at the initial stage
of investigation, this Court could not hold that there are no prima
facie materials and the petitioners herein are innocent and they did
not commit offence punishable under Section 63 of the Copyright
10.    As I have already pointed out, right of a person or a firm,
who obtained copyright in respect of a particular subject is a
protected right and any infringement thereof is a serious offence
punishable under Section 63 of the Copyright Act. The legislative
intent behind the Copyright Act is to protect the Copyright, which
one obtained after huge investment and tedious efforts to get the
subject as one with high fame. If someone enjoys or uses the same
either by plagiarization or by making the same deceptively similar
and getting benefit out of them, either monitory or otherwise by
infringing the said right, allowing infringement to continue and to
facilitate the infringer to use or exhibit a cinema with the said
plagiarized version, ultimately after the expiration of the vital part
of the period of use or exhibition and collection of huge amount by
the Director and Producer of the cinema, in fact, the same will be
detrimental to the interest of the persons who obtained copyright.
11.      That apart, releasing the accused on anticipatory bail
and allowing the infringement to continue so as to permit the
infringer of the copyright to take benefit out of the same, could not
be done. If so, ultimately the infringer would get benefit out of the
plagiarized and pirated version after infringing the copyright of
another person which he obtained after long cherished hard work
and intellectual application of mind. Resultantly, the copyright
holder's right to enjoy benefit out of the copyright protected subject
matter practically will be taken away. Therefore, while considering
grant of anticipatory bail in cases of such nature, the courts should
be very vigilant foreseeing all the above aspects. In the case at
hand, admittedly civil litigations have been initiated, but further
proceedings stand stalled because of the jurisdictional issue which
will be addressed by this Court in F.A.O No.147/2022. Therefore,
grant of anticipatory bail shall be on imposing a condition,
restraining the petitioners from exhibiting the cinema `KANTARA'
along with the music `VARAHAROOPAM' for a reasonable period
till an interim order or final order in this regard will be passed by
the competent civil court. By imposing such a condition, I am
inclined to allow this petition.
12. Accordingly the petition stands allowed on the
following conditions:
(i)   The petitioner shall surrender before the Investigating
Officer for 2 days, ie. on 12.02.2023 and 13.02.2023, in between 10
a.m and 1 p.m, for interrogation. The Investigating Officer can
interrogate them and on completion of interrogation within the
above time specified, if they will be arrested, they shall be
produced before the jurisdictional court. On such production, the
jurisdictional court shall release the petitioners on bail on their
executing bonds for Rs.50,000/- (Rupees Fifty Thousand Only)
each with two solvent sureties each for the like amount to the
satisfaction of the jurisdictional court concerned.
(ii) Accused/petitioners shall not intimidate the witnesses or
tamper with evidence. They shall co-operate with the investigation
and shall be available for trial.      They shall appear before the
Investigating Officer, as and when directed.
(iii) Accused/petitioners shall not leave India without prior
permission of the jurisdictional court.
(iv)     Accused/petitioners shall not involve in any other
offence during the currency of bail and any such event, if reported
or came to the notice of this Court, the same shall be a reason to
cancel the bail hereby granted.
(v) The specific condition further is that the petitioners shall
not exhibit the film `KANTARA' along with the music
`VARAHAROOPAM' in the film till an interim order or final order
after addressing infringement of copyright in this matter will be
passed by a competent civil court. It is made specifically clear that
the petitioners also can move before the competent civil court at
their instance at the earliest in this regard to have a meritorious
decision as regards to the allegation of infringement of copyright,
as per law.