3.     This appeal, at the behest of the claimant (now deceased) through
his legal representatives, challenges the judgment and decree dated
4.5.2018 passed by the Motor Accident Claim Tribunal/Additional District
Judge, Court No. 15, Ghaziabad (hereinafter referred to as ‘Tribunal’) in
M.A.C.P. No. 516 of 2005 (Deceased Satish Chand Sharma and others
Vs. Manoj and another. The appeal is preferred for enhancement of the
compensation awarded under the impugned award and that with a
prayer that this Court be pleased to allow the claim petition in toto by
exercising powers under section 173 of the Act..
4.     Recently the Apex Court in Sudarsan Puhan Vs.Jayanta Ku.
Mohanty and another etc.,reported in AIR 2018 SC4662, reiterated
the observations made in the case of UPSRTC Vs. Km. Mamta and
others, reported in AIR 2016 SCC 948, directing that as appeal is
continuation of the earlier proceedings, High Court is under legal
obligation to decide all the issues raised and decide the lis and decide
appeal by giving reasons.
5.     Essential facts and chronology of events giving rise to the instant
dispute are noted at the outset. We feel it necessary to narrate the
chronology of events which would show that the Tribunal has committed
illegality in passing the impugned award which requires to be
readdressed by this Court in favour of the claimants who represent the
estate of the injured who died subsequent to the passing of award and
decree in in his favour in the year 2010. The accident occurred on
22.2.2005. The claimant was admitted in hospital from the date of
accident and, thereafter was discharged. The claimant filed claim
petition on 14.9.2005 after being discharged from hospital. On petition
being filed, summons were issued to respondents. Though disputed by
owner, the respondent No.1-owner was served with the summons on
13.1.2007 as mentioned by the Tribunal in its judgment dated
27.9.2010. The matter proceeded ex parte against the owner namely
Manoj Kumar. The owner and driver of the offending vehicle did not
appear     before   the   Tribunal.  The    Insurance   Company     sought
adjournment till 2008 and did not file their reply. The reply one of denial
was filed in the year 2009. The evidences were recorded from 2009 to
2010. On 08.07.2010 the Insurance Company was permitted to contest
the petition under Section 170 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988. The
Tribunal passed award on 27.09.2010 in favour of claimant .The Tribunal
came to the conclusion that as the owner did not appear it could not be
held that the vehicle was insured on          the date of accident i.e.
22.2.2005.It is admitted position of fact that though the policy was
produced, the Tribunal passed award only against the owner on
27.09.2010 as no other documents were produced. thereby did not hold
respondent No.2 Insurance Company liable to satisfy the award and pay
the claimant.
6.     The Tribunal vide award dated 27 9 2010         awarded medical
expenses for the treatment. In the judgment and award dated
27.09.2010 where all the documents were proved, the Tribunal granted
a sum of Rs. 20,16,500/-(rounded up) as medical expenses on the basis
of the documents which were produced and awarded a sum of Rs.
63,250/- for not being able to attend the services for 163 days due to
injuries, under other head under pecuniary as also non pecuniary
damage,did not grant any amount for the future loss or under other
admissible heads, and granted only a further sum of Rs. 5.000/- for pain
shock and suffering.
7.     The next important aspect to be noted for our purpose is that the
claimant preferred execution petition being 34 of 2011 against the
owner. Notice /summons came to be issued to the owner but the owner
did not respond The owner did not appear before the executing court.
The owner appeared after two years namely on 16.4.2013 after issuance
of attachment warrant against him,the owner filed application under
Order 9 Rule 13 of C.P.C. contending that he was never served with any
summons/notice and came to know of the proceedings only when the
clerk from the office of Tehsildar came with the warrant and hence filed
application before the tribunal to set aside the ex parte decree-as his
vehicle was insured with respondent no 2 who would be liable to satisfy
the decree. The Tribunal in application 14 of 2013 filed not in execution
petition but in macp no 516 of 2005 (disposed) granted ex parte stay of
execution of warrant and decree on 25 4 2013. The matter thereafter
was adjourned from time to time and as the record shows till 2015
except adjourning the matter no further steps were taken and then
came to be listed again on 29.4.2016 namely after six years of passing
of the decree. The tribunal allowed the application under Order IX Rule
13 of C.P.C. From the said date, the matter again went on being listed
and thereafter the legal heirs were added as original claimants. The
record shows that when the application was filed in the year 2013, the
documents showing that the vehicle was insured were also on record
and were produced. The respondent was permitted to file his reply which
he filed on 29.11.2016. On 5.1.2017, an application was moved on
coming to know that the proceeding was going on. On 30.5.2017 an
application was made that the deceased died out of the injuries
sustained due to the accident and medical evidence was also filed by the
claimants and doctors were examined on oath. The last bill of OPD of
1.8.2013 was also filed. It is an admitted position of fact that to the
documents which were filed the Insurance company did not raise any
objection. The objection was to the order dated 29.4.2016 which was
unfortunately rejected. The claimants filed reply contending that though
the vehicle was insured, the Insurance company had taken the stand
that the vehicle was not insured. Against the order rejecting the
application, the Insurance company requested to stay the orders dated
29.4.2016 and 9.3.2018 as they wanted to challenge the same but from
the record we find that there is no challenge either to the said order or
the subsequent award      dated 4.5.2018 namely the impugned award.
The original claimant meanwhile after appearing in response to the
application for setting aside the decree, passed away in the year 2013
more particularly on 2.8.2013. The tribunal allowed the application
under order 9 Rule 13 of C.P.C. (against a dead person) on 29.7.2016.
This order was passed on hearing the advocate of claimant and directed
execution petition to be kept on file. The award was set aside. The
matter was adjourned from time to time without any orders. After a
period   of one year, i.e in the year 2017 heirs of the claimant were
brought on record. The Tribunal permitted owner to produce documents
so as to prove that the vehicle was insured . The tribunal decided the
matter afresh by permitting owner to file written statement.
8.    It is an admitted position that in the execution petition though
served the owner did not appear. The tribunal issued recovery warrants
against the owner When warrants were issued and bailiff tried to execute
the decree, owner filed an application on 16.04.2013 under Order 9 Rule
13 of C.P.C. and prayed for stay of execution of award. There was no
delay condonation application filed with the application requesting to set
aside the decree. On 24.05.2013, the Tribunal granted ex-parte stay
against execution of decree. The Tribunal directed issuance of notice,
after issuance of notice, to the original claimant who was alive is not
known whether appeared and filed objections to the said application for
review/application for setting aside the award. The matter after granting
stay came up for hearing only in the year 2016. The Tribunal passed the
order in application filled under Order 9 Rule 13 C.P.C. on 24.05.2013
stayed the recovery proceeding ex parte. The order was passed in Misc.
Case No. 14 of 2013 on 29.04.2016, namely after the death of original
decree holder. On 2.8.2013 Satish Chandra, the original claimant, had
passed away, which shows that the order passed on 29.4.2016 was
against a dead person. Despite that, instead of removing this irregularity
the application (paper No. 445 Ga) filed by the Insurance Company was
dismissed by the tribunal.
9. The moot question is could the decree not have been set aside in part
which was the prayer by the owner as the decree was severable , the
prayer of the owner could be answered by treating it as objection to
decree. The policy and non breach of policy condition could be proved
and the insurance company could have been directed to indemnify the
injured. The execution application and application to set aside the
decree passed against the owner was kept pending and was adjourned
and listed in the year 2016 which was again adjourned.
10.   An application was filed in the year 2018 by the Insurance
Company that the original claimant had died and the order passed on
the application under Order 9 Rule 13 C.P.C. in absence of the original
claimant was bad in the eyes of law as the order passed in the year 2016
allowing the application under Order 9 Rule 13 of C.P.C. was against a
dead person. This application was also rejected by Tribunal. The Tribunal
and on oral testimony of doctors who had treated the original claimant
and on the testimony of original claimant which was recorded earlier, re
decided the entire lis and even came to its own finding and even did not
grant the full amount of medical expenses which was earlier granted by
tribunal of competent jurisdiction. The reason for reducing the claim was
that the documents were not proved and that deceased died due to
kidney failure and after prolonged treatment passed away.
11.   It is submitted by the counsel for the appellants that the Tribunal
was suppose to decide only the liability and not the compensation
awarded. Had the tribunal awarded compensation also been decided as
per law and or at least granted what the earlier tribunal had granted,
the appellants would not have been forced to prefer this appeal for
pressing for what is known as just compensation under Section 166 of
the Act. The chronology of events would show that the main claimant in
his life time had a award and decree passed in his favour and the same
had to be executed. The Tribunal on re-appreciation of evidence
disallowed majority of the claim amount under the head of medical
expenses on the ground that the documents were not proved and
granted paltry sum of Rs. 1,19,000/- as medical expenses as against
more than twenty lacs spent by the claimant by the time award dated
27.9.2010 was pronounced.
12.     We would be obliged to decide as to whether the approach of the
Tribunal in awarding compensation by award dated 29.7.2010 and
4.5.2018 can be sustained.
13.      The accident occurred on 22.02.2005 is not in dispute and the
injured was rushed to hospital where he was treated for injuries received
due to accident. The original claimant who was going on his vehicle at
7.45 a.m and was hit by bus bearing No.DL IP 6567 which was being
driven by driver rashly and negligently. The said finding of fact does not
require any further elaboration as it has attained finality.
14.     From the record available which we have minutely perused it is
evident that the claim petition was allowed in favour of the original
injured claimant when he was alive way back in the year 2010 and the
decree was passed against the owner as though policy was produced,
as it was not proved to exist on date of accident and that the terms were
fulfilled or not was not proved the Insurance Company was not made
liable is also bad as the policy papers were valid at the time of accident
and hence recovery rights could have been granted or not but we do not
go in ti that issue in this appeal as the said finding is not challenged,
15.     The Tribunal while deciding the claim petition on 29.7.2010 held
that as the injured was in service and his pay package had increased no
amount under pecuniary loss was awarded, the documentary evidence
was produced as far as medical expenses which came to Rs. 20,84,750/-
was the amount, which was rounded up to Rs. 20,16,500/- awarded and
loss of five months’ salary for(163 days), which came to Rs. 63,250/-
and Rs. 5,000/- was added for pain shocks and sufferings was granted
16.    As narrated above this decree was sought to be executed against
the owner of the vehicle.          The difficulty of the original claimant now
started because the owner of the vehicle did not bring any documents
before the Executing Court in his defence but instead of depositing the
amount after a period of three years filed an application being
Application No. 14 of 2013 in MACP No. 516 of 2005 for stay and to set
aside the decree qua him.                even without condoning the delay the
learned Tribunal on 24.05.2013 stayed the recovery. It appears that the
objections raised by the claimants and the insurance company were not
considered by the Tribunal while allowing the application to set aside the
17.    With this prelude we decide the lis between the parties and the
question of law namely whether the tribunal could due to the prolong
litigation re decide compensation already awarded or it was to confine
itself to the objection raised by the owner namely that insurance
company was to satisfy the decree.
18.    The Tribunal which decided the matter in the year 2010 had
framed the following five issues and answered the same. The
subsequent tribunal decided these issues but gave different reasons
19.    The Issue No.1 as as can be seen related to the negligence and
who was negligent? Whether the driver of the motorcycle No. U.P. 14 P
5863 who was driving Hero Honda was negligent or the driver of the Bus
No. DL IP 6567 was negligent? The Tribunal while deciding this lis vide
award dated 27.9.2010 held in favour of the claimant but while deciding
this issue afresh in the year 2018, it went on to hold that the death was
due to dialysis. This finding cannot withstand the judicial scrutiny as it
was not within the purview of the tribunal to decide how the claimant
died while deciding issue relating to negligence and was beyond the
purview of the said issue as the wordings suggest the said observations
were unwarranted. However, the final finding is that accident occurred
because of rash and negligent driving of the driver of the offending
vehicle and no negligence was attributed to claimant)deceased).
20.    As far as the Issues No. 2, 3 and 4 are concerned, the Tribunal
returned the finding in favour of the claimants and owner and held that
the Insurance Company would be liable as the documents subsequently
filed by owner proved that there was no breach of policy conditions. The
Tribunal while re deciding the case ventured and also to decide Issue
No.5 also afresh and decided all other issues afresh and granted
compensation to the tune of Rs. 2,02,967/-only with 7%, rate of interest
from the date of filing of the claim petition till realisation against owner
and insurance company jointly and severely.
21 . This takes us      to the crux of the matter, namely whether the
tribunal had power to re decide compensation awardable to the claimant
who passed away before the decree was recalled or set aside.
22.    The learned counsel for the appellant heavily relied on decisions
cited herein below so as to contend that the lis even after allowing the
application under Order 19 Rule 13 of C.P.C. was between the owner
and the Insurance Company . The claimant and thereafter his heirs could
not have been put to disadvantage due to efflux of time .It is further
submitted that the owner was agitated only qua the party who should
satisfy the decree as policy conditions of insurance was not breached
and the owner had satisfied the tribunal as early as 2013 when stay was
granted against implementation of recovery warrants that insurance
company should be saddled with liability. It is further submitted that the
reasonings given by the tribunal to reduce the compensation payable is
also based on wrong interpretation of the judgments relied as it was
proved that deceased died after the award and the subsequent tribunal
could not come to the finding that documents were not proved. The
decisions relied by the appellants are as follows:-
(1). Sanjiv Mishra Vs. Ramashcharya Verma and others,
(2). Madhuben Maheshbhai Patel and Ors Vs. Joseph
Francis Mewan & 1 Anr, 2014 LawSuit (Guj) 2214;                and
(3). Samarjeet Singh Vs. Khursheed Khan and others,
23.    It is submitted by the learned counsel for the appellants that
decision rendered in the case of Sanjiv Mishra (supra), Division Bench
of this Court has decided two appeals namely one filed by the claimants
and other filed by the Insurance Company The appeal of the Insurance
Company was dismissed. The order of the Tribunal regarding the
compensation was upheld and modified. The factual aspect about
injuries and the-compensation payable was considered IT is further
submitted that in the decision titled Madhuben Maheshbhai Patel
and Ors (supra) is pressed into service as the Division Bench of the
Gujarat High Court decided the fact whether subsequent death of
injured-claimant would abate the cause of action or right of legal
representative would survive and to what compensation they would be
entitled. Lastly it is submitted that the entire exercise is bad and against
the object of the Act for which learned counsel relies on the decision in
Samarjeet Singh(supra). It is further submitted on behalf of the
claimants that the deceased passed away because of the after effect of
the accident and the cause of death was also attributable to the injuries
caused and therefore the finding of fact by the tribunal that the claimant
died solely due to kidney failure is bad in eye of law and is based on
misreading of the evidence of treating doctors witness no 3 and 4 who
have orally deposed and proved medical bills and certificates produced
prior to 2010 and later on . Learned counsel for the appellants has
submitted that on the basis of the ratio of the judgements relied the
claimants who are heirs and legal representatives of the original
claimant are entitled to the loss to the estate which would include
personal expenses incurred on the treatment and other claims related
to the loss to the estate.
24   Per contra, the learned counsel for the insurance company while
supporting the judgment of the Tribunal whose judgment is impugned
herein relied on decision of Supreme Court in Vijay Singh Vs. Shanti
Devi and others, AIR 2017 SC 5672 and has contended that once an
ex-parte decree has been set aside, the matter had to be decided afresh.
25.   It would be profitable to reproduce paragraphs 9 to 12 of the
“According to us, argument which has been made by the
learned Counsel appears to be fallacious. Whether the law is
codified or not, is not the subject matter nor the situation is
contemplated in the Indian law. Therefore, requirement of the
evidence is necessary to come to a conclusion by the Court
consequential to the accident. If it is independent, claim has
to be refused. But if it is consequential due to loss of any of
his usual skill, which was lost due to accident, Insurance
Company cannot shirk the liability.
So far as the total claim is concerned, though this seems to
be more than Rs.10 lacs (ten lacs), but the medical expenses
is Rs.7,69,296/- (Seven lacs sixty nine thousand two hundred
ninety six). Therefore, the claimant only got the
compensation of Rs.3,06,000/- (Three lacs six thousand). The
accident is of the year 2002. The original order of the Tribunal
is of the year 2006. Now it is the year 2010. By the passage
of time, much more expenditure might have been incurred
which cannot be part and parcel of the claim. Therefore,
taking into the totality of the facts, we cannot refuse any
compensation on the basis of the order, passed by the
Tribunal. Hence, we uphold the order of the Tribunal.
Learned counsel for the appellant-Insurance Company has
made his submission with regard to the rate of interest which
according to them ought to be at the rate of 6%. We are of
the view that the Tribunal has passed the order carrying on
the interest @ 6% but when this Court has passed the order
in the earlier occasion directed to deposit the entire sum
within 60 days, but the Insurance Company instead of
depositing the same, only by making an application for
recalling the order dated 18.11.2009, they themselves
become silent, which does not favour to get reduced rate of
interest. Making a recall application itself cannot operate as
an order of stay of the order dated 18.11.2009.
Therefore, at this stage, if we grant any relaxation for
payment of accruing interest @ 9%, that will be indulgence
to the Insurance Company. In further, the interest at the
banking interest, therefore, it cannot be said to be
excessive. Hence the appeal of the Insurance Company is
dismissed on merits.”           (emphasis supplied).
The High Court of Gujarat in case titled Madhuben (supra) held:-
“Whether the view taken by the learned Single Judges of this
Court in the decisions referred to above as well as decision
of the Division Bench in the case of Surpal Singh L. Gohil v.
R. M. Savalia (supra), lay down the correct proposition of law
regarding applicability of Section 306 of the Succession Act
to a claim -application under Section 166 of the MV Act where
the claim for compensation is filed for the personal injuries
caused to the claimant and during the pendency of the
petition, he died a natural death.”
26.    After a detailed discussion, the Division Bench in case referred to
it in Madhuben (supra) has answered the reference holding that claim
would be payable to legal heirs where claimant dies as follows:-
“….we are of the opinion that maxim “actio personalis moritur
cum persona” on which section 306 of the Succession Act is
based cannot have an applicability in all actions even in an
case of personal injuries where damages flows from the head
or under the head of loss to the estate. Therefore, even after
the death of the injured claimant, claim petition does not
abate and right to sue survive to his heirs and legal
concerned, which would include personal expenses
incurred on the treatment and other claim related to
loss to the estate. Under the circumstances, the issue
referred to the Division Bench is answered accordingly…..”
27.    It is an admitted position of fact that the petitioner survived for a
period of eight years after the accident. The petition was taken up for
hearing during that period and award was passed. The position as held
by High Court of Gujarat in light of the decisions reported in 1991[1]
GLR 352 in the case of Jenabai Wd/O Abdul Karim Musa Vs.
Gujarat State Road Transport Corporation, Ahmedabad, the heirs
would be entitled to compensation. It would be necessary to note the
fact that the deceased at the time of filing of the petition and on date
of decision namely 27.9.2010 was alive. The decisions on which reliance
can be placed so as to come to the finding as to entitlement and amount
admissible would have been decided         in case of     Shanti Bai    and
others v. Charansingh Singh and others 1998 ACJ 848 and
judgement in case of Saruyaben Harisinghbhai Bilwal v/s.
Ataullakhan Mehtabkhan Lalkhan Pathan reported in 2001 [3]
G.L.R. 2029. The fact that whether his heirs would be entitled to
dependency benefit or the claimant would be entitled to the amount of
compensation on the basis of injury sustained in the accident will have
to decided by this court. The facts go to show that the claimant was
under the constant treatment of doctors till the claimant survived
therefore, it can safely be held that the accident caused lot of trauma
both to the claimant as well his heirs. There is nexus between the death
of the deceased and accidental injury. There is sufficient evidence to the
effect that death of the deceased was due to development which took
place due to resultant multiple injuries caused by the accident which
would show that injuries were the root cause of the death. Therefore,
heirs are entitled to compensation. As per oral testimony of the original
claimant who was alive and there after the substituted heirs of the
deceased namely the original claimant, who passed away after three
years of the award but he suffered till end of his life because of this
accident and incidental diseases. Reliance on the decision titled Surpal
Singh Ladhubha Gohil Versus Raliyatbahen Mohanbhai Savlia in
Letters Patent Appeal No. 83 of 2007 ; in First Appeal No. 301 of 1990
decided on December 24, 2008 where the court considered provisions
of Section 166, of the Act, read with Order 22 Rule 1 of C.P.C. while
considering the maxim "actio personalis moritur cum persona" and its
applicability, and, injuries sustained by original claimant. The death of
original claimant during pendency of claim petition his legal heirs being
brought on record and where the Tribunal held that claimants would not
be entitled to compensation since they have no right to continue the
proceedings on the death of original claimant, since action for personal
injury abates with the death of original claimant. The question whether
maxim "actio personalis moritur cum persona" namely that personal
right of action abates with the death of the person, can be imported to
a social welfare legislation so as to deny the benefits to legal heirs of a
deceased claimant, to the advantage of a wrong doer the High Court
held that strict application of maxim "actio personlis mortiur cum
persona" cannot be imported to defeat the purpose and object of a social
welfare legislation like Motor Vehicles Act. Once the status of claimants
as legal heirs or legal representatives is conceded and acknowledged, to
deny benefit of compensation to them on the ground that injury was
personal to the claimant, it will be giving a premium to the wrong doer
and it would defeat the very purpose and object of beneficial piece
legislation. The question whether injury was personal or otherwise is of
no significance so far as wrong doer is concerned and he is obliged to
make good the loss sustained by injured, even after death of injured,
claim petition does not abate and right to sue survives to his heirs and
legal representatives.
28.    The decision cited by learned counsel for insurance company in
Vijay Singh( supra) will not apply at the out set as it was in execution
petition and both the appeals against the ex-parte decree was filed .
The execution petition was filed meanwhile and the appellant took the
possession. The application of the defendant for setting aside ex-parte
decree was allowed throughout which is not the case in our case . We
are to consider beneficial peace of legislation where the Tribunal was not
even asked to reconsider the question of quantum and interest
29.    It can be safely culled out from the record that       the      main
purpose for filing the application under Order 9 Rule 13 C.P.C. by the
owner was to see that the liability is mulcted on the Insurance Company
and not on them. The decree could have been set aside in part namely
qua issue of liability as it was a award which could be set aside in part
there was definitely severable decree. The provision of Order 9 Rule
13 of Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (referred as 'C.P.C.') reads as
"Setting aside decree ex parte against defendant.- In
any case in which a decree is passed ex parte against a
defendant, he may apply to the Court by which the decree
was passed for an order to set it aside; and if he satisfies the
Court that the summons was not duly served, or that he was
prevented by any sufficient cause from appearing when the
suit was called on for hearing, the Court shall make an order
setting aside the decree as against him upon such terms as
to costs, payment into Court or otherwise as it thinks fit, and
Provided that where the decree is of such a nature that it
cannot be set aside as against such defendant only it may be
set aside as against all or any of the other defendants also:
[Provided further that no Court shall set aside a decree
passed ex parte merely on the ground that there has been an
irregularity in the service of summons, if it is satisfied that
the defendant had notice of the date of hearing and had
sufficient time to appear and answer the plaintiff's claim.]
[Explanation.- Where there has been an appeal against a
decree passed ex parte under this rule, and the appeal has
been disposed of on any ground other than the ground that
the appellant has withdrawn the appeal, no application shall
lie under this rule for setting aside that ex parte decree.]."
30.    In our case Order 9 Rule 13 C.P.C. could not have been made
applicable by setting aside the entire decree instead partial modification
of decree even in execution could have been resorted to which would
have served the purpose of all the litigating parties. Even if during the
execution, proceedings it was brought to the notice of the executing
court that the vehicle was insured, the liability could have been fastened
on the contesting insurance company with whom the vehicle was
insured. We may hold that the documentary evidence,which was placed
and that part could have be ordered as expeditiously as possible, may
on the first hearing before the Tribunal by directing owner to produce all
the documents which were subsequently produced,these facts showed
that there were no breach of policy conditions and that part of the
finding namely Issue Nos. 2 and 3 could have been severed, reviewed
and or Order 9 Rule 13 C.P.C. could not have been made fully applicable.
Thus, the judgment under challenge is erroneous. Fresh finding of
quantum could not have been given on the same set of evidence
recorded in the matter .
31.    The order of attachment could have been passed, unfortunately,
the Tribunal showed over leniency to the judgment debtor namely the
owner and granted indulgence.        The Tribunal could have decided the
issue regarding the liability only afresh and should have decided what is
known as just compensation. The judgment, therefore, suffers from vice
of non-application of mind. The basic principles of adjudication of claim
petition were absent in both the decisions.
32.    In this view of the matter, let us see had the decree passed on
27.09.2010 been executed what would have been the position. In the
event the decree would have been executed, of course, the claimants
would have got the benefit of the decretal amount during the life-time
of the original claimant who breathed his last in 2013. Had an illegal
stay would not have been granted, what would have been the position.
The Tribunal instead of granting stay could have directed the Insurance
Company to verify the documents and deposited the amount as per the
provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 more particularly Section 169
read with Section 170 and further Section 174 of the Act.
33.    It is settled position of law that the award of the Claims Tribunal
shall be paid by owner or driver of the vehicle in the accident and they
would be indemnified by insurer or by all or any of them, as the case
may be. Thus, we venture to decide the quantum as the claimant was
alive when the first decree was passed. However, he has subsequently
passed away and therefore, as far as the enhancement is concerned, we
would be guided by the provisions of law and the Section 173 of the
Motor Vehicles Act which grants statutory right of appeal, will have to
be looked into.     The powers of the Appellate Court will have to be
exercised so as to do justice. It is clear that on the death of the injured
pending appeal, the claim will not be liable to be dismissed. The claim
can survive to the legal representatives under the possible heads such
as medical expenses, loss of income, loss to the estate of the deceased.
The facts in our case are slightly different the reason being that in our
case after the decree was passed and after the execution proceeding
started, the claimant died after three years namely during the period
when the application under Order 9 Rule 13 C.P.C. was pending. As per
the practice and procedure the reliability of the witnesses was already
accepted in the earlier award which could not have been re-decided
34.   The decision in the case of Samarjeet Singh (supra) is though
of single judge deciding appeal where similar situation had arisen except
the fact of death of claimant. The claimant had preferred appeal against
the judgment and award dated 28.5.2019 passed by Motor Accident
Claims Tribunal, Kanpur Nagar re-deciding the matter and reducing the
compensation from Rs. 3,79,220/- to Rs. 1,19606/- with interest at the
rate of 7 per cent from the date of judgment.
35. The facts are similar in the case on hand. The Tribunal re-decided
the entire matter on an application moved by the owner of the offending
vehicle. Vide judgment and order dated 23 rd of November, 2020, this
“31. In view of the ratio laid down by Hon'ble Gujarat High
Court, in the case of Smt. Hansaguti P. Ladhani v/s The
Oriental Insurance Company Ltd., reported in 2007(2)
GLH 291, total amount of interest, accrued on the principal
amount of compensation is to be apportioned on financial year
to financial year basis and if the interest payable to claimant
for any financial year exceeds Rs.50,000/-, insurance
company/owner is/are entitled to deduct appropriate amount
under the head of 'Tax Deducted at Source' as provided u/s
194A (3) (ix) of the Income Tax Act, 1961 and if the amount
of interest does not exceeds Rs.50,000/- in any financial year,
registry of this Tribunal is directed to allow the claimant to
withdraw the amount without producing the certificate from the
concerned Income- Tax Authority. The aforesaid view has been
reiterated by this High Court in Review Application No.1 of 2020
in First Appeal From Order No.23 of 2001 (Smt. Sudesna and
others Vs. Hari Singh and another) while disbursing the
amount.
32. Fresh Award be drawn accordingly in the above petition by
the tribunal as per the modification made herein. The Tribunals
in the State shall follow the direction of this Court as herein
aforementioned as far as disbursement is concerned, it should
look into the condition of the litigant and the pendency of the
matter and not blindly apply the judgment of A.V. Padma
(supra). The same is to be applied looking to the facts of each
case.”
36.    The issue which arises before us is whether a subsequent Tribunal
could partially non-suit the claimant on the same set of evidence except
the fact that the heirs were joined as claimants without leading fresh
evidence and could have completely ignored the findings recorded by
the Tribunal of competent jurisdiction? No doubt, the Tribunal will have
all the powers of a civil court which is meant for doing complete justice.
The question which arises is had the amount been deposited by the
judgment debtor, what would have been the situation? The Tribunal
committed a mistake rather irregularity by setting aside the award and
decree in totality under Order 9 Rule 13 C.P.C. after the death of the
original claimant without impleading the legal heirs.        The Tribunal
further committed an error which is apparent on the face of record by
re-deciding the compensation. The only new circumstances were death
of the injured claimant and production of documents so as to prove that
the vehicle was insured and there was no breach of policy condition.
37.    The awards passed by of the Claims Tribunal must be in conformity
with the provisions of Section 166 read with Section 169 and 170 of the
“166. Application for compensation.-- (1) An application
for compensation arising out of an accident of the nature
specified in sub-section (1) of Section 165 may be made--
(c) where death has resulted from the accident, by all or any
(d) by any agent duly authorised by the person injured or all
or any of the legal representatives of the deceased, as the
Provided that where all the legal representatives of the
deceased have not joined in any such application for
compensation, the application shall be made on behalf of or
for the benefit of all the legal representatives of the deceased
and the legal representatives who have not so joined, shall
be impleaded as respondents to the application.
(2) Every application under sub-section (1) shall be made, at
the option of the claimant, either to the Claims Tribunal
having jurisdiction over the area in which the accident
occurred, or to the Claims Tribunal within the local limits of
whose jurisdiction the claimant resides or carries on business
or within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the defendant
resides, and shall be in such form and contain such particulars
Provided that where no claim for compensation under Section
140 is made in such application, the application shall contain
a separate statement to that effect immediately before the
signature of the applicant.
(4) The Claims Tribunal shall treat any report of accidents
forwarded to it under sub-section (6) of Section 158 as an
(3) When an award is made under this section, the person who is
required to pay any amount in terms of such award shall, within
thirty days of the date of announcing the award by the Claims
Tribunal, deposit the entire amount awarded in such manner as the
Claims Tribunal may direct.”
(1) In holding any inquiry under section 168, the Claims
Tribunal may, subject to any rules that may be made in this
behalf, follow such summary procedure as it thinks fit.
(2) The Claims Tribunal shall have all the powers of a Civil
Court for the purpose of taking evidence on oath and of
enforcing the attendance of witnesses and of compelling the
discovery and production of documents and material objects
and for such other purposes as may be prescribed; and the
Claims Tribunal shall be deemed to be a Civil Court for all the
purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).
(3) Subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, the
Claims Tribunal may, for the purpose of adjudicating upon
any claim for compensation, choose one or more persons
possessing special knowledge of and matter relevant to the
inquiry to assist it in holding the inquiry.
170. Impleading insurer in certain cases.-- Where in the
course of any inquiry, the Claims Tribunal is satisfied that ---
(a) there is collusion between the person making the claim
(b) the person against whom the claim is made has failed to
contest the claim, it may, for reasons to be recorded in
writing, direct that the insurer who may be liable in respect
proceedings and the insurer so impleaded shall thereupon
have, without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-
section (2) of Section 149, the right to contest the claim on
all or any of the grounds that are available to the person
against whom the claim has been made.”
38.       Reference to and reliance on the decision of the Samarjeet
Singh’s case (supra) will also go to show that the Tribunal has erred in
exercising power under Order 9 Rule 13 of C.P.C. The decisions
impugned are not in conformity with the object of the Act. The findings
are perverse and do not satisfy the legislative intent of the Act. The
claimants were under the impression that the lis was between the owner
and the Insurance Company and had the owner deposited the entire
amount which he was supposed to, he could have recovered the same
from the Insurance Company; if he had proved that there was no breach
of policy condition.     The primary duty to satisfy the decree is on the
driver and owner of the offending vehicle. The only basis of challenge
was that the owner had all the documents and therefore, it was the
liability of the Insurance Company to indemnify as per the Act. The
Tribunal was only under an obligation to direct the payment to be made
by the Insurance Company which could have done even in the execution
proceedings as the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 were
applicable to the Act. The provisions of part – II namely Sections 36 to
74 as well as Order 21 of C.P.C. relates to the payment of money under
decree. The process for execution was also stayed without any order
directing part compliance of the decree as required under the            the
provisions of Order 21 Rule 26 C.P.C and that the order staying the
execution to the detrimental of the claimant could not have been passed
ex parte frustrating the very provision of the Code and Act. The Tribunal
acted in a very casual manner by not deciding the matter for a period
of five years namely 2013 till 2018.
39.    We now consider the question of compensation. The claimant had
sustained injuries and the right to claim damages accrued in the year
2005 more particularly on 22.2.2005 the year of accident. The decision
in the case of Raj Kumar Vs. Ajay Kumar and another, (2011) 1
SCC 343 will have to be considered on the facts of the present case also
as in this case    the injured was alive on date the first decision was
rendered. Undoubtedly, the compensation in law is paid to restore the
person, who has suffered damage or loss in the same position, if the
tortuous act or the breach of contract had been committed. The law
requires that the party suffering should be put in the same position, if
the contract had been performed or the wrong had not been committed.
The law in all such matters requires payment of adequate, reasonable
and just monetary compensation. In case of motor accidents the
Endeavour is to put the dependents/ claimants in the pre-accidental
position. Compensation in cases of motor accidents, as in other matters,
is paid for reparation of damages. The damages so awarded should be
adequate sum of money that would put the party, who has suffered, in
the same position if he had not suffered on account of the wrong.
Compensation is, therefore, required to be paid for prospective
pecuniary loss i.e. future loss of income/dependency suffered on
account of the wrongful act. However, no amount of compensation can
restore the lost limb or the experience of pain and suffering due to loss
of life. Loss of a child, life or a limb can never be eliminated or
ameliorated completely.     To put it simply-pecuniary damages cannot
replace a human life or limb lost. Therefore, in addition to the pecuniary
losses, the law recognizes that payment should also be made for non-
pecuniary losses on account of, loss of happiness, pain, suffering and
expectancy of life etc.
40.    We would also take upon ourselves to refer to law laid down in
General Insurance Company Vs. M.D. Davasia & Anr.; and Lalan
D. and Ors. Vs. The Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. (2014) 14
SCC 396; Kirti vs Oriental Insurance Company: 2021 (1) TAC 1
and two decades old decision of Gujarat High Court in Union of India
Vs. A.S. Sharma,1993(1)GLH1044 In the case of Kirti (supra) the
principle of assessment of compensation even for home maker has been
narrated. We may even take guidance from the decision of the Apex
Court in Anita Sharma Vs. New India Assurance Company Ltd.
reported in (2021) 1 SCC 171 on the point of just compensation and
also for the appreciation of pleadings and proof and the standard
required for placing reliance on the evidence led both oral and
documentary and lastly role of Tribunals in interpreting beneficial
legislation. The principles and approach has been highlighted by the
apex Court which this Court is bound to apply and mitigate the hardship
of person wronged. We feel that the decree was severable and therefore
the Tribunal should have set aside only that part of the decree which
was challenged. The object and reasons of the said provision is to ensure
that parties are not put to such hardship because of the ex part decree.
As narrated herein above, the execution could have been decided
considering the objection of the owner and that the decree should have
been set aside only qua that portion as the remedy was for not making
payment though he was the primary debtor but there was a contract of
indemnity with the Insurance Company. The relevant consideration was
this factor and not the challenge to compensation. The provisions of
Order 9 Rule 13 no doubt states that the entire decree be set aside but
where the decree is joint and divisible, the whole decree need not be
set aside is the view of the Division Bench of the Andhra Pradesh High
Court. We feel that the illustration given in the Code of Civil Procedure,
11th Edn on page 1120 in (1960) 2 Andh WR 160 (162 (DB) and the
logical and practical approach suggested for such matters would be to
set aside that portion of the decree and award for which prayers are
made as review is not maintainable and/or review of limited portion of
the judgment is permissible. We hold that in future the mode to be
adopted would be to set aside the decree qua the findings which are
challenged and/or permit objection even in the execution filed by the
claimant and/or the Insurance Company where they are given right to
recovery from the owner and the owner can prove that there was no
breach of policy condition but he was unfortunately not represented
before the Tribunal properly and, therefore, we feel that instead of
remanding the matter, we decide the lis so that the claimant who are
without the fruits of litigation started by their father who later on
succumbed to the vagaries of the injuries which though the Tribunal has
felt that was not because of this injuries but because of his failure of his
kidney. The Doctor has said that the trauma of this accident may have
accelerated the problem of kidney. However, we do not delve further into
that and propose to decide the lis under Section 173 of the Motor
41.    In case on hand the injured had to be given a reasonable amount
of compensation as there is permanent disablement resulting from the
accident this is a finding of fact but both the adjudicating authorities
declined to grant compensation as the original claimant was in
government service and there was no loss of monetary benefit due to
the accident as held by the tribunal This denial is bad as held by High
court of Gujarat in the case titled Union of India Vs. A. S. Sharma
(supra), the High Court of Gujarat has held that a person has to be
compensated for the torturous act and it is this act        for which the
tortfeasor cannot be benefitted. In our case also the deceased died on
2.8.2013 i.e. three years after the first decree and award were passed
in his favour. The finding of the Tribunal in both the awards that as he
was a salaried person and as his salary had increased, he was not
entitled for loss to estate is bad.
42.    The question whether the Tribunal could have revisited and re-
decided the issue of compensation will also have to be looked into as
this is an appeal under Section 173 of the Act and this Court is obliged
to do what is known as complete justice. Whether the order allowing
application under Order 9 Rule 13 of C.P.C. passed in the year 2016 was
a nullity in the eyes of law as it was passed against a dead person.
43.    The subsequent Tribunal even did not consider granting the
amount which was already granted to him by the earlier Tribunal on the
erroneous finding that the documentary evidence was not proved and
that he had died out of natural death. Unfortunately, the Tribunal has
mislead itself that it had to decide the issue of quantum also.         The
pleadings of the owner was not qua the compensation awarded but was
qua indemnification and liability and hence, as narrated herein above,
had the Tribunal taken a practical approach, it would not have
disregarded the earlier medical bills. The injured was admitted in
hospital on 25.2.2005 and was being treated, admittedly, up to year
2010, in such situation we have to take into account the period up to
29.7. 2010 when the decree was passed. Whether he was in the fourth
stage of kidney problem could not have been evaluated by the learned
Tribunal once the earlier Tribunal had held that he was being treated up
to 2010. The bills which have already been considered could not have
been re-evaluated by the Tribunal though there was no fresh evidence
led. The tribunal had already decided on 27.09.2010 holding that the
medical bills were admissible to the original claimant.
44.    The Tribunal while considering objection in the execution petition,
could have considered that the objections raised could be permitted to
be raised as per the provisions of C.P.C. and also as per provisions of
Section 170 of Act and mulcted the liability on the Insurance Company
as per the provisions of the Act. A question arises as to whether the
decision of the Tribunal act detrimental to the beneficiary of the
beneficial legislation , namely, the claimant? These are the questions
which    will have to be answered as we could not find from the
Commentary as to whether a decree already granted while claimant was
alive, be reviewed on the application of the owner and the entire decree
could be set aside and a fresh decision could be rendered. So as to do
the complete justice,we will have to rely on the principle of granting just
compensation and the law enunciated in Madhuben (supra) by the High
Court of Gujarat by the Division Bench of High Court of Gujarat headed
by His Lordship Justice M.R. Shah, J. (as He then was), the admitted
position is that the injured-claimant had fractured both his legs. On
21.06.2005, he was readmitted and was operated.              The accident
occurred on 22.02.2005. The Tribunal exhibited all the documents being
81G to 289 G which were medical certificates which were proved after
recording oral evidence of the claimant and his wife. The Tribunal in its
judgment dated 27.09.2010 granted the medical expenses on the basis
of these documents.
45.    The question which arises is should we set aside the award as the
order passed in 2016 was a nullity or decide the lis here so as to do
complete justice as the record is before us and now except the legality
46.    The order in 2016 allowing application under Order 9 Rule 13 of
C.P.C. against a dead person is nullity and is irregularity. We do not
propose to remand the matter to the Tribunal as we would decide the lis
here itself as 15 years have already elapsed and 9 years have elapsed
after the death of the claimant as the Insurance Company has accepted
their liability by not challenging the award of the Tribunal. The legal
heirs would have spent the amount for medical expenses of their father
during his life time. The facts would demonstrate that for no fault of the
appellants herein, the Tribunal who could not have refused to grant
compensation and practically non suited, the appellants qua injuries and
disability incurred due to the vehicular accident The subsequent award
shows that the Tribunal took a very hyper technical stand in not granting
any compensation as it was of the view that the claimants had failed to
prove medical certificates and that no amount for future loss could be
granted though       the treating doctor was examined on oath and
disbelieved the medical certificate produced and though not objected to
be read in evidence by any of the parties. The same have been
47.    The injuries which were caused were in the realm of tortuous act.
The injured had suffered 40 per cent disability. His pay package was Rs.
11,500/- at the time of the accident. The Tribunal at the first instance
while deciding the quantum did not grant what can be said to be the
compensation for the tortuous act just on the ground that the injured
was a government servant and his pay package had increased.
48.    It has been time and again held that trappings of civil and criminal
proceedings cannot be applied in a very strict manner. I am fortified in
my view by the decisions in Sunita and others Vs. Rajasthan State
Road      Transport    Corporation    and   Another,     2019     LawSuit
and Others, 2018 (5) SCC 656 and Vimla Devi and others Vs.
National Insurance Company Limited and another, (2019) 2 SCC
186. The compensation is ordered to be reassessed in view of the
submission made by learned counsel for the appellant and in view of
and in view of the decision in F.A.F.O. No.2389 of 2016 (National
Insurance Co. Ltd. Vs. Smt. Vidyawati Devi And 2 Others) decided
on 27.7.2016. On the basis of the recent judgments laying principles for
ascertaining compensation. The right to compensation would accrue on
the date the accident took place, namely, 22.02.2005.             The law
enunciated in Kirti Vs. the Oriental Insurance Company Limited
(supra) that the compensation awarded by a court ought to be just,
reasonable and must undoubtedly guided by principles of fairness,
equity and good conscious. In our case both the Tribunals had not
granted what can be said to be just compensation.
49.    We take aid of the observations and ratio laid in Erudhayapriya
Vs State Express Transport Corp. Ltd reported in 2020 (2)
TAC1.We have perused all the medical reports of the claimant up to
2010 showing the pain of several times being hospitalised for corrective
surgery apart from his kidney problem which he developed at the of age
of 38 years . The trauma and his chances of promotion were hampered
we do not grant the compensation on multiplier method as functional
loss is not that much as his job was on but there was permanent
disablement as per doctors certificate which has been considered by
tribunal but compensation denied . Hence, the findings of the Tribunal
in its subsequent judgment being perverse are set aside as far it relates
to compensation awarded which is computed in a manner not approved
by Apex Court in Anita Sharma (supra).
50.    The compensation now to be paid would be determined on the
basis of the age of the injured which was 38 years at the time of the
accident, he suffered 40 per cent      permanent disability and was in
permanent government service earning a sum of Rs. 11500/- per
month. His medical expenses as granted by the Tribunal in its order
dated 29.07.2010 is maintained entirely as all the documents are
proved, therefore, the finding to the contrary in the subsequent
judgment impugned in this appeal dated 4.5.2018 is bad in the eyes of
law and against settled legal principles.
51.    The additional amount of five months’ salary as actual loss to the
estate granted by the Tribunal is also maintained. This takes us to
further amount which would be payable to the claimants. We award a
lump-sum amount of two lacs of rupees in addition to the compensation
as loss to estate and mental harassment to the legal heirs for protracted
litigation as they were not supposed to be brought even on record as
the lis now was only between owner and the Insurance Company. But
non appearing of the owner and a wrong stand taken by the Insurance
Company that the vehicle was not insured        on 22.02.2005 became
52.   In view of the above discussion, the amount payable would be
Rs.20,16,500 + 63,250 +5,000 being Rs20,84750/ as awarded by the
tribunal in its award dated 27.9.2010.The original claimant has passed
away hence the family members can be awarded a further sum of two
lacs and fifty thousand for loss to estate. Rs. 50000/- for mental trauma
and incidental expenses for looking after the deceased after he suffered
the injuries. We award a lump sum           amount aggregating to total
compensation for a sum of Rs.24,00,000/- .(twenty four lacs )
53.   The respondents shall jointly and severely pay a sum of Rs.
24,00,000/-(Twenty Four lacs) which is much on the lower side than
what would be admissible but as the original claimant has passed away
we deem it fit to grant this amount comprising of medical expenses plus
actual loss of salary as computed by tribunal in award dated 29.7.2010
and additional amount under other heads.
54.   The insurance company having accepted its liability by not
challenging the finding of the tribunal deciding that the insurance
company is liable under contract of insurance shall deposit the awarded
amount after deducting the amount if any deposited pursuant to the
impugned award and decree within a period of two months from the
date of this order. The insurance company has not challenged its liability
nor before this court it is proved or demonstrated that the owner has
violated any policy condition. The insurance company has been rightly
saddled with liability by the tribunal which finding we affirm.
55.   As far as issue of rate of interest is concerned, it should be 7.5%
in view of the latest decision of the Apex Court in National Insurance
Co. Ltd.Vs. Mannat Johat and Others, 2019 (2) T.A.C.705 (S.C.)
"13.The aforesaid features equally apply to the contentions urged on
behalf of the claimants as regards the rate of interest. The Tribunal had
awarded interest at the rate of 12% p.a. but the same had been too
high a rate in comparison to what is ordinarily envisaged in these
matters. The High Court, after making a substantial enhancement in the
award amount, modified the interest component at a reasonable rate of
7.5%p.a. and we find no reason to allow the interest in this matter at
56.   The amount shall carry interest also at the rate of 7.5 per annum
from the date of the filing of the claim petition till the date of actual
57.    Since the injured-claimant was in government service, T.D.S.if has
to be deducted on pecuniary damages will be deducted as per statutory
58.    The amount once deposited be not kept in fixed deposit as the
appellants must have borne the medical expenses which we are
reimbursing to them after 11 years. Reference to decision in A.V.
Padma and others Vs. R. Venugopala and others(2012) 3 SCC
378 can be made where principles for disbursement are given. On
monies being deposited apportionment be made as directed by the
59.    We deem it fit to rely on the Judgment of the Apex Court in the
case of A.V. Padma and others Vs. R. Venugopal, 2012 (3) SCC
378 wherein the Apex Court has considered the Judgment rendered in
Trivandrum Vs. Susamma Thomas and others, AIR 1994 SC
1631. Paras 5 and 6 of A.V. Padma’s Judgment read as under:-
“5. Thus, sufficient discretion has been given to the
Tribunal not to insist on investment of the compensation
amount in long term fixed deposit and to release even the
whole amount in the case of literate persons. However, the
Tribunals are often taking a very rigid stand and are
mechanically ordering in almost all cases that the amount
of compensation shall be invested in long term fixed
deposit. They are taking such a rigid and mechanical
approach without understanding and appreciating the
distinction drawn by this Court in the case of minors,
illiterate claimants and widows and in the case of semi-
literate and literate persons. It needs to be clarified that
the above guidelines were issued by this Court only to
safeguard the interests of the claimants, particularly the
minors, illiterates and others whose amounts are sought to
be withdrawn on some fictitious grounds. The guidelines
were not to be understood to mean that the Tribunals were
to take a rigid stand while considering an application
seeking release of the money. The guidelines cast a
responsibility on the Tribunals to pass appropriate orders
after examining each case on its own merits.
However, it is seen that even in cases when there is no
possibility or chance of the feed being frittered away by the
beneficiary owing to ignorance, illiteracy or susceptibility
to exploitation, investment of the amount of compensation
in long term fixed deposit is directed by the Tribunals as a
matter of course and in a routine manner, ignoring the
object and the spirit of the guidelines issued by this Court
and the genuine requirements of the claimants. Even in the
case of literate persons, the Tribunals are automatically
ordering investment of the amount of compensation in long
term fixed deposit without recording that having regard to
the age or fiscal background or the strata of the society to
which the claimant belongs or such other considerations,
the Tribunal thinks it necessary to direct such investment
in the larger interests of the claimant and with a view to
ensure the safety of the compensation awarded to him. The
Tribunals very often dispose of the claimant's application
mechanical manner and without proper application of
mind. This has resulted in serious injustice and hardship to
the claimants. The Tribunals appear to think that in view
of the guidelines issued by this Court, in every case the
amount of compensation should be invested in long term
fixed deposit and under no circumstances the Tribunal can
release the entire amount of compensation to the claimant
even if it is required by him. Hence a change of attitude
and approach on the part of the Tribunals is necessary in
the interest of justice.
21.7.1993. The award was passed by the Tribunal on
15.2.2002. The amount of compensation was enhanced by
the High Court on 6.7.2006. Neither the Tribunal in its
compensation had directed to invest the amount of
compensation in long term fixed deposit. The Insurance
Company deposited the compensation amount in the
Tribunal on 7.1.2008. In the application filed by the
appellants on 19.6.2008 seeking withdrawal of the amount
without insisting on investment of any portion of the
amount in long term deposit, it was specifically stated that
the first appellant is an educated lady who retired as a
Corporation, Bangalore. It was also stated that the second
appellant Poornachandrika is a M.Sc. degree holder and
the third appellant Shalini was holding Master Degree both
in Commerce and in Philosophy. It was stated that they
were well versed in managing their lives and finances. The
first appellant was already aged 71 years and her health
was not very good. She required money for maintenance
and also to put up construction on the existing house to
provide dwelling house for her second daughter who was
a co-owner along with her. The second daughter was
stated to be residing in a rented house paying exorbitant
rent which she could not afford in view of the spiralling
costs. It was further stated in the application that the first
appellant was obliged to provide a shelter to the first
daughter Poornachandrika. It was pointed out that if the
money was locked up in a nationalised bank, only the bank
would be benefited by the deposit as they give a paltry
interest which could not be equated to the costs of
materials which were ever increasing. It was further stated
exposed the appellants to serious prejudice and economic
ruin. Along with the application, the second and third
appellants had filed separate affidavits supporting the
prayer in the application and stating that they had no
objection to the amount being paid to the first appellant.
7. While rejecting the application of the appellants, the
Tribunal did not consider any of the above-mentioned
aspects mentioned in the application. Unfortunately, the
High Court lost sight of the said aspects and failed to
properly consider whether, in the facts and circumstances
compensation amount in long term fixed deposit. ”
60.    Thus, it goes without saying that, in our case, the oral prayer of
learned counsel for the claimants to be considered as the guidelines in
A.V. Padma and others (supra) was in the larger interest of the
claimants. Rigid stand should now be given way. People even rustic
villagers’ have bank account which has to be compulsorily linked with
Aadhar, therefore, what is the purpose of keeping money in fixed
deposits in banks where a person, who has suffered injuries or has lost
his kith and kin, is not able to see the colour of compensation. We feel
that time is now ripe for setting fresh guidelines as far as the
disbursements are concerned. The guidelines in Susamma Thomas
(supra), which are being blindly followed, cause more trouble these
days to the claimants as the Tribunals are overburdened with the
matters for each time if they require some money, they have to move
the Tribunal where matters would remain pending and the Tribunal on
its free will, as if money belonged to them, would reject the applications
for disbursements, which is happening in most of the cases. The parties
for their money have to come to court more particularly up to High
Court, which is a reason for our pain. Reliance can be placed on
Susamma Thomas (supra) in matters where claimants prove and
show that they can take care of their money. In our view, the Tribunal
may release the money with certain stipulations and that guidelines
have to be followed but not rigidly followed as precedents. Recently, the
Jammu and Kashmir High Court was faced with similar situation in the
case of Zeemal Bano and others Vs. Insurance Company, 2020
61.    In view of the above, the appeal is partly allowed. Award and
decree passed by the Tribunal shall stand modified to the aforesaid
extent. The respondents shall jointly and severally liable to pay
compensation and deposit additional amount within a period of 12 weeks
from today with interest at the rate of 7.5% from the date of filing of
the claim petition till the amount is deposited. It is further directed that
on deposit of the amount, the Tribunal shall disburse the entire amount
by way of account payee cheque or by way of RTGS to the account of
the appellants within 12 weeks from the date the amounts are deposited
by the respondents.
62.    Fresh Award be drawn accordingly in the above petition by the
tribunal as per the modification made herein. The Tribunals in the State
shall follow the direction of this Court as herein afore mentioned as far
as disbursement is concerned, it should look into the condition of the
litigant and the pendency of the matter and not blindly apply the
judgment of A.V. Padma (supra). The same is to be applied looking to
the facts of each case. A copy of this Judgment be circulated by the
learned Registrar General to the Motor Accident Claims Tribunals in the
State of Uttar Pradesh for guidance after seeking approval of the Hon’ble
63.    The record and proceeding be sent back to the Tribunal.
64.    We are thankful to both the learned advocates for assisting us.