1. Petitioner has invoked the jurisdiction of this Court in terms of Section 482
of Code of Criminal Procedure with the prayer for calling the record of
Criminal Challan/FIR No. 25-Sessions titled State of J&K Vs. Bashir
Ahmed and ors. from the Court of 3rd Additional Sessions Judge Jammu
(Special Judge u/ss22 of NIA Act) and for expunging the adverse remarks,
observations and directions made by the Ld. Judge in order dated
02.06.2021 against the petitioner at page No. 15, 16 & 17 of the order dated
02-06-2021 and for quashing/setting aside the impugned adverse remarks
and observations made against the petitioner on the following grounds:-
(i) that the petitioner is a citizen of India and permanent resident of
UT of Jammu and Kashmir and fully entitled to invoke the
inherent criminal jurisdiction of this Court for protection of his
fundamental rights guaranteed to him under the Constitution of
India, and is aggrieved of the order dated 02.06.2012 passed by
the Court of Ld. 3rd Additional Sessions Judge Jammu in criminal
challan/file No. 25/Sessions titled State through SHO P/S Dachhan
Vs. Bashir Ahmed and others arising out of FIR No. 01/2020
registered with Police Station Dachhan Kishtwar for offences u/ss
13/18/19/38/39 of Unlawful Activities Prevention Act r/w
offences u/ss 3/25 & 7/25 Arms Acts, whereby, Ld. Trial Court
while adjudicating the issue of framing of charges against the
accused persons, passed certain uncalled for strictures,
observations and directions against the petitioner who was the
Investigating Officer (I/O) in the said FIR No. 01/2020, the
impugned observations are aimed at causing grave and serious
prejudice to the service career and rights of the petitioner;
(ii) that the petitioner is a direct recruit in J&K Police and has been
appointed to the post of Dy. Superintendent of Police and was
posted as Dy. Superintendent of Police (HQ) Kishtwar, and while
serving as Dy. SP (HQ) Kishtwar, the petitioner was assigned the
investigations in case FIR No. 268 of 2019 of Police Station
Kishtwar for offences u/ss 13/18/19/20/38/39 of Unlawful
Activities Prevention Act r/w Sections 3/25, 7/25 & 7/27 of Arms
Act and case FIR No. 01/2020 registered with Police Station
Dachhan Kishtwar for offences u/ss 13/18/19/38/39 of Unlawful
Activities Prevention Act r/w sections 3/25 & 7/25 Arms Acts;
(iii) that in case FIR No. 268/2019 of Police Station Kishtwar, an
information was received on 02.12.2019 from reliable source that
a militant namely Tariq Hussain S/o Mohd. Amin Wani R/o
Sounder Dachhan had joined a band militant organization and had
made a hideout near Ikhala Forest where he has kept arms and
ammunition with the intention to disrupt the peaceful environment
of Kishtwar and to secede the Union Territory of J&K from India,
the accused persons always remained in lurk to attack the integrity
and threatening the sovereignty of the Nation, on this report, the
aforesaid FIR was registered and investigation was assigned to the
(iv) that in case FIR No. 01/2020 of Police Station Dachhan, the brief
facts are, that on 02.01.2020 it was reliably learnt at Police Station
Dachhan that as many as 10 accused persons namely (i) Mohd.
Hassan s/o Dulla Gujjar R/O Gujjar Kothan Dachhan, (ii) Saddam
Dachhan through underground network are associated with banned
organization Hizbul Muzahideen (HM) and the said persons are
harboring and providing transportation and other logistic aid to the
militants, the said persons are managing meetings with active
militants namely Mohd Amin @ Jahangir S/o Mohd. Anwar R/o
Tander Dachhan and Riaz Ahmed S/o Mohd. Ramzan R/o Renie
Marwah for carrying out terrorist activities in the area by plotting
conspiracies, the said persons were also providing information
with regard to the security forces to the militants for carrying out
attacks with intention to hurt the integrity of the country, the said
persons were also arranging funds to active militant Mohd. Amin
@ Jagangir, and on this information FIR No. 01/2020 for the
commission of offence u/ss 13/18/19/38/39 Unlawful Activities
Prevention Act was registered at Police Station Dachhan and
investigation entrusted to the petitioner;
(v) that both the FIRs were serious in nature involving the offences
under Unlawful Activities Prevention Act, the terrorist Mohd.
Hussain S/o Mohd. Amin Wani Ro Sounder Dachhan is the prima
accused who is categorized terrorist of HM militant organization
since 13.11.2019 whereas, other three terrorists viz. Mohd. Amin
@ Jahangir, Mudassir Hussain, & Riaz Ahmed are the prime
accused in FIR No. 01/2020 of Police Station Dachhan who have
been declared as categorized militant and operating in District
Kishtwar particularly in Marwah/Dachhan areas, Mohd. Amin
Butt @ Jahangir is an active terrorist is categorized as A++ and
designated as Divisional Commander of banned HM outfit since
1992 and is the longest surviving militant in Jammu & Kashmir
which speaks volume about his reliable network of OGWs/UGs
which is maintaining the highest level of secrecy and they are
intentionally and willfully providing him all logistic supports like
food, clothing, information to commit the terrorist acts and carry
on their illegal unlawful activities against the State;
(vi) that the petitioner as I/O of both the said FIRs has been
instrumental in successfully breaking down the terrorist network
in the area, and it is only during investigation and sustained
interrogation that these co-accused/ abettors were nominated and
even recoveries were affected from two accused namely Khazir
Mohd. (12 Bore) and Mohd. Hassan (25 Live rounds of Insas)
upon their disclosures in case FIR No. 01/.2020 of Police Station
Dachhan, petitioner being I/O of the aforesaid cases without
caring for his life acted in a most professional manner and on
interrogation of the accused persons succeeded to break down the
network of these abettors/harbors and supporters, as painstakingly
identified, prepared & produced the local independent witnesses
for their statement u/ss164 Cr.PC before the Judicial Magistrate,
accused Yassir Hussain is accused No. 6 in criminal challan titled
State of J&K Vs. Bashir Ahmed and ors. in FIR No. 01/2020 and
has been arraigned as accused on the basis of evidence that he has
been providing food to the longest surviving terrorist Mohd. Amin
(vii) that on completion of investigation in FIR No. 01/2020 criminal
challan titled State Vs. Bashir Ahmed and ors was presented
which was committed to the Court of Ld. 3 rd Additional Sessions
Judge Jammu, and the Ld. trial Court after hearing the arguments
of ld. counsel for the parties as well as Ld. Additional Public
Prosecutor on the issue of framing of charges has passed the
impugned order dated 02.06.2021 regarding framing of charge
where against accused No. 1 Bashir Ahmed, accused No. 2 Wali
Mohd, accused No. 3, Khazar Mohd, accused No. 7 Ghulam Nabi,
accused No. 8 Mohd. Hassan, accused No. 9 Mohd. Ramzan, and
accused No. 10 Saddam Hussain charges for the commission of
offences u/ss 13/18/19/23/39 of Unlawful Activities Prevention
Act & 3/25 Arms Act have been framed, while accused No. 4
Zahoor Ahmed, accused No. 5 Bashir Ahmed, accused No. 6
Yassir Hussain have been discharged, whereas, remaining three
accused viz. accused Nos. 11, 12 & 13 could not be apprehended
during investigation till the presentation of charge-sheet as such
proceedings u/ss299 Cr.pc were initiated against them and general
warrants of arrest were issued against the accused persons;
(viii) that in the order impugned of framing of charges dated 02.06.2021
the Ld. Trial Court proceeded to record his observation and
dissatisfaction against the I/O/petitioner whereby the trial Court at
page No. 15 of the impugned order, has recorded that
investigation of the case has been conducted in very perfunctory
and unprofessional manner, number of persons have been roped in
the present case but during investigation I/O/petitioner has
conducted the investigation in a lethargic and sluggish manner and
has not taken even a little pain to search for the evidence in the
present case, much better investigation could be conducted by
even a Head Constable in comparison to I/O; on Page 16 of the
impugned order, Ld. Trial Court has further recorded that the
I/o has not bothered to seize the mobile phones of any of the
accused persons as well has not taken any pain to collect the
CDRs of their mobile phones and their connectivity with the
categorized terrorists, besides, thus, learned trial Court has further
observed that how the petitioner has qualified the administrative
examination of the State and became Dy. S.P in the police
department, petitioner/I/O has arrayed accused Mohd. Ramzan as
one of the accused in the present case but the said accused was in
judicial custody in another case FIR No. 268/2019 at the time
when FIR No. 01/2020 was registered, trial Court has further
proceeded to hold the I/O while conducting the investigation in
FIR No. 268/2019 acted in the same manner and has demolished
the said case, due to sheer incompetency and negligence, the Court
was forced to discharged some of the accused persons in FIR No.
268/2019, by the impugned order dated 02.06.2021 the ld. trial
Court proceeded to recommend that a departmental enquiry should
be initiated against the petitioner whereby he should be asked that
why and under what circumstances he has not collected the real
evidence in the case and left over the important aspects, the trial
Court has further ordered that the petitioner should be asked that
how and under what circumstances he had implicated and charge
sheeted the accused Zahoor Ahmed against whom no evidence
was available with him even at the time of registration of FIR as
well as at the time when the charge sheet against him was framed
and other co accused were presented, whereby, the Inspector
General of Police Jammu Zone has been directed to conduct a
departmental enquiry against the petitioner;
(ix) that from the bare perusal of the impugned findings, observations
and disparaging remarks made by the Ld. trial Court whereby the
trial Court has said that the petitioner has not taken any pains to
collect CDRs of their mobile phones and their connectivity with
the categorized terrorist, the trial Court has made disparaging
remarks against the petitioner are hypothetical and not practical
with regard to not seizing of the mobile phones of the accused and
non-analysis of CDRs while performing his duties as Investigating
Officer, the impugned findings, observations, remarks and
directions against the petitioner recorded by the trial Court in its
order dated 02.06.2021 are totally illegal and contrary to the
factual and legal position;
(x) that the UT of J&K has also felt aggrieved of the order impugned
dated 02.06.2021 regarding framing of charges to the extent that
the trial Court has discharged three accused persons from the
charge-sheet titled State Vs. Bashir Ahmed and ors and the
Government in the Department of Law, Justice and Parliamentary
Affairs has already granted necessary sanction vide Government
order No. 4200-JK (LD) of 2021 dated 05.08.2021 for filing of
appeal against the said order passed by the learned trial Court;
(xi) that the disparaging remarks made by the Ld. Trial Court against
the petitioner have the potential to demoralize the police officers
who by putting their lives to great and grave risks are bursting the
militants/terrorists network and are investigating the cases under
Unlawful Activities Prevention Act, besides this, personal remarks
casting of aspersions on the selection of the petitioner through the
prestigious constitutional body i.e. Public Service Commission are
totally unwarranted and uncalled for and could not have been
made by the Ld. Trial Court, the vide media publicity of the
antecedents of the petitioner in print and electronic media in
reference to the order dated 06.02.2021 has invited unnecessary
and avoidable attention of the general public and anti-national
elements which may expose the petitioner including his family to
the threats by anti national elements and militants;
(xii) that the impugned findings/observations and disparaging remarks
by the trial Court against the petitioner are nothing but abuse of
process of law, illegal and contrary to settled position of law,
therefore, the same deserve to be expunged. Prayer has been made
for expunging of adverse disparaging remarks/observations and
directions passed by the learned trial Court in its order dated
02.06.2021 of framing of charges against the accused at page 15,
2. Respondents have opposed the petition by filing objections, wherein, they
have contended, that the petitioner was deputed as I/O in FIR No. 01/2020
of Police Station Dachan, therefore, the duty was caste upon him to collect
the evidence admissible in accordance with law against the accused persons,
that as per the investigation disclosure memo, seizure memo, categorization
certificate and statements of witnesses U/S 161/164 Cr.PC and
circumstances offences U/s 3/25,7/25 I.A. Act 20 ULA Act were
incorporated, detail of offences proved against the accused into the instant
investigation depicts, that offences U/S 13/18/20/38 ULA (P) Act have been
proved against terrorist namely (1) Mohd Amin@Jahangir Saroori S/O
Hussain Gianoo R/O Tander Dachan and (3)Reyaz Ahmed S/O Mohd
Ramzan R/O Renaie Marwah; Offences u/ss 13/18/19/39 ULA Act have
been proved against (1) Bashir Ahmed S/O Lal Din Mingnoo R/O
S/O Mohd Amin Wani R/O Suid Dachan; offences U/S 3/25 IA Act
13/18/19/39 ULA (P) Act have been proved against accused (9) Khazar
Mohd S/O Habib Sheikh R/O Dangduru Dachan, offences U/S 7/ 25 I A Act
13/18/19/39 ULA (P) Act have been proved against accused person namely
(10) Mohd Hassan S/O Dulla Gujjar R/O Gujjar Kothan Dachan for
providing harbor/lood and shelter and other logistic support to militants
Bhadat Saroor (2) Mudassir Ahmed s/o Tariq Hussain Gianoo R/O Tander
Dachan and (3) Reyaz Ahmed S/ Mohd kRamzan R/O Renaie Marwah; the
accused also managed transportation for the said militants who committed
terrorist attacks in Kishtwar town; accused Namely (1)Bashir Ahmed S/O
Dangduru (3) Khazar Mohd S/O Habib sheikh R/O Dangduru (4) Bashir
Ahmed s/O Abdul Gani Sheikh R/O Dangduru (5) Zahoor Ahmed S/O Sana
Danduru and (7) Ghulam Nabi Chupan S/O Abdul Aziz Chupan
and all the arrested accused persons are lodged in District Jail Amphalla
is already arrested in Case FIR No 268/20199 U/S 3/25, 7/25, 7/27 1.A.Act,
7/25, 7/27 I.A. Act, 13/18/19/20/23/38/39 ULA (P) Act of P/S Kishtwar and
is lodged in Central Jail Kot Balwal Jammu and (10) accused namely Sadam
Hussain S/O Mohd Amin R/O Suid Dachan is absconding since the logging
of FIR, against whom warrant u/s 299 Cr.pc against terrorists accused (1)
Reyaz Ahmed S/O Mohd Ramzan R/O Renaie Marwah, the above said
challan has been presented before the Court of 3rd Addl. District Judge,
Jammu vide challan no. 02/2020 dated 27/06/2020. It is contended, that on
presentation of challan, ld. 3rd Additional Sessions Judge Jammu vide order
dated 02.06.2021 while framing charges against the accused persons,
discharged A-1, A2, A3 namely Bashir Ahmed, Wali Mohd. & Khazar
Mohd for commission of offences u/ss 18/19/39 of UAPA Act; A-4 Zahoor
Ahmed, A-5 Bashir Ahmed & A-6 Yassir Hussain were also discharged
from the charge sheet; A-7 Ghulam Nabi was discharged from Section 18 of
UAPA Act, A-8 was partly discharged from the charge sheet, while A-9
Mohd. Ramzan & A10 Saddam Hussain were charged for commission of
offence u/ss 13/19 & 39 of UAPA Act, while A-12 & A-13 could not be
apprehended during investigation till presentation of the charge sheet,
wherein they have been proceeded u/ss299 Cr.PC and general warrants of
arrest have been initiated against them. It is contended, that the
petitioner/I/O has failed to investigate the case in a manner as required under
law against the accused herein by collecting necessary evidence admissible
under law, therefore, the Court below in its order dated 02.06.2021 recorded
that the investigation has been conducted in a very perfunctory and in an
unprofessional manner, whereby, the ld. trial Court has directed IGP Jammu
to conduct the departmental enquiry against the petitioner and such a
direction passed by the Ld. Trial Court is in accordance with law and does
not suffers from any illegality.
3. Mr. Sunil Sethi Ld. Sr. Counsel for petitioner while strongly laying
emphasis for expunging the adverse/derogatory remarks and observations
made by the Ld. Trial Court against the petitioner has vehemently argued,
that though it is right of the courts to make free and fearless comments and
observations on the one hand, but there is corresponding need for
maintaining sobriety, moderation and restraint regarding the character,
conduct, integrity, credibility etc. of parties or witnesses or others
concerned, moreso, the Judges and Magistrates must be guided by
considerations of justice, fair play and restraint and it is not infrequent that
sweeping generalization defeat the very purpose. It is argued, that in the case
in hand, the derogatory and uncalled for remarks made by the Ld. Trial
Court against the petitioner who is Dy. SP in police department viz; that the
petitioner (I/O) has conducted investigation in a lethargic and sluggish
manner, much better investigation could be conducted by a head constable,
how the petitioner has qualified the administrative examination of state and
has become Dy. SP in Police Department, during investigation of the case in
FIR No. 268/2019 of P/S Kishtwar petitioner/I/O has acted in a manner
which has demolished the case due to his sheer incompetency and
negligence, are harsh/disparaging which should not have been made by the
trial court which was only dealing with a question of charge/discharge of
accused, moreso, higher the forum and greater the powers, the greater is the
need for restraint and the more mellowed the reproach should be. Reliance
has been placed on (i) AIR1986 Supreme Court 819 [Niranjan Patnaik,
Appellant Versus Shashibhusan Kar and another, Respondents], (ii) AIR
Versus State of Orissa].
4. Mr. Suneel Malhotra Ld. GA for the respondents, has strenuously argued,
that petitioner as I/O has failed to investigate the case in a manner required
under law against the accused persons, therefore, court below in its order
dated 02-06-2021 has correctly recorded that investigation has been
conducted in a very perfunctory and unprofessional manner, whereby, IGP
Jammu has been directed by the trial court to conduct departmental enquiry
against the petitioner, the impugned order is in accordance with law and
does not suffer from any illegality.
5. Heard and considered. I have gone through the contents of the petition,
status report filed by the respondents and perused the relevant law on the
subject matter. I have also meticulously scanned the ratios of the judgments
relied by Ld. Counsel for the petitioner.
Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in a case law titled Niranjan
Patnaik VS. Sashibhusan Kar and anr. [AIR1986 Supreme Court 819]
relied by Ld. Counsel for petitioner, while expunging several highly
derogative remarks made against prosecution witness (PW-8 Niranjan
Patnaik) by the Ld. Judge of High Court of Orissa in paras 19, 20, 23, 24 &
19. We may now refer to certain earlier decisions where
the right of courts to make free and fearless comments and
observations on the one hand and the corresponding need
for maintaining sobriety, moderation and restraint regarding
the character, conduct integrity, credibility etc. of parties,
witnesses and others are concerned.
20. In The State of Uttar Pradesh v. Mohammad Naim,
((1964) 2 S.C.R. 363 it was held as follows :
"If there is one principle of cardinal importance in the
administration of justice, it is this: the proper freedom and
independence of Judges and Magistrates must be
maintained and they must be allowed to perform their
functions freely and fearlessly and without undue
interference by anybody, even by this court. At the same
time it is equally necessary that in expressing their
opinions Judges and Magistrates must be guided by
considerations of justice, fairplay and restraint. It is not
infrequent that sweeping generalisations defeat the very
purpose for which they are made. It has been judicially
recognized that in the matter of making disparaging
remarks against persons or authorities whose conduct
comes into consideration before courts of law in cases to be
decided by them, it is relevant to consider (a) whether the
party whose conduct is in question is before the court or has
an opportunity of explaining or defending himself; (b)
whether there is evidence on record bearing on that conduct
justifying the remarks; and (c) whether it is necessary for
the decision of the case, as an integral part thereof, to
animadvert on that conduct. It has also been recognized that
judicial pronouncements must be judicial in nature, and
should not normally depart from sobriety, moderation and
reserve."
23. It is, therefore, settled law that harsh or disparaging
remarks are not to be made against persons and authorities
whose conduct comes into consideration before courts of
law unless it is really necessary for the decision of the case,
as an integral part thereof to animadvert on that conduct.
We hold that the adverse remarks made against the
appellant were neither justified nor called for.
24. Having regard to the limited controversy in the appeal
to the High Court and the hearsay nature of evidence of the
appellant it was not at all necessary for the Appellate Judge
to have animadverted on the conduct of the appellant for the
purpose of allowing the appeal of the first respondent. Even
assuming that a serious evaluation of the evidence of the
appellant was really called for in the appeal the remarks of
the learned Appellate Judge should be in conformity with
the settled practice of courts to observe sobriety,
moderation and reserve. We need only remind that the
higher the forum and the greater the powers, the greater the
need for restraint and the more mellowed the reproach
should be.
25. As we find merit in the contentions of the appellant, for
the aforesaid reasons, we allow the appeal and direct the
derogatory remarks made against the appellant set out
earlier to stand expunged from the judgment under appeal.
Pramod Kumar Gupta, Respondent], relied by Ld. Counsel for the
petitioner, Hon’ble Supreme Court of India while expunging certain
derogatory remarks made by Mr. B.M. Lal Judge of Madhya Pradesh High
Court against Mr. A.M. Mathur Sr. Advocate and also Ex-Advocate General
of the State of Madhya Pradesh, in paragraphs 13, 14 & 16 of the judgment
13. Judicial restraint and discipline are as necessary to the
orderly administration of justice as they are to the
effectiveness of the army. The duty of restraint, this
humility of function should be a constant theme of our
judges. This quality in decision making is as much
necessary for judges to command respect as to protect the
independence of the judiciary. Judicial restraint in this
regard might better be called judicial respect; that is,
respect by the judiciary. Respect to those who come
before the Court as well to other co-ordinate branches of
the State, the Executive and Legislature. There must be
mutual respect. When these qualities fail or when litigants
and public believe that the judge has failed in these
qualities, it will be neither good for the judge nor for the
judicial process.
judges have power to make binding decisions, their
decisions legitimate the use of power by other officials.
The Judges have the absolute and unchallengeable control
of the Court domain. But they cannot misuse their
authority by intemperate comments, undignified
banter or scathing criticism of counsel, parties or
witnesses. We concede that the Court has the inherent
power to act freely upon its own conviction on any matter
coming before it for adjudication, but it is a general
principle of the highest importance to the proper
administration of justice that derogatory remarks ought not
to be made against persons or authorities whose conduct
comes into consideration unless it is absolutely necessary
for the decision of the case to animadvert on their conduct.
(See (i) R. K. Lakshmanan v. A. K. Srinivasan, (1976) 1
SCR 204; (ii) Niranjan Patnaik v. Sashibhushan Kar,
(1986) 2 SCR 569 at p 576.
16. We, therefore, allow the appeal and expunge all the
remarks made by B.M. Lal Judge against appellant in the
impugned order.
In 1995 Supreme (SC) 1019 [Abani Kanta Ray Versus State of
Orissa], relied by Ld. Counsel for the petitioner, Hon’ble Supreme Court of
India while expunging the unwarranted remarks made by the Division
Bench of the Orissa Administrative Tribunal against appellant Chairman of
Orissa Administrative Tribunal, in an application made by respondent No.3
Dandanirodha Mishra for cancellation of his transfer held, that the use of
intemperate language, making disparaging remarks against anyone unless
that be the requirement for deciding the case is inconsistent with judicial
Ratios of the judgments (Supra) of “Niranjan Patnaik”, “A.M. Mathur” &
“Abani Kanta Ray” Cases relied by Ld. Counsel for petitioner, make the
legal proposition abundantly clear, “that in expressing their opinions, Judges
and Magistrates must be guided by consideration of justice, fair play and
restraint, and it is not infrequent that sweeping generalizations defeat the
very purpose for which they are made, in the matter of making disparaging
remarks against persons or authorities whose conduct comes into
consideration before the Courts of law in cases to be decided by them, the
judges should not normally depart from sobriety, moderation and reserve
and harsh or disparaging remarks are not to be made against the parties or
authorities unless it is really necessary for the decision of the case as integral
part thereof”. Ratio of the judgments (Supra) squarely applies to the facts of
the case in hand. In the case in hand, the vide impugned order dated
02.06.2021 rendered by the Court of 3rd Additional Sessions Judge Jammu
(Special Judge u/ss22 of NIA Act) at the stage of charge/discharge of
accused personal, the role of as many as 10 accused persons have come into
play, whereby, in the impugned order of framing charges against the accused
persons A-1 Bashir Ahmed has been charged for commission of offences
u/ss 13/19/30 of UAPA Act while he has been discharged u/s 18 of the said
Act; A-2 Wali Mohd. has been discharged u/s 18 of UAPA Act whereas he
has been charged for the commission of offences u/ss 18/19/39 of the Act;
A-3 Khazer Mohd. has been discharged for offences u/ss18/19/39 of UAPA
Act while he has been found prima-facie indicted for commission of
offences u/ss 13/23 of UAPA Act & 3/25 Arms Act; A-4 Zahoor Ahmed
has been discharged; A-5 Bashir Ahmed has been discharged from the
charge-sheet; A-6 Yassir Hussain has been ordered to be discharged from
the charge-sheet; A-7 Ghulam Nabi has been prima-facie indicted for
commission of offences u/ss 13/19/39 of UAPA Act while he has been
discharged from offence u/s 18 of the UAPA Act; A-8 Mohd. Hussain has
been prima-facie found involved u/ss13/18/19/23/39 of UAPA Act; A-9
Mohd. Ramzan has been found prima-facie indicted for commission of
offences u/ss 13/19/39 of the UAPA Act, while A-10 Saddam Hussain has
been prima-facie found involved in the commission of offence u/ss13/19/39
of the UAPA Act. In the impugned order of charge/discharge dated 02-06-
2021 as many as three (03) accused namely, A-4 Zahoor Ahmed, A-5 Bashir
Ahmed and A-6 Yassir Hussain have been discharged from the commission
of offences leveled against them in the charge sheet. It is noteworthy to
reiterate here, that while passing the impugned order of charge/discharge,
the Ld. Trial Court has recorded derogatory remarks against petitioner at
pages 15, 16 & 17 in paras 8 & 9 which for the sake of convenience are
“8. Before parting away I would like to register my
reservations and dissatisfaction about the conduct of
investigating officer of the present case who appeared to have
conducted the investigation in the present case in a very
perfunctory and unprofessional manner. The quality of the
investigation does no where speaks about the fact that the
investigation in the present case has been conducted by a
Gazetted officer with the Rank of Dy. SP. From the perusal
of the file, it reveals that initially at the time of registration of
the FIR, number of persons have been roped in the present
case, but during the investigation, the Investigating officer
namely Mr. Sunny Gupta, Dy. SP (HQ) Kishtwar has
conducted the investigation in such a lethargic and sluggish
manner that he had not taken even a little pain to search for
the evidence in the present case. These kind of sensitive cases
which are connected with the sovereignty and unity of the
nation have been assigned to Senior Police officers not below
the Rank of Dy. SP, so that a better investigation can be
expected from them. But when we look into the investigation
in the present case, we find that a much better investigation
could be conducted by even a Head Constable in comparison
to the investigation conducted in the present case by Mr.
Sunny Gupta, Dy. SP. At the time of registration of FIR,
there was a clear allegation against all these persons who
were arrayed as accused persons that they used to provide,
hide outs and harbour the categorized militants of HM
terrorists Organization namely Mohd. Amin @ Jahangir
Saroori Mudassir Ahmed and Riaz Ahmed. It was also
alleged that these persons used to provide weapons to the
aforesaid terrorists and also to other terrorists of HM
Terrorists Organization. Despite the arrest of all the said
accused persons, the investigating officer in the present case
has not bothered to seize the mobile phones of any of the
accused persons and he has not appeared to have taken any
pain to collect the CDRs of their mobile phones and their
connectivity or links with the categorized terrorists. The
investigating officer in the present case has only acted as
spectator and had only got the statements of the some of the
witnesses recorded either u/s 161 or u/s 164 Cr.PC. Besides
this, he had not moved even an inch in the investigation of
the case. I am quite surprise that how Mr. Sunny Gupta, Dy.
SP has qualified the administrative examination of the state
and become Dy. SP in the police department, as I have not
been able to find him suitable to the basic intellect of an
ordinary person. From the perusal of the file, I find that he
has also arrayed Mohd. Ramzan as one of the accused in the
present case. But the accused Mohd. Ramzan was already in
judicial custody in another case vide FIR 268/2019 of P/S
Kishtwar at the time when the present FIR was registered. It
is also interesting to note that the investigation in the said
case i.e. FIR No 268/2019 was also conducted by the same
officer i.e. Mr. Sunny Gupta, Dy. SP and as such, he was
well aware about the custody of the accused Mohd. Ramzan
in FIR No 268/2019. But the investigating officer has not
taken the custody of accused Mohd. Ramzan in the present
case as an accused and no kind of remand either police or
judicial was ever obtained in the present case. This kind of
lapse on the part of investigating officer is highly depreciable
and should not be tolerated. Similarly, while investigation in
FIR No 268/2019, the same officer i.e. Mr. Sunny Gupta, Dy.
SP has acted in the same like manner and he had also
demolish the said case as he has demolish the present case.
Due to sheer his incompetency and negligence, this court was
forced to discharged some of the accused persons in the
earlier case vide FIR No 268/2019 entitled State V/S Tariq
Hussain & Ors and in the present case also this court is
forced to discharged three accused persons from the present
charge sheet.
9. Hence, I strongly recommend that a departmental enquiry
should be initiated against the said police officer i.e. Mr.
Sunny Gupta, Dy. SP where he should be asked that why and
under what circumstances he had not collected the real
evidence in the said cases and left over the important aspects
of the cases. He should also be asked that how and under
what circumstances he had implicated and charge sheeted the
accused Zahoor Ahmed, against whom no evidence was
available with him even at the time of registration of FIR as
well as at the time when the charge sheet was presented
against him and other accused persons. Therefore, Inspector
General of Police Jammu Zone is hereby directed to conduct
a departmental enquiry either himself or by his subordinate
officer not below the rank of SSP against the aforesaid
delinquent police officer namely Mr. Sunny Gupta, Dy. SP
who has not done his job in a honest and abled manner.
Office is directed to communicate this order to IGP Jammu
through APP of this court for its compliance”.
6. It is apt to mention here, that the limited controversy before the Ld. Trial
Court was to pass an order regarding the charge/discharge of the accused
persons on the strength of the material collected by the investigating agency
during investigation. The petitioner as I/O of the case, in his best wisdom,
has collected all the material/evidence during the investigation conducted by
him and has placed all the relevant evidence before the Trial Court in the
form of charge sheet. It was the duty of the Trial Court to evaluate/assess the
entire evidence on the record and to prima-facie come to conclusion whether
accused persons can be prima-facie charged/discharged for commission of
offences indicted against them in the charge sheet. Having regard to the
limited controversy of passing an order regarding charge/discharge of
accused persons in the case in hand, it was not at all necessary for the trial
Court to have passed/recorded such harsh/disparaging remarks against the
petitioner (being I/O of the case) in his impugned order dated 02-06-2021 in
paras 8&9 of the order and even the trial court has not afforded opportunity
of explaining or defending the petitioner himself. As discussed above, law
is no longer res-integra that the harsh or disparaging remarks are not to be
made against the persons and authorities whose conduct comes into
consideration before the courts unless heard. It is the settled practice of the
courts to observe sobriety, moderation and reserve. It is reminded that the
higher the forum and greater the powers, the greater is the need for restraint
and the more mellowed the reproach should be. Judicial restraint and
discipline are as necessary to the orderly administration of justice. The duty
of restraint is humility of function and should be a constant theme of our
Judges. The judicial restraint might better be called judicial respect. The
Judge’s Bench is a seat of power and has absolute and unchallengeable
control of the court domain, but they cannot misuse their authority by
intemperate comments, undignified banter or scathing criticism of counsel,
parties or witnesses. It is the general principle of highest importance to the
proper administration of justice that derogatory remarks are not to be made
against persons unless absolutely necessary for decision of the case to
animadvert on their conduct. In the case in hand, the trial judge was to
pass/record an order on the charge/discharge of the accused persons, and it
was not absolutely necessary for him that the conduct of petitioner was
necessary for the decision of charge/discharge of accused.
7. As I find merit in the contentions of the petitioner and arguments of his
counsel, for the aforesaid reasons, I allow the petition and direct the
derogatory remarks made/recorded against the petitioner set out at pages 15,
16 & 17 & in paras 8 & 9 to stand expunged from impugned order dated
02.06.2021 under challenge.