What is the court fee to be paid on an application for
probate/letters of administration is the question posed in the
original petition.
2.      The plaintiff in O.S No.2/2014 of the Court of the
First Additional District Judge, Thrissur (court below) has
assailed Ext P8 order in the original petition. The respondent
is the brother of the petitioner and defendant in the suit.
3.      The relevant background facts leading to Ext P8
OP(C) No. 2832 of 2018
(i) The petitioner had filed LAOP No.577/2013 before
the court below under Sec.278 of the Indian Succession Act to
issue letters of administration in respect of the Will executed
by his father – late K.K Govindan.
(ii) The petitioner valued the original petition at
Rs.50,000/- and paid a court fee of Rs.6,000/- under Sec.56
read with Article 6 of Schedule I of the Kerala Court Fees and
Suit Valuation Act, 1959 (in short ‘Court Fees Act’).
(iii) The respondent has filed Ext P2 objection, inter alia,
disputing the Will, the valuation of the original petition and
the court fee paid.
(iv)      In view of the Ext P2 objection, the court below
converted the original petition to a suit i.e., O.S.No.2/2014.
(v) The petitioner filed IA No.4438/2014 (Ext P3),
volunteering to pay the requisite court fee on the fair value of
the property covered by the Will.
(vi) Subsequently, the petitioner filed IA No.3721/2015
(Ext P4), seeking leave to amend the valuation portion of the
plaint. The respondent opposed Ext P4 application by filing
Ext P5 objection. The court below, by Ext P6 order,
dismissed Ext P4 application.
(vii) Later, the petitioner filed IA No.412/2016 (Ext P7)
to amend the relief and valuation portion of the plaint. The
court below again, by the impugned Ext P8 order, dismissed
Ext P7 application.
(viii) Ext P8 is ex facie illegal, improper and irregular.
Hence, the original petition.
4.      The respondent has filed a counter affidavit denying
the allegations in the original petition. The respondent has
contended that the valuation of the plaint is incorrect.
Ext.R1(e) fair value notification substantiates the value of the
property. The respondent had filed I.A.No.4438/2014 to hear
OP(C) No. 2832 of 2018
the question of valuation as a preliminary issue. By Ext.P3
order, the court below permitted the petitioner to value the
plaint, which was not done. Instead, the petitioner filed Ext P4
application to amend the plaint, with the sole intention to
protract the payment of the court fee. The respondent has also
filed      Ext.R1(f)    court fee   statement.  Accepting     the
respondent’s contention, the court below, by Ext P 6 order,
had directed the petitioner to pay the requisite court fee under
Section 25 (a) of the Court Fees Act. Exts. P3 and P6 orders
have become final and conclusive. It is to indirectly get over
the said orders, the petitioner had filed Ext.P7 application,
which again was opposed by the respondent. The court below
has rightly rejected Ext P7 application by the impugned Ext
P8 order. The petitioner is estopped from challenging Ext P8
order without assailing Exts.P3 and P6 orders. The original
petition is meritless and may be dismissed.
OP(C) No. 2832 of 2018
5.      Heard; Sri.N.N.Sugunapalan, the learned Senior
Counsel appearing for the petitioner and Sri. Kodoth
Sreedharan, the learned Counsel appearing for the respondent.
6.      The petitioner had filed LAOP No.577/2013 to
issue letters of administration in respect of the Will executed
by the father of the petitioner and the respondent. The
respondent resisted the original petition through Ext.P2
objection, disputing the Will.
7.      This Court has framed Rules under the Indian
Succession Act 1925. It is profitable to extract Rule 26 of the
Rules, which reads thus:
“26. Conversion of application into suit.-- Upon the affidavit in
support of the caveat being filed, notice whereof shall
simultaneously be given by the caveator to the petitioner. The
proceedings shall be ordered by the Court to be numbered as a suit
in which the petitioner for probate or Letters of Administration
shall be the plaintiff and the caveator shall be the defendant, the
petition for probate or Letters of Administration being registered
as and deemed as a plaint filed against the caveator, and the
affidavit filed by the caveator being treated as his written
OP(C) No. 2832 of 2018
statement in the suit. The procedure in such suit shall, as nearly as
may be, be according to the provisions of the Code.”
8.      In the light of Ext P 2 objection and following the
procedure laid down under Rule 26 of the Indian Succession
Rules (Kerala), 1968, the court below converted the original
petition to a suit.
9.        The respondent has also specifically contended in
Ext P2 objection that the plaint is undervalued and the
petitioner has not paid the requisite court fee as per the market
value of the property.
10. The court below, by Ext.P3 order, permitted the
petitioner to correct the valuation portion of the plaint and pay
the proper court fee. Instead of paying the court fee, the
petitioner filed Ext.P4 application to amend the valuation
portion of the plaint, to increase the market value of the
property from Rs.50,00,000/- to Rs.3,21,47,561, and pay a
court fee of Rs.1,60,500/- in place of Rs.50,000/- paid under
OP(C) No. 2832 of 2018
Article 6 of Schedule I of the Court Fees Act. The respondent
resisted the application by filing Ext.P5 counter statement,
inter alia, contending that the petitioner has not shown the
value of the building worth more than Rs.30/- lakh and
that the plaint is to be valued under Section 25(a) or 25 (d)(i)
of the Court Fees Act.
11. By Ext.P6 order, the court below held that as the
original petition is converted to a suit, court-fee is to be
computed under Section 25 (a) read with Article 1 of
Schedule I of the Court Fees Act. Accordingly, the court
below dismissed Ext P 4 application with liberty to the
petitioner to properly value the plaint and pay the court fee.
12. The petitioner then filed Ext.P7 application, seeking
leave to amend the prayer portion of the plaint and increase
the value of the property.
13. The court below, by the impugned Ext.P8 order,
dismissed Ext.P7 application by observing as follows:
“Admittedly the suit was filed on 17.08.13 as LAOP 577/13
and later converted as OS 2/14 on 02.04.14. Admittedly, the
Respondent/Defendant strongly opposed the prayer on the
main ground that it is so filed only with the hidden intention
to escape from the liability of remitting required Court Fee.
Defendant filed a Court Fee Statement on 30.10.15 also.
Anyhow it is seen that the Applicant/Plaintiff had earlier filed
IA 3721/15 u/o VI Rule 17 of CPC for the amendment of
valuation portion and that was dismissed by my learned
predecessor-in-office as per Order dtd. 07.01.16. He also
filed another Application as IA 3722/15 u/s 151 of CPC to
grant three months time to remit balance Court Fee. The
Court Fee calculated in the Petition is Rs. 50000/-. It can be
gathered from the Order Sheet, even after granting more
than sufficient chances the Applicant/Plaintiff failed to remit
Court Fee and one or other reason dragged on as far as he
can. IA 3721/15 and 3722/15 were dismissed with the strict
direction to remit Court Fee and even then the applicant
failed to remit balance Court Fee. It is seen from the records
that Respondent/ Defendant filed IA 754/14 with the request
to direct the Applicant/ Plaintiff for a proper valuation and
for the remittance of balance Court Fee. Now this IA is filed
on 22.01.16 and till today balance of Court Fee not remitted.
After going through the amendment sought for and also
considering the Counter filed by the Respondent/ Defendant,
OP(C) No. 2832 of 2018
I am convinced that the prayer is if allowed then it will
change the character of the suit and also will cause prejudice
to the other side. Hence it is to be noted that the LAOP
577/13 was converted as OS 2/14, so I feel that in such a
circumstances the Applicant/Plaintiff cannot exploit that
situation there by to escape from the remittance of required
Court Fee. After going through the averments in the
Application, and also considering the amendment sought for,
I   also     feel  that it is only   a   clever  attempt  of  the
Applicant/Plaintiff with a view to escape from the liability of
remitting Court Fee in the Suit. I also satisfied that the
prayer in this Application are not allowable as they are asked
without any bonafide. In this circumstances, I am of the
opinion that the prayer at any stretch of imagination cannot
allowed, as it is obvious that it is filed as experiment so as to
escape from remitting the required Court Fee. In these
circumstances I am not inclined to allow the prayer.
Accordingly dismissed without costs.”
14. Chapter VI of the Kerala Court-Fees and Suits
Valuation Act, 1959 deals with the manner in which court fee
is to be computed and paid on applications filed for probate,
letter of administration and certificate of administration. It is
apposite to extract Sections 55 and 56 of the Court Fees Act,
which reads as follows:
“55.Application for probate or letters of administration.-
(1) Every application for the grant of probate or letters of
administration shall be accompanied by a valuation of the estate
in duplicate in the form set forth in Part I of Schedule III.
(2) On receipt of such application, the Court shall send a copy
thereof and of the valuation to the Collector of the district in
which the estate is situated, or if the estate is situated in more
than one district, to the Collector of the district in which the
most valuable portion of the immovable property included in the
estate is situated.
(1) The fee chargeable for the grant of probate or letters of
administration shall comprise—
a fee at the rate or rates prescribed in Article 6 of Schedule I,
(a)where the application is made within one year of the date of
death of the deceased, on the market value of the estate on such
(b)where the application is made after the expiry of one year
from such date, on the market value of the estate on the date of
the application:
Provided that property held in trust not beneficially or with
general power to confer a beneficial interest shall not be liable to
any fee under this chapter.
Explanation.- Any member of a joint Hindu family governed by
the Mitakshara Law who applies for probate or letters of
administration in respect of the estate of a deceased member of
the joint family shall pay a fee on the value of the share in the
joint property which the deceased would have received if a
partition of the property had been made immediately before his
death.
(2) For the purpose of the computation of fee—
(a)the value of the items mentioned in Annexure B to Part I of
Schedule III shall be deducted from the value of the estate:
Provided that, when an application is made for probate or letters
of administration in respect of part only of an estate, no debt, no
expenses connected with any funeral rites or ceremonies and no
mortgage encumbrance on any part of the estate other than that
in respect of which the application is made shall be deducted:
Provided further that when, after the grant of a certificate under
Part X of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (Central Act XXXIX
of 1925), in respect of any property included in an estate, a grant
of probate or letters of administration is made in respect of the
same estate, the fee payable in respect of the latter grant shall be
reduced by the amount of the fee paid respect of the former
(b)the power of appointment which the deceased had over a
property or which was created under a ‘Will’ shall be taken into
account, the value being taken to be the value of the property
forming the subject-matter of the power.
OP(C) No. 2832 of 2018
15. The above provisions clearly specify that whenever
an application for the grant of probate or letters of
administration is filed, the same has to be accompanied by a
valuation statement of the estate in the form set forth in Part I
of Schedule III of the Court Fees Act, and court fee is to be
paid under Article 6 of Schedule I of the Court Fees Act.
16. Article 6 of Schedule I of the Court Fees Act reads
“6. Probate of a will or letters of administration
with or without will annexed—
i) When the amount or value of the                         One percentum on such
estate in respect of which the grant of probate or letters amount or value
is made does not exceed rupees ten million
When such amount or value exceeds rupees ten million        Half a percentum on such
amount or value.
17. However,             whenever          there     is   a    contest,    as
contemplated under Rule 26 of the Indian Succession Rules
(Kerala), 1968, the original petition is to be converted to a
OP(C) No. 2832 of 2018
suit, and the court fee is to be paid under Article 11 (k) of
Schedule II of the Court Fees Act.
18. Article 11 (k) of Schedule II of the Court Fees Act
“11 (k) (i) Application for probate or letters of
administration to have effect throughout India. Rs.50/-
(ii) Application for probate or letters of
administration not falling under clause (i)-
(1) if the value of the estate does not exceed
(2) if the value exceeds Rs.1,000: Rs.5/-
Provided that if a caveat is entered and the application is
registered as a suit, one-half the scale of fee prescribed in Article
1 of Schedule 1 on the market value of the estate less the fee
already paid on the application shall be levied.”
19.   In Pappoo v. Kuruvila [1982 KLT 255], this Court
has held that the proviso to Article 11 (k) of Schedule II of the
Court Fees Act applies to both clauses (i) and (ii).
20. So, in an uncontested application falling under
Section 56 of the Court Fees Act, the court fee is to be paid
under Article 6 of Schedule I of the Act and in a contested
application, the court fee is to be paid under Article 11 (k) of
OP(C) No. 2832 of 2018
Schedule II of the Act, i.e., one half of the scale of
fees prescribed under Article 1 of Schedule I of the Court
21. A similar view has been taken by this Court in Elsy
22. In the above conclusion, the finding of the court
below, in Ext.P6 order, that the petitioner has to pay court fee
under Section 25(a) of the Act read with Article 1 Schedule I
of the Court Fees Act is incorrect and wrong.
23. The question does not end here because Section 55
of the Court Fees Act mandates that every application for
probate or letters of administration is to be accompanied by a
valuation of the estate in the form set forth in part 1 of
schedule III of the Act. And on the filing of such an
application, it is obligatory on the part of the Court to forward
a copy of the valuation statement to the Collector and call for
OP(C) No. 2832 of 2018
a report regarding the valuation of the property. The manner
in which the inquiry is to be conducted is delineated in
Sections 59 and 60 of the Court Fees Act.
24. In the instant case, undisputedly, neither has the
petitioner filed the valuation statement of the properties nor
was an enquiry conducted by the Collector as stipulated under
the Court Fees Act. Instead, the court below has directed the
court fee to be paid on the disputed valuation statement filed
by the petitioner without following the procedure laid down in
the Court Fees Act. Therefore, it is only to be held that the
entire procedure and the directions passed by the court below
are erroneous and wrong. Consequentially, Exts.P3, P6 and P8
orders warrant to be interfered under Article 227 of the
Constitution of India.
Resultantly, the original petition is allowed in the
following manner:
(i)       Exts.P3, P6 and P8 orders are set aside.
(ii)      Exts.P4 and P7 applications are dismissed.
(iii)     The parties are directed to appear before the
court below on 03.01.2023.
(iv) The petitioner is directed to file a valuation
statement as prescribed under Section 55 of the Court
Fees Act read with Part I of Schedule III of the Act on
or before 09.01.2023.
(v)       The court below is directed to forward the
valuation statement to the District Collector, Thrissur,
who shall conduct an inquiry as provided under
Section 59 of the Court Fees Act and file his report
within three months from the date of receipt of the
statement from the court below.
(vi)      On the District Collector filing the valuation
report before the court below, the petitioner shall pay
OP(C) No. 2832 of 2018
one-tenth of the court fee as provided under Article 1
Schedule I of the Act within one month and the
balance court fee within 15 days after the framing
of issues or within such extended period fixed by the
court below.
(vii) As the original petition is of the year 2013, the
court below shall make an endeavour to consider and
dispose of the suit, in accordance with law, as
expeditiously as possible.
OP(C) No. 2832 of 2018