This Civil Miscellaneous Appeal has been preferred against the
award passed in M.C.O.P.No.445 of 2014, dated 30.06.2015, on the file
of   Motor   Accidents     Claims   Tribunal/Principal      District  Court,
2.Admittedly, the first claimant is the father, the second claimant is
the mother and the third claimant is the sister of the deceased
Govindaraju. The accident is admitted and the involvement of TVS
Sport/Motor Cycle and the Bus bearing Registration No.TN-55-0520
owned by the Appellant/Transport Corporation, is not in dispute.
3.The case of the claimants is that on 15.12.2011, when the
deceased Govindaraju was returning to his school, after purchasing paper
and pen along with his three friends Venkateshwaran, Prasanth and
Gowthamanraj in a Motorcycle driven by the said Prasanth, one lorry,
which was proceeding before the two wheeler had allowed the two
wheeler to overtake the lorry, that when the two wheeler rider was
proceeding after overtaking the said lorry, the bus bearing Registration
No.TN 55 0520, which came in the opposite direction in a rash and
negligent manner, dashed against the two wheeler and as a result of
which, all the four persons were thrown out and sustained serious
injuries, that the said Govindaraju, despite treatment, succumbed to the
injuries on 26.12.2011 and that the accident had occurred only due to the
rash and negligent driving of the Bus driver.
4.The defence of the Transport Corporation is that on 15.12.2011
at about 01.20. pm when the Bus after brief stop at Vadakadu school Bus
stand, was proceeding towards west, two lorries and a Sumo Car came in
the opposite direction and on noticing the same, the Bus driver diverted
the Bus towards left side of the road, that at that time, one two wheeler
with four boys by overtaking the lorries came in a rash and negligent
manner and on seeing the same, the Bus driver had immediately stopped
the Bus and sounded horn, that the two wheeler rider, who was unable to
control the vehicle, had dashed against the front right side bumper of the
Bus and caused the accident and that the Motorcycle rider was
responsible for the accident.
5.During enquiry, the claimants have examined the first claimant
as P.W.1 and one Rengan, alleged to be the occurrence witness as P.W.2
and    exhibited     five   documents    as   Ex.P.1    to   Ex.P.5.   The
Appellant/Transport       Corporation    has    examined      its    driver
Thiru.Subramanian as R.W.1 and adduced no documentary evidence.
6.The trial Court, upon considering the evidence both oral and
documentary, has passed the impugned award, dated 30.06.2015, holding
that the Bus driver was responsible for the accident and directing the
appellant to pay compensation of Rs.6,62,000/- with interest at 7.5% per
annum to the claimants. Aggrieved by the said award, the Transport
Corporation has preferred the present appeal.
7.The learned counsel for the appellant would contend that the
deceased Govindaraju was proceeding in a two wheeler along with three
persons and while the rider had tried to overtake the lorry without
noticing the Bus, which came in the opposite direction and thus invited
the accident, that the accident had occurred only due to the negligence on
the part of the deceased himself and that even otherwise, the deceased
had contributed to the accident and as such, he was liable for
contributory negligence.
8.It is not in dispute that the deceased was proceeding in a two
wheeler as a pillion rider along with his three friends Venkateshwaran,
Prasanth and Gowthamanraj and that the two wheeler was owned by the
said Gowthamanraj. The claimants in order to prove their case have
examined P.W.2 Rangan as occurrence witness and he would reiterate the
version of the claimants and according to him, when he was taking Tea at
Thankaprakasam Tea Stall on 15.12.2011, the Bus bearing Registration
No.TN-55-0520, which came in a rash and negligent manner and without
sounding horn dashed against the two wheeler and as a result of which,
motorcycle rider and pillion riders had sustained serious injuries and that
the accident was occurred only due to the rash and negligent driving of
the bus driver.
9.P.W.2 in his cross examination would say that he came to depose
at the request of the claimants, that he had not lodged any complaint with
the police, that he was taking tea at the time of accident and that the Bus
came towards west. He would deny the suggestion that the accident was
occurred due to the negligence of the deceased Boy and that he was
deposing falsely as both of them were belonging to the same place.
10.As already pointed out, the Appellant Corporation has
examined its driver as R.W.1 and he would narrate the manner of the
accident as put forth in their counter statement. R.W.1 would say that
after seeing the two wheeler with four persons coming in the opposite
direction in a rash and negligent manner, he stopped the Bus at a distance
of 15 feet, that they were unable to control their vehicle and that the
accident was occurred for the reason that four persons had travelled in
the two wheeler.
11.R.W.1 in his cross examination would say that FIR was lodged
against him, that he has not preferred any complaint before the police as
FIR was wrongly registered against him, that he has not filed any
documents to show that he preferred a complaint and that he has not filed
any documents to show that the criminal case ended in his favour. No
doubt, though R.W.1 has stated that the criminal case ended in his favour,
he has not produced any documents to prove the same. But the fact
remains that though R.W.1 has specifically stated that the complaint
registered against him has been closed in FIR stage itself, the same was
not specifically disputed or denied by the claimants.
12.The trial Court has relied on the decision reported in 2011 (1)
Karaikudi Vs. Uma and others. In that case, the deceased was
travelling with his wife and 14 years old son in a two wheeler and the
High Court has held that simply because three persons travelled in a
motorcycle, it is not to be presumed that the deceased was negligent in
riding the two wheeler and rejected the plea of contributory negligence.
No doubt, recently our Hon'ble Supreme Court in Mohammed Siddique
and another Vs. National Insurance Company Limited and others,
reported in 2020(1) TN MAC 161 (SC), has set aside the order of the
High Court, holding that the victim was guilty of contributory
negligence. In that case, the accident was occurred at 02.00.am and the
motorcycle in which, the deceased was travelling, was hit by a Car from
behind. The Hon'ble Apex Court has held that the fact that a person was a
pillion rider on a motorcycle along with driver and one more person on
pillion, may be a violation of the law, but such violation by itself, without
anything more, cannot lead to a finding of Contributory Negligence,
unless it is established that his very act of riding along with two others,
contributed either to the accident or to the impact of the accident upon
the victim. In para No.14, the Hon' ble Apex Court has held as follows:
“14.Therefore, in the absence of any evidence to
show that the wrongful act on the part of the deceased
victim contributed either to the accident or to the nature of
the injuries sustained, the victim could not have been held
guilty of Contributory Negligence. Hence, the reduction of
10%     towards    Contributory    Negligence,    is  clearly
unjustified and the same has to be set aside.”
13.The learned counsel for the Appellant has relied on the decision
of this Court reported in 2012 (1) TN MAC 713 [Oriental Insurance
“10.In spite of warning of this Court earlier,
deprecating the practice of the drivers of Two-wheelers
carrying more number of passengers, unfortunately, as rightly
pointed out, they do not care about their lives when they take
the entire family in a Two-wheeler, which has to be
deprecated and therefore, as rightly held by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court, this Court only would say that by carrying
extra person, the injured person definitely has contributed to
the accident and 50% is liable to be borne by the injured
person as he has violated Section 128 of the Motor Vehicles
Act. Hence, this Court is of the view that contributory
negligence can be fixed at 50%.”
14.Generally, two wheeler popularly called as Motor bike or
motorcycle is designed and is meant for travelling of two persons. If
anyone takes more than 2 persons and violates two only rule, then he will
be committing an offence and is punishable under Section 128 of the
15.That is one aspect of the matter. Let us discuss the other aspect.
Suppose if a two wheeler rider takes two grown-up persons or weighty
and bulky persons or three grown-up persons in the pillion which is only
meant for one person, what would be the effect or impact? Firstly, rider
has to necessarily move forward towards petrol tank so as to give some
place to those pillion riders which forces him to sit and ride in an unusual
position and posture. Secondly if 2 or 3 persons are seated in the pillion,
then they have to necessarily sit in a cramped or jam-packed position
along with rider and the rider will definitely feel or suffer pressure
behind, which in turn, will definitely affect or disturb his rhythm of
driving and consequently balancing of the vehicle. Thirdly, if any one of
2 or 3 pillion riders makes any movement usual or unusual, that would
make the rider to loose his control over the vehicle. In the above
scenario, the movement of rider's legs and hands would get restricted and
consequently he can't have full control over the vehicle.
16.Now coming to the technical side, there are many factors like
weight, aerodynamics, gearing, etc. which contribute to determining a
vehicle's top speed and acceleration. But Power and Torque are the most
important factors, Power determines the vehicle's top speed and Torque
helps the vehicle in its acceleration. In automobile industry, it is
commonly said that higher the power of a vehicle, higher is its top speed
and that better the torque of a vehicle, better is its acceleration. Various
automobile manufacturers are releasing their two wheelers with different
maximum power and maximum torque and with lot of facilities for easy
and convenient riding and for safe and comfortable travelling, even for
very long distances. But whatever be the power or torque and whatever
be the facilities made, the two wheeler is only meant to take a rider and a
pillion rider and not more than two at any cost. If the rider takes 2 or 3
persons in his vehicle, then he has to give more acceleration to increase
the pulling capacity so as to take more weight. The efforts required from
the rider to maintain the acceleration level would affect or divert his
attention and concentration.
17.Despite the penal laws and awareness programmes conducted
by the Governments and various NGOs, people have not changed. Every
road user owes a duty of care and caution and is duty bound to drive their
vehicles in such a way not to endanger themselves and more importantly
not to endanger the pedestrians, cyclists, two wheelers and other vehicle
users.
18.As per the statistics available for the past two years excluding
the Corona year of 2020, in 2018 India ranked 1st in the road accidents
across 199 countries with total accidents at 4,67,044 in which two
wheeler accidents accounted for 35.2%, the highest in all categories of
vehicles. It is pertinent to note that in India, the state of TN stood 1st in
the number of accidents. In 2019, total accidents occurred were 4,37,396
in which 38% of victims of road accidents were riders of two wheelers.
19.It is high time for all stakeholders to review our mind-set that in
cases of road accidents involving big and small vehicles, fixing the driver
of the big vehicle as tort-feasor, as in majority of cases FIRs came to be
registered against the driver of the big vehicle and investigations are
being carried out in such a way to make that driver is responsible for the
accident. It is also high time for all who are dealing with motor accident
claims to review our mentality in considering the plight of the injured
victim or the legal heirs of the deceased victim sympathetically and
awarding of compensation in the accidents occurred by violating the
Laws and Rules.
20.No doubt, as already pointed out, taking more than 2 persons in
a two wheeler, by itself is an offence but whether it would amount to
negligence or not is required to be decided on the facts and
circumstances of the given case. If a rider takes 2 persons as pillion
riders, that itself would not amount to negligence. For example, if a rider
takes his wife and a child or if he takes 2 small boys or lean persons, that
by itself would not amount to negligence. But if the rider takes 2or 3
grown-up persons or obese persons, that by itself would amount to
negligent driving since the rider can loose his control of the vehicle at
any point of time. In the case on hand, since four grown-up students had
travelled in the two wheeler, I have no hesitation to hold that the rider
and all the pillion riders are guilty of negligent riding / travelling.
21.In the present case, to some extent, it's a case of head on
collision. In Ex A3, the Motor vehicle Inspector has pointed out that he
noticed some damages in the centre of bumper and grill of the Bus. The
Appellant in their counter statement has taken a stand that the Bus driver
after noticing the two wheeler with four persons coming after overtaking
two lorries in the opposite direction, stopped the Bus on the left extreme
of the road and that at that time two wheeler rider who came in a rash and
negligent manner, unable to control the vehicle, dashed against the front
right side bumper of the Bus. The Tribunal, on considering the damages
shown in MVI Report, has observed that the version of the Appellant
cannot be accepted. Considering the evidence available, I am of the view
that the variation shown as to where the damages occurred in the Bus,
does not make any difference.
22.Though the claimants have pleaded that lorry driver had
allowed the two wheeler rider to overtake the lorry and while proceeding
after overtaking the lorry, bus driver who came in the opposite direction,
in a rash and negligent manner, had dashed against the two wheeler, they
have not chosen to examine the said lorry driver nor gave any particulars
of the said lorry.
23.Since the two wheeler was proceeding on the right side of the
lorry and was overtaking the lorry, as alleged by the claimants, two
wheeler rider should have seen the Bus coming from the opposite
direction. Even after seeing the Bus, he decided to proceed further and in
that decision, we can easily infer that he miscalculated the speed of the
vehicles, the space and the time taken to cross that space between the two
wheeler and the Bus, as he was carrying more weight than the prescribed.
Considering the above, this court is of the clear view that not only the
two wheeler rider but all the pillion riders are also liable for contributory
negligence. Considering the entire facts and circumstances, this court is
also of the view that the degree of contributory negligence can be fixed at
50% on the part of the deceased and is fixed accordingly.
24.Though    the Appellant      has    disputed    the   quantum    of
compensation arrived at and the mode of calculation in the Appeal
memorandum, the same was not pressed into service. Considering the
other facts and circumstances of the case, this Court further decides that
the parties are to be directed to bear their own costs and the above points
are answered accordingly.
25.In the result, the Civil Miscellaneous Appeal is partly allowed,
directing the claimants to bear 50% of the amount awarded by the
tribunal for contributory negligence. In case if the Appellant/Corporation
has already deposited the entire amount, they are at liberty to withdraw
the 50% of the amount with proportioned interest and the claimants are
permitted to withdraw their share amounts with interest and costs on due
application before the Tribunal. Parties are directed to bear their own
costs. Consequently, connected Miscellaneous Petition is closed.