Hindu       Marriage     Act, 1955      (for    short  ‘the    Act,       1955)
respectively, is at the instance of the original plaintiff - wife
and is directed against the judgment and decree dated
18.02.2020 passed by the Family Court No.6, Ahmedabad in
the Family Suit No.2543 of 2018 whereby the Family Court
dismissed the Suit and declined to grant the declaration as
prayed for in the plaint.
2.      The facts giving rise to the present appeal may be
2.1     The        marriage   between         the   appellant         (original
plaintiff/wife) and the opponent (original defendant/husband)
was solemnized on 09.12.2010 as per the Hindu rites and
rituals at village Hadala, Taluka: Bagasara, District: Amreli. The
marriage was registered with the Office of the Registrar of
Marriage on 27.04.2011. Over a period of time, matrimonial
disputes arose between the appellant and the opponent.                        It
appears that as reconciliation between the parties was not
possible, the respective family members and relatives of the
parties decided to dissolve the marriage by way of a
customary deed of divorce. It appears from the materials on
record that the Panch of the community thought fit to put an
end to the marriage by way of customary divorce. The parties
amicably relegated themselves to customary divorce.
2.2     The appellant intends to get remarried and settle abroad.
It is the case of the appellant that for the purpose of visa etc.
the foreign embassy/authority would insist for a valid decree of
divorce drawn by a competent Court. In other words, it is the
case of the appellant that the foreign embassy/immigration
authority may not look into the customary deed of divorce so
as to understand the marital status of the parties in law.
2.3    In such circumstances referred to above, the appellant
(original plaintiff) instituted the Family Suit No.2543 of 2018
under Sections 7 and 8 respectively of the Act, 1984 read with
Section 29(2) of the Act, 1955 seeking a declaration that the
marriage between the parties stood validly dissolved by way of
the customary deed of divorce.
2.4. Having           regard     to    the     important      issue     relating      to
customary divorce being involved in the present appeal, we
deem fit to reproduce the entire plaint as under:
“In the court of the Ld. Judge of the Family Court
Plaintiff:        Bhartiben W/o. Amitbhai Vitthalbhai Sojitra and D/o.
Ravjibhai Kavani, Age 33 years, Occupation: Household, Hindu by
Religion, Presently residing at: A/25, Kailashdham Raw House, Nr.
Defendant:        Amitbhai Vitthalbhai Sojitra, Age about 33 Years,
Hindu by Religion, Occupation: Business, Residing at:
Subject:          Suit for Declaration of Divorce as per Section-7B and
8 of the Family Court Act.
I, the plaintiff, pray before the Hon'ble Court that:
1)      I reside with my parents at aforesaid address.
2)      I, the plaintiff got married to the respondent as per Hindu
wedding rituals and our community traditions at Hadala,
Taluka – Bagasra, Dist. - Amreli on 09-12-2010. The marriage
was registered vide Register Part No.02 and Serial
No.2010/2011 at Hadala on 27-04-2011 and from then, the
respondent and I became legally husband and wife.
3)      We, the plaintiff and the respondent do not have any child
out of our wedlock and I, the plaintiff am not pregnant by the
respondent.
4)      As we, the plaintiff and the respondent had extreme
displeasures and disputes during our married life and do not
have coordination, it was not possible to continue our married
life by staying together and therefore, we – the plaintiff and
the respondent decided to end our marriage and accordingly,
we – the plaintiff and the respondent had customary divorce
by executing “agreement of divorce, i.e. dissolution of
marriage” on stamp papers of Rs.100/- and Rs.100/- vide Sr.
No.3948 of Page No.34 of Register Book No.2 of Notary Shri
Rajnikant S. Sojitra on 02-07-2018 as per custom of our
community. The deed of dissolution of marriage has been
executed unanimously by us – the plaintiff and the
respondent in presence of witnesses and is agreed upon by
us. Such practice of executing deed of dissolution of marriage
is recognized by our community. Such divorce is customary
and recognized in our community.
5)      After getting married on 09/12/2010, I-the Plaintiff went to
reside with the Respondent, but as there were no harmonious
relations between me and Respondent, we have executed
divorce agreement on 02/07/2018 on the stamp paper of
Rs.100/- for each as per our social customs. Since then, there
has not been any relation between me and the Respondent.
Thus, I-Plaintiff and the Respondent have accepted the
divorce agreement on 02/07/2018 and we have ended the
relations of husband-wife and we have been living
independently. As we have executed this agreement as per
the customs of our community, the same is binding to me-the
6)      I-the Plaintiff and the Respondent have executed the
agreement of dissolution of marriage as per the customs of
our community. Hence, it is required to award the divorce
decree by confirming this dissolution of marriage executed
between I-the Plaintiff as legally valid. As I-the Plaintiff
require the divorce decree awarded by the Hon’ble Court for
passport and for producing in government or semi-
government offices, I have filed this Plaint to obtain the
same. My marriage was solemnized in the jurisdiction of this
court and I have been residing within the territorial
jurisdiction of this court, this Hon’ble court has authority and
power to try and hear this Plaint.
7)      Our marriage has been dissolved as per the customs and
rituals of our community and accordingly, considering the
said divorce took place by deed of marriage dissolution dated
02/07/2018 to be valid, this suit is filed to obtain decree of
divorce.
8)      The cause of action was arisen in the jurisdiction of this court
when we, the parties, entered into marriage as per Hindu
Customs and Rituals on 09/12/2010 and when it appeared
impossible to continue the conjugal life and when we ended
the marital relationship as per the customs and rituals of the
community in presence of the elders and when we executed
Divorce Deed on 02/07/2018 and when we needed to pray for
the decree of divorce from the Hon'ble Court.
(A)        Kindly allow this suit and pass the decree of divorce
between the parties as per Section-7B of the Family Act, 1984
declaring the divorce deed dated 02/07/2018 executed
between the parties to be valid and legal.
(B)       Kindly declare the marriage solemnized between us
on 09/12/2010 as per Hindu customs and rituals, to be
dissolved w.e.f. 02/07/2018 and direct to pass the decree of
divorce declaring the end of our marriage w.e.f. 02/07/2018.
(c)       Kindly pass any other relief that the Hon'ble Court
may deem fit.
10)     I have affixed prescribed court fee on this suit.
11)     It is declared by the pursis that the names and addresses of
the parties mentioned in the title of the suit are true and
correct as per Order-6, Rule-14A of the C.P.C.
12)     Vakilpatra, List of Evidences and Additional Plaint is
appended herewith. Fixed Court Fee Stamp is affixed on this
suit.
I, the plaintiff, hereby declare at Ahmedabad City that all
the facts mentioned above are true and correct as per my
knowledge and belief.
2.5. The examination-in-chief of the appellant - plaintiff in the
“In the court of the Family Court Judge, Ahmedabad
Subject :        Affidavit of Examination-in-Chief of the Plaintiff
I, the undersigned Bhartiben W/o Amitbhai Vitthalbhai Sojitra
and D/o Ravjibhai Kavani, age about – 34 years, occupation –
housewife, religion – Hindu, residing at present at – A/25,
Bungalows, Nikol, Ahmedabad hereby execute this affidavit of
examination-in-chief on oath of my religion that:-
(1)      I, the plaintiff live with my parents at the above mentioned
address.
(2)      I, the plaintiff got married to the respondent as per Hindu
wedding rituals and our community traditions at Hadala, Taluka –
Bagasra, Dist. - Amreli on 09-12-2010. The marriage was registered
vide Register Part No.02 and Serial No.2010/2011 at Hadala on 27-
04-2011 and from then, the respondent and I became legally
husband and wife.
(3)      We, the plaintiff and the respondent do not have any child
out of our wedlock and I, the plaintiff am not pregnant by the
respondent.
(4)      As we, the plaintiff and the respondent had extreme
displeasures and disputes during our married life and do not have
coordination, it was not possible to continue our married life by
staying together and therefore, we – the plaintiff and the
respondent decided to end our marriage and accordingly, we – the
plaintiff and the respondent had customary divorce by executing
“agreement of divorce, i.e. dissolution of marriage” on stamp
papers of Rs.100/- and Rs.100/- vide Sr. No.3948 of Page No.34 of
Register Book No.2 of Notary Shri Rajnikat S. Sojitra on 02-07-2018
as per custom of our community. The deed of dissolution of
marriage has been executed unanimously by us – the plaintiff and
the respondent in presence of witnesses and is agreed upon by us.
Such practice of executing deed of dissolution of marriage is
recognized by our community. Such divorce is customary and
recognized in our community.
(5)      After getting married on 09/12/2010, I-the Plaintiff went to
reside with the Respondent, but as there were no harmonious
relations between me and Respondent, we have executed divorce
agreement on 02/07/2018 on the stamp paper of Rs.100/- for each
as per our social customs. Since then, there has not been any
relation between me and the Respondent. Thus, I-Plaintiff and the
Respondent have accepted the divorce agreement on 02/07/2018
and we have ended the relations of husband-wife and we have been
living independently. As we have executed this agreement as per
the customs of our community, the same is binding to me-the
(6)      I-the Plaintiff and the Respondent have executed the
agreement of dissolution of marriage as per the customs of our
community. Hence, it is required to award the divorce decree by
confirming this dissolution of marriage executed between I-the
Plaintiff as legally valid. As I-the Plaintiff require the divorce decree
awarded by the Hon’ble Court for passport and for producing in
government or semi-government offices, I have filed this Plaint to
obtain the same. My marriage was solemnized in the jurisdiction of
this court and I have been residing within the territorial jurisdiction
of this court, this Hon’ble court has authority and power to try and
hear this Plaint.
(7)      The name of the Respondent is being continued after my
name but, as the marriage between us has been dissolved, I want
to delete the name of Respondent which is being continued after
my name. I require the decree of this Hon’ble Court to change my
name as such in the passport and also in the government and semi-
government record. Therefore, I have filed the present Plaint as per
section-7(B) of the Family Court Act to get the decree declaring the
agreement of dissolution of marriage executed between I-the
Plaintiff and the Respondent on 02/07/2018 as legal and valid and
declaring our marriage solemnized on 09/12/2010 as per Hindu
rituals as dissolved vide the agreement of dissolution dated:
(8)      The summons/notice of this suit issued by this court have
been served to the Respondent of this case on 05/01/2019.
Thereafter, this Suit was adjourned on 11/01/2019, 19/02/2019 and
27/03/2019 but the Respondent of this case has neither appeared
nor filed his reply despite giving him three adjournments.
(9)      The respondent in this case does not appear before this
Court deliberately and he does not wish that proceedings of this
suit are carried out. Thus, the respondent in this case is deliberately
wasting the valuable time of the Hon’ble Court and plaintiff. The
respondent in this case does not wish that the decree is issued by
the Hon’ble Court as sought by the plaintiff in the suit and thus he
is mentally and physically harassing me and wasting my precious
time and money. It becomes clear that the respondent has malafide
intention of harassing me.
(10) I have submitted the xerox copy of documentary evidences
in connection with the aforementioned case along with my plaint.
True copies obtained from the original have been submitted with
the list vide Exh-.... My marriage with respondent was solemnized
on 09-12-2010 at Hadala, Taluka: Bagasara, District: Amreli. The
marriage was registered on 27/04/2011 vide Register part no.2, sr.
no.2010/2011 at Hadala. The notarized true copy of the certificate
is submitted vide Mark-..../1 and it is requested to assign Exhibit to
it.I the applicant and the respondent executed the Divorce Deed at
Mark-__/2 for dissolving our marriage. The deed is signed by I the
applicant and the respondent which I identify. It is the notarized
copy of the deed which is registered at Serial no. 3948 dated
02/07/2018 on page no. 34 of Register Book No.2 of Notary Shri
Rajnikant S. Sojitra. The deed was executed with the consent of I
the applicant and the respondent. It was executed in accordance
with the tradition followed in our community. It is requested to
assign a final exhibit number to it. The notarized copy of passport of
I, the applicant am produced at Mark- __/3. It is requested to assign
final exhibit number to it. The notarized copy of identity proof of I,
the applicant am produced at Mark- __/4. It is requested to assign
final exhibit number to it.
(11) Considering all the above stated facts, Your Honour may be
pleased to grant as prayed at Para 9(a) of our original application
and issue a decree in accordance with Section- 7(b) of the Family
Act, 1984 declaring that the Divorce Deed dated 02/07/2018
dissolving the marriage is legal and valid. Your Honour may also be
pleased to grant as prayed at Para 9(b) and issue a decree
declaring that our marriage dated 09/12/2010 in accordance with
the Hindu rituals is dissolved w.e.f. 02/07/2018.”
2.6    The Family Court having regard to the pleadings in the
plaint, framed the following issues at Exh.8:
1.       Whether the petitioner proves that the divorce deed vide
List Exh.-4 at M-4/2 dated 02.07.2018 executed by and
between the parties is legal and valid as per the custom
2.       Whether the petitioner is entitled to get a decree of
3.       What order and decree?”
2.7    The above referred issues came to be answered by the
3.       As per the final order.”
2.8    The      Family      Court     thought fit to        dismiss the           Suit
substantially on the ground that the plaintiff failed to prove
any practice of customary divorce being prevalent in the Leuva
Patel Community. The parties hail from the Leuva Patel
Community. The Family Court while dismissing the Suit held as
“11. Now, three questions arise before the Court, are whether the
relief which is prayed for by the petitioner can be granted? and
second question comes before the Court is whether Court may
pass order for declaration of marital status of the parties based
upon divorce deed executed by and between the parties as per the
custom of their society? and the third question comes before the
court that whether parties of the present petition proves that there
has custom in their society to take customary divorce?
12.      Here in the present case, main issue is whether by way of
customary divorce the petitioner and respondent’s marital status
can be declared as they are divorcee? For this it is required to
decide and to appreciate the evidence produced by the petitioner.
It is pertinent to note that merely she has filed her routine affidavit
in support of the petition and no witness has been examined by the
petitioner side. It is the argument of the petitioner side that she
has declared on oath that there is custom in her society to obtain
customary divorce. But merely by said words, Court can not
consider that there is custom. To prove customary divorce,
petitioner must establish the existence and fact of prevailing of
custom. The record of the present case shows that petitioner-wife
has not lead any evidence to show existence of any customary
divorce prevailing in her community. No document has been filed
relating to the period prior to the passing of the Hindu Marriage
Act. In my view, no evidence has come before the Court to prove
that there was a practice of dissolving the marriage by way
customary divorce prevailing in their community. So far as the
custom is concerned, petitioner shall have to prove what is the
custom in their society for obtaining divorce? For this it is required
to narrate reported judgments of Hon’ble Apex Court as well as
Hon’ble Various High Courts. In the case of M. Chandralekha Versus
Subramani and others, reported in 2001 Supreme (Madras) 1284,
“6. The only point that survives for consideration is whether
the document viz., Ex.B-1 dated 25.10.1984 would dissolve
the marriage between the plaintiff and Kandasamy. The
plaintiff is not disputing, having executed such a document.
Sec.29(2) of the Hindu Marriage Act is as follows:
“Nothing contained in this Act shall be deemed to affect any
right recognised by custom or conferred by any special
enactment to obtain the dissolution of a Hindu Marriage,
whether solemnized before or after commencement of this
Hence, firstly the defendants in order to establish their case
has to satisfactorily prove that there has been a custom in
the community in question, by which the marriage can be
dissolved by an agreement. Or in other words, a party who
claims that a marriage duly solemnized was dissolved by a
custom, has to state with precision and clarity what that
custom is. It is not enough to state that there is an ancient
custom of divorce and that divorce could be obtained by even
one party executing a deed or from the caste Panchayat. The
law requires to prove a fact, first he/she must plead the same
and then prove by letting in satisfactory oral and
documentary evidence. Secondly, the party should convince
the Court that whatever procedure required as per the said
custom has been complied with by the parties.”
19.      Hence, from the above cited cases, it can be said that
petitioner shall have to prove the custom, which is ancient and
prior to enforcement of Hindu Marriage Act, but such evidence has
not produced by the petitioner. Hence, merely by filing affidavit, no
decree can be passed. The Division Bench of the Hon’ble High
Court of Gujarat has decided case of NRG Patel couple and has
decided on 2.7.2018 observing that the Patel community does not
follow such practice for obtaining divorce by way of custom. Here
in this present petition, no satisfactory evidence has produced by
the petitioner to believe that there is custom in their society to
obtain the divorce by way of agreement or deed as customary
divorce. Hence, no marital status can be declared under
explanation (b) of Section 7 of the Family Courts Act, 1984. Hence,
petitioner is not entitled for said declaration.”
2.9    Being dissatisfied with the impugned judgment and order
referred to above dismissing the Suit, the appellant – original
plaintiff is here before this Court with the present appeal.
3.     Mr. Shah, the learned counsel appearing for the appellant
vehemently submitted that the Family Court committed a
serious error in dismissing the Suit on the ground that the
appellant has failed to prove the practice of customary divorce
prevalent in the Leuva Patel Community. According to Mr.
Shah, the Family Court failed to take into consideration the five
affidavits of the members of the Leuva Patel Community
stating that customary divorce is prevalent and permissible in
the Leuva Patel Community. In such circumstances, referred to
above, Mr. Shah prays that there being merit in his appeal, the
same may be allowed and the declaration as prayed for in the
plaint may be granted. Mr. Shah, in the alternative prays that
the Suit be remitted to the Family Court so as to give an
opportunity to the appellant to lead appropriate evidence to
establish that customary divorce is permissible and prevailing
in the Leuva Patel Community.
4.     We take notice of the fact that the respondent - husband
thought fit not to appear before the Family Court and put
forward his stance. In such circumstances, the Family Court
proceeded to decide the Suit in the absence of the defendant -
husband. In the present appeal also although the respondent
has been served with the notice issued by this Court, yet has
chosen not to remain present before this Court either in person
or through an advocate and put forward his stance.
5.     Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the
appellant – plaintiff and having gone through the materials on
record, the only question that falls for our consideration is
whether the Family Court committed any error in passing the
6.     At this stage, we would like to refer Section 29(2) of the
Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, which reads thus:
“29(2) Nothing contained in this Act shall be deemed to affect any
right recognised by custom or conferred by any special enactment
to obtain the dissolution of a Hindu marriage, whether solemnized
before or after commencement of this Act.”
7.     At this juncture, it would also be apposite to refer to 23 rd
Edition, Hindu Law, published by Sir Dinshaw Fardunji Mulla,
explaining the realm of Section 29(2) of the Hindu Marriage
“Divorce was not known to the general Hindu law but then in
certain communities, divorce was recognised by custom and the
courts upheld such custom when it was not opposed to public
policy. The scheme and object of the present Act is not to override
any such customs, which recognised divorce, and effect is given to
the same by the saving contained in this sub-section. It is not
necessary for the parties in any such case to go to the court to
obtain divorce on the ground recognised by custom. The custom
must, of course, be a valid custom. There exists a custom among
the Sikh Jats of Amritsar district, under which a husband can
dissolve his marriage even otherwise than under the provisions of
the present Act. When the material on record does not show the
existence of a custom of divorce on the basis of which the
purported deed of divorce is entered into and custom has not even
been pleaded, divorce cannot be granted on the basis of custom.”
7.1. The Supreme Court in case of Yamanaji H. Jadhav vs.
Nirmala reported in AIR 2002 SC 971 has held in paragraph 7,
“7.      In the view that we are inclined to take in this appeal, we do
not think it is necessary for us to go into the contentions advanced
by the learned counsel for the parties in this case, because we find
that the courts below have erroneously proceeded on the basis that
the divorce deed relied upon by the parties in question was a
document which is acceptable in law. It is to be noted that the deed
in question is purported to be a document which is claimed to be in
conformity with the customs applicable for divorce in the community
to which the parties to this litigation belong to. As per the Hindu Law
administered by courts in India divorce was not recognised as a
means to put an end to marriage, which was always considered to
be a sacrament, with only exception where it is recognised by
custom. Public policy, good morals and the interests of society were
considered to require and ensure that, if at all, severance should be
allowed only in the manner and for the reason or cause specified in
law. Thus such a custom being an exception to the general law of
divorce ought to have been specially pleaded and established by the
party propounding such custom since said custom of divorce is
contrary to the law of the land and which, if not proved, will be a
practice opposed to public policy. Therefore, there was an obligation
on the trial court to have framed an issue whether there was proper
pleadings by the party contending the existence of a customary
divorce in the community to which the parties belonged and
whether such customary divorce and compliance with the manner or
formalities attendant thereto was in fact established in the case on
hand to the satisfaction of the court. In the instant case, we have
perused the pleadings of the parties before the trial court and we do
not find any material to show that prevalence of any such
customary divorce in the community, based on which the document
of divorce was brought into existence was ever pleaded by the
defendant as required by law or any evidence was led in this case to
substantiate the same. It is true in the courts below that the parties
did not specifically join issue in regard to this question and the
lawyers appearing for the parties did orally agree that the document
in question was in fact in accordance with the customary divorce
prevailing in the community to which the parties belonged but this
consensus on the part of the counsel or lack of sufficient pleading in
the plaint or in the written statement would not, in our opinion,
permit the court to countenance the plea of customary divorce
unless and until such customary divorce is properly established in a
court of law. In our opinion, even though the plaintiff might not have
questioned the validity of the customary divorce, the court ought to
have appreciated the consequences of their not being a customary
divorce based on which the document of divorce has come into
existence bearing in mind that a divorce by consent is also not
recognisable by a court unless specifically permitted by law.
Therefore, we are of the opinion to do complete justice in this case.
It is necessary that the trial court be directed to frame a specific
issue in regard to customary divorce based on which the divorce
deed dated 26th of June, 1982 has come into existence and which is
the subject matter of the suit in question. In this regard, we permit
the parties to amend the pleadings, if they so desire and also to lead
evidence to the limited extent of proving the existence of a
provision for customary divorce (otherwise through the process of or
outside court) in their community and then test the validity of the
divorce deed dated 26.6.1982 based on the finding arrived at in
deciding the new issue.
7.2    The Supreme Court in case of Subramani and others vs.
M. Chandralekha, reported in AIR 2005 SC 485, has held in
“15.....The courts below have erroneously proceeded on the basis
that the divorce deed relied upon by the parties in question was a
document which is acceptable in law. It is to be noted that the deed
in question is purported to be a document which is claimed to be in
conformity with the customs applicable to divorce in the community
to which the parties belong. As per the Hindu law administered by
courts in India divorce was not recognized as a means to put an end
to marriage, which was always considered to be a sacrament, with
only exception where it is recognized by custom. Public policy, good
morals and the interests of society were considered to require and
ensure that, if at all, severance should be allowed only in the
manner and for the reason or cause specified in law. Thus such a
custom being an exception to the general law of divorce ought to
have been specially pleaded and establish by the party
propounding such a custom since the said custom of divorce is
contrary to the law of the land and which, if not proved, will be a
practice opposed to public policy. Therefore, there was an
obligation on the trial court to have framed an issue whether there
was proper pleading by the party contending the existence of a
customary divorce in the community to which the parties belonged
and whether such customary divorce and compliance with the
manner or formalities attendant thereto was in fact established in
the case on hand to the satisfaction of the Court."
7.3    Further, the Supreme Court in case of State of M.P. and
another vs. Dungaji (D) by Lrs. and another, reported in AIR
2019 SC 3665 has held in paragraphs 8 and 9, which reads
“8. Now, so far as the impugned Judgment and Order passed by the
High Court declaring and holding that the marriage between
Dungaji and Kaveribai had been dissolved by way of customary
divorce, much prior to the coming into force the provisions of the
Act 1960 and therefore after divorce, the property inherited by
Kaveribai from her mother cannot be treated to be holding of the
family property of Dungaji for the purposes of determination of
surplus area is concerned, at the outset, it is required to be noted
that as such there were concurrent findings of facts recorded by
both the Courts below specifically disbelieving the dissolution of
marriage between Dungaji and Kaveribai by way of customary
divorce as claimed by Dungaji-original plaintiff. There were
concurrent findings of facts recorded by both the Courts below that
the original plaintiff has failed to prove and establish that the
divorce had already taken place between Dungaji and Kaveribai
according to the prevalent custom of the society. Both the Courts
below specifically disbelieved the Divorce Deed at Exhibit P5. The
aforesaid findings were recorded by both the Courts below on
appreciation of evidence on record. Therefore, as such, in exercise
of powers under Section 100 of the CPC, the High Court was not
justified in interfering with the aforesaid findings of facts recorded
by both the Courts below. Cogent reasons were given by both the
Courts below while arriving at the aforesaid findings and that too
after appreciation of evidence on record. Therefore, the High Court
has exceeded in its jurisdiction while passing the impugned
Judgment and Order in the Second Appeal under Section 100 of the
9. Even on merits also both the Courts below were right in holding
that Dungaji failed to prove the customary divorce as claimed. It is
required to be noted that at no point of time earlier either Dungaji
or Kaveribai claimed customary divorce on the basis of Divorce
Deed at Exhibit P5. At no point of time earlier it was the case on
behalf of the Dungaji and/or Kaveribai that there was a divorce in
the year 1962 between Dungaji and Kaveribai. In the year 1971,
Kaveribai executed a Sale Deed in favour of Padam Singh in which
Kaveribai is stated to be the wife of Dungaji. Before the Competent
Authority neither Dungaji nor Kaveribai claimed the customary
divorce. Even in the Revenue Records also the name of Kaveribai
being wife of Dungaji was mutated. In the circumstances and on
appreciation of evidence on record, the Trial Court rightly held that
the plaintiff has failed to prove the divorce between Dungaji and
Kaveribai as per the custom.”
8.     We shall first address ourselves on the issue whether
there was a recognized custom in the Leuva Patel Community
to dissolve a marriage by way giving divorce to each other,
privately before the Panchas and if so, whether the appellant –
plaintiff could be said to have led appropriate evidence in that
9.     In the aforesaid context, it is necessary to summarize the
law laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of Yamanaji
(Supra). It has been held therein that in accordance with the
Hindu Law administered by the Courts in India, divorce was not
recognized as a means to put an end to marriage, which was
always considered to be a sacrament, with the only exception,
where it is recognized by custom, public policy, good morals
and the interests of society were considered to require and
ensure that, if at all, severance should be allowed only in the
manner and for the reason or cause specified in law. It is held
that such a custom being an exception to the general law of
divorce ought to have been specially pleaded and established
by the party propounding such custom since such custom of
divorce is contrary to the law of the land and which, if not
proved, will be a practice opposed to public policy. The
Supreme Court held that there was an obligation on the trial
Court to have framed an issue whether there was proper
pleadings by the parties contending the existence of a
customary divorce in the community to which the parties
belonged and whether such customary divorce and compliance
with the manner or formalities attendant thereto was in fact
established in the case on hand to the satisfaction of the Court.
In the said case, the Supreme court held that even if the
plaintiff might not have questioned the validity of the
customary divorce, the Court ought to have appreciated the
consequences of their not being a customary divorce based on
which the document of divorce has come into existence
bearing in mind that the divorce by consent is also not
recognizable by a Court unless specifically permitted by law.
10.    The Supreme Court in the case of Jairam Somaji More vs.
Sindhubai w/o Jairam More and others, reported in 1993 (3)
Mh.L.J., 872 after considering section 4 and section 29(2)
respectively of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 has held that the
custom cannot be only pleaded but it has to be proved that the
parties were entitled for a customary divorce. It has held that
unless and until the marriage between the petitioner and the
respondent wife was dissolved legally, the husband had no
right to contract a second marriage and since the earlier
divorce was not recognized by law, the parties continued to be
under      marital  bond. The    Supreme       Court     in    case      of
Rameshchandra         Rampratapji        Daga     vs.     Rameshwari
Rameshchandra Daga, reported in (2005) 2 SCC 33 has taken
a similar view.
11.    The Supreme Court in the case of Subramani & Ors.
(Supra) has held that in the absence of any pleadings that the
marriage between the husband and wife could be dissolved in
their community under custom and in the absence of any
satisfactory evidence let in to prove the custom prevalent in
the community or the procedure to be followed for dissolving
the marriage, it cannot be held that the marriage between the
respondent and her husband stood dissolved by executing the
marriage dissolution deed. It is held that the parties alleging
the customary divorce had not proved that the document was
in conformity with the custom applicable to divorce in the
community to which the parties belonged. The Supreme Court
in the said judgment also adverted to its earlier judgment in
case of Yamanaji H.Jadhav (supra) and has taken the similar
12.    The Supreme Court in the case of Shakuntalabai and
another vs. L.V.Kulkarni and another, reported in (1989) 2 SCC
526 has held that a custom cannot be extended by logical
process. The Supreme Court adverted to its earlier judgment in
case of Saraswati vs. Jagadambai, reported in AIR 1953 SC 201
in which it has been held that the oral evidence as to the
instances which can be proved by documentary evidence
cannot be fairly relied upon to establish custom when no
satisfactory explanation for withholding the best evidence is
given. It is held that custom cannot be extended by analogy
and it cannot be established by a priori method. It is held that
the custom must be proved and the burden of proof is on the
person who asserts it.
13.    It is well settled principles of law as laid down by the
Supreme Court that prevalence of customary divorce in the
community to which the parties belong, contrary to general
law of divorce must be specifically pleaded and established by
person propounding such custom. In our view, in the absence
of any proper pleadings on behalf of the plaintiff in the plaint
about the then alleged existing custom and customary divorce
in the Leuva Patel Community, the plaintiff could not have led
any oral evidence on the said issue.
14.    In the case on hand, the appellant- plaintiff stated in her
examination-in-chief that customary divorce in the Leuva Patel
Community is permissible. In support of such statement, the
appellant – plaintiff relied upon five affidavits of five individuals
belonging to the Leuva Patel Community. It is difficult to
appreciate how did the appellant -plaintiff expect the Family
Court to take into consideration the affidavits of five members
of the Leuva Patel community. The question is whether such
affidavits would constitute legal evidence?
15.    In our view, the appellant – plaintiff could be said to have
miserably failed to prove the prevalence of customary divorce
in the Leuva Patel Community to obtain divorce by execution
of the document in presence of the Panchas when such
customary divorce was contrary to the general law of divorce
prescribed under the provisions of the Act, 1955.
16.    Section 13 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 provides for
dissolution of marriage by a decree of divorce on various
grounds set out therein. Section 4 of the Hindu Marriage Act,
1955 provides that save as otherwise expressly provided in the
Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, any text, rule or interpretation of
Hindu Law or any custom or usage as part of that law in force
immediately before the commencement of the Hindu Marriage
Act, 1955 shall cease to have effect with respect to any matter
for which provision is made in the said Act. Section 29 (2) of
the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 provides that nothing contained
in the said Hindu Marriage Act shall be deemed to affect any
right recognised by custom or conferred by any special
enactment to obtain the dissolution of a Hindu marriage,
whether solemnized before or after the commencement of the
said Act. Section 3(a) of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 defines
the expressions 'custom' and 'usage.' It is provided that unless
the context otherwise requires, the custom and usage signify
any rule which, having been continuously and uniformly
observed for a long time, has obtained the force of law among
Hindus in any local area, tribe, community, group or family. It
is provided that the rule is certain and not unreasonable or
opposed to public policy and further provided that in the case
of a rule applicable only to a family, it has not been
discontinued by the family.
17.    The conjoint reading of Section 3(a), 4(a) and 29 (2)
respectively of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 indicates that
though Section 29(2) of the said Act saves the customary
rights, a person who relies upon such custom has to prove that
such custom and usage had been continuously and uniformly
observed for a long time and had obtained the force of law
amongst the Hindus in their local area, tribe, community,
group or family and such custom was not unreasonable or
opposed to public policy. In our view, the plaintiff has
miserably failed to prove at the first instance that there was
any such custom prevailing in the Leuva Patel Community to
obtain divorce by execution of a document in presence of the
Panchas and secondly, whether such alleged customary
divorce was continuously and uniformly observed for a long
time in the Leuva Patel Community and was not opposed to
public policy.
18.    A perusal of Section 4 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955
clearly indicates that any custom or usage as part of that law
in force immediately before the commencement of the Hindu
Marriage Act, 1955 shall cease to have effect after the Hindu
Marriage Act, 1955 came into force.
19.    As noted above, the plaintiff has relied upon five
affidavits filed by five individuals stating about the customary
divorce being prevalent in the Leuva Patel Community. All the
five affidavits are stereo type. We quote one of those as under:
I,the undersigned, Talaviya Himmatlal Keshavbhai,
Age - 50 years, Date of Birth - 01/06/1970, Place of Birth - Lundhiya,
Occupation - Construction, Residing at - 14, Bhakti Bungalows, near
Bhakti Circle, opposite to S.P. Ring Road, New Nikol, Ahmedabad,
declare on oath that........
community is in majority in Amreli, Junagadh, Rajkot, Bhavnagar,
Jamnagar, Porbandar etc. areas of Saurashtra. When any question
regarding the marriage life arises in our community, elders of the
community and families and the well-wishers discuss the cases of
marriage life in presence of the pancha before such cases are tried
in courts with a view to avoid adverse impacts of marriage disputes
on the society. An ancestral custom of divorce exists in our
community in the interest of both the parties under which
transactions are settled amicably and a permanent solution is
sought to avoid any future disputes. Bharatiben D/o Ravjibhai
Manjibhai Kawani is my niece (Daughter of my wife's sister).
Viththalbhai Sojitra on 09/12/2010 at Hadala. But there were some
disputes in their marriage life, and therefore, a compromise had
been done between them in the presence of the pancha on
02/07/2018. This divorce is acceptable in the community and there
are examples of such divorce in our community and remarriage can
also take place.
The fact stated in this affidavit is true and I am willing
to give deposition as a witness before the court when it is required.
20.    To what extent the Court can look into such affidavits as
legal evidence has been succinctly explained by the Rajasthan
High Court in the case of Saraswati vs. Narayan in S.B. Civil
Writ Petition No.6667 of 2015 decided on 24.07.2015. We
“The relevant provisions of the Act read as under:- "10. Procedure
generally.-(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act and the
rules, the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908)
and of any other law for the time being in force shall apply to the
suits and proceedings [other than the proceedings under Chapter IX
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)] before a Family
Court and for the purposes of the said provisions of the Code, a
Family Court shall be deemed to be a civil Court and shall have all
the powers of such Court.
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this Act and the rules, the
provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) or
the rules made thereunder, shall apply to the proceedings under
Chapter IX of that Code before a Family Court.
(3) Nothing in sub-Section (1) or sub-Section (2) shall prevent a
Family Court from laying down its own procedure with a view to
arrive at a settlement in respect of the subject-matter of the suit or
proceedings or at the truth of the facts alleged by the one party and
denied by the other.
15. Record of oral evidence.-In suits or proceedings before a Family
Court, it shall be necessary to record the evidence of witnesses at
length, but the Judge, as the examination of each witness proceeds,
shall, record or cause to be recorded, a memorandum of the
substance of what the witness deposes, and such memorandum
shall be signed by the witness and the Judge and shall form part of
the record.
16. Evidence of formal character on affidavit.-(1) The evidence of
any person where such evidence is of a formal character, may be
given by affidavit and may, subject to all just exceptions, be read in
evidence in any suit or proceeding before a Family Court.
(2) The Family Court may, if it thinks fit, and shall, on the application
of any of the parties to the suit or proceeding summon and examine
any such person as to the facts contained in his affidavit.
20. Act to have overriding effect.-The provisions of this Act shall
have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith
contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any
instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act."
A bare look at the provisions, noticed hereinbefore, reveals that
subject to the other provisions of the Act, provisions of CPC and any
other law apply to the suits and proceedings before the Family Court
and for the purposes of the provisions of the Code, a Family Court is
deemed to be a civil Court and have all the powers of such Court.
Section 15 , which deals with record of oral evidence provides that
in suits or proceedings before a Family Court, it shall not be
necessary to record the evidence of witnesses at length, but the
Judge, can record or cause to be recorded, a memorandum of
substance of what the witness deposes, and such memorandum
signed by the witness and the Judge shall form part of the record.
Further, Section 16 provides that evidence of formal character can
be given by affidavit and can be read in evidence in any suit or
proceeding. Sub-Section (2) of Section 16 provides for summoning
and examination of person giving the affidavit, on an application.
Section 20 provides for overriding effect of the Act regarding
anything inconsistent contained in any other Act.
An over all analysis of the above provisions reveals that while
provisions of CPC have been made applicable for the purpose of
procedure before the Family Court, Section 15 of the Act enables a
Family Court to record the evidence of witness by way of
memorandum of the substance of what the witness deposes and
provides that it shall not be necessary to record the evidence of
witnesses at length. The use of expression it shall not be necessary
to record the evidence of witnesses at length cannot be read as a
prohibition against recording of evidence at length and it cannot be
said that in case instead of recording the deposition of witnesses by
way of memorandum of the substance, evidence of witness at
length has been recorded, the said procedure would stand vitiated.
The emphasis laid by learned counsel for the petitioner that
evidence of only formal character can be taken on affidavit with
reference to Section 16 is misplaced. The provisions of Section 16(1)
have been incorporated to apparently take care of provisions of
Section 1 read with Section 3 of the Evidence Act, 1872, which
provides that the said Act does not apply to affidavits presented to
any Court and as held by Honble Supreme Court in the case of
Sudha Devi Vs. M.P. Narayanan AIR 1988 SC 1381 that affidavits are
not included in the definition of evidence in Section 3 of the
Evidence Act and can be used in evidence only if the Court permits
it to be so used for sufficient reasons. Even under Sub-Section (2) of
Section 16 of the Act, on an application of any of the parties, even
the deponents of affidavits produced by way of evidence of formal
character, can be cross-examined, therefore, the submissions made
by learned counsel for the petitioner that it is only the evidence of
formal character, which can be produced by way of affidavit and not
examination in chief qua substantive evidence pertaining to the suit
or proceeding before the Family Court has apparently no substance.
However, in case petitioner had any objection regarding filing of
affidavits/applicability of Order XVIII CPC, the objections/submissions
should have been made at the appropriate stage, to raise the
objections after long lapse of time i.e. after the entire evidence of
both the parties was recorded, appears to be only a after thought
and only an attempt to get out of the evidence available on record,
therefore, not bona fide.”
21.    The Hindu Marriage Act came into force on 18.5.1955.
“Nothing contained in this Act shall be deemed to affect any right
recognised by custom or conferred by any special enactment to
obtain the dissolution of a Hindu marriage, whether solemnised
before or after the commencement of this Act.”
22.    Thus, the custom must be ancient and there must be
proof of customary divorce prior to passing of the Act. All the
documents filed are after the Act and that will not prove
custom. The evidence of the plaintiff is that in the presence of
Panchayatdars, divorce had taken place. It is not the custom
and it does not prove that customary divorce was prevailing in
their community and it was ancient and prior to passing of the
Act. To prove customary divorce, the plaintiff must establish
the proof of custom. As regards the nature and quantum of
proof of custom, the following propositions are enunciated by
the Madras High Court in Gopalayyan v. Ragupatiayyan, 7
“(i) The evidence should be such as to prove the uniformity and
continuity of the usage and the conviction of those following it that
they were acting in accordance with the law and this conviction must
be inferred from the evidence.
(ii) Evidence of the acts of the kind, acquiescence in those acts,
decisions of Courts, or even of Panchayats, upholding such acts;
statements of experienced and competent persons of their belief
that such acts were legal and valid, will all be admissible; but it is
obvious that although admissible evidence of this latter kind will be
of little weight if unsupported by actual examples of the usage
asserted.”
23.    The Madras High Court has held in Thangammal v.
“There was proof of a custom in a community permitting divorce if
both the husband and wile desired a divorce on account of
disagreement between them and there was no alternative plea in
the case by the wife that even if there was a divorce it was forced
upon her and that the custom was not illegal and it is only where the
divorce is enforced against the wish of the wife that the custom
permitting divorce may be illegal.”
24.    It is held in Nallathangal v. Nainan Ambalam, (1960) I MLJ
“Hindu Law no doubt does not recognise a divorce, but custom in
particular communities permit a valid divorce by means of a caste
Panchayat or other simiar tribunal. Such customary divorces
continue to have the force of law among the communities where the
custom prevails.”
25.    It is held in Are Lachiah v. Are Raja Mallu, 1963 MLJ (Crl.)
“Section 29(2) of the Hindu Marriage Act states that, nothing
contained in this Act shall be deemed to affect any right recognised
by custom or conferred by any special enactment to obtain the
dissolution of a Hindu marriage, whether solemnised before or after
the commencement of this Act. Thus, the Act does not disturb the
position which a customary divorce occupied before the enactment of
the Act. What has to be found as a fact for this exception to operate,
is, whether, there had been as a fact such a customary divorce or
dissolution of a Hindu marriage.
In the matter of divorce according to custom it is not necessary for
the parties to such a divorce or dissolution of Hindu marriage to have
again to go before the Court under Section 10 or 13 of Hindu
Marriage Act and obtain sanction of the Court in order that the
divorce or dissolution may be rendered valid.”
26.    The great philosopher Bertrand Russell authoritatively
said that the National policy is the best policy. Internationalism
is an Ethiopian world. Regionalism is a bad policy. Thus,
nationalism        is  the    best    policy      and     therefore,      injecting
nationalism in the minds of the people for development of our
great Nation is of paramount importance. Internationalism is
not possible. Regionalism will paralise the unity and stop the
developmental activities. Thus, the Courts and Statesmen
should not recognize or encourage regionalism. But, they have
to promote nationalism.
27.    Our Indian society is now more concerned about women
empowerment.            We     are     speaking        much       about        equal
employment opportunity to women. Special reservations are
made for women to bring them up on par with their counter
parts (male candidates). As far as our Indian society is
concerned, divorce is a social evil. The concept of family is to
be     protected       for the     development         of    our       Nation.
Characteristically molded individuals alone can constitute a
good family. A good family constitutes good Nation. A good
Nation alone can prosper in developmental activities. Thus,
good families are the foundation for the development of our
great Nation. The concept of family, even during ancient times,
considered         as  the  root   for      unity   and    for     individual
developments. When these all are the concepts being adopted
by the Indian Society, even during primitive days, still we love
and recognize the concept of family. The man being a social
animal cannot live separately. Under these circumstances, on
the one hand we are talking about women empowerment,
opportunity for women in all fields and at all levels, however,
we are neglecting certain other factors, like, grant of divorce,
non-maintenance etc. Even after the development of the
constitutional principles and in the presence of ever so many
welfare legislations in favour of women, the Courts are
recognizing the customary divorces, which can never be
accepted nor be approved. Customary divorce undoubtedly is
a social evil. Customary divorces undoubtedly are happening
on account of the attitude of ill-minded male chauvinists.
Customary divorces are decided by few persons, who may not
have much idea about the social developments and the
constitutional perspective. Be that it be, the only concern of
this Court is that such customary divorces are approved by the
Civil Courts even without ascertaining the basic factors
regarding        the  customs    prevailing      as   well    as     practice.
Customary divorce can never be approved nor recognized by
the law. The Hindu Marriage Act, which was enacted in the
year 1955, recognized such customary divorce and now, after
a lapse of 64 years, the practice of granting customary divorce
can never be adopted nor be followed and the Courts should
not approve any such customary divorce granted by few men
from the community or the relatives of the husband or wife. In
the event of approving such customary divorces, then the
implications would be large and we will be marching towards
backward and that can never be accepted. Such customary
divorces are affecting personal liberty and fundamental rights
of the women to adjudicate their issues before the competent
[See: Banumathi vs. The Regional Manager, New India Assurance Company and Another,
W.P. (MD) No.6514 of 2014 decided on 22.07.2019]
28.     In view of the aforesaid discussion, we have reached to
the conclusion that we should not interfere with the impugned
judgment and decree passed by the Family Court.
29.     In the result, this appeal fails and is hereby dismissed.
30.     We clarify that this judgment shall not come in the way of
the parties if, even as on date, the parties intend to file an
appropriate application under Section 13(B) of the Hindu
Marriage Act and pray for a decree of divorce with consent. We
leave it open to the parties to do so if they deem fit. If such
application is filed, the Court concerned shall take it up for
hearing at the earliest, waive the mandatory period as
prescribed under the provisions and proceed to pass a decree
of divorce with mutual consent.