[1]          Heard Sri V.P. Srivastava, learned Senior Advocate assisted by Sri
Rajiv Nayan Singh and Sri Ritukar Gupta learned counsel for the revisionists, Sri
Raj Kumar Kesari, learned counsel for opposite party no. 2 and learned A.G.A for
[2]          Pleadings have been exchanged between the parties in all the above
captioned revisions and as such, all the matters has ripe for final submissions to
be adjudicated on merits.
[3]         Coincidentally, all the aforesaid three revisionists, are assailing the
legality and validity of the order dated 03.03.2022 through their respective
revisions mentioned above whereby learned Additional Sessions Judge (Fast
Track Court­I), Hapur, by three different orders of the same date i.e 03.03.2022,
have rejected all the discharge applications of the revisionists under section 227
Cr.P.C. in S.T. No. 19 of 2020 (State v. Manju Bansal and others) arising out of
Case Crime No. 567 of 2018, under sections 498­A, 504, 506, 307 and 120­B IPC
and ¾ of the Dowry Prohibition Act, P.S. Pilakhuwa, District Hapur.
Since, order dated 03.03.2022 has been passed on three different
applications in the same Sessions Trial, therefore, for the sake of brevity and
convenience, all the aforesaid three revisions are clubbed together and decided
by a common judgement by this Court.
[4]         As per prevailing practice nowadays in the society mostly in the cases
of matrimonial discord, misunderstanding and incompatibility between the
married couples, results into ever abhorring FIR. Here too, it seems to be a
repetition of the same practice. In the instant case, the FIR was lodged by none
other than the wife Ms. Shivangi Bansal herself against her husband as well as
her in­laws. From the perusal of the FIR, it is borne out that for the incident of
04.10.2018, the present FIR came into existence on 22.10.2018 lodged at Police
Station­Pilkhua, District­Hapur(native place of Ms. Shivani Bansal) against five
named accused including husband and his relatives. In addition to above named
accused persons, two more namely Chirag Bansal brother­in­law(devar) and Smt.
Shipra Jain, married sister­in­law(nanad) were also roped in these offences.
From the text of the FIR, following salient factual features of the case are
[5]         The written complaint signed by the informant Ms. Shivangi Bansal
was sent to the office of the Prime Minister, Government of India, Chief Minister,
State of U.P., Police Commissioner, New Delhi, D.G.P. Lucknow, Superintendent
of Police, Hapur and Circle Officer, Police Station­Pilkhua, District­Hapur with
the allegations that opposite party no.2 Ms. Shivangi Bansal was married with
Sahib Bansal on 05.12.2015 according to Hindu rites and rituals. It seems that
there was a deep rooted misunderstanding, and thorough incompatibility and
discord between husband and wife, in fact, both of them were fierce­foe of each
[6]         It is alleged that in the marriage, her parents have spent about Rs.2
crores in the shape of cash, jwellery, clothing, utensils, furniture and other gifts
worth Rs.50 lacs. But, all the above named five persons were not happy by the
aforesaid dowry and were demanding Rs.20 lacs more as an additional dowry
which later on swelled to the figure of Rs.50 lacs. It is alleged that (a) the
informant's father­in­law Mukesh Bansal wanted to have sexual favours from
opposite party no.2 and not only this, her devar Chirag Bansal also have tried to
ravish her physically. (b) The husband­Sahib Bansal used to lock her in the
bathroom after taking away her mobile phone.(c) When the informant got
pregnant, then they asked some astronomer to predict the sex of 'still born' baby.
Then, her mother­in­law and sister­in­law pressurized her to get aborted. On
making refusal, all the family members became physical with her. (d) During the
stage of pregnancy, her husband tried to establish sexual relationship per­force.
Not only this, he tried to have unnatural and oral sex and even, pissed in her
mouth. (e) There was constant demand of additional dowry and on refusal by
opposite party no.2 to oblige them, she was assaulted brutally by fists and kicks
and maltreated and humiliated to its optimum.
[7]         On 03.04.2017, Mukesh Bansal, (father­in­law) tried to distance with
the warring couple and they shifted to some other rented accommodation,
leaving behind the husband & wife to 130, First Floor, Rajdhani Enclave,
Pithampura, New Delhi. In the month of September, 2017, when the informant
was impregnated for the second time, the family members got her aborted in
2017 itself. On 03.10.2018, there was again demand of additional dowry of
Rs.50 lacs and again on refusal, her husband attempted to strangulate her by
'chunni' and to further humiliate her, got her head into the commode of the
toilet. On 04.10.2018, she dialed '100' and thereafter, gave written tehrir to
A.S.P., Women Cell, New Delhi and then, left the company of her husband and
returned to her place at Hapur.
[8]         The story narrated in the FIR is not only abhorring, full of dirt, filth
and venomous accusations where the informant fiercely abused her own husband
and in­laws by using all the ways and means in the tone, tenor and texture in the
extreme manner. The graphic and vivid descriptions of the incident without any
shame or hitch of any sort which, speaks out volume of mental condition and
amount of venom and poison in the mind of the informant. She without mincing
any word, rather exaggerating the incident to manifolds, had vomitted the snide
before the Court. Interestingly, general and sweeping allegations have been
fastened against all the family members for committing sodomy, attempt to rape
and illegal abortion etc. upon all the family members with special focus upon her
[9]          As such, it is clear that the couple Sahib Bansal and Shivangi Bansal
was married in December, 2015. Parents­in­law of the informant withdrew
themselves from the company of their son and daughter­in­law keeping in view
the growing acrimony between them and started residing to some other place in
a rented accommodation. Thus, in­fact Mukesh Bansal and Smt. Manju
Bansal(parent­in­law) remained in the company of warring Sahib Bansal (son)
and daughter­in­law Shivangi Bansal, for almost one year and four months only
and in order to achieve larger good, they came out silently from the lines of their
son and daughter­in­law with hope and trust that bitterness between them would
be diluted and the relationship between them would congenial.
[10]         Learned counsel for the revisionist drew attention of this Court to GD
Entry 027­A dated 04.10.2018, a call received by PCR that, in House No. 130
First Floor, Rajdhani Enclave, Peetampura, New Delhi, the husband is beating his
wife. On 04.10.2018 at 10.10 P.M. an endorsement was made to the Police
personnels, after meeting Ms. Shivangi Bansal, it was disclosed that the
informant got married with Sahib Bansal about three years back, who constantly
used to tease, beat and assault her for additional dowry. Thereafter, Ms. Shivangi
Bansal after collecting her belongings along with her daughter's clothes and toys,
proceeded to the house of her father Rajesh Goyal and mother­Sandhya Goyal at
Pilkhuwa, Hapur. She has also given a handwritten application, enclosing a
photostat copy of her complaint filed in the office of ACP, Women Cell, Rani
Bagh, New Delhi and then proceeded to Pilakhuwa, District Hapur. On the same
breath, she made similar allegations that her husband made demand for
additional dowry of Rs. 50 Lacs and sought sexual favours in the shape of anal
and oral sex and various other cruel acts of sex. She has also reiterated all the
versions of the FIR in this application too. In the same application, she, in no
uncertain terms, have stated that “I do not want to live with him(husband).” “I am
not physically hurt.” “I am not going for medical examination.” It is crystal clear
that despite all allegations of marpeet, she has made a candid statement that she
was not physically assaulted, therefore, does not want to undergo any medical
examination. On the same date, husband­Sahib Bansal also gave a detailed
application with the allegation, exploiting the ugly situation that Shivangi Bansal
has demanded Rs.5 crore else she would make the life of Sahib Bansal(husband)
and his family members miserable like hell. The detailed application running into
five pages is at Page­54 onwards of the affidavit.
[11]        Interestingly, by giving application on 04.10.2018 as mentioned
above, Shivangi Bansal categorically denying any physical assault upon her by
her husband and she does not want to get herself medically examined. On the
other hand, she appeared before the police on 22.10.2018 to get herself
medically examined in C.H.C. Hapur wherein the doctor in the medical report,
has candidly mentioned that she has sustained no injury on her person,
annexure­3 to the petition.
However, in the counter affidavit filed by learned counsel for
the opposite party no.2 and injury report issued by Bhagwan Mahavir Hospital,
Pitampura, New Delhi dated 04.10.2018 at 9:11 pm is annexed whereby, it
discloses certain injuries over her persons. It is alleged that these injuries were
sustained by her husband who was present at his flat. She has made a complaint
to the doctor that she was assaulted by her husband who tried to strangulate her
and she made a complaint of pain around her neck and also nausea and
vomitting. The condition of the patient was conscious and oriented and making a
physical investigation, the doctor has opined that there is linear transverse bruise
seen over lateral part of the neck. There is small burn sign seen at left forearm
and tenderness in the backside. Thus, in totality, it is alleged that the husband
had tried to strangulate her by a scarf resulting into a bruise over the neck.
Except this, there is no vital injury over her person. Thus, it is quite clear that the
instant is a no injury case wherein the informant has sustained a single scratch
over her person and so far as strangulating her neck by chunni is concerned,
there is sign and mark of struggle over her neck suggestive of the fact that
husband has made an effort to gag her neck.
[12]         The police, after probing the matter in depth, has submitted the
charge sheet dropping all the offences, wherein the informant had made wild
accusations in the FIR against her husband and his family members. The
aforesaid charge sheet has been filed only under sections 498A, 323, 504, 506,
307 IPC and ¾ of D.P. Act. Thus, it is explicitly clear that the FIR is nothing but a
virtual canard and full of venom where the informant unmindful of the fact to its
far­reaching repercussions, pasted all the filth upon revisionist in wild manner
but was unable to produce any documentary evidence/proof to substantiate the
levelled allegations and thus, all the sections of unnatural/oral sex, forcible
abortion have gone to haywire resultantly dropped from charge sheet. Not only
this, names of Chirag Bansal and Ms. Shipra Jain finds no place in the charge
sheet, so filed by the police.
[13]         It is also relevant to point out here that under the auspices of Hon'ble
the Apex Court and this Court as well, the matter was referred twice for
mediation and conciliation proceeding so as to sort out and patch up the matter
outside the court in an amicable way. But, unfortunately its ultimate result was a
big zero. The parties failed to avail the advantage of the opportunity offered by
the Apex Court as well as this Court. Eventually, after getting themselves bailed
out from the court concerned, the husband Sahib Bansal, Mukesh Bansal, father­
in­law, and Manju Bansal, mother­in­law moved the different discharge
applications and vide order dated 03.03.2020, all the three applications stood
dismissed by the learned sessions Judge, Hapur. On this factual backdrop of the
case, the present three different revisions have been tabled before this Court by
Sahib     Bansal(husband),        Mukesh      Bansal(father­in­law)    and     Manju
[14]         This Court has perused the order impugned and the submissions
advanced by the respective parties and the grounds taken by the learned counsel
for the revisionists, is that the order impugned passed by the court below which
was canvassed as an illegal, perverse and without application of judicial mind,
besides, it is a misuse of the procedure of the court.
[15]         It is further urged by learned counsel for the revisionist that so far as
Mukesh Bansal and Manju Bansal are concerned, they are parents­in­law of the
opposite party no.2, informant who got married in December, 2015 with the son,
Sahib Bansal. They remained in the company of the son and daughter­in­law
upto 30.04.2017, to be precise 1 year, 4 months and 25 days from the date of
marriage. During this, they repeatedly tried to pacify and get the rifts patched up
but sensing that situation, heated up from bad to worse, they themselves decided
to resile from the company of their son and daughter­in­law and started to reside
in a distant place i.e. 44, Kapil Vihar, North­west, Delhi, a rented
accommodation. Thus, from 30.04.2017, the physical presence of the old and
pained couple from the site of the plagued situation on the place of said
occurrence is completely cut off. The opposite party no.2 is a furious lady who
wants to level the score with her husband as well as in­laws and the tone, texture
and tenor of the FIR speaks volume about her mental condition. Her psyche and
amount of venom in the mind of the informant goes to show that in order to take
revenge from her husband and in­laws, she has gone to any extent, crossing all
the limits of decency. On making an inquiry, except one small bruise over her
neck, there is no other scratch over her person. The injuries shown may or may
not touch the four corners of Section 307 IPC only against her husband who was
residing with her at relevant point of time. On top of it, it has been contended by
learned counsel for the revisionist that it is true, that there are certain specific
allegations against the husband who resides with opposite party no.2 in the same
flat and it is just possible that relationship between the husband and wife may be
sore but so far as parent­in­law are concerned, they are out of canvass since
30.04.2017. The parent­in­law and other family members are roped in just
because they are the parent, brother and sister of the husband­Sahib Bansal.
Lastly, learned counsel for the revisionist has drawn the attention of
the Court to the allegations of the FIR whereby it is mentioned that parents of
the informant spent Rs.two crores on her marriage and has given gifts worth
Rs.50 lacs.
Learned counsel for the revisionist has drawn the attention of the
Court to the annexure 3 and 4 of the rejoinder affidavit which are Income Tax
Return of the opposite party no.2. The ITR of assessment year of 2014­15 shows
that Shivangi Bansal has a gross total income of Rs.2,24,542/­ whereas in the
year 2015­16, she has shown her gross total income of Rs.2,75,246/­ whereas
her father's ITR of 2015­16, 2016­17, gross total income is Rs.3,53,693/­ and
Rs.5,54,772/­ respectively and after having deduction, the total income was
Rs.3,85,500/­. Their financial health on which they have given tax, clearly
indicates their financial status and to suggest that the amount of Rs.2 crore was
spent in the marriage and gifts of Rs.50 lacs were given, is simply cock and bull
story. The informant has mentioned astronomical figures without any basis for
which she is required to give a reasonable justification. The ITRs of father and
daughter indicates that both of them belongs to upper middle­class, a well­to­do
[16]         Thus, in the instant revision, judicial scrutiny of order dated
03.03.2022 passed by the Additional District and Sessions Judge/F.T.C.­I, Hapur
is required to be done by this Court.
[17]         Section 227 of Cr.P.C. has to be read with Section 228 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure is indeed precious safe­guard for the defence to have a pre­
battle protection conferred by the legislation under chapter XVI of Cr.P.C. There
is no provision which empowers the Magistrate to discharge the accused. This
extra­ordinary power can only be exercised by the trial Court and not by the
Magistrate for the offences which are exclusively tried by the Court of Sessions
itself. It is settled law that charge sheet constitute prima facie evidence
constituting the offence for the proceedings and it is only the learned trial Judge
after assessing the material on record and after affording the opportunity of
hearing to the contesting parties, framed charges against the accused persons.
Prior to this, the avenue has been created by the legislation giving a weapon of
discharge in the hands of accused so as to rely upon the material collected by the
police during investigation and citing the loopholes and pitfalls in the
prosecution story and the material collected by the Investigating Officer of the
case during investigation, and after assessing those materials collected during
investigation and critically examined them, if the court finds that there is no
sufficient or confidence generating material collected in the investigation, the
trial court well within its power to discharge the accused and record the reasons
for doing so.
informant and her parent that entire family used to harass her for the additional
dowry of Rs.20 lacs or Rs.50 lacs ?? Thereafter, the applicant and his son Chirag
Bansal used to seek sexual favours from her, putting her head in the commode,
pissing in her mouth, all these are nothing but exaggaration and magnifying the
incident to thousands fold for obvious reasons and purpose. Learned trial Judge
ought to have weighed entire material on record specifically the fact that the
Mukesh Bansal and his wife since 30.04.2017 are out of scene and they have got
feeble reason or occasion for them to demand additional dowry.
[18]        For the purpose of determining that whether there is sufficient
ground for proceeding against the accused, the Court assess compartively wider
discretion in exercise of which it can determine the question, whether the
material on record, if undisputed is such on the basis of which conviction can be
of such reasonable possibility. Only the prima facie case is to be seen whether the
case is beyond reasonable doubt or not, cannot be assessed at this stage. If the
Court comes to the conclusion that the commission of the offence, is probable
consequence, prima facie case of framing charge exist then the charges would be
framed. At the stage of framing the charge, probative value of materials cannot
be gone into. The basic underline idea behind section 227 and 228 Cr.P.C. is to
ensure that the court should be satisfied that the accusation made against the
accused is not frivolous and fictitious but on the contrary, some material for
proceeding against the named accused persons.
[19]          It would be hazardous to act upon the discrepancies in the material
collected during investigation unless they are so apparent and glaring as to
adversly affect the credibility of the prosecution case in its totality, without
affording the reasonable opportunity to the prosecution to substantiate the
allegations. The only prima facie case is to be seen while assessing all the facts
and circumstances, materials collected during investigation, strict standard or
proof while evaluating the material to ascertain, whether there is prima facie
case against the accused or not.
Sri Srivastava, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the
revisionist in order to buttress his submissions, has relied upon the celebrated
judgment of Hon'ble the Apex Court in the case of State of Karnataka Vs. L.
Munishwamy and others reported in 1977 AIR 1489, paragraph nos.7 and 8 of
which are quoted hereinbelow :­
“The second limb of Mr. Mookerjee's argument is that in any event the High Court could
not take upon itself the task of assessing or appreciating the weight of material on the
record in order to find whether any charges could be legiti- mately framed against the
respondents. So long as there is some material on the record to connect the accused with
the crime, says. the learned counsel, the case must go on and the High Court has no
jurisdiction. to put a precipitate or premature end to the proceedings on the belief that the
prosecution is not likely to succeed. This, in our opinion, is too broad a proposition to
accept.
-Section 227 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 2 of 1974, provides that:
"If, upon consideration of the record of the case and the documents submitted there- with,
and after hearing the submissions of the accused and the prosecution in this be- half, the
Judge considers that there is not sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused, he
shall discharge the accused and record his reasons for so doing."
This section is contained in Chapter XVIII called "Trial Before a Court of Sessions". It is
clear from the provi- sion that the Sessions Court has the power to discharge an accused if
after perusing the record and hearing the parties he comes to the conclusion, for reasons to
be re- corded, that there is not sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused. The
object of the provision which requires the Sessions Judge to record his reasons is to enable
the superior court to examine the correctness of the reasons for which the Sessions Judge
has held that there is of is not sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused. The
High Court therefore is entitled to go into the reasons given by the Sessions Judge in
support of his order and to determine for itself whether the order is justified by the facts
and circumstances of the case.................................
Let us then turn to the facts of the case to see, wheth- er the High Court was justified in
holding that the proceed- ings against the respondents ought to be quashed in order to
prevent abuse of the process of the court and in order to secure the ends of justice. We
asked the State counsel time and again to point out any data or material on the basis of
which a reasonable likelihood of the respondents being convicted of any offence in
connection with the attempted murder of the complainant could be predicated. A few bits
here and a few bits there on which the prosecution proposes to rely are woefully inadequate
for connecting the respond- ents with the crime, howsoever, skilfully one may attempt to
weave those bits into a presentable whole. There is no material on the record on which any
tribunal could reason- ably convict the respondents for any offence connected with the
assault on the complainant. It is undisputed that the respondents were nowhere near the
scene of offence at the time of the assault. What is alleged against them is, that they had
conspired to commit that assault. This, we think, is one of those cases in which a charge of
conspiracy is hit upon for the mere reason that evidence of direct involvement of the
accused is lacking. we have been taken through the statements recorded by the police
during the course of investigation and the other material. The worst that can be said
against the respondents on the basis thereof is that they used to meet one another frequently
after the dismissal of accused No. 1 and prior to the commission of the assault on the
complainant. Why they met, what they said, and whether they held any deliberations at all,
are matters on which no witness has said a word. In the circumstances, it would be a sheer
waste of public time and money to permit the proceedings to continue against the
respondents. The High Court was therefore justified in holding that for meeting the ends of
justice the proceedings against the respondents ought to be quashed.”
[20]         Hammering further, learned Senior Counsel, Sri Srivastava has relied
upon the recent judgment of Hon'ble the Apex Court in the case of Sanjay
Kumar Rai Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh and another reported in 2021 AIR(SC)
2351 in which three Judges Bench of the Court has pointed out and underlined
need of Discharge in the Cr.P.C., paragraph no.16 of which is quoted
“16. Further, it is well settled that the trial court while considering the discharge
application is not to act as a mere post office or mouth piece to the prosecution. The
Court has to sift through the evidence in order to find out whether there are sufficient
grounds to try the suspect. The court has to consider the broad probabilities, total effect
of evidence and documents produced and the basic infirmities appearing in the case
and so on. [Union of India v. Prafulla Kumar Samal]. Likewise, the Court
has sufficient discretion to order further investigation in appropriate cases, if need be. ”
[21]         In this regard, there are two earlier celebrated judgment of Hon'ble
the Apex Court on the issue of Discharge i.e. (i) Union of India Vs. Prafulla
Kumar Samal reported in 1979 3 SCC 4 ; (ii) Dilwar Balu Kurane Vs. State of
Maharashtra reported in (2002) 2 SCC 135. In Prafulla Kumar Samal's case,
scope of Section 227 of Cr.P.C. was considered and after adverting to various
judgments, the Court has enumerated following principles :­
(i) The Judge while considering the question of framing the charges under
section 227 of the Code has the undoubted powers to sift and weigh the
evidence for the limited purpose of finding out whether or not, a prima facie
case against the accused has been made out.
(ii)Where the materials placed before the Court disclose “grave suspicion”
against the accused which has not been properly explained the Court will be
fully justified in framing a charge and proceeding with the trial.
(iii)        The test to determine a prima facie case would naturally depend upon
the facts of each case and it is difficult to lay down a rule of universal
application. By and large, however, if two views are equally possible and the
Judge is satisfied that the evidence produced before him while giving rise to
some suspicion but not grave suspicion against the accused, he will be fully
within his right to discharge the accused.
[22]        Similarly, in the case of Dilawar Balu Kurane (supra), the principle
enunciated in Prafull Kumar Samal case has been reiterated as held that the
jurisdiction under section 227 of the Cr.P.C.,             “Judge which under the present
Code, an experience Court, cannot act merely as a postoffice or a mouthpiece of
the prosecution but has to consider the broad prababilities of the case, the total
impact of the evidence and the documents produced before the court, the basic
infirmities appearing in the case and so on. It is however, does not mean that
Judge should make a roving inquiry into the pros and cons of the matter and
weigh the evidence as if he is conducting a trial. The Court is not required to
hold a mini­trial at the state of Discharge.
[23]        After evaluating the material and various case laws discussed in the
judgment of Sajjan Kumar VS. Central Bureau of Investigation, reported in
2010 (9) SCC 368 Hon'ble the Apex Court has broadly formulated the
parameters to be exercised while dealing the case under section 227 and 228 of
Cr.P.C. Paragraph no.17 of the aforesaid judgment is quoted as under :­
“17) Exercise of jurisdiction under Sections 227 & 228 of Cr.P.C.
On consideration of the authorities about the scope of Section 227 and 228 of the Code, the
following principles emerge:-
(i) The Judge while considering the question of framing the charges under Section 227 of
the Cr.P.C. has the undoubted power to sift and weigh the evidence for the limited purpose
of finding out whether or not a prima facie case against the accused has been made out.
The test to determine prima facie case would depend upon the facts of each case.
ii) Where the materials placed before the Court disclose grave suspicion against the
accused which has not been properly explained, the Court will be fully justified in framing
a charge and proceeding with the trial.
iii) The Court cannot act merely as a Post Office or a mouthpiece of the prosecution but
has to consider the broad probabilities of the case, the total effect of the evidence and the
documents produced before the Court, any basic infirmities etc. However, at this stage,
there cannot be a roving enquiry into the pros and cons of the matter and weigh the
evidence as if he was conducting a trial.
iv)      If on the basis of the material on record, the Court could form an opinion that the
accused might have committed offence, it can frame the charge, though for conviction the
conclusion is required to be proved beyond reasonable doubt that the accused has
committed the offence.
v)        At the time of framing of the charges, the probative value of the material on record
cannot be gone into but before framing a charge the Court must apply its judicial mind on
the material placed on record and must be satisfied that the commission of offence by the
accused was possible.
vi) At the stage of Sections 227 and 228, the Court is required to evaluate the material and
documents on record with a view to find out if the facts emerging therefrom taken at their
face value discloses the existence of all the ingredients constituting the alleged offence. For
this limited purpose, sift the evidence as it cannot be expected even at that initial stage to
accept all that the prosecution states as gospel truth even if it is opposed to common sense
or the broad probabilities of the case.
vii) If two views are possible and one of them gives rise to suspicion only, as distinguished
from grave suspicion, the trial Judge will be empowered to discharge the accused and at
this stage, he is not to see whether the trial will end in conviction or acquittal.”
Toing the similar lines in recent judgment of Tarun Ji Tejpal Vs.
State of Goa reported in (2015) 14 SCC 481, same ratio has been reiterated as in the
case of Sajjan Kumar's case(supra).
[24]          Now, coming to the precise question involved in the present case has
to level the omnibus allegations of dowry related harassment of all the family
members connected with the husband in recent judgment of Hon'ble the Apex
Court in the case of K. Subba Rao Vs. State of Telangana reported in 2018 (14)
SCC 452 , it was observed by Hon'ble the Apex Court that the Court should be
extremely careful and vigilant in proceeding against the distant relative of the
husband in the crimes pertaining to the dispute even in dowry deaths. All the
relatives of the husband should not be roped in on the basis of omnibus
allegations unless Specific Instances of the involvement in the crime as alleged
and surfaced during investigation with materials certainty. The sweeping and
general allegations are very frequent now­a­days and if such people are put to
trial on such a casual and omnibus allegations, it would bound to lead the
disastreous result and unwarranted hardships to those persons.
In the instant case where her in­laws Mukesh Bansal and Manju
Bansal remained in the company of their warring son and daughter­in­law barely
for one year and four months and 25 days, left their company on 30.04.2017.
Since, thereafter, the affair is between son and the victim alone. In addition to
this, in their respective statement under section 161 Cr.P.C., a casual and
sweeping allegations were fastened against them also when they are not in
position to demand any additional dowry. It was further argued that victim priot
to 03.10.2018, has not made a single whisper regarding dowry relatedd
harassment and atrocities upon her by her parent­in­law. Then, the court has got
no reason to presume that the in­laws were also active participants in extending
dowry related harassment from the distance. It is urged by learned counsel for
the revisionist that obnoxious allegations are motivated one, driven by a sheer
retaliation without any iota of any sanctity to it.
Sri Srivastava, learned Senior Counsel also relied upon the latest
judgment of Hon'ble the Apex Court in the case of Kahkashan Kausar@Sonam
Vs. State of Bihar in Criminal Appeal No.195 of 2022 decided on 01.02.2022,
following observations were made by the Apex Court :­
“18. The above-mentioned decisions clearly demonstrate that this court has at
numerous instances expressed concern over the misuse of section 498A IPC and the
increased tendency of implicating relatives of the husband in matrimonial disputes,
without analysing the long term ramifications of a trial on the complainant as well as
the accused. It is further manifest from the said judgments that false implication by
way of general omnibus allegations made in the course of matrimonial dispute, if left
unchecked would result in misuse of the process of law. Therefore, this court by way
of its judgments has warned the courts from proceeding against the relatives and in-
laws of the husband when no prima facie case is made out against them.”
[25]         Per contra, Sri Raj Kumar Kesari, learned counsel for the complainant
has drawn the attention of the Court to the 161 and 164 Cr.P.C. statements of
the victim annexed as Annexure­4 to the revision. The most interesting feature of
the entire counter affidavit is that there is not a single averment in the entire
affidavit which is dedicated exclusively to parent­in­law Mukesh and Manju
Bansal. As usual, vague and sweeping allegations are made not only in the FIR
but also in the averments of the counter affidavit qua her parent­in­law.
[26]         I have perused the statement carefully. Being the youngest among the
children of Rajesh Kumar Goyal and Sandhya Goyal, opposite party no.2
completed her B.Com Hons. from Sri Ram College of Commerce, New Delhi
University. She is aged about 28 years and got married with Sahib Bansal on
05.12.2015. Besides Mukesh Bansal and Manju Bansal, she has included Chirag
Bansal, unmarried devar and Shipra Jain, married nanad(sister­in­law). The
couple were blessed with daughter Raina Bansal. The date of incident is
03.04.2018 and from the 161 Cr.P.C. statement, its questionaire and 164 Cr.P.C.
statement, it is abunduntly clear that on the fateful day, oppposite party no.2
along with her husband and Raina Bansal were at the residence residing at 130,
First Floor, Rajdhani Enclave, Pitampura, New Delhi. So far as parent­in­law are
concerned, she states that her devar chirag also resides with her parent­in­law at
Kapil Vihar, Pitampura, New Delhi. Both of them are in distinct domestic and
separate entity on 30.04.2017. She has made severe allegations of assault and
unnatural sex with her upon her husand and in this questionaire, she had made
completely sweeping allegations of having sexual favours upon her own father­
in­law and brother­in­law on unspecified date and time. Though, she has levelled
omnibus allegations of demanding additional dowry upon all the named accused
persons. In addition to this, there was also accusation with regard to forcible
abortion and second time pregnancy. But its accusation got flat when the
Investigating Officer inquired from Dr. Amita Agrawal, her Gynechologist who in
no uncertain terms, gave the statement to the I.O. of the case that the second
abortion was made on her own acceptance and willingness. There was nothing
like forced abortion. However, in her statement, learned counsel for the
complainant has tried to defend the orders of learned Additional Sessions Judge,
Hapur that in parcha no.17, the statement of Rajesh Kumar Goyal and Sandhya
Goyal was recorded in which they stated that both of them also demanded
additional dowry and became physical with her on this score.
I have perused the order impugned passed by Additional Sessions
Judge, Fast Track Court, Hapur dated 03.03.2022 and while rejecting the
discharge application, it has been mentioned :
Sandhya Goyal ke bayan antargat 161 Cr.P.C. me abhiyukt dwara pidita ke sath
dahej ki maang ko lekar marpeet ki gayi aur pidita k sath Sahib va saas va sasur
dahej ki maang karne ka kathan kiya hai. Vivechak dwara vivechana ke dauran
ekatrit kiye gaye sakshyo ke aadhar par, prarthi/abhiyukt Mukesh Bansal ke virudh
antargat dhara 498­A, 323, 504, 506, 307, 120B IPC va 3/4 D.P. Act me aarop
patra preshit kiya gaya hai |”
consciously ignored the plethora of evidence collected by the I.O. during
investigation that Mukesh Bansal and his wife are residing separately since
30.04.2017 and they have got no occasion to demand additional dowry.
Moreover, at some places, there is demand of Rs.20 lacs and at some place, it has
been swelled to Rs.50 lacs ??? In addition to this, there is general and sweeping
allegation without any material particulars of demand of dowry by the parent­in­
law makes the entire prosecution story a doubtful and revengful proposition.
Still, the learned Sessions Judge has picked up few lines in 161 Cr.P.C. statement
ignoring the rest of the averments and material caste a serious expulsion upon
the order impugned.
[27]          Learned counsel for the complainant in his counter affidavit has
annexed the injury report of the complainant dated 04.10.2018 by making a
mention that she was examined on the date of incident by Bhagwan Mahavir
Hospital, Pitampura, New Delhi with the report that physical assault has been
made by her husband and had tried to strangulate her as told by the patient. But
surprisingly, in the entire counter affidavit, except making a mention that “since
at the time of marriage”, the revisionist and all the family members were
demanding dowry continuously, there is nothing special indicting the parent­in­
laws in this offence. It is further most important to mention that Mukesh Bansal
and Manju Bansal had left the company of her son and daughter­in­law on
30.04.2017 itself and residing in a separate accommodation as independent
domestic unit and therefore, there is no chance of any interference in the
matrimonial or personal matter of Sahib Bansal and Shivangi Bansal.
[28]          I have perused the 161 Cr.PC. Statement of the witness Neha(aunt of
Shivangi Bansal), Shweta(Aunt), Anand Prakash, family acquaintance, Chandra
Mohini Goyal, independent witness, Vinay Agrawal, independent witness, Sri
Bhagwan, Vina Jain. None of these witnesses in their respective 161 Cr.P.C.
statements, even whispered against the parent­in­law for their alleged act of
misbehaviour on account of additional dowry and seeking sexual favours from
their daughter­in­law.
In our traditional Indian family, where they are residing in a joint
family with unmarried son, it is highly improbable and difficult to digest the
allegations of demanding sexual favours from her daughter­in­law by father­in­
law or brother­in­law. The stray and tangent allegations of demanding dowry by
father­in­law and mother­in­law would not bring them within four corners of
Section 498­A IPC and keeping in view the ratio laid down by Hon'ble the Apex
Court in the case of Sajjan Kumar(supra) and Kahkashan Kausar@Sonam
and assessing them with the facts of the present case, I find that the order of
learned trial Judge is well short of standards enumerated in the aforesaid case,
so far as it relates to Mukesh and Manju Bansal.
No doubt, Sahib Bansal, being the husband and the allegations are
clearly against him for committing marpeet, atrocities and treating her in
inhuman way, the Court is not in a position to make any comment either ways.
But since, he was residing with opposite party no.2 at the relevant point of time,
his complicity in the commission of offence cannot be ruled out altogether.
[29]          Hence, considering the facts and circumstances of the case, the present
revision with regard to Mukesh Bansal and Manju Bansal is hereby allowed for the
reasons enumerated above and the order impugned dated 03.03.2022 is hereby set­
aside. So far as husband­Sahib Bansal is concerned, the revision relates to him is
dismissed and he is directed to regularly and faithfully appear before the court
concerned and contest the trial to its logical conclusion.
[30]         Yet coming to another aspect of the issue which is disturbing and
mind­boggling to the Court. After reading the FIR allegedly lodged by Ms.
Shivangi Bansal after 18 days of the incident, which is ever­abhorring, full of dirt
and filth. The graphical description portrayed by her in her FIR is deplorable to
be condemned in its strongest terms. The FIR is the place where the informant
gives the story mobilizing the State Machinery engaging in the commission of
cognizable offence. It is not soft porn literature where the graphical description
should be made. Hon'ble the Apex Court in its judgment in the case of Priti
Gupta Vs State of Jharkhand, 2010(71) SCC 667 has fastened the liability
upon the counsels, paragraph nos.30, 31, 32 and 33 are quoted hereinbelow :­
“30. It is a matter of common experience that most of these complaints under section
498-A IPC are filed in the heat of the moment over trivial issues without proper
deliberations. We come across a large number of such complaints which are not even
bona fide and are filed with oblique motive. At the same time, rapid increase in the
number of genuine cases of dowry harassment are also a matter of serious concern.
31. The learned members of the Bar have enormous social responsibility and
obligation to ensure that the social fiber of family life is not ruined or demolished.
They must ensure that exaggerated versions of small incidents should not be reflected
in the criminal complaints. Majority of the complaints are filed either on their advice
or with their concurrence. The learned members of the Bar who belong to a noble
profession must maintain its noble traditions and should treat every complaint under
section 498-A as a basic human problem and must make serious endeavour to help the
parties in arriving at an amicable resolution of that human problem. They must
discharge their duties to the best of their abilities to ensure that social fiber, peace
and tranquility of the society remains intact. The members of the Bar should also
ensure that one complaint should not lead to multiple cases.
32. Unfortunately, at the time of filing of the complaint the implications and
consequences are not properly visualized by the complainant that such complaint can
lead to insurmountable harassment, agony and pain to the complainant, accused and
his close relations.
33. The ultimate object of justice is to find out the truth and punish the guilty and
protect the innocent. To find out the truth is a herculean task in majority of these
complaints. The tendency of implicating husband and all his immediate relations is
also not uncommon. At times, even after the conclusion of criminal trial, it is difficult
to ascertain the real truth. The courts have to be extremely careful and cautious in
dealing with these complaints and must take pragmatic realities into consideration
while dealing with matrimonial cases. 34. Before parting with this case, we would like
to observe that a serious relook of the entire provision is warranted by the legislation.
It is also a matter of common knowledge that exaggerated versions of the incident are
reflected in a large number of complaints. The tendency of over implication is also
reflected in a very large number of cases.
35.      The criminal trials lead to immense sufferings for all concerned. Even ultimate
acquittal in the trial may also not be able to wipe out the deep scars of suffering of
ignominy. Unfortunately a large number of these complaints have not only flooded the
courts but also have led to enormous social unrest affecting peace, harmony and
happiness of the society.”
[31]           Therefore, the Court is of the opinion that while deciding the present issue,
the Court should not take into these graphical description of the accusation made by the
complainant and simply over-look these graphic and distressful allegations made by a
lady who after receiving legal advice, pasted those dirt and filth upon her husband and
other family members. The interesting feature is that she has been unable to substantiate
those allegations even at the time of investigation and these allegations were found false
and the sections related to it were dropped.
The Court records its strongest exception to such type of language used by
the informant. The language of the FIR should be decent one and no amount of atrocities
faced by the informant, would justify her to use such type of castic expressions.
FIR/complaint is the gateway of any criminal case even soft and decent expression
would well communicate the alleged atrocities faced by her.
[32]           In this connection, there is yet another judgment of Hon'ble the Apex Court
in the case of Social Action Forum for Manav Adhikar Vs. Union of India reported in
2018 (10) SCC 443. The Hon'ble Apex Court was aware that Section 498A IPC and its
allied sections is mercilessly used by the advocates to serve the objective of their clients
and that is why after exaggerating the incident manyfold, tailored an imaginary and
abhorring story. This laudable section was brought into the Statute Book in the year
1983. The objective and the reasons for introducing Section 498-A IPC can be gathered
from the Statements of Object and Reasons of the criminal law(Second amendment Act,
“Increasing graph of dowry death is matter of serious concern. The extent of effort
has been commented by the Joint Committee of the House constituted to examine the
working of Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961. The cases of cruelty by the husband and
other relatives which culminated in the society or murder, hapless women concerned
constitute only a small fraction of cases involving the cruelty. It is therefore proposed
to amend the IPC, Code of Criminal Procedure and Indian Evidence Act suitably to
deal effectively not only with the cases of dowry deaths but also cases of cruelty to
married woman by her in-laws”.
[33]          However, it has been contended that Section 498A IPC since its
introduction, has increasingly deal vilified and associated with the perception and its
misuse by the women who frequently used it as a weapon against her in-laws. As the
petitioners, though there is general complaint that Section 498A IPC is subject to gross
misuse, yet there is no concrete data to indicate how frequently the provision has been
misused. Further, the Court by whittling down the stingency of Section 498A IPC is
proceeding on an erroneous premises that there is misuse of said provision whereas
infact misuse by itself cannot be ground to repeal the panel provision or take away its
It is question of a common observation that every matrimonial case is being
exaggerated manifold with all the pungent and castic allegations dowry related atrocities
involving the husband and all family members. This rampant practice now a days has
adversaly affecting our social fibre especially in the northern India. In the metro cities,
the doctrine of 'live-in relationship' has silently sneaked into our socio-cultural ethos by
replacing our traditional marriages by its new modern abrasion in the name of 'live-in
relationship'. This is a ground reality and one has to accept it willy-nilly which is
nowhere similar to our traditional marriage. It is defined as domestic co-habitation
between adult couple who are not married. It is a stress free companionship without any
legal obligation, it has many complication, responsibilities and legal liabilities. It is a
voluntary agreement in it that unmarried male or female decides to live together in one
roof in a sexual and romantic relationship which seems to be marriage in alternative or
substitute to the traditional marriage in which unmarried couple lives together without
marrying with each other free from its legal implications, committment and
responsibilities. In fact, this is an off shoot of traditional indian marriage just to save the
couple from the hazards and legal complications and bickering between them, The two
young couples agree to have sexual and romantic relationship. The traditional fragarance
of our age-old institution of marriage would completely evapourated over period of
time if such gross and unmindful misuse of section 498-A IPC would keep on pasted
[34]             Thus assesing the totality of the circumstances, object and the allegation of
misuse of this piece of legislation in a shape of Section 498A IPC, the Court is
proposing the safeguards after taking the guidace from the judgment of Hon'ble the
Apex Court in the case of Social Action Forum for Manav Adhikar Vs. Union of India
(Supra) keeping in view the growing tendency in the masses to nail the husband and all
family members by a general and sweeping allegations.
(i) No arrest or police action to nab the named accused persons shall be made after lodging
of the FIR or complaints without concluding the “Cooling-Period” which is two months
from the lodging of the FIR or the complaint. During this “Cooling-Period”, the matter
would be immediately referred to Family Welfare Committe(hereinafter referred to as
FWC) in the each district.
(ii)      Only those cases which would be transmitted to FWC in which Section 498-A IPC along
with, no injury 307 and other sections of the IPC in which the imprisonment is less than 10 years.
(iii) After lodging of the complaint or the FIR, no action should take place without concluding the
“Cooling-Period” of two months. During this “Cooling-Period”, the matter may be referred to
Family Welfare Committee in each districts.
(iv) Every district shall have at least one or more FWC (depending upon the geographical size
and population of that district constituted under the District Legal Aid Services Authority)
comprising of at least THREE MEMBERS. Its constitution and function shall be reviewed
periodically by the District & Sessions Judge/Principal Judge, Family Court of that District, who
shall be the Chairperson or Co-chairperson of that district at Legal Service Authority.
(v)     The said FWC shall comprise of the following members :-
(a) a young mediator from the Mediation Centre of the district or young advocate having
the practices up to five years or senior most student of Vth year, Government Law
College or the State University or N.L.Us. having good academic track record and who is
public spirited young man, OR;
(b) well acclaimed and recognized social worker of that district having clean antecedant,
(c) retired judicial officers residing in or nearby district, who can devote time for the
(d) educated wives of senior judicial or administrative officers of the district.
(vi) The member of the FWC shall never be called as a witness.
(vii) Every complaint or application under Section 498A IPC and other allied sections mentioned
above, be immediately referred to Family Welfare Committee by the concerned Magistrate. After
receiving the said complaint or FIR, the Committee shall summon the contesting parties along
with their four senior elderly persons to have personal interaction and would try to settle down the
issue/misgivings between them within a period of two months from its lodging.
The contesting parties are obliged to appear before the Committee with their four
elderly persons (maximum) to have a serious deliberation between them with the aid of members
of the Committee.
(viii) The Committee after having proper deliberations, would prepare a vivid report and would
refer to the concerned Magistrate/police authorties to whom such complaints are being lodged
after expiry of two months by inserting all factual aspects and their opinion in the matter.
(ix) Continue deliberation before the Committee, the police officers shall themselves to avoid any
arrest or any coercive action pursuant to the applications or complaint against the named accused
persons. However, the Investigating Officer shall continue to have a peripheral investigation into
the matter namely preparing a medical report, injury report, the statements of witnesses.
(x) The said report given by the Committee shall be under the consideration of I.O. or the
Magistrate on its own merit and thereafter suitable action should be taken by them as per the
provision of Code of Criminal Procedure after expiry of the “Cooling-Period” of two months.
(xi) Legal Services Aid Committee shall impart such basic training as may be considered
necessary to the members of Family Welfare Committee from time to time(not more than one
(xii) Since, this is noble work to cure abrasions in the society where tempos of the contesting
parties are very high that they would melow down the heat between them and try to resolve the
misgivings and misunderstanding between them. Since, this is a job for public at large, social
work, they are acting on a pro bono basis or basic minimum honrarium as fixed by the District &
Sessions Judge of every district.
(xiii) The investigation of such FIRs or complaint containing Section 498A IPC and other allied
sections as mentioned above, shall be investigated by dynamic Investigating Officers whose
integrity is certified after specialized training not less than one week to handle and investigate
such matrimonal cases with utmost sincerity and transparancy.
(xiv) When settlement is reached between the parties, it would be open for the District & Sessions
Judge and other senior judicial officers nominated by him in the district to dispose of the
proceedings including closing of the criminal case.
At the cost of repetition, it is made clear that after lodging of the F.I.R. or the
complaint case without exhausting the “Cooling-Period” of two months, no arrest or
any coercive action shall be taken against the husband or his family members in order to
derail the proceedings before the Family Welfare Committee.
[38]           Let copy of this order be circulated by the Registrar General of this High
Court for wide circulation to all the concerned, the Director General of Police, U.P.;
Chief Secretary, Govt. Of U.P.; Principal Secretary (Law), Govt. Of U.P. and all the
District & Sessions Judges to constitute and establish Family Welfare Committees and
make them operational within a period of next three months positively. Let a circular to
this effect may be isused by all the concerned authorities attaching utmost sincerity and
frame rules for the said purpose within a period of next two months positively.
For the reasons narrated in paragraph no.29 out of three revisions, Criminal
Revision No.1126 of 2022 and 1187 of 2022 are hereby ALLOWED. Order impugned
date 03.03.2022 is hereby quashed with regard to Mukesh Bansal and Manju Bansal
respectively and they shall stand discharged from the allegations of Section 498A, 504,
506, 307, 120-B IPC and Section 3/4 of D.P. Act. in S.T. No.19 of 2020 arising out of
case crime no. 567 of 2018 pending in the court of Additional Sessions Judge, F.T.C.-I,
Hapur and so far as Criminal Revision No.1122 of 2022 is concerned in Re : Sahib
Bansal Vs. State of U.P and anr is hereby REJECTED.