1)     The petitioner has invoked jurisdiction of this Court under Section
439 of J&K Cr. P. C seeking bail in a case arising out of FIR No.68/2021
for offences under Section 8/15, 18 of the Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances, Act, (for short ‘the NDPS Act’) registered with
2)     It is averred in the petition that the petitioner was arrested on
28.07.2021 in connection with alleged recovery of 89 kgs of Poppy straw.
The charge sheet against the petitioner is stated to have been filed before
the Court of Principal Sessions Judge, Anantnag, on 7th October, 2021 but
at the relevant time, the FSL report was not accompanying the charge
sheet. It is averred that despite directions extended from time to time by
the learned Sessions Judge, the FSL report was not filed even after the
expiry of 180 days of arrest of the petitioner. On this ground, it is urged
that because there was an incomplete and defective charge sheet before
the learned Sessions Judge, as such, the petitioner had become entitled to
default bail. It is averred that after the expiry of 180 days of his arrest, the
petitioner applied for default bail before the learned Sessions Judge but
the same has been rejected by the learned Sessions Judge vide his order
3)     I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the material
on record.
4)     Certain admitted facts are required to be noticed. The petitioner is
alleged to have been found in possession of commercial quantity of Poppy
Straw. It is also an admitted fact that the report of FSL has not been filed
by the prosecution before learned Sessions Judge along with the charge
sheet and, in fact, it has not been filed within 180 days of arrest of the
petitioner. It is also an admitted position that the charge sheet without FSL
report was filed by the investigating agency well within the period of 180
days of arrest of the petitioner. The question that is required to be
answered is whether a charge sheet filed without FSL report qualifies to
be a defective charge sheet and if so, whether an accused, who has been
in custody for more than 180 days prior to the filing of FSL report before
the Court, is entitled to default bail.
5)     For answering the aforesaid issue, it is necessary to have a look at
the provisions contained in Section 36A of NDPS Act which provides for
modified application of the provisions contained in Section 167 of Cr. P.
“36A. Offences triable by Special Courts.—(1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974),—
(a)   all offences under this Act which are punishable
with imprisonment for a term of more than three
years shall be triable only by the Special Court
constituted for the area in which the offence has
been committed or where there are more Special
Courts than one for such area, by such one of them
as may be specified in this behalf by the
(b)   where a person accused of or suspected of the
commission of an offence under this Act is
forwarded to a Magistrate under sub-section (2) or
sub-section (2A) of section 167 of the Code of
Magistrate may authorise the detention of such
person in such custody as he thinks fit for a period
not exceeding fifteen days in the whole where such
Magistrate is a Judicial Magistrate and seven days
in the whole where such Magistrate is an Executive
Provided that in cases which are triable by the Special
Court where such Magistrate considers—
(ii)    upon or at any time before the expiry of the
period of detention authorised by him, that
(c)   the Special Court may exercise, in relation to the
person forwarded to it under clause (b), the same
power which a Magistrate having jurisdiction to try
a case may exercise under section 167 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), in relation
to an accused person in such case who has been
(d)    a Special Court may, upon perusal of police report
of the facts constituting an offence under this Act
or upon complaint made by an officer of the Central
Government or a State Government authorised in
his behalf, take cognizance of that offence without
the accused being committed to it for trial.
(2) When trying an offence under this Act, a Special Court
may also try an offence other than an offence under this
Act with which the accused may, under the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), be charged at the
same trial.
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to
affect the special powers of the High Court regarding bail
under section 439 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
(2 of 1974), and the High Court may exercise such powers
including the power under cluase (b) of sub-section (1) of
that section as if the reference to “Magistrate” in that
section included also a reference to a “Special Court”
constituted under section 36.
(4) In respect of persons accused of an offence punishable
under section 19 or section 24 or section 27A or for
offences involving commercial quantity the references in
sub-section (2) of section 167 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) thereof to “ninety days”,
where they occur, shall be construed as reference to “one
hundred and eighty days”:
Provided that, if it is not possible to complete the
investigation within the said period of one hundred and
eighty days, the Special Court may extend the said period
up to one year on the report of the Public Prosecutor
indicating the progress of the investigation and the
specific reasons for the detention of the accused beyond
the said period of one hundred and eighty days.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), the offences
punishable under this Act with imprisonment for a term of
not more than three years may be tried summarily.”
6)    Before proceeding further, it would also be profitable to notice the
provisions contained in Section 167 of Cr. P. C. It reads as under:
“167. Procedure when investigation cannot be completed in
twenty-four hours.—(1) Whenever any person is arrested and
detained in custody, and it appears that the investigation cannot
be completed within the period of twenty-four hours fixed by
section 57, and there are grounds for believing that the accusation
or information is well-founded, the officer in charge of the police
station or the police officer making the investigation, if he is not
below the rank of sub-inspector, shall forthwith transmit to the
nearest Judicial Magistrate a copy of the entries in the diary
hereinafter prescribed relating to the case, and shall at the same
time forward the accused to such Magistrate.
(2) The Magistrate to whom an accused person is forwarded under
this section may, whether he has or has not jurisdiction to try the
case, from time to time, authorise the detention of the accused in
such custody as such Magistrate thinks fit, for a term not exceeding
fifteen days in the whole; and if he has no jurisdiction to try the
case or commit it for trial, and considers further detention
unnecessary, he may order the accused to be forwarded to a
Magistrate having such jurisdiction:
Provided that—(a) the Magistrate may authorise the detention of
the accused person, otherwise than in custody of the police,
beyond the period of fifteen days, if he is satisfied that adequate
grounds exist for doing so, but no Magistrate shall authorise the
detention of the accused person in custody under this paragraph
for a total period exceeding—
(i)     ninety days, where the investigation relates to an offence
punishable with death, imprisonment for life or
imprisonment for a term of not less than ten years;
(ii)    sixty days, where the investigation relates to any other
offence, and, on the expiry of the said period of ninety days,
or sixty days, as the case may be, the accused person shall
be released on bail if he is prepared to and does furnish bail,
and every person released on bail under this sub-section
shall be deemed to be so released under the provisions of
Chapter XXXIII for the purposes of that Chapter;
(b) no Magistrate shall authorise detention of the accused in
custody of the police under this section unless the accused is
produced before him in person for the first time and subsequently
every time till the accused remains in the custody of the police, but
the Magistrate may extend further detention in judicial custody on
production of the accused either in person or through the medium
of electronic video linkage;
(c) no Magistrate of the second class, not specially empowered in
this behalf by the High Court, shall authorise detention in the
custody of the police.
[Explanation I.—For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby declared
that, notwithstanding the expiry of the period specified in
paragraph (a), the accused shall be detained in custody so long as
he does not furnish bail.
[Explanation II.—If any question arises whether an accused person
was produced before the Magistrate as required under clause (b),
the production of the accused person may be proved by his
signature on the order authorising detention or by the order
certified by the Magistrate as to production of the accused person
through the medium of electronic video linkage, as the case may
Provided further that in case of a woman under eighteen years of
age, the detention shall be authorised to be in the custody of a
remand home or recognised social institution.
(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or sub-
section (2), the officer in charge of the police station or the police
officer making the investigation, if he is not below the rank of a
sub-inspector, may, where a Judicial Magistrate is not available,
transmit to the nearest Executive Magistrate, on whom the powers
of a Judicial Magistrate or Metropolitan Magistrate have been
conferred, a copy of the entry in the diary hereinafter prescribed
relating to the case, and shall, at the same time, forward the
accused to such Executive Magistrate, and thereupon such
Executive Magistrate, may, for reasons to be recorded in writing,
authorise the detention of the accused person in such custody as
he may think fit for a term not exceeding seven days in the
aggregate; and, on the expiry of the period of detention so
authorised, the accused person shall be released on bail except
where an order for further detention of the accused person has
been made by a Magistrate competent to make such order; and,
where no order for such further detention is made, the period
during which the accused person was detained in custody under
the orders made by an Executive Magistrate under this sub-
section, shall be taken into account in computing the period
specified in paragraph (a) of the proviso to sub-section (2):
Provided that before the expiry of the period aforesaid, the
Executive Magistrate shall transmit to the nearest Judicial
Magistrate the records of the case together with a copy of the
entries in the diary relating to the case which was transmitted to
him by the officer in charge of the police station or the police officer
making the investigation, as the case may be.
(3) A Magistrate authorising under this section detention in the
custody of the police shall record his reasons for so doing.
(4) Any Magistrate other than the Chief Judicial Magistrate making
such order shall forward a copy of his order, with his reasons for
making it, to the Chief Judicial Magistrate.
(5) If in any case triable by a Magistrate as a summons-case, the
investigation is not concluded within a period of six months from
the date on which the accused was arrested, the Magistrate shall
make an order stopping further investigation into the offence
unless the officer making the investigation satisfies the Magistrate
that for special reasons and in the interests of justice the
continuation of the investigation beyond the period of six months
is necessary.
(6) Where any order stopping further investigation into an offence
has been made under sub-section (5), the Sessions Judge may, if he
is satisfied, on an application made to him or otherwise, that
further investigation into the offence ought to be made, vacate the
order made under sub-section (5) and direct further investigation
to be made into the offence subject to such directions with regard
to bail and other matters as he may specify.
7)     From a conjoint reading of Section 36A of NDPS Act and Section
167 of Cr. P. C, it becomes clear that if an accused has been detained in
connection with investigation of a case for a period of more than 180 days
in an offence under NDPS Act, he is entitled to be released on bail if he is
prepared to and does furnish bail unless the Special Court has extended
the period of detention during investigation of the case beyond 180 days.
In the instant case, detention of the petitioner has not been extended by
the learned Sessions Judge beyond 180 days.
8)     In the instant case, the charge sheet without FSL report has been
filed within the statutory period of 180 days. The question whether a final
report presented before the Court in terms of Section 173 of Cr. P. C is
incomplete or defective without the opinion of the FSL expert is required
to be considered in the light of the provisions contained in Section 173 of
the Cr. P.C so as to determine whether the petitioner is entitled to default
bail. Section 173 of the Cr. P.C provides that officer incharge of the police
station has to forward to the Magistrate empowered to take cognizance of
the offence, the report of the police after completion of the investigation.
Sub-Section (2) provides the particulars which are required to be
mentioned in the final report. Sub-section (8) of Section 173 clearly states
that the investigating agency is not precluded from undertaking further
investigation of the case and to forward further reports regarding evidence
which may be collected during further investigation.
9)     Thus, it is not that after completion of investigation of the case and
presentation of final report before the Magistrate the investigating agency
is precluded from collecting further evidence and producing it before the
competent court. In these circumstances it may not be correct to hold that
merely because certain report of expert is not accompanying with the final
report, the said report is defective or incomplete. On the analysis of the
statutory provisions of Section 173 and 167 of Cr. P. C, it can safely be
stated that a charge sheet containing details specified in Section 173 of the
Cr. P. C, if filed within the period prescribed under Section 167(2) is not
vitiated or incomplete simply because the same was not accompanied by
the FSL report.
10)    The learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon two
judgments of Punjab & Haryana High Court in the case of Vinay Kumar
@ Vicky v. State of Haryana, (CRR-712-2021 (O&M) decided on
14.10.2021) and Rinku v. State of Haryana (Criminal Revision No.1150
of 20202 decided on November 03, 20202), wherein the two learned
Single Judges of the said Court have held that a challan devoid of report
of the FSL is an incomplete challan and when no application for extension
of time for purposes of investigation was made by the investigating
agency, on expiry of period of 180 days, the accused is entitled to default
11)    I would respectfully beg to differ with the opinion rendered by the
two learned Single Judges of the Punjab & Haryana High Court because
in both these cases, the learned Judges have not noticed the provisions
contained in Section 173 of Cr. P. C, which clearly vest jurisdiction with
the investigating agency to undertake further investigation of the case
even after presentation of the final report. The interplay of provisions
contained in Section 173 and 167 of the Cr. P. Chas not been considered
by the High Court of Punjab & Haryana. The analysis of these two
provisions clearly shows that a charge sheet is not vitiated merely because
report of the FSL is not filed within the period prescribed under Section
167 of the Cr. P. C.
12)    My aforesaid view is supported by a recent judgment of the
Karnataka High Court in the case of Mr. Sayyad Mohammad @ Nasim
v. State of Karnataka and another. In the said case, the learned Single
Jude of the Karnataka High Court has clearly observed that that the
petitioner does not get a right to demand default bail under Section 167(2)
of the Cr.P.C. merely because the charge sheet/final report filed by the
Police after investigation is without FSL report, as non-filing of the FSL
report by itself would not make the charge sheet contrary to Section 173(2)
of the Cr.P.C. While taking the aforesaid view, the learned Single Judge
of the Karnataka High Court has relied upon the judgment of the Division
Bench of the Bombay High Court in the case of Mans Krishna T. K. v.
State, 2021 SCC Online Bom 2955. In the said case, the Division Bench
of the High Court of Bombay, in view of conflicting views of two learned
Single Judges on the same very issue of an accused becoming entitled to
default bail on the ground that FSL report did not accompany the final
report, answered the reference in the following manner:
81. Resultantly, we answer this reference by holding
(a) Question no. (i) is answered by holding that even in
an NDPS case a police report containing the details prescribed
under Section 173(2) Cr.P.C. is a complete police report or a
charge sheet or a challan even if it is unaccompanied by a
CA/FSL report. If such police report is filed within the period
stipulated under Section 167(2) Cr.P.C. r/w. Section 36-A(4) of
the NDPS Act, the accused cannot insist upon a default bail.
(b) Question no. (ii) is answered by holding that in an
NDPS case, a charge sheet accompanied by a field testing
report as reflected in the Panchanama or otherwise also
cannot be labelled as an incomplete police report/charge
sheet/challan simply because the same was not accompanied
by a CA/FSL report.
(c) Question no. (iii) is answered by holding that the
Drug Law Enforcement Field Officers' Handbook issued by the
NCB has no legal efficacy, in the sense that the handbook has
no statutory flavour or the handbook is not 23 a set of
executive instructions issued by the Central Government.”
13)    Again, the Supreme Court in the case of Dinesh Dalmia vs. CBI,
(2007) 8 SCC 770, has held that though ordinarily all documents should
accompany the charge sheet but even if all documents have not been filed,
the same would not vitiate filing of the same.
14)    From the foregoing enunciation of law on the subject, it is clear that
merely because the FSL report did not accompany the charge sheet at the
time of its presentation, before the learned Sessions Judge, it cannot be
said that the charge sheet was incomplete or defective. This is particularly
so, keeping in view the nature of substance which was allegedly recovered
from the possession of the petitioner. Poppy Straw, the substance which
is alleged to have been recovered from the petitioner in the instant case,
can from its very appearance be detected by Investigating Officers who
are generally well-versed in these matters and, as such, it cannot be stated
that the Investigating Officer by filing the charge sheet without waiting
for the FSL report has tried to circumvent or defeat the right of the
petitioner to default bail.
15)     Thus, it can safely be stated that the charge sheet in the instant case
has been filed within the statutory period of 180 days of arrest of the
petitioner and the same without annexing with it the FSL report cannot be
termed as defective or incomplete. Hence, the petitioner is not entitled to
compulsive bail. Therefore, I do not find any merit in this bail application.
The same is, accordingly, dismissed.