1.      This petition has been preferred under Section 482 of Cr.P.C.
seeking quashment of FIR registered against the petitioner and
consequential criminal proceedings arising out of Crime
No.207/2019 registered at Police Station Bajranggarh District
Guna for offence under Sections 376, 506 of IPC.
2.      An FIR got registered by respondent No.2/complainant/prosecutrix
on 04-12-2019 who happens to be a lady aged 41 years against the
petitioner, a male aged 55 years for offence punishable under
Sections 376 and 506 of IPC with the allegations that her husband
Mukesh died in 1999 leaving two children. Since petitioner was
issueless from his first marriage with his wife Sheela Bai, he
induced her to marry so that he can maintain her children born out
of first wedlock of prosecutrix and with that inducement he
brought her to Bajranggarh and without her consent committed
rape in the month of May, 2001 with her as a result whereof she
became pregnant and out of such relation, one child namely Harsh
was born. Thereafter petitioner used to have physical relationship
with her continuously and when after four years she came back to
Gwalior then also petitioner used to call her for intermittent
payments towards her maintenance amount and used to commit
rape and threatened her with dire consequences. Presently she is
living with her child Harsh at Gwalior, another child born out of
the wedlock of petitioner and complainant and therefore, filed this
complaint against the petitioner.
3. After investigation, charge-sheet was filed against the petitioner
and trial is under consideration.
4. It is the submission of learned counsel for the petitioner that from
the very contents of FIR, improbable event has been
conceptualized by prosecutrix and case suffers from vexatious
litigation just to harass petitioner. In 2001, she came in the contact
of petitioner and out of their relationship, if child was born who
happens to be 20 years old by now then it is highly improbable
that she remained silent for such long years and after 18 years she
raised her voice. Story indicates false allegations.
5. It is further submitted that petitioner and respondent No.2 both
belong to Scheduled Caste and as per their customs Natra (social
customs like live-in/marriage) was performed          in which with
consent of his first wife Sheela Bai, he lived with both of his
wives and when despite instance of prosecutrix, petitioner did not
part his whole property in favour of prosecutrix, then these false
allegations have been levelled.
6. Learned counsel for the petitioner filed written synopsis in which
he annexed copy of application under Section 125 of Cr.P.C. filed
by the prosecutrix against the present petitioner before Principal
Judge, Family Court, Gwalior in which she mentioned the fact that
with petitioner marriage was solemnized on 13-06-2001 through
Hindu Rites and Rituals and thereafter they lived together till July,
2019 and now petitioner has removed her from his family
household and therefore, she is living in her maternal home,
therefore, seeking maintenance to sustain herself. Such divergent
admission of facts itself renders the case doubtful. He relied upon
Uday Vs. State of Karnataka, (2003) 4 SCC 46, Popular
Muthiah Vs. State represented by Inspector of Police, (2006) 7
SCC 296, Deepak Gulati Vs. State of Haryana, AIR 2013 SC
2071,      Dr. Dhruvaram Murlidhar Sonar Vs. State of
Maharashtra and others, AIR 2019 SC 327, Pramod
Suryabhan Pawar Vs. State of Maharashtra and others, AIR
7. Learned counsel for the respondent/State opposed the submissions
and prayed for dismissal of this petition on the ground that trial
will decide the fate of the case.
8. This is a case where petitioner is facing heat of trial on the basis of
allegations so levelled by the prosecutrix over her for offence
under Sections 376 and 506 of IPC. Contents of FIR reproduced
for ready reference:
“vkj- 630 lanhi dqqekj }kjk ftyk iqfyl dk;kZy; xquk ls i=
Ø-@iq-v-@xquk@jhMj@dsl             Mk;jh@232,@19         fnukad
05@12@19 lfgr Fkkuk dksrokyh xquk ds vi- Ø- 0@19
/kkjk 376]506 Hkknfo dh izFke lwpuk izfrosnu] Mk;jh e; izi=ks
ds vly vijk/k dk;eh gsrq ykdj is'k dh xbZ Fkkuk dksrokyh
xquk ds izFke lwpuk izfrosnu Øeakd 0@19 dh udy fuEuor
gS Qfj;kfn;k Jhefr vuhrk ferkSfy;k iq=h uRFkhyky ferkSfy;k
mez 40 o"kZ fuoklh txthou uxj xak/kh jksM FkkVhiqj Xokfy;j
eksckby uEcj 9685345539 us gejkg vius yMds g"kZ
flykoV]yMdh 'kkyuh flykoV ds mifLFkr Fkkus vkdj ekSf[kd
fjiksVZ dh fd lu~ 1999 esa esjs ifr eqds'k dh e`R;q gks xbZ FkhA
ifr dh e`R;q ds ckn euksgj iq= lq[kyky flykoV fuoklh
ctjaxx< ds cPps ugh gksrs Fks blfy;s euksgj eq>s ebZ 2001 esa
cgyk Qqlykdj 'kknh djus dk >kalk nsdj ,oa cPPkksa dk [kpZ
mBkus dh dgdj eq>s ctjaxx< ys vk;k FkkA ctjaxx< esa
euksgj us esjh lgefr ds fcuk esjs lkFk cqjk dke cykRdkj
fd;k ftlls eSa izsxusaV gks xbZ o esjs 01 iq= g"kZ iSnk gqvkA
euksgj esjh ethZ ds f[kykQ eq>s tku ls ekjus dh /kedh nsdj
esjs lkFk cqjk dke ¼cykRdkj½ djrk FkkA mlls ijs'kku gksdj
04 lky ckn eSa Xokfy;j pyh xbZ Fkh rc euksgj [kpZs ds iSls
nsus ds cgkus eq>s cqykrk Fkk vkSj tcjtLrh esjs lkFk cqjk dke
¼cykRdkj½ Fkk vkSj dgrk Fkk fd ;fn Fkkus esa fjiksVZ djus xbZ
rks rq>s tku ls [kRe dj nwaxkA mlds Mj ds dkj.k eSaus Fkkus esa
fjiksVZ ugha dhA orZeku esa eSa vius yM+ds ds lkFk Xokfy;j esa
jg jgh gwWaA euksgj us eq>s cgyk Qqlykdj iRuh cukdj j[kus
dk dgdj ,oa esjs cPpksa dk [kpkZ mBkus dh dgdj eq>s ys
vk;k Fkk vkSj esjs lkFk cqjk dke ¼cykRdkj½ djrk FkkA vkt
fjiksVZ dks vkbZ gwWa fjiksVZ djrh gwWa dk;Zokgh dh tkosA mijksDr
fjiksVZ ij ls vi-dz-0@19 /kkjk 376-506 Hkknfo dk dk;e dj
foospuk esa fy;k x;kA ?kVuk LFky Fkkuk ctjaxx< ftyk xquk
ds {ks=kf/kdkj dk ik;k tkus ls ,Q-vkbZ-vkj- vly vijk/k
iathc) djus gsrq Fkkuk ctjaxx< LFkkukarfjr dh tkrh gSA
gLrk- Qfj;kfn;k fgUnh vuhrk gLrk-dk;ehdrkZ mfu- :ch
HkkXkZo Fkkuk dksrokyh fnukad 04@12@19 mDr vijk/k fooj.k
ij ls vly vijk/k dz- 207@19 /kkjk 376-506 Hkknfo dk
iathc) dj foospuk esa fy;k x;kA^^
9.  Similarly perusal of application under Section 125 of Cr.P.C. filed
at the instance of petitioner through synopsis indicates that
marriage between the petitioner and respondent No.2 held on 13-
06-2001 according to Hindu Rites and Rituals and she lived with
petitioner for 18 years and blessed with a child Harsh who is
almost 20 years old by now and pursuing his study. Petitioner
happens to be a Headmaster in Government School Aron,
therefore, amount to the tune of Rs.40,000/- was sought for along
with expenses Rs.5,000/- and counsel fee Rs.10,000/-.
10. Both these allegations and submissions go in different directions.
Contents of FIR reveal that for 18 years, prosecutrix lived with
petitioner and in fact blessed with a boy namely Harsh who is
almost 20 years old by now and after 18 years she filed a
complaint on which case has been registered against the petitioner.
Such delay in filing of case renders the case doubtful.
11. When petitioner and prosecutrix lived together as a couple for 18
long years then after such lapse of time any allegation levelled by
prosecutrix pales into oblivion because they are primarily
motivated to exert pressure. Not only this, perusal of application
under Section 125 of Cr.P.C. filed at the instance of respondent
No.2 further reveals that on the one hand she levelled the
allegations that they lived in live-in relationship but now she
makes an application that they lived as married couple. Such
divergent stand can only be availed of in case of misrepresentation
of facts.
12. The Apex Court in the matter of State of Haryana and others Vs.
Ch. Bhajan Lal and others, AIR 1992 SC 604 laid down the
different exigencies under which interference under Section 482 of
Cr.P.C. can be made. Following exigencies are as under:
“(a) where the allegations made in the First
Information Report or the complaint, even if they
are taken at their face value and accepted in their
entirety do not prima facie constitute any offence
or make out a case against the accused;
(b) where the allegations in the First Information
Report and other materials, if any, accompanying
the F.I.R. do not disclose a cognizable offence,
justifying an investi- gation by police officers
under Section 156(1) of the Code except under an
order of a Magistrate within the purview of Section
(c) where the uncontroverted allegations made in the
FIR or 'complaint and the evidence collected in
support of the same do not disclose the commission
of any offence and make out a case against the
(d) where the allegations in the FIR do not constitute a
cognizable offence but constitute only a non-
cognizable offence, no investigation is permitted by
a police officer without an order of a Magistrate as
contemplated under Section 155(2)of the Code;
(e) where the allegations made in the FIR or
complaint are so absurd and inherently improbable
on the basis of which no prudent person can ever
reach a just conclusion that there is sufficient
ground for proceeding against the accused;
(f)  where there is an express legal bar engrafted in
any of the provisions of the Code or the concerned
Act (under which a criminal proceeding is
instituted) to the institution and continuance of the
proceedings and/or where there is a specific
provision in the Code or the concerned Act,
providing efficacious redress for the grievance of
the aggrieved party;
(g) where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended
with mala fide and/or where the proceeding is
maliciously instituted with an ulterior motive for
wreaking vengeance on the accused and with a
view to spite him due to private and personal
grudge.”
13. Here, it appears that from the very perusal of contents of FIR, no
offence is made out and perusal of charge-sheet and different
statements further substantiates the arguments of petitioner.
Besides that, it appears to be vexatious and frivolous litigation just
to exert pressure over petitioner to extract money or an attempt
made by prosecutrix to convert domestic dispute into criminal
allegations. It would be miscarriage of justice if such false
allegations are allowed to sustain and petitioner is unnecessarily
dragged into litigation to defend himself.
14. On the basis of cumulative analysis, perusal of charge-sheet and
nature of allegations, no case for trial is made out. From the very
contents of FIR and attending circumstances, case appears to be
frivolous one and hence FIR registered at Crime No.207/2019 at
Police Station Bajranggarh District Guna for offence under
Sections 376, 506 of IPC and consequential criminal proceedings
are hereby quashed. Petitioner stands discharged from all
allegations.
15.       Petition stands allowed and disposed of.