Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 48444 of
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 49354 of
Opposite Party :- State of U.P.
Counsel for Applicant :- Harshit Pathak, Anurag Pathak
1.    Since both the bail applications are connected and arisen from
same case crime number, therefore, both the bail applications are
being disposed off by a common order.
2.    Heard Shri V.P. Srivastava, learned Senior Counsel assisted by
Shri Satyendra Singh, learned counsel for the applicant (Vinay
Kumar Tiwari), Shri Shyam Narayan Verma, Shri Anurag Pathak and
Shri Harshit Pathak, learned counsel for the applicant (K.K. Sharma)
and Shri Manish Goyal, learned Additional Advocate General assisted
Tiwari and Shri Mayank Mishra, learned AGA, Shri Abhijeet
Mukherjee, learned Brief Holder for the State and perused the record.
3.    The present bail applications have been filed by the accused-
applicants Vinay Kumar Tiwari and K.K. Sharma in Case Crime No.
0192 of 2020, under sections 147, 148, 149, 302, 307, 504, 506, 353,
332, 333, 396, 412, 120B, 34 IPC, section 7 of Criminal Law
Amendment Act and section ¾ of Explosive Substances Act, P.S.-
4.    In the year 1981, in Prem Chand (Paniwala) vs Union Of India,
AIR 1981 SC 613, Justice V. R. Krishna Iyer opened the judgment
with a question “Who will police the police?” About 40 years have
passed, but, that question is still there with a bigger question mark.
On the date of incident, the raid conducted by police force was
countered by the gangster Vikas Dubey and member of his gang in a
very planned way and 8 police personnels including Circle Officer of
the area were brutally killed and several police personnels sustained
serious firearms injuries. The accused persons were carrying
sophisticated firearms and the accusation against the accused-
applicants is that they were in collusion with the gangster and his
associates. Under a conspiracy, they leaked information of police raid
and gave them opportunity to remain in preparedness and did not
render due support to police personnels nor informed the police force
regarding their preparedness to effectively counter the raid and their
being equipped with sophisticated firearms.
5.     As per FIR version and police papers, the brief facts are that
on 03.07.2020, at 1 AM in the midnight, the incident took place in
respect of which on the same day in the early morning at 5:35 AM,
the FIR was lodged in which 21 accused persons were named with 60
to 70 unnamed accused persons and the allegation was that an FIR
was registered on 02.07.2020, Crime No. 191/20, under section 147,
148, 504, 323, 364, 342, 307 IPC and section 7 of Criminal Law
Amendment Act, 1932 against Vikas Dubey, Sunil Kumar, Bal
Govind, Shivam Dubey and Amar Dubey. In order to arrest the
accused persons, with reference to GD No. 5 at 00:27 AM midnight,
SO Vinay Kumar Tiwari with other SI and Constables keeping
weapon and cartridges reached at Bela crossing, where, as planning
CO Bilhaur Shri Devendra Kumar Mishra with other police officers
along with Govt. Vehicle and Driver and SHO Bithoor, Shri
Kaushalendra Pratap Singh with other police officers along with
Government Vehicle and Driver and also SHO Shivrajpur, Shri
Mahesh Yadav with SI and Constables (all mentioned in the FIR by
name), after due consideration, set out from the place in search and
arrest of the accused persons. Between the police parties of three
police stations mentioned above, in view of fencing around the house
of accused which is surrounded by big walls of adequate heights with
barbed wire fencing and huge iron gates in different directions, it was
decided that on reaching on the main gate in the leadership of CO
Bilhour, the police will be divided into three teams. The first police
team was led by CO Bilhour, the second by SHO Bithoor and the
third by SO Chaubepur. The police teams and police officers ensured
that there was no illegal article with them. Thereafter, the police party
departed from Diwedi Atta Chakki to Bikru village and the moment
they reached 20 meters close to the house of accused Vikas Dubey
(now dead), it was found that on the road, a JCB machine was
standing horizontally in such manner that the road was almost
blocked. The police party anyhow, from the remaining space,
managed to reach to the Tiraha close to the house gate of accused
Vikas Dubey. The first police party lead by CO Bilhour stopped at the
gate and the second party led by SO, Bithoor proceeded towards left
side in east direction, and from the right side towards south direction
the third police group led by SO Chaubeypur was proceeding.
6.     All the police personnels were in police uniform except one
Guard who was in civil dress. There was sufficient light of electricity
and dragon light. Suddenly, from the room situating on the first floor
on the north east side from the roof of Vikas Dubey, accused Vikas
Dubey and other co-accused persons with rifle, pistol and firearms in
their hands, in a preplanned way, with intention to kill the police
personnels, opened fire shouting loudly how the police personnels
dared to raid and nobody would escape alive from this place. Side by
side, from the roof of Raja Ram alias Prem Kumar Pandey, situating
in front of the house of accused Vikas Dubey, Prem Kumar Pandey
and other accused persons Shyam Bajpai, Chhotu Shukla, Monu,
Jahan Yadav and others, and from the roof of the house of Atul
situating in the west of the house of accused Vikas Dubey, Atul
Vishnu Pal Yadav, Ram Singh, Ramu Bajpai and other co-accused
persons opened firing in a planned way with intention to kill the
members of the police party. Because of this sudden and
indiscriminate firing, most of the policemen of the first group and
second group were seriously injured. Some of the members of police
party after positioning themselves proceeded towards the house of
Rajaram Pandey and some proceeded towards the open land of Pappu
Mishra. At the same time when the police party was so proceeding,
the accused persons from the roof of their house came down and
started firing on already injured police personnel. The police party led
by SO Caubeypur, because of indiscriminate firing, did not proceed
further. There was no place to shelter and there was regular firing by
the main accused persons from the roof. They, therefore, covered the
firing in order to reach at a safe place. The accused persons coming
from all sides surrounded the police personnel, fired and killed SI
Anoop Kumar Singh Chawki in-charge Mandhana, Constable
Jitendra Pal, Constable Bablu Kumar, Constable Rahul Kumar and
Constable Sultan Singh by causing gunshot injuries. In the varanda of
the house of accused Rajaram Pandey, SO Shivrajpur, Shri Mahesh
Yadav and SI Nimbu Lal were also killed by the accused persons. CO
Bilhour was dragged inside the house of Prem Kumar Pandy by
accused Vikas Dubey, Prem Kumar Pandey, and Amar Dubey,
Dubey, Balgovind, Bauwa Dubey, and other co-accused persons and
was killed brutally by them by causing injuries by fire arms and sharp
7.     Meanwhile, remaining members of first, second and third
police party, in their self-defense, started firing and saved 7 police
personnels including SO Bithour, Shri Kaushalendra Singh, SI
Singh Sengar and took them to safe place. During the incident the
accused persons looted the Govt. pistol of injured SO Bithour, but
because of cover firing caused by the police party, the accused
persons could not succeed in causing death of SO Bithour,
Kaushalendra Singh. The accused persons looted the Government
arms form the police personnels and absconded away. The alive
policemen, in the light of electricity and other light, recognized the
accused persons. Injured policemen were admitted in the Regency
Hospital for their treatment. Thereafter, the police reached at the
place of occurrence and found the dead body of the policemen lying
there. 9MM pistol with 10 cartridges of SO Mahesh Chandra Yadav,
9MM pistol with 10 cartridges of SI Anoop Kumar Singh, AK-47
with 30 cartridges of Constable Jitendra Kumar, insas rifle with 20
round cartridges magazine of Constable Sultan Singh were already
looted by the accused persons during incident. Besides the named
accused persons, there were 60 to 70 more armed accused persons
who in a very planned way, initially hiding themselves at a high
place, with intention to kill the policemen, caused fire and
subsequently, they jumped down from the roof and from very close
range they committed brutal murder of the policemen. The policemen
also fired, but, because of this incident and indiscriminate and daring
firing by the accused persons, a situation of lawlessness and sense of
fear was created. The accused persons were led by accused Vikas
Dubey was a known gangster and history sheeter of the area and there
remained fear and terror of the gangster and his gang around the
vicinity. Because of the criminal activities, the gang had gained a lot
of movable and immovable properties. The police inspected the place
of occurrence where cartridges were scattered here and there and the
sign of firing was also present on the walls around and other places.
Human blood was also scattered all over the place. On this basis, the
FIR was lodged by SO Vinay Kumar Tiwari, who is presently one of
the accused applicants.
8.     The statement of informant was recorded by the Investigating
Officer. The dead bodies were also taken into possession, inquest
report was prepared, dead bodies were sealed and were sent for
postmortem. The statement of SI Azhar Ishrat was recorded on the
same day who stated in accordance with the FIR version. Thereafter,
the statement of SI Vishwanath Mishra, P.S. Chaubepur, was also
recorded who also stated to the tune of FIR and had additionally
stated that from the roof of the house of the Vikas Dubey some
women were loudly shouting that no police personnel should escape
today and they were instigating the accused persons to kill the
policemen. These women were Smt. Chhama, Smt. Khushi, Smt.
Rekha Agnihotri, a maid of accused Vikas Dubey who used to live in
the house of accused Vikas Dubey and she was also involved in his
criminal activities.
9.     Thereafter, SO Vinay Kumar Tiwari was suspended by order
dated 4th July, 2020 of SSP, Kanpur Nagar on account of his inaction,
suspicious role and for not apprising the police force about the kind
and quality of weapon accused Vikas Dubey and the members of his
gang were keeping, nor he apprised about the way to get away from
the place of occurrence. It was also found that when the firing started
from the side of accused persons, the applicant did not lead his team
and escaped from the place. Because the police personnels were not
having any knowledge about the way to get away from the place, a
number of them were killed and in a great number sustained injuries.
10.    The IO recorded the statement of constable Rajeev Kumar who
stated to the tune of SI Vishwanath Mishra and further added that SI
Krishna Kumar Sharma and SO Vinay Kumar Tiwari of the police
station were closely related with accused Vikas Dubey and prior to
the incident, SI Krishna Kumar Sharma talked with Vikas Dubey for
20 minutes on mobile. He has also stated that these police officers
(accused-applicants) were conspired with accused Vikas Dubey to
humiliate and give lesson to CO Bilhour out of jealous and bad
11.    Statement of constable Abhishek Kumar was also recorded and
he also stated that SI Krishna Kumar Sharma and SO Vinay Kumar
Tiwari were closely related with accused Vikas Dubey. He has also
supported the statement of Constable Rajeev Kumar on that point.
Statement of co-accused Suresh Verma was also recorded and he also
stated in similar fashion showing the closeness of these two with
accused Vikas Dubey and the prior talk with SI Krishna Kumar
Sharma with him just before 20 minutes from the time of incident.
12.    SI Azhar Ishrat was again examined by the IO, and despite that
he supported the FIR version, he also stated about the involvement of
the women who instigated the accused persons for commission of the
offence and said that he saw Sanjay Dubey @ Sanju who was firing
on the police party who was known to him because he used to come
to the police station regularly. Co-accused Suresh Verma was also
instigating the other accused persons. On being asked by the IO, he
stated that SI K.K. Sharma was not present there during the raid who
was present in the police station but deliberately did not join the raid.
He was asked to join but he avoided. He had already given
information about the raid much before the time of incident to
gangster Vikas Dubey with whom he was closely related. He has also
stated that he knew the accused persons with name because he is
posted in the police station from the last about 3 years and he had
gone to the village of Vikas Dubey several times in respect of his
official duty and Vikas Dubey and his other associates were well
known to him. He saw and recognized the accused persons in the
solar light which is installed at the main gate of Vikas Dubey and also
in the light on the roof of the house of Vikas Dubey, Prabhat Dubey,
identified the other accused persons going from the side of house of
Agar Dubey to the house of Vikas Dubey. The witness has stated that
he also fired 7 times but realizing that by firing his location will be
exposed, he stopped firing and concealed himself in the veranda of
the neighbour of the Prabhat Mishra. Constable Navneet also
concealed himself there. Thereafter there was power cut and Prabhat
Mishra who was firing from his roof came down with his rifle and
seeing them, he fired on Constable Navneet but because the witness
intervened by slapping on the but of rifle, constable Navneet escaped
and thereafter he and constable Navneet, because they were fully
acquainted with the geographical situation, through the field, came to
the road. The JCB driver was Rahul Pal and not Monu as he had
stated earlier. He has named the accused persons who fired on the
members of the police party.
13.    Subsequent statement of SI Vishwanath Mishra was recorded
and he has given detailed statement and besides that he supported the
FIR version, he has also stated that the accused persons were firing
from the roof of Prabhat Mishra. He has stated that Vikas Dubey was
a known criminal and, in the area, he used to possess and grab lands
of others with the help of police. He used to create terror and
organize gambling. SO Vinay Kumar Tiwari was in his contact
through SI K.K. Sharma and they used to regularly associate with
them. This came in the knowledge of CO Bilhour and he had
submitted adverse report about them to the superior authority. On the
date of incident, K.K. Sharma deliberately avoided in participating in
the raid and during the period he was regularly in touch with the
accused persons. He and SO Vinay Kumar Tiwari just to lower down
the image of CO Bilhour,         conspired with the criminals and
consequently 8 police persons were killed and 7 police persons
sustained serious injuries.
14.    SI Ajhar Ishrat was re-examined by IO and he also stated that
the accused persons were well informed about the raid which is also
clear from electronic surveillance and other evidence. The
relationship between SO Chaubepur and Circle Officer was bad and
the CO had sent adverse report regarding misconduct of SO Vinay
Kumar Tiwari to superior officer. He stated that SI K.K. Sharma and
SO Vinay Kumar Tiwari were in contact with accused Vikas Dubey
and used to regularly associate with him and therefore, the accused
persons succeeded in causing such a horrible incident only because SI
K.K. Sharma and SO Vinay Kumar Tiwari leaked the information
about raid to them. He has also stated that he recognized the accused
persons in the road light and accused persons were also lighting torch
from their roof and were shouting.
15.    Certain call details have been also annexed at page 156 and
onward showing that accused-applicant K.K. Sharma had talked with
the gangster and his gangmen. The learned counsels for the applicants
have contended that constable Rajeev Kumar was also in touch with
Vikas Dubey. The audio conversation of Constable Rajeev Kumar
with Vikas Dubey has also been annexed to show that he was in
regular touch with Vikas Dubey and he has not been made accused.
Constable Rajeev Kumar has been subsequently examined and he has
stated that Vikas Dubey was having prior knowledge of the police
raid and he rang him on mobile phone but, being occupied in work,
he could not pick up the same and when he saw that there was miss
call of Vikas Dubey, he dialed him and Vikas Dubey gave a lot of
threatening and abuse and threatened that he will kill all the police
personnels who will be found on the police jeep and he would
commit such a big offence which will be unprecedented. The witness
has stated that he recorded the phone call and told about this
threatening to Vinay Tiwari, SO, Chaubepur and also said that the
gangster has prior information of police raid, but, SO Vinay Tiwari
ignored and did not take him seriously. He was also accompanying
SO Vinay Tiwari during the raid. He recognized most of the accused
persons. He has stated that Chhama        Dubey, Khushi Dubey and
Shanti Devi from the roof of Atul Dubey were disclosing the location
of police personnels to the accused persons and were instigating them
to kill the policemen. The accused persons continued firing from 1
AM in the night for 30 to 35 minutes.
16.    From the description above, it is clear that 8 police personnel
including the Circle Officer were brutally murdered by the accused
persons and 7 police personnel sustained serious injuries. The
accused persons who were named in the FIR with 60-70 more
accused persons constituted unlawful assembly with firearms and
deadly weapons killed eight police personnels in a brutal way and
injured the police personnel very badly by causing firearm injuries.
Some of the police personnels were killed and part of their limbs was
also separated from body. The police witnesses who were one time
colleagues of the accused applicants have given statement that the
accused applicants were very close to gangster Vikas Dubey and his
gangmen and they leaked the information of raid which gave
opportunity to the accused persons to prepare and plan the brutal
murder of the police personnels.
17.    Submission of the learned Senior counsel for accused applicant
Vinay Tiwari is that there is no direct or indirect evidence against
him. It was a police raid conducted by the police party which was
countered by the main accused persons and in the incident 8 police
persons were killed by gunshot injuries and 7 policemen also
sustained gunshot injuries. The accused applicant was himself leading
one of the police party. He himself lodged the FIR against the main
accused persons and he also lodged FIR on the basis of information
given by Rahul Tiwari implicating them. Therefore, it has been
submitted that there is no question of the accused-applicant being
involved in the commission of the offence. He has no motive nor
there was any reason for him to enter into so called conspiracy which
resulted in such a heinous crime. Further submission is that the
witnesses have changed their version when they were subsequently
examined by IO and all of them in a tutored way have stated about
the closeness of the accused-applicants with gangster Vikas Dubey
and his gang. There is no substantial evidence and there is only some
scattered evidence against the accused applicants which is
insufficient for the accusation of criminal conspiracy. Nothing can be
concluded against them on the basis of CDR, particularly against SO
Vinay Tiwari who never made any communication on mobile with
either Vikas Dubey or his gangmen. There is no such CDR collected
by the Investigating Officer.
18.    It has been further submitted that the applicants have been
falsely implicated. Late CO Devendra Mishra was informed about the
incident of Rahul Tiwari who directed him not to make entry in GD
as the police is going to take stern action and this will alert gangster
Vikas Dubey. The policemen including CO Devendra Kumar Mishra
were posted there for much longer period and were well-versed with
history sheeter Vikas Dubey. The accused-applicants had no cordial
relation with them. The said viral letter of CO indicating close
relation is forged and has been obtained from social media. No such
letter was sent by CO Mishra to SP, Kanpur Nagar nor the applicant
was put to any departmental proceeding nor any explanation was
asked from him. It has also not been mentioned in his suspension
order. The allegations regarding his conduct during raid are vague,
imaginary and false and is not supported by any evidence.
19.    On the contrary, the learned additional Advocate General Shri
Manish Goyal has argued that it is not a case of simple crime and the
crime has been committed because the police assisted the gangster
and leaked the information with regard to raid and, because of the
prior information about the raid, the gangster was in preparedness and
he planned the murder of the policemen and it is why so many
accused persons assembled with the main accused and were active at
the time of raid. They were inhabitants of area falling within the same
police station in which house of the gangster situated and where the
incident took place. Being the member of police force and working at
the local police station, the accused-applicants had enough
information about the geographical situation and path ways around
the vicinity. The police force reached to the place of gangster and
could not get away from the place as the accused applicants did not
render support nor cooperated and remained inactive. The role of SI
K.K. Sharma is rather evident in view of the fact that he was
regularly in touch with Vikas Dubey and his gang and through him
SO Vinay Tiwari was also in his touch. Both the accused applicants
certainly helped them and always closed their eyes towards the
criminal activities of the gang. They, during the incident, maintained
distance from the other police party and went away to save
themselves. In case of such an organized crime where members of
police force were assisting the gangster and his group, it is not
possible to have a direct evidence. Moreover, in a case of conspiracy,
there is no possibility of direct evidence. The evidence which can be
available is only circumstantial in nature and may be in the form of
inaction on the part of the accused applicants who, in their endeavor
to assist the accused persons, kept themselves out from the picture.
Therefore, the conclusion of conspiracy is to be drawn from the
circumstances of the case and the situation that the applicants, being
member of police force, were indulged in assisting gangster Vikas
Dubey and his gang, and all the paper work was done by them. It has
been submitted that the IO examined several witnesses of police force
who worked with the accused applicants and they have stated about
conspiracy and their close links with the gangster and his gang.
20.    Moreover, it has been also pointed out on behalf of the State
that, on being arrested, gangster Vikas Dubey gave statement to the
IO revealing that the accused applicants used to give prior
information of police activities and on the date of incident also he
was informed about the police raid. The gangster is dead and his
statement given to police is legally admissible as the same is
statement of a dead man. Therefore, it has been submitted that taking
into consideration over all circumstances, the culpability is writ large
and the accused applicants do not deserve to be released on bail.
21.    This case raises certain serious questions which relate to
administration of criminal justice system in the country with
reference to organized crime and criminals and the role and efficiency
of police force in combating the problem. The police force is one of
the most important force with great potential, easily approachable to
the people facing criminal wrong and law and order problem and the
most visible component of the criminal justice system. Like other
departments, there has been a general fall and deterioration in the
standard of functioning of the police force also. With time, it has been
seen that the police force, not as a whole, but in small groups, has
gone through a phase of moral and professional deterioration. There
are black sheep also in the police force and they reflect upon the
whole department which has led to growing concern, and a number of
attempts have been made to mend this situation. In this direction, the
past few years have been particularly eventful, with a number of
positive developments having taken place towards a solution of the
problem and the state appears to have observed zero tolerance policy
towards organized crime and criminals. Strict and rigorous steps have
been taken to break and demolish financial network of gangsters. In
future, this shall certainly bring about more and more positive results
towards restricting criminal activities and organized crime.
22.    Organized crime is not confined to a single state, or any one
country and has become an international problem in view of their
wide spread network and sometimes they have been also found to be
a natural ally of terrorist groups. Organized crime is an act of threat
involving murder, kidnapping, gambling, arson, robbery, burglary,
extortion or dealing in narcotics or dangerous drugs and other crime.
The basic features of organized crime involves a group of individuals
that is structured, sophisticated and widely spread across nations; it is
a section of society that seeks to operate outside control of the people
and government and it is a self-perpetuating, continuing criminal
conspiracy for profit and power, using fear and corruption and
seeking protection from law. The focus areas of organized crime are
smuggling, drug trafficking, women and child trafficking, arms trade,
hawala, circulation of fake currency, extortion and contract killing.
With financial solidarity, these criminals have entered into business
of film financing, hotel business, house building, government
contracts and the like. The gangsters are divided into three categories,
namely, sharp shooters, money collectors and liaison agents. The
liaison agents deal with lawyers and law enforcement officials to
resolve legal problems and to ensure easy bail to gangsters. (For
details see S M Sharma The Organized Crime in India, Tokyo: United
Nations Asia and Far East Institute (UNAFEI), 1999, Vol. 54, pp
23.    The police force faces some real difficulty in combating with
organized crime and criminal activities. The police personnels are
mostly not provided with that kind of sophisticated arms which are
available in plenty to the gangsters and their gang members. The
police stations are mostly under-manned and the strength of police
force is remarkably less in comparison to the population. The police
has to act in accordance with legal norms and while acting so, they
are required to avoid any excesses and human rights violation. They
have to behave like a disciplined force actuated to uphold rule of law
and motivated by sense of public security and service. The force also
face the problem of some police personnels who may be close and in
collusion with the local mafia. They can leak the confidential
informations and strategy of police for taking action and conducting
raid to arrest the gangsters. On the contrary, the organized criminals
keep with them all kinds of sophisticated weapons, they use the same
indiscriminately and they can cause any amount of damage to the
human life and property. Where they are having support from some
members of police force, their potential to execute criminal act is
adequately enhanced.
24.    The problems of police force has been time and again
highlighted by several Law Commissions appointed for making
recommendations for police reforms and needless to point out that
several recommendations have been suggested from time to time. It is
pertinent to mention that the Supreme Court has also issued
directions in view of recommendations in some of the judgments
such as Vineet Narain v Union of India, AIR 1998 SC 889 and
Prakash Singh v Union of India, (2006) 8 SCC 1. Professor M P
Singh, in his book Police Problems and Dilemmas in India 10 (1989)
has discussed the fundamental complexities of Indian police system
and has remarked that the police in the country faces tremendous
challenges and works under extreme pressure due to a number of
reasons such as growing unemployment, deterioration in educational
environments, conflicting claims of socio-economic components,
fluctuations in political order, rampant corruption etc. Frequent
transfers to unfavorable positions or locations have demoralizing
effects on the police force and it becomes a survival technique for
police to have close relationship with one or other political person.
25.    The purpose of the above discussion is to show the prevalent
conditions in which the police has to perform the complicated and
difficult job of ensuring law and order, maintaining security and
peace, preventing crime and taking action against and causing arrest
of offenders. These all require home work and team work and if any
member of police force starts giving clues about and leak the police
strategy, the strategies are bound to fail and shall certainly result
sometimes, particularly when police is confronting against organized
crime and criminals, in disastrous situation as has resulted in this
case. In such situation, policing such police personnels is a big task
and it requires early identification of such black sheep, monitoring of
their conduct, isolating them and taking immediate strict disciplinary
action against them.
26.    Now coming to the facts of this case. The accusation against
the accused-applicants is that they had close friendly relationship
with the gangster Vikas Dubey who and the members of his gang
were running organized criminal activities of all sorts and was
residing and flourishing within the local jurisdiction of the police
station in which both the applicants were posted. IO has examined
several witnesses and they have stated about the close relationship of
the applicants with the gangster Vikas Dubey and gang. Submission
of the learned senior counsel and other counsel for the the applicants
is that the witnesses have stated against the applicants only when they
have been examined subsequently on second and third time and their
subsequent statement is after thought to meet the case against the
applicants. Otherwise, the witnesses had not stated anything against
the applicants.
27.    It is pertinent to mention that gangster Vikas Dubey was
arrested in Ujjain and while he was being brought to Kanpur Nagar,
the Investigating Officer took his statement. On the way, the police
vehicle suffered accident. Vikas Dubey snatched the pistol of IO and
attempted to run away from the police custody. He opened fire on
police personnels and by police firing in self-defense, he was shot
dead. The IO got hospitalized and after being discharged, he wrote
the said statement of Vikas Dubey in CD. Some of the part of his
statement has been also quoted in the bail application. In brief,
Vikash Dubey, giving detailed description of the incident, has stated
to the IO that on 2/3.07.2020, he had prior information of police raid
at about 04:00 PM and the information was given by SI K.K. Sharma.
The JCB of Sultaan Ahmad was working there from the last one and
half months and in the night at about 12:00 PM, he called upon driver
Rahul Pal with JCB and he got obstructed the road by JCB so that the
police suddenly might not come to his house. He further stated that
one Rahul Tiwari was harassing him by giving false complaints
against him and the police was also supporting him. Therefore, hatred
was generated in him towards the police and he had decided that he
might be killed but he will give lesson and kill as many as police
personnels as he can. He called his associates Raja Ram @ Prem
Kumar (maternal brother), Shashi Kant, Shyamu Vajpayee, Chotu
Yadav and Balloo Musalmaan. Licence holders came with their arms
and to the remaining persons, he provided guns, country made pistols
and cartridges. CO, Bilhaur, Devendra Mishra was behind him and,
therefore, he was brutally killed. He was having animosity with SO,
Shivrajpur also as in February, 2020, in the election in Kota, his
nephew Aman Tiwari was contesting election and SO Shivrajpur got
his man arrested with illegal pistol whereupon he felt very
humiliated. His close companions were on the roof with arms and he
had made planning on every pathway coming to his house to kill the
police personnels. Fortunately, the police force came from the way on
which J.C.B. was planted and it made the task very easy and they
surrounded the police officials and killed them. When there was
power cut, he used code words which was a signal to run away from
the place. He had also intended to kill his distant associates in order
to implicate the police force but this could not happen. The women of
his family and close to him such as Rekha Agnihotri, Kshama,
Khushi, Shanti Devi were told to cry seeing the police personnel as
“thief-thief”. Manu Pandey was also having the knowledge of
planning. Thereafter, with the help of his close associates, he went to
28.    Submission, in this respect, from the side of accused-applicants
has been two fold- that the statement of Vikas Dubey is not relevant
against accused-applicants as he was the prime accused in the FIR
and secondly, he did not state any thing against SO Vinay Tiwari and
has only taken the name of SI K K Sharma. From the side of State, it
has been contended that the statement of Vikas Dubey is statement of
a dead man and it has legal effect under section 32(3) of the Indian
Evidence Act. Moreover, other witnesses have stated that SO Vinay
Tiwari was very much close to Vikas Dubey through SI K K Sharma
and therefore, the statement can be well considered against both the
applicants. Section 32(3) provides as follows:
“32 Cases in which statement of relevant fact by person
who is dead or cannot be found, etc, is relevant. —
Statements, written or verbal, of relevant facts made by a
person who is dead, or who cannot be found, or who has
attendance cannot be procured without an amount of
delay or expense which, under the circumstances of the
case, appears to the Court unreasonable, are themselves
relevant facts in the following cases:—(3) or against
interest of maker. —When the statement is against the
pecuniary or proprietary interest of the person making it,
or when, if true, it would expose him or would have
exposed him to a criminal prosecution or to a suit for
damages.”
29.    It is clear from the reading of section 32(3) that statement of a
dead man has been legally recognized and used in evidence even
though the same does not relate to the cause of his death. Although, a
final view is not required to be expressed at this stage as the same
will be considered by the trial court, yet, this much is clear that the
statement is of a dead man and the same has legal relevance in view
of the provision of the Evidence Act.
30.    CDR has been annexed with the bail application at page 156 to
163 to show the relationship of accused-applicants with the gangster.
On the basis of study of CDR, the IO has noted that on the date of
incident, prior to incident, the accused persons contacted each other
and this call pattern is exceptional in the last one month as this type
of communication between them is unique; the CDR of the mobile
number of Vikas Dubey shows that his location was in Village Bikaru
where the incident took place; between Vikas Dubey and co-accused
persons of his gang, there is 15 calls by the gangster, again a unique
pattern, by which he talked to the co-accused persons which indicates
that he was preparing for the incident; Vikas Dubey talked with one
police personnel Rajiv Kumar prior to incident which is full of
abusive language and threatening to kill police personnels and of
committing big criminal incident; it further indicates that he was
having prior information of police raid and he was in full
preparedness to commit the offence and kill police personnels as
many as he can; and call details also show that between co-accused
Ramsingh and applicant K.K. Sharma, there were two calls and the
location was in Village Bikaru, and as such by the mobile of
Ramsingh, Vikas Dubey was in contact before and during the
incident. The accusation is that the accused-applicants, particularly
accused-applicant K.K. Sharma, were giving information to the
gangster and were working as agent to the aid and assistance of the
gangster and it is why accused K.K. Sharma kept himself in the
police station deliberately and both the accused-applicants had
conspired with Vikas Dubey and gang as it was not possible for the
accused-applicant Vinay Kumar Tiwari to contact the gangster at the
time or during the incident.
31.    The learned Senior Counsel for the accused-applicant Vinay
Kumar Tiwari has submitted that constable Rajiv himself had also
contacted on mobile with Vikas Dubey and as such he should have
been also made accused on the basis of the analogy put forward by
the State. Moreover, there appears to be no such communication by
applicant Vinay Kumar Tiwari with the gangster or his gang-men.
The statement of constable Rajiv however shows that he found a miss
call of Vikas Dubey and he called back to him. In respect of second
argument, it has been submitted by State that applicant Vinay Tiwari
used to be in contact with the gangster through K.K. Sharma.
Whatever the truth may be, this much is clear that the accused-
applicants who were posted in the same police station could not have
any professional relationship with the gangster and his men and
communication on mobile with him is certainly a relevant
circumstance which can be considered during trial.
32.    From the side of the State it has been also pointed out that the
incident took place in the notified area under the UP Dacoity Affected
Area Act and due attention is required to be given to the law provided
under section 10 of the Act. The relevant part of Section 10 is as
Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of
convicted of a scheduled offence shall, if in custody, be
(a) the prosecution has been given an opportunity to
(b) where the prosecution opposes the application for
bail, the Court is satisfied that there are reasonable
grounds for believing that he is not guilty of such
offence:.......”
Submission is that after investigation, finding sufficient
evidence, charge-sheet has been already submitted by police and at
this stage there is no reason to believe that the accused- applicants are
33.    From the side of accused-applicants, it has been pointed out
that the witnesses examined by the IO initially did not state any thing
against the accused-applicants and only in their second and third
statements, they have started making allegations against them. As
such, their subsequent statement is nothing but an after thought in
order to falsely implicate the accused-applicants. It has been
specifically mentioned that the allegations have been made by the
witnesses mostly in the last part of their statements and a reading
thereof shows that the words and expressions used are same and
similar which is not possible if statements have been given by the
witnesses individually and separately. This contention appears to
have no weight as it has been rightly pointed out on behalf of the
State that all the statements are part of CD and a view at this stage
has to be taken after due consideration to all the material on record.
34.    The bail applications have been also opposed on behalf of State
on the ground that applicants are police officers and they are in a
position to influence the witnesses if they are released on bail. They
hatched conspiracy with the gangster and deliberately acted in such a
manner which helped the gang in the commission of this offence. It
has been submitted that in the counter affidavit dated 25.1.2021, in
order to save skin, accused-applicant Vinay Tiwari set up a false case
that while he was on patrolling duty on 2.7.2020, he saw Vikas
Dubey and his gang-men beating one Rahul Tiwari and while he
confronted him, Vikas Dubey pointed his rifle on him and to save
himself, he came back and convinced Rahul Tiwari to lodge FIR
against Vikas Dubey. The falsity of this version is clear from the two
facts, one, this has not been mentioned by the accused-applicant in
the relevant GD, and two, this fact has been nowhere mentioned in
the FIR of Rahul Tiwari nor it has been mentioned therein that he
saved the informant during the said incident. Further submission is
that applicant Vinay Kumar Tiwari himself lodged FIR and all papers
were either prepared by him or on his direction, and he made all
efforts to save his skin and after the applicants were made accused in
this case, during investigation, incriminatory things have been
revealed against them.
35.    Further submission is that the applicant as SHO of concerned
police station was very much aware about the activities of Vikas
Dubey and was having healthy relation with him. The then Circle
officer Sri Devendra Mishra (deceased) had also made a complaint
against the working of the applicant highlighting his close
relationship with gangster Vikas Dubey. On the date of incident, the
raid was planned which is clear from GD entry of 03.07.2020 of
12:27 AM in the mid night about movement of the police team. When
the police team reached near the house of accused Vikas Dubey led
by Circle Officer, Bilhaur, late Sri Devendra Mishra and SO Shivraj
Pur, SHO Bithoor, the applicant requested to be the part of third team
and convinced CO, Bilhaur to lead the main team and to enter from
the main gate and while the team of CO proceeded towards the gate,
they found that a JCB had blocked the main gate and a narrow
passage was left there. Anyhow, when they reached close to the gate,
suddenly from all the three sides, indiscriminate firing was started
from the side of the gangster and his associates. The accused-
applicant as per plan had to conduct raid from the right side. But
neither he proceeded towards the right side nor he provided any help
to the other teams. As such, the conduct of the accused-applicant
shows that he was having knowledge of the plan of Vikas Dubey and
he was also aware about the topography of the place and he
knowingly avoided to lead the team which raided from the main gate
and on account of conspiracy, the accused-applicant did not provide
necessary information.
36.    All the aforesaid contentions relate to one or other
circumstance and they will be examined during trial and, therefore, it
is not desirable to express any final opinion. The fact is that in the
incident, CO Devendra Mishra, SHO Mahesh Kumar Yadav, two Sub
Inspectors Anoop Kumar Singh, Nebulal and four Constables Jitendra
Kumar, Sultan Singh, Rahul Kumar and Babloo Kumar were brutally
murdered and seven police personnels SI Kaushalendra Pratap Singh,
SI Sudhakar Pandey, Home Guard Jairam Katiyar, constables Ajay
Singh Sengar, Shiv Murat Nishad and Ajay Kumar Kashyap received
gun shot injuries and one person also received injury. Perusal of
injuries found on the dead bodies shows that several gunshot injuries
were caused to them and it was ensured that they could not survive.
The gunshot injuries of all the deceased police personnels affirm that
injuries were caused from close range as blackening and charring has
been found. This also shows intention and knowledge in causing
death and extreme culpability on the part of the main accused
37.    At no point of time, applicant Vinay Tiwari along with the
members of his team responded to provide any backup to the team.
While the members of other two teams, late Sri Devendra Mishra,
late Sri Mahesh Chandra Yadav and late Nabu Lal, Sub Inspector and
from second team SHO Bithur Kaushlendra Singh sustained fire arm
injury and from his team five other police personnels including Sub
Inspector Anoop Kumar were shot dead, only two persons from the
team of accused-applicant sustained injuries who, as submitted, by
default joined the first team at the time of firing. The accused-
applicant did not receive any injury and this also shows that he
avoided active participation in the raid. The accused-applicant
deliberately concealed the availability of automatic weapons with
gangster Vikas Dubey and also concealed the incident which took
place at the time of alleged saving of Rahul Tiwari. For this lapse and
misconduct, the accused-applicant was suspended.
38.    During the course of investigation, several witnesses present at
the time of incident have stated that the accused-applicants were
having cordial relationship with accused Vikash Dubey. Constable
Rajeev Kumar who was the fellow of applicant Vinay Tiwari has in
his first statement stated that the applicant Vinay Tiwari, co-accused
Sub Inspector K.K Sharma were having cordial relationship with
gangster Vikash Dubey. Constable Abhishek Kumar and others have
also stated the same facts. The call details show that Sub Inspector
K.K. Sharma on 02.07.2020 made several calls to the gangster and
informed them about the raid as he talked with the accused for more
than 20 minutes in different calls. There is enough evidence on record
to show that the accused-applicants were having very good
relationship and soft corner towards Vikas Dubey. This fact has also
been stated by accused Kshama and Rekha Agnihotri in their
39.    The witnesses have stated that Sub Inspector K.K. Sharma was
regularly in touch with the main accused and was regularly informing
him about the movement of police team. The call details of K.K.
Sharma sufficiently demonstrate his involvement in the crime.
Moreover, Applicant Vinay Kumar Tiwari was having jealous and
bad relation with Circle Officer Devendra Mishra and it is why he
was convinced by accused-applicant to lead from the main gate as a
result of which 8 police personnels were killed and 7 policemen
received gunshot injuries. After investigation, sufficient credible
evidence was found against the accused-applicants showing their
involvement in the whole criminal conspiracy which led to the
commission of such a horrendous crime. They conspired with
gangster Vikas Dubey, leaked confidential information about the raid
and facilitated the gangster and his gang to commit such a crime
which resulted in death of 8 police officers. The enmity and bad
relation of accused-applicant with Circle Officer Devendra Mishra is
very much evident and the Investigating Officer has taken note of the
viral letter in his CD in which Circle Officer Devendra Mishra had
intimated to higher authorities that integrity of Vinay Tiwary was
completely doubtful and he was regularly meeting with Vikas Dubey
and was communicating with him. It was also complained that if
Vinay Tiwari does not modify his conduct, any time some serious
incident can take place. With the CD, the report of Sri Devendra
Mishra, Circle Officer has been annexed by the accused-applicant in
his rejoinder affidavit dated 22.02.2021. At this stage, it cannot be
ruled that the said letter of Devendra Mishra is fake as contended on
behalf of accused-applicants.
40.    It has been also argued from the side of accused-applicants that
investigation has been completed and charge-sheet has been already
filed in this matter. The applicants are in jail from the last more than
one year. Their pretrial detention for such a long period is resulting in
deprivation of their right to liberty and freedom. The learned counsel
for applicant K.K. Sharma, has relied on the judgments of Dalvir
Hussain v State of Gujarat, AIR 1991 SC 56, Pawan Kumar v State
of UP, 2015(90) ACC 9 (SC), Mukesh Kumar Kashyap v State of
Uttarakhand, 2015(89) ACC 903, State of UP v Rajju, 2005(53) ACC
343, and K R Purushothaman v State of Kerla, 2006(54) ACC
255(SC). Therefore, it has been requested that, taking into
consideration overall circumstances and the long period to which they
are in jail, the court should take sympathetic view and the applicants
should be released on bail.
41.    This court is not oblivious about the fact that the release on bail
is crucial to the accused as the consequences of pretrial detention are
grave. If release on bail is denied to the accused, it would mean that
though he is presumed to be innocent till the guilt is proved beyond
reasonable doubt, he would be subjected to the psychological and
physical deprivations of jail life. The jailed accused loses his job and
is prevented from contributing effectively to the preparation of his
defence. Equally important, the burden of his detention frequently
falls heavily on the innocent members of his family. But, if the
accused is involved in a conspiracy for commission of a heinous
offence by a hardened criminal, his release on bail will give him an
opportunity to abscond or temper with witnesses. Against such crime,
social reaction is also sharp. Therefore, a balance between the need
for protection of individual liberty which is so important and the
requirements of the society for being shielded from the hazards of
being exposed to the misadventures of organized crime has to be
42.    The criminal justice system is often criticized for its pro-active
approach towards the accused. The rights of the accused are protected
not only during trial but also during investigation and even after the
delivery of judgment, more particularly when the case has resulted in
conviction. The accused cannot be kept in police custody unless with
the order of Magistrate and that too is possible only within first
fifteen days of his arrest. The bail provisions are liberal and for
arresting the accused there must be prima facie evidence collected by
the Investigation Officer. He can also be released on anticipatory bail.
The accused cannot be put to cruel or inhuman treatment at any stage.
There is a strong presumption of innocence in favor of accused and
consequently, it creates a heavy burden on prosecution to establish
the guilt beyond any shadow of reasonable doubt. The accused has
been given constitutional protection against self incrimination and he
has right to keep silence throughout and his silence will not be taken
adversely against him. Moreover, he enjoys all the rights associated
with his fair trial claim including free legal aid and impartial justice
delivery. Thus, protection of rights of accused is natural feature of
democracy which is accorded for the simple reason that the criminal
law machinery is controlled by the State. Accused is given free food,
free lodging, free clothes etc. and if he has been directed to undergo
rigorous imprisonment, he will have to be paid by the state for the
work he has rendered during jail life. But, the victim who is the most
adversely affected person by the criminal incident has no such claim.
The guilty man is lodged, fed, clothed, entertained and educated by
the state at the expense of the public, but ironically, the victim is left
to pay for even his medical expenses which may be the result of that
criminal event. There is no free education, free housing, free clothing
and free food for the victim. The injured party, in the criminal law,
often takes a back seat and after being examined in court as witness,
he stands aside waiting and watching the criminal justice in action
satisfied by conviction and sentence. He is fortunate if he gets a little
compensation or even expenses of the litigation. The administration
of criminal justice inspired and dominated by human rights and
humanitarian causes does every effort to reform, treat and rehabilitate
the offender, but does not show equal concern for the poor victim
who has suffered loss or injury. ( See for details Stephen Schafer,
Restitution to victim of crime, Stevens & Sons Ltd., London (1960)
p. VII as quoted by Bharat C. Das, Victims in the criminal justice
S.V. Joga Rao, Victim Restitution, the Lawyer, June 1990, p. 17 and
Proff. A. Lakshminath & Dr. J. Krishnakumari, Criminal Trial and
43.    Crime, corruption and population are three major problems the
society is facing at present. While against crime and corruption,
particularly when it is organized crime and corruption, strict state
action and intervention is necessary to restrict and minimize the same
to maximum extent, control over population growth requires legal
steps and strategy inclusive of motivation, spread of education and
awareness and some positive incentive to those who opt for family
planning. Against crime and corruption, the State must continue with
the policy of zero tolerance. The political parties should rise above
board against crime and corruption without being influenced by
consideration of “his man” and “our man” as this approach will not
only undermine rule of law but will also damage the democratic set
up of the nation.
44.    This is not an unknown phenomenon that there are policemen,
may be very few in numbers, who show their loyalty more to such
gangster than to their department for the reasons best known to them.
Such policemen tarnish the image, name and fame of police and it is
necessary that suspicious police personnels should be taken to task
and their conduct should be regularly monitored for which a
mechanism should be evolved, and if it exists already, the same
should be geared up at different levels. There is a concerning trend
that one or other political party welcomes gangsters and criminals
involved in organized crime in the party and try to back and protect
them, painting and spreading an imaginary image of Robinhood.
They are given tickets to contest elections and sometimes they win
also. This trend needs to be stopped as soon as possible. All the
political parties should sit and together a decision is required to be
taken by them that gangsters and criminals will be discouraged in
politics and no political party will give ticket to them in public
elections. The political parties should rise to the occasion and must
guide themselves keeping in view that there cannot be a concept of
“my criminal” and “his criminal” or “my man” and “his man,” as a
gangster is gangster only and is required to be condemned from all
corners and even people/voters should also take note of it while
making their choice for a candidate in a general election. We must
have the idea in mind that if we are entrusted with responsibility of
nation building, our responsibility is to think about the future
generation to whom we have to handover a legacy. We need to ponder
what kind of nation and society we want to leave for our future
generation. A sooner decision is necessary lest one day these
gangsters and criminals will become “Bhasmasur” and will give such
serious dent to the country and democratic set up which cannot be
45.      The pursuit of life, liberty and peace includes freedom from
crime. The State’s foremost duty is to provide these basic rights to
each citizen. The success of a Criminal Justice System can only be
measured by how successful it is in ensuring these rights in word and
spirit. The extent to which these rights are successfully protected, will
be reflected in the confidence of the public in the system. The
organized crime should be treated differently from traditional
individual criminality. Conspiracy is an integral aspect of organized
crime. There cannot be a direct evidence of conspiracy in such cases
and the law has to deal with organized crime on a footing different
from that of individual or conventional crime, as regards
admissibility and appreciation of the evidence.
46.     The discussion aforesaid certainly goes to show that the nature
of offence and amount of culpability is serious, heinous, shocking
and unprecedented. It is also evident that the main accused persons
had prior information of the police raid and naturally, in the present
set of facts, this information was revealed by police which not only
made the main accused persons alert but also provided them fullest
opportunity to prepare for attack and commit such a horrendous
crime in which 8 police personnels including the Circle Officer
sustained gunshot injuries and died. The situation of crime was such
and so sudden that the police force could not get opportunity to
sustain and counter and could do nothing. The accusation against the
accused-applicants is that they conspired with the main accused for
the commission of the offence because of their good relationship and
loyalty with main accused and also they wanted to score their
personal grudge with the Circle Officer. It is not possible to give a
final opinion at this stage. Certain witnesses who were part of the
police raid have given evidence against the accused-applicants
showing their closeness with the main accused persons which is
supported by circumstances such as the magnitude of the crime and
the preparedness on the part of gangster Vikas Dubey and his
associates; the statement of Vikas Dubey given to the IO before his
death that he had prior information about the raid; the conduct of the
accused-applicants before and during incident; applicant Vinay
Kumar Tiwari though leading one team but did not give any backup
support nor sustained any injury and showed complete inaction; and
applicant K K Sharma deliberately avoided in participating in raid
and the accusation is that he stayed and was deliberately left on
police station to pass information to the gangster.
47.    In view of the above discussion, the serious and heinous nature
of the offence, complicity of the accused-applicants in the conspiracy
and taking into consideration overall circumstances of the case, I do
not find any reason sufficient to allow the bail applications. Hence,
the bail applications of accused-applicants Vinay Kumar Tiwari and
K. K. Sharma are rejected.
48.    The learned trial court to expedite the trial. If the case is not
disposed nor a substantial development is found towards progress of
trial in one year, the accused-applicants will be at liberty to move
fresh bail application.
49.    It is also made clear that no observation of this Court in this
order will have any binding effect on the trial court and the case shall
be decided on the basis of evidence adduced during trial.