For the Appellant         :     Mr. Partha Pratim Das, Adv.
Appellant has assailed judgment and order dated 19.01.2005
passed by the learned Additional Sessions Judge, 1st Fast Track Court,
Alipurduar, Jalpaiguri in Sessions Trial Case No. 36 of 2004 arising out
of Sessions Case No. 54 of 2000 convicting the appellant for
commission of offence punishable under Sections 376(2)(f) of the Indian
Penal Code and sentencing him to suffer imprisonment for life and to
pay fine of Rs. 5,000/-, in default, to suffer imprisonment for one year.
Mr. Partha Pratim Das, learned Advocate appearing for the
appellant submits that the appellant was a juvenile at the time of
occurrence. During his examination under Section 313 Cr. P. C., he
had stated his age in January, 2004 as 23 years. Incident occurred in
October, 1996 when he would be around 16 years old.
In view of the aforesaid submission, by an order dated 8th June,
2016, this Court had directed enquiry to be made with regard to the
age of the appellant under the provisions of the Juvenile Justice Act.
Report of Chief Judicial Magistrate, Jalpaiguri dated 24th September,
2016 stating the date of birth of the appellant as April 7, 1980 as per
certificate dated 17th August, 2016 issued by Hasimara Hindi High
School (HS) was, however, not accepted by this Court and direction was
given upon the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Jalpaiguri to conduct
ossification test to determine approximate age of the appellant.
Pursuant to such direction, ossification test was conducted and report
of Dr. Rajib Prasad, M.D., Associate Professor, Department of Forensic
Medicine and Toxicology, NBMCH showing the approximate age of the
appellant between 35-40 years as on 02.06.2017 was placed before this
Court. In view of the wide gap of five years between the lower and the
upper age limit, Chief Judicial Magistrate was again directed to obtain
opinion of the medical expert of Medical College, Calcutta with regard to
the approximate age. Till date no report from Medical College, Calcutta
has been placed before this Court.
In Mukarrab And Others Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh 1 the
Apex Court observed determination of age through Radiological
examination after the accused is above 30 years cannot be done with
precision. In Darga Ram Vs. State of Rajasthan2 the Apex Court
expressed discomfort in estimating age when a wide range is proposed
in the medical report. In the present case, while calculation of age in
terms of Rule 12(3) of the Juvenile Justice Rules by taking the lower
age limit would take the approximate age of the appellant below 18
years. Similar calculation on the basis of the upper age limit would,
however, show that the appellant was above 18 years at the time of
In the light of the aforesaid situation, Mr. Das submits that the
appeal may be taken up for hearing on merits which we presently do.
Prosecution case as alleged against the appellant is to the effect
that on 21.10.1996 P.W.3 along with his wife (P.W.4) and two minor
children aged 4 years and 7 years respectively went to his in-laws’
house at Beech Tea Garden. Appellant was their neighbour. P.W.3
stayed back at his in-law’s house and the appellant accompanied his
wife and children to his residence. On the way, appellant took their
minor daughter (P.W.5) inside the tea garden and raped her. The victim
started shouting “save me, save me”. Mother of the victim (P.W.4)
rushed to the spot and found her daughter in her under garments with
(2017) 2 SCC 210 (para 27 to 29)
bleeding injuries. Appellant was also pulling up his trousers. Victim
narrated the incident to her mother. Written complaint was lodged by
her father (P.W.3) resulting in registration of Jaigaon P.S. Case No. 94
of 1996 under Section 376 IPC. Victim was medically treated at the tea
garden hospital and thereafter at Alipurduar Hospital. Charge sheet
was filed against the appellant and charge was framed under Section
376(2)(f) IPC.    During trial, prosecution examined 12 witnesses
including the victim. In conclusion of trial learned trial Judge by the
impugned judgment and order dated 19.01.2005 convicted and
sentenced the appellant, as aforesaid.
Mr. Das appearing for the appellant argues that the version of
the victim suffers from various improbabilities and inconsistencies.
Manner and circumstance in which the victim was forcibly raped does
not appear to be credible. Hence, the appellant is entitled to the benefit
of doubt.
Ms. Amita Gaur, learned Advocate appearing for the State
submits that the victim was aged about 7 years at the time of incident.
She was being accompanied by her mother (P.W.4) and younger brother
when the appellant dragged her inside the tea bushes and raped her.
Her version is corroborated by her mother (P.W.4) as well as the
Doctors who treated her (P.W.9 and 10). Other prosecution witnesses
also support the case. Hence, the appeal is liable to be dismissed.
P.W.5 is the minor victim. She deposed that on the fateful day she
was returning home from her maternal grandfather’s house along with
her mother and brother. Appellant was also accompanying them. When
they reached No. 10 garden, her mother and brother were walking
ahead of her. She was following them along with the appellant.
Appellant suddenly caught her and dragged her inside the tea garden.
Thereafter, he forcibly raped her. She shouted for help and her mother
came to the spot. She suffered bleeding injuries in her private parts.
She narrated the incident to her mother. She was taken to the hospital
in the tea garden and thereafter to Alipurduar S.D. Hospital. She told
the facts to local people.
P.W.4 mother of the victim girl, has substantially corroborated
her deposition.
P.W.3 is the father of the victim girl. He heard the incident from
his wife and lodged First Information Report which was scribed by
P.W.1 and Marked Exhibit 1. He stated police seized the wearing
apparels of the victim girl.
P.W.7 stated he heard the incident from P.W.4 and the victim girl
P.W.5. He took the victim to the garden hospital. He saw bleeding
injuries in the private parts of the victim.
P.W.8 stated after hearing the incident he tried to catch the
appellant but he fled away.
P.W.9 (Dr. Kamalesh Adhikary) treated the victim at tea garden
hospital at Malangi. He found bleeding injury in her vaginal region.
Such injury may be caused due to various reasons such as forcible
penetration of penis. He proved the injury report, Exhibit 4.
P.W.10 (Dr. Rudra Kumar Iswarary) is the doctor who treated the
victim at Alipurduar S.D. Hospital. He proved his report Exhibit 2/1
and signature of Dr. B.K. Sikdar, Exhibit 2/2.
From the aforesaid evidence on record, it appears that the version
of forcible rape as stated by the minor victim viz. P.W.5 is corroborated
by her parents as well as local people. Her evidence also receives
corroboration from the medical evidence on record. Hence, conviction of
the appellant has been proved beyond doubt.
Although, the victim was a minor and was forcibly raped,
appellant was also a young person who was barely above 18 years at
the time of occurrence. He does not have criminal antecedents. Keeping
in mind the aforesaid facts and as he has already suffered incarceration
for about 18 years, I modify the sentence imposed upon the appellant
and direct that he shall suffer imprisonment for the period already
undergone in place of the maximum sentence of life imprisonment
imposed upon him and pay the fine imposed upon him by the trial
Court, in default, shall suffer rigorous imprisonment for one year.
With this modification as to sentence, appeal is disposed of.
Connected application being CRAN 1 of 2007 (Old CRAN 1415 of
2007) is also disposed of.
Period of detention suffered by the appellant during investigation,
enquiry and trial shall be set off from the substantive sentence imposed
upon the appellant in terms of Section 428 of the Code of Criminal
Lower court records along with copies of this judgment be sent
down at once to the learned trial Court for necessary compliance.
Photostat certified copy of this judgment, if applied for, shall be
made available to the appellant upon completion of all formalities.
I agree.