01.       Petitioner, through the medium of this revision petition, has
assailed the order dated 23.11.2015 passed by the Court of learned 2nd
Additional Sessions Judge, Jammu (hereinafter called ‘Appellate
Court’, for short) whereby order dated 23.09.2015 passed by learned
Chief Judicial Magistrate, Jammu, whereby the appellant was not found
to be a juvenile and the charge sheet was committed to the Court of
learned Principal Sessions Judge, Jammu for trial, as a sessions trial
02.        The impugned order dated 23.11.2015 passed by the Appellate
Court has been assailed on the grounds that the learned Appellate Court
while upholding the order passed by learned Chief Judicial Magistrate,
Jammu whereby the petitioner had been declared as not a juvenile, in a
case arising out of FIR No.05/2014 registered at Police Station Gangyal
for the commission of offences punishable under sections 302/380/449
RPC is against the basic tenants of the J&K Juvenile Justice (Care and
Protection of Children) Act, 2013 (herein after called ‘Juvenile Justice
Act’, for short). It has been asserted that the prosecution has laid the
charge sheet showing the petitioner/accused in the case as juvenile,
however, the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Jammu vide order dated
23.09.2015 has held that the petitioner/accused was not a juvenile within
the meaning of Juvenile Justice Act and instead of trial of the case by a
Juvenile Justice Board, committed the case for sessions trial to the Court
of learned Principal Sessions Judge, Jammu. It has been further asserted
that both the Courts below concurrently held that the petitioner/accused
was not a juvenile on the date of the commission of the offence on a
wrong premise that the petitioner was born on 08.01.1994 as against
20.08.1996 as was claimed by the petitioner based on school record.
03.      Heard and considered.
04.      Learned counsel for the petitioner has, vehemently, argued that
both the Courts below have decided the juvenility of the petitioner as an
accused, based on the record of the Chowkidar of the village and did not
rely upon the school certificate issued in favour of the petitioner/accused
which has a primacy as had been repeatedly held not only by the Hon’ble
High Courts but by Hon’ble Supreme Court as well. He has further
submitted that the petition filed by the petitioner be allowed by setting
aside both the orders passed by the Courts below and the petitioner be
directed to be tried by the Juvenile Justice Board in accordance with the
Juvenile Justice Regime of law.
05.       Learned counsel for the respondents, on the other hand, argued
that the Courts below have passed the orders declaring the
petitioner/accused as not a juvenile based on the record produced during
inquiry with regard to the birth of the petitioner/accused in his village, as
such, no fault can be found with the impugned order. He has further
submitted that a hypertechnical approach is not required to be adopted
while appreciating the evidence adduced on behalf of the accused in
support of his plea that he was a juvenile and if two views may be
possible on the said evidence, the Court should lean in favour of the
accused to be a juvenile in borderline cases. He further argued that date
of birth record in the school has a primacy over all other evidence and
the Courts below have overlooked the same while holding that the
petitioner/accused was above the age of 18 as on the date of commission
of the offence.
06.        On a perusal of the order dated 23.09.2015 passed by learned
Chief Judicial Magistrate, Jammu, it is found that the Court had ignored
the birth certificate issued by Headmaster, Government (Boys) High
School, Bari Brahmana, where the petitioner had been a student and the
certificate had been duly proved by Ms. Poonam Chib Teacher,
examined as a witness showing that the date of birth of the
petitioner/accused had been recorded as 20.08.1996 in the admission
register on 05.04.2007. The father of the petitioner/accused namely Basi
Ram had also stated that the date of birth of his son is 20.08.1996 and
that the petitioner/accused had been admitted in Government (Boys)
High School, Bari Brahmana as his family has shifted to Bari Brahmana
from Doda after his birth.
07.       The Court of learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Jammu
accepted the date of birth of the petitioner/accused as 08.01.1994, based
on the Chowkidar certificate proved by the SHO Police Station Doda
wherefrom the family of the petitioner/accused hailed initially and
ignored the School Certificate issued by a Govt. School and duly proved.
Learned Appellate Court while deciding the appeal against the order
passed by learned Chief Judicial Magistrate upheld the order passed by
the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Jammu.
08.       Section 8 of the Juvenile Justice Act provides that, whenever, a
claim of juvenility is raised before any Court or a Court is of the opinion
that the accused person was a juvenile on the date of commission of the
offence, the Court shall make an inquiry, take such evidence as may be
necessary (but not on affidavit) so as to determine the age of such
person, and shall record a finding whether the person is a juvenile or not,
stating his age as nearly as may be, with a further proviso that a claim of
juvenility may be raised before any Court and it shall be recognised at
any stage, even after final disposal of the case, and such claim shall be
determined in terms of the provisions contained in the Act and the rules
made thereunder, even if the juvenile has ceased to be so on or before the
date of commencement of the Act and if the Court finds, a person to be a
juvenile, on the date of commission of the offence, it shall forward the
juvenile to the Board for passing appropriate order and sentence, if any,
passed by a Court shall be deemed to have no effect.
09.       Rule 74 of the Rules framed under the Act provide as to how
the age is to be determined. Sub-rule 3 of Rule 74 of the Rules provides
that the Board or the Committee, as the case may be, shall, as far as
possible decide the juvenility or otherwise, on the basis of physical
appearance or documents available, if any. It further provides that when
an inquiry is contemplated, the same shall be conducted on the basis of
the birth certificate issued by a Corporation or a Municipal Committee or
any other notified Authority or the Matriculation or equivalent certificate
or, in absence of these certificates in case of any contradiction arising
therefrom, the authority deciding the age issue may refer to a duly
constituted Medical Board which shall record its findings and submit to
10.       The Appellate Court has also relied upon the record produced
from the village Chowkidar and the concerned Police Station which were
notified authorities holding there were no record with regard to the date
of birth of the accused from matriculation or equivalent certificate. It
was also held that the date of birth certificate issued by Government
(Boys) High School Bari Brahmana, was not a certificate of
matriculation or equivalent certificate and that the learned Chief Judicial
Magistrate, Jammu has, therefore, rightly relied upon the certificate
issued by the Village Chowkidar and the Police Station concerned.
11.        Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in a case reported as AIR
2012 SC 3437 titled Vijay Singh V/s State of Delhi held that in the claim
of juvenility, first priority is given to the matriculation certificate or
equivalent certificate, second priority is to be given to the date of birth
certificate issued from school (other than play School) first attended and
in absence of other certificates, the certificate issued by Municipality or
Panchayat. The Court has thus, given priority to the certificate issued by
the educational institution other than play school which was firstly
attended by the accused to ascertain the claim of juvenility.
12.        Hon’ble Apex Court in a case titled Ashwani Kumar Saxena
V/s State of M.P. reported as (2012) 9 SCC 750 held in para 32 which is
“32. Age determination inquiry contemplated under Section 7A of
the Act read with Rule 12 of the 2007 Rules enables the court to
seek evidence and in that process, the court can obtain the
matriculation or equivalent certificates, if available. Only in the
absence of any matriculation or equivalent certificates, the court
needs to obtain the date of birth certificate from the school first
attended other than a play school. Only in the absence of
matriculation or equivalent certificate or the date of birth certificate
from the school first attended, the court needs to obtain the birth
certificate given by a corporation or a municipal authority or a
panchayat (not an affidavit but certificates or documents). The
question of obtaining medical opinion from a duly constituted
Medical Board arises only if the above mentioned documents are
unavailable. In case exact assessment of the age cannot be done,
then the court, for reasons to be recorded, may if considered
necessary, give the benefit to the child or juvenile by considering
his or her age on lower side within the margin of one year.”
Again Hon’ble Apex Court in a case titled Jodhbir Singh V/s State
of Punjab reported as (2012) 0 Supreme (SC) 854 relying upon the law
laid down in Ashwani Kumar Saxena case (supra) held that when the law
gives prime importance to the date of birth certificate issued by the
school first attended, the genuineness of which is not disputed, there is
no question of placing reliance on the certificate issued by the village
13.        It had been proved during the inquiry conducted by learned
Chief Judicial Magistrate that as on the date of commission of the
offence on 09.01.2014 and having regard to the date of birth of the
accused as on 08.01.1994 based on Village Chowkidar record and Police
Station record, the age of the accused was 20 years, as such, the accused
was not found to be a juvenile. Since Hon’ble Apex Court in the
aforestated judgments, had consistently held that the first priority is to be
given to a matriculation certificate and if that is not available, the second
priority is to be given to the date of birth issued from the school, that the
accused first attended, before placing reliance on this birth certificate
issued by Municipality or Panchayat. In the instant case, the accused was
shown, to have his date of birth as 20.08.1996, as recorded in the
Government (Boys) High School Bari Brahmana Jammu, which he had
attended first. The date of birth issued by the said school in view of the
law laid down by the Apex Court in the citations (supra) should have
been relied upon and date of birth of the petitioner/accused should have
been accepted as 20.08.1996.
14.        Having regard to this proposition and in the considered opinion
of this Court, both the Courts below have committed error by not
accepting the date of birth as shown in the school record which had also
been proved during the inquiry. The age of the petitioner should have
been accepted as 20.08.1996 based on the school record, having primacy
over other documents as against the record of village Chowkidar. In this
backdrop, date of birth based on school record, the petitioner/accused on
the date of occurrence on 09.01.2014 was of the age of 17 years 04
months and 20 days. Therefore, the petitioner/accused as on the date of
commission of the offence was below the age of 18 years and was a
juvenile within the definition of Juvenile Justice Act and his trial, in any
case, could have been conducted only by Juvenile Justice Board and not
by a regular Sessions Court.
15.       For the aforesaid reasons and observations made, herein above,
both the orders passed by learned Chief Judicial Magistrate Jammu and
learned 2nd Additional Sessions Judge Jammu, impugned in this petition
are hereby set aside holding that the petitioner/accused as on the date of
commission of the offence was a juvenile and is required to be dealt with
as a juvenile/child in conflict with law, before the Juvenile Justice Board.
The petition is, accordingly, allowed.
16.       As a sequel to the above, case titled State of J&K V/S Sanjay
Raina arising out of FIR No. 05/2014 registered at Police Station
Gangyal for the commission of offences punishable under sections
302/380/449 RPC and pending on the files of the trial Court, is ordered
to be transferred to the Juvenile Justice Board Jammu, for further
proceedings. Copy of the order be certified to the Court below for
17.       Criminal Revision Petition along with interim application(s) is
disposed of as granted.