The petitioners before this Court have filed the present
petition by way of a Public Interest Litigation stating that
they are the members of Sri Shiroor Mutt Bhaktha Samithi,
a Trust duly registered under the provisions of the Indian
Trusts Act, 1882. It has been stated that the Trust has been
established for the purposes of carrying out the religious,
cultural   and   other  activities  alongside   managing    the
properties of Sri Shiroor Mutt, which is one of the Ashta
Mutts of Udupi responsible for the activities and management
of Shri Krishna Temple at Udupi. The petitioners have stated
that they are associated with the said Mutt for generations
and their ancestors were also associated with Sri Shiroor
2.    The facts as stated in the writ petition further
reveal that Shri Laxmivara Teertha Swamiji, Peetadhipathi of
Sri Shiroor Mutt reached his heavenly abode during July,
2018. During his lifetime, he was managing the affairs of the
Mutt.   After his demise, in order to fill the vacuum and to
take charge of the administration and overall control of the
affairs of the management of the Mutt, the petitioners have
formed Sri Shiroor Mutt Bhaktha Samithi, which is the
consortium of all the persons and Bhakths of Sri Shiroor
Mutt, convened with the sole object and purpose of carrying
out the affairs and management of the Mutt as well as to
further the interests and tenets of the Madhva Philosophy,
which is the sole guiding factor and the purpose behind the
formation of the Mutt.
3.   The petitioners have further stated that after the
demise of Sri Laxmivara Teertha Swamiji, respondent No.6 -
Sri Vishwavallabha Teertha Swamiji took charge of Sri
Shiroor Mutt and started to portray himself as the coroneted
Peetadhipathi   of the   Mutt.    It has    been stated that
respondent No.6 illegally took charge and custody of Sri
Vittala Devara Pettige of the Mutt. The Vittala Devara Pettige
is an auspicious box containing all the spiritual and highly
valuable Idols and precious stones belonging to the Mutt,
which have travelled through several generations of the
Peetdhipathis of the Mutt.
4.   Much has been said in the writ petition about
respondent    No.6   by   the   petitioners  levelling various
allegations against him and it has been further stated that
the petitioners issued a legal notice on 12.3.2021 to
respondent No.6 informing him about his alleged illegal acts
and to desist from not only indulging in the affairs of the
Mutt, but also from portraying himself as the Peetadhipathi of
the Mutt. The petitioners have further stated that while all
this was going on, respondent No.6 along with his henchmen
began to float a news that respondent No.6 will appoint
respondent No.7, a minor as Peetadhipathi of the Mutt and it
was announced in a Press Conference that said ceremony
and appointment will take place in April-May, 2021. It has
been stated that a Press Conference was called in April, 2021
by respondent No.6 announcing the nomination of the
Peetadhipathi of the Mutt and the petitioners protested in the
5.    It has been further stated that respondent No.6
does not have any authority to indulge himself in the affairs
of the Mutt and does not have any power to nominate or
appoint a person as Peetadhipathi. It has been stated that
again a Press Conference took place on 20.4.2021, in which
respondent No.6 announced publicly that he would nominate
respondent No.7, a minor and a non-disciple of Sri Shiroor
Mutt as Peetadhipathi and the religious ceremony will take
place in the month of May 2021.
6.    It has been further stated that the petitioners
protested in the matter and informed the law enforcement
agencies about the alleged illegal acts of respondent No.6.
However, the ceremonies were performed to project the
nomination of respondent No.7 as Peetadhipathi of Sri
Shiroor Mutt. It has been stated that the announcement of
respondent     No.6    for   appointing  respondent   No.7  as
Peetadhipathi of Sri Shiroor Mutt and carrying on the
religious rituals are illegal and they could ignite communal
violence, pose threat to the maintenance of public health and
it is against all tenets and beliefs of the followers of Sri
Shiroor Mutt and as such, a direct infringement of the
fundamental     rights    provided   under   Part III  of  the
Constitution of India to the petitioners and to the public at
7.    The petitioners have raised a ground that the
minor is not capable of exercising free consent and is not
competent to contract in terms of Section 11 of the Indian
Contract Act, 1872 and even under the scheme of Guardian
and Wards Act, 1890 and as per the provisions of the Hindu
Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956, as long as the child
does not attain 18 years of age, the natural guardians, who
are the parents would continue to be the legal guardians of
the minor child unless ordered otherwise.
8.    It has been further stated that respondent No.7
is not from an affluent background and there are economic
challenges, which the family is faced with. He is the only son
of his parents and he has an younger sister.       It has been
stated that after filing of the present petition, respondent
No.6 has declared that religious ceremony for appointment of
respondent No.7 would be held between 11.5.2021 and
14.5.2021 and therefore, the petitioners have immediately
taken steps to alert the State Machinery and the concerned
authorities about the flagrant violation of Covid 19 guidelines
and consequential violation of the provisions of the Disaster
Management Act, 2005 and the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897.
9.    It has been stated that several representations
had been given to the District Administration, District Police
and those representations have been brought on record.        It
has been stated that the petitioners have also given
representations     to  Karnataka     State   Commission    for
Protection of Child Rights and the representation dated
27.5.2021 is also on record.
10.   It has been further stated that respondent No.4 –
Karnataka State Commission for Protection of Child Rights
has formulated a detailed policy on child rights including the
National Policy for Children. In consonance with the same
and for establishing the authorities as envisaged under
various policies of the Central Government and that of
Ministry of Women and Child Development, respondent No.1
– State of Karnataka and respondent No.8 – Department of
Women and Child Welfare have devised the Karnataka Child
Protection Policy, 2016 and have set up various authorities
under the said Policy.
11.   It has been stated and argued before this Court
that conferment of Sanyasa on a minor is violative of all the
policies issued on the subject.     It has been further stated
that the petitioners are the persons owing allegiance to Sri
Shiroor Mutt and they are deeply interested in ensuring that
the religious practices attached are practiced in the same
manner in which they are being performed right from the
inception of the Mutt. It has been stated that in respect of
the fundamental rights under Articles 25 and 26 of the
Constitution of India as to the religious practices attached to
the religious denomination, Sri Shiroor Mutt requires to be
protected    and   as   respondent    No.6   has  violated  the
constitutional and fundamental rights guaranteed under
Articles 25 and 26, the only remedy available is to approach
the Constitutional Mechanism provided under Article 226 and
32 of the Constitution of India.
12.   The petitioners have further stated that they
have submitted representations to all the authorities, who
are respondents before this Court. However, as nothing has
been done, the present petition is being filed to espouse the
general public cause, the rights of minors and for protection
of the religious practices of Sri Shiroor Mutt.
13.   Various grounds have been raised in the present
petition and it has been contended that the present petition
is maintainable before this Court.          On the ground of
maintainability, it has been stated that the issue involved in
the present petition relates to a public institution and the
action of respondent No.6 is violative of fundamental rights
guaranteed to the devotees of Sri Shiroor Mutt under Part III
of   the   Constitution  of  India,  hence,   the   petition is
14.   Reliance has been placed upon a judgment
delivered in the case of Shalini Shyam Shetty and Anr., v.
Rajendra Shankar Patil, reported in (2011) 1 CTC 854.
Reliance has also been placed upon a judgment delivered in
the case of Sheela Barse v. Union of India, reported in
AIR 1988 SC 2211 in respect of the issue of maintainability of
the writ petition.    Reliance has also been placed upon a
judgment delivered in the case of C.K.Rajan v. State of
Kerala and others, reported in AIR 1994 Kerala 179;
A.A.Gopalakrishnan v. Cochin Devaswom Board and
others, reported in (2007) 7 SCC 482; and State of
Uttaranchal v. Balwant Singh Chaufal and others,
reported in (2010) 3 SCC 402.
15.   In respect of the ground that respondent No.6
has no authority or religious sanction to nominate or appoint
Peetadhipathi of Sri Shiroor Mutt, it has been stated by the
petitioners    that   respondent    No.6   is   the   coronate
Peetadhipathi of Sri Sode Vadiraja Mutt and has no nexus
whatsoever with Sri Shiroor Mutt and therefore, as he is not
the Peetadhipathi of Sri Shiroor Mutt, he does not have
power to nominate a Peetadhipathi of Sri Shiroor Mutt.
Therefore, the exercise of powers by respondent No.6 to
appoint respondent No.7 as Peetadhipathi of Shiroor Mutt is
in violation of the fundamental rights guaranteed to the
petitioners under Part III of the Constitution of India.
16.    Another  ground      has   been    raised  by  the
petitioners stating that a minor cannot be appointed as a
Matadhipathi of Sri Shiroor Mutt.         In respect of the said
ground,    it  has  been   stated    that   the  appointment  of
respondent No.7 as Peetadhipathi of Sri Shiroor Mutt is
opposed to law and religious tenets. The respondent No.7 is
a minor, is incapable of exercising his independent judgment
and discretion in the matters of submitting his will to accept
the position of Peetadhipathi of the Mutt, let alone use his
knowledge and wisdom in dealing with the affairs and
management of the activities and properties of the Mutt. It
has been further stated that respondent No.7 is an innocent
and immature minor, who has not even attained the age nor
the independent thinking ability of differentiating the nuances
attached to the life of grihastha and a sanyasa. It has been
further stated that respondent No.7 is not even a disciple of
Sri Shiroor Mutt and a person who is not disciple of Sri
Shiroor Mutt, has been appointed as a Peetadhipathi. He is
an alien to Sri Shiroor Mutt.
17.   Another ground has been taken by the petitioners
stating that respondent No.7 who is a minor cannot be the
owner of the properties of the Mutt.     The properties of the
Mutt are worth crores and crores of rupees and respondent
No.7    being  a   minor,  cannot  exercise   in  any  manner
independent     judgment    or  contractual   rights  qua   the
properties and as such, respondent No.7 will not be able to
exercise the control over the properties of the Mutt.
18.   Another ground raised by the petitioners is that
respondent No.7 does not have an elder or younger brother –
sibling and the religious books and customary practices
provide that a person cannot be appointed as a Peetadhipathi
unless he is having an elder or younger brother – sibling.
Such a practice, is prevalent only to ensure that the parents
are taken care of by his elder or younger brother – sibling. It
has been further stated that respondent No.7 is the only son
of his parents and his appointment as a Peetadhipathi will
leave his parents all alone and he will not be able to
discharge the pious obligations of a son towards his parents
and therefore, the appointment is bad in law.
19.   Another    ground     has   been    raised  by    the
petitioners, though it has been raised in earlier paragraphs
also, stating that respondent No.6 does not enjoy the
religious sanction to nominate a Peetadhipathi of Sri Shiroor
Mutt and the appointment is bad on the ground that a minor,
who is a non disciple of Sri Shiroor Mutt has been appointed
as a Peetadhipathi of Sri Shiroor Mutt.
20.   The petitioners by way of an amendment have
added another ground and the contention of the petitioners is
that the appointment of respondent No.7 as Peetadhipathi of
Sri Shiroor Mutt is violative of Article 21 of the Constitution of
India and it is also violative of Article 14 of the Constitution
of India.   It has also been stated that the appointment of
respondent No.7 as Peetadhipathi is again contrary to the
provisions as contained under Article 39(a) and 39(f) of the
Constitution of India.
21.   The petitioners have raised other grounds also in
respect of violation of the child rights and have placed
reliance upon a judgment delivered in the case of Sheela
Barse and Ors., v. Union of India and Ors., reported in
1986(3) SCC 596; in the case of Sheela Barse (II) and
Ors., v. Union of India and Ors., reported in 1986(3) SCC
632; in the case of Lakshmi Kant Pandey v. Union of
India, reported in 1984(2) SCC 244; and in the case of Suo
Moto v. State of Karnataka, W.P.No.4840/2012, decided
by the High Court of Karnataka on 5.7.2012.
22.   The petitioners have also placed reliance on
UNCRC- 1989      and the contention of the petitioners is that
various laws have been enacted to protect the rights of the
child and appointment of respondent No.7 is again in
violation of the Child Rights and is also in violation of the
Commission of Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005.     It has
been further stated that there was a wide coverage of minor
rights   being  violated   by  imposition  of  sanyasa   upon
respondent No.7 and all the authorities have failed to protect
the rights of the child. It has been further stated that as no
action has been taken against respondent No.6, it lends
credence to the statement of the petitioners that respondent
No.6 has been in a position to wield extraneous influence on
the    concerned    authorities    and  the   stakeholders   for
implementation of law and therefore, the petitioners have
filed the present petition before this Court.
23.   It has been further stated that various guidelines
have been issued by the State Government, Government of
India and the guidelines in respect of Covid 19 pandemic
have been violated as well as statutory provisions under the
Disaster Management Act, 2005 and Epidemic Diseases Act,
1897, by holding a religious ceremony of appointing a
Peetadhipathi by respondent No.6 and no action has been
taken by the State Government.
24.   The petitioners have again and again projected
themselves to be the followers of Sri Shiroor Mutt and it has
been alleged that the religious rights protected in terms of
Articles 25 and 26 including the management of a Religious
Institution, have been violated.
25.   The petitioners have placed reliance upon a
judgment delivered in the case of The Commissioner,
Hindu      Religious     Endowments,        Madras     v.   Sri
Lakshmindra Thirtha Swamiar of Sri Shirur Mutt,
reported in 1954 SCR 1005; Adi Saiva Sivachariyargal
Nala Sangam and Ors., v. The Government of Tamil
Nadu and Ors., reported in (2016) 2 SCC 725; Seshammal
v. State of Tamil Nadu, reported in (1972) 2 SCC 11; and
Indian Young Lawyers Association and Ors., v. The
State of Kerala and Ors., reported in 2019 11 SCC 1.
26.   Another    ground    has   been  raised   by  the
petitioners stating that the Balasanyasa as a whole is done
away with the common consensus of the Ashtamatas
including that of Sri Sode Vadiraja Mutt, of which respondent
No.6 is a Pontiff while the seers of Ashtamatas have regarded
this practice as obsolete and unnecessary.        It has been
stated that Sri Vishwesha Tirtha, the erstwhile pontiff of the
Pejawara Mutt, who is highly revered not only by the people
owing allegiance to Sri Pejawara Mutt but by the Madhwa
Community      at  large,   have   also  expressed   a  strong
disapproval against the practice of anointing a minor as a
Uttaradhikari/Matadhipathi.     It has been stated that the
Seers of many respective Ashtamatas have also expressed
dissatisfaction against the anointment of a minor in place of a
Peetadhipathi of Sri Shiroor Mutt and the same has received
wide publicity.
27.  The petitioners have prayed for an interim relief
in the present petition to prohibit respondent No.6 from
carrying out any religious events for the appointment of
respondent No.7, a minor to the seat of Peetadhipathi.
However, as this Court is deciding the matter on merits, the
question of granting any interim relief in the matter does not
28.  Respondent Nos.5 and 6 have filed their reply
and it has been stated that the present petition is not a
Public Interest Litigation. It is purely a private and publicity
oriented petition.    It has been stated that the petitioners
have not approached this Court with clean hands and the
petitioners in the guise of espousing a public cause have
attempted to project their own personal interest and agenda.
The petition presented by the petitioners do not involve
anything, which even has a semblance of public interest. It
has been stated that no resolution has been filed by the so-
called Trust empowering the petitioners to file a writ petition
on behalf of the Trust. The petition also does not raise any
substantial issue relating to any public cause or interest and
it has been filed with vested interest.
29.    It has been further stated that under the guise of
public interest the petitioners have attempted to project and
establish their private rights vis-à-vis Sri Shiroor Mutt, one of
the AshtaMutts (eight Mutts) established 800 years ago by
his Holiness Shriman Madhwacharya, the profounder of the
Madhwa Philosophy, known as the 'Dwaitha Sidhantha",
which is held in great reverence and sanctity, not only by the
followers of Madhwacharya throughout India, but by the
pious Hindus of the State of Karnataka in particular and
various other States of this Country in general.
30.    The respondents No.5 and 6 have further stated
that the petitioners have not been able to establish violation
of any statutory provision of law warranting any reliefs from
the hands of this Hon'ble Court. It has been further stated
that the Mutts and other religious institutions in the State of
Mysore    were    governed    by   the  Mysore    Religious  and
Charitable Endowments Act.          The State of Mysore was
formed in 1956 on the reorganization of the States in India
by adding some Districts of the then Madras State, the then
Andhra Pradesh and Maharashtra States.            The undivided
Dakshina Kannada District and Udupi District were earlier
governed by the Madras Hindu Religious and Endowments
Act.    The State of Mysore (Karnataka) has enacted a
comprehensive law in the State, including the Districts'
merger with the State after reorganization since there was a
longstanding public demand to bring about a uniform law to
provide for the regulation of all charitable endowments and
Hindu Religious Institutions in the State of Karnataka, which
were regulated under different enactments having local
applications in different parts of the States.
31.   The enactments quoted by the respondents No.5
1)     The Karnataka Religious and Charitable Institutions
2)     The     Madras   Hindu    Religious   and Charitable
3)     The Bombay Public Trust Act, 1950; and
32.    The Hindu Religious Institutions and Charitable
Endowments Act, 1997 (hereinafter referred to as the Act of
1997) was brought into force by replacing several local laws
and to bring uniformity in the matter of regulating the
various   charitable    endowments      and     Hindu Religious
Institutions. The said Act excluded all the Mutts in the State
of Karnataka     from  its application    and   the  same  was
challenged before this Court.        The petition was initially
dismissed by the learned Single Judge, who has upheld the
validity of the Act and the matter was taken up before the
Division   of  this  Court  in   the   case   of  Sri  Sahasra
Lingeshwara Temple and others v. State of Karnataka
and others, in W.A.No.3440/2005 and other connected
matters and the Division Bench of this Court has struck down
the Act by judgment dated 8.9.2006. The matter was then
taken up in appeal before the Hon'ble Supreme Court and the
matter is still pending before the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
Thereafter, the Act of 1997 was amended by the State
Government in the year 2011 by Amendment Act 27/2011
and the amendment was again challenged before this Court
and this Court has struck down the amendment.          Thus, in
short, as on today, there is no law governing the Religious
and Charitable Endowments in the State of Karnataka.
33.     The respondents No.5 and 6 have further stated
that assuming that earlier Endowment Act applies in the
State in the light of the orders passed by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court, the said Act in unequivocal terms does not
apply to Mutts and therefore, there is no exclusive right
available to the petitioners to challenge under Article 226 of
the Constitution of India.
34.     The respondents No.5 and 6 in reply to the
alleged violation of rights flowing to the Peetadhipathi of Sri
Shiroor Mutt under the Commission for Protection of Child
Rights Act, 2005, have stated that none of the rights flowing
to the Peetadhipathi of Sri Shiroor Mutt, who is below the age
of 18 years, are affected by his appointment as Peetadhipathi
to the said Mutt. It has been further stated that all the rights
flowing to him from or under any statute including those
guaranteed to him under Article 39(e) and 39(f) of the
Constitution of India or under the Juvenile Justice Act, 2015
or any other law for the time being in force, are not affected
or infringed or impaired by his appointment as Peetadhipathi
35.     It has been further stated that the appointment
of Peetadhipathi of Sri Shiroor Mutt is also well within the
policies formulated by the Union of India from time to time
including National Policy for Children of 2013.    It has been
further stated that Peetadhipathi of Sri Shiroor Mutt –
respondent No.7 has not been denied or deprived of any of
his rights flowing to him under any law or policies of the
Union of India. Peetadhipathi pursues education by learning
Vedas,     Upanishads,      Philosophy     of    Sri    Shriman
Madhwacharya, to which he had always keen interest,
profound love and desire.      Peetadhipathi is not abused or
forced to do any vocation unsuited to his age or strength nor
is forced to carry out the duties attached to the post of
Peetadhipathi owing to any economic necessity or need.        It
has been stated that in Sri Shiroor Mutt he has all the
opportunities and facilities for over all development of his
person and personality in a most conducive environment and
his freedom is not all curtailed. It has been stated that the
Peetadhipathi lives under the care and protection of the
Peetadhipathi of respondent No.5 and also under the learned
Teachers of the said Mutt.         His childhood is perfectly
protected against all fours, against any sort of exploitation,
against moral and material abandonment and the petitioners
have raised all baseless allegations in the writ petition.
36.  It has been stated by respondents No.5 and 6
that the writ petition lies against the State and the
instrumentalities of the State and in the case on hand, a
careful reading of the contentions raised and grounds urged
and reliefs sought by the petitioners against private parties,
that too after failing to get any reliefs in the Criminal
Proceedings instituted by the petitioners with very same
allegations, indicate the real intention and motive of the
petitioners in filing the present proceedings in the guise of a
37.   It has been stated that the petitioners have not
placed proper facts before this Hon’ble Court but have placed
distorted version of events. The facts in their proper
perspective as stated by respondents No.5 and 6 are as
The holy land Bharata, is a leading centre of rich
tradition of culture and heritage. The treasure of culture and
heritage has its roots in ancient sacred texts i.e., the Vedas,
the Upanishads, the Smritis, Ramayana, Maha-Bharata,
Purana etc.     Ancient sages, who were the seers of truth,
preserved this vast literature and blessed the generation.
They lived with nature and worshipped it. They had the
shelter in caves, leaf huts, etc.     Since they enjoyed the
realization of Cosmic Truth, they surpassed the mundane
hardships. They roamed around this holy land and sanctified
it. They used to initiate the holy texts to the qualified. Thus,
the sages accomplished this academic goal in their holy
shelters (Ashramas) and also elsewhere.           Gradually, the
generation of qualified felt the need of academic initiation
and hence, flocked to the Ashramas voluntarily. Then, the
holy shelters (penance grooves) became the renowned
learning centres.       The contribution of these centres is
significant in all respects. When the number of such centres
increased,    there   occurred   amalgamation    for  meticulous
transaction. The number of pupils also got increased. Along
with studies, there started distinct practice of observance.
Each learning centre systematized the learning and mode of
observance and thus, sustained its individuality. Thereafter,
such centres were replaced by Mutts.           There came the
founder of that institution, who was also reckoned as the
expounder of the doctrine of particular system. To continue
the propagation of doctrines and noble observance, the
founder    nominated     qualified  disciples for  the  purpose
mentioned above.
38.   Shriman Madhwacharya was a great philosopher
and a saint, who professed, propounded, preached and
practised Hindu Philosophy popularly known as Dwaitha
Philosophy (pluralistic theism of the Hindu religion). Shriman
Madhwacharya, established a Mutt called Sri Krishna Mutt in
Udupi    about   800   years  ago,   where   he   installed  and
consecrated an idol of Lord Shri Krishna said to have been
worshiped by Lord Sri Krishna’s wife, Rukmini Devi, herself
during her life time, and the said Mutt is now popularly
known as Shri Krishna Mutt. In the said Shri Krishna Mutt,
Shriman Madhwacharya during his life time himself carried
out all the rites and rituals associated with the worship of
Lord Shri Krishna. Shriman Madhwacharya, during his life
time also established Ashta Mutts (8 Mutts) in Udupi town
inter alia for the purposes of carrying out the worship of Lord
Shri Krishna in Shri Krishna Mutt, all other religious rites and
rituals connected with the worship of Lord Shri Krishna as
also for the propagation, preaching and practice of Dwaitha
39.   The eight Mutts so established by Shriman
Madhwacharya for the above purposes are as under:
To the aforesaid 8 Mutts, Shriman Madhwacharya
appointed 8 Peethadhipathis, who were his direct ‘Sanyasin-
40.    It has been stated that Shriman Madhwacharya
blessed    his   8   disciples  mentioned    above  with   the
images/idols of the following deities:
These 8 Balasanyasi-Disciples were all living in Shri
Krishna Mutt at the relevant point in time and carried out the
activities associated with the Worship of Lord Shri Krishna as
ordained by their teacher Shriman Madhwacharya. The
Propounder       of    the   Dwaitha     Philosophy,   Shriman
Madhwacharya, had established these 8 Mutts in pairs. In
other words, the Ashta Mutts were grouped into pairs and the
set of 4 Pair Mutts are popularly known as Dwandwa Mutts.
41.   The    arrangements     so   made    by   Shriman
Madhwacharya of these 8 Mutts are as under :
It has been stated that as per the aforementioned
arrangements, respondent No.5 - Mutt Shri Sode Mutt is the
Dwandwa Mutt of the Shri Shiroor Mutt. The arrangement so
put in place by Shriman Madhwacharya 800 hundred years
ago among these 8 Mutts was such that as and when the
circumstances as obtaining demanded or presented on
account    of   death   or   any   incapacity of the presiding
Peethadhipathi of any of the Ashtamatas, the Peethadhipathi
of its Pair Mutt (Dwandwa Mutt) could step in and take care
of its affairs and activities. Such was the power conferred on
the Peethadhipathi of the Dwandwa Mutt that he had the
power to select and appoint a successor not only to the Mutt
of which he is the Peethadhipathi, but also a successor to its
Pair Mutt (Dwandwa Mutt), whose Peethadhipathi for reasons
such as death, impairment-mental or physical, or for any
reason whatsoever did not or could not select and appoint his
42.    It has been stated that the qualifications for
being selected and appointed as a Peethadhipathi of any of
the Ashta Mutts are that the person should belong to the
Tulu Shivalli Madhwa Brahmin Community and he should be
a Brahmachari (Celibate) belonging to a Tulu speaking
Brahmin Family from South Canara and a follower or disciple
of any of the Ashta Mutts. A person so selected and
appointed would be initiated into “Sanyasa” in accordance
with the Hindu scriptures, procedures, religious ceremonies
and rituals as are prescribed in that behalf and he shall live
with the Peethadhipathi of the Mutt if available, or with the
Peethadhipathi of the Pair Mutt (Dwandwa Mutt), if the
Swamiji of a particular Mutt is not available due to death,
incapacity or impairment or any such reasons.          While so
living with the Peethadhipathi of the Mutt to which he is
appointed or anointed as a Peethadhipathi or with the
Peethadhipathi of its Dwandwa Mutt (pair Mutt), he shall
learn the Vedas, Upanishads and other religious and spiritual
subjects. Primarily he should learn the teachings of Shriman
Madhwacharya enshrined in his 37 texts, which are popularly
known as “Sarva Moola Granthas”.
43.   It has been further stated by respondents No.5
and   6  that   it is  necessary    to  place  on   record   the
incontrovertible fact before this Court that the earlier pontiffs
of Shri Shiroor Mutt, namely Shri Shri Lakshmindra Theertha,
Shri   Shri   Lakshmimanojna       Theertha   and    Shri   Shri
Lakshmivara Theertha, hailed from the same blood family,
who are recognized to be the disciples of Shri Sode Vadhiraja
Mutt. Moreover, the above mentioned three of them were
appointed as the Peethadhipathi of Sri Shiroor Mutt, one after
the other, by the then Dwandwa Matadhipati, Shri Shri
Vishwothama Theertha and the ashrama guru of the present
pontiff of Shri Sode Vadhiraja Mutt, under the concept of the
Dwandwa Mutt, which is prevailing in the customs of the Shri
Krishna Mutt since the time of Shriman Madhwacharya.
44.   It has been stated that Shriman Madhwacharya
having established the above mentioned 8 Mutts and the
Krishna Mutt, had ordained that each of the disciples
appointed as Peethadhipathis of each of the 8 Mutts should
take charge of the affairs of Shri Krishna Mutt from the other,
who was in charge of such affairs of the Mutt when his turn
would come to an end and preside over the affairs of Sri
Krishna Mutt for a period of 2 months and function as
“Paryaya Peethadhipathi of Shri Krishna Mutt”. The period of
2 months of such charge is called “Paryaya”, the duration of
which came to be extended later to 2 years by Shri. Vadiraja
Teertha of Sri Sode Mutt during his term of Peethadhipathi of
that Mutt. The end of each such term is marked by a Festival,
which is celebrated on a grand scale and is attended by lakhs
of people.
45.   All the 8 Peethadhipathis are the “Joint Trustees”
of Shri Krishna Mutt, where the idol of Lord Shri Krishna was
installed and consecrated by Shriman Madhwacharya. The
Paryaya Swamiji will be the Managing Trustee of Sri Krishna
Mutt during his term of 2 years (Paryaya) and will be
responsible for carrying out series of rituals and ceremonies
associated with the worship of Lord Shri Krishna from early
dawn and till late in the night. The religious activities and
ceremonies connected with the worship of Lord Shri Krishna
will be carried out as per a practice known as “Tantra Sara
Paddathi”,     laid  down    by    Shriman  Madhwacharya. The
Paryaya Peethadhipathi is also required to carry out Car
Festival (Rathostava) of Lord Shri Krishna. During Paryaya,
Shri Krishna Mutt feeds all the devotees who come to witness
the festival from all over the world, from out of the income of
Shri Krishna Mutt, the resources of the Paryaya Swamiji and
from the borrowings that he may make. The Peethadhipathis
of the other 7 Mutts assist the Paryaya Swamiji in the series
of rituals and spiritual activities associated with the worship
of Lord Shri Krishna and preach, propagate and spread not
only the teachings of Shriman Madhwacharya but also the
Vedas, the Upanishads, other Holy Scriptures and Spiritual
Sciences associated with Hindu Dharma to the people so as
to enable them to lead a pious, honest, truthful and peaceful
life and also to earn the merit and grace of the almighty.
46.   It has been stated that during the past over 800
years the aforesaid custom, tradition, procedure, system,
religious and spiritual activities of Sri. Krishna Mutt and Ashta
Mutts     are    being    carried    out   by    their   respective
Peethadhipathis, as their trustees strictly as ordained by
Shriman     Madhwacharya       and   in  accordance    with   other
religious scriptures, without any hindrance, obstructions,
interruptions,    threat,   coercion,    duress,   enticement    or
inducement from any quarter whatsoever and to the utmost
satisfaction of the followers of the 8 Mutts and other devotes.
Suffice it to say that the place or premises, where the great
saint Shriman Madhwacharya lived with his 8 disciples in the
initial period and carried out the worship of Lord Shri Krishna
was called and continues to be called and known as Sri
Krishna Mutt and is attached to the Ashta Mutts established
by Shriman Madhwacharya, each one of which is presided
over by his disciples as Peethadhipathis. It is further stated
that the very aim, object and purpose of establishing the
Ashta Mutts and grouping them into 4 pairs (Dwandwa
Mutts),    as   detailed   herein    was    to  have   cordiality,
camaraderie, among the Ashta Peethadhipathis so that any
complicated circumstances or situations which may arise in
any of the Ashta Mutts could be dealt with and solved by the
Peethadhipathis of Ashta Mutts and to ensure proper worship
of Lord Shri Krishna and other religious ceremonies or
activities connected therewith perpetually and without any
interruption or obstruction from any quarter whatsoever. It
has been further stated that all the pontiffs of Ashta Mutts
from     their   inceptions    have      had   Balasanyasis     as
Peethadhipathis,    who    have    efficiently and   successfully
managed and administered the Sri Krishna Mutt and their
respective    Ashta   Mutts,  for   over   800  years.  Shriman
Madhwacharya himself was a Balasanyasi and was initiated
into Sanyasa at the age of 11 years by his Teacher Shri
47.   It has been stated that, Shri Sode Vadiraja Mutt
(5th respondent herein) and Shri Shiroor Mutt, as stated
earlier, have been paired with each other for the purposes
mentioned earlier and are hence called Dwandwa Mutts. By
virtue of being Dwandwa Mutts, each of the Peethadhipathis
of these two Mutts has the inherent power to take care of the
affairs of the other Mutt and carry out the activities
associated therewith.
48.   It has been stated that Shri Shiroor Mutt is one
of the Ashta Mutts established by Shriman Madhwacharya
and he appointed his direct disciple Shri Vamana Teertha as
its first Peethadhipathi. The pontiff so appointed was handed
down an idol of Shri Vithala, the presiding deity of this Mutt,
by Shriman Madhwacharya. This Mutt has an adorable and
glorious history to its credit. This Mutt has been rendering
the yeomen’s service to the cause of propagation of Madhwa
Sidhanta and Unbroken observance. The Mutt has not lagged
behind to respond to the social issues as a matter of
obligation. All the pontiffs of this Mutt starting from Shri
Vamana      Teertha,   the  founder    of  the  lineage,  have
contributed to various fields. Even other exalted saints of this
lineage, endowed with godly characteristics, readily came
forward to help the whole of mankind. This Mutt has had as
many as 30 Peethadhipathis, including the incumbent Shri
Vedavardhana Teertha (who has been arrayed herein as
respondent No. 7 under the name Aniruddha). This Mutt has
been paired with Sri Sode Mutt by Shriman Madhwacharya.
49.   In respect of Shri Sode Vadiraja Mutt (5th
respondent) it has been stated that Shri Sode Vadiraja Mutt
was also established by Shriman Madhwacharya and its first
Peethadhipathi was Shri Vishnu Teertha. Shri Vishnu Teertha
was    the   direct  brother   and    disciple   of   Shriman
Madhwacharya. The presiding deity of this Mutt is Shri
Bhuvaraha. Shri Vadiraja Teertha was also a pontiff of this
Mutt and he was very well read and, erudite saint and toured
to the length and breadth of India propagating the Dwaitha
philosophy. The 6th Respondent is the present pontiff of this
Mutt.   This Mutt was paired with Shri Shiroor Mutt by
Shriman Madhwacharya and that is how these two Mutts
have come to be kwon as Dwandwa Mutts. Among the Ashta
Mutts, Sri Sode Vadiraja Mutt (then known as Kumbhasi
Mutt) has the adorable and glorious history to its credit. The
Mutt has been rendering the yeoman’s service to the course
of propagation of Siddhanta and unbroken observance. The
Mutt has not lagged behind to respond to the social issues as
a matter of obligation. All the pontiffs, starting from Sri
Vishnuthirtha - the founder of the lineage, have contributed
to various fields. The crest jewel of the lineage Sri Vadiraja
Teertha has enriched the dignity of higher rank by his mystic
power and extra ordinary contribution. Being Latavya Ruju
god incarnated, Vadiraja showed the noble path to the world
of qualified souls to set themselves free from the mundane
worries. Even other saints of this lineage, endowed with
godly characteristics, readily came forward to help the whole
of mankind. All of these saints enjoyed the reward and
recognition for the services rendered. With safeguarding the
greatness tradition, Mutt realized the timely need and also
accorded the importance to the modern education. Mutt has
the rich collection of rare manuscripts. Mutt is providing
better facilities of its branches for devotees.
50.     It has been stated that respondent No.7 -
Anirudha, is the son of Dr.Uday Kumar Saralathaya and Smt.
Srividya    Saralathaya. Dr.Uday      Kumar    Saralathaya has
studied Vedanta in Sanskrit College in Udupi, secured B. Ed
degree from Rashtriya Sanskrit Vidya Peeta, Tirupathi and
has also obtained a Ph.D degree. He has also passed the
National Eligibility Test (NET), conducted by the University
Grant Commission (UGC). He has worked in Ayurvedic
College at Maniyal and Shri Madhwa Vadiraja Engineering
College, Bantakal as a teacher. Presently he is engaged in
Paurohitya (Priestly Duties) and giving religious discourses.
He   has   been    helping   thousands  of students  in  their
education.    He    is  a  tax  payer  and  his PAN    No  is:
AMKPK2883P. He is living with his wife at a place called
Alevoor in Udupi.      The mother of Anirudha, Smt.Srividya
Saralathaya holds a Bachelor’s degree in Arts and having
completed her Teacher Certificate Higher (TCH) course, she
was working as a teacher in Vakatharu Primary School,
Vittala, Dakshina Kannada District and teaching the subjects
Maths and Science. Anirudha has a younger sister by name
Kum.Hiranmayi Saralathaya and she is pursuing her studies
in 8th Standard at Vidyodaya Public School at Udupi. The
parents of Anirudha come from a decent and reasonable well
to do family. The family of Anirudha is a self-sufficient,
contented and self-dependant family and live a decent life.
Prior to his appointment or anointment as the Peethadhipathi
of Shri Shiroor Mutt, Anirudha used to listen to and observe
his father teaching the students who came to his house for
tuitions every day in Shriman Mahabharatha, Tatparya
Nirnaya, Yukthi Mallika, Rig Veda studies. He was drawn and
attracted towards studying these topics and many more. He
used to be a part of tuitions with keen interest and exhibited
signs of keen interest to learn all the aspects of Hinduism,
the Vedas, the Upanishads and expressed his desire to learn
all these along with the students, who used to go to his
house for tuitions from his father. He also disclosed to his
parents his interest in studying and learning all the aspects of
Hinduism, the Vedas, the Upanishads and other Dharma
Shastras.   Having regard to the keen interest shown by
Aniruddha, his father taught him the subjects relating to the
Vedas, the Upanishads and other Dharma Shastras. In
addition, he used to attend his regular classes in Vidyodaya
Public School, Udupi and on the day he was appointed as
Peethadhipathi of Shri Shiroor Mutt, he had written his
through the said school and has been declared as successful
with distinction.
51.   It  has   been  further   stated  that   after the
appointment      of   respondent   No.7     –   Aniruddha     as
Peethadhipathi of Shri Shiroor Mutt, in accordance with
Shastras, Shri. Vedavardhana Teertha (Aniruddha) is being
taught by renowned scholars of Shri Sode Vadiaraja Mutt, at
the 5th respondent Mutt in the Vedas, the Upanishads,
various other texts, treatises & other spiritual sciences. He
at Shri Sode Vadiraja Mutt, is studying with his classmate by
name Sri Krishna. He is being taught these subjects as are
taught to students in Gurukula. Shri Sode Vadiraja Mutt, has
all the manifestations of a Gurukula and it is treated as a
Gurukula by Brahmin Community in general and Madhwa
Brahmins in particular. It is not a Borstal School or a Juvenile
Offenders Rehabilitation Centre or a Remand Home so to
speak the Mutt is a sacred place with a healthy environment
and the students, both minors and adults are imparted with
knowledge in the above mentioned subjects. It is a place of
learning which is highly respected by Brahmin Community
world over. In Shri Sode Vadiraja Mutt there are more than
40 students who are learning the Vedas, the Upanishads, the
Dharma Shastras and other Spiritual Sciences from the 6th
Respondent and other scholars of 5th respondent. The
present   Peethadhipathi      of    Shri Shiroor    Mutt,   Shri
Vedavardhana Teertha (Aniruddha) is also taught the Vedas,
the Upanishads, and other Spiritual Sciences by the 6th
Respondent herein and other Scholars, with the other 40 and
odd students in an atmosphere congenial for students and
studies. In addition to studies in the Vedas, the Upanishads,
and Spiritual Shastras, the Peethadhipathi of Shri Shiroor
Mutt    (Aniruddha)   also   participates   in  extra-curricular
activities,    sports   and    games      along    with   other
children. Presently housed at Shri Sode Vadiraja Mutt, at a
place called Sonda, in North Canara District of Karnataka
State, where the 6th respondent is observing Chaturmasya,
the incumbent Peethadhipathi is pursuing his education in the
above mentioned subjects, on the lines of education imparted
in Gurukulas. In his place of abode, the Peethadhipathi of
Shri   Shiroor Mutt    (Aniruddha)   has   the  following daily
5.00 AM to 6.00 AM-       Studies.
6.00 AM to 8.30 AM- Nithyanusthana-Pooja-
seeking Dashan of the principal deity of the Mutt.
8.30 AM to 9.15 AM-Parayana along with his
classmate Srikrishna.
9.30 AM to 10.15. AM-Classes of Mani
Manjari imparted by VidhwanShri Vishnu Hatwar.
Baladarsha by Sri V.Pandurangachar.
11.00 AM to 12.15 PM-Snana (bathing)
Bhiksha (Mendicancy / or Food / Lunch).
12.15 PM to 1.00 PM-Swadhya (Self-studies)
with his classmate.
1.00 Pm to 2.00 PM-Lessons in Rigveda
from Veda Murthy Karthikachar.
2.00 PM to 2.30 PM-       Rest.
on Guruvaracharithamritha.
3.15 PM to 3.30 PM-Studies.
3.30 PM to 4.45 PM-Classes in Sadacharasmrithi
by Sode Shri Vishwa VallabhaTheertha Swamiji.
4.45 PM to 5.45 PM-Swimming, and other games.
5.45 PM to 8.15 PM-       Snana(bathing),
8.15 PM to 8.45 PM-Revision of lessons.
8.45 PM to 9.45 PM-Chanting and Memorization of
10.00 PM-He retires for the day.
52.    In this background, it has been stated by
respondents No.5 and 6 that the petitioners in their writ
petition have questioned the legality or otherwise of the
action of respondent No.6 in appointing the Peethadhipathi
for Shri Shiroor Mutt on the ground that the same would
violate Section 11 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872; the
Guardian and Wards Act; Hindu Minority and Guardianship
Act, 1956; The Disaster Management Act, 2005 and the
Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897; the National Policy for Children
2013; The Karnataka Child Protection Policy, 2016; the
Fundamental Rights guaranteed by the Constitution of India
under Articles 25 & 26 and that there is violation of Child
rights flowing to the person who is now appointed as the
Peethadhipathi of Shri Shiroor Mutt (shown as Respondent
No7 to these proceedings), and under Article 39(e) & (f) of
the   Constitution    of   India. Based  on  the allegations  of
violation of these provisions of law, child abuse, material
abandonment, denial of freedom, dignity, exploitation of the
childhood,    the    petitioners    have  contended   that   the
appointment of Anirudha as Peethadhipathi of Shri Shiroor
Mutt is illegal, null and void and have sought a declaration as
at prayer (ii)(b)&       ii(e); a direction to the Respondent
Government of Karnataka and the Union of India to curtail
the practice of Balasanyasa and or imposition of Sanyas on
a minor. The petitioners have also sought declaration that
the appointment of Anirudha as Peethadhipathi of Shri
Shiroor Mutt by the 6th Respondent as null and void, illegal
and that the same is without jurisdiction. The petitioners
have    also  sought  certain    directions in  the   nature  of
mandamus to the respondents No. 1,10 & 12 vide prayer No.
53.   It has been stated that the petitioners are not
entitled for any relief from this Hon’ble Court as the writ
petition is highly motivated and actuated by petitioners’
desire to have their own person as Peethadhipathi of Shri
Shiroor Mutt.     Therefore, the relief sought for by the
petitioners cannot be granted by this Hon’ble Court and there
is absolutely no public interest in the writ petition or in such
declarations as are sought by the petitioners. The remedy
for such declaration, if any, lies elsewhere and if they are so
advised, they are free to pursue the same. Be that as it
may, the petitioners cannot abuse the process of this Court
in the form of public interest litigation to further their own
selfish ends.
54.   It has been further stated that the petitioner
Nos.1 & 2 are the brothers of the previous Peethadhipathi of
Shri Shiroor Mutt, late Laxmivara Teertha who reached his
heavenly abode in July, 2018. The petitioner Nos. 3 & 4 are
the sons of petitioner Nos.2 & 1 respectively. The Mutt in
question, viz. Shri Shiroor Mutt has never been under the
control and administration of the petitioners or of Shri
Shiroor Mutt Bakhtha Samithi      (Samithi for short),which is
claimed to be a registered trust under the provisions of
Indian Trust Act. The affairs of this Mutt, as is the case with
the    remaining    7    Mutts    established    by    Shriman
Madhwacharya, have always been administered, controlled
and managed by the Peethadhipathi of the respective Mutts
either personally or through his agents or duly constituted
Attorneys. Neither the petitioners nor the Samithi mentioned
above has anything to do with Shri Shiroor Mutt or its
administration or management. There is absolutely no basis
for the claims made by the petitioners to the contrary. None
of the Ashta Mutts are under the administration of any trust,
association, society or anybody or by whatever name they
are called. From their inception or establishment by Shriman
Madhwacharya, the Ashta Mutts of Udupi are administered
and managed by the Peethadhipathis of the respective Ashta
Mutts strictly in accordance with the procedure laid down
therefor by Shriman Madhwacharya or such subsequent
Peethadhipathis of these Ashta Mutts who thought it fit to do
so from time to time. It has been further contended that the
Samithi constituted by the petitioners is totally an alien and
Shri Shiroor Mutt has never been in its control nor was it
ever administered by the Samithi or any other body or group
of persons by whatever name called it at any point in time.
In fact, the petitioner Nos.1 to 4 are not the followers or
disciples of Shri Shiroor Mutt, but are the followers of Shri
Sode Vadiraja Mutt and none of them has anything to do with
Shri Shiroor Mutt, its affairs, activities religious or culture, or
with the Mutt, its properties both moveable and immoveable
or with any aspect of management and administration of this
Mutt and these facts are incontrovertible. It has been further
stated that Shri Shiroor Mutt and its properties have always
been managed and administered by the Peethadhipathis of
Shri Shiroor Mutt and has never been assigned to any
individual or anybody of individuals.          However, for the
reasons best known to themselves, these petitioners have
claimed to be carrying on the religious or cultural activities of
the said Mutt in addition to managing the properties thereof,
through the above mentioned Samithi. It has been further
stated that there is absolutely no basis much less any valid
basis for claims so made by the petitioners. The affairs,
activities, administration and management of Shri Shiroor
Mutt have always been with the Peethadhipathi of Shri
Shiroor Mutt. However, to the best of the knowledge of the
Respondents herein wish to state that the petitioners are in
illegal possession of the valuable assets of the Sri Shiroor
Mutt and the respondents are initiating appropriate action to
recover the said assets.
55.    It has been further stated that the “Samithi”
mentioned      hereinabove   as   pleaded  by  the  petitioners
themselves has come into existence recently only with a view
to usurp the charge of the administration and management
of Shri Shiroor Mutt. The Samithi inter alia consists of 4
office bearers who are petitioner Nos.1 to 4, who are none
other than the brothers and nephews respectively of the
deceased Peethadhipathi Laxmivara Theertha.          The very
purpose and aim of this Samithi is to take over the Mutt and
its affairs keeping in mind the large valuable properties worth
several crores of rupees.
56.   It has been further stated the petitioners are not
the members of Shri Shiroor Mutt and they along with the
deceased Peethadhipathi Laxmivara Teertha always followed
the tenets and teachings of Shri Sode Vadiraja Mutt and have
never been associated with Shri Shiroor Mutt for any length
of time. Their ancestors were the followers and disciples of
Shri Sode Vadiraja Mutt and they did not at any point of time
associated themselves with Shri Shiroor Mutt, except that the
deceased     Laxmivara     Teertha     was    appointed     as
Peethadhipathi of Shri Shiroor Mutt by the Peethadhipathi of
its Dwandwa Mutt Shri Sode Vadiraja Mutt.         Even the 2
Peethadhipathis preceding Laxmivara Tirtha were not the
followers of Shri Shiroor Mutt and were appointed as
Peethadhipathi of Shri Shiroor Mutt by the Peethadhipathi of
Shri Sode Vadiraja Mutt.     Neither the petitioners nor the
ancestors of the petitioners have any role to play in the
administration or management of Shri Shiroor Mutt and they
were the follower and disciple of Shri Sode Vadirja Mutt. Shri
Shiroor   Mutt    has  been     developed    by   its  various
Peethadhipathis of the said Mutt and has progressed well so
far by following the teachings, and the tenets of Shriman
Madhwacharya and also the teachings of the past pontiffs of
Shri Shiroor Mutt. It has been further stated that the claim
made by the petitioners about their ancestors lending of their
blood   and    sweat   for  decades    for  the    progress   and
development      of Shri   Shiroor   Mutt  is   false,  frivolous,
veracious, without basis even to the knowledge of the
petitioners.   The aim, purpose and object of forming the
Samithi is well disclosed by the petitioners themselves. None
of the Ashta Mutts or its affairs or administration are
managed by any third person or body of unconnected
persons except by the respective Peethadhipathi.           As has
been ordained by Shriman Madhwacharya, in the absence of
anybody to manage the affairs of a Mutt owing to the death
of   Peethadhipathi    or  due    to  incapacity    of  the   said
Peethadhipathi, the Peethadhipathi of Dwandwa Mutt, in the
present case Shri Sode Vadiraja Mutt, has managed the
administration and management of Shri Shiroor Mutt.
57.   It has been further stated that respondent Nos.5
& 6 have not violated any of the provisions of any law cited
and relied upon by the petitioners in support of their
contentions before this Court in the present writ petition.
There is absolutely no basis much less any valid basis for the
petitioners to accuse the 5th & 6th respondents of violation of
the said laws. The allegations of the petitioners made in this
behalf are bereft of truth, merit, basis and substance. While
there is no quarrel with the proposition that a minor is not
capable of entering into a contract in terms of the provisions
of Indian Contract Act, 1872, the said situation does not arise
in the present case, in as much as the Peethadhipathi of Shri
Shiroor Mutt, as he stands now, will not contract with any
person or body of persons for any of the requirements of Shri
Shiroor Mutt and such contract if need to be entered into
shall be entered into by the Swamiji of Shri Sode Vadiraja
Mutt, who is the Peethadhipathi of Dwandwa Mutt. By virtue
of his being the Peethadhipathi of Dwandwa Mutt the
Peethadhipathi of Shri Sode Vadiraja Mutt is empowered,
entitled,  competent    and  authorised   to   enter into   any
transaction including contracts, if necessary, on behalf of Shri
Shiroor    Mutt.    This   power     and   authority   of    the
Peethadhipathi of Shri Sode Vadiraja Mutt (Dwandwa Mutt) is
unassailable or incontrovertible.      Such power has been
exercised by the Swamijies of one Dwandwa Mutt in respect
of or with reference to the other Dwandwa Mutt. In fact, it
was for meeting such contingency which may arise in the
administration and management of Mutts that Shriman
Madhwacharya had established Ashta Mutts by grouping
them into four pairs. This has been the practice ever since
the    establishment    of   these   8    Mutts   by    Shriman
Madhwacharya and at no point of time such powers exercised
by the Swamijies of Dwandwa Mutts, with reference to the
affairs of their respective Dwandwa Mutt, has ever been
successfully questioned in any Court of law or authority.
Therefore, there is absolutely no merit and substance in the
contentions of the petitioners that the Peethadhipathi being a
person below the age of majority is not capable of exercising
free    consent    in  the    matter   of    contracting.   The
Peethadhipathi of Shri Shiroor Mutt as he stands today need
not enter into any contract with anybody for any purpose so
long as the Peethadhipathi of Shri Sode Vadiraja Mutt which
is its Dwandwa Mutt is empowered to exercise all the powers
of Peethadhipathi of Shri Shiroor Mutt.
58.   It has been further stated that the petitioners are
guilty   of  suppression   of  material   facts.    They   have
deliberately suppressed the fact of they having approached
the jurisdictional criminal court through the 1st petitioner
herein, against the 6th Respondent herein and one person by
name Shri Rathna Kumar with a private complaint under
Section 200 of the Code of Criminal Procedure for offences
punishable under Sections 417, 420, 464 to 467, 471, 468,
511 read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code in Private
Complaint Report (PCR) No.2 of 2021. The said PCR came to
be rejected by the said jurisdictional criminal court by an
order dated 07.01.2021, with the following observations :
“14. In view of the aforesaid proposition of law in my
view, the first and foremost question, which would
arise in the present case, is that even if the entire
allegations made in the complaint are taken at their
face value and accepted in their entirety, whether or
not the ingredients of the offences punishable under
sections 417, 420, 464, 465, 467, 471, 468, 511 r/w
34 of IPC would be attracted. It is an admitted fact
that Sri. Sri. Laxmivara Theertha Swamiji of Shirooru
Mutt has passed away on 19-7-2018 without
appointing a successor and Sode Mutt has been
looking after its affairs thereafter as Dwandha Mutt
of Shirooru Mutt as per the customs and traditions
prevailing in the AshtaMutt. Admittedly, there is no
written constitution for affairs of the Ashta Mutt.
Under such circumstances, whether Sode Mutt being
Dwandhwa Mutt of Shirooru Mutt having right to
collect rent or execute G.P.A.to manage the affairs of
the properties of Shirooru Mutt is all required to be
decided by the civil court. Mere execution of GPA is
itself is not amounts forgery as defined under section
463 of IPC. The allegation made in the complaint
even if it is translated into evidence at this stage it
only indicates the civil liability of accused persons.
The allegations made in the complaint even if they
are accepted, they are vague and are not sufficient
to constitute offence particularly, offence punishable
under the provisions of the Indian Penal Code. Under
the above said circumstances, I am of the clear
opinion that this is a case where totally civil liability
has been converted into criminal liability in order to
lodge complaint.
16. Therefore the complainant has failed to make out
prima facie case to refer the complaint under section
156(3) of Cr.P.C., in respect of the alleged offences
punishable under sections 417, 420, 464,465, 467,
471, 468, 511 r/w 34 of IPC. From the above
observations, the court proceeds to pass the
Complaint filed by the complainant under section
200of Cr.P.C. is hereby dismissed.
59.   It has been stated that feeling aggrieved by the
order of the Trial Court, the 1st petitioner challenged the
order of the jurisdictional criminal court before this Hon’ble
Court in Criminal Petition Crl.P.No.2669/2021. This Hon’ble
Court was pleased to dismiss the said petition by its order
dated 04.06.2021 with the following observations:
“5. I have carefully considered the arguments
addressed by the learned Counsel for the petitioner
and also perused the material on record.
6. Petitioner, who is admittedly the brother of
deceased Sri Laxmivara Thirtha Sripadaru who was
the Peethadhipathi of Sri Shirooru Mutt has filed the
present complaint before the Trial court in his
capacity as the Secretary of Shri Shirooru Mutt
Bhaktha Samithi. His brother late Sri Laxmivara
Thirtha Sripadaru had attained salvation on
19.07.2018.      After filing of the complaint on
04.01.2021, the learned counsel appearing for the
complainant was heard by the learned Magistrate on
the very same day and the matter was posted on
07.01.2021 for orders. The learned Magistrate after
receiving the complaint under Section 200 Cr.PC for
offences of which he is authorized to take cognizance
or which has been made over to him under Section
192, may, if he thinks fit, postpone the issue of
process against the accused and either inquire into
the case himself or direct an investigation to be
made by a police officer or by such other person as
he thinks fit, for the purpose of deciding whether or
not there is sufficient ground for proceeding further
in the case. Such an exercise appears to have been
done by the learned Magistrate himself. The learned
Magistrate has observed in his order that late Sri
Laxmivara      Thirtha   Sripadaru   who     was     the
Peethadhipathi of Sri Shirooru Mutt had passed away
on 19.07.2018 without appointing a successor to his
Mutt. After his death, Sode Mutt of which accused
No.1 is the Peethadhipathi is looking after the affairs
of Sri Shirooru Mutt which is a Dwandhwa Mutt. He
has observed that as per the customs and traditions
prevailing in the Ashta Mutt of Udupi, in the absence
of a successor being named by the Peethadhipathi,
after the death of such a Peethadhipathi, the
Peethadhipathi of Dwandhwa Mutt is required to look
after the affairs of such Mutt. He has also observed
that there is no written constitution for the affairs of
the Ashta Mutt of Udupi. This has been the practice
and custom followed by Ashta Mutt for years
together. It is under these circumstances, accused
No.1 has taken charge of the affairs of Sri Shirooru
Mutt which cannot be found fault with. Therefore, it
is prima facie clear that the learned Magistrate has
made an enquiry in compliance of the requirements
7. The complainant has made allegations in his
complaint that accused No.1 has executed a power
of attorney in favour of accused No.2 and they have
clandestinely sold the property belonging to Sri
Shirooru Mutt and he has also made an allegation
that the building belonging to Sri Shirooru Mutt was
demolished by the accused persons without any
authority.    These allegations, at the most would
amount to a civil dispute and no case on these
allegations can be made out against the accused
persons for the offences alleged in the complaint.
The learned Magistrate having exercised his powers
under Section 202 Cr.PC and being satisfied that
there was no case made out by the complainant to
proceed against the accused persons for the alleged
offences in the complaint, has rightly dismissed the
complaint exercising his powers under Section 203
8. The impugned order is a well reasoned order
and it does not suffer from any illegality or
irregularity which calls for interference by this Court.
Therefore, I do not see any good ground to entertain
this petition.
Accordingly, I proceed to pass the following order:
Criminal petition is dismissed.”
60.   It has been stated that the aforesaid facts ought
to have been placed before this Hon’ble Court by the
petitioners. However, there is no whisper about these
proceedings in the present writ petition. This amounts to
wilful, deliberate and wanton suppression of facts by the
petitioners and on this count alone they are liable to be non-
suited and their writ petition is liable to be dismissed with
exemplary costs. However, the petitioners have chosen to
make reckless, unfounded and unsustainable allegations
against the 6th Respondent accusing him of colluding with the
jurisdictional police and the Child Right Enforcing Agency,
which are false frivolous, vexatious, without basis and bear
no consideration by this Hon’ble Court.
61.   Learned    Government     Advocate    for   State
Government has vehemently argued before this Court that
the present petition is not a PIL and the reliefs claimed by
the petitioners are declaratory in nature. He has stated that
it is a private law remedy and a petition under Article 226 of
the Constitution of India as a PIL is certainly not at all
maintainable.     He has also stated that the scope of judicial
review in the matter of appointment of Pontiff is quite
limited.    He has stated that respondent No.7 has been
appointed as Peetadhipathi of Shiroor Mutt keeping in view
the religious practices of the Mutt and there has been no
violation of fundamental rights guaranteed to respondent
No.7 under the Constitution of India. He has also stated that
there is no violation of any other statutory provisions of law
in the matter of appointment of Peetadhipathi and the
person, who has been appointed as Peetadhipathi has
crossed 16 years of age. He has also stated that the State
was vigilant in the matter and there has been no violation of
Covid 19 pandemic       guidelines   nor violation of Disaster
Management Act, 2005 and the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897.
He has placed reliance upon two judgments i.e., (i) in the
case of Guruvayoor Devaswom Managing Committee
and anr., v. C.K.Rajan and ors., reported in (2003) 3 SCC
546; and (ii) in the case of Jaipur Shahar Hindu Vikas
Samithi v. State of Rajasthan and ors., reported in
62.  This   Court  has   appointed   Sri.S.S.Naganand,
learned Senior Counsel as an Amicus Curiae and he has
assisted this Court by summarizing the issue with the help of
religious texts and the judicial pronouncements on the
subject from time to time. He has been assisted by learned
counsel Sri.Ragahvendra S.Srivatsa and Sri.Prashant Murthy
63.  Sri.S.S.Naganand, learned Senior Counsel has
argued before this Court that two questions arise for
consideration in the present case, they are:
(i)  Whether the head of Sode Sri Vadiraja Mutt has
the authority to appoint the Matadhipathi for Sri
(ii) Whether the appointment of respondent No. 7 as
the Matadhipathi of Sri Shiroor Mutt is opposed to
any statutory or constitutional provision, for the
reason of the said person being less than 18
64.    As regards the first question, it has been stated
by the learned Senior Counsel that the accepted practice and
custom is the system of “Dwandwa Mutts” prevailing among
the eight Mutts (Ashtha Mutts) in Udupi. In the event of the
head of one of the Mutts passing away without nominating
his successor, the head of the paired Mutt has the authority
to appoint such successor. This custom has found judicial
recognition by way of a judgement of a Division Bench of the
Madras High Court in the case of Bheemanakatte Mutt, AIR
1917 Mad 809. A seven judge Bench of the Hon’ble Supreme
Court in AIR 1954 SC 282 (Shrioor Mutt case) has declared
that the followers of Madhwacharya constitute a religious
denomination and the followers of Shiroor Mutt form a
section    of  the  religious  denomination.     As   Article 26
contemplates not merely a religious denomination, but also a
section    thereof,  the   Mutt    or the   spiritual  fraternity
represented by it legitimately comes within the purview of
Article 26 of the Constitution of India. The system of
Dwandwa Mutts being an essential religious practice, is
protected under Article 26 of the Constitution of India.
65.   It has been stated by the learned Senior Counsel
that the second issue is really the larger issue involved in this
case.     He has stated that the petitioners, by way of
amendment, have sought the very broad relief of declaration
that “Bal Sanyasa”or the imposition of Sanyasa on a minor
amounts to material abandonment of the minor and that it
violates Articles 21 and 39 (e) and (f) of the Constitution. In
the order dated 25/05/2021, it is recorded that this Hon’ble
Court had invited the attention of the counsel for the
petitioners to the prayer made in the petition. At that stage,
it was contended that the rights of the minor are being
violated and accordingly the writ petition was amended. It is
the respectful submission of the amicus that this general
issue having larger implications for the society at large
across religions and religious denominations does not really
arise in this case. Such a broad proposition having extremely
wide ramifications is an academic issue as far as the present
case is concerned. This is so for the following reasons:
(a)       The age of majority is reckoned as 18 years only
for purposes of entering into a binding contract and
undertake    responsibilities as   majors.  This  is  the
purpose for which the Majority Act, 1875 was enacted.
While prescribing the age of majority as 18 years for
this purpose, a specific exception is carved out in
Section 2 which says that nothing contained in the Act
shall affect the religion or religious rites and usages of
any class of citizens of India. Therefore, for purposes of
religion or religious rites and usages that have the
protection of the Constitution as also international
treaties, a person cannot be presumed to be a minor
only for the reason that he is less than 18 years of age.
When the question arises whether any of the rights of
such a person is violated, it has to be examined in the
totality of circumstances and it may not be appropriate
to proceed on the presumption that he is a minor for all
purposes.
(b)       As per the United Nations Convention on the
Rights of the Child (CRC), “child” means every human
being below the age of 18 years unless under the law
applicable to the child, maturity is attained earlier. This
prescription has to be read in conjunction with the laws
of India as contained in the Majority Act, 1875 which
saves customary law in respect of religion or religious
rites and usages.
(c) From the record, it is clear that the person concerned
(respondent No. 7) is above 16 years of age and that
he has passed his 10th standard examination at school.
Even if it is presumed that the person concerned is a
“child”, Article 12 of CRC guarantees to the child, who
is capable of forming his or her own views the right to
express those views freely in all matters affecting the
child, the views of the child being given due
weight in accordance with the age and maturity
of the child.
(d)        Article 14 of CRC assures the right of the child to
freedom of thought, conscience and religion. A duty is
cast on the parents to provide direction to the child in
the exercise of his or her right in a manner consistent
with the evolving capacities of the child.
(e)        The freedom of religion and conscience can be
curtailed only if it violates public order, morality and
health. This is the mandate of article 25 of the
Constitution as also that of CRC.
(f) In the present case, the question arises in the context
of a Madhwa Mutt in Udupi, being one among the Ashta
Mutts. They are a religious denomination, or at least a
section of a religious denomination having their own
customs and practices and the question will have to be
considered in this context.
(g)        It is therefore inappropriate to generalise that the
initiation into Sanyasa of any person below the age of
18 years is a violation of the rights of the minor. When
the question arises, it will have to be examined in the
light of all the attendant circumstances so that the
various salutary principles are balanced.
66.     It has been stated that it is settled practice that
the Court does not decide matters, which are only of
academic interest on the facts of a particular case. (See
Arnit Das vs State of Bihar, (2001) 7 SCC 657, at Para 6,
Dhartiparkar Madan Lal Agarwal vs Rajiv Gandhi, 1987
(Supp) SCC 93 at Para 4).
67.     In respect of practices/customs prevalent among
various denominations in South India, it has been stated that
broadly, there are three schools of thought that are followed
among the Brahmin community in South India. Advaita is the
school of thought propounded by Adi Shankaracharya. Dvaita
is the school of thought propounded by Sri Madhwacharya
and Vishishtadvaita is the school of thought propounded by
Sri Ramanujacharya. The followers of each of these schools
have their own precepts, usages and customs. The present
case is concerned with the followers of Madhwacharya, who
instituted the eight Mutts in Udupi.
68.   As far as the Advaita school in South India is
concerned it has been stated that the Sringeri Mutt is one of
the Peethas established by Adi Shankaracharya. In the past,
there have been instances of persons below 18 years have
been initiated into Sanyasa. The requirement is that the
person has to be a Brahmachari (unmarried, celibate) and
must have a foundation in Shastric studies. The Swamiji who
will appoint the successor and intitiate him into Sanyasa will
take an informed decision, after having observed the person
for some time and based on divine instincts.
69.   It  has   been    further  stated  that  in  the
Shrivaishnava Sampradaya, it is usually persons, who have
experienced the preceding Ashramas of Brahmacharya and
Gruhastha who are initiated into Sanyasa. There is however,
no bar on young and unmarried persons entering Sanyasa
70.   It has been stated that among the followers of
Madhwacharya in the Udupi region, particularly the Ashta
Mutts, the practice is to give Sanyasa Deeksha only to a
Brahmachari (unmarried,celibate). There is, however, no
inflexible rule that a person has to be of a certain age. It is
not necessary that only boys of a tender age are to be
initiated into Sanyasa. The family background of the person
concerned, his inclination towards Shastric studies, his ability
to study the Sriman Nyayasudha by Sri Jayatheertha and
profess the principles propounded by Sri Madhwacharya are
all observed and then his Jataka (horoscope) is examined by
expert astrologers to ascertain his suitability for the position.
Deva    Prashna    (consultation   with the    divine)   is  also
undertaken and as per the outcome, the person is given
Sanyasa Deeksha. If the person so initiated happens to be of
less than 18 years of age, it is only coincidental. There is no
rule of Bala Sanyasa.
71.   It has been stated that there is no compulsion or
force involved in the matter of Sanyasa. Unless the person
concerned and his parents consent whole heartedly, Sanyasa
Deeksha will not be given. There is nothing like imposition of
Sanyasa on a child.
72.   It  has   been   further  stated    that  while    Sri
Madhwacharya,     like  Sri   Shankaracharya,     was    inclined
towards an ascetic life right from a tender age and
accordingly became a Sanyasi at a very young age, that was
not the case with his younger brother who came to be known
as Sri Vishnu Theertha. In the case of Sri Vishnu Theertha,
Sanyasa was at a later age. In fact, as per Sumadhwa Vijaya
(a biographical work on Sri Madhwacharya by Sri Narayana
Panditacharya) Sanyasa should immediately follow Virakti
(detachment). It is that detachment, irrespective of the age
of the person, that determines the eligibility to enter Sanyasa
73.   It has been stated that as per Sri Krishnamruta
Maharnava by Sri Madhwacharya, a person comes of age (in
the sense of having discretion and being responsible for his
actions) at the age of fourteen. This is said in the context of
the incident of Ani Mandavya, who argued with the God of
Dharma and professed that no child below the age of
fourteen years should be punished for his delinquencies.
74.    In respect of practice of initiating children as
Buddhist monks it has been stated by learned Senior Counsel
that although the question is alien to the case on hand, some
information has been gathered about child monks in Buddhist
Monasteries. Broadly, this is the practice prevalent among
•  In    Buddhism, minors       are  encouraged     to become
monks. This practice is prevalent in Tibet, Bhutan,
Nepal and Sri Lanka.
•  The Dalai Lama who is said to be the reincarnation of
the Buddha is selected from amongst the children from
birth to 3 years of age.
•  Parents consent is a must. Without consent, a minor
cannot be ordained.
•  There are practical and theoretical scriptures which
imparts rigorous training to a person for a year or so
before he can be robed as a monk.
•  These     scriptures     are    contained    in Thripitaka.
Thripitaka has 3 sections. The section pertaining to
Sanyasin is called Vinayapitaka meaning ‘book of
discipline’ or ‘rule of conduct’. It his written by Buddha
himself   and    contains    the  scriptures   for  training,
everyday routine for a monk, routine for a person to be
ordained etc.
•  There is no tradition of head of a mutt. After the
lifetime of the founder of the mutt, they keep idols of
Buddha. Only in rare circumstances, a person is chosen
as a head of the mutt, if it is believed that the founder
has been reborn.     Reincarnation is believed to have
happened if the person reborn has intense connection
with any of the things of the former.
•   Nowadays, in India, the practice of children being
offered by parents to monasteries to become monks is
reducing. Instead, children are encouraged to take up
education and higher education internationally.
•   Monasteries do not force children to become monks.
75.   It has been stated that there are some academic
studies into the life and treatment of child monks in Buddhist
monasteries. A study of monasteries in Sikkim reveals that
the rights of children initiated as monks are well taken care
of at the monasteries. There is, however, another study by a
Canadian social worker who has certain recommendations to
make as regards “Alternative Care” for child Buddhist monks.
There    is, however,    consensus    that   there  is no   legal
prohibition for children being free to pursue lives as monks.
76.   It has been further stated that in the Jain sect,
there is a practice of young children being initiated into
Sanyasa. There is no inflexible rule as to the age at which
Sanyasa Deeksha can be given. The Pontiff from whom
Deeksha is sought will have absolute discretion whether to do
so or not. There is no concept of appointing a successor to a
Mutt or an institution by the devotees if no successor is
appointed. In recent times, there was an incident of a girl of
8 years becoming a Jain Sanyasin. The matter reached the
Bombay High Court and is pending before a Division Bench in
Writ Petition No.3159 of 2006.
77.    To sum up, it has been stated by the learned
Senior Counsel that there is no statutory, much less
constitutional, bar on a person of less than 18 years age
being initiated into Sanyasa. It is impossible, and also
inappropriate, to generalise the issue and each case will have
to be seen in the fatual context involved.
78.    To  support   his    submission,     learned    Senior
Counsel has drawn the attention of this Court to relevant
Shlokas with translation.
(yadā viraktaḥ puruṣaḥ prajāyate             tadaiva
Na saṅgahīno'pi parivrajāmi           vāmahaṃ      tu
-   Sumādhva-vijaya by nārayaṇa-panḍitācārya
79.    The   aforesaid       śloka  elaborates the principle
contained in the Ṣruti which reads as “यदहरे व वरजेत ् तदहरे व
!जेत ्” (yadahareva virajet tadahareva pravrajet). The said
Ṣruti mandates that a person who attains Vairāgya, i.e.
dispassion towards worldly affairs, should also take up
“Pravrajya”, commonly known as Sannyāsa, on the very
same day of attaining Vairāgya. The abovementioned śloka,
after reaffirming the principle of necessary immediacy of
Sannyāsa after Vairāgya, further asserts that the existence of
worldly obligations, such as the duty to attend to aging
parents, is no bar to Sannyāsa, as the duty to attend to
aging parents can still be fulfilled by appointing someone else
for the task. Furthermore, the commentary Mandopakāriṇi
elaborates that duties such as taking care of parents are
suited only for those who have not yet attained Vairāgya.
Therefore, it becomes all the more clear that Sannyāsa
should immediately follow Vairāgya.
caturddaśordhvajīvini saṃsāraścādivarjitaḥ।
ato'vittvā paraṃ devaṃ mokṣāśā kā mahāmune॥)
-   Śloka 206 and 207,Śrīkṛśṇāmṛta-mahārṇava
-  by Shri Madhvācārya.
80.    The aforesaid ślokas state that any person who
has attained the age of fourteen, be it a man or woman,
every passing day after attaining that age, necessarily earns,
through his actions, as much Karma as is sufficient to cause
at least ten re-incarnations in the human body. The effect is
further compounded by the immense likelihood that more
Karma would also be earned in subsequent lives, and one is
stuck in an eternal loop. Therefore, in order to attain Mokṣā,
i.e. Salvation, it is essential for one to make efforts to realize
the Divine, as soon as possible in life.
(ācaturdaśamād varṣāt karmmāṇi niyamena tu।
daśāvarāṇām dehānām kāraṇāni karotyayam।
ataḥ karmakṣayānmuktiḥ kuta eva bhaviṣyati॥)
81.    The aforesaid Śloka reaffirms that after attaining
the age of fourteen, a person earns enough Karma as to
cause at least ten re-incarnations in the human body.
However, before the age of fourteen, no Karma is earned.
This is due to the fundamental principle of the Dharma-
śastras that a person becomes responsible for his
actions, i.e. that his actions produce either Pāpa or
Puṇya only after he attains the age of fourteen years.
The bar of “Karmic capacity” is set at the age of fourteen.
However, once the threshold of fourteen years is
crossed, Karma is inescapably produced. Therefore, it is
not possible to free oneself from the cycle of re-incarnation
by mere attempts at “Karmakṣayā”, but direct realization of
the Divine is necessary.
82.    The age bar of fourteen is proclaimed by Rishi
Animandavya in the following Ślokas as:
(maryādāṃ sthāpayāmyadya loke dharmaphalodayām।
pareṇa kurvatāmevaṃ doṣa eva bhaviṣyati॥)
In the aforesaid shloka Rishi Animandavya proclaims
that   he    is    hereby     establishing   the    “maryādā”    of
“dharmaphalodaya”, i.e. the threshold after which one’s
actions produce Dharma, i.e. Pāpa or Puṇya. This “maryādā”
is the age of fourteen. The commission of prohibited actions
by a person who has not attained the age of fourteen years
shall not produce “Pātakam”, i.e. Sin. However, if he has
crossed the age of fourteen, the commission of prohibited
actions shall inevitably have consequences.
83.    Heard      the  learned   counsel   for  the  parties,
Sri.S.S.Naganand, learned Senior Counsel and Amicus Curie
and perused the record. The matter is being disposed of with
the consent of the learned counsel for the parties at the
motion hearing stage itself.
84.    The    petitioners   before   this  Court,   who  are
projecting themselves as members of Sri Shiroor Bhakth
Samithi, a trust registered under the provisions of the Indian
Trusts Act, 1882 have filed this present petition being
aggrieved    by  the   nomination    of  respondent  No.7   as
Peetadhipathi of Sri Shiroor Mutt by respondent No.6 – Sri
Vishwa Vallabha Teertha Swamiji, who is Peetadhipathi of Sri
Sode Vadiraja Mutt. The petition has been filed by way of a
PIL and petitioner Nos.1 and 2 are real brothers, petitioner
No.3 is the son of petitioner No.2 and petitioner No.4 is the
son of petitioner No.1.     Thus, the members of one family
have formed some Trust and have filed the present writ
petition before this Court.
85.  The petitioners have conveniently omitted the
history of past litigation, which was at the behest of
petitioner No.1 against respondent No.6 and one person by
name Sri Rathna Kumar.           Petitioner No.1 has filed a
complaint under Section 200 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure for offences punishable under Sections 417, 420,
464 to 467, 471, 468, 511 r/w Section 34 of the Indian Penal
Code in Private Complaint Report (PCR) No.2/2021. The said
complaint was rejected by the jurisdictional Criminal Court by
an order dated 7.1.2021. The Trial Court has dismissed the
complaint by an exhaustive order and the Trial Court has
observed that the allegations made against respondent No.6
are vague and are not sufficient to constitute any offence
under the Indian Penal Code. The order passed by the Trial
Court has already been reproduced in the earlier paragraphs.
86.  The petitioner No.1 being aggrieved by the order
passed by the Trial Court has approached this Court also
challenging the order dated 7.1.2021 by filing Criminal
Petition No.2669/2021 and again this Court by an order
dated 4.6.2021 has dismissed the criminal petition by holding
that the order passed by the Trial Court is a well reasoned
order and it does not suffer from any illegality or irregularity.
The order passed by this Court has also been reproduced in
the earlier paragraphs, meaning thereby, attempts were
made to malign the image of respondent No.6 – Sri Vishwa
Vallabha Teertha Swamiji, Peetadhipathi of Respondent No. 5
–   Sri  Sode   Vadiraja   Mutt    and  the   petitioners  were
unsuccessful in their attempt.
87.  In all fairness, petitioner No.1, who was a party
to the criminal proceedings should have disclosed the
aforesaid facts and the non disclosure amounts to wilful and
deliberate suppression of the material facts.
88.   In the present case, there has been suppression
of the aforesaid facts and the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the
case of Arunima Baruah v. Union of India and ors.,
reported in (2007) 6 SCC 120, has dealt with the issue of
suppression of facts. The Apex Court in the aforesaid case,
in paragraphs 10, 11, 12, 15, 16, 21 and 22 has held as
"10. On the one hand, judicial review is a basic
feature of the Constitution, on the other, it provides
for a discretionary remedy. Access to justice is a
human right. (See Dwarka Prasad Agarwal v. B.D.
Agarwal [(2003) 6 SCC 230] and Bhagubhai
Dhanabhai Khalasi v. State of Gujarat [(2007) 4 SCC
A person who has a grievance against a State, a forum
must be provided for redressal thereof. (See Hatton v.
United Kingdom [15 BHRC 259] . For reference see
also Zee Telefilms Ltd. v. Union of India [(2005) 4 SCC
11. The court's jurisdiction to determine the lis
between the parties, therefore, may be viewed from
the human rights concept of access to justice. The
same, however, would not mean that the court will
have no jurisdiction to deny equitable relief when the
complainant does not approach the court with a pair of
clean hands; but to what extent such relief should be
denied is the question.
12. It is trite law that so as to enable the court to
refuse to exercise its discretionary jurisdiction
suppression must be of material fact. What would be a
material fact, suppression whereof would disentitle the
appellant to obtain a discretionary relief, would
depend upon the facts and circumstances of each
case. Material fact would mean material for the
purpose of determination of the lis, the logical
corollary whereof would be that whether the same was
material for grant or denial of the relief. If the fact
suppressed is not material for determination of the lis
between the parties, the court may not refuse to
exercise its discretionary jurisdiction. It is also trite
that a person invoking the discretionary jurisdiction of
the court cannot be allowed to approach it with a pair
of dirty hands. But even if the said dirt is removed and
the hands become clean, whether the relief would still
be denied is the question.
15. In Spry on Equitable Remedies, 4th Edn., p. 5,
referring to Moody v. Cox [(1917) 2 Ch 71 : (1916-17)
All ER Rep 548 (CA)] and Meyers v. Casey [(1913) 17
“… that the absence of clean hands is of no account
‘unless the depravity, the dirt in question on the
hand, has an immediate and necessary relation to
the equity sued for’. When such exceptions or
qualifications are examined it becomes clear that
the maxim that predicates a requirement of clean
hands cannot properly be regarded as setting out a
rule that is either precise or capable of satisfactory
operation.”
Although the aforementioned statement of law was
made in connection with a suit for specific
performance of contract, the same may have a
bearing in determining a case of this nature also.
16. In the said treatise, it was also stated at pp. 170-
“In these cases, however, it is necessary that the
failure to disclose the matters in question, and
the consequent error or misapprehension of the
defendant, should be such that performance of
his obligations would bring about substantial
hardship or unfairness that outweighs matters
tending in favour of specific performance. Thus,
the failure of the plaintiff to explain a matter of
fact, or even, in some circumstances, to correct a
misunderstanding of law, may incline the court to
take a somewhat altered view of considerations of
hardship, and this will be the case, especially
where it appears that at the relevant times the
misapprehension        of    the    defendant       but
nonetheless did not take steps to provide
information or to correct the material error, or a
fortiori, where he put the defendant off his guard
or hurried him into making a decision without
proper enquiry.”
21.Ubi jus ibi remedium is a well-known concept. The
court while refusing to grant a relief to a person who
comes with a genuine grievance in an arguable case
should be given a hearing. (See Bhagubhai Dhanabhai
(2007) 5 Scale 357] .) In this case, however, the
appellant had suppressed a material fact. It is evident
that the writ petition was filed only when no order of
interim injunction was passed. It was obligatory on the
part of the appellant to disclose the said fact.
22. In this case, however, suppression of filing of the
suit is no longer a material fact. The learned Single
Judge and the Division Bench of the High Court may
be correct that, in a case of this nature, the Court's
jurisdiction may not be invoked but that would not
mean that another writ petition would not lie. When
another writ petition is filed disclosing all the facts, the
appellant would be approaching the writ court with a
pair of clean hands, and the Court at that point of time
will be entitled to determine the case on merits having
regard to the human right of the appellant to access to
justice, and keeping in view the fact that judicial
review is a basic feature of the Constitution of India."
In the light of the aforesaid judgment, as deliberately
the factum of filing of criminal case has been suppressed by
the petitioners, the present public interest litigation appears
to be more a personal interest litigation than a private
interest litigation. However, as a serious dispute has been
raised in respect of appointment of respondent No.7 as
Peetadhipathi, the matter is being dealt with on merits also.
89.     The Hon'ble Supreme Court on an abuse of
public interest litigation has time and again held that public
interest litigation is a weapon which has to be used with
great care and circumspection and the judiciary has to be
extremely careful to see that behind the beautiful veil of
public interest, an ugly private malice, vested interest
and/or publicity-seeking is not lurking [see: (1) Dattaraj
Nathuji Thaware v. State of Maharashtra, reported in
(2005) 1 SCC 590; (2) Ashok Kumar Pandey v. State of
West Bengal, reported in (2004) 3 SCC 349; (3) State of
Uttaranchal v. Balwant Singh Chaufal, reported in
(2010) 3 SCC 402; and (4) Janata Dal v. Chowdhary,
reported in (1992) 4 SCC 305].
90.   The dispute in the present case relates to the
appointment of respondent No.7, who is aged about 16
years, as Peetadhipathi of Sri Shiroor Mutt by respondent
No.6, who is Peetadhipathi of Sri Sode Vadiraja Mutt.
91.   The holy land Bharata, is a leading centre of rich
tradition of culture and heritage and the treasure of culture
and heritage has its roots in ancient granthas (sacred texts)
i.e., the Vedas, the Upanishads, the Smritis, Ramayana,
Maha-Bharata, Purana and other religious texts.           In the
earlier times, the Sanyasis used to live in caves and leaf huts
and they used to roam around this holy land to spread their
unlimited knowledge.
92.   The Guru-Shishya parampara is in existence
since ages and in order to learn religious texts, pupils used to
reside in Ashramas voluntarily and with time, in addition to
Ashramas, the Mutts were also established and the dispute in
the present case is arising out of a Mutt established by
Shriman Madhwacharya, a great Philospher and a saint. He
initially established a Mutt called Sri Krishna Mutt about 800
years ego and has installed an Idol of Lord Krishna and the
Mutt is known as Sri Krishna Mutt. Shriman Madhwacharya
during his lifetime has also established Ashta Mathas (eight
Mutts) in Udupi Town and propounded "Dwaitha Philosophy".
93.   The eight Mutts so established by Shriman
Madhwacharya for the above purposes are as under:
94.   To the aforesaid 8 Mutts, Shriman Madhwacharya
appointed 8 Peethadhipathis, who were his direct ‘Sanyasin-
95.    Shriman Madhwacharya blessed his 8 disciples
mentioned above with the images/idols of the following
96.    These 8 Balasanyasi-Disciples were all living in
Shri Krishna Mutt at the relevant point in time and carried
out the activities associated with the Worship of Lord Shri
Krishna as ordained by their teacher Shriman Madhwacharya.
The    Propounder     of  the   Dwaitha   Philosophy, Shriman
Madhwacharya, had established these 8 Mutts in pairs. In
other words, the Ashta Mutts were grouped into pairs and the
set of 4 Pair Mutts are popularly known as Dwandwa Mutts.
97.    The    arrangements     so   made    by  Shriman
Madhwacharya of these 8 Mutts are as under :
98.   From the aforesaid, it is clear that respondent
No.5 - Mutt Sri Sode Mutt is the Dwandwa Mutt of the Sri
Shiroor Mutt. The arrangement so put in place by Shriman
Madhwacharya 800 hundred years ago among these 8 Mutts
was such that as and when the circumstances as obtaining
demanded     or  presented   on   account   of  death   or  any
incapacity of the presiding Peethadhipathi of any of the Ashta
Mutts, the Peethadhipathi of its Pair Mutt (Dwandwa Mutt)
could step in and take care of its affairs and activities. Such
was the power conferred on the Peethadhipathi of the
Dwandwa Mutt that he had the power to select and appoint a
successor   not   only  to  the   Mutt  of  which   he   is the
Peethadhipathi, but also a successor to its Pair Mutt
(Dwandwa Mutt), whose Peethadhipathi for reasons such as
death, impairment-mental or physical, or for any reason
whatsoever did not or could not select and appoint his
99.   The facts on record reveal that the qualifications
for being selected and appointed as a Peethadhipathi of any
of the Ashta Mutts are that the person should belong to the
Tulu Shivalli Madhwa Brahmin Community and he should be
a Brahmachari (Celibate) belonging to a Tulu speaking
Brahmin Family from South Canara and a follower or disciple
of any of the Ashta Mutts. A person so selected and
appointed would be initiated into “Sanyasa” in accordance
with the Hindu scriptures, procedures, religious ceremonies
and rituals as are prescribed in that behalf and he shall live
with the Peethadhipathi of the Mutt if available, or with the
Peethadhipathi of the Pair Mutt (Dwandwa Mutt), if the
Swamiji of a particular Mutt is not available due to death,
incapacity or impairment or any such reasons.       While so
living with the Peethadhipathi of the Mutt to which he is
appointed or anointed as a Peethadhipathi or with the
Peethadhipathi of its Dwandwa Mutt (pair Mutt), he shall
learn the Vedas, Upanishads and other religious and spiritual
subjects. Primarily he should learn the teachings of Shriman
Madhwacharya enshrined in his 37 texts, which are popularly
known as “Sarva Moola Granthas”.
100. Respondents No.5 and 6 have placed on record
before this Court the incontrovertible fact that the earlier
pontiffs of Shri Shirooru Mutt, namely Shri Shri Lakshmindra
Theertha, Shri Shri Lakshmimanojna Theertha and Shri Shri
Lakshmivara Theertha, hailed from the same blood family,
who are recognized to be the disciples of Sri Sode Vadhiraja
Mutt. Moreover, the above mentioned three of them were
appointed as the Peethadhipathi of Shirooru Mutt, one after
the other, by the then Dwandwa Matadhipati, Shri Shri
Vishwothama Theertha and the ashrama guru of the present
pontiff of Shri Sode Vadhiraja Mutt, under the concept of the
Dwandwa Mutt, which is prevailing in the customs of the Shri
Krishna Mutt since the time of Shriman Madhwacharya.
101. The facts on record also reveal that Shriman
Madhwacharya having established the above mentioned 8
Mutts and the Krishna Mutt, had ordained that each of the
disciples appointed as Peethadhipathis of each of the 8 Mutts
should take charge of the affairs of Shri Krishna Mutt from
the other, who was in charge of such affairs of the Mutt when
his turn would come to an end and preside over the affairs of
Sri Krishna Mutt for a period of 2 months and function as
“Paryaya Peethadhipathi of Shri Krishna Mutt”. The period of
2 months of such charge is called “Paryaya”, the duration of
which came to be extended later to 2 years by Shri. Vadiraja
Teertha of Sri Sode Mutt during his term of Peethadhipathi of
that Mutt. The end of each such term is marked by a Festival,
which is celebrated on a grand scale and is attended by lakhs
of people.
102. All the 8 Peethadhipathis are the “Joint Trustees”
of Shri Krishna Mutt, where the idol of Lord Shri Krishna was
installed and consecrated by Shriman Madhwacharya. The
Paryaya Swamiji will be the Managing Trustee of Sri Krishna
Mutt during his term of 2 years (Paryaya) and will be
responsible for carrying out series of rituals and ceremonies
associated with the worship of Lord Shri Krishna from early
dawn and till late in the night. The religious activities and
ceremonies connected with the worship of Lord Shri Krishna
will be carried out as per a practice known as “Tantra Sara
Paddathi”,    laid  down   by    Shriman   Madhwacharya. The
Paryaya Peethadhipathi is also required to carry out Car
Festival (Rathostava) of Lord Shri Krishna. During Paryaya,
Shri Krishna Mutt feeds all the devotees who come to witness
the festival from all over the world, from out of the income of
Shri Krishna Mutt, the resources of the Paryaya Swamiji and
from the borrowings that he may make. The Peethadhipathis
of the other 7 Mutts assist the Paryaya Swamiji in the series
of rituals and spiritual activities associated with the worship
of Lord Shri Krishna and preach, propagate and spread not
only the teachings of Shriman Madhwacharya but also the
Vedas, the Upanishads, other Holy Scriptures and Spiritual
Sciences associated with Hindu Dharma to the people so as
to enable them lead a pious, honest, truthful and peaceful life
and also to earn the merit and grace of the almighty.
103. The facts on record further reveal that during the
past   over   800   years    the   aforesaid custom,   tradition,
procedure, system, religious and spiritual activities of Sri.
Krishna Mutt and Ashta Mutts are being carried out by their
respective Peethadhipathis, as their trustees strictly as
ordained by Shriman Madhwacharya and in accordance with
other    religious    scriptures,    without   any    hindrance,
obstructions,    interruptions,     threat,  coercion,   duress,
enticement or inducement from any quarter whatsoever and
to the utmost satisfaction of the followers of the 8 Mutts and
other devotes. Suffice it to say that the place or premises,
where the great saint Shriman Madhwacharya lived with his 8
disciples in the initial period and carried out the worship of
Lord Shri Krishna was called and continues to be called and
known as Sri Krishna Mutt and is attached to the Ashta Mutts
established by Shriman Madhwacharya, each one of which is
presided over by his disciples as Peethadhipathis. It is
respectfully submitted that the very aim, object and purpose
of establishing the Ashta Mutts and grouping them into 4
pairs (Dwandwa Mutts), as detailed herein was to have
cordiality, camaraderie, among the Ashta Peethadhipathis so
that any complicated circumstances or situations which may
arise in any of the Ashta Mutts could be dealt with and solved
by the Peethadhipathis of Ashta Mutts and to ensure proper
worship of Lord Shri Krishna and other religious ceremonies
or activities connected therewith perpetually and without any
interruption or obstruction from any quarter whatsoever. It
is noteworthy and necessary to point out that all the pontiffs
of Ashta Mutts from their inceptions have had Balasanyasis
as Peethadhipathis, who have efficiently and successfully
managed and administered the Sri Krishna Mutt and their
respective    Ashta   Mutts,  for  over  800  years.  Shriman
Madhwacharya himself was a Balasanyasi and was initiated
into Sanyasa at the age of 11 years by his Teacher Shri
104. Sri Sode Vadiraja Mutt (5th respondent herein)
and Sri Shiroor Mutt, as stated earlier, have been paired with
each other for the purposes mentioned herein above and are
hence called Dwandwa Mutts. By virtue of being Dwandwa
Mutts, each of the Peethadhipathis of these two Mutts has
the inherent power to take care of the affairs of the other
Mutt and carry out the activities associated therewith.
105. Sri Shiroor Mutt is one of the Ashta Mutts
established by Shriman Madhwacharya and he appointed his
direct   disciple  Shri   Vamana      Teertha    as   its first
Peethadhipathi. The pontiff so appointed was handed down
an idol of Shri Vithala, the presiding deity of this Mutt, by
Shriman Madhwacharya. This Mutt has an adorable and
glorious history to its credit. This Mutt has been rendering
the yeomen’s service to the cause of propagation of Madhwa
Sidhanta and Unbroken observance. The Mutt has not lagged
behind to respond to the social issues as a matter of
obligation. All the pontiffs of this Mutt starting from Shri
Vamana Teertha the founder of the lineage, have contributed
to various fields. Even other exalted saints of this lineage,
endowed with godly characteristics, readily came forward to
help the whole of mankind. This Mutt has had as many as 30
Peethadhipathis, including the incumbent Shri Vedavardhana
Teertha (who has been arrayed herein as respondent No. 7
under the name Aniruddha).This Mutt has been paired with
Sri Sode Mutt by Shriman Madhwacharya.
106. In respect of Shri Sode Vadiraja Mutt (5th
respondent) it has been stated that Shri Shiroor Mutt was
also  established   by   ShrimanMadhwacharyaand     its  first
Peethadhipathi was Shri Vishnu Teertha. Shri Vishnu Teertha
was    the   direct   brother   and  disciple  of    Shriman
Madhwacharya. The presiding deity of this Muttis Shri
Bhuvaraha. Shri VadirajaTeertha was also a pontiff of this
Mutt and he was very well read and, erudite saint and toured
to the length and breadth of India propagating the Dwaitha
philosophy. The 6th Respondent is the present pontiff of this
Mutt.   This Mutt was paired with Shri Shiroor Mutt by
ShrimanMadhwacharya and that is how these two Mutts have
come to be kwon as DwandwaMutts. Among the Ashta Mutts,
Sri Sode Vadiraja Mutt (then known as Kumbhasi Mutt) has
the adorable and glorious history to its credit. The Mutt has
been rendering the yeoman’s service to the course of
propagation of Siddhanta and unbroken observance.         The
Mutt has not lagged behind to respond to the social issues as
a matter of obligation. All the pontiffs, starting from Sri
Vishnuthirtha - the founder of the lineage, have contributed
to various fields. The crest jewel of the lineage Sri Vadiraja
Teertha has enriched the dignity of higher rank by his mystic
power and extra ordinary contribution. Being Latavya Ruju
god incarnated, Vadiraja showed the noble path to the world
of qualified souls to set themselves free from the mundane
worries. Even other saints of this lineage, endowed with
godly characteristics, readily came forward to help the whole
of mankind. All of these saints enjoyed the reward and
recognition for the services rendered. With safeguarding the
greatness tradition, Mutt realized the timely need and also
accorded the importance to the modern education. Mutt has
the rich collection of rare manuscripts. Mutt is providing
better facilities of its branches for devotees.
107. Respondent No.7 hails from a highly educated
family and right from his childhood he used to show deep
interest in the religious texts and he was appointed as a
Peetadhipathi of Sri Shiroor Mutt in accordance with the
Shastras (religious texts).  The appointment of respondent
No.7 has been done by respondent No.6 keeping in view the
Dwaitha Philosophy as it is only respondent No.6, who can
appoint respondent No.7 as Matadhipathi/Peetadhipathi as
Sri Sode Vadiraja Mutt is paired with Sri Shiroor Mutt by
Shriman     Madhwacharya,      who     propounded    Dwaitha
108. Another important aspect of the case is that the
petitioners are not at all the disciples of Sri Shiroor Mutt.
They might be having respect and faith in the philosophy and
the teachings of Shriman Madhwacharya, but they are not all
the followers of Sri Shiroor Mutt.   The Hindu Religion does
not debar a person to take sanyasa below the age of 18
years and it is nobody's case that respondent No.7 has been
forced to become a sanyasi.         Respondent No.7, after
becoming sanyasi was appointed as a Matadhipathi/Pontiff of
Sri Shiroor Mutt under the accepted practice and customs,
known as Dwandwa Mutts prevailing among eight Mutts
(Ashta Mutts) in Udupi. Dwandwa Mutt's philosophy provides
that in the event of the head of one of the Mutts passing
away without nominating his successor, the head of the
paired Mutt has the authority to appoint such successor. This
custom has found judicial recognition by way of a judgement
of a Division Bench of the Madras High Court in the case of
Raghubhushana           Tirthaswami        and       another     v.
Vidiavaridhi Tirthaswami and another, reported in AIR
1917 Mad 809.        Paragraphs 1, 4, 5, 7, 8 and 9 read as
"1. Appellant 1 (plaintiff 1 in the suit) is the Swami
of a mutt called the Bhimanakattai and appellant 2
(plaintiff 2) was nominated by him to the headship of
another mutt called the Bhandarikere. Defendant 1
in the suit is a person who claims to have been
nominated Swami of the Bhandarikere mutt by
defendant 2 who is described as the Pariyaya Swami.
The suit was instituted in order to obtain a
declaration that the head of the Bhimanakattai Mutt
for the time being is entitled to appoint a Swami to
the Bhandarikere Mutt in default of any appointment
by the last Swami of the latter mutt during his
lifetime and that the Pariyaya Swami of the Krishna
temple at Udipi, which is the office held by defendant
2 has no right to appoint a Swami to the
Bhandarikere Mutt in case of such vacancy. The next
important prayer in the plaint is that plaintiff 2 may
be declared to have been lawfully appointed to the
Bhandarikere Mutt and that he may be put in
possession of that mutt and its properties. The
learned Subordinate Judge has found against the
claims of plaintiffs 1 and 2. He also found that the
Pariyaya Swami has no right to make any
appointment to the Bhandarikere Mutt. In the result
he dismissed the suit. The plaintiffs have preferred
this appeal against the decision of the Subordinate
4. As regards the case of the plaintiffs, so far as it is
based on the allegation that the Bhimanakattai Mutt
is the parent mutt and as such its Swami has a right
to appoint to the Bhandarikara Mutt, it can vary
easily be disposed of. The entire evidence of the
plaintiff was adduced to prove the dwandwa
relationship between the two mutts in question. That
is to say, the Swami of either I of them in a
contingency such as this has a right to appoint the
Swami of the sister mutt and not that the
Bhimanakattai Mutt possessed any predominant
right, by virtue of being the original mutt, of
appointing to the Bhandarikere Mutt. The connexion
between a moola mutt and the branch or cowle mutt
presupposes a certain amount of controlling
authority and superiority of position in the one and
of subordination in the other; while the idea of
Dwandwa Mutts is that they are both of co-ordinate
and independent authority, but that in cases of
urgency, the Swami of each has a right to appoint
the Swami of the allied mutt. This is very well
established by the evidence with regard to the eight
Udipi Mutts which are grouped into twos with the
dwandwa right existing inter se. Of these Dwandwa
Mutts no one has authority of any sort over the
other, and it is only the Pariyaya Swami who, being
the custodian of the Krishna temple, has a certain
superior authority over all the eight mutts. It is not
even suggested that the Swami of Bhimanakattai
Mutt is entitled to any special honours from the
Bhandarikere Mutt or that he exercises any kind of
control, supervision or privilege over it.
5. What is claimed on behalf of the Bhimanakattai
Mutt is that this was the original mutt founded by the
sage Durvasa whose name appears on the top of the
pedigree,     and   that     Bhimankattai   was    the
Samasthanam of Yisvamurti who was the last Swami
of the original matt before division. Visvamurti had
two disciples Visvapathi and Gadadhara. Visvapathi
was ordained successor to Visvamurthi in the original
mutt and Gadadhara was placed in charge of a
branch mutt which was then established. All this is a
matter merely of tradition and cannot be said to be
proved by any evidence. It is alleged that
Bhimanakattai Mutt is proved at least to be an older
mutt than the other and in support of that
contention, a copper plate inscription marked as Ex.
JJ is relied on. If this document could be said to
genuine, there would be good ground for holding
that Bhimanakattai mutt is the more ancient of the
two. It is a grant alleged to have been made in the
era of Yudhishtra 89 by Janamejaya, the great-
grandson of Yudhishtra himself. That would take the
matter back to about 3,000 B.G. It is pointed out by
Mr. Rice that having regard to the fact that the
writing is modern Canarese and also other facts
mentioned by him the copper plate inscription to say
the least, is of doubtful authenticity. The learned
Subordinate Judge seems to think that though the
date 89 Yudhishtra era cannot be correct the grant
itself is not fabricated and that it can be safely
attributed to 14th century. He however fails to notice
that the grant purports to be by the great-grandson
of Yudhishtra himself who is said to have lived about
3,012 B.C. I think the Subordinate Judge was wrong
in placing any reliance at all on Ex. JJ. Similarly I am
not inclined to attach any importance to the claim
that the sage Durvasa worshipped at Bhimanakattai,
alleged to be his hermitage. It is wholly founded on a
vague tradition of a non-historical character. The
Subordinate Judge has also attached significance to
the letter Ex. DD written in 1837 by the Swami of
Bhandarikere Mutt to the Swami of Bhimanakattai
Mutt, asking the latter to find out if there were any
old accounts and documents in his possession which
might be useful in connexion with certain suits
relating to the land of Bhandarikere. It appears that
sometime about 1705 (Ex. CC) there was partition
between the two mutts of certain jewels, books,
brass and copper vessels and other articles of
worship and that apparently explains why the Swami
of Bhandarikere Mutt who wrote Ex. DD thought that
the Swami of Bhimanakattai Mutt might have some
papers which would throw light in the suits re-lasing
to the properties of his mutt. Nor does the conclusion
of the lower Court, that Gopinath is the principal
deity worshiped in the Bhandarikere Mutt while
Ramadeva is the original deity worshipped in the
Bhimanakattai Mutt, seem to be warranted by the
evidence. There is ample evidence corraborated by
the statements of witnesses on the plaintiffs' side to
show that the images of Rama, Lakshmana and Sita,
singly or together, form a principal object of worship
in the Bhandarikere Mutt as well. There is however
the undoubted fact that the grants recorded in the
stone inscriptions M, N, O, P, all made in the 16th
century are in favour of the deity Gopinath. But
admittedly more than one deity is worshipped in
these mutts and it is likely that a particular devotee
of a particular deity should make endowments for his
7. On the question of the dwandwa right we have
certain admitted facts. Such a right does exist
among the eight Udipi Mutts which are also Madhava
Mutts. We have also one undoubted instance of an
appointment made by the Swami of Bhandarikere
Mutt to the headship of the Bhimankattai Mutt. This
instance was admitted on the defendants' side before
the learned Subordinate Judge, as would appear
from the judgment. The Swami so appointed was
Raghu Pravira Thirta, the 35th in the list of
Bhimanakattai     Swamis;     and    the   Swami    of
Bhandarikere who appointed him was Vidyasagar,
the predecessor of the lunatic Vidyanidhi. No doubt
an attempt was made before us to show that what
the Bhandarikere Swami did was merely to perform
the ceremony of ordination, the nominee in fact
being designated by the Swami of Bhimanakattai
Mutt during his lifetime. But apparently the
suggested distinction between ordination and
selection, so far as the particular case is concerned,
is an after thought and was not sought to be drawn
before the lower Court. The suggestion is based on
the reading of Ex. FF, which is a document produced
to support the case of the plaintiff and which has
been found by the Subordinate Judge to be a
fabriation, a finding strenuously supported by the
learned Advocate-General himself who appeared for
8. I may here conveniently deal with the question
whether the finding of the Subordinates Judge
regarding Exs. FF, GG and EE is correct. Ex. EE is a
letter purporting to be written by some villagers of a
place called Halesige in the Bombay Presidency to
one Anantha Battar who, at that time, that is, in
1821, was the agent of Bhimanakattai Mutt,
informing him that Raghunatha Thirta, the Swami of
that mutt, died of small pox in Halesige village, that
before death, he desired the writers of the letter to
write to Anantha Battar to the effect that he should
request the Swami of Bhandarikere which was
dwandwa to the Bhimanakatati to give asram to the
eldest son of Anantha Battar, that is, or a in him to
the Samasthanam or office of the Swami of the
Bhimanakattai Mutt. This letter refers to the case
which, as I have already mentioned, did undoubtedly
occur. Ex. FF was produced first in 1899 and as
mentioned in the judgment of the Subordinate Judge
who tried the previous suit, it was produced at a late
stage of that suit and the present Subordinate Judge
was justified in relying on this fact in considering the
question of genuineness of the document. It is
perfectly true that Raghunatha Thirta Swami of
Bhimankattai died in Halesige where his tomb is and
is worshipped by his devotees. But the Subordinate
Judge remarks that it is hardly likely that there
should not have been with him some responsible
agent or officer of the Samasthanam and that he
should have been under necessity of entrusting his
personal effects and era important massage to men
who must have been more or less strangers.
9. It is also pointed out that Ex. FF contains
statements which are not true or at least are not
likely to be inserted in a bona fide document; for
instance the statement that the mutts were
dwandwa and that the writers were interested in the
Samasthanam of the deceased Swami from former
times. “The latter statement is apparently not proved
by any evidence although the descendants of the
alleged writers, that is, P.W. Nos. 7, 8, 9, and 10
have been examined. On the other hand, P.W. 10,
who alone among these witnesses identifies the
signature of one of the signatories to FF as that of
his great-grandfather, belonged to the Utharahti
Mutt and is not a follower of Bhimanakattai Mutt.
P.W. Nos. 7, 8 and 9 do not prove the writing or
signatures of their ancestors in Ex. FF. The cross-
examination of P.W. 10 shows that he is hardly a
reliable witness. He is a mendicant and makes
statements in support of the plaintiffs' case which
having regard to the fact that he is a follower of
Utharatbi Mutt, would not ordinarily be within his
personal knowledge. I am unable to say that the
Subordinate Judge's finding that Ex. FF is not
genuine is wrong. The same with Ex. GG. That is a
peculiar document and though it is extremely likely
that it was in existence in the Bhimanakattai Mutt,
the entries could easily be rubbed out and other
entries substituted in their place. The entries are
made on folded pieces of cloth stitched together in
the form of a book and blackened with charcoal dust.
One has only to put fresh charcoal dust on and write
again with a piece of steel or something like that and
nobody could tell the difference between that writing
and the older writing. The lower Court has also held
that Ex. EE, by which it is sought to prove a case of
appointment of a Swami to the Bhandarikare Mutt by
a Swami of the Bhimanakattai Mutt, is not genuine.
It is a very long letter purporting to be written
sometime in 1776 and in it there occurs a statement
of parsons who are alleged to be the servants of the
Bhimanakattai Mutt, to the effect that the then
Swami Raghuvaria Thirta of that mutt had ordained
the then Swami of Bhanclarikere. The Subordinate
Judge points out that the name of the Swami of
Bhandarikere is not mentioned and urges that this
shows that the man who concocted the document
were not certain who was in fact the Swami of
109. The aforesaid judgment makes it very clear that
Dwandwa right exists among the eight Udupi Mutts, which
are also Madhva Mutts and respondent No.6 does have an
authority to appoint a Matadhipathi/Peetadhipathi of Sri
Shiroor Mutt and the same has been done by him.
110. Seven judges of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
the    case     of    Commissioner,         Hindu       Religious
Endowments,        Madras     v.   Sri   Lakshmindra       Thirtha
Swamir of Shirur Mutt, reported in AIR 1954 SC 282, has
declared that the followers of Madhva philosophy constitute
a religious denomination and the followers of Sri Shiroor
Mutt form a sect of religious denomination. Paragraphs 10,
11 and 15 of the aforesaid judgment read as under;
"10. As regards Article 19(1)(f) of the Constitution, the
question that requires consideration is, whether the
respondent as Mathadhipati has a right to property in
the legal sense, in the religious institution and its
endowments, which would enable him to claim the
protection of this Article? A question is also formulated
as to whether this Article deals with concrete rights of
property at all? So far as Article 25 of the Constitution is
concerned, the point raised is, whether this Article
which, it is said, is intended to protect religious freedom
only so far as individuals are concerned, can be invoked
in favour of an institution or organisation? With regard
to Article 26, the contention is that a Math does not
come within the description of a religious denomination
as provided for in the article and even if it does, what
cannot be interfered with is its right to manage its own
affairs in matters of religion only and nothing else. It is
said, that the word “religion”, as used in this article,
should be taken in its strict etymological sense as
distinguished from any kind of secular activity which
may be connected in some way with religion but does
not form an essential part of it. Reference is made in
this connection to clause (2)(a) of Article 25 and clause
(d) of Article 26. We will take up these points for
consideration one after another.
11. As regards the property rights of a Mathadhipati, it
may not be possible to say in view of the
pronouncements of the Judicial Committee, which have
been accepted as good law in this country ever since
1921, that a Mathadhipati holds the Math property as a
life tenant or that his position is similar to that of a
Hindu widow in respect to her husband's estate or of an
English Bishop holding a benefice. He is certainly not a
trustee in the strict sense. He may be, as the Privy
Council [ Vide Vidya Varuthi v. Balusami, 48 IA 302]
says, a manager or custodian of the institution who has
to discharge the duties of a trustee and is answerable as
such; but he is not a mere manager and it would not be
right to describe Mahantship as a mere office. A superior
of a Math has not only duties to discharge in connection
with the endowment but he has a personal interest of a
beneficial character which is sanctioned by custom and
is much larger than that of a Shebait in the debutter
property. It was held by a Full Bench of the Calcutta
High Court [ Vide Monahar v. Bhupendra, 60 Cal 452]
that Shebaitship itself is property, and this decision was
approved of by the Judicial Committee in Ganesh v. Lal
Behary [63 IA 448] and again in Bhabatarini v. Ashalata
[70 IA 57] . The effect of the first two decisions, as the
Privy Council pointed out in the last case, was to
emphasise the proprietary element in the Shebaiti right
and to show that though in some respects an anomaly,
it was an anomaly to be accepted as having been
admitted into Hindu law from an early date. This view
was adopted in its entirety by this Court in Angurbala v.
Debabrata [1951 SCR 1125] and what was said in that
case in respect to Shebaiti right could, with equal
propriety, be applied to the office of a Mahant. Thus in
the conception of Mahantship, as in Shebaitship, both
the elements of office and property, of duties and
personal interest are blended together and neither can
be detached from the other. The personal or beneficial
interest of the Mahant in the endowments attached to
an institution is manifested in his large powers of
disposal and administration and his right to create
derivative tenures in respect to endowed properties;
and these and other rights of a similar character invest
the office of the Mahant with the character of
proprietary right which, though anomalous to some
extent, is still a genuine legal right. It is true that the
Mahantship is not heritable like ordinary property, but
that is because of its peculiar nature and the fact that
the office is generally held by an ascetic, whose
connection with his natural family being completely cut
off, the ordinary rules of succession do not apply.
15. As regards Article 26, the first question is, what is
the precise meaning or connotation of the expression
“religious denomination” and whether a Math could
come within this expression. The word “denomination”
has been defined in the Oxford Dictionary to mean “a
collection of individuals classed together under the same
name: a religious sect or body having a common faith
and organisation and designated by a distinctive name”.
It is well known that the practice of setting up Maths as
centres of theological teaching was started by Shri
Sankaracharya and was followed by various teachers
since then. After Sankara, came a galaxy of religious
teachers and philosophers who founded the different
sects and sub-sects of the Hindu religion that we find in
India at the present day. Each one of such sects or sub-
sects can certainly be called a religious denomination,
as it is designated by a distinctive name, — in many
cases it is the name of the founder, — and has a
common faith and common spiritual organisation. The
followers of Ramanuja, who are known by the name of
Shri Vaishnabas, undoubtedly constitute a religious
denomination; and so do the followers of Madhwacharya
and other religious teachers. It is a fact well established
by tradition that the eight Udipi Maths were founded by
Madhwacharya himself and the trustees and the
beneficiaries of these Maths profess to be followers of
that teacher. The High Court has found that the Math in
question is in charge of the Sivalli Brahmins who
constitute a section of the followers of Madhwacharya.
As Article 26 contemplates not merely a religious
denomination but also a section thereof, the Math or the
spiritual fraternity represented by it can legitimately
come within the purview of this article."
111. Discussion       on    the    religious    denomination
becomes relevant here. Article 26 refers not only to religious
denominations,      but   also   to   sects    thereof.   Article  26
guarantees     that   every   religious    denomination,      or  sect
thereof, shall have the right inter-alia to manage its own
affairs in matters of religion. This right is made subject to
public order, morality, and health. The expression “religious
denomination” as interpreted in Commissioner, Hindu
Religious Endowments, Madras v. Sri Lakshmindra
Thirtha Swamiar of Sri Shirur Mutt (supra) was “a
collection of individuals classed together under the same
name : a religious sect or body having a common faith and
organisation and designated by a distinctive name”. The
Court held that each of the sects or sub-sects of the Hindu
religion could be called a religious denomination, as such
sects or sub-sects, had a distinctive name.
112. The petitioners have vehemently argued before
this    Court    that    there   has   been    a  violation   of  the
constitutional rights guaranteed under Articles 25 and 26 of
the Constitutions of India and the action of respondent No.6
is   violative    of   fundamental     rights  guaranteed     to  the
devotees      of   Sri   Shiroor   Mutt   under   Part   III   of the
Constitution of India.
113. Articles 25 and 26 of the Constitution of India
"25. Freedom of conscience and free profession,
practice and propagation of religion.—(1) Subject to
public order, morality and health and to the other
provisions of this Part, all persons are equally entitled
to freedom of conscience and the right freely to
profess,      practise     and     propagate     religion.
(2) Nothing in this article shall affect the operation of
any existing law or prevent the State from making any
(a) regulating or restricting any economic, financial,
political or other secular activity which may be
associated with religious practice;
(b) providing for social welfare and reform or the
throwing open of Hindu religious institutions of a
public character to all classes and sections of Hindus.
Explanation I.—The wearing and carrying of kirpans
shall be deemed to be included in the profession of
the Sikh religion.
Explanation II.—In sub-clause (b) of clause (2), the
reference to Hindus shall be construed as including a
reference to persons professing the Sikh, Jaina or
Buddhist religion, and the reference to Hindu religious
institutions    shall    be     construed    accordingly.
26. Freedom to manage religious affairs.—Subject to
public order, morality and health, every religious
denomination or any section thereof shall have the
(a) to establish and maintain institutions for religious
(b) to manage its own affairs in matters of religion;
(c) to own and acquire movable and immovable
(d) to administer such property in accordance with
114. As     already    stated   earlier,  the   followers of
Madhva philosophy constitute a religious denomination and
the followers of Sri Shiroor Mutt form a sect of religious
denomination.      As Article 26 of the Constitution of India
contemplates not merely a religious denomination but also a
sect thereof, the Mutt or the spiritual fraternity represented
by it legitimately comes within the purview of Article 26 of
the Constitution of India.    Hence, the system of Dwandwa
Mutt being an essential religious practice, is protected under
Article 26 of the Constitution of India.
115. The framers of the Constitution were aware of
the rich history and heritage of this country being a secular
polity with diverse religions and faiths, which were protected
within the fold of Articles 25 and 26. State interference was
not permissible, except as provided by Article 25(2)(b) of
the Constitution, where the State may make law providing
for social welfare and reform. Article 26 of the Constitution
guarantees the freedom to every religious denomination, or
sect thereof, the right to establish and maintain institutions
for religious or charitable purposes, and to manage their
own affairs in matters of religion. The right conferred under
Article 26 is subject to public order, morality and health, and
not to any other provisions in Part III of the Constitution. A
religious denomination or organization enjoys complete
autonomy in matters of deciding what rites and ceremonies
are essential according to the tenets of that religion. The
only restriction imposed is on the exercise of the right being
subject to public order, morality and health under Article 26.
Therefore, respondent No.6 is certainly in respect of
religious denomination entitled under Article 26 of the
Constitution   of  India  to   appoint   respondent No.7    as
116. In S.P. Mittal v. Union of India & Ors. (1983
AIR 1: 1983 SCC (1) 51), the Supreme Court, while relying
upon the judgment in the case of Commissioner, Hindu
Religious Endowments, Madras v. Sri Lakshmindra
Swamiar Thirtha Swamiar of Shirur Mutt (supra), held
that the words ‘religious denomination’ in Article 26 of the
Constitution must take their colour from the word ‘religion’,
and if this be so, the expression ‘religious denomination’
(1) It must be a collection of individuals who have a
system of beliefs or doctrines which they regard as
conducive to their spiritual well-being, that is, a
(3) designation by a distinctive name
117. If there are clear attributes that there exists a
sect, which is identifiable as being distinct by its beliefs and
practices, and having a collection of followers who follow the
same     faith,  it   would    be    identified  as   a   ‘religious
denomination’.       The followers of Sri Shiroor Mutt constitute
a religious denomination, or sect thereof, as the case may be
and follow common faith and common beliefs and practices.
Thus, the beliefs and practices are based upon the teachings
of Shriman Madhwacharya and as per the essential religious
practices    and    therefore,  respondent      No.6   has   rightly
appointed respondent No.7 as Matadhipathi/Peetadhipathi.
118. Before     concluding     the  matter,   the  essential
practice of particular religion test needs to be applied. The
‘essential practices’ test was formulated in Commissioner,
Hindu Religious Endowments, Madras v. Sri Lakshmindra
Thirtha Swamiar of Sri Shirur Mutt. (Supra) by the Supreme
Court. Before articulating the test, the Supreme Court drew
on the words “practice of religion” in Article 25(1) to hold
that the Constitution protects not only the freedom of
religious belief, but also acts done in pursuance of a religion.
In doing so, it relied on an extract from the decision of
Latham, C.J. of the High Court of Australia in Adelaide
Company of Jehovah’s Witnesses Incorporated v. The
Commonwealth, reported in 67 CLR 116, 127. The original
extract relied upon has been reproduced herein below:-
“5. It is sometimes suggested in discussions on the
subject of freedom of religion that, though the civil
government should not interfere with religious
opinions, it nevertheless may deal as it pleases with
any acts which are done in pursuance of religious
belief without infringing the principle of freedom of
religion. It appears to me to be difficult to maintain
this distinction as relevant to the interpretation of
s.116. The section refers in express terms to the
exercise of religion, and therefore it is intended to
protect from the operation of any Commonwealth laws
acts which are done in the exercise of religion. Thus
the section goes far beyond protecting liberty of
opinion. It protects also acts done in pursuance of
religious belief as part of religion.”
The Supreme Court then went on to formulate the
‘essential practices test in the following words:
“20...what constitutes the essential part of a religion is
primarily to be ascertained with reference to the
doctrines of that religion itself. If the tenets of any
religious      sect     of      the      Hindus    prescribe
that offerings of food should be given to the idol at
particular hours of the day, that periodical ceremonies
should be performed in a certain way at certain periods
of the year or that there should be daily recital of sacred
texts or oblations to the sacred fire, all these would be
regarded as parts of religion...all of them are religious
practices       and     should       be      regarded     as
matters of religion within the meaning of Article 26(b)...
...23. Under Article 26(b), therefore, a religious
denomination       or   organization      enjoys   complete
autonomy in the matter of deciding as to what rites and
ceremonies      are    essential    according     to     the
tenets of the religion they hold and no outside authority
has any jurisdiction to interfere with their decision in
such matters.”
119.    The ‘essential practices test’ was reiterated by
the Supreme Court in Ratilal Panachand Gandhi v. The
State of Bombay & Ors. reported in (1954) SCR
1055:AIR 1954 SC 388, where the narrow definition of
“religion” given by the Bombay High Court was discarded. It
was held that all religious practices or performances of acts
in pursuance of religious beliefs were as much a part of
religion, as faith or belief in particular doctrines. The
Supreme Court re-iterated the ‘essential practices test’ in
“13...Thus if the tenets of the Jain or the Parsi religion
lay down that certain rites and ceremonies are to be
performed at certain times and in a particular manner, it
cannot be said that these are secular activities partaking
of commercial or economic character simply because
they involve expenditure of money or employment of
priests or the use of marketable commodities. No
outside authority has any right to say that these are not
essential parts of religion and it is not open to the
secular authority of the State to restrict or prohibit them
in any manner they like under the guise of
administering the trust estate...We may refer in this
connection to the observation of Davar, J. in the case of
Jamshed ji v. Soonabai and although they were made in
a case where the question was whether the bequest of
property by a Parsi testator for the purpose of perpetual
celebration of ceremonies like Muktad bag, Vyezashni,
etc., which are sanctioned by the Zoroastrian religion
were valid and charitable gifts, the observations, we
think, are quite appropriate for our present purpose. If
this    is    the    belief    of    the   community       thus
observed the learned judge, and it is proved
undoubtedly to be the belief of the Zoroastrian
community, - a secular judge is bound to accept that
belief – it is not for him to sit in judgment on that belief,
he has no right to interfere with the conscience of a
donor who makes a gift in favour of what he believes to
be the advancement of the religion and the welfare of
his community or mankind. These observations do in
our opinion afford an indication of the measure of
protection        that      is       given      by       Article
26(b) of our Constitution.”
120. In Durgah Committee, Ajmer & Anr. v. Syed
Hussain Ali & Ors. reported in 1961 AIR 1402 : 1962 SCR
383 the ‘essential practices test’ was discussed by a
Constitution Bench in the following words:
“33...Whilst we are dealing with this point it may not be
out of place incidentally to strike a note of caution and
observe that in order that the practices in question
should be treated as a part of religion they must be
regarded by the said religion as its essential and
integral part; otherwise even purely secular practices
which are not an essential or an integral part of religion
are apt to be clothed with a religious form and may
make a claim or being treated as religious practices
within the meaning of Article 26. Similarly, even
practices though religious may have sprung from merely
superstitious     beliefs    and     may    in    that   sense
be extraneous and unessential accretions to religion
itself. Unless such practices are found to constitute an
essential and integral part of a religion their claim for
the protection under Article 26 may have to be carefully
scrutinised; in other words, the protection must be
confined       to     such       religious     practices      as
are an essential and an integral part of it and no other.”
The Supreme Court affirmed the ‘essential practices
test’ as laid in the previous decisions in Commissioner,
Hindu Religious Endowments, Madras v. Sri Lakshmindra
Thirtha Swamiar of Sri Shirur Mutt (supra), and Ratilal
Panachand Gandhi v. The State of Bombay & Ors. (supra)
insofar as it emphasised on the autonomy of religions to
identify essential or integral practices.
121. Reference     is required   to be   made    to the
doctrines and tenets of a religion, its historical background,
and the scriptural texts to ascertain the ‘essentiality’ of
religious practices.
122.   The ‘essential practices test’ in its application
would have to be determined by the tenets of the religion
itself. The practices and beliefs which are considered to be
integral by the religious community are to be regarded as
“essential”, and enjoys protection under Article 25.
123.   The   only    way   to  determine   the  essential
practices test would be with reference to the practices
followed since time immemorial, which may have been
scripted in the religious texts of this temple. If any practice
in a particular mode of worship can be traced to antiquity,
and is integral to the sect, it must be taken to be an
essential religious practice of that sect.
124. Learned counsel for the petitioners has placed
heavy reliance upon a judgment delivered in the case of
Indian Young Lawyers Association (supra), however,
the same has been now referred to a Larger Bench and the
Hon'ble Supreme Court (Larger Bench) in the case of
Kantaru Rajeevaru (Right to Religion, In re-9 J.) (2) v.
Indian Young Lawyers Assn., reported in (2020) 9 SCC
121, in paragraph 5 has held as under;
"5. It is our considered view that the issues arising in
the pending cases regarding entry of Muslim women in
durgah/mosque [being Writ Petition (Civil) No. 472 of
2019] [Ed.: See the latest order in this case dated 5-11-
2019: Yasmeen Zuber Ahmad Peerzade v. Union of
India, (2020) 2 SCC 50 (1)] ; of Parsi women married to
a non-Parsi in the Agyari [being Special Leave Petition
(Civil) No. 18889 of 2012] [Ed.: Reference may be
made to two of the orders in these proceedings, the first
order below referring the matter to a Constitution
Bench: Goolrokh M. Gupta v. Burjor Pardiwala, (2020) 2
SCC 50 (2); and Goolrokh M. Gupta v. Burjor Pardiwala,
(2020) 2 SCC 705] and including the practice of female
genital mutilation in Dawoodi Bohra community [being
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 286 of 2017] [Ed.: Reference
may be made to the order referring the matter to a
Constitution Bench in these proceedings: Sunita Tiwari
v. Union of India, (2019) 18 SCC 719 : 2018 SCC
OnLine SC 2667] may be overlapping and covered by
the judgment [Indian Young Lawyers Assn. (Sabarimala
Temple-5 J.) v. State of Kerala, (2019) 11 SCC 1] under
review. The prospect of the issues arising in those cases
being referred to the larger Bench cannot be ruled out.
5.1.(i) Regarding the interplay between the freedom of
religion under Articles 25 and 26 of the Constitution and
other provisions in Part III, particularly Article 14.
5.2.(ii) What is the sweep of expression “public order,
morality and health” occurring in Article 25(1) of the
5.3.(iii) The expression “morality” or “constitutional
morality” has not been defined in the Constitution. Is it
overarching morality in reference to Preamble or limited
to religious beliefs or faith. There is need to delineate
the contours of that expression, lest it becomes
subjective.
5.4.(iv) The extent to which the court can enquire into
the issue of a particular practice is an integral part of
the religion or religious practice of a particular religious
denomination or should that be left exclusively to be
determined by the head of the section of the religious
group.
5.5.(v) What is the meaning of the expression “sections
of Hindus” appearing in Article 25(2)(b) of the
5.6.(vi) Whether the “essential religious practices” of a
religious denomination, or even a section thereof are
afforded constitutional protection under Article 26.
5.7.(vii) What would be the permissible extent of
judicial recognition to PILs in matters calling into
question religious practices of a denomination or a
section thereof at the instance of persons who do not
belong to such religious denomination?
The aforesaid case is still pending before the Hon'ble
125. Much has been argued on the issue of Sanyasa
and it has been vehemently argued before this Court that
respondent No.7 is a minor and his becoming sanyasi
violates Article 39(a) and 39(f) of the Constitution of India.
In   respect    of    this aspect,   learned   Senior   Counsel
Sri Naganand was justified in arguing before this Court that
age of majority is reckoned as 18 years only for the purposes
of   entering    into    a binding   contract  and    undertake
responsibilities as majors and for the same purpose, the
Majority Act, 1875 was enacted.          He has rightly argued
before this Court that while describing the age of majority as
18 years for this purpose, a specific exception is carved out
in Section 2, which says that nothing contained in the Act
shall affect the religion or religious rites and usages of any
class of citizens of India.    Various statutes and even the
Constitution of India does not prohibit any person, who is
less than 18 years of age to become a sanyasi.
126. Reference has also been drawn to United Nations
Convention on the Rights of Child. However, in the present
case, respondent No.7 is 16 years of age and even if it is
presumed that the person concerned is a child, Article 12 of
CRC guarantees to the child, who is capable of forming his or
her own views the right to express those views freely in all
matters affecting the child, the views of the child being given
due weight in accordance with the age and maturity of the
child.   It also assures the right of the child to freedom of
thought, conscience and religion and this is also the mandate
of Article 25 of the Constitution of India.
127. In the present case, Sri Shiroor Mutt is one of the
Ashta Mutts and it is a religious denomination having its own
customs and practices and therefore, respondent No.7 was
rightly appointed as a Matadhipathi/Peetadhipathi. It is not
for the first time that a person of below age is becoming
sanyasi. Sri Shringeri Mutt is one of the Peetas established
by Shriman Adishankaracharya and large number of persons
below 18 years of age have become sanyasis. The present
petition has been filed with an ulterior motive without going
through the religious practices of Sri Shiroor Mutt.
128.     The Hon'ble Court in the case of His Holiness
Sri Vishwothama Thirtha Swamiar of Sode Mutt, Udipi,
minor rep.by next friend P.S.Charya and ors., v. The
State of Madras, represented by the Collector of South
Kanara, Mangalore and ors., reported in AIR 1956 Mad
541, in paragraphs 110 and 111 has held as under;
"110. The third relevant reported case in this
connection is 1927 PC 131(AIR V 14) © decided by the
Judicial Committee of the Privy Council. Their Lordships
“It is in evidence that in the town of Udipi
there are eight maths each presided over by a
superior Swamiar. They appear to form four
groups connected by a tie which permits in case
of the superior of one Math dying without
nominating a successor the superior of the other
Math to appoint a successor to the deceased
111. Besides these Maths there is temple
dedicated to Krishna, one of the manifestations of
Vishnu, perhaps the most popular deity forming the
Hindu, Triad. Admittedly it has no superior but the
affairs of the Krishna Temple are managed by the
superiors of the eight maths in turn."
In light of the aforesaid, it can be safely gathered that
Dwandwa rights have been rightly exercised by respondent
No.6 by appointing respondent No.7 as Peetadhipathi of Sri
129. In other religions also like Buddhism, children of
tender age have become monks and there is no impracticable
rule as to the age on which sanyasa deeksha can be given.
Also, there is no statutory much less constitutional bar on a
person of less than 18 years being initiated into sanyasa and
the religious texts, which have been           quoted in the
arguments of learned Senior Counsel Sri Nagananda, Amicus
Curiae, makes it very clear that the religion permits a person
to become sanyasi before attaining the age of 18 years and
there is no such bar and as per the Dwandwa philosophy
respondent No.6 was certainly empowered to keeping in view
the essential religious practices to appoint respondent No.7
as Peetadhipathi of Sri Shiroor Mutt.
130. In the considered opinion of this Court, the
Courts are certainly not at all meant to write the religious
text, however, they are under an obligation to follow the
religious text in the matter of cases dealing with religious
dispute and to follow the old practices which are prevalent in
religion so long as they do not violate constitutional rights of
an individual.
131. In the present case, Sri Shiroor Mutt is a religious
denomination and as per the essential religious practices,
respondent No.7 has become a sanyasi and has been
appointed as a Matadhipathi/Peetadhipathi of Sri Shiroor
Mutt by respondent No.6.             Therefore, by no stretch of
imagination it can be presumed that the essential religious
practice of Dwandwa Mutt, which is in vogue, is violative of
constitutional rights guaranteed to the citizens of India.
132. The petitioners have not been able to establish
violation of any statutory provisions nor violation of any
constitutional rights guaranteed to respondent No.7. The
essential religious practice is continuing for the last 800
years and the appointment of Pontiff is a practice, which is in
existence for the last 800 years keeping in view the
philosophy and the teachings of Shriman Madhwacharya.
133. The Division Bench of Madhya Pradesh High
Court in the case of Aarsh marg Seva Trust and Another
v. State of Madhya Pradesh and Ors., W.P.No.8310/2019
(PIL), decided on 1.11.2019, as dealt with the essential
religious practices and in paragraph 72 has held as under;
"This Court is not a theological wizard and shall be
transgressing its role as a constitutionist authority by
interfering with the essential religious practice, which
is certainly not at all opposed to public order, morality,
health or any other fundamental right. Resultantly, no
case for interference is made out in the matter and the
writ petition is accordingly dismissed."
134. In the light of the aforesaid judgment, in which
the Division Bench has declined to interfere in an essential
religious    practice,    which     was   continuing   since   time
immemorial, the question of interference of this Court in the
essential religious practice of Sri Shiroor Mutt, which is
continuing     for   the    last  800    years,  does   not   arise.
Resultantly, the writ petition is dismissed.
Pending IAs, if any, stand disposed of.
No order as to costs.