[Arising out of the final order dated 5.5.2021 in O.A.No. 880/2020 on the file of the KAT, TVM
The final verdict rendered by the Division Bench of the Kerala
Administrative Tribunal, Thiruvananthapuram Bench on 5.5.2021 in
the instant original application, O.A.No. 880/2020 is under challenge
before us in the instant Original Petition filed under Arts.226 and 227
of the Constitution of India.
2.      The sole petitioner in the Original Petition is the sole
applicant in the O.A. and the respondents in the OP are the
respondents in the O.A..
3.      Heard Sri.N.Asok Kumar, learned counsel appearing for
the petitioner in the O.P./sole applicant in the O.A., Sri.Saigi Jacob
Palatty, learned Senior Govt. Pleader appearing for respondents 1 & 2
in the O.P./R-1 & R-2 in the OA, Sri.P.C.Sasidharan, learned Standing
Counsel for the Kerala Public Service Commission appearing for R-3
in the O.P/R-3 in the O.A. and Sri.Nirmal V.Nair, learned Advocate
appearing for contesting respondents 4 to 7 in the O.P./R-4 to R-7 in
4.    The main issue posed before us in this OP is as to whether
a serving Government employee, who had earlier secured enrollment
as an Advocate in terms of the provisions contained in the Advocates
Act, and who had later suspended his legal practice for taking up the
above Government employment, can be treated as a “member of the
Bar” for the purpose of       selection and appointment as Assistant
Public Prosecutor Grade II. Our answer to the abovesaid issue is in
the negative and thus against the petitioner in the OP. The reasonings
for arriving at the abovesaid conclusion will be dealt with hereunder.
The original petitioner herein/original applicant will be referred for
convenience as “the applicant”. The respondent Kerala Public Service
Commission will be referred for convenience as “PSC”.
5.    A brief reference to the factual aspects in this case would
be pertinent and relevant. According to the applicant, she had
secured a degree in law from the University of Calicut and thereafter
she had duly got herself enrolled as Advocate before the Bar Council
of Kerala on 30.12.2007, in terms of the provisions contained in the
Advocates Act, 1961 and the rules framed thereunder. According to
her, she has commenced practice as an Advocate in the courts at
Alappuzha, including the criminal courts there. Later she got
appointment as Lower Division Typist (LDT) in the Excise
Department of the Government of Kerala and pursuant to the said
appointment order, she has joined Government service as LDT on
16.10.2012. It is also her admitted case that before that, she had given
the requisite application before the Bar Council of Kerala and had got
her legal practice suspended in terms of the provisions contained in
the Advocates Act and the Bar Council of India Rules and that the
abovesaid voluntary suspension from legal practice was rendered on
10.10.2012. The last date of submission of the application as per
Anx.A-1 notification dated 30.8.2017, was upto 4.10.2017.
6.    The 3rd respondent PSC had issued Anx.A-1 selection
notification dated 30.8.2017, inviting applications from eligible and
qualified candidates for appointment as Assistant Public Prosecutor
Gr.II (APP Gr.II) in the State of Kerala. The qualifications prescribed
to hold the post of APP Gr.II as per the rules and as per clause 7 of
Anx. A-1 selection notification are as follows:
“i.   Must be a Graduate in Law.
ii.  Must be member of the Bar and must have had not less than three
years of active practice in Criminal Courts.
Note:Certificate of enrollment issued by the Bar Council and 3 years
experience certificate of active practice in criminal courts as on
First January 2017 issued by the Judicial Officer not below the rank
of a First Class Judicial Magistrate should be produced.”
(see page 29 of the paper book of the OP).
7.    According to the applicant, she had earlier secured the
certificate of enrollment issued by the Bar Council of Kerala and she
had active practice in the criminal courts since 30.12.2007 and that
she had also secured the necessary certificates certifying about her
active practice in criminal courts, etc. Further that there is no dispute
that she is a graduate in law, etc.
8.    She would also contend that since she had already secured
enrollment with the Bar Council of Kerala, as an Advocate, the mere
fact that she had later suspended her legal practice, for the purpose of
taking up Government employment, will not result in a scenario that
she cannot be treated as a member of the Bar. It is contended that all
what is involved in the process of suspension of legal practice for the
purpose of taking up any permanent employment, is only to suspend
legal right to practise, but the enrollment in the Bar continues and
therefore, persons like the applicant should be treated as a member of
the Bar. Hence, it is contended that the petitioner has all the
qualifications and the eligibility conditions for being considered as
APP Gr.II, in terms of Clause 7 of Anx.A-1 selection notification, as on
4.10.2017 (last date of submission of the applications), etc. There is
no serious dispute as between the petitioner and the respondents that
she is a graduate in law and that she had earlier secured certificate of
enrollment, issued by the Bar Council, on 30.12.2007, etc. The only
dispute raised by the respondents is that, after having suspended her
legal practice for the purpose of taking up Government employment,
the applicant as a serving Government employee, cannot be treated
as a member of the Bar after her voluntary suspension of legal
practice on 10.10.2012 and at any rate, she cannot be treated as a
member of the Bar as on 4.10.2017 (the last date of submission of the
application as per Anx. A-1). So the only issue to be determined by us
is the one mentioned herein above.
9.     For a proper determination of the abovesaid issue, it will
be pertinent to note some of the relevant provisions of the Advocates
Act, 1961 and the Bar Council of India Rules framed thereunder. Sec.
2(1)(a) of the Advocate Act, 1961, defines “advocate” as follows: :
'Sec.2. Definitions.(1). In this Act, unless the context otherwise
(a)      “advocate” means an advocate entered in any roll under the
Sec.2(k) of the said Act defines, “roll” as to mean roll of
Advocates prepared and maintained under the Act.
Sec. 2(n) defines “State roll” to mean a roll of Advocates
prepared and maintained by the State Bar Council under Sec.17.
Sec.17 mandates that State Bar Council has to maintain roll of
Advocates. Sec.22 deals with certificate of enrollment, which reads
“Sec.22. Certificate of enrolment.-- (1) There shall be issued
a certificate of enrolment in the prescribed form by the State Bar Council
to every person whose name is entered in the roll of advocates
maintained by it under this Act.
(2) Every person whose name is so entered in the State roll shall
notify any change in the place of his permanent residence to the State
Bar Council concerned within ninety days of such change.”
Sec.30 of the Act deals with the Right of Advocates to practise and it
it is mandated therein, that subject to the provisions of the said Act,
every Advocate, whose name is entered in the State roll, shall be
entitled, as of right, to practise throughout the territories to which this
Act applies,- (i) in all courts including the Supreme Court; (ii) before
any tribunal or person legally authorised to take evidence; and (iii)
before any other authority or person before whom such Advocate is by
or under any law for the time being in force entitled to practise. In
this context, it is also relevant to note the provisions contained in Sec.
33 of the Act, which envisages that Advocates alone are entitled to
practise and it is stipulated therein that except as otherwise provided
in the Act or in any other law for the time being in force, no person
shall, on or after the appointed day, be entitled to practise in any
court or before any authority or person unless he is enrolled as an
Advocate under the abovesaid Act. Sec.35 (3)(c) of the Act inter alia
stipulates that the disciplinary committee of a State Bar Council, after
giving the Advocate concerned and the Advocate-General an
opportunity of being heard, may make an order to suspend the
Advocate from practice for such period as it may deem fit. Sub section
(4) of Sec.35 further mandates that where an Advocate is suspended
from practice under clause (c) of sub-section (3), he shall, during the
period of suspension, be debarred from practising in any court or
before any authority or person in India.
10.     Sec.41 of the Act deals with alteration in the roll of
“Sec.41. Alteration in roll of Advocates.―(1) Where an
order is made under this Chapter reprimanding or suspending an
advocate, a record of the punishment shall be entered against his name
(a) in the case of an advocate whose name is entered in a State roll, in
and where any order is made removing an advocate from practice, his
name shall be struck off the State roll.
(3) Where any advocate is suspended or removed from practice, the
certificate granted to him under section 22, in respect of his enrolment
shall be recalled.”
It is true that the provisions contained in Sec.35 supra as well as Sec.
41(1) deal with the scenario of suspending an Advocate from the rolls,
as part of penal/ punishment proceedings. Sub section (3) of Sec. 41
would specifically mandate that where any Advocate is suspended or
removed from practice, the certificate granted to him under Sec.22 in
respect of his enrollment shall be recalled.
11.    Now it will be pertinent to refer to some of the provisions
contained in the Bar Council of India (BCI) Rules.
Rule 49 under Section VII of Chapter II of Part VI and Rule 5
under Chapter III, Part VI of Bar Council of India Rules, will have to
be examined. Sec.VII of the BCI Rules deals with the section on other
employments. Rule 49 supra provides as follows:
“Rule 49. An Advocate shall not be a full-time salaried employee
of any person, Government, firm, corporation or concern, so long as he
continues to practise, and shall, on taking up any employment, intimate
the fact to the Bar Council on whose roll his name appears, and shall
thereupon cease to practise as an Advocate so long as he continues in
such employment.”
In this context it is also pertinent to refer to the provisions contained
in Rule 43 under Section IVA Part VI under Chapter II of the BCI
Rules. Rule 43 supra inter alia stipulates that, where the Advocate
has taken full time service or part time service or engages in business
or any avocation inconsistent with his practising as an Advocate, then
he shall send a declaration to that effect to the respective State Bar
Council in which the Advocate is enrolled, within ninety days from
the date of such disqualification and if the Advocate does not file the
said declaration or fails to show sufficient cause for not filing such
declaration provided therefor, the Committee constituted by the State
Bar Council under Rule 42 may pass orders suspending the right of
the Advocate to practise, etc. The cumulative effect of Rule 43 supra
and Rule 49 supra is that an Advocate shall not be a full time salaried
employee of any person, government, firm, corporation or concern, so
long as he continues to practise, and shall, on taking up any such
employment, intimate the fact to the Bar Council on whose roll his
name appears and shall thereupon cease to practise as an Advocate so
long as he continues in such employment. Rule 43 Supra also deals
with those aspects and in case the Advocate concerned does not make
the requisite declaration before the State Bar Council, after securing
permanent employment, which is inconsistent with the practising of
an Advocate, the competent committee by the State Bar Council,
under Rule 42 supra, has the power to pass orders suspending the
right of the Advocate to practice. He then shall send a declaration to
that effect to the respective State Bar Council in which the Advocate is
enrolled, within ninety days from the date of such disqualification.
12.   Reference to the provisions contained in Rule 5 under
Chapter III Part VI of the BCI Rules would also be apposite. Rule 5(1)
supra mandates that an Advocate, who voluntarily suspends his
practice for any reason whatsoever, shall intimate, by registered post
to the State Bar Council, on the rolls of which his name is entered, of
such suspension together with his certificate of enrollment in original.
Hence it can be seen from the cumulative and combined effect of Rule
49 supra, Rule 5(1) supra, etc. that, upon voluntarily suspending the
practice, the person concerned will have to surrender the original of
the certificate of enrollment to the State Bar Council. Rule 5(2) supra
envisages a situation, wherever any such Advocate who has
suspended his practice, desires to resume his legal practice and if that
be so, he/she shall apply to the Secretary of the State Bar Council for
resumption of practice, along with an affidavit stating whether he/she
has incurred any of the disqualifications under Sec. 24-A, Chapter III
of the Act during the period of suspension. Rule 5(3) further provides
that the Enrollment Committee of the State Bar Council may order
the resumption of practice of such a person and return the certificate
to him with necessary endorsement. If, on the other hand, the
Enrollment Committee is of the view that the Advocate has incurred
any of the disqualifications, the Committee shall refer the matter
under proviso to Sec.26(1) of the Act. So, reading of Rule 5(2) and
5(3) supra would make it clear that, where the person concerned,
after voluntarily suspending his practice for taking up permanent
employment, subsequently desires to resume legal practice, which
obviously is after giving up the said employment, should make an
application before the enrollment committee of the State Bar Council,
along with the requisite affidavit and if the enrollment committee is
satisfied about the bona fides of the said request that his request is to
be allowed, etc. then the enrollment committee can order for the
resumption of the legal practice and only then the surrendered
original certificate of enrollment has to be returned to the person
concerned. So, it can be seen that the effect of the abovesaid Rule is
that once an Advocate, who is enrolled with the State Bar Council,
subsequently      takes    up   permanent      employment,     including
Government employment, then he/she is bound to intimate the State
Bar Council about the said factual aspects and then should request
for voluntary suspension of the legal practice and has to surrender the
original certificate of enrollment to the State Bar Council.
13.   It appears that, though the Bar Council of India Rules
make provisions for voluntary suspension of legal practice, there are
no explicit provisions regarding the said scenario as per the
provisions of the Advocates Act, 1961. Rule 49 supra mandates that, upon
voluntarily suspending the practice, the said person shall cease to
practise as an Advocate as long as he continues in such employment
and Rule 5(1) supra mandates that the original certificate of
enrollment will have to be surrendered. In this regard, the provisions
contained in Sec. 41(3) of the Act may be referred, which stipulate
that, where any Advocate is suspended or removed from practice, the
certificate granted to him under Sec. 22, in respect of his enrollment
shall be recalled. In the light of these provisions, more particularly,
provisions contained in the abovesaid Bar Council of India Rules, it
can be seen that the Advocate concerned, after voluntary suspension
of legal practice, will cease to have the legal right to practise. In other
words, such a person who secures suspension of legal practice will
cease to have the right to practise as an Advocate in terms of Secs.30
and 33 of the Advocates Act, 1961, so long as the said person is in
employment, as conceived in the Bar Council of India Rules. So the
inevitable consequence of the statutory provisions in such a situation
is that the said person, who has initially secured enrollment with the
State Bar Council and who later secured voluntary suspension of legal
practice, consequent to taking up of employment, including public
employment, will cease to have the right to be an Advocate or to
practise as an Advocate, so long as the voluntary suspension is in
force. In other words, such a person will not have the legal right to
practise as an Advocate in terms of Secs. 30 and 33 of the Act. It is in
this context that we will have to adjudge the issue as to whether such
a person can be treated as a member of the Bar, after having secured
voluntary suspension of practice.
14.     Rule 6 under Chapter III of Part VI of the BCI Rules
“Rule 6. (1) An Advocate whose name has been removed by order
of the Supreme Court or a High Court or the Bar Council as the case may
be, shall not be entitled to practice the profession of law either before the
Court and authorities mentioned under Section 30 of the Act, or in
chambers or otherwise.
(2) An advocate who is under suspension, shall be under same
disability during the period of such suspension as an advocate whose
name has been removed from the roll.”
Rule 6(1) stipulates that an Advocate, whose name has been removed
by order of the Supreme Court or a High Court or the Bar Council, as
the case may be, shall not be entitled to practise the profession of law
either before the Court and authorities mentioned under Sec. 30 of
the Act, or in chambers or otherwise. Rule 6(2) further mandates that
an Advocate, who is under suspension, shall be under the same
disability, during the period of such suspension, as an Advocate
whose name has been removed from the roll. Rule 6(2) supra does
not make any distinction as between voluntary suspension and penal
suspension and the effect of suspension is dealt in Rule 6(2) as above.
15.    The expression, “member of the Bar” is not seen explicitly
defined in the provisions of the Advocates Act or in the rules framed
thereunder. In this regard, it will be pertinent to refer to the contents
of para No.9 of Ext.P-5 reply statement filed by the additional
respondents 4 to 7 in the above O.A., which reads as follows:
'9.     The Black's Law Dictionary, 6th Edition, defines the term
“Bar” as the court in its strict sense, siting in full term or in another
sense, the whole body of attorneys or the members of the legal
profession, collectively, who are figuratively called the “Bar”. Wharton'
Law Lexicon published by the Universal Law Publishing Company Pvt.
Ltd. also defines “Bar” as a Court, Tribunal, a place of audience or the
profession of barrister, who is said to be called to the bar. The Law
Lexicon in fact provides a separate and distinct definition or explanation
to the terms “Bar Council”, “Bar Council of India”, etc. Thus, what
emanates from these explanations to the term “Bar” is that it is a term
which denotes the Court and its proceedings or it's a collective reference
to the attorney or the members of the legal profession. Thus, in order
for a person to (sic) called a member of the bar, such person should be
member of the legal profession, who earns her livelihood through such
profession carried on in the Courts, Tribunals, etc. A mere membership
in the Bar Council rolls or enrolment as an Advocate no longer extends
the status of being a member of the Bar which is discernible from the
provisions of the Advocates Act, 1961, Bar Council of India Rules and
the Certificate of place and Practice (Verification), Rules 2015.”
16.    After hearing all the parties concerned, we are of the view
that the reference to the meaning of the term,                         “Bar”, etc. as
appearing in the Black's Law Dictionary and Law Lexicons, would be
pertinent to really understand the substance and essence of the
expression, “member of the Bar” as envisaged in Clause 7 of Anx. A-1
selection notification and relevant provisions of Anx. R-4 (b) special
rules. In the light of the above aspects, we have no hesitation to hold
that in order to describe a person as being a member of the Bar,
he/she should be a member of the legal profession, who earns a
livelihood through the profession of legal practice carried on the
courts, Tribunals, etc. We have already noted the consequence of
voluntary suspension of legal practice, which will result in the
person/ Advocate concerned ceasing to have the legal right to practise
and he/she should also surrender the original certificate of
enrollment to the Bar Council. So long as a person like the applicant
does not have the legal right to practise as an Advocate in terms of
Secs.30 and 33 of the Act, in view of the abovesaid aspects and the
consequences flowing from the Act and the Rules, it cannot be said
that such a person should be a member of the Bar, as envisaged in
Clause 7 of Anx.A-1 selection notification and the provisions
contained in Anx. A-4 (b) special rules.
17.   In this regard, we also refer to the decision rendered by
the Apex Court in the case in Deepak Aggarwal v. Keshav
Kaushik & Ors. [(2013) 5 SCC 277], wherein it has been observed
that Rule 49 of the Bar Council of India Rules provides that Advocate
shall not be a full time salaried employee of any person, government,
firm, corporation or concern, so long as he continues to be in legal
practice and that the term “employment” referred to in Rule 49 does
not cover the employment of an Advocate, who has been solely or, in
any case, predominantly employed to act and/or plead on behalf of
his client in courts of law and that if a person has been engaged to act
and/or plead in a court of law as an Advocate although by way of
employment on terms of salary and other service conditions, such
employment is not what is covered by Rule 49 supra, as he continues
to practise law but, on the other hand, if he is employed, not mainly to
act and/or plead in a court of law, but to do other kinds of legal work,
the prohibition in Rule 49 immediately comes into play and then he
becomes a mere employee and ceases to be an Advocate, etc. In the
instant case, we are not concerned with such exceptional scenario
considered by the Apex Court in Deepak Aggarwal's case supra
[(2013) 5 SCC 277]. It will be pertinent to refer to para 98 of the
decision in Deepak Aggarwal's case supra, which                              reads as
“98. Admittedly, by the above resolution of the Bar Council of
India, the second and third paragraphs of Rule 49 have been deleted but
we have to see the effect of such deletion. What Rule 49 of the BCI Rules
provides is that an advocate shall not be a full-time salaried employee of
any person, Government, firm, corporation or concern so long as he
continues to practise. The “employment” spoken of in Rule 49 does not
cover the employment of an advocate who has been solely or, in any
case, predominantly employed to act and/or plead on behalf of his client
in courts of law. If a person has been engaged to act and/or plead in
court of law as an advocate although by way of employment on terms of
salary and other service conditions, such employment is not what is
covered by Rule 49 as he continues to practise law but, on the other
hand, if he is employed not mainly to act and/or plead in a court of law,
but to do other kinds of legal work, the prohibition in Rule 49
immediately comes into play and then he becomes a mere employee and
ceases to be an advocate. The bar contained in Rule 49 applies to an
employment for work other than conduct of cases in courts as an
advocate. In this view of the matter, the deletion of the second and third
paragraphs by the Resolution dated 22-6-2001 has not materially
altered the position insofar as advocates who have been employed by the
State Government or the Central Government to conduct civil and
criminal cases on their behalf in the courts are concerned.”
18.   In the instant case, the applicant is a full time
Government servant employed as a Lower Division Typist in the
Excise Department of the State Government and the applicant has no
case that she has been employed in a public employment solely or
predominantly to act and or plead on behalf of a party in courts of
law, etc. Since the applicant has taken up a full time Government
employment, as an LD Typist, then consequent to the voluntary
suspension of legal practice, she ceases to be having the legal right to
practise as an Advocate and consequently she ceases to be an
Advocate so long as the voluntary suspension is in force.
19.   There is yet another aspect which will have to be dealt
with by us. Sri.P.S.Sasidharan, learned Standing Counsel for the
Kerala Public Service Commission appearing for R-3 would point out
that when special rules require that the candidate should be a
member of the Bar and must have had active practice of not less than
3 years on the first day of the year, in which the applications are
invited, it is clear that the applicant must be having active practice
not only as on the last date of submission of the application but also
thereafter and upto his/her date of advice and regular appointment,
etc. In that regard, it will be pertinent to refer to the relevant portion
of para 5 of the decision of a Division Bench of this Court in Mahin
v. State of Kerala [2013 (3) KLT 639], which reads as follows:
“5.     It is trite law that an applicant has to possess the
prescribed qualification as on the last date fixed for the receipt of
applications by the P.S.C.. Such qualification that an applicant
possesses, has to continue to run with that person during the selection
process, to be continually carried at the selection, appointment, joining
the service, and even while holding the post to which the incumbent was
selected and appointed; that is, during the entire spectrum of
employment from the last moment available to apply for being
considered. This is a basic doctrine and salutary principle of law. .. .......
This we say, not based on the interpretation of any provision of law
applicable to driving of motor vehicles, but on the indefeasible legal
effect of the prescriptions and terms of the recruitment rules and the
P.S.C.'s notification, over which the petitioner has no dispute... .....”
20.     We would also note that the Tribunal has referred to the
judgment of the Patna High Court in the case Amar Sinha v. Bar
Council [2017 KHC 2225], wherein, while upholding the legality of
the Certificate and Place of Practice (Verification) Rules, 2015, the
Court has held that the word, “practice” to mean repeated action,
habitual performance and a succession of acts of similar kind. It was
observed therein that a person, having licensed to practise law under
the Advocates Act, abandons his profession or is having no bonafide
intend and interest to continue in the profession, there is no reason to
treat him as a member of the profession merely on the strength of his
enrollment and that it is to identify and weed out such fake persons
and non practising Advocates that the Certificate and Place of
Practice (Verification) Rules, 2015 have been introduced in the
statute book. In the light of these aspects, we are constrained to hold
that reliance placed by the petitioner on the contra view laid down in
Anx. A-9 judgment dt.13.12.2018 by a learned Single Judge of the
Madurai Bench of the Madras High Court in W.P.(MD).No. 237 of
2014 is not tenable as the same does not reflect the correct legal
21.   The upshot of the above discussion is that, in view of the
statutory consequences flowing out from the provisions contained in
the Advocates Act and the Bar Council of India Rules, noted herein
above, a person like the applicant, who has initially secured
enrollment as an Advocate in the State Bar Council and later has
taken up full time Government employment as above, and has
thereupon voluntarily suspended from legal practice as above, then
such a person cannot be said to have the legal right to practise as an
Advocate and hence, as per the provisions of the Act and the Rules
supra, such a person cannot be said to be a member of the Bar as
understood in Anx. A-1 selection notification and Anx. R-4 (b) special
Rules. Such an eligibility condition of being a member of the Bar
should be possessed by the candidate concerned not only as on the
last date of submission of the application to the Public Service
Commission but also thereafter, even as on the date of advice by the
PSC and the date of appointment order issued by the appointing
authority, etc.
In the light of the above aspects, it is only to be held by us that
no grounds are made out to interfere with the well considered verdict
of the Tribunal in the instant case. The petition fails and accordingly,
the Original Petition will stand dismissed.