For Respondent(s)          :    Ms. Suruchi Kasliwal, Adv. through
1.    By way of present writ petition, petitioner has challenged
action of the respondent-Indian Oil Corporation Limited (for short,
'IOCL') in conducting selection for retail outlet dealership and
allotment of petrol pump at location within Khasra No.76,
Nahargatti 31/1, Dug, District Jhalawar on account of violation of
her fundamental rights enshrined under Article 14,19 and 21 of
the Constitution of India making following prayers:-
"i.     Issue an appropriate writ, order or directions in
the nature thereof thereby to quash and set side the
letter/mail dated 13 march 2019 in declining the
candidature of the petitioner in Group 1 category
(land) is illegal and bad in the eye of law.
ii.   Issue an appropriate writ, order or directions
thereby declaring the petitioner is entitled for and to
be considered in Group 1 category (land) in
pursuance to the advertisement Annexure-1.
iii.  Issue such other writ, order or directions as may
be deemed just and proper by this Hon'ble Court in
facts & circumstances of case and in favour of humble
petitioner.
iv.   By an appropriate writ, order or directions,
award cost of writ petition in favour of humble
petitioner.
Any other order which this Hon'ble Court
considers fit and proper in favour of the petitioner
2.    The    facts   of  the    case       are      that     on 14/12/2018,    an
advertisement was issued by the respondent-IOCL in daily
newspaper "Rajasthan Patrika' for selection of dealers qua IOCL
retail outlet at various locations. The respondent-IOCL also issued
a brochure dated 24/11/2018 for selection of dealers for regular
and rural retail outlets wherein the terms, conditions and
guidelines were also incorporated. As per the advertisement, the
last date for submitting application form was 12/01/2019 and the
same could have been submitted through on-line mode which was
to be withdrawn immediately after lapse of last date i.e.
3.    On 11/01/2019, sale deed of the land qua the allotment was
presented in the office of Sub-Registrar, Dug, District Jhalawar for
registration and after receiving the same, necessary e-challan and
appropriate stamps duty was deposited, affidavits, prescribed
forms were also deposited and the consideration was paid and
possession was given by the seller to the petitioner on 11/01/2019
but the sale deed could not be registered on 11/01/2019 due to
the server being down and due to there being public holidays on
12th,13th and 14th January, 2019 ultimately, the sale deed could
be registered on 15th January, 2019. As regards the application
form, the petitioner had submitted the same on 12/01/2019 within
4.     It is relevant to note that it has come on record that a
certificate was also issued by the office of the Sub-Registrar, Dug
certifying that the sale deed was presented for registration on
11/01/2019 but as the server was down on that day and
thereafter 12th, 13th and 14th January, 2019 were public
holidays, the matter could not be processed and the sale deed
5.     On 14/01/2019, the respondent-IOCL vide e-mail declared
the petitioner as a successful candidate.
6.     It is also relevant to note that no documents were required
to be submitted alongwith the application form.
7.     The requirement made by the respondent-IOCL vide its letter
dated 14/01/2019 for submission of documents including the land
documents within a period of 10 days, was duly fulfilled and the
entire documents as required were submitted in the office of the
respondents on 21/01/2019.
8.     Vide communication dated 13/03/2019 (Annexure-5), the
respondent-IOCL declared application form of the petitioner as not
proper under Group-1 and found candidature of the petitioner
under the said category as ineligible but directed for consideration
of the application of the petitioner under Group-3 as per
9.     The only reason for rejection of the candidature of the
petitioner for Group-1 to the best knowledge of the petitioner was
non-registration of the land documents on or before 12/01/2019.
10.   The petitioner got a certificate from the office of Sub-
Registrar, Dug on 19/03/2019 which specifies the factum of sale
deed being presented for registration on 11/01/2019 and the
reasoning for non-execution of the same on the said date on
account of the server being down and thereafter there being
public holidays and the same being registered on 15/01/2019.
11.   On 20/03/2019, the petitioner submitted a representation to
the respondents apprising the above facts and also that she
became owner of the land on 11/01/2019 for allotment of outlet
dealership under Group-1 category and had submitted the said
fact in her application form as well as also filed documents with
the respondents within required time of 10 days of the letter dated
14/01/2019 and therefore categorization of her entitlement under
Group-3 is erroneous, illegal and unjustified.
12.   Further,   representations         were        also     submitted  by   the
petitioner but no heed was paid and no response qua the same
was given. The petitioner, therefore, filed present writ petition on
11/11/2019 under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
13.   Learned counsel for the petitioner placed reliance upon
Sections 23 and 47 of the Registration Act, 1908 and Section 54 of
The Transfer of Property Act, 1882 which read as under:-
"23. Time for presenting documents.—Subject to
the provisions contained in sections 24, 25 and 26, no
document other than a will shall be accepted for
registration unless presented for that purpose to the
proper officer within four months from the date of its
Provided that a copy a of a decree or order may
be presented within four months from the day on
which the decree or order was made, or, where it is
appealable, within four months from the day on which
it becomes final.
47. Time from which registered document
operates.—A registered document shall operate from
the time which it would have commenced to operate
if no registration thereof had been required or made,
and not from the time of its registration."
"54. “Sale” defined.—“Sale” is a transfer of
ownership in exchange for a price paid or promised or
part-paid and part-promised.
Sale how made.—Such transfer, in the case of
tangible immovable property of the value of one
hundred rupees and upwards, or in the case of a
reversion or other intangible thing, can be made only
by a registered instrument. In the case of tangible
immovable property of a value less than one hundred
rupees, such transfer may be made either by a
registered instrument or by delivery of the property.
Delivery of tangible immovable property takes place
when the seller places the buyer, or such person as he
directs, in possession of the property.
Contract for sale.—A contract for the sale of
immovable property is a contract that a sale of such
property shall take place on terms settled between
the parties.
It does not, of itself, create any interest in or charge
14.   While placing reliance upon the said Sections of the
Registration Act, learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that
the registered document shall operate from the time when the
same is commenced to operate or has been executed and not
from the date of registration/issuance by the authority concerned.
As per Section 23 of the Registration Act, a document of the
nature of sale deed specifies time of four months from the date of
its execution. Learned counsel further submitted that Section 74
of the Registration Act, 1908 permits enquiry to be performed by
the competent authority under the Act. Learned counsel has also
submitted that Section 54 of The Transfer of Property Act, 1882
defines sale as a transfer of ownership when consideration is paid
qua the same.
15.   In the light of above provisions, learned counsel for the
petitioner relied upon judgment of the Apex Court rendered in
16.   Learned counsel for the petitioner further placed reliance
upon Division Bench Judgment of Gujarat High Court passed in
Letter Patent Appeal No.963/2015, decided on 23/11/2015, titled
as Indian Oil Corporation Vs. Ranjitsinh Jitusinh Zala in the
case of LPG distributorship in the similar kind of facts wherein
after considering the provisions of Section 47 of the Registration
Act, 1908, vide Para 8 and 9, it was held that the date of effect of
sale deed will be its presentation and not issuance of registration
in terms of Section 47 of the Registration Act, 1908 and the
guidelines of the Oil Companies cannot override the Act of the
Parliament. The said decision of the Division Bench was affirmed
by the Apex Court in SLP No.5299/2016 by the Supreme Court
vide order dated 01/04/2016 dismissing the SLP of the IOCL and
therefore, the guidelines of the Oil Companies cannot override the
law of parliament as well as the settled position of law.
17.   Per-contra, learned counsel for the respondent-IOCL very
vehemently submitted that Section 47 of the Registration Act,
1908 specifies that in cases where the registration is required
compulsorily,   the  date     of    execution/presentation       cannot   be
considered; the terms and conditions of the guidelines of the Oil
Companies are binding upon them as well as the applicant and the
same were specified in the document which has been duly
accepted by the petitioner in Para No.4(v)(a). Learned counsel for
respondent-IOCL further submitted that it is an admitted case of
the petitioner that his application was filed on 12/10/2019 and the
documents were filed on 21/01/2019 after getting the document
registered on 15/01/2019 and therefore, once the registration of
the document was done on 15/01/2019, the case of the petitioner
cannot be considered under Group-1 category as on 12/01/2019,
the document in question qua the title of land was unregistered
sale deed which is more than enough to debar the petitioner to
from considering his case under Group-1 category. Further, the
submissions of the documents was falsely made and is an act of
misrepresentation, concealment and suppression and on this
count alone, the candidature of the petitioner is falsified. Learned
counsel for the respondent-IOCL further submitted that the
judgments relied upon by the petitioner are not applicable in the
facts of the present case as the sale deed was required to be
compulsorily registered prior to filing of the application form in
terms of Section 17 and 49 of the Registration Act, 1908.
18.   On screening records of the writ petition,                hearing the
respective counsels and considering the judgments relied upon at
bar, this Court is of the considered view that admittedly prior to
last date of submission of application form, the sale deed was
presented before the office of Sub-Registrar, Dug. The sale
consideration and required stamp duty had been paid and the
entry of the same had also been made in the records of the office
of Sub-Registrar, Dug. The certificate dated 19/03/2019 issued by
the office of the Sub-Registrar, Dug categorically discloses that the
server was down on 11/01/2019 and there were public holidays on
12/01/2019, 13/01/2019 and 14/01/2019 and, therefore, the
process of final registration and issuance of the registered
documents was carried out on 15/01/2019.
19.   It is also an admitted case of the respondents that vide letter
dated 14/01/2019 (Annexure-4) they have selected the petitioner
on the basis of the application form provisionally and permitted
the petitioner to submit documents within a time span of ten days
which has been complied with by the petitioner. The only ground
for categorizing the application of the petitioner at later point of
time under Group-3 category was that on the date of depositing
the application form, the land document was not registered. In
this regard, the Apex Court in Hamda Ammal (supra) has
categorically held in Paras 4 and 5 which are reproduced as
"4. Section 54 of the Act defines Sale as "a transfer
of ownership in exchange for a price paid or promised
or part-paid and part-promised." Thus after the
execution of the sale deed with consideration all the
ingredients of sale are fulfilled except that in case of
tangible immovable property of the value of Rs. 100
and upwards it can be made only by registered
instrument. Now, if we read Section 47 of the
Registration Act, it clearly provides that a registered
document shall operate from the time from which it
would have commenced to operate if no registration
thereof had been required or made and not from the
time of its registration. This provision makes it clear
that after the registration it will relate back to the
date of execution of the sale deed. The act of
registration is to be performed by the registering
authority. According to sec. 23 of the Registration Act
a document of the nature of sale deed shall be
accepted for registration within four months from the
date of its execution. Thus a statutory period of four
months has been provided for presenting the sale
deed for registration from the date of its execution. In
case of dispute regarding the execution of the
document an enquiry is permitted under Section
74(a) of the Registration Act and that may also take
sometime. The Legislature being alive of such
situations has already provided in Section 47 of the
Registration Act that it shall operate from the time
from which it would commence to operate if no
registration thereof had been required or made and
not from the time of its registration. Thus in our view
the vendee gets rights which will be related back on
registration from the date of the execution of the sale
deed and such rights are protected under Order 38
Rule 10 C.P.C. read together with Section 47 of the
5. We cannot accept the contention of learned counsel
for the respondent that till registration, the execution
of the sale deed does not confer any rights
whatsoever on the vendee. Even Section 49 of the
Registration Act in its proviso inserted by Section 10
Supplementary Act, 1929, negatives the above
contention of the learned counsel. The above
provision lays down that an unregistered document
affecting immovable property and required by this Act
or by the Transfer of Property Act, 1882, to be
registered may be received as evidence of a contract
in a suit for specific performance under Chapter II of
the Specific Relief Act, 1877, or as an evidence of
part performance of a contract for the purposes of
Section 53-A of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882, or
as evidence of any collateral transaction not required
to be affected by registered instrument. Thus even an
unregistered document can be received as evidence
for purposes mentioned in the proviso to Section 49
20.   As per Section 23 of the Registration Act, 1908, four months'
time is provided for acceptance of registration qua the sale deed
and as per Section 74 enquiry can be conducted. As per Section
47, it is specifically provided that a registration shall operate from
the time from which it would have commenced to operate if no
registration thereof had been required or made, and not from the
time of its registration.
21.   The   arguments       advanced         by      learned     counsel  for  the
respondents are negated in view of the judgment of the Apex
Court (supra) in as much as within time frame of four months, a
sale deed can be presented for registration. As per Section 23,
after submitting the sale deed for registration with the registration
office, the same can be considered for enquiry and as per Section
47, the act of registration is not bound to operate but it is a time
from which it would have commenced to operate.
22.   In the case in hand, it is an admitted position that on
11/01/2019, the sale deed commenced to operate, the petitioner's
father has taken possession of the said land, paid consideration
qua the same to the seller, deposited adequate stamp duty
alongwith prescribed form in the office of Sub-Registrar, Dug and
as the server of the office of Sub-Registrar, Dug was down on the
date of presentation of sale deed for registration on 11/01/2019
and thereafter there were public holidays for three days, the sale
deed was registered on 15/01/2019 and the same was submitted
within the prescribed time of ten days as provided by the
23.   Even otherwise, as per Sections 9 and 10 of the General
Clauses Act, computation of time and manner of computation
excludes the date of filing when there are public holidays.
24.   The same situation was also considered by the Gujarat High
Court in Indian Oil Corporation Vs. Ranjitsinh Jitusinh Zala
(supra) in the case of the respondents only and vide Paras No.11
and 12, after considering the Apex Court judgment and Section 47
of the Registration Act, 1908, in the similar situation, the
contention of the Oil Company (respondents) was turned down
and the said view of the Gujarat High Court was affirmed by the
25.   In the light of above, the prayers made by the petitioner in
the present writ petition appear to be justified and the impugned
action of the respondents communicated by them to the petitioner
vide their letter/email dt.13/03/2019 in not considering the case
of the petitioner for retail outlet under Group-1 is held to be
unjustified. The respondents are accordingly directed to consider
the claim of the petitioner for allotment of retail outlet under the
category of Group-1 and proceed further.
26.   The writ petition is allowed in above terms. All pending
application stand disposed of.