The present appeal is directed against an order passed by
National  Consumer   Disputes   Redressal   Commission   (for  short,
‘NCDRC’) on 26.05.2010 affirming the order passed by the District
Consumer Disputes Redressal Forum and the State Consumer Disputes
Redressal  Commission,   dismissing   the  complaint   filed  by   the
appellant inter alia on the ground that the appellant was not a
consumer within the meaning of Section 2(1)(d)(ii) of the Consumer
Protection Act, 1986 (for short, ‘the Act’).
Learned counsel for the appellant relies upon a receipt dated
27.08.2004 of payment of Rs.266/- as service charge to the District
Women Hospital, Ghazipur. It is admitted by learned counsel for the
appellant that no consideration was paid to the doctors who were in
fact the Government servants.
In terms of Section 2(1)(d)(ii) of the Act, a consumer is the
one who hires or avails of any services for a ‘consideration’ which
has been paid or promised or partly paid or partly promised.
Since the admitted case of the appellant is that the appellant
has not paid any consideration for availing the services of the
respondents - doctors and the nurses, she would not be covered
under the definition of consumer to avail the remedies under the
Act. In fact, in a common written statement filed, an objection was
raised that the appellant should file a suit in a competent Civil
Court by depositing proper court fee and not in Consumer Court as
the suit is not maintainable before the Consumer Court.
Learned counsel for the appellant relies upon a judgment of
this Court reported in (1995) 6 SCC 651 titled “Indian Medical
Association Vs. V.P. Shantha & Ors.” to contend that payment for
service availed is not a necessary ingredient to file a complaint
under the Act. However, we find that the said argument is not
tenable in view of the following findings recorded:-
“45.   In   respect   of   the   hospitals/nursing    homes
(government and non-government) falling in category (i),
i.e.,  where  services  are  rendered  free  of  charge  to
everybody availing of the services, it has been urged by
Shri Dhavan that even though the service rendered at the
hospital, being free of charge, does not fall within the
ambit  of  Section  2(1)(o)  of  the  Act  insofar  as  the
hospital  is  concerned,   the  said  service   would  fall
within the ambit of Section 2(1)(o) since it is rendered
by a medical officer employed in the hospital who is not
rendering the service free of charge because the said
medical officer receives emoluments by way of salary for
employment in the hospital. There is no merit in this
contention. the medical officer who is employed in the
hospital renders the service on behalf of the hospital
administration and if the service, as rendered by the
hospital, does not fall within the ambit of Section 2(1)
(o), being free of charge, the same service cannot be
treated as service under Section 2(1)(o) for the reason
that it has been rendered by a medical officer in the
hospital    who   receives   salary   for    employment    in   the
hospital. There is no direct nexus between the payment
of the salary to the medical officer by the hospital
administration     and   the   person    to   whom    service    is
rendered.    The   salary   that   is  paid    by   the   hospital
administration to the employee medical officer cannot be
regarded    as   payment   made   on   behalf    of   the   person
availing of the service or for his benefit so as to make
the   person   availing   the   service    a   "consumer"    under
Section 2(1)(d) in respect of the service rendered to
him.    The   service   rendered    by   the    employee-medical
officer to such a person would, therefore, continue to
be service rendered free of charge and would be outside
the purview of Section 2(1)(o).”
A reading of the above para shows that a medical officer who
is employed in a hospital renders service on behalf of the hospital
administration and if the service as rendered by the Hospital does
not fall within the ambit of 2(1)(0) of the Act being free of
charge, the same service cannot be treated as service under Section
2(1)(0)   for   the  reasons   that  it   has   been   rendered    by  medical
officer in the hospital who receives salary for the employment in
the hospital. It was thus concluded that the services rendered by
employee-medical officer to such a person would therefore continue
to be service rendered free of charge and would be outside the
purview of Section 2(1)(0) of the Act.
In view thereof, we do not find any merits in the present
appeal and the same is dismissed.
Pending application(s), if any, also stand disposed of.
Date : 07-12-2021 This appeal was called on for hearing today.
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
The appeal is dismissed in terms of the signed order.
Pending application(s), if any, also stand disposed of.
(Signed order is placed on the file)