Children) Act 2015 (herein after termed as Act) in the criminal case bearing
FIR No. 250 of 2017 U/Sections 302 IPC, P. S. Bhondsi, Gurugram with RC
-8(S) of 2017 under Section 302 IPC SC-3 Lodhi Road, Delhi.
2.                Though the maintainability of the instant application for bail
and the jurisdictional competency of this court to decide it are the
vehemently contended questions here, yet such issues may also not be
determined by this court without writing down the arguments raised
from both the sides in this regard. Even the factual background of the case
is also required to be mentioned here.
3.                As per allegations, found recorded in the first information report
initially registered in this matter, Prince was a student of second class in Ryan
International School Bhondsi. His father had left him and his sister at school
on 8.9.2017 at 8.00 am. At 8.10 am, a telephonic call was received from the
school staff that Prince had been taken to Badshahpur Hospital due to profuse
bleeding and he had received a cut on his neck. Later, it was told by one of the
staff member of the school that Prince was taken to Artemis Hospital. When
the father of the child reached at Artemis hospital, the child Prince was found
in emergency ward. Later, the child died due to injuries caused on his neck.
On the basis of the complaint made by the father of the deceased child, the
case was registered by the State police.
4.                After registration of the first information report, the investigation
was initiated by the Haryana Police. One Ashok Kumar son Ami Chand was
arrested. However, through the State Notification dated 17.9.2017, issued by
6.                As far as application for bail earlier moved by the applicant is
concerned, the same has also been dealt with up to the Hon’ble Supreme Court
(i) The first bail application moved under Section 12 of the
Act was dismissed by the Juvenile Justice Board vide order dated
(ii) His bail application was also dismissed by the learned
Sessions court vide order dated 5.11.2018.
(iii) The bail application was also dismissed by the Hon’ble High
court of Punjab and Haryana vide order dated 30.6.2020 in view
of the order dated 28.2.2019 passed by the Hon’ble Supreme
Court in IA No. 155572 of 2019 when the Hon’ble Supreme
Court directed to decide the question of granting bail to the
applicant by way of treating him as an adult.
(iv) The bail application of the applicant was also dismissed by
the Hon’ble Supreme Court vide order dated 2.9.2020 passed in
SLP No. 3350 of 2020. However, the applicant preferred a review
petition of the same which is allegedly still pending before the
7.                The learned counsel Sh. Sandeep Aneja appearing for the
applicant/Juvenile in conflict with law has argued the applicant is lying in
custody since 7.11.2017 without any reason as there is no incriminating
evidence in charge sheet against the applicant filed by the Central Bureau of
Investigation. Even the sanction for prosecuting the four police officials of
State police has been declined by the Government vide order dated 19.2.2021
and this decline of sanction itself shows the genuineness of the investigation
earlier made by the state police when one of the another person had been
booked as an accused in this matter. It was also argued that CBI has falsely
implicated the applicant in matter in hand without having any evidence. It was
also argued that the applicant is entitled to bail under Section 12 of the Act and
the bail application may be moved before the children court under Section 12
of the Act even if the juvenile is being tried as an adult. The learned counsel
has cited the authority titled as Lalu Kumar @ Lal Babu @ Lallu Vs State
of Bihar Criminal Appeal no. 2117 of 2019 decided by the Hon’ble Patna
High Court on 9.9.2019 in this regard. It was also argued that the essential
provisions of the the Act have not been followed in matter in hand by CBI and
the juvenile in conflict with law has not been interrogated by the Child Police
Welfare Officer (CPWO) to be designated as such under the Act.
8.                The learned Counsel Sh. Sandeep Aneja also argued that the
juvenile in conflict with law is lying in custody for last more than 3 years and
the inquiry has been stayed before the Juvenile Justice Board with the orders
dated 19.11.2018 passed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in SLP No. 10123 of
2018. The Hon’ble Supreme Court has merely stayed the assessment process
pending before the Juvenile Justice Board and the bail proceedings have not
been stayed. Even the Hon’ble High Court had also decided the bail
application of the applicant vide order dated 30.6.2020 i.e after passing of the
status quo order by the Hon’ble Supreme Court. Therefore, there is no bar on
the powers of this court to grant the concession of bail to the applicant. It was
also argued that the applicant has no remedy at all except to seek bail from the
children court as he is lying in custody despite of being a juvenile on the date
of alleged commission of offence. The learned counsel has also the authorities
titled as Vicky Vs State of U.T. Chandigarh CRM-M 21388 of 2020 decided
by Hon’ble Punjab and Haryana High Court on 31.8.2020, Happy Vs State of
Haryana CRM-M3049 of 2018 decided by Hon’ble Punjab and Haryana High
Court on 26.10.2018, Tejram Nagrachi Vs State of Chhattisgarh MCRC
No. 8523 of 2016 decided by Hon’ble Chhattisgarh High Court on 5.4.2019
and Vishal Vs State of UP and Another Criminal Revision No. 3907 of 2019
decided on 9.7.2020 by Hon’ble Allahabad High Court and Radhika Vs State
of UP Criminal Appeal No. 4418 of 2019 decided by the Hon’ble Allahabad
High Court on 5.8.2019.
9.                It was further argued by the learned counsel Sh. Sandeep Aneja
that the learned counsel of the complainant may only advance his arguments
in assistance of the learned Public Prosecutor but may not legally file the
written reply as such a reply has already been filed by the prosecution. It was
urged that the learned counsel of the complainant may not be permitted to take
command of the case of the prosecution and therefore, their reply may not be
considered by this court. The learned counsel also cited the authority titled as
Rekha Murarka Vs The State of West Bengal and Another, Criminal
Appeal no. 1727 of 2019 decided by the Hon’ble Supreme Court on
20.11.2019 in support of his such contention.
10.               The learned Prosecutor appearing for the Central Bureau of
Investigation Sh. Amit Jindal argued that once the application for bail of the
applicant has already been dismissed up to the Hon’ble Supreme Court, then
such bail application may not be considered by this court without any change
in circumstances. No such change in circumstances has been shown by the
applicant before this court. Mere decline of sanction of some police officials
by the state Government may not be a change in circumstances. Even such
order of the Government has also been challenged before the Hon’ble High
Court in CRM-M No. 10268 of 2021.
11.               The learned Counsel Sh. Sushil K. Tekriwal appearing for the
complainant also vehemently argued that the complainant, being a victim,
whose son has been brutally murdered, is entitled to contest the instant
application for bail filed by the applicant. Not only advancing the oral
arguments, the complainant is having a legal right to file the written reply
separate from the reply of the prosecuting agency. Even the complainant has
also been allowed to join the proceedings before the Hon’ble Supreme Court
through which the inquiry before the Juvenile Justice Board has been stayed.
The learned counsel Sh. Sushil K. Tekriwal also urged that he will cite a
number of authorities on this point.
12.               The learned counsel Sushil K. Tekriwal further argued that the
application for bail may not be maintainable before this court as the inquiry
has already been stayed before the Juvenile Justice Board vide order dated
19.11.2018 passed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court. Even the SLP No. 3350 of
2020 has also been dismissed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court vide order dated
2.9.2020 and the applicant has preferred a review petition against that order
which is still pending there. In such circumstances, the matter again may not
be raised before this court as being barred under the principle of res-judicata.
The learned counsel also cited the authorities titled as Pritam Singh and
Another Vs The State of Punjab AIR 1956 SC 415 and Kishore
Bhikansingh Rajput Vs Preeti Kishore Rajput Writ Petition No. 7502 of
2006 decided by the Hon’ble Bombay High Court on 7.2.2007 in support of
his such arguments.
13.               It was also argued by the learned counsel Sh. Sushil K. Tekriwal
that the applicant is habitual of filing application for bail on one ground or the
other and several bail applications have been moved earlier by him in different
courts which all have been dismissed. Nor this fact has been disclosed by the
applicant in the instant bail application. It was also urged that once the inquiry
is pending before the Juvenile Justice Board, such an application may not be
maintainable before the children court. It was further argued that even there is
no such change in circumstances and subsequent applications for bail may not
be considered without such change in circumstances.
14.               I have heard the arguments advanced at length advanced by the
learned Counsel Sh. Sandeep Aneja appearing for the applicant, the learned
Prosecutor Sh. Amit Jindal appearing for the CBI and the learned Counsel Sh.
Sushil K. Tekriwal appearing for the complainant. I also perused the whole
15.               This issue has been hotly contested by both the sides before this
court, whether the complainant, being a victim, may file a written reply to the
application for regular bail particularly when the prosecuting agency has
already filed reply. The learned counsel appearing for the applicant has urged
that there is no such provision in Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 which
gives such right to the complainant to file the written reply to the bail
application. It was argued by him that though the complainant may advance
the arguments only to assist the prosecutor, yet no written reply can be filed by
him. Per contra, the learned counsel appearing for the complainant also urged
that the complainant is a victim being father of the deceased and the victim is
legally entitled to protect his rights.
16.               In the authority Rekha Murarka (supra), the question before the
Division Bench of Hon’ble Supreme Court was, whether the counsel of the
complainant may be allowed to cross examine the witnesses after the Public
Prosecutor. In the mentioned case, the Hon’ble Supreme Court widely
discussed the relevant provisions of Code of Criminal Procedure like Section
24, Section 225, Section 301 and Section 302 which contain the importance of
Public Prosecutor in conducting a criminal trial as well as the role which may
be played by the complainant in such trial. In para no. 12.1 of the judgment, it
has been recorded by the Hon’ble Supreme Court that :
The use of the term ‘assist’ in the proviso of Section 24 (8) is
crucial and implies that victim’s counsel is only intended to have
a secondary role qua the Public Prosecutor.
If the victim’s counsel feels that a certain aspect has gone
unaddressed in the examination of the witnesses or the arguments
advanced by the Public Prosecutor, he may route any questions
or points through the Public Prosecutor himself. This would not
only preserve the paramount position of the Public Prosecutor
under the scheme of the Cr.P.C but also ensure that there is no
inconsistency between the case advanced by the Public
Prosecutor and the victim’s counsel.
17.               In the matter in hand, advancing the arguments by the learned
counsel appearing for the complainant after the learned Public Prosecutor has
not even been opposed by the learned counsel appearing for the applicant/
juvenile in conflict with law. Only filing of written reply by the complainant
has been objected. Apart from this, there is hardly any plea or point which has
not been orally argued by the learned counsel appearing for the complainant,
which is mentioned in his written reply. Meaning thereby, the learned counsel
appearing for the complainant Sh. Sushil Kumar Tekriwal has covered almost
all the points in his arguments which are written in his reply. Therefore, in
view of the dictum of the authority Rekha Murarka (supra), even if this
court does not consider the written reply of the complainant and only
considers the oral arguments advanced by the learned counsel appearing for
the complainant after the arguments of the learned Prosecutor of the CBI to
assist him, which has not even been objected from the side of applicant, even
then that is not going to affect the fate of the instant application for bail.
18.               The earlier bail applications of the applicant have already been
dismissed up to the Hon’ble Supreme Court. Whether the applicant should be
considered as a juvenile or an adult for the purpose of trial, that question is
still pending for determination before the Hon’ble Supreme Court in SLP No.
10123 of 2018 and vide order dated 19.11.2018, the Hon’ble Supreme Court
has directed to maintain the status quo. In such circumstances, this application
for bail is not maintainable in any case before this court. If the applicant is
considered a juvenile, then such bail application should be moved before the
Juvenile Justice Board, Gurugram. On the other side, if the applicant is
considered as an adult, then such bail application should be moved before the
Special Sessions Court at Panchkula designated in the State of Haryana for the
cases investigated by CBI as the instant case has also been investigated by
CBI. Hence, in both the eventualities, the instant application for bail may not
be maintainable before this court.
19.               Even otherwise also, once the bail application of the applicant has
already been dismissed upto the Hon’ble Supreme Court, then the another bail
application may not be moved by the applicant and considered by this court in
a routine manner. Rather, the applicant is required to show the subsequent
events or any other change in circumstance which has allegedly taken place
after the dismissal of his bail application earlier. Only on the basis of changed
circumstances or any such subsequent event, the applicant may seek the
concession of regular bail from this court. The law is quite clear in this regard.
20.               Here, in matter in hand, the applicant has moved the instant
application for bail on the ground that he is lying in custody since 7.11.2017
and recently the request for granting the sanction of prosecution of four state
police officials, sought by the Central Bureau of Investigation, has been
declined by Government vide order dated 19.2.2021. It is alleged that such
decline of sanction goes to suggest that the investigation earlier made by the
State police in the matter in hand was genuine and Central Bureau of
Investigation has falsely implicated the applicant/juvenile in conflict with law
without any basis. However, mere decline of sanction of four state police
officials by the Government is no ground to seek the bail from this court as
such a decline is merely an administrative action of the Government which
may not be taken by this court as a falsification of the entire case of Central
Bureau of Investigation. Such a decline of sanction by Government is not a
change in circumstances nor such a subsequent event to consider this another
bail application. Even such order of Government dated 19.2.2021 has also
been challenged before the Hon’ble Punjab and Haryana High Court in CRM-
M no. 10268 of 2021.
21.               As an inference of the above discussion, this court is having a
view that the instant bail application is neither maintainable before this court,
nor any other ground has been made out to consider such request of granting
bail. Even the inquiry, whether the applicant should be treated by Juvenile
Justice Board as juvenile, or whether he should be tried as an adult, has still
not been concluded and the same is stayed under the orders passed by the
Hon’ble Supreme court dated 19.11.2018 in SLP No.10123 of 2018. In such
circumstances, the application for bail filed by the applicant is hereby
dismissed. The other authorities cited by the learned counsel appearing for the
applicant/juvenile in conflict with law are not applicable here as his
application for bail have already been considered and dismissed on merits up
to the Hon’ble Highest Court of this country and no such change in
circumstance has been shown to be made out before this court, making him
entitled to concession of bail.
22.               Nothing observed by this court in the present order will be taken
as affecting the merits of the case during trial in any manner. File be consigned
to the record room after due compliance.
Note : All the pages of this Order has been checked and signed by