The present intra court appeal has been preferred against
the judgment dated 12.04.2018 passed by learned Single Bench
whereby      writ   petition      filed       by      the      petitioner   seeking
compassionate appointment in the respondent Jai Narayan Vyas
(2 of 8)                   [SAW-1565/2018]
University (hereinafter referred to as ‘respondent-university’) in
lieu of his deceased father was rejected.
Briefly stated facts of the case are that the father of the
appellant while working on the post of ‘Tabla Vadak’ in the
respondent-university, passed away on 01.12.2004. The appellant
and respondent No.4 (born through second wife Smt. Kamla)
applied for appointment on compassionate grounds in place of
deceased employee. The respondent-university considered both
the applications keeping in view the provisions of the Rajasthan
Compassionate      Appointment           of     Dependents         of  Deceased
Government Servants Rules, 1996 (hereinafter referred to as
‘Rules of 1996’) and vide office order dated 04.08.2005 extended
compassionate     appointment         in    favour        of   respondent   No.4.
Aggrieved by the aforesaid action of the respondent-university, the
appellant filed a writ petition which came to be dismissed vide
order dated 12.04.2018. Hence, this special appeal.
Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that legality of
second marriage of the deceased employee with Smt. Kamla is
doubtful and therefore, compassionate appointment could not
have been offered to the respondent No.4. Learned counsel
further submitted that name of respondent No.4 was not entered
as a dependent in the service book of deceased employee
therefore,   he  was   not    even        eligible to         be considered    for
compassionate     appointment.         Lastly,       it    was   submitted    that
appellant was fully eligible and entitled to be considered for
compassionate appointment in place of deceased employee,
however, illegally ignoring his right of claiming compassionate
appointment as per Rules of 1996, the respondent No.4 has been
(3 of 8)                   [SAW-1565/2018]
appointed on compassionate grounds in the respondent university
vide office order dated 04.08.2005 against the post of Class-IV
employee. It was thus prayed that the present appeal deserves to
be allowed.
Per contra, learned counsel for the respondents submitted
that indisputably, respondent No.4 is son of deceased employee
and Smt. Kamla Devi therefore, he was fully eligible to seek
employment in the respondent-university upon the death of his
father Shri Harish Puri. Learned counsel further submitted that in
cases where more than one of the dependents seek employment
on compassionate grounds, Rule 10(2) the Rules of 1996
empowers     Head    of   the     Department            to   select  one   of  the
dependents of the deceased employee. Lastly, it was submitted
that the competent authority, after receiving applications for
compassionate appointment from more than one dependent of the
deceased employee thoroughly considered the financial position
and educational qualifications possessed by the applicants before
reaching to the conclusion that respondent No.4 deserved to be
appointed as Class-IV employee in the respondent-university. It
was thus prayed that the appeal deserves to be dismissed as
being devoid of merit.
Heard submissions advanced at Bar and perused the material
available on record.
Rule 10(2) of the Rules of 1996 is reproduced hereinbelow
for the sake of ready reference:-
10. Procedure :- (2) Where the deceased Government
servant is not survived by a spouse the application shall
be made by one of the dependants of the deceased
Government servant and other dependants shall have to
give their consent for his/her candidature. Provided that if
(4 of 8)               [SAW-1565/2018]
more than one of the dependants seek employment, the
Head of Department shall select one, keeping in view the
overall interest and welfare of the entire family,
particularly the minor members.”
In the case of Union of India vs. V.R. Tripathi reported in
(2019)    14    SCC    646,     Hon’ble         the     Supreme  Court,  while
considering the issue of legitimacy of child born from a second
marriage, held as under:
12. The real issue in the present case, however, is
whether the condition which has been imposed by the
circular of the Railway Board under which compassionate
appointment cannot be granted to the children born from
a second marriage of a deceased employee (except where
the marriage was permitted by the administration taking
into account personal law, etc) accords with basic notions
of fairness and equal treatment, so as to be consistent
with Article 14 of the Constitution. While answering this
issue, it would be necessary to advert to the provisions of
Section 16 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 which provide
“16. Legitimacy of children of void and voidable
marriages.-(1) Notwithstanding that marriage is null and
void under section 11, any child of such marriage who
would have been legitimate if the marriage had been
valid, shall be legitimate, whether such child is born
before or after the commencement of the Marriage Laws
(Amendment) Act, 1976 (68 of 1976), and whether or not
a decree of nullity is granted in respect of that marriage
under this Act and whether or not the marriage is held to
be void otherwise than on a petition under this Act.
(2) Where a decree of nullity is granted in respect of a
voidable marriage under section 12, any child begotten or
conceived before the decree is made, who would have
been the legitimate child of the parties to the marriage if
at the date of the decree it had been dissolved instead of
being annulled, shall be deemed to be their legitimate
child notwithstanding the decree of nullity.
(3) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) or subsection (2)
shall be construed as conferring upon any child of a
marriage which is null and void or which is annulled by a
decree of nullity under section 12, any rights in or to the
(5 of 8)              [SAW-1565/2018]
property of any person, other than the parents, in any
case where, but for the passing of this Act, such child
would have been incapable of possessing or acquiring any
such rights by reason of his not being the legitimate child
of his parents.”
13. In sub-section (1) of Section 16, the legislature has
stipulated that a child born from a marriage which is null
and void under Section 11 is legitimate, regardless of
whether the birth has taken place before or after the
commencement of Amending Act 68 of 1976. Legitimacy
of a child born from a marriage which is null and void, is a
matter of public policy so as to protect a child born from
such a marriage from suffering the consequences of
illegitimacy. Hence, though the marriage may be null and
void, a child who is born from the marriage is nonetheless
treated as legitimate by sub-section (1) of Section 16.
One of the grounds on which a marriage is null and void
under Section 11 read with clause (i) of Section 5 is that
the marriage has been contracted when one of the parties
had a spouse living at the time of marriage. A second
marriage contracted by a Hindu during the subsistence of
the first marriage is, therefore, null and void. However,
the legislature has stepped in by enacting Section 16(1)
to protect the legitimacy of a child born from such a
marriage. Subsection (3) of Section 16, however,
stipulates that such a child who is born from a marriage
which is null and void, will have a right in the property
only of the parents and none other than the parents.
14. The issue essentially is whether it is open to an
employer, who is amenable to Part III of the Constitution
to deny the benefit of compassionate appointment which
is available to other legitimate children. Undoubtedly,
while designing a policy of compassionate appointment,
the State can prescribe the terms on which it can be
granted. However, it is not open to the State, while
making the scheme or rules, to lay down a condition
which is inconsistent with Article 14 of the Constitution.
The purpose of compassionate appointment is to prevent
destitution and penury in the family of a deceased
employee. The effect of the circular is that irrespective of
the destitution which a child born from a second marriage
of a deceased employee may face, compassionate
appointment is to be refused unless the second marriage
was contracted with the permission of the administration.
Once Section 16 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 regards
a child born from a marriage entered into while the earlier
marriage is subsisting to be legitimate, it would not be
open to the State, consistent with Article 14 to exclude
(6 of 8)              [SAW-1565/2018]
such a child from seeking the benefit of compassionate
appointment. Such a condition of exclusion is arbitrary
and ultra vires.
15. Even if the narrow classification test is adopted, the
circular of the Railway Board creates two categories
between one class of legitimate children. Though the law
has regarded a child born from a second marriage as
legitimate, a child born from the first marriage of a
deceased employee is alone made entitled to the benefit
of compassionate appointment. The salutary purpose
underlying the grant of compassionate appointment,
which is to prevent destitution and penury in the family of
a deceased employee requires that any stipulation or
condition which is imposed must have or bear a
reasonable nexus to the object which is sought to be
achieved. The learned Additional Solicitor General has
urged that it is open to the State, as part of its policy of
discouraging bigamy to restrict the benefit of
compassionate appointment, only to the spouse and
children of the first marriage and to deny it to the spouse
of a subsequent marriage and the children. We are here
concerned with the exclusion of children born from a
second marriage. By excluding a class of beneficiaries
who have been deemed legitimate by the operation of
law, the condition imposed is disproportionate to the
object sought to be achieved. Having regard to the
purpose and object of a scheme of compassionate
appointment, once the law has treated such children as
legitimate, it would be impermissible to exclude them
from being considered for compassionate appointment.
Children do not choose their parents. To deny
compassionate appointment though the law treats a child
of a void marriage as legitimate is deeply offensive to
their dignity and is offensive to the constitutional
guarantee against discrimination.
16. The learned Additional Solicitor General submitted
that the decision of this Court in Rameshwari Devi (supra)
arose in the context of the grant of family pension to the
minor children born from the second marriage of a
deceased employee. That is correct. This Court, in that
context, observed that Section 16 of the Hindu Marriage
Act, 1955 renders the children of a void marriage to be
legitimate while upholding the entitlement to family
pension. The learned Additional Solicitor General
submitted that pension is a matter of right which accrues
by virtue of the long years of service which is rendered by
the employee, entitling the employee and after his death,
their family to pension in accordance with the rules. Even
(7 of 8)                   [SAW-1565/2018]
if we do accept that submission, the principle which has
been laid down by this Court on the basis of Section 16 of
the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 must find application in the
present case as well. The exclusion of one class of
legitimate    children      from        seeking         compassionate
appointment merely on the ground that the mother of the
applicant was a plural wife of the deceased employee
would fail to meet the test of a reasonable nexus with the
object sought to be achieved. It would be offensive to and
defeat the whole object of ensuring the dignity of the
family of a deceased employee who has died in harness.
It brings about unconstitutional discrimination between
one class of legitimate beneficiaries – legitimate children.”
Hon’ble the Apex Court in the case of Mukesh Kumar &
Anr. vs. Union of India reported in (2022) 2 JT 346, while
reiterating the above settled proposition of law held that while
compassionate appointment is an exception to the consitutional
guarantee     under     Article     16,      a     policy      for  compassionate
appointment must be consistent with the mandate of Article 14
and 16. That is to say, a policy for compassionate appointment,
which has the force of law, must not discriminate on any of the
grounds mentioned in Article 16(2), including that of descent. In
this regard, descent must be understood to encompass the familial
origins of a person which would include the validity or otherwise of
the marriage of the parents of a claimant for compassionate
appointment and the claimant’s legitimacy as their child.
In view of law enunicated by Hon’ble the Supreme Court and
provisions    of  the   Rajasthan         Compassionate            Appointment    of
Dependents of Deceased Government Servants Rules, 1996, we
have no hesitation in reaching to the conclusion that the
application submitted by respondent No.4 seeking compassionate
appointment could not have been rejected by the respondent-
university solely on the ground of him being child from the second
(8 of 8)               [SAW-1565/2018]
wife. The Head of the Department as per Rule 10(2) of the Rules
of 1996 is competent to decide the applications for compassionate
appointment keeping in view the overall interest and welfare of
the family, if more than one of the dependents claim employment
on compassionate grounds.
In view of the facts noted above, we are of the firm view that
the competent authority i.e. the Head of the Department had
rightly considered the application submitted to be compliant of the
Rules of 1996 and issued an offer of appointment in his favour.
In light of aforesaid discussion, the order of compassionate
appointment dated 04.08.2005 issued in favour of respondent
No.4 does not suffer from any infirmity warranting interference by
this Court. The order dated 12.04.2018 passed by the learned
Single Bench is resonable and logical, therefore, we are not
inclined to interfere with the same.
In the result, the special appeal stands dismissed being
devoid of merit.