The lis on hand raises an important question, whether the tribal
women in the State of Tamil Nadu can be excluded from their share in the
family property under the Hindu Succession Act, 1956.
2.The facts as detailed in the impugned judgment, broadly are not
disputed between the parties and more so, the Trial Court decreed the suit in
favour of the plaintiff, who claimed equal share in the family property by
instituting a suit for partition. The Trial Court invoked the provisions of the
Hindu Succession Act, 1956 and held that the Tribal Women are also
entitled for equal share in their family property on par with the other male
coparceners and the defendants in the suit has chosen to file the present
appeal suit.
3.The suit was instituted by the respondent herein: wife and daughter
of Mr.Ramasamy, seeking a partition of the suit mentioned property, which
belonged to Mr.Ramar @ Ramasamy. The plaintiffs claimed that they are
entitled for 2/5 equal and separate shares in the suit mentioned property.
The defendants filed a written statement denying the plaint averments. The
defendants denied the right to property to the plaintiffs on the ground that
some of the properties were sold in favour of the husband of the second
plaintiff and regarding the other properties, there was an oral partition
between the parties and therefore, the plaintiffs have no right to claim any
share in the suit mentioned property.
4.The Trial Court adjudicated the issues with reference to the
documents and evidences and formed an opinion that the defendant had not
established their case and therefore, the plaintiffs are entitled for equal share
in the suit mentioned property as prayed for.
5.The learned counsel for the appellant, beyond the facts adjudicated
by the Trial Court, raised an important legal question that the tribal women
are expressly excluded from the application of the provisions of the Hindu
Succession Act. Section 2(2) of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 stipulates
“ Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), nothing contained
in this Act shall apply to the members of any Scheduled Tribe within the
meaning of clause (25) of Article 366 of the Constitution unless the Central
Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, otherwise directs.”
Relying on the above provision, the learned counsel for the appellant
reiterated that, the scheduled tribe women are expressly excluded from the
provisions of the Act and therefore, the Trial Court has erroneously applied
the Hindu Succession Act and granted relief in the suit, which is untenable.
6.The learned counsel for the respondent strenuously objected to the
said contention by stating that the defendants have miserably failed to
establish the custom and practice, if any prevailing amongst the community,
where the plaintiff and defendant belong and in the absence of any such
proof to establish such custom of practice, the Hindu Succession Act alone
should be applied and therefore, the Trial Court is right in granting the relief
of partition to the plaintiffs. It is further contended that the tribal women
cannot be denied or deprived of equal share on par with other female Hindu
in the state of Tamil Nadu and thus, denying the right to the scheduled
tribe, will result in unconstitutionality and discrimination. Thus, the Trial
Court has rightly proceeded based on the Hindu Succession Act and granted
the relief and hence, the appeal suit to be dismissed.
7.Let us now consider the spirit of Section 2(2) of the Hindu
Succession Act 1956, with reference to Article 366(25) of the Constitution
of India. The said Article contemplates “Scheduled Tribes means such
tribes or tribal communities or parts of or groups within such tribes or
tribal communities as are deemed under Article 342 to be Scheduled Tribes
for the purposes of this Constitution;”
8.Article 342 of the Constitution enumerates “Scheduled Tribes” as:
(1) The President may with respect to any State or Union Territory,
and where it is a State, after consultation with the Governor thereof, by
public notification, specify the tribes or tribal communities or parts of or
groups within tribes or tribal communities which shall for the purposes of
this Constitution be deemed to be Scheduled Tribes in relation to that State
or Union territory, as the case may be
(2) Parliament may by law include in or exclude from the list of
Scheduled Tribes specified in a notification issued under clause ( 1 ) any
tribe or tribal community or part of or group within any tribe or tribal
community, but save as aforesaid a notification issued under the said
clause shall not be varied by any subsequent notification PART XVII
9.In the present case, the parties to the suit are falling under the
category of notified tribes and therefore, it is to be examined, whether the
parties have established any custom and practice for the purpose of applying
the exclusion clause contemplated under Section 2(2) of the Hindu
Succession Act. In the absence of any such custom and practice, which is to
be proved, the Courts have no option but to apply Hindu Succession Act,
since the parties are professing Hinduism and further there is no other
reason whatsoever to deprive equal share to women on par with the male
10.Section 2(1) of the Act does not exclude the scheduled tribes from
the definition of “Hindu”. Section 2(1) starts as “This Act applies-” and
Sub Clause (c) stipulates that “to any other person who is not a Muslim,
Christian, Parsi or Jew by religion unless it is proved that any such person
would not have been governed by the Hindu law or by any custom or usage
as part of that law in respect of any of the matters dealt with herein if this
Act had not been passed.” Therefore, Section 2(1) of the Act does not
exclude the scheduled tribes from the definition of “Hindu”. Section 2(2)
therefore, postpones the application of the Hindu Succession Act till the
notification as required under the provision is issued.
11.Let us examine Section 2(2) which expressly stipulates that
“nothing contained in this Act shall apply to the members of any Scheduled
Tribe within the meaning of Clause (25) of Article 366 of the Constitution
unless the Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette,
otherwise directs.” Therefore, when the custom and usage is not established
nor prevailing, then the Central Government has to notify, enabling such
tribal women to get equal shares in the family property. Mere non-issuance
of notification or postponement of issuing notification cannot deprive the
scheduled tribe women from getting their right in the family property, more
specifically for equal share. Thus, Section 2(2) cannot be construed as a
complete bar for invoking the provisions of the Hindu Succession Act. But
it paves way for the Central Government to notify the tribal communities,
who have already moved forward and whose primitive customs and practice
are not prevailing amongst the community for inheritance.
12.When Section 2(2) postpones the application of the Hindu
Succession Act till the notification as required under provisions is issued,
this by implication means scheduled tribes are also Hindus only and the
application of Hindu Succession Act is simply contingent to set a
notification. A Scheduled tribe, pure and simple, who is adhering to its
custom is to be distinguished from that who has been Hindu, prior to the
commencement of the Hindu Succession Act, and the view of this Court is
that such Hindu tribal do fall within Section 2(1) (c) of the Act and may be
treated as “Hindu” because there is no proof on record to show that such
tribals could not have been turned by the Hindu law.
13.Nothing has been shown about the custom and practice prevailing
in the community, where the parties to the lis on hand belong. But the tribal
women are deprived of adopting the Hindu Succession Act. Therefore, Sub
Section (2) of Section 2 of the Hindu Succession Act 1956, will not come in
the way of inheritance of the property by the daughters belonging to the
tribal area, where Hinduism and Buddhism are followed.
14.Even recently the Supreme Court of India in the case of Kamla
Neti vs The Special Land Acquisition Officer & Ors., 2022 LiveLaw (SC)
2014, directed the Government to re-examine the provisions of the Hindu
Succession Act which denied a tribal women, the right of succession to her
family property. The Bench led by Justice M.R.Shah said that there was no
justification to deny a women belonging to the Scheduled Tribe community
“the right of survivorship” under the Hindu Succession Act.                 It was
observed that “when the daughter belonging to a non-tribal community is
entitled to the equal share in the property of the father, then there is no
reason to deny such right to the daughter of the Tribal community. Female
tribal is entitled to parity with male tribal in intestate succession.” Court
found it saddening that the tribal women were still denied the equal right to
equality after 70 years of the Constitution came into existence. May that as
it be, the definition of custom is that, it is an established practice at variance
with the general law. A custom varying a general law may be a general,
local, tribal or a family custom. A general custom includes a custom
common to any considerable class of persons. A custom which is applicable
to a locality, tribe, sect or a family is called a special custom. Custom has
effected to modify the general personal law, but it does not over-ride the
statute law unless it is expressly saved by it. Such custom must be ancient,
uniform certain, peaceable, continuous and compulsory. No custom is valid
if it is illegal, immoral, unreasonable or oppose to the public policy.
15.He who relies upon custom, varying the general law, must plead
and prove it. Customs must be established by clear and unambiguous
evidence. It is to be proved that it is not opposed to public policy, more
specifically not unconstitutional. Section 3(d) of the Hindu Succession Act
defines the expression “customs” and “usage”, which signify any rule,
which is having been continuously and uniformly observed for a long period
of time as obtaining the force of law among Hindus in any local area, tribe
community, group or family, provided that the rule is certain and not
unreasonable or opposed to the public policy, and it is provided further that
in the case of a rule applicable only to a family which has not been
discontinued by the family.
16.Therefore, the legislature have not intended for any inequality or
unconstitutionality in the matter of inheritance as far as the scheduled tribe
women are concerned. The intention of the legislature was to protect the
custom and practices, which all are strongly prevalent amongst the tribal
communities and not in respect of the schedule tribes, who came out from
such backwardness or customs or otherwise. Section 2(1)(c) is exhaustive
and more so, cannot be construed as an exclusion clause. It is inclusive as
far as the schedule tribe women are concerned and Section 2(2) only
provides an opportunity to adopt custom and practice only if it is certain and
not opposing public policy.
17.The rights of inheritance of the tribal women governed by
customs and had only evolved through judicial interventions. The right of
succession is not directly available to the tribal women, rather it was
provided by the judicial innovation of the Chattisgarh High Court, known as
the “test of Hinduisation” in the case of Smt.Butaki Bai & others Vs.
Sukhbati & others, dated 02.05.2014, wherein the Court provided the
requirements that need to be fulfilled by tribal women to avail the benefit of
Hindu Succession Act. It would have to be proved that:
(i) the plaintiffs pleading that they have abandoned their law of origin
(customary law) has to plead and establish by leading appropriate evidence
that they have given up their customary succession, and
(ii) to establish further that they have become “Hindus out and out” or
“sufficiently Hindus” so as to be governed by in matter of succession and
inheritance by any school of Hindu law and thereafter to prove.
18.The Patna High Court in the case of Budhu Manjhi & another
Vs. Dukhan Majhi & other, AIR 1956 PAT 123, held that it is not
necessary that the parties must be completely Hinduised. Even if they had
been sufficiently Hinduised so as to be governed by the hindu law of
succession, it is enough in matters of inheritence and succession.
19.The Himachal Pradesh High Court in the matter of Bahadur Vs.
Bratiya & others, AIR 2016 HP 58, held that gender discrimination
violates fundamental rights and daughters are entitled to equal shares in the
property. It concluded that the daughters in the tribal areas in the state of
Himachal Pradesh shall inherit the property in accordance with the Hindu
Succession Act, 1956 and not as per their customs and usage.
20.Section 2(3) of the Hindu Succession Act denotes 'The expression
“Hindu” in any portion of this Act shall be construed as if it included a
person who, though not a Hindu by religion, is, nevertheless, a person to
whom this Act applies by virtue of the provisions contained in this section.'
Thus, the whole reading of Section 2 cogently would reveal that the statute
never intended to exclude the tribal women completely from the application
of the Act but contemplated to enable the tribal community to adopt their
custom and practice in the absence of any notification by the Central
Government. This would not deprive the tribal women from getting equal
share in the family property. In this context, rule of golden interpretation is
to be adopted and the negative interpretation depriving equal right which is
otherwise guaranteed under the constitution to the tribal women, cannot be
adopted. Thus, the golden rule of interpretation, if adopted, would establish
that the tribal women are not completely excluded but the statute intended
to provide an opportunity to the tribal communities to adopt customs and
practices in the matter of inheritence and in the absence of any such
certainty in customs and practices, then undoubtedly the Hindu succession
Act alone should be applied for the purpose of inheritence and for providing
equal share to tribal women.
21.In appeal filed in   WPPIL/140/2019 on 17 March, 2021 at
Uttarakhand High Court by the VAN Gujjar Community which was based
on whether the tribal community could be ousted from the forest land they
have lived on or not it was held that the tribal community must not be
denied their fundamental rights. The State is duty bound to:
(a)take steps for the benefit of the tribal population
(b)to ensure that Fundamental Rights are concretised for the benefit
of the Tribal population.
(c)to ensure that the basic fundamental facilities are provided to the
(d)in light of the Directive the Principles of the Constitution of India
to improve the lifestyle and the condition of the tribal population, and
(e)to ensure that the tribal population improves its living standard to
the extent it merges with the mainstream of the society, an becomes a part of
the productive population of the State.
Hence on these grounds Article 14 and 15 of the Constitution of
India applies to the tribal community which includes tribal women as well.
22.In the case of Maneka Gandhi Vs. Union of India, 1978 AIR 597,
wherein the Apex Court dealt with the personal liberty. The judgment
expanded the scope of personal liberty under Article 21 of the Constitution
of India, whereby it held that the procedure established by law needed to be
in accordance with the Principles of Natural Justice. In the case of Salek
Chand (dead) by LRs Vs. Satya Gupta and others(2008) 13 SCC 119, the
Apex Court held that where the custom is set up to prove that it is at
variance with the ordinary law, it has to be proved that it is not opposed to
public policy and that it is ancient, invariable, continuous, notorious, not
expressly forbidden by the legislature and not opposed to morality or public
23.Apart from the judgments cited supra, it is to be noted that the
backwardness of tribal population in the state of Tamil Nadu is not
prevailing to such an extent so as to form an opinion that the custom of such
tribal community is to be adopted. There is no such custom and practice
established in the present case, by the defendants and therefore, the question
of application of custom and practice in the matter of inheritance in the
present case would not arise at all.
24.The nature of custom and practice to be established must be not
only certain, it must be in practice continuously. In the present case, there is
no whisper about such custom or practice in the community in which the
parties are living and in the absence of any such proof, the Trial Court has
rightly arrived at a conclusion that the parties to the suit are to be construed
as Hindus for the purpose of application of Hindu Succession Act and
accordingly, granted the relief of partition and granted equal share to tribal
women on par with their counter parts/male copercenors.
25.This Court is of the considered opinion that the relationship
between the parties are not in dispute and admittedly the ground mainly
raised is the exclusion clause under Section 2(2) of the Act and in view of
the elaborate discussion in the aforementioned paragraphs, the said
exclusion clause is inapplicable with reference to the facts and
circumstances of the case on hand and thus, this Court has no hesitation in
arriving at a conclusion that the Trial Court has rightly applied the provision
of the Hindu Succession Act and granted the relief of partition in favour of
the plaintiffs, which requires no further interference.
26.However, the Government of Tamil Nadu shall initiate necessary
steps for the purpose of issuing appropriate notification through Central
Government under Section 2(2) of the Hindu Succession Act 1956, to
protect the equal property right of the tribal women in the state of Tamil
27. Accordingly, the judgment and decree dated 06.10.2017 passed in
O.S.No.30 of 2014 stands confirmed and consequently A.S.No.905 of 2018
stands dismissed. No costs.
Note: The Registry, High Court, Madras is directed to communicate the
copy of this judgment to the Chief Secretary to the Government of Tamil
Nadu, Old Sector, Chennai-9 for initiating appropriate action.
2. The Chief Secretary to the Government of Tamil Nadu,