1.     The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas in the Union
Government has instituted these proceedings purportedly under
O.M.P.(T) (COMM.) 125/2022                                            Page 1 of 39
Sections 14(2) read with Section 15(2) of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996 1 for a declaration that the majority of the
members of the Arbitral Tribunal consisting of the Chairman Sir
Michael D. Kirby AC CMG and Sir Bernard Rix, the two
Arbitrators nominated by respondent Nos. 1 to 3 are de jure/de
facto unable to discharge their functions and consequently their
mandate stands terminated in terms of Section 14 of the Act.
2.      The arbitration proceedings emanate from a Production
Sharing Contract 2 dated 12 April 2000 executed between the
petitioner and the respondent Nos. 1 to 3 and related to the
development and production of gas from D1 to D3 gas discoveries
falling in the D-6 block and marketing of gas in terms thereof.
3.      The allegation in the present petition essentially is that the
various procedural orders passed by the Arbitral Tribunal and the
manner in which proceedings have been conducted clearly leads
the petitioner to apprehend an evident bias and harboring
justifiable doubts as to the independence and impartiality of the
arbitrators. The petitioner alleges that the various procedural
orders passed by the Tribunal would indicate that it has treated
them unfairly, denied them reasonable opportunity and of favoring
the cause of respondent Nos. 1 to 3.
4.      However, and before the Court proceeds to elaborate upon
the submissions which were addressed in support of the present
petition by Mr. Ganguli, learned Senior Counsel, it would be
O.M.P.(T) (COMM.) 125/2022                                   Page 2 of 39
pertinent to consider and rule upon a preliminary objection which
was raised by Mr. Harish Salve, learned Senior Counsel appearing
for respondent Nos. 1 to 3 with respect to the maintainability of
the petition itself.
5.     Taking the Court through the relevant statutory provisions,
Mr. Salve submitted that in terms of Section 12 of the Act, an
arbitrator is obliged to make a disclosure with respect to the
existence of any relationship or interests that he may have with
any of the parties or in relation to the subject matter of the dispute
and which is likely to give rise to justifiable doubts as to their
independence or impartiality.
6.     Proceeding then to Explanation 1 to Section 12(1) of the
Act, Mr. Salve submitted that a reading thereof would indicate
that the grounds set out in the Fifth Schedule act as a guide in
determining whether circumstances exist which may give rise to
justifiable doubts being harbored. Proceeding further, learned
Senior Counsel submitted that the procedure for challenge to the
mandate of an Arbitrator in a situation that gives rise to justifiable
doubts as to his independence or impartiality is set forth in
Section 12(3) of the Act.
7.     Mr. Salve, then submitted that sub-section (5) of Section 12
which came to be introduced by virtue of the Arbitration and
Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2016 creates an ineligibility
criterion on grounds set out in the Seventh Schedule to the Act
and which would operate notwithstanding any prior agreement to
O.M.P.(T) (COMM.) 125/2022                                   Page 3 of 39
the contrary between parties. Mr. Salve further clarified that the
aforesaid is subject to the solitary exception of a situation where
parties may waive the applicability of sub-section (5) by way of
an express agreement in writing.
8.     According to Mr. Salve, since Section 12(5) read with the
Seventh Schedule constructs a non-derogable disqualification, an
Arbitrator accused of being affected by the aforesaid provisions
would become de jure unable to perform his functions. According
to Mr. Salve, it is this de jure disqualification alone which can be
challenged under Section 14.
9.     Mr. Salve further contended that a challenge to an
Arbitrator on grounds enumerated in Section 12(3) would have to
necessarily follow and abide by the procedure set out in Section
13. Learned Senior Counsel submitted that in terms of sub-
sections (3), (4) and (5) of Section 13, once a challenge to an
arbitrator is raised in terms of Section 12(3) and that arbitrator
fails to withdraw from office, the Arbitral Tribunal would have to
necessarily rule upon the challenge. It was further pointed out that
in terms of Section 13(4), if a challenge laid in accordance with
the procedure noticed above fails, the Arbitral Tribunal is
mandatorily obliged to continue the arbitral proceedings and
render an award. That award could be assailed by a party
challenging the arbitrator by way of an application for setting
aside the same in accordance with Section 34 of the Act.
O.M.P.(T) (COMM.) 125/2022                                  Page 4 of 39
10.      According to Mr. Salve, since the challenge to the Arbitral
Tribunal in the present case is raised on the ground of bias and a
justifiable doubt with respect to the independence and impartiality
of the arbitrators, it is the procedure specified in Section 13 alone
which could have been pursued.
11.      Mr. Salve urged that a de jure disqualification and which
could possibly form subject matter of a petition under Section 14
would have to necessarily be confined to the arbitrator suffering a
disqualification by virtue of the provisions contained in the
Seventh Schedule. The de jure disqualification, according to Mr.
Salve, cannot extend to bias or justifiable cause which would
necessarily be subjects which would stand confined to Sections 12
and 13 of the Act.
12.      Mr. Salve contended that the aforesaid issue is no longer res
integra and stands duly explained by the Supreme Court in HRD
Corporation (Marcus Oil and Chemical Division) versus GAIL
(India) Limited (Formerly Gas Authority of India Limited) 3.
Learned Senior Counsel referred to the following passages of that
reported decision: -
“12. After the 2016 Amendment Act, a dichotomy is made by the Act
between persons who become “ineligible” to be appointed as
arbitrators, and persons about whom justifiable doubts exist as to their
independence or impartiality. Since ineligibility goes to the root of the
appointment, Section 12(5) read with the Seventh Schedule makes it
clear that if the arbitrator falls in any one of the categories specified in
the Seventh Schedule, he becomes “ineligible” to act as arbitrator.
Once he becomes ineligible, it is clear that, under Section 14(1)(a), he
O.M.P.(T) (COMM.) 125/2022                                                     Page 5 of 39
then becomes de jure unable to perform his functions inasmuch as, in
law, he is regarded as “ineligible”. In order to determine whether an
arbitrator is de jure unable to perform his functions, it is not necessary
to go to the Arbitral Tribunal under Section 13. Since such a person
would lack inherent jurisdiction to proceed any further, an application
may be filed under Section 14(2) to the Court to decide on the
termination of his/her mandate on this ground. As opposed to this, in
a challenge where grounds stated in the Fifth Schedule are disclosed,
which give rise to justifiable doubts as to the arbitrator's
independence or impartiality, such doubts as to independence or
impartiality have to be determined as a matter of fact in the facts of
the particular challenge by the Arbitral Tribunal under Section 13. If a
challenge is not successful, and the Arbitral Tribunal decides that
there are no justifiable doubts as to the independence or impartiality
of the arbitrator/arbitrators, the Tribunal must then continue the
arbitral proceedings under Section 13(4) and make an award. It is
only after such award is made, that the party challenging the
arbitrator's appointment on grounds contained in the Fifth Schedule
may make an application for setting aside the arbitral award in
accordance with Section 34 on the aforesaid grounds. It is clear,
therefore, that any challenge contained in the Fifth Schedule against
the appointment of Justice Doabia and Justice Lahoti cannot be gone
into at this stage, but will be gone into only after the Arbitral Tribunal
has given an award. Therefore, we express no opinion on items
contained in the Fifth Schedule under which the appellant may
challenge the appointment of either arbitrator. They will be free to do
so only after an award is rendered by the Tribunal.
13. Confining ourselves to ineligibility, it is important to note that the
Law Commission by its 246th Report of August 2014 had this to say
in relation to the amendments made to Section 12 and the insertion of
the Fifth and Seventh Schedules:
“59. The Commission has proposed the requirement of
having specific disclosures by the arbitrator, at the stage
of his possible appointment, regarding existence of any
relationship or interest of any kind which is likely to give
rise to justifiable doubts. The Commission has proposed
the incorporation of the Fourth Schedule, which has
drawn from the red and orange lists of the IBA
Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in International
Arbitration, and which would be treated as a “guide” to
determine whether circumstances exist which give rise to
such justifiable doubts. On the other hand, in terms of the
proposed Section 12(5) of the Act and the Fifth Schedule
which incorporates the categories from the red list of the
IBA Guidelines (as above), the person proposed to be
O.M.P.(T) (COMM.) 125/2022                                                  Page 6 of 39
appointed as an arbitrator shall be ineligible to be so
appointed, notwithstanding any prior agreement to the
contrary. In the event such an ineligible person is
purported to be appointed as an arbitrator, he shall be de
jure deemed to be unable to perform his functions, in
terms of the proposed Explanation to Section 14.
Therefore, while the disclosure is required with respect
to a broader list of categories (as set out in the Fourth
Schedule, and as based on the red and orange lists of the
IBA Guidelines), the ineligibility to be appointed as an
arbitrator (and the consequent de jure inability to so act)
follows from a smaller and more serious sub-set of
situations (as set out in the Fifth Schedule, and as based
on the red list of the IBA Guidelines).
that real and genuine party autonomy must be respected,
and, in certain situations, parties should be allowed to
waive even the categories of ineligibility as set in the
proposed Fifth Schedule. This could be in situations of
family arbitrations or other arbitrations where a person
commands the blind faith and trust of the parties to the
dispute, despite the existence of objective “justifiable
doubts” regarding his independence and impartiality. To
deal with such situations, the Commission has proposed
the proviso to Section 12(5), where parties
may, subsequent to disputes having arisen between them,
waive the applicability of the proposed Section 12(5) by
an express agreement in writing. In all other cases, the
general rule in the proposed Section 12(5) must be
followed. In the event the High Court is approached in
connection with appointment of an arbitrator, the
Commission has proposed seeking the disclosure in
terms of Section 12(1) and in which context the High
Court or the designate is to have “due regard” to the
contents of such disclosure in appointing the arbitrator.”
(emphasis in original)
14. The enumeration of grounds given in the Fifth and Seventh
Schedules have been taken from the IBA Guidelines, particularly
from the Red and Orange Lists thereof. The aforesaid guidelines
consist of three lists. The Red List, consisting of non-waivable and
waivable guidelines, covers situations which are “more serious” and
“serious”, the “more serious” objections being non-waivable. The
Orange List, on the other hand, is a list of situations that may give rise
to doubts as to the arbitrator's impartiality or independence, as a
consequence of which the arbitrator has a duty to disclose such
O.M.P.(T) (COMM.) 125/2022                                                 Page 7 of 39
situations. The Green List is a list of situations where no actual
conflict of interest exists from an objective point of view, as a result
of which the arbitrator has no duty of disclosure. These Guidelines
were first introduced in the year 2004 and have thereafter been
amended, after seeing the experience of arbitration worldwide. In Part
1 thereof, general standards regarding impartiality, independence and
disclosure are set out.
15. General Principle 1 reads as follows:
“IBA Guidelines on Conflicts of Interest in International
Every arbitrator shall be impartial and independent of the
parties at the time of accepting an appointment to serve and
shall remain so until the final award has been rendered or
the proceedings have otherwise finally terminated.”
On “conflicts of interest”, Guidelines laid down are as
“(2) Conflicts of Interest
(a) An arbitrator shall decline to accept an appointment or,
if the arbitration has already been commenced, refuse to
continue to act as an arbitrator, if he or she has any doubt as
to his or her ability to be impartial or independent.
(b) The same principle applies if facts or circumstances
exist, or have arisen since the appointment, which, from the
point of view of a reasonable third person having
knowledge of the relevant facts and circumstances, would
give rise to justifiable doubts as to the arbitrator's
impartiality or independence, unless the parties have
accepted the arbitrator in accordance with the requirements
set out in General Standard 4.
(c) Doubts are justifiable if a reasonable third person,
having knowledge of the relevant facts and circumstances,
would reach the conclusion that there is a likelihood that
the arbitrator may be influenced by factors other than the
merits of the case as presented by the parties in reaching his
or her decision.
(d) Justifiable doubts necessarily exist as to the arbitrator's
impartiality or independence in any of the situations
described in the Non-Waivable Red List.”
17. It will be noticed that Items 1 to 19 of the Fifth Schedule are
identical with the aforesaid items in the Seventh Schedule. The only
O.M.P.(T) (COMM.) 125/2022                                                  Page 8 of 39
reason that these items also appear in the Fifth Schedule is for
purposes of disclosure by the arbitrator, as unless the proposed
arbitrator discloses in writing his involvement in terms of Items 1 to
34 of the Fifth Schedule, such disclosure would be lacking, in which
case the parties would be put at a disadvantage as such information is
often within the personal knowledge of the arbitrator only. It is for
this reason that it appears that Items 1 to 19 also appear in the Fifth
20. However, to accede to Shri Divan's submission that because the
grounds for challenge have been narrowed as aforesaid, we must
construe the items in the Fifth and Seventh Schedules in the most
expansive manner, so that the remotest likelihood of bias gets
removed, is not an acceptable way of interpreting the Schedules. As
has been pointed out by us hereinabove, the items contained in the
Schedules owe their origin to the IBA Guidelines, which are to be
construed in the light of the general principles contained therein—that
every arbitrator shall be impartial and independent of the parties at the
time of accepting his/her appointment. Doubts as to the above are
only justifiable if a reasonable third person having knowledge of the
relevant facts and circumstances would reach the conclusion that
there is a likelihood that the arbitrator may be influenced by factors
other than the merits of the case in reaching his or her decision. This
test requires taking a broad commonsensical approach to the items
stated in the Fifth and Seventh Schedules. This approach would,
therefore, require a fair construction of the words used therein, neither
tending to enlarge or restrict them unduly. It is with these prefatory
remarks that we proceed to deal with the arguments of both sides in
construing the language of the Seventh Schedule.”
13.      Mr. Salve further submitted that the dichotomy in the
challenge procedure with respect to persons who may become
ineligible to be appointed as arbitrators and persons against whom
a justifiable doubt may exist was again recognised and reiterated
by the Supreme Court in Bharat Broadband Network Ltd. v.
United Telecoms Ltd. 4 where after reiterating the principles
which were enunciated in HRD Corporation the Supreme Court
O.M.P.(T) (COMM.) 125/2022                                                  Page 9 of 39
“14. From a conspectus of the above decisions, it is clear that Section
12(1), as substituted by the Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment)
Act, 2015 [“the Amendment Act, 2015”], makes it clear that when a
person is approached in connection with his possible appointment as an
arbitrator, it is his duty to disclose in writing any circumstances which
are likely to give rise to justifiable doubts as to his independence or
impartiality. The disclosure is to be made in the form specified in the
Sixth Schedule, and the grounds stated in the Fifth Schedule are to
serve as a guide in determining whether circumstances exist which give
rise to justifiable doubts as to the independence or impartiality of an
arbitrator. Once this is done, the appointment of the arbitrator may be
challenged on the ground that justifiable doubts have arisen under sub-
section (3) of Section 12 subject to the caveat entered by sub-section
(4) of Section 12. The challenge procedure is then set out in Section 13,
together with the time-limit laid down in Section 13(2). What is
important to note is that the Arbitral Tribunal must first decide on the
said challenge, and if it is not successful, the Tribunal shall continue
the proceedings and make an award. It is only post award that the party
challenging the appointment of an arbitrator may make an application
for setting aside such an award in accordance with Section 34 of the
15. Section 12(5), on the other hand, is a new provision which relates
to the de jure inability of an arbitrator to act as such. Under this
provision, any prior agreement to the contrary is wiped out by the non
obstante clause in Section 12(5) the moment any person whose
relationship with the parties or the counsel or the subject-matter of the
dispute falls under the Seventh Schedule. The sub-section then
declares that such person shall be “ineligible” to be appointed as
arbitrator. The only way in which this ineligibility can be removed is
by the proviso, which again is a special provision which states that
parties may, subsequent to disputes having arisen between them,
waive the applicability of Section 12(5) by an express agreement in
writing. What is clear, therefore, is that where, under any agreement
between the parties, a person falls within any of the categories set out
in the Seventh Schedule, he is, as a matter of law, ineligible to be
appointed as an arbitrator. The only way in which this ineligibility
can be removed, again, in law, is that parties may after disputes have
arisen between them, waive the applicability of this sub-section by an
“express agreement in writing”. Obviously, the “express agreement in
writing” has reference to a person who is interdicted by the Seventh
Schedule, but who is stated by parties (after the disputes have arisen
between them) to be a person in whom they have faith
notwithstanding the fact that such person is interdicted by the Seventh
17. The scheme of Sections 12, 13 and 14, therefore, is that where an
arbitrator makes a disclosure in writing which is likely to give
justifiable doubts as to his independence or impartiality, the
appointment of such arbitrator may be challenged under Sections
12(1) to 12(4) read with Section 13. However, where such person
becomes “ineligible” to be appointed as an arbitrator, there is no
question of challenge to such arbitrator, before such arbitrator. In
such a case i.e. a case which falls under Section 12(5), Section
14(1)(a) of the Act gets attracted inasmuch as the arbitrator becomes,
as a matter of law (i.e. de jure), unable to perform his functions under
Section 12(5), being ineligible to be appointed as an arbitrator. This
being so, his mandate automatically terminates, and he shall then be
substituted by another arbitrator under Section 14(1) itself. It is only
if a controversy occurs concerning whether he has become de
jure unable to perform his functions as such, that a party has to apply
to the Court to decide on the termination of the mandate, unless
otherwise agreed by the parties. Thus, in all Section 12(5) cases, there
is no challenge procedure to be availed of. If an arbitrator continues
as such, being de jure unable to perform his functions, as he falls
within any of the categories mentioned in Section 12(5), read with the
Seventh Schedule, a party may apply to the Court, which will then
decide on whether his mandate has terminated. Questions which may
typically arise under Section 14 may be as to whether such person
falls within any of the categories mentioned in the Seventh Schedule,
or whether there is a waiver as provided in the proviso to Section
12(5) of the Act. As a matter of law, it is important to note that the
proviso to Section 12(5) must be contrasted with Section 4 of the Act.
Section 4 deals with cases of deemed waiver by conduct; whereas the
proviso to Section 12(5) deals with waiver by express agreement in
writing between the parties only if made subsequent to disputes
having arisen between them.”
14.    In view of the aforesaid, Mr. Salve contended that the
instant petition which seeks to invoke the powers of this Court
conferred by Section 14 of the Act is not maintainable.
Mr. Salve further submitted that the petitioner has independently
also filed an application before the Arbitral Tribunal itself
purporting to be under Section 14 of the Act. According to Mr.
Salve, even if that petition were to be understood as having been
O.M.P.(T) (COMM.) 125/2022                                               Page 11 of 39
incorrectly titled as being one under Section 14 of the Act and
constituting a challenge raised in terms contemplated under
Section 13, the petitioner must be relegated to pursue that
application before the Arbitral Tribunal itself and if aggrieved by
any final decision that may be rendered thereon to take
appropriate steps as contemplated under Section 13(4) and (5) of
the Act.
15.    Appearing for the petitioner, Mr. Ganguli, learned Senior
Counsel, submitted that an allegation of bias or where justifiable
doubts are raised with respect to the independence or impartiality
of an Arbitrator would necessarily fall within the ambit of a de
jure disqualification which is contemplated under Section 14 of
the Act. Learned Senior Counsel submitted that once an allegation
of bias or justifiable doubt is raised, it would be wholly
inequitable for a party to seek a ruling in that respect from the
very members of the Arbitral Tribunal against whom such
allegations have been levelled. Mr. Ganguli submitted that the
Section 14 remedy which is provided to a party to arbitration
proceedings must necessarily be interpreted as including the
power of the Court to rule on an allegation of bias that may come
to be laid against an arbitrator. According to Mr. Ganguly, the
avenue provided by Section 14(1)(a) subserves the objective of
safeguarding a valuable right inhering in a party to question the
independence or impartiality of an arbitrator. According to
learned senior counsel, it would be wholly incorrect to deprive
such a party of a salutary remedy provided under the Act and
O.M.P.(T) (COMM.) 125/2022                                  Page 12 of 39
compelling it to pursue its remedies before the Arbitral Tribunal.
Mr. Ganguly argued that acceptance of the submission as
advanced on behalf of the petitioner would render Section 14(2)
of the Act otiose.
16.     Mr. Ganguli submitted that the issue of bias and the right of
a party to challenge the same in terms of Section 14 has been
accorded judicial recognition in the decisions rendered by two
learned Judges of this Court in National Highways Authority of
India versus K.K. Sarin & Ors. 5 as well as Alcove Industries
Ltd. v. Oriental Structural Engineers Ltd. 6
17.     In National Highways Authority of India, the learned
Judge while dealing with the question of the remedy available to a
party where an allegation of bias comes to be laid against an
arbitrator held as follows: -
“25. As far as the first of the aforesaid questions is concerned, Section
14 permits a party to approach the Court to return a finding if “a
controversy remains” as to whether the arbitrator has become de
jure or de facto unable to perform his functions. The 1996 Act in
Section 5 thereof otherwise prohibits judicial intervention except
where so provided by the Act itself. Thus unless Section 14 permits
judicial intervention in the case of a bias being made out against the
arbitrator, the petition on the said ground shall not lie.
28. I have already in Sharma Enterprises v. National Building
MANU/DE/1238/2008, held that Section 5 of the 1940 Act as
interpreted in Panchu Gopal Bose (supra) finds place in the form of
Section 14 of the 1996 Act. There can be no other interpretation of
the power given to the Court to terminate the mandate of the
arbitrator when the arbitrator de jure is unable to perform this
function. The de jure impossibility can be nothing but impossibility in
law. Bias vitiates the entire judicial/arbitration process and renders
the entire proceedings nugatory. Reference in this regard may also be
made to state of West Bengal v. Shivananda Pathak, (1998) 5 SCC
513, cited by the ASG, though in a different context, holding that all
judicial functionaries have necessarily to decide a case with an
unbiased mind; an essential requirement of a judicial adjudication is
that Judge is impartial and neutral and in a position to apply his mind
objectively—if he is predisposed or suffers from prejudices or has a
biased mind he disqualifies himself from acting as a Judge. This
equally applies to arbitrators, as statutorily provided in Sections 12
and 13. In my opinion, if the arbitrator is biased, he is de jure unable
to perform his functions within the meaning of Section 14. Thus if the
Court without any detailed inquiry is able to reach a conclusion of
arbitrator for the reason of bias is unable to perform his functions, the
Court is empowered to, without requiring the parties to in spite of so
finding go through lengthy costly arbitration, hold that the mandate of
arbitrator stands terminated. However, the said power under Section
14 has to be exercised sparingly with great caution and on the same
parameters as laid down by Apex Court in SBP & Company v. Patel
Engineering Limited., (2005) 8 SCC 618, in relation to Section 11(6).
Only when from the facts there is no doubt that a clear case of bias is
made out, would the Court be entitled to interfere. Else it would be
best to leave it to be adjudicated at the stage of Section 34.
29. The next question is whether the party alleging bias can move a
petition under Section 14 without following the procedure in Sections
12 and 13 of the Act. Section 12(3) of the Act permits challenge by a
party to the arbitrator if circumstance exists that give rise to the
justifiable doubt as to his independence or impartiality. Sub-section
(4) permits a party who has participated in the appointment of the
arbitrator to challenge the authority of the said arbitrator also. Section
13 provides the procedure for such challenge in the absence of any
agreed procedure. No agreed procedure has been cited in the present
case and in the absence thereof, the petitioner who is challenging the
arbitrator was required to within 15 days of becoming aware of the
circumstances giving rise to justifiable doubts as to the independence
of the arbitrator was required to send a written statement of the
reasons for the challenge to the Arbitral Tribunal. No such thing has
been done in the present case. Of course, Sub-section (4) provides
that if the challenge is not successful, the Arbitral Tribunal will
proceed with the arbitration and Sub-section (5) provides that the
remedy of the aggrieved party would then be only under Section 34
of the Act.
34. I have also wondered as to whether Section 13(5) leads to an
inference that upon the challenge to the arbitrator under Section
O.M.P.(T) (COMM.) 125/2022                                                 Page 14 of 39
13(1) being unsuccessful, the only remedy is under Section 34 of
the Act inasmuch as Section 13(5) does not make any reference to
Section 14. However, if we are to hold so then we would be
rendering the de jure inability of the arbitrator to perform his
functions otiose. To me, the scheme of the Act appears to be that
the challenge has to be first made before the arbitrator in
accordance with the Section 13 of the Act and upon such challenge
being unsuccessful the challenging party has a remedy of either
waiting for the award and if against him to apply under Section 34
of the Act or to immediately after the challenge being unsuccessful
approach the Court under Section 14 of the Act. The Court when
so approached under Section 14 of the Act will have to decide
whether the case can be decided in a summary fashion. If so, and if
the Court finds that the case of de jure inability owing to bias is
established, the Court will terminate the mandate. On the contrary,
if the Court finds the challenge to be frivolous and vexatious, the
petition will be dismissed. But in cases where the Court is unable
to decide the question summarily, the Court would still dismiss the
petition reserving the right of the petitioner to take the requisite
plea under Section 34 of the Act. This is for the reason of the
difference in language in Section 14 and in Section 34 of the Act.
While Section 14 provides only for the Court deciding on the
termination of the mandate of the arbitrator, Section 34 permits the
party alleging bias to furnish proof in support thereof to the Court.
Section 34(2)(a) is identically worded as Section 48. The Apex
Court in relation to Section 48 has in Shin-Etsu Chemicals Co.
Ltd. v. Aksh Optifibre Ltd., (2005) 7 SCC 234 : AIR 2005 SC
3766, held that leading of evidence is permissible. Per contra,
Section 14 does not permit any opportunity to the petitioner to
furnish proof. Thus all complicated questions requiring may be
trial or appreciation of evidence in support of a plea of bias are to
be left open to decision under Section 34 of the Act.
34.1 therefore conclude that a party alleging bias is required to first
follow the procedure in Sections 12 and 13 and if unsuccessful has
choice of either waiting till the stage of Section 34 or if he feels
that bias can be summarily established or shown to the Court,
approach the Court immediately under Section 14, after the
challenge being unsuccessful, for the Court to render a decision.”
18.    Alcove Industries Ltd. which was noticed and approved in
National Highways Authority of India had while dealing with
O.M.P.(T) (COMM.) 125/2022                                            Page 15 of 39
the scheme underlying Sections 12, 13 and 14 of the Act entered
the following pertinent observations: -
“24. This means that the termination of the mandate of the
arbitrator upon the occurrence of any of the said contingencies is
automatic by sheer force of law, i.e. ipso jure. There may be cases
where there may be no scope at all for the parties to get into a
controversy with regard to the automatic termination of the mandate
of the arbitrator, such as, where he is declared to have become
insolvent or insane, and such determination has attained finality, or
where he may have suffered from such a debilitating diseases or
ailment which robs him of his mental faculties. However, there may
be cases where one party is of the view that the Arbitrator has ipso
jure lost his mandate, while the other contends that the mandate of
the arbitrator still subsists. When such a controversy arises, the same
is to be resolved by the court by virtue of section 14(2) of the Act,
which reads as under.
“14 (2) If a controversy remains concerning any of the
grounds referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (1), a party
may, unless otherwise agreed by the parties, apply to the
Court to decide on the termination of the mandate.”
25. Therefore, a petition under Section 14(2) of the Act, to
determine the issue as to whether the mandate of the arbitrator
stands terminated on the occurrence of one or more of the
contingencies contained in clauses (a) and (b) of Section 14(1) of
the act would be maintainable. While deciding a petition under
Section 14(2) of the Act, all that the court does is to declare whether
the termination of the mandate of the arbitrator ipso jure has taken
place or not. To that extent, the order of the court passed under
Section 14(2) of the Act is merely declaratory, and is not in the
nature of a mandatory or perpetual injunction to remove the
arbitrator or to restrain him from acting as an arbitrator. Removal of
an arbitrator postulates that the arbitrator is otherwise vested with
mandate to proceed to function as an arbitrator, but the Court, for
certain reasons, removes or dislodges him from that position. What
follows post that declaration is a different matter. If the Court finds
that the mandate of the Arbitrator stands terminated, it may or may
not proceed to supply the vacancy, depending on the facts and
circumstances of a particular case. However, merely because the
Court may in the facts of a given case declare that the mandate of
the existing Arbitrator stands terminated and thereafter proceeds to
fill up the vacancy, that would not tantamount to the removal of the
Arbitrator by the Court.
33. Similarly, in my view, it would not serve any meaningful
purpose to negate the rights of a party which are statutorily granted
under Section 14 of the Act, on account of the desire to see that the
arbitral proceedings are not allowed to be stalked or interfered with
at the behest of one of the parties during their progress. To deny
such a right would be in the teeth of the law. Of course, it would be
for the Court to evaluate in the facts of a given case whether there is
any merit in the petition or it is merely a delaying tactics on the part
of the petitioner.
37. The purpose of Section 14 is thus clearly to prevent an
Arbitrator, who has inter alia, become de jure or de facto unable to
perform his functions as an Arbitrator from dragging a party though
the process of a long wait or futile arbitration proceedings which
may adversely affect his rights or impose on him financial liability.
40. Section 12 of the Act casts a duty on the Arbitrator to disclose in
writing at the outset, such facts which may give rise to justifiable
doubts as to his independence or impartially. This obligation
continues throughout the arbitral proceedings i.e. whenever such
facts come into being during the arbitral proceedings. Therefore,
what the law stipulates as a disqualification to become or remain an
Arbitrator in a given dispute, is not the existence of actual bias, but
the existence of such facts and circumstances as are “likely to give
rise to justifiable doubts as to his independence and impartiality”.
An Arbitrator may be challenged only on limited grounds i.e. if
circumstances exist that give rise to justifiable doubts as to his
independence or impartiality or that he does not possess the
qualifications agreed to by the parties. Even this challenge is limited
only to such cases where the party raising the challenge who has
participated in the appointment of the Arbitrator becomes aware of
the grounds on which the challenge is made after the Arbitrator has
been appointed. Therefore, if a party was aware of such facts and
circumstances at the time of participating in the process of
appointment of the Arbitrator as would otherwise be considered
good enough to give rise to justifiable doubts as to the independence
or impartiality of the Arbitrator, that party is disentitled from
challenging the Arbitrator on the same ground. Moreover, the
challenge is required to be made within 15 days of the party learning
of the relevant circumstances. If the challenge is not made in a
timely manner, the same may fail as having being condoned and
waived on the ground of his acquiescence in the holding of further
proceedings.
41. The procedure for challenge to the authority of the arbitrator is
contained in Section 13. The Arbitrator is empowered to rule on this
issue. However, his decision (if he overrules the objection) is not
final and is open to judicial review by a competent Court in exercise
of the power conferred by Section 34 read with 13 (5) of the Act. No
doubt Section 13(4) states that if the challenge under the procedure
agreed upon by the parties or under the procedure prescribed by sub-
Section (2) is not successful, the arbitral Tribunal shall continue the
arbitral proceedings and make the arbitral award. What this means is
that the party challenging the Arbitrator cannot endlessly enter into a
dialogue or argument with the Arbitrator on the same issue and after
the said challenge is rejected by the Arbitrator, the Arbitrator shall
be entitled to proceed with the Arbitral proceedings and to make his
award. The party raising the challenge cannot validly refuse to
participate in the Arbitral proceedings and stall the same. Section
13(5) also shuts out a challenge to the determination of the
Arbitrator with regard to his competence and authority under
Section 13 as an interim award, lest the same is challenged under
Section 34 of the Act by the aggrieved party even before the
culmination of the arbitral proceedings into a final award on the
merits of the claims and counter claims, if any. One cannot read into
the said provision a limitation on the right of one or the other party
to move the Court under Section 14 of the Act on the ground that the
Arbitrator has become de jure and de facto to unable to perform his
functions. In that sense the Act does not contemplate an election of
one or the other remedy by the aggrieved party to choose between
the remedy under Sections 12 & 13 on one hand, and the remedy
under Section 14 on the other hand.
43. Applying the aforesaid guidelines in the present case, I am of the
view that there is no inconsistency between the remedies available
to a party under Sections 12 and 13 on the one hand and Section 14
on the other and the invocation of one remedy by a party does not
restrict that party from invoking the other remedy as well. In fact
these remedies appear to be constitute a single scheme, wherein the
aggrieved party would first be expected to challenge the arbitrator
under Sections 12 and 13, and if that fails, and the party is still
aggrieved, and can make out a case of de jure or de facto inability of
the Arbitrator to act, to move the Court under Section 14.”
19.    Apart from the aforenoted two decisions rendered by this
Court on the question, Mr. Ganguli also placed reliance upon the
following observations as appearing in the decision of the
O.M.P.(T) (COMM.) 125/2022                                               Page 18 of 39
Supreme Court in Swadesh Kumar Agarwal v. Dinesh Kumar
“20. Section 15 provides other grounds for termination of the
mandate of the arbitrator. It provides that in addition to the
circumstances referred to in Section 13 or Section 14, the mandate of
an arbitrator shall terminate (a) where he withdraws from office for
any reason; or (b) by or pursuant to an agreement of the parties.
Where the mandate of an arbitrator is terminated on the aforesaid
grounds mentioned in Sections 15(1)(a) and (b) in such a situation a
substitute arbitrator shall have to be appointed and that too, according
to the rules that were applicable to the appointment of the arbitrator
being replaced.
21. Therefore, on a conjoint reading of Sections 13, 14 and 15 of the
Act, if the challenge to the arbitrator is made on any of the grounds
mentioned in Section 12 of the Act, the party aggrieved has to submit
an appropriate application before the Arbitral Tribunal itself.
However, in case of any of the eventualities mentioned in Section
14(1)(a) of the 1996 Act and the mandate of the arbitrator is sought to
be terminated on the ground that the sole arbitrator has become de
jure and/or de facto unable to perform his functions or for other
reasons fails to act without undue delay, the aggrieved party has to
approach the “court” concerned as defined under Section 2(1)(e) of
the 1996 Act. The court concerned has to adjudicate on whether, in
fact, the sole arbitrator/arbitrators has/have become de jure and de
facto unable to perform his/their functions or for other reasons he fails
to act without undue delay. The reason why such a dispute is to be
raised before the court is that eventualities mentioned in Section
14(1)(a) can be said to be a disqualification of the sole arbitrator and
therefore, such a dispute/controversy will have to be adjudicated
before the court concerned as provided under Section 14(2) of the
20.      Apart from the above, Mr. Ganguli, learned Senior Counsel
had taken the Court through the copious material and evidence
which stands placed before the Arbitral Tribunal as well as the
allegations which had been leveled by the petitioner in the petition
under Section 14 of the Act. Mr. Ganguli had addressed elaborate
submissions in support of the allegation of the petitioner that
O.M.P.(T) (COMM.) 125/2022                                                 Page 19 of 39
serious distrust and justifiable doubts existed with respect to the
independence and impartiality of the members of the Arbitral
Tribunal as would be evident from the detailed disclosures made
in the petition filed before them on 28 November 2022.
21.    It was then submitted that the majority members of the
Arbitral Tribunal have in terms of the communication of 01
December 2022 virtually rejected the challenge as laid and thus
the petition as preferred before it has clearly rendered otiose and
that in any case calling upon the members of the Arbitral Tribunal
to formally rule on that application would be a “useless
formality”.
22.    Mr. Ganguli laid stress upon the following observations as
appearing in the aforenoted communication in order to buttress the
aforesaid contention:-
“3. The Respondent's Application concludes with its
submission that the mandate of the majority of the Tribunal
stands terminated in accordance with section 14 by reasons of
the facts and circumstances set out in the Application. The
Claimants' contention is that the Application is misconceived
and without effect. I should state that Sir Bernard and I
(subject to argument) do not accept the Respondent's
allegation that we are "explicitly biased" - or lack
independence and impartiality in any way.
4. By the Tribunal's communication dated 29 November 2022,
in conformity with successive Procedural Orders and
correspondence appointing and fixing 10.30 am on Monday 5
December 2022 at the Taj Palace Hotel, New Delhi, as the
time and date and venue of the commencement of the final
hearing on the merits of this arbitration, the Tribunal referred
to that hearing and the necessary preparations for it. That date
and time remain unchanged. They have not been altered by
any order of the Tribunal or by any other lawful order.
Accordingly, it remains at present the duty of all concerned,
O.M.P.(T) (COMM.) 125/2022                                         Page 20 of 39
including the Parties and their advocates (and in due course
the witnesses), to attend in fulfilment of their respective
obligations to the arbitration and to any additional orders that
the Tribunal may make.
5. It is clear from the foregoing correspondence that a
difference has arisen between the Parties to the arbitration as
to the Respondent's Application. In accordance with the
obligation of procedural fairness including duties to hear both
sides, the Tribunal will receive any submissions from the
Parties, including any applications for relief from the Tribunal,
which they might wish to make concerning the Respondent's
Application (seeing that the Application itself makes no
request for relief) before proceeding to the opening
submissions of the Parties on the merits of the case. The
Parties and their advocates should be prepared for any such
submissions or applications. It may be hoped that proceeding
in this way will assist both sides in the observance of their
duties.”
23.    While the Court acknowledges the elaborate submissions
which were addressed in this respect and the asserted prejudice
caused to the petitioner in light of the procedural orders passed by
the Tribunal from time to time, it is of the considered opinion that
those issues and an evaluation thereof would have to necessarily
be deferred and await the determination of the preliminary
objection     which stands           raised.   The Court thus proceeds
accordingly.
24.    The challenge which stands raised would have to be
evaluated in the backdrop of the provisions contained in Sections
12 to 14 of the Act. Those provisions are extracted hereinbelow: -
“12. Grounds for challenge.— [(1) When a person is
approached in connection with his possible appointment as an
arbitrator, he shall disclose in writing any circumstances,—
(a) such as the existence either direct or indirect, of any
past or present relationship with or interest in any
O.M.P.(T) (COMM.) 125/2022                                             Page 21 of 39
of the parties or in relation to the subject-matter in
dispute, whether financial, business, professional or
other kind, which is likely to give rise to justifiable
doubts as to his independence or impartiality; and
(b) which are likely to affect his ability to devote
sufficient time to the arbitration and in particular
his ability to complete the entire arbitration within a
period of twelve months.
Explanation1.—The grounds stated in the Fifth Schedule shall
guide in determining whether circumstances exist which give
rise to justifiable doubts as to the independence or impartiality
of an arbitrator.
Explanation 2.—The disclosure shall be made by such person
in the form specified in the Sixth Schedule.]
(3) An arbitrator may be challenged only if—
(a) circumstances exist that give rise to justifiable
doubts as to his independence or impartiality,
(b) he does not possess the qualifications agreed to by
the parties.
(4) A party may challenge an arbitrator appointed by
him, or in whose appointment he has participated, only for
reasons of which he becomes aware after the appointment has
been made.
[(5) Notwithstanding any prior agreement to the
contrary, any person whose relationship, with the parties or
counsel or the subject-matter of the dispute, falls under any of
the categories specified in the Seventh Schedule shall be
ineligible to be appointed as an arbitrator:
Provided that parties may, subsequent to disputes
having arisen between them, waive the applicability of this
sub-section by an express agreement in writing.]
13. Challenge procedure.—(1) Subject to sub-section (4), the
parties are free to agree on a procedure for challenging an
arbitrator.
(2) Failing any agreement referred to in sub-section (1),
a party who intends to challenge an arbitrator shall, within
fifteen days after becoming aware of the constitution of the
arbitral tribunal or after becoming aware of any circumstances
O.M.P.(T) (COMM.) 125/2022                                            Page 22 of 39
referred to in sub-section(3) of section 12, send a written
statement of the reasons for the challenge to the arbitral
tribunal.
(3) Unless the arbitrator challenged under sub-section
(2) withdraws from his office or the other party agrees to the
challenge, the arbitral tribunal shall decide on the challenge.
(4) If a challenge under any procedure agreed upon by
the parties or under the procedure under subsection (2) is not
successful, the arbitral tribunal shall continue the arbitral
proceedings and make an arbitral award.
(5) Where an arbitral award is made under sub-section
(4), the party challenging the arbitrator may make an
application for setting aside such an arbitral award in
accordance with section 34.
(6) Where an arbitral award is set aside on an
application made under sub-section (5), the Court may decide
as to whether the arbitrator who is challenged is entitled to any
fees.
14. Failure or impossibility to act.—(1) [The mandate of an
arbitrator shall terminate and he shall be substituted by another
(a) he becomes de jure or de facto unable to perform his
functions or for other reasons fails to act without undue
(b)     he withdraws from his office or the parties agree
to the termination of his mandate.
(2) If a controversy remains concerning any of the
grounds referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (1), a party
may, unless otherwise agreed by the parties, apply to the Court
to decide on the termination of the mandate.
(3) If, under this section or sub-section (3) of section
13, an arbitrator withdraws from his office or a party agrees to
the termination of the mandate of an arbitrator, it shall not
imply acceptance of the validity of any ground referred to in
this section or sub-section(3) of section 12.”
25.    Section 12(1) mandates that where a person is approached in
connection with his possible appointment as an arbitrator, he shall
disclose in writing any circumstances which amongst others are
O.M.P.(T) (COMM.) 125/2022                                           Page 23 of 39
likely to give rise to justifiable doubts and apprehensions as to his
independence or impartiality.            In terms of sub-section (3) of
Section 12, the jurisdiction of an arbitrator may be challenged by
a party, if circumstances exist and give rise to justifiable doubts as
to his independence or impartiality. In terms of Explanation 1
which stands placed in Section 12(1), the grounds stated and set
out in the Fifth Schedule are to act as a guide for determining the
aforesaid. Explanation 1 is couched in mandatory terms and uses
the expression “shall guide in determining….”.
26.    The challenge procedure where such an objection is taken is
then specified and set out in Section 13. Dealing specifically with
a challenge which is referable to Section 12(3) of the Act, Section
13(2) stipulates that a party who intends to challenge an arbitrator
shall send a written statement of reasons for challenge to the
Arbitral Tribunal. Upon receipt of that statement, it would be
open for an arbitrator to recuse or withdraw from the arbitral
proceedings. However, the contingency where an arbitrator fails
or refuses to withdraw is one which is duly conceived of under the
Act. Section 13(3) prescribes that if the arbitrator fails to
withdraw, the Arbitral Tribunal shall decide on the challenge. In
terms of Section 13(4) if that challenge fails, the Arbitral Tribunal
would be entitled in law to continue the proceedings and make an
award.
27.    On a due consideration of the relevant statutory provisions
which would govern the question which stands posited, the Court
O.M.P.(T) (COMM.) 125/2022                                     Page 24 of 39
is of the view that while Sections 12, 13 and 14 of the Act, the trinity
provisions, may be recognised as constituting a composite statutory
scheme dealing with the subject of challenge to an arbitrator and
termination of mandate, they clearly appear to construct separate
causeways for a challenge that may be laid. While Sections 12 and 13
lay down the procedure for challenges which must mandatorily be
mounted before the Arbitral Tribunal, Section 14 speaks of challenges
that may be instituted before a court as defined under the Act.
28.    Section 12 relates to a challenge to the jurisdiction of an
arbitrator that may be based either on the Fifth or the Seventh
Schedule. Insofar as the question of “justifiable doubts” is concerned,
the same is statutorily ordained to draw color from the provisions
incorporated in the Fifth Schedule. The Seventh Schedule on the other
hand lists out the disqualifications which are incurable and non-
derogable except where parties expressly concur on a waiver.
29.    A careful reading of the Seventh Schedule would establish that
it does not deal with the aspect of justifiable doubts relating to
independence or impartiality that may arise by virtue of the conduct of
an arbitrator or the manner in which proceedings may be conducted by
the Arbitral Tribunal at all. It deals with disqualification by virtue of
the arbitrator‟s relationship with parties, counsel or the dispute and
extending to situations where the arbitrator may be said to have a
direct or indirect interest in the dispute. These non derogable
disqualifications are predetermined and decreed by law.
O.M.P.(T) (COMM.) 125/2022                                     Page 25 of 39
30.    On a conjoint reading of Sections 12, 13 and 14 of the Act, the
Court is of the considered opinion that it is the disqualifications set out
in the Seventh Schedule alone which can be recognised as being the
de jure disqualifications under the Act. De jure, as is well settled,
would mean something stipulated or prescribed by law or according to
law.    It   would     thus    include    disqualifications which    would
automatically render an arbitrator ineligible to be either appointed or
to continue. These disqualifications would inevitably result in the
termination of mandate.
31.    Bias as distinct from the above, would be an issue which would
have to axiomatically be established in fact. An allegation of bias
would have to be alleged and proven. Viewed in that light, it is
manifest that it would clearly fall outside the pale of a de jure
disqualification. The view taken by the Court stands fortified from a
reading of Section 12(3) of the Act which mandates a party
establishing that “circumstances exist” giving rise to a justifiable
doubt with respect to the independence or impartiality of an arbitrator.
32.    The Court for the following additional reasons finds itself
unable to countenance the submission that a bias allegation would fall
within the ambit of Section 14(1)(a) of the Act. As has been noticed
above, the subject of bias and justifiable doubt is specifically dealt
with in Section 12. If the Court were to accord an interpretation upon
Sections 12 and 14 and treat such an allegation as falling within an
overlap of the aforesaid provisions, it would not only be contrary to
O.M.P.(T) (COMM.) 125/2022                                       Page 26 of 39
well settled rules of interpretation but would also clearly violate the
evident scheme and intent of the Legislature.
33.    A Section 12(3) challenge is guided by the provisions of
Section 13. Sub-sections (4) and (5) thereof provide for the
consequences which would ensue once such a challenge fails. They
mandate that in such an eventuality, the proceedings before the
Arbitral Tribunal would have to be continued and terminate only once
an award is rendered. They perceive of the party challenging the
mandate of an arbitrator to await the making of an award and only
then assailing the same in accordance with Section 34. The provision
does not contemplate a curial challenge being raised or pursued at the
intermediate stage. Recognising the right to raise such a challenge at
the interim stage by recourse to Section 14(1)(a) would clearly be
contrary to the evident legislative intent and resolve to debar such a
recourse.
34.    The expression de jure as occurring in Section 14 would
necessarily have to be construed as conditions which are
recognized and so ordained by law.                The subject of bias and
justifiable doubts is clearly one which is specifically provisioned
for in Section 12. Once that subject stands taken note of by the
legislature in the said provision, it would be tenuous to hold an
allegation of bias as being one which would be triable in a Section
14 proceeding also. Sections 12 and 13 when read together thus
appear to constitute a complete and an independent code for the
purposes of trial of such an allegation. They clearly mandate and
O.M.P.(T) (COMM.) 125/2022                                       Page 27 of 39
oblige the Arbitral Tribunal to examine whether circumstances
exist that give rise to justifiable doubts. The factual enquiry which
would necessarily have to be undertaken in connection with the
aforesaid clearly appears to be controlled and governed by
Sections 12 and 13 exclusively. Once the aforesaid issue stands
governed by the aforenoted two provisions, it would be incorrect
to recognize an identical enquiry being undertaken by the court
under Section 14. This would not only fall foul of the principles
enunciated in HRD Corporation and Bharat Broadband, it
would also appear to be contrary to the legislative intent enshrined
in sub-sections (3), (4) and (5) of Section 13.
35.    The aforesaid conclusions of the Court would also be in
consonance with the decisions of the Supreme Court which were
commended for the consideration of the Court by Mr. Salve. The
Supreme Court in HRD Corporation observed that once an
arbitrator becomes ineligible by falling in any one of the
categories specified in the Seventh Schedule, he would in turn be
liable to be viewed as having become de jure unable to perform
his functions. This since in law [Section 12(5) and the Seventh
Schedule] he is to be regarded as ineligible. HRD Corporation
goes on to explain that once an arbitrator suffers ineligibility in
terms of Section 12(5) read with the Seventh Schedule, it would
clearly lack the inherent jurisdiction to proceed any further and in
such a situation his mandate would be liable to be terminated in
accordance with Section 14 of the Act. The Supreme Court in
HRD Corporation further went on to pertinently observe that
O.M.P.(T) (COMM.) 125/2022                                  Page 28 of 39
where a challenge be on grounds set out in the Fifth Schedule and
relate to justifiable doubts with respect to the arbitrator‟s
independence or impartiality, those issues would have to be
determined in accordance with the challenge procedure set out in
Section 13. It is this dichotomy between the challenges which may
be raised on the basis of the Fifth and Seventh Schedules which
were highlighted and underlined in HRD Corporation.
36.    The Court notes that the Supreme Court in the aforesaid
decision went on to further hold that where a challenge based on
the grounds of independence or impartiality fails, the Tribunal
“must then continue the arbitral proceedings under Section 13(4)
and make an award. It is only after such award is made, that the
party challenging the arbitrator's appointment on grounds
contained in the Fifth Schedule may make an application for
setting aside the arbitral award in accordance with Section 34 on
the aforesaid grounds.”
37.    HRD Corporation is thus an incontestable authority for the
proposition that challenges which may be raised with respect to
justifiable cause relating to impartiality or independence would
have to necessarily follow the route prescribed by Sections 12 and
13 of the Act.        The aforesaid authority also exposits the legal
position that a disqualification with which an arbitrator may be
visited and which would fall within the ambit of the grounds set
out in the Seventh Schedule would have to be considered
O.M.P.(T) (COMM.) 125/2022                                  Page 29 of 39
exclusively by the court as defined under the Act and under
38.    The aforesaid view as expressed in HRD Corporation finds
resonance in the principles enunciated in Bharat Broadband. In
the aforesaid decision too, a clear distinction was recognised to
exist between an ineligibility which may be incurred by virtue of
Section 12(5) of the Act read with the Seventh Schedule and the
issue of a justifiable doubt as to the independence or impartiality
of an arbitrator. The de jure disqualification thus clearly appears
to have been recognized to be one which would be relatable to
Section 12(5) and the Seventh Schedule alone.
39.    While the decisions rendered by this Court in National
Highways Authority of India and Alcove Industries Ltd. appear
to have taken the view that an allegation of bias would also fall
within the ambit of a de jure inability to perform, the Court notes
that the principles laid down in the aforenoted two decisions
would have to necessarily yield and be appreciated bearing in
mind the two subsequent decisions handed down by the Supreme
Court in HRD Corporation and Bharat Broadband.
40.    Additionally, it would be pertinent to note that both
National Highways Authority of India as well as Alcove
Industries Ltd. came to be rendered prior to the insertion of
Section 12(5) and the Seventh Schedule in the Act. The
correctness of the view expressed in those two decisions would
also have to be considered and weighed in light of the subsequent
O.M.P.(T) (COMM.) 125/2022                                  Page 30 of 39
decision rendered by a Division Bench of this Court in
which though not cited by parties, clearly appears to set the issue
at rest insofar as precedents delivered by this Court on the
question are concerned. The issue which arose for consideration in
Progressive Career Academy was culled out by the Division
“The question in this bunch of Appeals concerns the legal
proprietary of judicial directions for the removal of an
arbitrator even before the publishing of an Award. Several
judgments of our esteemed Single Benches have been cited
before us, a perusal of which manifests the existence of a
polarity of opinion. On one side of the watershed is the view
that assertions as to the de jure or de facto incompetence of the
Arbitral Tribunal must immediately be addressed by the Court,
and in deserving cases remedied, whilst on the other side is the
contrary view that the statutorily provided procedure
postulates an immediate remonstration but a deferred
assailment of the Award, inter alia on this ground, by way of
an invocation of Section 34 of the Arbitration & Conciliation
Act, 1996 (A&C Act for short).”
41.     Proceeding then to rule on whether curial challenges
relating to bias of an arbitrator could be entertained even before
an award is pronounced, the Division Bench held as follows: -
“10. In the present analysis of the law, we cannot concur with the
ratio of Interstate Constructions v. NPCC Limited, 2004 (3) R.A.J.
672 (Del) in which one of us (Vikramajit Sen, J.) had terminated the
authority of the Arbitrator keeping in mind the directions of the latter
requiring the claimants to travel from New Delhi to Andhra Pradesh
solely to carry out inspection of documents. Bias was found to
pervade the arbitral proceedings in that the Arbitrator was manifestly
functioning to the detriment of the Claimant and to the advantage of
the party who had appointed him. This dialectic appears to have
found favour with another learned Single Judge in Indira
Rai v. Vatika Plantations (P) Ltd., 127 (2006) DLT 646. The mandate
of the Arbitrator was accordingly terminated and another Arbitrator
was appointed in his stead. Our Learned Brother had also drawn
support from the decision of the Division Bench in Sushil Kumar
Raut v. Hotel Marina, 121 (2005) DLT 433. While doing so, the
Bench was cautious to record that its action may not be technically or
strictly in tune with the provisions of the Act. The Division Bench
considered it necessary to „break the impasse‟ and accordingly
removed the existing arbitrator and appointed a third person as the
Arbitrator. In National Highways Authority of India v. K.K. Sarin,
159 (2009) DLT 314, a Single Bench of this Court (Rajiv Sahai
Endlaw, J.) has concluded that the „party alleging bias is required to
first follow the procedure in Sections 12 and 13 and if unsuccessful
has choice of either waiting till the stage of Section 34 or if he feels
that bias can be summarily established or shown to the Court,
approach the Court immediately under Section 14, after the challenge
being unsuccessful, for the Court to render a decision‟. In Shyam
Telecom Ltd. v. Arm Ltd., 113 (2004) DLT 778 a Single Bench (R.C.
Jain, J.) has concluded that Section 14(2) of the Act empowers the
Court to decide the question of termination of the mandate if a
controversy arises concerning the termination of the Arbitrator's
mandate on one or the other grounds.
14. There are a few judgments which clearly and unequivocally hold
that the Applications filed in a Court of Law assailing arbitral
proceedings on the grounds of bias, thus making out a case of de jure
and de facto failure to perform arbitral functions, are not maintainable
at the pre Award stage. The decisions brought to our notice laid
before us emanating from the High Court of Delhi are those of S.N.
Dhingra, J. in Neeru Walia v. Inderbir Singh Uppal, 160 (2009) DLT
55 and of Aruna Suresh J. in Ahluwalia Contracts (India)
Ltd. v. Housing and Urban Development Corporation, 2008 (100)
DRJ 461. We have already noted Pinaki Das Gupta where Mukul
Mudgal, J. has concluded that “de jure and de facto, the authority of
the Arbitrator cannot be questioned under Section 14”. This is also
the position in Newton Engineering and Chemicals Ltd. v. Indian Oil
Corporation Ltd., where Reva Khetrapal, J. expressed the view that
where the Arbitrator does not recuse from the proceedings, the Award
must be published and the challenge under Section 34 would
thereafter provide complete remedy.
16. On a reading of Section 13(5), the legislative intent becomes
amply clear that Parliament did not want to clothe the Courts with the
power to annul an Arbitral Tribunal on the ground of bias at an
intermediate stage. The Act enjoins the immediate articulation of a
challenge to the authority of an arbitrator on the ground of bias before
the Tribunal itself, and thereafter ordains that the adjudication of this
O.M.P.(T) (COMM.) 125/2022                                               Page 32 of 39
challenge must be raised as an objection under Section 34 of the Act.
Courts have to give full expression and efficacy to the words of the
Parliament especially where they are unambiguous and unequivocal.
The golden rule of interpretation requires Courts to impart a literal
interpretation and not to deviate therefrom unless such exercise would
result in absurdity. In Raghunath Rai Bareja v. Punjab National
Bank, (2007) 2 SCC 230, the Hon'ble Supreme Court, while
emphasizing on the rule of literal interpretation, held as under:
40. It may be mentioned in this connection that the first and the
foremost principle of interpretation of a statute in every system
of interpretation is the literal rule of interpretation. The other
rules of interpretation e.g. the mischief rule, purposive
interpretation, etc. can only be resorted to when the plain
words of a statute are ambiguous or lead to no intelligible
results or if read literally would nullify the very object of the
statute. Where the words of a statute are absolutely clear and
unambiguous, recourse cannot be had to the principles of
interpretation other than the literal rule, vide Swedish Match
AB v. Securities and Exchange Board of India, (2004) 11 SCC
641 : AIR 2004 SC 4219. As held in Prakash Nath
Khanna v. CIT, (2004) 9 SCC 686, the language employed in a
statute is the determinative factor of the legislative intent. The
legislature is presumed to have made no mistake. The
presumption is that it intended to say what it has said.
Assuming there is a defect or an omission in the words used by
the legislature, the court cannot correct or make up the
deficiency, especially when a literal reading thereof produces
an intelligible result, vide Delhi Financial Corpn. v. Rajiv
Anand, (2004) 11 SCC 625. Where the legislative intent is
clear from the language, the court should give effect to it,
vide Govt. of A.P. v. Road Rollers Owners Welfare Assn.,
(2004) 6 SCC 210and the court should not seek to amend the
law in the garb of interpretation.
41. As stated by Justice Frankfurter of the US Supreme Court
(see “Of Law & Men: Papers and Addresses of Felix
“Even within their area of choice the courts are not at
large. They are confined by the nature and scope of the
judicial function in its particular exercise in the field of
interpretation. They are under the constraints imposed
by the judicial function in our democratic society. As a
matter of verbal recognition certainly, no one will
gainsay that the function in construing a statute is to
ascertain the meaning of words used by the legislature.
O.M.P.(T) (COMM.) 125/2022                                                 Page 33 of 39
To go beyond it is to usurp a power which our
democracy has lodged in its elected legislature. The
great judges have constantly admonished their brethren
of the need for discipline in observing the limitations. A
judge must not rewrite a statute, neither to enlarge nor
to contract it. Whatever temptations the statesmanship
of policy-making might wisely suggest, construction
must eschew interpolation and evisceration. He must
not read in by way of creation. He must not read out
except to avoid patent non-sense or internal
contradiction.”
42. As observed by Lord Cranworth in Gundry v. Pinniger,
“To adhere as closely as possible to the literal meaning
of the words used', is a cardinal rule from which if we
depart we launch into a sea of difficulties which it is not
easy to fathom.”
43. In other words, once we depart from the literal rule, then any
number of interpretations can be put to a statutory provision,
each judge having a free play to put his own interpretation as he
likes. This would be destructive of judicial discipline, and also
the basic principle in a democracy that it is not for the Judge to
legislate as that is the task of the elected representatives of the
people. Even if the literal interpretation results in hardship or
inconvenience, it has to be followed (see G.P. Singh's Principles
of Statutory Interpretations, 9th Edn., pp. 45-49). Hence
departure from the literal rule should only be done in very rare
cases, and ordinarily there should be judicial restraint in this
connection.
44. As the Privy Council observed (per Viscount Simonds,
“Again and again, this Board has insisted that in
construing enacted words we are not concerned with the
policy involved or with the results, injurious or
otherwise, which may follow from giving effect to the
language used.” (See King Emperor v. Benoari Lal
Sarma, (1944-1945) 72 IA 57 : AIR 1945 PC 48, AIR at
p. 53.)
45. As observed by this Court in CIT v. Keshab Chandra
Mandal, 1950 SCC 205 : AIR 1950 SC 265 : (AIR p. 270, para
O.M.P.(T) (COMM.) 125/2022                                                Page 34 of 39
“Hardship or inconvenience cannot alter the meaning of
the language employed by the legislature if such
meaning is clear on the face of the statute….”
46. The rules of interpretation other than the literal rule would
come into play only if there is any doubt with regard to the
express language used or if the plain meaning would lead to an
absurdity. Where the words are unequivocal, there is no scope
for importing any rule of interpretation vide Pandian Chemicals
Ltd. v. CIT, (2003) 5 SCC 590.
47. It is only where the provisions of a statute are ambiguous
that the court can depart from a literal or strict construction
vide Nasiruddin v. Sita Ram Agarwal, (2003) 2 SCC 577 : AIR
2003 SC 1543. Where the words of a statute are plain and
unambiguous effect must be given to them vide Bhaiji v. Sub-
48. No doubt in some exceptional cases departure can be made
from the literal rule of the interpretation e.g. by adopting a
purposive construction, Heydon's mischief rule, etc. but that
should only be done in very exceptional cases. Ordinarily, it is
not proper for the court to depart from the literal rule as that
would really be amending the law in the garb of interpretation,
which is not permissible vide J.P. Bansal v. State of Rajasthan,
AIR 2003 SC 1405, State of Jharkhand v. Govind Singh,
349. It is for the legislature to amend the law and not the court
vide State of Jharkhand v. Govind Singh (supra). In Jinia
Keotin v. Kumar Sitaram Manjhi, (2003) 1 SCC 730 this Court
observed (SCC p. 733, para 5) that the court cannot legislate
under the garb of interpretation. Hence there should be judicial
restraint in this connection, and the temptation to do judicial
legislation should be eschewed by the courts. In fact, judicial
legislation is an oxymoron.
20. A comparison of the provisions dealing with the challenge to the
arbitrator's authority in the A&C Act and the UNCITRAL Model
Law discloses that there are unnecessary and cosmetic differences in
these provisions, except for one significant and far-reaching
difference. The UNCITRAL Model Law, in Article 13(3), explicitly
enables the party challenging the decision of the Arbitral Tribunal to
approach the Court on the subject of bias or impartiality of the
Arbitral Tribunal. However, after making provisions for a challenge
to the verdict of Arbitral Tribunal on the aspect of bias, the
UNCITRAL Model Law prohibits any further Appeal. It seems to us,
therefore, that there is no room for debate that the Indian Parliament
O.M.P.(T) (COMM.) 125/2022                                               Page 35 of 39
did not want curial interference at an interlocutory stage of the
arbitral proceedings on perceived grounds of alleged bias. In fact,
Section 13(5) of the A&C Act indicates that if a challenge has been
made within fifteen days of the concerned party becoming aware of
the constitution of the Arbitral Tribunal or within fifteen days from
such party becoming aware of any circumstances pointing towards
impartiality or independence of the Arbitral Tribunal, a challenge on
this score is possible in the form of Objections to the Final Award
under Section 34 of the A&C Act. Indeed, this is a significant and
sufficient indicator of Parliament's resolve not to brook any
interference by the Court till after the publication of the Award.
Indian Law is palpably different also to the English, Australia and
Canadian Arbitration Law. This difference makes the words of Lord
Halsbury in Eastman Photographic Materials Co. all the more pithy
and poignant.”
42.    The Court in Progressive Career Academy proceeded to
record its conclusions as follows: -
“21. In this analysis, we must immediately observe that the
approach taken by one of us (Vikramajit Sen, J.) in Interstate
Constructions is not correct as it transgresses and infracts the
provisions of the A&C Act. Learned Single Benches have
interfered and removed arbitrators obviously on pragmatic
considerations, viz. the futility and idleness of pursuing arbitral
proceedings despite lack of faith therein because of justifiable
doubts as to the independence or impartiality of the arbitrators.
Clearly, Parliament has also proceeded on the compelling
expediency and advisability of expeditious conclusion of these
proceedings. Relief against possible mischief has been provided by
making clarification in Section 13(5) that apart from the challenges
enumerated in Section 13(4), an assault on the independence or
impartiality of the Arbitral Tribunal is permissible by way of filing
Objections on this aspect after the publishing of the Award. We,
therefore, affirm the approach in Pinaki Das Gupta, Neeru Walia,
Ahluwalia Contracts (India) Ltd. and Newton Engineering and
Chemicals Ltd.. We are of the opinion that the Single Benches who
interfered with the progress of the proceedings of the Arbitral
Tribunal in the pre-Award stage fell in error. Humans often fall
prey to suspicions which may be proved to be ill-founded on the
publication of an Award. There is compelling wisdom in
Parliament's decision to allow adjudication on grounds of bias, lack
of independence or impartiality of the Tribunal only on the
culmination of the arbitral proceedings.”
O.M.P.(T) (COMM.) 125/2022                                              Page 36 of 39
43.    It may be additionally noted that Swadesh Kumar Agarwal
clearly does not appear to hold or lay down a principle which may
be possibly viewed as being contrary to HRD Corporation and
Bharat Broadband.             It would be pertinent to note that the
Supreme Court even in Swadesh Kumar Agarwal while
elucidating on the ambit of Sections 13, 14 and 15 of the Act had
categorically observed that if the challenge be on any of the
grounds which are mentioned in Section 12, the party aggrieved
would have to submit a petition before the Arbitral Tribunal itself.
The learned Judges of the Court went on to observe that in the
case of eventualities contemplated by Section 14(1)(a) alone
would a party be entitled to approach the concerned court as
defined in Section 2(1)(e) of the Act. Thus, Swadesh Kumar
Agarwal cannot possibly be read as including the subject of bias
or justifiable doubts with respect to independence and impartiality
as falling within the scope of Section 14(1)(a).
44.    The Court also finds itself unable to sustain the submission of
Mr. Ganguly that compelling a party to proceed in the arbitration even
though it may have lost faith in its members would not only be a
useless formality but also cause grave prejudice for the following
reasons. It may at the outset be noted that the provisions of the Act
leave no space of ambiguity with respect to the procedure to be
adopted once a challenge on the ground of bias fails before the
Arbitral Tribunal. In fact, and to the contrary, the Act unequivocally
commands the parties to proceed further till such time as an award is
made. The right to challenge a ruling by the Arbitral Tribunal on the
O.M.P.(T) (COMM.) 125/2022                                  Page 37 of 39
question of justifiable doubt thus stands statutorily deferred till such
time as the award is rendered. The Court draws sustenance for the
aforesaid conclusion also from the explicit enunciation of the legal
position by the Division Bench of the Court in Progressive Career
Academy. The Court is thus of the firm opinion that it would be
wholly impermissible for it to either create or countenance such a
right by interpreting Section 14(1)(a) in the manner as suggested by
the petitioner.
45.    The fact that the Arbitral Tribunal stands statutorily empowered
to deal with such a challenge also does not appear to be an
incongruous or incompatible facet when one bears in mind the
principles of kompetenz-kompetenz which inform Section 16 of the
Act. In fact, the power of the Arbitral Tribunal to rule on its own
jurisdiction constitutes a key stone of the Act and the UNCITRAL
Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration (1985)
provisions which have been adopted.
46.    The Court fails to find any merit in the submission of Mr.
Ganguly that the members of the Arbitral Tribunal have already
prejudged the entire issue and that relegating the petitioner to pursue
the pending application would be an empty formality for the following
reasons. The Court notes that the Chairman and the other member of
the Arbitral Tribunal have unequivocally recorded that they, “subject
to argument”, do not accept the allegations as levelled by the
petitioner. In paragraph 3 of that communication the members have
proceeded to observe that differences appear to have arisen between
the parties with respect to the application made by the petitioner here.
O.M.P.(T) (COMM.) 125/2022                                     Page 38 of 39
It was in that backdrop that the Tribunal had placed the matter for
consideration of submissions of respective parties on the challenge
that stood raised and before commencing the process of hearing on
merits. The Court thus finds itself unable to read or construe that
communication as indicative of the members having prejudged the
challenge raised by the petitioner. In fact, the members clearly appear
to have acted in accord with the challenge procedure which stands
engrafted in Sections 12 and 13 of the Act.
47.    Accordingly, and for all the aforesaid reasons, the preliminary
objection is upheld. The petition shall consequently stand dismissed as
being not maintainable.
48.    The present order, however, shall not preclude the petitioner
from pursuing its application dated 28 November 2022 preferred
before the Arbitral Tribunal. While that application is titled as having
been preferred under Section 14 of the Act, since an application under
the aforenoted provision can only be presented before a court as
defined, it would be open for the petitioner to amend the nomenclature
of the said application, if so chosen and advised.
49.    The Court further clarifies that it has neither considered nor
ruled upon the allegations that have been levelled by the petitioner
against the members of the Arbitral Tribunal. All contentions of
respective parties in that respect are kept open.
50.    Order dasti.