This appeal challenges the final judgment and order dated
11-09-2017   passed   by   the    High   Court  of   Madhya    Pradesh,
Principal Seat at Jabalpur in MCRC No. 1395/2016.
The   appellant    No.1    was   arrested   on   24.12.2013    in
connection with crime registered pursuant to FIR No.22/2013
lodged with STF/ATS Police Station, District Bhopal in respect
of offences punishable under Sections 307, 34, 467, 468, 481
and 120-B of IPC, Sections 25 and 27 of the Indian Arms Act,
Sections   3,10,13,15,18,19,20,23,38       and 39   of   the   Unlawful
Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (“UAPA” for short).
Nos.2 to 4 were also arrested around the same
time.
On  20th  March,  2014   while   dealing  with   an   application
moved on behalf of the Investigating Machinery under Section
43-D(2)(b) of the UAPA, appropriate extension was granted by
On  completion      of   90   days   of   their   actual   custody,
applications on behalf of appellants were moved under Section
167(2) of Code of Criminal Procedure (“the Code” for short)
seeking bail on the ground that no charge-sheet was filed by
the Investigating Agency within 90 days.
Said applications under Section 167(2) of the Code having
been   rejected     by   the    Court     of   CJM,    Bhopal,   Revision
Applications were preferred by the appellants which were also
rejected   by   the    Sessions   Court,     Bhopal   vide   order   dated
The matter was carried further by filing M.Cr.C. No. 1396
of 2016 under Section 482 of the Code.
The High Court by its judgment which is presently under
challenge rejected the prayer.           It was observed by the High
Court that since the CJM, Bhopal had passed an appropriate
order  on   20th   March,    2014,   the    period   available   for   the
Investigating    Machinery    to  complete     the  investigation    stood
extended to 180 days and as such the applications preferred by
the  appellants    under   Section    167(2)    of  the   Code  were   not
maintainable and that the appellants were not entitled to the
relief as prayed for.
Considering     the  importance    of  the  matter,    this  Court
requested Mr. S.V. Raju, learned ASG to assist this Court.
Appearing     for   the   appellants,    Mr.    Siddhartha   Dave,
learned Senior Advocate has relied upon the decision of this
Court in Bikramjit Singh vs. State of Punjab1.            It is submitted
that para 26 of the decision completely covers the issue and
that the extension granted in the instant case by CJM, Bhopal
was    beyond     jurisdiction    and   would,   therefore,     be  of  no
consequence.
Para 26 of the decision of this Court in Bikramjit Singh
was to the following effect:
“26. Before the NIA Act was enacted, offences
under the UAPA were of two kinds — those with a
maximum imprisonment of over 7 years, and those
with a maximum imprisonment of 7 years and under.
Under the Code as applicable to offences against
other laws, offences having a maximum sentence
of 7 years and under are triable by the
Magistrate’s courts, whereas offences having a
maximum sentence of above 7 years are triable by
Courts   of   Session.    This   scheme   has   been
completely done away with by the NIA Act, 2008
as all Scheduled Offences i.e. all offences
under the UAPA, whether investigated by the
National    Investigation    Agency   or    by   the
investigating agencies of the State Government,
are to be tried exclusively by Special Courts set
up under that Act. In the absence of any
designated court by notification issued by
either the Central Government or the State
Government, the fallback is upon the Court of
Session alone. Thus, under the aforesaid scheme
what becomes clear is that so far as all offences
under the UAPA are concerned, the Magistrate’s
jurisdiction to extend time under the first
proviso in Section 43-D(2)(b) is non-existent,
“the Court” being either a Sessions Court, in the
absence of a notification specifying a Special
Court,or the   Special Court itself. The impugned
judgment in arriving at the contrary conclusion
is incorrect as it has missed Section 22(2) read
with Section 13 of the NIA Act. Also, the
impugned judgment has missed Section 16(1) of the
NIA Act which states that a Special Court may
take cognizance of any offence without the
accused being committed to it for trial, inter
alia, upon a police report of such facts.”
After   considering   various  provisions    of  the   relevant
statues, it was concluded that “so far as all offences under
the UAPA are concerned, the Magistrate’s jurisdiction to extend
time under the first proviso in Section 43-D (2)(b) is non-
Consequently, in so far as “Extension of time to complete
investigation”   is  concerned,    the  Magistrate    would   not  be
competent   to  consider   the  request   and  the   only   competent
authority to consider such request would be “the Court” as
specified in the proviso in Section 43-D (2)(b) of the UAPA.
In view of the law laid down by this Court, we accept the
plea raised by the appellants and hold them entitled to the
relief of default bail as prayed for.
The appeal is, therefore, allowed.
The appellants be produced before the concerned Trial
Court within three days from today and the Trial Court, shall
release them on bail subject to such conditions as the Trial
Court may deem appropriate to impose to ensure their presence
and participation in the pending trial.
We have been apprised that the trial has progressed to a
considerable length.   We, therefore, direct the Trial Court to
conclude the proceedings as early as possible.
With these observations, the instant criminal appeal is
In the end, we must express our sincere gratitude for the
assistance rendered by Mr. S.V. Raju, learned ASG.
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Crl.)   No(s).   7767/2018
(Arising out of impugned final judgment and order dated 11-09-2017
in MCRC No. 1395/2016 passed by the High Court Of M.P. Principal
Date : 07-09-2021 This petition was called on for hearing today.
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
Leave granted.
The appeal is allowed in terms of the signed order.
Pending applications, if any, shall stand disposed of.