1.       Rule. Rule made returnable forthwith and, with the consent
of the learned counsels for the parties, heard fnally.
2.       This petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India is
fled for a writ of habeas corpus to produce Master R, son of the
petitioner, who has been allegedly illegally kept away from the
petitioner by respondent No.2-the wife of the petitioner; and
immediate transfer of the custody of Master R to the petitioner.
3.       The petition arises in the backdrop of the following facts :
(a)    The petitioner is an actor. Respondent No.2 is
also an actress. The marriage between the petitioner
and respondent No.2 was solemnized on 13th July
2013. Respondent No.2 has a daughter by her
quondam husband. Master R was born to respondent
No.2 by the petitioner on 27th November 2016.
Respondent No.2 resides at 211, ‘A’ Wing, Kalpataru
Towers,    Kandivali   (East), Mumbai,      which    the
petitioner claimed to have shared with respondent
No.2 as a matrimonial home. The petitioner’s mother
has a fat in ‘B’ Wing of the same complex. The
petitioner now resides in the said fat of his mother.
(b)     The petitioner alleges that the respondent
No.2   designedly    separated  Master    R   from   the
petitioner by forcing him out of the respondent No.2’s
house for three months over a matrimonial dispute.
Respondent No.2 allegedly made an effort to take
Master R out of the country clandestinely by forging
travel documents.
(c)     Since respondent No.2,      according to the
petitioner, is extremely busy with her professional
commitments, respondent No.2 has not been able to
devote any time for the parenting and development of
Master R. In contrast, the petitioner decided, in the
year    2019,   not    to    accept   any    professional
commitment and devote his entire time, effort and
attention to bring-up Master R. With the escalation of
marital discord, respondent No.2 allegedly prevented
the petitioner from meeting Master R, jeopardizing
the willingness and happiness of Master R. When the
petitioner made efforts to meet Master R, respondent
No.2 retaliated by lodging false and motivated reports
against the petitioner with the police.
(d)     Respondent No.2 has been guilty of persistent
neglect of the parental and developmental needs of
Master R. Often Master R was left with the maids, to
be taken care of by them.
(e)     In the wake of the Pandemic, respondent No.2
and Master R got infected with Covid-19 virus. The
respondent No.2 sent Master R to the house of the
petitioner. The petitioner and his mother took care of
Master R and nursed him to good health. Master R
developed    an   extremely     thick  bond    with    the
petitioner. Master R refused to leave the house of the
petitioner and accompany respondent No.2. After
making disingenuous efforts, respondent No.2 took
away Master R surreptitiously.
(f)     The petitioner alleges that since 25th October
2020, respondent No.2 absconded with Master R. The
petitioner made frantic efforts to locate respondent
No.2 and Master R.         Since 12 th November 2020,
Master R has been missing from the house of
respondent No.2. He had no knowledge of the
whereabouts of Master R. The petitioner made several
attempts to contact respondent No.2. The petitioner
also made several complaints to police and other
authorities. Those attempts did not yield any result.
Hence, the petitioner was constrained to invoke the
writ jurisdiction of this Court.
(g)     The petitioner has also sought immediate
transfer of the custody of Master R to him from
respondent No.2. In the circumstances of the case,
according to the petitioner, the welfare of the child
would be better served by immediate transfer of the
custody of the child.
4.       Pursuant to the notice issued by this Court, respondent No.2
appeared before the Court on 5 th January 2021. She volunteered to
allow the access of the child to the petitioner through video
conferencing for minimum 30 minutes from 6:00 p.m. to 6:30 p.m.
5.       An affdavit in reply is fled by respondent No.2. At the outset,
the tenability of the petition for writ of habeas corpus is assailed.
The petitioner has allegedly made several blatantly false, obnoxious
and defamatory statements against respondent No.2. Referring to
her credentials as a professional actress, the respondent No.2
asserts that she continues to perform her professional duties in
order to support herself and her children and parents. The
allegations of making deliberate attempts to separate the child from
the petitioner are denied. Myriad counter allegations have been
made against the petitioner, ranging from misbehaviour with the
daughter of respondent No.2 to substance abuse.            Reference is
made to various reports lodged against the petitioner. Those
complaints and reports, according to respondent No.2, indicate
that the petitioner has proven himself to be a threat to her, her
family members and Master R, in particular.
6.       Respondent No.2 contends that Master R is perfectly safe and
happy with her. Any contact with the petitioner is likely to be
detrimental to the growth and well-being of Master R. The writ
petition thus being devoid of any merit and the prayers made
therein being not sustainable in law, respondent No.2 has prayed
for dismissal of the petition.
7.       An affdavit in rejoinder is fled by the petitioner.
8.       During the pendency of the petition, the petitioner took out
an application, being Interim Application No.1474 of 2021 to hand
over the custody of Master R as the respondent No.2 had gone
abroad purportedly for a professional commitment.
9.       In the backdrop of the aforesaid pleadings, we have heard Ms.
Swapana Kode, the learned counsel for the petitioner and
Mr.Hrishikesh Mundargi, the learned counsel for respondent No.2,
at length. With the assistance of the learned counsels of the
parties, we have perused the material on record, including the
documents and notes of arguments tendered on behalf of the
petitioner and respondent No.2.
10.      At the threshold, Mr. Mundargi, the learned counsel for
respondent No.2 took exception to the tenability of the petition
once Master R was produced before this Court, albeit through
video conference.
11.      Mr. Mundargi would urge that writ of habeas corpus is
maintainable only when it is established that the detention of a
minor child by a parent was illegal and sans any authority in law.
In the case at hand, indisputably, Master R is in the custody of
respondent No.2, who is entitled to have the custody of Master R, a
child below fve years of age, under governing statutory regime.
There is no material to demonstrate that the custody of Master R
with respondent No.2 is illegal or unlawful in any manner
whatsoever. Thus, the petition does not deserve to be entertained
any more, canvassed Mr. Mundargi.
12.      In order to buttress the aforesaid submission, Mr. Mundargi
placed a very strong reliance on the judgment of the Supreme
Court in the case of Tejaswini Gaud and Others Vs. Shekhar
Jagdish Prasad Tewari and Others 1, wherein in the backdrop of
the order passed by this Court to transfer the custody of the minor
child from the relations of the mother of the child to the father, the
Supreme Court considered the justifability of the exercise of writ
jurisdiction by the High Court to transfer the custody of a minor
child and, in the process, expounded the legal position as under :
“18    Habeas corpus proceedings is not to justify or
examine the legality of the custody. Habeas corpus
proceedings is a medium through which the custody
of the child is addressed to the discretion of the court.
Habeas corpus is a prerogative writ which is an
extraordinary remedy and the writ is issued where in
the circumstances of the particular case, ordinary
remedy provided by the law is either not available or is
ineffective; otherwise a writ will not be issued. In child
custody matters, the power of the High Court in
granting the writ is qualifed only in cases where the
detention of a minor by a person who is not entitled to
his legal custody. In view of the pronouncement on the
issue in question by the Supreme Court and the High
Courts, in our view, in child custody matters, the writ
of habeas corpus is maintainable where it is proved
that the detention of a minor child by a parent or
others was illegal and without any authority of law.
19.      In child custody matters, the ordinary remedy
lies only under the Hindu Minority and Guardianship
Act or the Guardians and Wards Act as the case may
be. In cases arising out of the proceedings under the
Guardians and Wards Act, the jurisdiction of the
court is determined by whether the minor ordinarily
resides within the area on which the court exercises
such jurisdiction. There are signifcant differences
between the enquiry under the Guardians and Wards
Act and the exercise of powers by a writ court which is
of summary in nature. What is important is the
welfare of the child. In the writ court, rights are
determined only on the basis of affdavits. Where the
court is of the view that a detailed enquiry is required,
the court may decline to exercise the extraordinary
jurisdiction and direct the parties to approach the
civil court. It is only in exceptional cases, the rights of
the parties to the custody of the minor will be
determined in exercise of extraordinary jurisdiction on
a petition for habeas corpus.”
13.      Ms. Swapana Kode, the learned counsel for the petitioner
joined the issue by forcefully submitting that the legal position has
now crystallized to the effect that the High Court, while considering
the petition for writ of habeas corpus concerning a minor child, is
empowered to direct return of the child or decline to change the
custody of the child, as the case may be.
14.      To bolster up this submission, Ms.Kode, invited the attention
of the Court to the judgments of the Supreme Court in the cases of
Gohar Begam Vs. Suggi alias Nazma Begam & Ors. 2, Dr.(Mrs.)
and Yashita Sahu Vs.
15.      In the case of Dr.(Mrs.) Veena Kapoor (Supra), where the High
Court had dismissed the petition of the petitioner therein for a writ
of habeas corpus concerning a child, who was alleged to be in the
illegal custody of respondent-her estranged husband, the Supreme
“2       It is well settled that in matters concerning the
custody of minor children, the paramount consideration is
the welfare of the minor and not the legal right of this or
that particular party. The High Court, without adverting
to this aspect of the matter, has dismissed the petition on
the narrow ground that the custody of child with the
respondent cannot be said to be illegal.”
16.      In the case of Yashita Sahu (Supra), the Supreme Court
considered the previous pronouncements on the maintainability of
writ of habeas corpus and ruled in favour of maintainability in
“10         It is too late in the day to urge that a writ of
habeas corpus is not maintainable if the child is in the
custody of another parent. The law in this regard has
developed a lot over a period of time but now it is a
settled position that the court can invoke its
extraordinary writ jurisdiction for the best interest of
the child. This has been done in Elizabeth Dinshaw vs.
vs. State (NCT of Delhi) & Anr. 2 and Lahari Sakhamuri
vs. Sobhan Kodali3 among others. In all these cases the
writ petitions were entertained. Therefore, we reject the
contention of the appellantwife that the writ petition
before the High Court of Rajasthan was not
maintainable.”
17.      A useful reference, in this context, can also be made to the
judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Sayed Saleemuddin
pronouncement in the case of Gohar Begam (Supra), the Supreme
Court enunciated the legal position as under :
“10       This Court in the case of Gohar Begam v. Suggi
Alias Nazma Begam and others (1960(1) SCR 597) dealt
with a petition for writ of Habeas Corpus for recovery of a
illegitimate female infant of an unmarried Sunni Muslim
mother, took note of the position under the
Mohammedan Law that the mother of an illegitimate
female infant is entitled to its custody and the refusal to
restore such a child to the custody of its mother would
result in an illegal detention of the child within the
meaning of Section 491 of the Criminal Procedure Code.
This Court held that the dispute as to the paternity of
the child is irrelevant for the purpose of the application
and the Supreme Court will interfere with the
discretionary powers of the High Court if the discretion
was not judicially exercised. This Court further held that
in issuing writs of Habeas Corpus the Court have power
in the case of an infant to direct its custody to be placed
with a certain person.
aforementioned cases it is clear that in an application
seeking a writ of Habeas Corpus for custody of minor
children the principal consideration for the Court is to
ascertain whether the custody of the children can be said
to be unlawful or illegal and whether the welfare of the
children requires that present custody should be
changed and the children should be left in care and
custody of somebody else. The principle is well settled
that in a matter of custody of a child the welfare of the
child is of paramount consideration of the Court.
Unfortunately, the Judgment of the High Court does not
show that the Court has paid any attention to these
important and relevant questions. The High Court has
not considered whether the custody of the children with
their father can, in the facts and circumstances, be said
to be unlawful. The Court has also not adverted to the
question whether for the welfare of the children they
should be taken out of the custody of their father and left
in the care of their mother. However, it is not necessary
for us to consider this question further in view of the fair
concession made by Shri M.N. Rao that the appellant
has no objection if the children remain in the custody of
the mother with the right of the father to visit them as
noted in the judgment of the High Court, till the Family
Court disposes of the petition fled by the appellant for
custody of his children.”
18.      In the backdrop of the aforesaid enunciation of the legal
position, in our view, the remit of the writ of habeas corpus, in a
matter where the custody of a child is sought from one parent by
another, cannot be constricted to the question of legality of the
custody alone. It is not an immutable rule of law that writ of
habeas corpus, at the instance of one parent, is not maintainable if
the child is in the custody of another parent, unless the custody is
strictly illegal or unlawful.
19.      Undoubtedly, the Court has to ascertain whether the custody
of the child, in the circumstances of the given case, can be said to
be unlawful or illegal. However, the matter does not rest at that
point. The writ of habeas corpus can very well be pressed into
service for granting the custody of a child to a spouse if the welfare
of the child so dictates. We are, thus, not persuaded to accede to
the submission on behalf of the respondent No.2 that the moment,
Master         R    was produced before  this  Court,   through     video
conference, the instant petition served its purpose.
20.      This propels us to the pivotal question as to whether, in the
facts of the instant case, this Court would be justifed in delving
into the aspect of the proper custody of the child keeping in view
the welfare of the child. It is well neigh settled that in determining
the question as to who should be given custody of a minor child,
the paramount consideration is the welfare of the minor and not
the legal rights of the parents, statutory or customary.
21.      Ms. Kode made an earnest endeavour to draw home the point
that various acts of commission and omission, attributed to
respondent No.2, as evidenced by the material on record,
unmistakably indicate that respondent No.2 is not in a position to
attend to the parental and developmental needs of Master R.
Inviting the attention of the Court to the alleged transcripts of the
conversation exchanged between the petitioner and respondent
No.2 and the contemporaneous material, Ms. Kode would submit
that respondent No.2 has neither the time nor the will to genuinely
ensure         the welfare of Master R. In contrast, the petitioner has
forsaken all the professional commitments and is willing to devote
his entire time and resources for the upbringing of Master R. In the
circumstances, according to Ms. Kode, the welfare of Master R can
only be sub-served by the change in custody. To lend support to
this submission, Ms. Kode placed a strong reliance on the
judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Gaurav Nagpal Vs.
22.      Per contra, Mr. Mundargi, the learned counsel for respondent
No.2 stoutly submitted that the issues sought to be raised by the
petitioner, in the instant petition, and allegedly refecting upon the
suitability of respondent No.2 to continue to have the custody of
Master R, are all rooted in facts. In exercise of writ jurisdiction, this
Court would not be justifed in adjudicating disputed questions of
facts. According to Mr. Mundargi, there is not a shred of material to
show that respondent No.2 had not properly attended to the needs
and requirements of Master R. On the contrary, at this tender age,
only the custody of the mother can be said to be the proper
custody.           In any event, on the basis of mere allegations and
counter-allegations, and sans any evidence/material in support
thereof, the question as to whether the welfare of Master R can be
met by transfer of the custody, cannot be legitimately determined,
23.      Mr. Mundargi would further urge that apart from the instant
petition, no other proceeding is subjudice between the petitioner
and respondent No.2. Thus, this Court ought not entertain the
petition as a Court of frst instance would do. The proper remedy
for    the       petitioner  is to agitate the  grievances   before    the
jurisdictional family/civil court, canvassed Mr. Mundargi.
24.      We have given our anxious consideration to the rival
submissions canvassed across the bar. To start with, from the
material on record it appears that, on account marital discord, the
petitioner and respondent No.2 have developed strong animosity
towards each other. Indisputably, the petitioner and respondent
No.2 are residing in the same residential complex, albeit in
different buildings. This proximity, it seems, has on the one hand,
provided opportunities to the parties to keep a tab on the activities
of the other, and, on the other hand, it had led to many
acrimonious          episodes    leading    to    police   reports.    It    is
incontrovertible that Master R has been residing with respondent
No.2, barring the period in which he was suffering from Covid-19.
Moreover, Master R has yet not completed fve years of age.
25.      In      the light  of  aforesaid    facts,  two   factors   assume
signifcance. One, is there material which warrants the exercise of
extraordinary writ jurisdiction to order change in custody on the
touchstone of the paramountcy of the welfare of Master R. Two, are
there exceptional circumstances to depart from “tender years
rules”. We propose to consider these issues broadly, without
delving deep into the thickets of facts.
26.      The parameters for determination of the proper custody for a
minor, when the parents are at loggerheads, are well recognized.
The legal rights of the parents yield to the paramountcy of the
welfare of the child. “Welfare”, in turn, is a term of wide
connotation. It is not restricted to physical comfort and well being.
It     comprises        emotional,   intellectual   and    overall    holistic
development of the child.
27.      A proftable reference in this context can be made to the
judgment in the case of Gaurav Nagpal (Supra) wherein, after
adverting to the relevant statutory provisions and governing
precedents, the Supreme Court articulated the factors, which
weigh in, in determining the question of custody of a minor child.
The observations of the Supreme Court in paragraphs 40, 42 and
43 are instructive and thus extracted below :
“40.     Merely because there is no defect in his personal
care and his attachment for his children--which every
normal parent has, he would not be granted custody.
Simply because the father loves his children and is not
shown to be otherwise undesirable does not necessarily
lead to the conclusion that the welfare of the children would
be better promoted by granting their custody to him.
Children are not mere chattels nor are they toys for their
parents. Absolute right of parents over the destinies and the
lives of their children, in the modern changed social
conditions must yield to the considerations of their welfare
as human beings so that they may grow up in a normal
balanced manner to be useful members of the society and
the guardian court in case of a dispute between the mother
and the father, is expected to strike a just and proper
balance between the requirements of welfare of the minor
children and the rights of their respective parents over
them.
42       When the court is confronted with conficting
demands made by the parents, each time it has to justify
the demands. The Court has not only to look at the issue
on legalistic basis, in such matters human angles are
relevant for deciding those issues. The court then does not
give emphasis on what the parties say, it has to exercise a
jurisdiction which is aimed at the welfare of the minor. As
observed recently in Mousami Moitra Ganguli's case
(supra), the Court has to due weightage to the child's
ordinary contentment, health, education, intellectual
development and favourable surroundings but over and
above physical comforts, the moral and ethical values have
also to be noted. They are equal if not more important than
the others.
43.      The word `welfare' used in Section 13 of the Act has
to be construed literally and must be taken in its widest
sense. The moral and ethical welfare of the child must also
weigh with the Court as well as its physical well being.
Though the provisions of the special statutes which govern
the rights of the parents or guardians may be taken into
consideration, there is nothing which can stand in the way
of the Court exercising its parens patriae jurisdiction
arising in such cases.”
28.      A useful reference, can also be made to the judgment of the
Supreme Court in the case of Nil Ratan Kundu & Anr, vs Abhiit
Kundu 7, wherein the consideration for determination of the proper
custody of a minor child were succinctly postulated, by the
“………...In selecting a guardian, the Court is exercising
parens patriae jurisdiction and is expected, nay bound, to
give due weight to a child's ordinary comfort, contentment,
health, education, intellectual development and favourable
surroundings. But over and above physical comforts, moral
and ethical values cannot be ignored. They are equally, or
we may say, even more important, essential and
indispensable considerations. If the minor is old enough to
form an intelligent preference or judgment, the Court must
consider such preference as well, though the fnal decision
should rest with the Court as to what is conducive to the
welfare of the minor.”
29.      The aforesaid pronouncements thus exposit that the welfare
of the minor is a broad and elastic term. The approach of the Court
in ascertaining and determining the welfare of the minor ought to
be well informed and pragmatic. The Court is called upon to
exercise parens patriae jurisdiction. Every factor which bears upon
the development of the child, must enter into the decision of the
Court. The Court is called upon to deal with a human problem
with a humane touch.
30.      As regards the “tender years rule”, it is necessary to note that
it fnds statutory recognisition under section 6 of the Hindu
Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956, which provides that in the
case of a boy or an unmarried girl, the father, and after him, the
mother shall be the natural guardian; provided that the custody of
a minor who has not completed the age of fve years shall ordinarily
be with the mother.
31.      The aforesaid statutory prescription is based on societal
wisdom and hard realities of life. At such tender age, a child needs
the company of mother. Ordinarily, the amount of love, affection,
care and protection which a mother can provide to a child of such
tender age, cannot be expected to be provided by the father or any
other       person. This   does   not   necessarily   refect   upon     the
unsuitability of the father and other relations. However, in the
circumstances, which are usually associated with a child of a
tender age, the custody of the mother appears more natural and
conducive for the development of the child.
32.      Reverting to the facts of the instant case, in the backdrop of
the aforesaid principle of paramountcy of welfare and “tender years
rule”, it is imperative to note that having regard to the age of
Master R, the tender years rules, which has statutory recognition,
gets attracted and, thus, cannot be brushed aside lightly in
evaluating the “welfare principle”.
33.      At this juncture, the allegations of neglect and lack of care,
attributed to respondent No.2, are in the realm of the disputed
questions of facts. There is an equal body of counter-allegations, at
the instance of respondent No.2, against the petitioner. It is trite
that in the wake of marital discord, the allegations and counter-
allegations fy thick and fast. In our view, the allegations against
respondent No.2, which refect upon the justifability of the
continued custody of Master R with respondent No.2, are
essentially rooted in facts, and thus, warrant adjudication.
34.      It is imperative to note that the edifce of these allegations is
sought to be built upon the premise that respondent No.2, being
an extremely busy actress, is not in a position to devote time and
efforts for sound upbringing of Master R. Conversely, the petitioner
has decided not to undertake any professional commitment. In our
view, the issue of welfare of the minor cannot be determined on the
sole parameter of the work commitment of one parent and
availability of ample time with another.
35.      The fact that respondent No.2 is a busy actress, cannot be
construed to unfavourably judge her suitability to have the custody
of Master R. In our view, the issue of work commitments of
respondent No.2 putting hindrances in overall development of
Master R, being again a question of fact, warrants adjudication. We
are, therefore, not persuaded to accede to the submission on behalf
of the petitioner on the said count.
36.      In the light of the material on record, we are of the view that
there are no exceptional circumstances which would warrant a
departure from “tender years rule”. Nor there is such material
which prima-facie indicates that the custody with respondent No.2
is detrimental to the welfare and development of Master R. We are,
therefore, not inclined to direct the change in custody, in exercise of
extraordinary writ jurisdiction.
37.      The petitioner is, however, at liberty to institute appropriate
proceedings before the jurisdictional forum for grant of custody of
Master R, including interim custody or custody for specifed period.
38.      Undoubtedly, Master R needs love, affection, care and
protection of both, the petitioner and respondent No.2. Love and
affection of both the parents is considered to be the basic human
right of a child. Thus, the element of the access of the child to a
non-custodial parent assumes critical salience. The Courts often
ensure that even if custody is given to one parent, non-custodial
parent has adequate visitation rights. In the case at hand, both the
parents reside in the same residential complex. Thus, in addition
to contact rights, through video conferencing, pursuant to the
order of this Court, dated 5th January 2021, in our view, for the
development of Master R, it would be necessary to allow the
physical access to the petitioner to Master R, at least twice a week.
39.      We are, thus, inclined to dispose of the petition with the
direction for daily access, through video conference for half an hour
and physical access twice a week of Master R to the petitioner.
40.      We propose to make the arrangements for physical and
virtual access to the petitioner till appropriate orders are passed by
the competent courts in the proceedings, which may be instituted
by the parties, in the event the marital discord is not amicably
resolved sooner.
41.      We clarify that the aforesaid observations have been made for
the purpose of determining the justifability of the exercise of writ
jurisdiction and this Court may not be construed to have expressed
an opinion and/or determined the issue of custody of Master R,
fnally. In the event, either of the party institutes a proceedings and
the question of custody of Master R arises in those proceedings,
the competent court shall decide the same in accordance with law,
without being infuenced by any of the observations made
42.      Before parting, we hope and trust that the petitioner and
respondent No.2, who claim to be adept at playing characters, in
reel life, act in the best interest of Master R, in real life.
The petition stands dismissed, subject to the
(i)       The petitioner is entitled to have access to Master
R, through video conferencing for minimum 30 minutes
from 6:00 p.m. to 6:30 p.m. on weekdays, subject to
convenience and comfort of Master R.
(ii)      The petitioner shall have physical access to Master
R every week, on Saturday and Sunday, for two hours,
ordinarily in the precincts of the residential complex,
(iii)     The petitioner and respondent No.2 are at liberty to
work out the modalities of physical access as regards the
day, time and place in such a way that the petitioner has
physical access for two hours twice a week.
(iv)      The aforesaid directions shall continue to operate
till appropriate orders are passed by the jurisdictional
courts.
Rule stands discharged, subject to aforesaid directions.
In view of disposal of writ petition, Interim Application No.
1474 of 2021 also stands disposed of.