3.    On the other hand, learned APP has opposed this
application          and     mainly         contended         that         the
statement         of   the   co-accused         can    be     considered
during the course of investigation as a clue for
further         investigation         and,     therefore         on      this
ground,         the  impugned       FIR     may    not    be     quashed.
Learned APP has placed reliance upon the order
dated 17.09.2020 passed by this Court in Criminal
Misc.        Application      No.11508/2020,            wherein          this
Court         has,     after      considering          the       reported
decisions of this Court as well as the Hon’ble
Supreme         Court,   dismissed          the   similar        type        of
application. Learned APP has submitted that the
issue       involved     in    the       present      application            is
squarely         covered    by      the      said    order.         It     is,
therefore,          urged      that        this     application              be
dismissed.
4.    Having heard learned APP and having considered the
averments          made    in     the       memo     of     application
including the material placed on record, it would
emerge that the present application has been filed
by    the      applicant    only       on    the   ground       that       the
applicant has been falsely implicated only on the
basis of the statement of the co-accused. However,
it is pertinent to note that so far as the present
applicant           is     concerned,            till       date           the
investigation is not over and, therefore, it is
always         open   for    the       investigating         agency          to
consider the statement of the co-accused for the
purpose of further investigation.
5.    Further as stated above, in similar type of aspect
in     case      of   Jignesh       @     Jigo    Jado      Jagdishbhai
Jarivala Vs. State of Gujarat in Criminal Misc.
Application        No.11508/2020          decided    on     17.09.2020
this Court has observed in Paragraph Nos.6 to 10
“6.     At this stage, it is relevant to note that this
Court has observed in the case of Mohmed Salim
abdul     Rasid    Shaikh        v.   State     of      Gujarat,
reported in 2001(2) GLR 1580, in para 12, as
“12………………………… It is pertinent to note
that    the    prosecution         case      rests
mainly on circumstantial evidence and
police has received a clue against
the    present        applicant      from        the
statement      of      co-accused,        already
arrested. Irrespective of the fact
that    statement         of   co-accused           to
police is not admissible in evidence
before the Court, but police can
certainly consider that statement as
a    clue    while        interrogating          him
further or other persons arrested or
interrogated during the course of
investigation……………………………………………………………”
7.      In another case of Dolatram Tekchand Harjani v.
State    of   Gujarat,      reported     in   2013       (3)     GLR
2133,     this    Court         has   considered           similar
contention and thereafter observed in para 9.10
to 9.13 as under:
“9.10 The said submission gives rise
to an issue viz. does it mean that on
the basis of, or in light of, a
statement        of        co-accused          even
investigation cannot be initiated. On
this count, it comes out that while
raising the said contention, it is
conveniently overlooked that such
position or preposition does not mean
that statement by a co-accused cannot
act as or cannot be even treated as a
piece of information or a clue to
initiate                 and              conduct
inquiry/investigation so as to find
out whether there is any independent,
cogent, reliable and satisfactory
material/evidence which may support,
justify and provide cause for further
investigation or a charge-sheet and a
trial.
9.11 In present case, name of the
petitioner is disclosed / mentioned
in a statement of a co-accused with
reference to offence under Sections
307 and 120B of          IPC    and     Sections
25(1)A and (b) and 27(1) of Arms
Act and     therefore,           police          has
commenced investigation.
9.12    Against         such     investigation
process, the petitioner has taken out
present petition under Section 482 of
the   Code      and       prayed     that        the
investigation process may be stopped
and it may be quashed. In support of
the   said     request,        the    aforesaid
contention is raised.
9.13 The position/preposition (raised
in     light        of       the      provision
under Section         25 of       the      Indian
Evidence Act) that a statement by a
co-accused     is       not    admissible           in
evidence and therefore cannot be
relied on, cannot be construed to
mean that such statement cannot be
even considered or treated as a clue
or a piece of information to initiate
and conduct inquiry/investigation or
to direct the investigation/inquiry
in a particular direction. Such a
statement can be treated as a clue or
piece    of     information          (and        not
evidence     )      for      initiating          and
conducting investigation/inquiry so
as to find out as to whether there is
any independent, satisfactory and
reliable material which may support
or justify or provide reason for
continuing inquiry/investigation for
initiating further investigation. At
the stage when the investigation has
commenced or the process is going on
any occasion or any question of
treating   or       considering     such         a
statement as evidence does not arise
and that, therefore, it would not be
proper and just to terminate, i.e. to
direct the investigation officer to
close the investigation.”
8.      Further, in the case of Kalyan Chandra Sarkar
v. Rajesh Ranjan Alias Pappu Yadav, reported in
(2004) 7 SCC 528, the Hon’ble Supreme Court has
observed as under:
"The next argument of the learned
counsel for the respondent is that
prima   facie      the    prosecution        has
failed to produce any material to
implicate the respondent in the crime
of conspiracy. In this regard he
submitted that most of the witnesses
have already turned hostile. The only
other   evidence       available     to      the
prosecution to connect the respondent
with   the    crime      is    an     alleged
confession of the co-accused which
according to the learned counsel was
inadmissible in evidence. Therefore,
he contends that the High Court was
justified in granting bail since the
prosecution has failed to establish
even a prima facie case against the
respondent. From the High Court order
we do not find this as a ground for
granting bail. Be that as it may, we
think that this argument is too
premature for us to accept. The
admissibility or otherwise of the
confessional statement and the effect
of the evidence already adduced by
the prosecution and the merit of the
evidence    that       may    be      adduced
hereinafter including that of the
witnesses sought to be recalled are
all matters to be considered at the
stage of the trial.”
9.      Further,    in  the   case     of   Mohammed       Fasrin        v.
State     Rep.   By    the      Intelligence          Officer,
rendered in Criminal Misc. Application No.296
of 2014, the Hon’ble Supreme Court observed as
“…….The confessions of a co-accused
gives a clue to the investigating
authorities as to how to investigate
the matter and against whom to
investigate the matter. Thereafter,
it is for the investigating officers
to collect evidence against the said
person who has been named by the co-
accused.....”
10.     From the aforesaid decisions, it would be
clear that a statement of co-accused can be
considered or treated as a clue or a piece of
information      to      initiate        and       conduct
inquiry/investigation         or     to    direct          the
investigation/inquiry           in     a      particular
direction so as to find out as to whether
there is any independent, satisfactory and
reliable material which may support or
justify or provide reason for continuing
inquiry/investigation for initiating further
investigation.      At      the    stage       when        the
investigation has commenced or the process is
going on any occasion or any question of
treating or considering such a statement as
evidence does not arise and therefore it
would not be proper and just to terminate,
i.e. to direct the investigating officer to
close the investigation. It is also required
to be noted that the admissibility or
otherwise of the confessional statement can
be examined at the stage of trial and not at
the stage of investigation. Thus, Section 25
of the Evidence Act would come into play not
at the stage of inquiry/investigation but at
the stage of trial.
6.    Thus, this Court is of the view that the present
matter is squarely covered by the aforesaid order
passed by this Court. Therefore, this Court is not
inclined to exercise the powers under Section 482
of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 in favour of
the present applicant at this stage.
7.    Therefore, the present application is dismissed.
However        liberty is      reserved    to     file        fresh
application before this Court after filing of the
chargesheet if there is no material against him in
the chargesheet papers.