Heard Sri Rajiv Lochan Shukla, learned counsel for the applicant and Sri Rishi
Chaddha, learned counsel for the State and perused the material on record.
This bail application under Section 439 of Code of Criminal Procedure has been
filed by the applicant- Nahid Hasan, seeking enlargement on bail during trial in
connection with Session Trial No. 730 of 2022, Case Crime No. 570 of 2019,
under Section 406, 504, 506, I.P.C., registered at Police Station Kairana, District
The first information report of the present case was lodged on 26.09.2019 by
Smt. Shahjahan against the applicant and one other person namely Nawab
alleging therein that her husband had given a Bolero pick-up vehicle of which he
was the registered owner on rent in the year 2015 to co-accused Nawab who was
having business of milk and milk products. Nawab did not pay the required
monthly rent of the same on which he was countered to which he stated that he
will give the same collectively. After some days he stated that he would give Rs.
1 lakh 50 thousand. Later on her husband asked him for return of the vehicle. On
22.04.2019 he came to know that the vehicle is standing in the premises of the
applicant who is M.L.A. after which the first informant along with her husband
went there to see the vehicle. A phone call was received by the husband of the
first informant from the applicant who threatened them and told them to go
back. They were also abused and threatened for life and even threat was
extended that they would be got involved in false cases. Her husband due to fear
went to Police Station Kotwali after which the Inspector in-charge was sent to
the place where the vehicle was standing and then again a threatening call was
received and there were abuses received by the first informant and the threat of
life was extended due to which her husband suffered heart attack after which he
was taken to the doctor and from there he was referred to higher centre. Next
day, she received a call from the police station that the vehicle has been brought
from the place of its standing and the same may be taken back by her. The rent
due on it be given to her. Nawab is a man of bad antecedents and is a relative of
the applicant who is M.L.A. On his saying only the applicant had called up the
husband of the first informant and threatened him. The first information report
has thus been lodged.
Learned counsel for the applicant argued that the incident is a petty offence and
even otherwise as per the prosecution case, the vehicle was given on rent to co-
accused Nawab. The applicant was not entrusted with the vehicle. The applicant
was not responsible for paying the rent of the vehicle. It is argued that although
the applicant is stated to be having criminal history of 17 cases but the said cases
are petty cases and are cases only because of the reason that he is an active
politician. Paragraph 24 of the affidavit has been placed before the Court. The
offences are triable by Magistrate. It is next argued that the parties have entered
into a compromise which was drawn on 25.10.2021 between them and filed
before the Additional District & Sessions Judge (F.T.C.) / M.P.M.L.A., Shamli at
Kairana, the copy of the same is annexed as Annexure-10 to the affidavit.
Learned counsel has further argued that during the pendency of investigation the
applicant was granted stay of arrest till filing of police report under Section 173
(2) Cr.P.C. vide order dated 24.10.2019 passed in Criminal Misc. Writ Petition
No. 23030 of 2019 (Navab and another Vs. State of U.P. and 3 Others), the copy
of the order is annexed as Annexure-1 to the supplementary counter affidavit
dated 23.05.2022 filed on behalf of the State. It is argued that even in the said
writ petition, the factum of compromise was considered which was filed therein
and the concerned Court had passed an order in favour of the petitioners therein.
It is argued that charge-sheet in the matter has been submitted and as such there
are no chances of the applicant not co-operating with the investigation or
tampering with the evidence. It is further argued that the applicant is ill. Second
supplementary affidavit has been placed before the Court for the same. It is
argued that as such the applicant deserves to be released on bail. The applicant is
in jail since 29.01.2022.
Per contra, learned counsel for the State vehemently opposed the prayer for bail
and argued that there is an audio recording of the threat extended by the
applicant to the first informant and her husband of which an audio recording was
provided by them which finds reference in the general diary also and the same is
mentioned in paragraph 05 of the counter affidavit. It is argued that Sub-
Inspector Ajay Kasana got the vehicle recovered from the premises of the
applicant and as such it cannot be said that the applicant had no concern with the
said vehicle. The copy of the statement of Sub-Inspector has been placed before
the Court which is annexed as Annexure-4 to the affidavit. Further learned
counsel has placed Annexure-11 to the affidavit being the order-sheet of the trial
court from 03.03.2021 to 22.11.2021 and has argued that the applicant had been
avoiding appearance in the Court in spite of service of summons which has been
mentioned in the order dated 03.03.2021. The summons were served at his place
to his persons and after that the summons were again sent which was refused to
be received by his family members. It is argued that bailable warrants were
issued against the applicant and even then he failed to appear before the trial
court. Learned counsel has further argued that vide order dated 25.10.2021
passed by the trial court the said compromise was rejected. Learned counsel has
fairly conceded to the fact that although audio recording is part of the general
diary but there is no relevant certificate under the Evidence Act for the same. It
is argued while placing paragraph 9 of the supplementary counter affidavit that
even in other cases against the applicant, the applicant had been avoiding
appearance before the concerned Courts. It is argued that in the present case also
there are good chances of the applicant not co-operating with the trial,
absconding and tampering with evidence and threatening the witnesses in spite
of the fact that he is a public representative. It is argued that the applicant has
criminal history of 17 cases against him. In so far as the argument of medical
illness is concerned, learned counsel has argued that as per his instructions when
the applicant was taken into custody and produced before the jail authorities, he
did not complain of any such illness but it was only at a later stage ground of
illness has cropped up and the same has been taken in the present bail
application for the first time.
After having heard the learned counsel for the parties and perusing the record, it
is evident that although as per the prosecution case, the vehicle in question was
not given to the applicant by the first informant and her husband, it was given to
co-accused Nawab for being used by him and rent was decided to be paid by
him. The said vehicle was although recovered from the premises of the
applicant. The applicant has criminal history of 17 cases. The order-sheet of the
trial court, the copy of which is annexed as Annexure-11 to the affidavit shows
that in spite of service of summons on 03.03.2021, the applicant kept on
avoiding appearance before the trial court. It was only when he was arrested in
another case he was then taken on remand in this case on 29.01.2022. The
charge-sheet in the present case, the the copy of which is annexed as Annexure-8
to the affidavit shows that the first informant / Smt. Shahjahan and Ummedrav
her husband are the witnesses of the case and then there are 05 other formal
witnesses.
In these circumstances, as of now, looking to the criminal history of the
applicant and the order-sheet of the trial court which shows the absondence of
the applicant and the apprehension of the applicant not co-operating in the trial
and their being an apprehension of his tampering with evidence and threatening
the witnesses, this Court is not inclined to release the applicant on bail. The
applicant may renew his prayer of bail after the evidence of first informant and
her husband has been recorded by the trial court in the present case. The Apex
Court in the case of Deepak Yadav Vs. State of U.P. and Another vide
judgement dated 20.05.2022 passed in Criminal Appeal No. 861 of 2022 has
held that the possibility of the accused absconding, likelihood of misuse of bail
and interference or attempt to interfere with the course of justice and even
evasion or attempt to avoid the due process of law has to be considered. The
Apex Court cancelled the bail of the said accused as granted by the High Court
considering even the criminal history of two cases, one proceedings under
Section 110G and 02 beat informations.
Looking to the facts and circumstances of the case, I do not find it a fit case for
bail, hence, the bail application is rejected.