possession of Methamphetamine about 62 gram, which is
commercial quantity, nothing is recovered or found in
possession of applicant either at the time of arrest or
subsequent thereto while searching even his premises. He has
further submitted that based on statement of co-accused the
arrest of the applicant is effected. The other connecting material
sought to be relied on by the prosecution, according to
submission of Mr.Dholakia, learned advocate for the applicant,
is insufficient to bring home charge against the applicant. At
any rate, according to him, the applicant cannot be said to have
conspired together along with other co-accused based on
material collected during the course of investigation to be a part
of conspiracy as under Section 29 of ‘the Act’. He has further
submitted that similarly situated co-accused of this very offence
came to be released on regular bail vide an order passed in
Criminal Misc. Application No.1764 of 2022 dated 23.2.2022 in
the case of co-accused, Rajin Abdulandim Saiyed, and therefore,
even on the ground of parity, he submitted that applicant may
also be released on bail.
3.     Mr.Dholakia, learned advocate for the applicant relied on
a decision in the case of Bharat Chaudhary V/s. Union of
India reported in 2021 SCC OnLine SC 1235 in support of his
submission that in absence of any possession of contraband
article and the print outs of whatsapp messages downloaded
from the mobile phone and devices seized from the mobile
phone were not treated to be sufficient material to establish live
link between the co-accused and the accused whose bail was
under consideration before the Supreme Court as Scientific
reports in respect of the said devices was still awaited.
4.     Ms.Maithali Mehta, learned APP submitted that in an
around the time of the incident, the applicant was in live contact
with the arrested accused and from whom contraband is found.
She has further submitted that, according to the case of the
prosecution, the applicant had ordered for the same and before
it could be delivered to him, the two accused have been arrested
in possession of contraband in a commercial quantity. She has
further submitted that though screenshot of one Whatsapp chat
available on devices / mobile phone of the applicant is not in
clear terms indict the applicant, since Whatsapp chat came to
be deleted by the applicant, it has been sent to FSL for
retrieving it. However, no such report based on examination by
FSL is yet available. Ms.Mehta, learned APP further submitted
that in view of Section 35 of ‘the Act’, there is a presumption of
culpable mental state of the accused. Considering the material
available with the prosecution, it is urged that, the presumption
of culpable mental state of the accused may be inferred from
the Whatsapp chat between the accused as also the call data
records. Therefore, she has submitted that the applicant be
denied bail.
5.     Having heard learned advocates for the appearing parties,
it emerges on record that the applicant is not found in
possession of any contraband article. Over and above that, the
call data records may reveal that in an around the time of
incident, he was in contact with the co-accused who were found
in possession of contraband. Since there is no recording of
conversation in between the accused, mere contacts with the co-
accused who were found in possession cannot be treated to be a
corroborative material in absence of substantive material found
against the accused. However, screenshot of one of the
whatsapp chat in between the co-accused shown to the Court,
there is hardly anything which connects the applicant with the
present offence or even asserting that he ordered for the same
which were to be delivered by the accused found in possession
of contraband. In absence of any other material, which is still to
be retrieved from the devices of the mobile phone and
information thereon which is still awaited, as considered by the
Supreme Court in the case of Bharat Chaudhary (Supra) said
material cannot be considered to be a sufficient material to
establish any live link with the co-accused who were found in
the possession of contraband.
6.     So far as submission that presumption of culpable mental
state be raised against the applicant is also for the time being in
absence of other material, which is to be proved at the time of
trial, without concluding thereon, suffice it to say that when co-
accused with similar role has come to be released on bail, even
on the ground of parity, application of the applicant is required
to be considered as from his possession nothing is found at any
point of time.
7.     I am conscious of the fact of restrictions imposed under
Section 37 of ‘the Act’, however, with a view not to prejudice
the case of either side, I am not recording any conclusion with
regard to existence of pirma-facie case at this stage. As
submitted by the learned advocate and confirmed by the learned
APP, there is no criminal antecedents of the applicant. There is
also no apprehension shown even by the prosecution that he is
likely to commit any offence while on bail. Considering the order
passed by co-ordinate Bench of this Court in case of co-accused
who is similarly situated as also aforesaid decision of the
Supreme Court in the case of Bharat Chaudhary (Supra), I am
inclined to grant bail to the applicant, that too, post submission
of charge-sheet on following terms and conditions.
8.     In the result, the present application is allowed and the
applicant is ordered to be released on regular bail in connection
with an offence being C.R.No.11191012211362 of 2021
registered with Danilimda Police Station, District :
Ahmedabad on executing a personal bond of Rs.15,000/-
(Rupees Fifteen Thousand Only) with one surety of the like
amount to the satisfaction of the learned Trial Court and subject
to the conditions that the applicant shall;
(a)    not take undue advantage of liberty or misuse liberty;
(b)    not act in a manner injurious to the interest of the
(c)    surrender passport, if any, to the lower court within a
(d)    not leave the India without prior permission of the
Sessions Judge concerned;
(e)    mark presence before the concerned Police Station once
between 1st and 5th day of every English calendar month
for a period of six months.;
(f)    furnish latest and permanent address of residence as well
as mobile number to the Investigating Officer and also to
the Court at the time of execution of the bond and shall
not change the residence without prior permission of this
9.     The authorities shall adhere to its own Circular relating to
COVID-19 and, thereafter, will release the applicant only if he is
not required in connection with any other offence for the time
being. If breach of any of the above conditions is committed, the
Sessions Judge concerned will be free to issue warrant or take
appropriate action in the matter. Bail bond to be executed
before the lower Court having jurisdiction to try the case.
10.     Rule is made absolute to the aforesaid extent.
Direct service permitted.