1.    Heard Mr. Surya Prakash, learned counsel for appellant,
learned A.G.A. for the State and perused the lower court record.
2.    This appeal has been preferred on behalf of appellant Ramsagar
challenging the impugned judgment and order dated 26.11.2019
passed by learned Additional District & Sessions Judge/FTC
Lakhimpur Kheri whereby the appellant was convicted and sentenced
(i). In Sessions Trial No. 1397 of 2014 arising
out of Case Crime No. 475 of 2007, under Section
Kheri, the appellant was convicted and sentenced
for two years imprisonment and fine of Rs.
10,000/- with default stipulation.
3.    Brief facts of the case emerges out as under:-
On 23.07.2007 at 02:00 an FIR was lodged by first informant,
namely Raju son of Lal Ji, R/o Village Ethpur, P.S. Palia, District
Lakhimpur Kheri with the allegation that in the evening of
22.07.20007, victim, the wife of the complainant, with her two
children, a two months old boy and a girl three years old, was laying
down in the home (hut). The complainant was also lying on the
ground under the bed in the hut, at around 11:00 pm, his neighbor
Ramsagar, son Kamala Shankar Mallah came and started molesting
complainant’s wife. When his wife screamed, he also woke up, made
a noise, then Dara Son Lalji and Kalavati wife of Kamalashankar
came, with the help of whom Ram Sagar was caught and took him
before the Police Station Palia, District Lakhimpur Kheri and F.I.R. of
this case was lodged under Section 376 I.P.C.
4.     The investigation of this was entrusted to the Investigating
Officer PW-3 Parashuram Goswami. During course of investigation,
the Investigating Officer prepared site plan (Ex. Ka-2) and recorded
statements of the witnesses. The victim was sent for medical
examination at Mahila Hospital, Kheri where she was medically
examined on 02.08.2007 by Emergency Medical Officer, Mahila
Hospital, Kheri and the medical report is (Ex. Ka-4). Thereafter she
was sent for pathological test at District Hospital Kheri on 03.08.2007
and the pathological report is Ex. Ka-6. On 14.09.2007, a
supplementary medical report was prepared as Ex. Ka-5.
5.     As per medical examination following opinion was given by the
Physical examination
(i)    Breast fully developed, axillary and pubic
hair was present.
(ii)   she is complain of pain in both knee.
Thereafter she was referred to E.M.O. District
No mark of injury present on private parts.
As per vaginal examination extracts admits
two fingers, hymen torn old and healed uterus
introverted normal size, vaginal smear prepared
and sent to pathology for evidence of spermatozoa.
Supplementary report awaited.
As per supplementary affidavit, on the basis of
chemical examination and vaginal smear report, no
definite opinion regarding sexual assault can be
given.
6.      After completion of all the formalities of investigation, charge
sheet (Ex. Ka-1) was filed before the learned Chief Judicial
Magistrate, Lakhimpur Kheri on 17.10.2014 against the appellant
under Section 376 IPC. Learned Chief Judicial Magistrate took
cognizance on 17.10.2014 and thereafter the case was committed for
trial before the learned Sessions Judge,          Lakhimpur Kheri on
18.10.2014 where it is registered as Sessions Trial No.1397 of 2014
and the same was transferred to the court of learned earned Additional
District & Sessions Judge/FTC Lakhimpur Kheri for trial, where
during course of trial, the following witnesses were examined on
behalf of the prosecution:-
7.     PW-1 is the victim, PW-2 is the complainant of this case. Both
are the witnesses of fact.
8.     PW-3 S.I. Parashuram Goswali (retired) was the Investigating
Officer of the case, who proved site plan (Ex. Ka-2) and charge sheet
(Ex. Ka-1). PW-4 Dr. Deepa Sharma, who medically examined the
victim and the proved the medical report (Ex. Ka-5)) and
supplementary report (Ex. Ka-6) and PW-5 Rajesh Kumar Yadav the
pairokar of the police station.
9.     The charge was framed against the appellant under Section 354
IPC, to which he pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried.
Subsequent to the closure of the prosecution evidence, statement of
appellant under Section 313 Cr.P.C. was recorded by the trial court
explaining entire evidence and other incriminating circumstances. In
statement recorded under Section 313 Cr.P.c., the accused appellant
denied prosecution version and said that he has been falsely
implicated by the informant and victim.
10.    In defence two witnesses i.e. DW-1 Vijay Bahadur and DW-2
Muhleshwar were examined.
11.    After hearing both the parties and appreciating entire oral and
documentary evidence available on record, the trial court convicted
the accused appellant as aforesaid.
12.    Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the judgment of the trial
court, the appellant preferred the instant criminal appeal.
13.    Learned counsel for appellant has submitted that the trial court
without appreciating the evidence available on record, wrongly
convicted the appellant. Further submission is that both the witnesses
examined by the prosecution is the interested witnesses. No
independent witness was examined on behalf of the prosecution. All
the witnesses examined by the prosecution are interested witness and
medical evidence on record does not support the case of the
prosecution as alleged in the FIR and the prosecution has failed to
prove its case beyond shadow of doubt.
14.    Lastly learned counsel for appellant has basically submitted that
the appellant does not want to argue this appeal on merits, he only
wants to advance submission only on the quantum of sentence
imposed upon him.
15.    Learned A.G.A. for the State has supported the judgment of
learned trial court and has submitted that the appeal has no force and
is liable to be dismissed. Further submission is that offence committed
by the appellant is very heinous in nature and there is no reason to
falsely implicate him. The case Under section 354 I.P.C has proved
against the appellant. The trial court has rightly convicted and
sentenced the appellant and the appellant deserves no leniency.
16.    Perusal of the record shows that PW-1, the victim and PW-2
informant of the case, who are the witnesses of facts, have fully
supported the prosecution version.
17. Not pressing the criminal appeal after the conviction of the
accused by the court below is like the confession of the offence by the
accused. The Courts generally take lenient view in the matter of
awarding sentence to an accused in criminal trial, where he
voluntarily confesses his guilt, unless the facts of the case warrants
severe sentence.
18. In the case of Sevaka Perumal etc. Vs. State of Tamil Nadu AIR
1991 SC 1463, the Apex Court in the matter of awarding proper
sentence to the accused in a criminal trial has cautioned the Courts as
"Undue sympathy to impose inadequate sentence
would do more harm to the justice system to
undermine the public confidence in the efficacy of
law and society could not long endure under such
serious threats. It is, therefore, the duty of every
court to award proper sentence having regard to
the nature of the offence and the manner in which
it was executed or committed etc."
19.     In the case of Dhananjoy Chatterjee Vs. State of W. B. [1994]
2 SCC 220, this Court has observed that shockingly large number of
criminals go unpunished thereby increasingly, encouraging the
criminals and in the ultimate making justice suffer by weakening the
system's creditability. The imposition of appropriate punishment is the
manner in which the Court responds to the society's cry for justice
against the criminal. Justice demands that Courts should impose
punishment befitting the crime so that the Courts reflect public
abhorrence of the crime. The Court must not only keep in view the
rights of the criminal but also the rights of the victim of the crime and
the society at large while considering the imposition of appropriate
punishment. Similar view has also been expressed in Ravji v. State of
Rajasthan, [1996] 2 SCC 175. It has been held in the said case that it
is the nature and gravity of the crime but not the criminal, which are
germane for consideration of appropriate punishment in a criminal
trial. The Court will be failing in its duty if appropriate punishment is
not awarded for a crime which has been committed not only against
the individual victim but also against the society to which the criminal
and victim belong. The punishment to be awarded for a crime must
not be irrelevant but it should conform to and be consistent with the
atrocity and brutality with which the crime has been perpetrated, the
enormity of the crime warranting public abhorrence and it should
"respond to the society's cry for justice against the criminal". If for
extremely heinous crime of murder perpetrated in a very brutal
manner without any provocation, most deterrent punishment is not
given, the case of deterrent punishment will lose its relevance.
20.     Appropriate sentence is the cry of the society. It is, therefore,
the duty of every court to award proper sentence having regard to the
nature of the offence and the manner in which it was executed or
21.   This position was reiterated by a three-Judge Bench of the Apex
Court in Ahmed Hussein Vali Mohammed Saiyed and Anr. vs. State
of Gujarat, (2009) 7 SCC 254, wherein it was observed as follows:-
"99.....The object of awarding appropriate sentence
should be to protect the society and to deter the
criminal from achieving the avowed object to law
by imposing appropriate sentence. It is expected
that the courts would operate the sentencing
system so as to impose such sentence, which
reflects the conscience of the society and the
sentencing process has to be stern where it should
be. Any liberal attitude by imposing meager
sentences or taking too sympathetic view merely
on account of lapse of time in respect of such
offences will be result-wise counter productive in
the long run and against the interest of society
which needs to be cared for and strengthened by
string of deterrence inbuilt in the sentencing
system.
100. Justice demands that courts should impose
punishment befitting the crime so that the courts
reflect public abhorrence of the crime.
The court must not only keep in view the rights of
the victim of the crime but the society at large also
while considering the imposition of appropriate
punishment. The court will be failing in its duty if
appropriate punishment is not awarded for a crime
which has been committed not only against the
individual victim but also against the society to
which both the criminal and the victim belong."
22. In Jameel vs. State of Uttar Pradesh (2010) 12 SCC 532, this
Court reiterated the principle by stating that the punishment must be
appropriate and proportional to the gravity of the offence committed.
Speaking about the concept of sentencing, this Court observed thus:
"15. In operating the sentencing system, law
should adopt the corrective machinery or
deterrence based on factual matrix. By deft
modulation, sentencing process be stern where it
should be, and tempered with mercy where it
warrants to be. The facts and given circumstances
in each case, the nature of the crime, the manner in
which it was planned and committed, the motive
for commission of the crime, the conduct of the
accused, the nature of weapons used and all other
attending circumstances are relevant facts which
would enter into the area of consideration.
It is the duty of every court to award proper
sentence having regard to the nature of the offence
and the manner in which it was executed or
committed. The sentencing courts are expected to
consider all relevant facts and circumstances
bearing on the question of sentence and proceed to
impose a sentence commensurate with the gravity
of the offence."
23. In Guru Basavaraj @ Benne Settapa vs. State of Karnataka,
(2012) 8 SCC 734, while discussing the concept of appropriate
sentence, this Court expressed that:
"It is the duty of the court to see that appropriate
sentence is imposed regard being had to the
commission of the crime and its impact on the
social order. The cry of the collective for justice,
which includes adequate punishment cannot be
lightly ignored."
24. In Gopal Singh vs. State of Uttarakhand JT 2013 (3) SC 444 held
"18. Just punishment is the collective cry of the
society. While the collective cry has to be kept
uppermost in the mind, simultaneously the
principle of proportionality between the crime and
punishment cannot be totally brushed aside. The
principle of just punishment is the bedrock of
sentencing in respect of a criminal offence....."
25.    Since counsel for appellant pressed the appeal only on the point
of quantum of sentence, hence on perusal of statement of victim and
other witnesses, I am of the view that the judgment rendered by the
trial court is affirmed and the conviction of the appellant is also
hereby affirmed. Now the question arise for quantum of sentence.
Since the appellant is guilty of the offence punishable under Section
354 IPC, which was existed in the year 2007, the sentence was
provided under Section 354 IPC shall be punished with imprisonment
of either of either description for a term which may extend to two
years or with fine or with both. As no minimum sentence was
prescribed and the trial court sentenced the appellant for maximum
period of two years. Perusal of report of Jail Superintendent, District
Jail Kheri, indicates that the appellant served out sentence of eight
months and fifteen days. Considering the entire possible conspectus of
circumstances, in my opinion, sending appellant back to penitentiary,
to serve out remaining part of his sentence will not be in the interest of
justice. Fear of being sending back to jail looming large for such long
period must have tormented him enough for which he must have been
penancing.
26.    Concludingly, while appellant’s conviction is upheld under
Section 354 IPC, but his sentence is reduced to the period of
imprisonment already undergone by him. However, the appellant shall
deposit the fine amount as awarded by the trial court within fifteen
days from the date of production of certified copy of this order. It is
made clear that if he fails to deposit the said amount, he shall serve
out the remaining part of his sentence.
27.    In view of the above, this appeal on the point of conviction is
hereby dismissed and on the point of sentence is partly allowed. The
appellant is on bail. He need not surrender.
28.    The record of this case be transmitted to the trial court for
necessary compliance.