Station, District Ahmedabad on 04.02.2015 and whereas allegations were
against two unknown males and two unknown females. It appears that the
said FIR was being investigated by the respondent No.6 herein and as can
be made out from the inquiry report by the SP concerned dated 27.04.2015
very conveniently the petitioner Nos. 1 and 2 while passing on a motorbike
had been intercepted by the police party and the petitioners had not stopped
their motorbike and they had slipped and fell down a little further and they
had been caught by the police officials. Thereafter the investigation
proceeded where the only material available against the petitioners, being in
the nature of their confession, the Investigating Officer accepting the same,
had submitted the charge-sheet and fortunately for the petitioners the entire
investigation fell through before the Court conducting the trial. The fall was
such that even the complainant who is alleged to have identified the
petitioners in the Identification Parade in the office of the Mamlatdar, in his
deposition has stated that the petitioners were not identified by him as the
persons who had committed the alleged offence.
5.      Things would not have attained such seriousness, if this was a one off
case by the police officials. It appears that upon the petitioners being
arrested with regard to the FIR referred to hereinabove, again merely based
upon the confessional statements of the petitioners, 04 undetected offences
of the year 2013 and 2014 were stated to be solved with regard to
concerned police station as well as with regard to nearby police station. It
would be pertinent to mention that in all the cases, the learned trial Courts
have acquitted the petitioners.
6.      It also would require to be mentioned herein that as regards an FIR
being C.R. No.I- 27 of 2013 registered with Barwala Police Station for
offence punishable under Section 302 and 394 of the IPC, it appears that
unlike the Investigating Officers of other FIRs referred to whereby based
upon the confessional statements of the petitioners, the offence was
detected and charge-sheets were filed, the Investigating Officer with regard
to the FIR registered with the Barwala Police Station appears to be a person
who went by the rule of law. The officer after thorough investigation had
submitted a report to the learned Magistrate, Barwala, under Section 169 of
the Cr.P.C. The report inter alia mentions that the petitioners had confessed
to have committed the alleged crimes on account of excessive torture by the
police officials. The report shows that the officer had recorded the
statements of two persons of the village, in which the petitioners are
residing, wherein the said persons mention that the petitioners for the last
12 years having been cultivating land to the extent of approximately 350
Bighas and whereas they were cultivating cotton in the said agricultural land
in partnership with the persons whose statements have been taken. It
appears that the petitioners through honest hard work have earned
reasonably and the amount as well as the ornaments recovered from the
petitioners clearly appears to be the money which had been earned by the
petitioners or which had been purchased from the said money and none of
the articles were relatable to any proceeds of the crime. The Investigating
Officer had also conducted an Identification Parade, more particularly with
regard to another offence, though which had not been stated to be
committed by the petitioners and because of the intervention and honest
investigation done by the said officer, it appears that the complainants of the
said FIRs have not identified the petitioners as the persons who had
committed the crime in question. Based upon the report by the said
Investigating Officer of the Barwala Police Station, the learned JMFC,
Barwala, has released the present petitioners. The investigation by the said
police officer also contains certificates issued by the Medical Officer of the
Community Health Center, Barwala, near about the period when the
petitioners had been first apprehended and whereas the said certificates
clearly reveal numerous injuries sustained by the petitioners, more
particularly on account of torture by the police officials.
7.      It appears that near about the same period when the Investigating
Officer, Barwala Police Station, had submitted his report under Section 169
of the Cr.P.C. before the learned Magistrate in the month of March, 2015,
the Deputy Superintendent of Police, Viramgam and Superintendent of
Police, Ahmedabad (Rural) had conducted an inquiry/investigation.
Unfortunately, it appears that the investigation could not unearth any fault
by the police officials. The report also reveals the probable reason for which
the petitioners appear to have been apprehended in the first place and as
referred to hereinabove, that would relate to the accident of the birth of the
petitioners. It appears that the police officials were swayed by the fact that
the petitioners belong to a particular community and whereas the said
community, according to the investigation as being attempted to be
obliquely mentioned therein, is engaged in theft and other illegal activities
and whereas there also appear to be numerous cases against a near relative
of the present petitioners. Thus, it appears that while the petitioners though
they are earning their livelihood honestly, on account of the fact that they
had been born in a particular community and certain persons in the
community are engaged in doing illegal activity and one of the relatives of
the petitioners also stated to be engaged in such illegal activity, therefore the
petitioners also have been profiled as law breakers. The apathy of the police
officials, more particularly the senior officers of the level of Dy.S.P and SP
submitting such a halfhearted report before this Court is not appreciated.
8.      Having regard to the observations hereinabove, let the respondent
No.4 - Inspector General of Police, Ahmedabad Range, conduct an inquiry
into the cause of arrest of the present petitioners and their being implicated
in other undetected offences and submit a very clear report as to whether
any excess had been committed by the police officials at any stage. Such
report shall be submitted after a thorough investigation by a Police Officer
not below the rank of Superintendent of Police and whereas the final report
should be submitted to the Court by way of an affidavit by the Inspector
General of Police.
9.       After the affidavit is submitted by the concerned Officer, this Court
would after hearing the State decide action to be taken against the police
officials found involved, if any.
10.      As this Court finds that prima facie the petitioners appear to have
been falsely implicated in approximately 05 FIRs and whereas the
petitioners have undergone pain, agony and suffering on account of a wrong
investigation, the term wrong is used since this Court has ordered an inquiry
but the the fact of the petitioners having been arrested, the fact of the
petitioners having beaten up by police, the fact of the petitioners having
been acquitted by the concerned Trial Courts cannot be ignored or
overlooked. Hence, the State of Gujarat through an Officer not below the
rank of Deputy Secretary of the Home Department to file an affidavit as to
why compensation in the nature of exemplary compensation should not be
directed to be paid to the petitioners by the State.
11.      For the purpose of filing both the affidavits, list this matter on