By this writ appeal under section 2 (1) of Madhya Pradesh
(Smt. Kala Devi Vs. State of M.P. and others )
Uchha Nyalaya (Khand Nyaypeeth Ko Appeal) Adhiniyam, 2005, the
appellant/petitioner had challenged the judgment dated 15.7.2019
passed by learned Single Judge in W.P. No.3998/2010, whereby the
writ petition filed by the appellant/petitioner was dismissed, while
holding that since the husband of the petitioner had not qualified
minimum       requirement    service   of    regularized   Work-charged
establishment i.e. 10 years to enable him to qualify for pension or
family pension, the authorities were justified in not granting the
pension or family pension to the petitioner.
2.     With consent of the parties the matter is finally heard at motion
3.     Brief facts leading to this appeal are that husband of the present
petitioner was appointed as a Gangman in the Public Works
Department on muster roll on 26/12/1963 and his services were
regularized with effect from 01/01/1998 and he stood retired after
attaining the age of superannuation on 31/05/2007 after completion of
9 years and 5 months and w.e.f. 26/12/1963 he had completed 43
years of service approx.
4.     Before the learned Single Judge, it was the case of the
petitioner that the petitioner’s husband during his life time had asked
for pension after his retirement but the same was denied on the
ground that since he had worked only for 9 years as a regular
employee, he doesn’t qualify the minimum service required to be
eligible for grant of pension. It was the case of the petitioner that
though similarly situated employee had been granted pension by the
department and even the law regarding counting of services rendered
while working under Work charged Contingency Department is clear
for the purposes of grant of pension, the Department had wrongly
denied it and accordingly a prayer was made for a direction to the
respondent department to count the services of the husband of the
(Smt. Kala Devi Vs. State of M.P. and others )
petitioner from initial date of appointment for pension purpose and to
grant family pension and arrears with interest.
5.     The stand of the respondent-department was that since the
husband of the petitioner did not complete 10 years of service as
regular employee which is the minimum requirement under the
Pension Rules, the petitioner is not entitled for grant of family
pension. After hearing the matter the learned Single Judge dismissed
the petition holding that since the husband of the petitioner did not
qualify the minimum requirement of regularized work-charged
establishment i.e. 10 years to enable him to qualify for the
pension/family pension, the authorities were justified for non-
granting of the pension/family pension to the petitioner.
6.     Learned Counsel for the petitioner vehemently argued that the
learned Single Judge overlooked the fact that as per rule 6 sub-rule 3
of Madhya Pradesh (Work Charged and Contingency Paid
Employees) Pension Rules, 1979 which deals with commencement of
qualifying service, specifically speaks of on absorption of temporary
employee without interruption against any regular pensionable post,
the service rendered with effect from 1 st January, 1974 onwards, if
such service is not less than six years shall be counted for pension as
if such service was rendered in a regular post. It was further argued
that rule 2(c) of the Pension Rules of 1979 defines term ‘Permanent
Employee’ as a contingency paid employee or a work charged
employee who had completed fifteen years of service or more on or
after 1st of January, 1974 and if in the light of the above definition, the
services of the husband of the petitioner is counted, he being in
employment since 1963 and had completed more than six years of
regular service prior to his regularization on 01/01/1998, was entitled
for the pension and consequently the petitioner was entitled for
family pension.
(Smt. Kala Devi Vs. State of M.P. and others )
7.     Per contra the learned Government Advocate argued that since
the husband of the petitioner did not complete 10 years of the service
as regular employee which is the minimum requirement under the
Pension Rules, the petitioner is not entitled for grant of family
pension. He also relied upon the decision of Full Bench of this Court
in the matter of Mamta Shukla Vs. State of M.P. & others reported
in (2011) 3 MPLJ 211 and contended that if an employee is not
appointed as per the Recruitment Rules of 1977, his past services
would not be counted as qualifying service for the purpose of pension
in accordance with the Pension Rules of 1979.
8.     Heard the Counsels for the parties in extenso.
9.     Considering the entire controversy, we find that the     order  of
learned Single Judge impugned herein deserves interference, as it is
not based upon correct interpretation of the pension rules and also the
stand   of    the   respondent department is severely      lopsided   and
injudicious.    The    case    of  the    petitioner  that   he   was   a
Gangman appointed on muster roll on 26/12/1963, was regularized
from     01/01/1998        and    stood       retired  on     31/05/2007
and for his services rendered, pension to be paid, would be regulated
by the M.P. Pension Rules of 1979, has force in it and for that it is
expedient to refer the relevant provisions of Pension Rules of 1979
10.    Rule 4 A and Rule 6 of Pension Rules, 1979 thereof
"4 A. Notwithstanding anything contained in rule
4 the family of a permanent employee, who dies
while in service or after retirement on pension, on
or after the 1st April 1981 shall be entitled to
family pension at the rate of 30% of his/her pay
drawn at the time of death/retirement subject to
minimum, of Rs.40/- per month and maximum of
Rs. 100/- per month subject to other conditions of
(Smt. Kala Devi Vs. State of M.P. and others )
Rule 47 of Madhya Pradesh Civil Services
(Pension) Rules, 1976 except sub-rule (3) of the
said Rules.
“6. Commencement of qualifying service-
(1) subject to the provisions of Chapter III of the
1976 or section IV of the Madhya Pradesh New
Pension Rules, 1951 as the case may be, for
calculating qualifying service of a permanent
employee who retires as such, the service
rendered with effect from the 1st January, 1959
onwards shall be counted.
(2)On absorption of a permanent employee
without interruption against any regular
pensionable post, the service rendered with effect
from 1st January, 1959 onward shall be counted
for pension as if such service was rendered in a
regular post.
(3) On absorption of temporary employee without
interruption against any regular pensionable post,
the service rendered with effect from 1st January,
1974 onwards, if such service is of less than six
years shall be counted for pension as if such
service was rendered in a regular post.
When the aforesaid two Rules are read together, it is clear as crystal
that the provisions which govern the family pension has a different
field of operation than the provisions regarding pension to an
employee who retires from the work-charged establishment and are
governed by Rule 6 of Rules of 1979.
11.    By virtue of Rule 4 A the provisions as contained under Rule
47 of the M.P. Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1976 are also attracted.
(1) The provisions of this rule shall apply:-
(a) to a Government servant entering service in a
pensionable establishment or on after 1st April 1966,
(Smt. Kala Devi Vs. State of M.P. and others )
(b) to a Government servant who was in service on
31st March, 1966 and came to be governed by the
provisions of the Family Pension Scheme for State
Government Employees, 1966 contained in
Government of Madhya Pradesh Finance Department
memo No 1963/C.R903-IV-R. II dated 17th August,
1966 as in force immediately before the
commencement of these rules.
(2) Subject to the provision of sub-rule (5) and without
prejudice to the provisions contained in sub rule (3),
(a) during the period of service he was found medically
fit at the time of appointment.
(b) after retirement from service and was on the date of
death in receipt of a pension or compassionate
allowance, referred to in Chapter V other than the
pension referred to in Rule 34, on the date of death, the
family of the deceased shall be entitled to a
contributory family pension (hereinafter in this rule
referred to as Family pension) the amount of which
Pay of Government Servant Amount of monthly Family
12.   A harmonious reading of Rule 4 A, 6 (3) of Rules of 1979 and
Rule 47 of Rules of 1976 would fresco that family of a person
employed in a regular work-charged establishment,            cannot be
deprived of the pension which it would be entitled for by virtue of
Rule 4 A of Rules, 1979.
13.   As to the law laid down by the Full Bench of this Court in
Mamta Shukla (supra) the issue before the Full Bench was-
"(i) Whether the decision of the Division Bench
in W.A. No. 725/2007, Smt. Rahisha Begum Vs.
State of M.P. and others is not a good law in view
(Smt. Kala Devi Vs. State of M.P. and others )
of the decision of the earlier Division Bench of
this Court vide order dated 18-7-2005, passed in
W.P. No. 1273/2000, State of M.P. and others Vs.
(ii) Whether an employee is eligible for the
benefit of family pension in accordance with the
provisions of Madhya Pradesh (Work Charged
and Contingency Paid Employees) Pension Rules,
1979 after completing qualifying service in
accordance with the provisions of Recruitment
Rules framed by the concerned Department for
work charged and contingency paid employees or
in accordance with the definition of Rule 2 of
Madhya Pradesh (Work Charged and Contingency
Paid Employees) Pension Rules, 1979 in regard to
"contingency paid employee", "work-charged
(iii) Whether for counting qualifying service of an
employee for the purpose of grant of benefit of
pension it is necessary that the employee has to be
appointed in accordance with the provisions of
contingency paid employee’s recruitment rules
framed by the concerned department in regard to
work charged and contingency paid employees?”
The reference was answered in the following terms-
"24- On the basis of above discussion, we hold in
regard to the substantial questions of law Nos: 2 and 3
that an employee is eligible to count his past service as
qualifying service in accordance with Rule 6 of the
Pension Rules, 1979, if he was appointed in accordance
with the provisions of Recruitment Rules of 1977. We
further hold that an employee, who was not appointed
in accordance with the provisions of Recruitment Rules
framed by the concerned department, i.e., the
Recruitment Rules of 1977, would not be eligible to
count his past service as qualifying service for the
purpose of grant of pension in accordance with the
Pension Rules of 1979 and we answer the substantial
questions of law Nos. 2 and 3 accordingly.
25. In regard to substantial question of law No. 1
Earlier Division Bench of this Court in W.P. No.
1273/2000, State of M.P. Vs. Ramsingh and another, as
held that a daily wager employee would not fall within
(Smt. Kala Devi Vs. State of M.P. and others )
the definition of work charged and contingency paid
employee, hence his case would not be covered by
Madhya Pradesh Workcharged and Contingency Paid
Employees Pension Rules, 1979, has not been noticed
by the subsequent Division Bench of this Court in
Rahisha Begum Vs. State of M.P. and others, 2010(4)
MPLJ 332. However, in the subsequent case, the
Division Bench has held that if an employee comes
within the definition of work charged and contingency
paid employee as defined the Pension Rules of 1979,
then he is eligible to count his past service for
the purpose of qualifying service in accordance with
the Rules of 1979. In our opinion, there is no conflict
between the Division Bench judgments, because the
findings of the Division Benches are based on different
factual aspects. Accordingly, we answer the substantial
question of law No. 1 that there is no conflict of
opinion between the two Division Bench judgments.
Hence, the decision of the Division Bench in the case
of Rahisha Begum Vs. State of M.P. and others,
2010(4) MPLJ 332, is not per incuriam. We answer
substantial question of law No. 1 accordingly."
14.    Apparent, it is from the above, we find that the ratio laid down
in the case of Mamta Shukla (supra) would not be applicable in the
present case firstly for the reason that the issue as to grant of family
pension to a widow of an employee of work charged who are covered
by Rule 4A & sub-rule 3 of rule 6 of Rules of 1979 was not the term
of reference there, nor was the same dwelt upon by the Full Bench
and secondly the case of the appellant/petitioner is fully covered by
rule 4A and sub-rule (3) of rule 6 as amended vide notification dated
30th of January, 1996 in the M.P. (Workcharged and Contingency Paid
15.    Consequently, in view of above, the order passed by the learned
Single Judge holding that the respondents were justified in denying
the family pension to the petitioner on the ground of petitioner's
husband did not complete 10 years of service in Regular Work
Charged Establishment, could not be sustained and therefore, it is
(Smt. Kala Devi Vs. State of M.P. and others )
hereby declared that the services of the husband of the petitioner
would be governed by Rule 4A and sub-rule 3 of Rule 6 of M.P.
(Work charged and Contingency Paid Employees) Pension Rules,
1979 and she would be entitled for the family pension.
16.    The order dated 15.7.2019 passed by learned Single Judge
dismissing the petition is hereby set aside. The respondent/State is
directed to pay the pension and other consequential benefits to the
petitioner, within a period of three months from the date of this order.
17.    Accordingly, the writ appeal is hereby allowed. No orders as
to cost.
E-copy/Certified copy as per rules/directions.