Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 46497 of
Counsel for Applicant :- Ran Vijay Singh,Atharva Dixit,Praveen
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.,Ajay Singh
1.     Heard Sri Manish Tiwari Senior Advocate, assisted by Sri
Praveen Kumar Singh Advocate, the learned counsel for the applicant,
Sri Arun Kumar Pandey, the learned A.G.A. for the State and Sri Ajay
Singh Advocate, the learned counsel for the informant / victim in Case
Crime No. 74 of 2022.
2.     The instant application has been filed seeking release of the
applicant on bail in Case Crime No. 126 of 2022, under Section 3 (1)
of the Uttar Pradesh Gangsters and Anti-Social Activities (Prevention)
Act, 1986 (which will hereinafter be referred to as ‘the Gangsters
Act), Police Station Chetganj, District Varanasi. A copy of the Gang-
chart accompanying the F.I.R. mentions involvement of the applicant
in four cases, one of which is Case Crime No. 74 of 2022 under
Sections 448, 386, 504, 506, 420, 120-B, 34 IPC and Sections 10 (i),
10 (ii), 22 and 23 of the Uttar Pradesh Regulation of Money-Lending
3.     Sri Ajay Singh, Advocate has put in appearance on behalf of the
informant of Case Crime No. 74 of 2022 and he has sought to oppose
the bail application.
4.     Sri. Manish Tiwari Senior Advocate has opposed the
intervention of the informant of Case Crime No. 74 of 2022 in the
present case, i.e. Case Crime No. 126 of 2022 and he has submitted
that the informant of Case Crime No. 74 of 2022 does not fall within
the definition of victim of the present case and, therefore, he has no
right to oppose the prayer for grant of bail to the applicant in the
present case. He has further submitted that the Gangsters Act is a
special enactment having an overriding effect on any other law, as
provided by Section 20 of the Act, which is as follows: -
“20. Overriding effect. - The provisions of this Act or any rule
made thereunder shall have effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any other enactment.”
5.     The provision for grant of bail to a person accused of an offence
under the Gangsters is provided in Section 19 of the Act, the relevant
portion whereof is as follows: -
“19. Modified application of certain provisions of the Code. –
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, no person
accused of an offence punishable under this Act or any rule
made thereunder shall, if in custody, be released on bail or on his
(a)    the Public Prosecutor has been given an opportunity to
oppose the application for such release, and
(b)    where the Public Prosecutor opposes the application, the
Court is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for believing
that he is not guilty of such offence and that he is not likely to
commit any offence while on bail.
(5) The limitations on granting of bail specified in sub-section
(4) are in addition to the limitations under the Code.”
6.     Section 19 (4) contains a provision for giving an opportunity to
the public prosecutor to oppose the application for release of a person
on bail but there is no provision giving such right to any person other
than the Public Prosecutor.
7.     Replying to the aforesaid objection, Sri Ajay Singh has stated
that although the present case has been registered on the basis of an
F.I.R. lodged by the Inspector In-charge, the F.I.R. mentions that the
applicant is involved in commission of several offences, one of which
being Case Crime No. 74 of 2022. He has further submitted that since
Case Crime No. 74 of 2022 forms the basis for lodging of the present
case, the victim of Case Crime No. 74 of 2022 is also a victim of the
present case.
8.Sri Ajay Singh, Advocate has placed reliance on a decision of the
Hon’ble Supreme Court in Jagjeet Singh Vs. Ashish Mishra @
9.    I have given a thoughtful consideration to the aforesaid
submissions made on behalf of the parties.
10.   The question whether a victim of a predicate offence can claim
a right of hearing to oppose the bail application of a person accused
under the Gangsters Act has been dealt with by a co-ordinate Bench of
this Court in Zeba Rizwan versus State of U.P., 2022 SCC OnLine
All 352 : (2022) 4 All LJ 175. It would be appropriate to note the
following submissions which raised in the aforesaid case: -
“8. Learned counsel has relied on the judgment of the Supreme
Court passed in Jagjeet Singh v. Ashish Mishra @ Monu (2022)
9 SCC 321, wherein it has been stated that a ‘victim’ within the
meaning of Cr.P.C. cannot be asked to await the commencement
of trial for asserting his/her right to participate in the proceed-
ings.
9. Learned counsel has further relied on the judgment of the
Supreme Court passed in Sudha Singh v. State of Uttar
Pradesh (2021) 4 SCC 781, wherein it has been opined that the
accused person, who has been prosecuted in fifteen cases for se-
rious offences including murder, attempt to murder and criminal
conspiracy, should not have been granted bail under the U.P.
Gangster and Anti-Social Activities (Prevention) Act, 1986, and
the said bail was set aside by the Supreme Court.”
11.   While dealing with the submissions, this Court held that: -
“15. If the said victims of the predicate offence are permitted to
appear and oppose the bail applications in the matters of
Gangsters Act, it shall open a Pandora's box and prove hurdle in
proper disposal of the case.
22. Of late, the criminal jurisprudence has developed that the
victim is being accorded proper opportunity of being heard not
only at the various stages of trial and even at the stage of
disposal of bail. But the story herein is a bit different. The matter
in question is under Section 3(1) of U.P. Gangster and Anti-
Social Activities (Prevention) Act, 1986, and not under the IPC
or any other Special Act and the complainant of the said case is
the S.H.O. of the police station. So the counsel for the victim of
the predicate offence i.e. FIR No. 002 of 2022 does not come
within the category of “victim” pertaining to the present case.
Inspite of the provisions discussed above, the counsel for victim
in the offence u/s 302 IPC has been heard at length.”
12.    What appears from a reading of the aforesaid judgment, is that
although Jagjeet Singh and Sudha Singh (Supra) were taken note of,
the Court has held that the victim of a predicate offence cannot be
treated to be a victim of an offence under the Gangsters Act and doing
so will open a pandora’s box and it will create hurdles in disposal of
13.    In Jagjeet Singh (Supra), the Hon’ble Supreme Court has been
pleased to hold as follows: -
“19. On the domestic front, recent amendments to the Cr.P.C.
have recognised a victim’s rights in the Indian criminal justice
system. The genesis of such rights lies in the 154 th Report of the
Law Commission of India, wherein, radical recommendations on
the aspect of compensatory justice to a victim under a
compensation scheme were made. Thereafter, a Committee on the
Reforms of Criminal Justice System in its Report in 2003,
suggested ways and means to develop a cohesive system in which
all parts are to work in coordination to achieve the common goal
of restoring the lost confidence of the people in the criminal
justice system. The Committee recommended the rights of the
victim or his/her legal representative “to be impleaded as a
party in every criminal proceeding where the charges
punishable with seven years’ imprisonment or more”.
20. It was further recommended that the victim be armed with a
right to be represented by an advocate of his/her choice, and if
he/she is not in a position to afford the same, to provide an
advocate at the State’s expense. The victim’s right to participate
in criminal trial and his/her right to know the status of
investigation, and take necessary steps, or to be heard at every
crucial stage of the criminal proceedings, including at the time of
grant or cancellation of bail, were also duly recognised by the
Committee. Repeated judicial intervention, coupled with the
recommendations made from time to time as briefly noticed
above, prompted the Parliament to bring into force the Code of
Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2008, which not only
inserted the definition of a ‘victim’ under Section 2 (wa) but also
statutorily recognised various rights of such victims at different
stages of trial.
21. It is pertinent to mention that the legislature has thoughtfully
given a wide and expansive meaning to the expression ‘victim’
which “means a person who has suffered any loss or injury
caused by reason of the act or omission for which the accused
person has been charged and the expression “victim” includes
his or her guardian or legal heir”.
22. It cannot be gainsaid that the rights of a victim under the
amended CrPC are substantive, enforceable, and are another
facet of human rights. The victim's right, therefore, cannot be
termed or construed restrictively like a brutum fulmen. We
reiterate that these rights are totally independent, incomparable,
and are not accessory or auxiliary to those of the State under the
CrPC. The presence of “State” in the proceedings, therefore,
does not tantamount to according a hearing to a “victim” of the
23. A “victim” within the meaning of CrPC cannot be asked to
await the commencement of trial for asserting his/her right to
participate in the proceedings. He/She has a legally vested right
to be heard at every step post the occurrence of an offence.
Such a “victim” has unbridled participatory rights from the
stage of investigation till the culmination of the proceedings in
an appeal or revision. We may hasten to clarify that “victim”
and “complainant/informant” are two distinct connotations in
criminal jurisprudence. It is not always necessary that the com-
plainant/informant is also a “victim”, for even a stranger to the
act of crime can be an “informant”, and similarly, a “victim”
need not be the complainant or informant of a felony.”
24. The abovestated enunciations are not to be conflated with
certain statutory provisions, such as those present in the Special
Acts like the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention
of Atrocities) Act, 1989, where there is a legal obligation to hear
the victim at the time of granting bail. Instead, what must be tak-
24.1.First, the Indian jurisprudence is constantly evolving,
whereby, the right of victims to be heard, especially in cases
involving heinous crimes, is increasingly being acknowledged.
24.2.Second, where the victims themselves have come forward
to participate in a criminal proceeding, they must be accorded
with an opportunity of a fair and effective hearing. If the right
to file an appeal against acquittal, is not accompanied with the
right to be heard at the time of deciding a bail application, the
same may result in grave miscarriage of justice. Victims
certainly cannot be expected to be sitting on the fence and
watching the proceedings from afar, especially when they may
have legitimate grievances. It is the solemn duty of a court to
deliver justice before the memory of an injustice eclipses.”
14.    In Sudha Singh v. State of U.P., (2021) 4 SCC 781, the
Hon’ble Supreme Court entertained and allowed an appeal filed by the
wife of a person, who had been allegedly murdered by the accused,
against an order of this Court granting bail to the accused in a case in-
volving commission of offence punishable under Section 3(1) of the
15.    From the aforesaid discussion, it naturally follows that the term
“victim” cannot be taken to be a synonym of the terms “complainant”
or “informant” and “victim” need not be the complainant or informant
of an offence. If a victim of a predicate offence can file appeal
challenging an order granting bail in an offence under the Gangsters
Act, he certainly has the right to have an opportunity to oppose the
application for grant of bail in an offence under the Act and for that
purpose, he will have to be treated as a victim of the offence under the
Gangsters Act. Where the victim of a predicate offence has come
forward to participate in the proceeding by making submissions in
opposition of a bail application, he must be given an opportunity of
16.    It appears that although Jagjeet Singh and Sudha Singh (Supra)
have been taken note of by the Bench deciding Zeba Rizwan (Supra),
the true purport of the aforesaid judgments has somehow escaped
attention of this Court and, therefore, which utmost respect to the co-
ordinate bench which decided Zeba Rizwan, I find myself unable to
follow the law laid down in it, as it runs contrary to the law laid down
by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the aforesaid cases.
17.    Since the F.I.R. of the present case mentions Case Crime No. 74
of 2022 as one of the predicate offences forming basis of lodging of
the present F.I.R., and the informant claims to be a victim of the
aforesaid predicate offence, he has to be treated as a victim of the
present offence and he has the right to make submissions in
opposition of the bail application. It is interesting to note that even in
Zeba Rizwan (Supra), after holding that the victim of a predicate
offence was not the victim of the offence under the Gangsters Act, the
Court provided him an opportunity of hearing before deciding the bail
18.     In view of the aforesaid discussion, the objection raised on
behalf of the applicant is hereby rejected and the Court proceeds to
decide the application on its merits after taking into consideration the
submissions made by the learned Counsel for the informant in Case
Crime No. 74 of 2022 in opposition of the bail application.
19.     The allegation against the applicant is that he is a member of a
gang, which is engaged in commission of several offences, and the
gang-chart mentions involvement of the applicant in the following
(i) Case Crime No. 72/2022 under Sections 386, 504, 506, 420,
120-B, 34 IPC and Sections 10 (i), 10 (ii), 22 and 23 of the
Uttar Pradesh Regulation of Money-Lending Act, 1976, Police
(ii) Case Crime No. 74 of 2022 under Sections 448, 386, 504, 506,
420, 120-B, 34 IPC and Sections 10 (i), 10 (ii), 22 and 23 of the
Uttar Pradesh Regulation of Money-Lending Act, 1976, Police
(iii) Case Crime No. 111 of 2021 under Sections 379, 506, 411 IPC,
(iv) Case Crime No. 1099 of 2018 under Sections 504, 506 IPC,
20.     Case Crime No. 74 of 2022 was lodged on the basis of F.I.R.
alleging that the informant’s father had started business of Sarees in
the year 1982-83. For meeting his business requirements, he had taken
a loan of Rs.25,00,000/- from the co-accused Kashi Singh and he had
executed an agreement on 21.11.2006 surrendering one of his shops in
favour of wife of Kashi Singh. It was alleged in the F.I.R. that after
taking the loan, the informant’s father came to know that the accused
persons are members of a gang involved in earning interest and
committing crimes and, therefore, he refunded the money, yet Kashi
Singh and others continued to extract money from him and they got
the informant’s flat transferred in the name of wife of Kashi Singh and
in the year 2016, the accused person took possession of another shop
belonging to the informant. The F.I.R. alleges that the informant and
his father have paid about 70-80 lakhs Rupees and they have got
written acknowledgment from Kashi Singh and the applicant in
respect of some of the amount paid.
21.    As per the F.I.R. allegations, the informant’s father had taken a
loan of Rs.25,00,000/- from the co-accused Kashi Singh and an
agreement was executed on a stamp paper and the sale deed of the flat
was executed in favour of wife of Kashi Nath. The informant claims
that he and his father have repaid about 70-80 lakhs and they have
written acknowledgment in respect of some of the amount paid, but
the exact amount repaid by them and exact amount for which they
have written acknowledgments has not been disclosed. Considering
the facts of the case, the learned Session Judge, Varanasi has passed
an order dated 14.09.2022 ordering the applicant’s release on bail in
Case Crime No. 74 of 2022.
22.    In two of the three other cases mentioned in the gang-chart,
namely Case Crime No. 72/2022 and Case Crime No. 1099 of 2018,
the applicant has already been granted bail by the Session Judge
Varanasi and in Case Crime No. 111 of 2021 the applicant has been
granted bail by the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Varanasi.
23.    A supplementary affidavit filed in support of the bail
application mentions the criminal history of the applicant of eleven
more cases, in four of which, the applicant has already been acquitted,
a Complaint Case No. 93 of 2014 under Sections 420, 506 IPC has
been rejected under Section 203 Cr.P.C., in two cases bearing Case
Crime No. 208 of 2019 under Sections 341, 504, 506 IPC and Case
Crime No. 990 of 2020 under Sections 420, 406, 504, 506 IPC, the
Police has submitted final reports which have been accepted by the
24.    In the remaining four cases, the applicant has been granted bail
and copies of the bail orders have been annexed with the
supplementary affidavit.
25.    Co-accused Kashi Nath Singh has already been granted bail in
the present case by means of an order dated 03-11-2022 passed by this
Court in Criminal Misc. Bail Application No. 45869 of 2022. The
other co-accused person Prem Shankar Singh @ Meethe has also been
granted bail by means of an order dated 21-10-2022 passed by this
Court in Criminal Misc. Bail Application No. 45765 of 2022.
26.    Sri. Arun Kumar Pandey, the learned AGA and Sri. Ajay Singh
Advocate, the learned Counsel for the victim have opposed the prayer
for grant of bail and they have submitted that the allegations against
the applicant are of serious nature. However, they could not dispute
the aforesaid aspects of the matter and the fact that both the other co-
accused persons have already been granted bail.
27.    Case Crime No. 126 of 2022, under Section 3 (1) of the
Gangsters Act, in which the applicant is seeking bail, has been
registered by means of an F.I.R. dated 27.08.2022 lodged by the
Inspector in-charge against three named accused persons, including
the applicant, alleging that while the Inspector was involved in
patrolling of the area in Government Vehicle No. UP 65 AG 0845
alongwith a Head Constable, three Constables and the Chauki In-
charge Sub-Inspector Angad Kumar Singh, from the record available
in the Police Station and verification of the information received, he
found that all the accused persons have formed an organized gang
which is led by the applicant and they are engaged in commission of
offences like illegal interest earning, money lending, extortion etc.
The FIR further alleges that because of the fear of the offences
committed by the gang, no person dares to lodge a complaint or give
evidence against it. It is further averred in the F.I.R. that a Gang-chart
prepared for preventing the criminal activities of the members of the
gang has already been approved by the Commissioner of Police,
28.    A copy of the Gang-chart accompanying the F.I.R. indicates that
it mentions three persons as the members of the gang – (i) Ramesh
Rai - the applicant, (ii) Kashi Nath Singh and (iii) Premshankar Singh
alias Meethe. The Gang-chart mentions involvement of the applicant
in four cases. The Gang-chart appears to have been prepared by the
Inspector In-charge on 18-08-2022 and after having been forwarded
by various officers, ultimately it was forwarded by the Deputy
Commissioner of Police on 27-08-2022 and thereafter it was approved
by the Commissioner of Police, Varanasi.
29.    The Inspector-in-charge, who himself had prepared and
forwarded the Gang-chart on 18-08-2022, states in the F.I.R. lodged
by himself on 27-08-2022 that while he was involved in patrolling of
the area in Government Vehicle No. UP 65 AG 0845 alongwith a
Head Constable, three Constables and the Chauki In-charge Sub-
Inspector Angad Kumar Singh, from the record available in the Police
Station and verification of the information received, he found that all
the accused persons have formed an organized gang which is led by
the applicant and they are engaged into commission of offences like
illegal interest earning, money lending, extortion etc., and a bare
reading of this narration indicates that the F.I.R. has been lodged in a
mechanical manner, on a stereotyped proforma, without application of
mind to the facts of the individual case.
30.    Sri. Manish Tiwari Senior Advocate has submitted that a
perusal of the narration made in the F.I.R. indicates that the applicant
has been implicated in the present case solely on the basis of perusal
of records available with the police, and that too, during patrolling in a
jeep, which prima facie indicates that the applicant has been
implicated by the police without any material against him to establish
that he is a gangster.
31.    In Ashok Kumar Dixit versus State of U. P. AIR 1987 All
235, while upholding the constitutional validity of the Uttar Pradesh
Gangsters and Anti-Social Activities (Prevention) Act, 1986, a Full
Bench of this Court held that: -
“73….If we advert to Section 2(b) of the Act, which defines the
term ‘gangster’ we would find significant words. They are “act-
ing”, ‘singly or collectively’, ‘violence or show of violence’, ‘in-
timidation’, ‘coercion’, or ‘unlawful means’. Thus, for booking a
person under the provisions of the Act, the authorities have to
be prima facie satisfied that a person has acted. The authority
has to be satisfied that there is a reasonable and proximate
connection between the occurrence and the activity of the per-
son sought to be apprehended and that such activities were to
achieve undue temporal, physical, economic or other advan-
tage. There need not be any overt or positive act of the person in-
tended to be apprehended at the place. It is enough to prove ac-
tive complicity which has a bearing on the crime.
74. While laying down so, we should not be oblivious of the
avowed object of the Act. Under the ordinary criminal law, it is
sometimes difficult to bring to book the overlords of crime and
underworld because they seldom operate in person or in the pub-
lic gaze. They indulge in clandestine operations which threaten
to tear apart the very fabric of society. It is this purpose which
the Act seeks to achieve.
75. But nevertheless we must sound a note of caution. Provisions
of the Act cannot be used as a weapon to wreak vengeance or
harass or intimidate innocent citizens or to settle scores on po-
litical or other fronts. The prosecution has to bear in mind that
it has to bring home the guilt.”
32.  In Subhash versus State of U.P., 1998 All.L.J. 4870 : 1998
SCC OnLine All 973, a Division Bench of this Court held that: -
We are to see, if under the concept of the offence, created by the
Act, there must be some allegation of any act or omission
towards commission of the offence. While taking up the question
of constitutional validity of the Act in the case of Ashok Kumar
Dixit [Ashok Kumar Dixit v. State of U.P., 1987 ACC 164 : (1987
All LJ 806)], the Full Bench had made certain very important
observations which are relevant for the present point. It was
observed that a person was not liable to be punished under the
Act merely because he happened to be a member of the group.
The Court was, rather, of the view that a person could be
accused of an offence only if he had chosen to join a group which
indulges in anti-social activities, defined under the Act, with use
of force for obtaining material or other advantages to himself or
to any person. The Court was of the view “The element of actus
reus is hence clearly present in the offence created under the
statute.” Whenever any act or omission covered by Sections 2
and 3 of the Act is reported an offence is made out and as a
corollary it may be indicated without any fear of contradiction
that unless an allegation is there concerning an act or omission
on the part of an accused, covered by the definition of the term
“gang” or “gangster”, no F.I.R. should be maintainable.
Whether the allegations are true or false will be a matter for
investigation, but unless the allegations of an offence under the
Act are indicated, as F.I.R. may not be justifiable whatever
large the number of past acts be alleged against him.”
33.    Upon scrutinizing the facts of the case in light of the aforesaid
law, what prima facie appears at this stage is that although the F.I.R.
alleges because of the terror of the gang, of which the applicant is a
member, no person comes forward to lodge a complaint against them,
numerous F.I.Rs. have been filed against the applicant. The informant
of Case Crime No. 174 of 2022 has not only filed an F.I.R. against the
applicant, but he has even come to oppose the bail application of the
applicant in the present case.
34.    The accusation made by the Inspector is that while he was en-
gaged in patrolling in a jeep, he found from the record available in the
Police Station and verification of the information received, that all the
accused persons have formed an organized gang, without any particu-
lars of any act committed by the applicant as a member of the gang.
Prima facie it appears that the applicant has been implicated in the
present case merely because he has a criminal history and the appli-
cant is languishing in jail since 26.08.2022.
35.    In view of the aforesaid discussion, there appears to be no rea-
sonable ground for prima facie believing that the applicant is guilty of
the offence alleged.
36.    The minimum punishment which can be imposed in case of the
applicant’s conviction is imprisonment for two years.
37.    There is nothing on record which may give rise to a reasonable
apprehension that the applicant may tamper with the evidence or in-
fluence the witnesses or that the applicant will abscond and will not
face the trial or that he is likely to commit any other offence in case he
is released on bail.
38.    The applicant has already been granted bail in all the cases
mentioned in the Gang-chart and in four other cases in which he is in-
volved, he stands acquitted in four cases, the police has filed final re-
ports in two cases and a complaint filed against him stands rejected
and there is no material indicate that the larger interest of the public or
the State would be affected in case the applicant is enlarged on bail.
39.     Both the other co-accused persons have already been granted
bail in the present case and the allegations leveled in the F.I.R. against
all the accused persons are the same and, therefore, the applicant is
entitled to claim his release on bail on the ground of parity also.
40.     In view of the aforesaid discussion, without expressing any
opinion on the merits of the case, this Court is of the view that the ap-
plicant is entitled to be released on bail.
41.     In view of the aforesaid discussion, the bail application is al-
lowed.
42.     Let the applicant Ramesh Rai @ Matru Rai be released on
bail in Case Crime No. 126 of 2022, under Section 3 (1), Uttar
Pradesh Gangsters and Anti-Social Activities (Prevention) Act, 1986,
Police Station Chetganj, District Varanasi, on his furnishing a personal
bond and two reliable sureties, each of the like amount, to the satisfac-
tion of the court concerned subject to following conditions:—
(i) The applicant will not tamper with the evidence during the trial.
(ii) The applicant will not influence any witness.
(iii) The applicant will appear before the trial court on the dates
fixed, unless personal presence is exempted.
(iv) The applicant shall not directly or indirectly make inducement,
threat or promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the
case so as to dissuade him from disclosing such facts to the
Court to any police officer or tamper with the evidence.
43.     In case of breach of any of the above conditions, the
prosecution shall be at liberty to move an application before this Court
seeking cancellation of bail.