Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 1461 of 2023
Applicant :- Nizamuddin Khan
Heard learned counsel for the applicant, learned A.G.A. for the State and
perused the material on record.
By means of this application, the applicant who is involved in Case Crime
No. 964 of 2022, under sections 295A, 109, 120B, 201 I.P.C. and section
13 of UAPA, P.S. Kwarsi, district-Aligarh, is seeking enlargement on bail
during the trial.
Learned counsel for the applicant submits that the applicant is the State
President of a political party namely, Social Democratic Party of India
(SDPI) and there is no evidence on record, which could show that the
applicant is involved in any anti national activity nor he hurt the religious
sentiment of any community in any manner. He is absolutely innocent and
has been falsely implicated in the present case with ulterior intention of
harassing him. He lastly submitted that the applicant has no criminal
history and he is languishing in jail since 27.9.2022 and in case he is
released on bail, he will not misuse the liberty of bail and will cooperate in
trial.
The prayer for bail has been vehemently opposed by learned A.G.A.
Keeping in view the nature of the offence, evidence, complicity of the
accused, severity of the punishment, submissions of learned counsel for
the parties, considering the law laid down in the case of Data Ram Vs.
State of U.P. and others, 2018(3) SCC 22 and without expressing any
opinion on the merits of the case, this Court is of the view that the
applicant is entitled to be enlarged on bail during pendency of the trial.
Let the applicant, Nizamuddin Khan involved in the aforesaid case be
released on bail on his executing a personal bond and furnishing two
sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction of the court concerned
subject to the following conditions:-
                                      1. The applicant will continue to attend and co-operate in the trial pending
                                      before the court concerned on the date fixed after release.
                                      2. He will not tamper with the witnesses.
                                      3. He will not indulge in any illegal activities during the bail period.
                                      It is further directed that the identity, status and residence proof of the
                                      sureties be verified by the authorities concerned before they are accepted.
                                      In case of breach of any of the above conditions, the trial court will be at
                                      liberty to cancel the bail.
