1.          These   Appeals    are   directed   against   the  order
dated 20.08.2020 of the Bombay High Court, granting
default bail to the respondents under Section 167 (2)
(a)(ii)          of  Code   of   Criminal    Procedure,   1973   (for
short          “CrPC“).     The    respondents    were  arrested   on
14.05.2020 for alleged commission of offence under
Section 3 of the Prevention of Money Laundering Act,
and   were    remanded    on    the   same   date.   On
through       e-mail,      the    Enforcement
Directorate           filed   a  Complaint    and   subsequently   on
13.7.2020, i.e., a Monday, a physical copy thereof
was tendered before the Court. The applications for
enlargement of bail were moved on 13.07.2020 at 8.53
am with physical filing token being issued by 11 am.
2.   It was   asserted   by   the respondents  that  the
period  of  60  days  from    the date  of remand  i.e.,
14.5.2020, expired on 12.7.2020(Sunday) and on the
next day, the bail petition was presented before the
Court.  The   learned   Special   Judge  however  denied
default bail to the respondents taking the view that
the 60 days will have to be computed from 15.7.2020,
by excluding the date of first remand.      However, the
High Court, under the impugned judgment felt that,
excluding the first date of remand while computing
the period of 60 days was erroneous and held that the
filing of the Charge Sheet by the ED on 13.7.2020,
being on the 61st day, would entitle the respondents
to default bail.     This order of the High Court was
stayed on 3.9.2020.
3.    The core issue that arises for consideration is
whether while computing the period of 90 days or 60
days as contemplated in Section 167 (2)(a)(ii) of the
CrPC,     the    day    of  remand  is  to  be included  or
excluded, for considering a claim for default bail.
4.    The moot question has been considered by this
Court in various matters, but there is divergence of
opinion on how the period available for completing
the investigation is to be computed. Some judgements
have favoured the exclusion of date of remand, while
few other cases have taken a contrary view.
5.    The appellants rely inter alia on the line of
reasoning in State of M.P. Vs. Rustom & Ors.1, Ravi
Prakash Singh Vs. State of Bihar2 and M. Ravindran
Vs.     Intelligence       Officer,   Director  of  Revenue
Intelligence3       where   it  was held  that the date  of
remand is to be excluded for computing the permitted
period for completion of investigation.
6.    On the other hand, the Respondents seek to rely
inter     alia     on   Chaganti    Satyanarayan  Vs.  State  of
Mohd. Ashraft Bhat6, State of Maharashtra Vs. Bharati
Chandmal Varma7, and Pragyna Singh Thakur Vs. State
of Maharashtra8 to contend that the date of remand
must be included for computing the available period
for    investigation        for   determining    entitlement  to
default bail.
7.    Because        of    the    conflicting    view   on   the
proposition        of   law   for   grant  of  default  bail,  a
judicial conundrum has arisen which is required to be
resolved for guidance of the Court. In Chaganti9, the
Court examined the legislative intent for expeditious
conclusion of investigation and the consequences of
the      failure       of    the     prosecution   to   conclude
investigation within the permitted period. However,
9  Supra  note 4.
the ratio in Chaganti10 and also in Mhd. Ashraft Bhat11
was not brought to the notice of the 3 judges bench
in M Ravindran12 and the Court took a contrary view in
declaring that the date of remand is to be excluded
for     computing     the   period   of  investigation,   to
facilitate the claim of default bail by an accused.
8.    Since     the   earlier   position  of  law   was  not
considered and the latest decision is of a 3 judges
bench, it is necessary for a bench of appropriate
strength to settle the law taking note of the earlier
precedents.       Unless    the   issue   is   appropriately
determined, the courts across the country may take
decision on the issue depending upon which judgement
is brought to the Court’s notice or on the Courts own
understanding of the law, covering default bail under
Section 167 (2)(a) II of CrPC.
9.    In     the    above    circumstances,   we   feel   it
appropriate to refer the above-mentioned issue to a
11 Supra note 6.
larger   Bench   of  this  Court  for   an  authoritative
pronouncement to quell this conflict of views as the
same   shall   enable  the   Courts  to   apply  the   law
uniformly.
10. Accordingly, we direct the Registry to place all
the  relevant    documents   before  the   Hon’ble   Chief
Justice for constituting a bench of at least 3 judges
to resolve the conflict in law on the issue of grant
of default bail.
11. In the meantime, as the respondents are praying
for benefit of the High Court’s bail order, which was
stayed on 3.9.2020, this matter be placed before a
bench of 3 judges on a near date, for consideration
of the interim prayer for the respondents.
Date : 23-02-2021 These matters were called on for hearing today.
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
The issue is referred to a larger Bench in terms of the
reportable signed order.
[Signed reportable order is placed on the file]