Heard the learned Senior counsel Sri. C.V. Nagesh
along with Sri. Mrinal Shankar, Sri. Vishwas N. and Sri.
Manu Kulkarni, learned counsel for the petitioner and
learned   counsel   Sri.  Prasanna   Kumar     P,  for   the
2.   Brief  facts  are   that the  petitioner   is  an
employee    of   Twitter  Communications    India    Private
Limited (for short TCIPL) and that he is the revenue head
in-charge of advertising and sales. He being a senior
employee of the company TCIPL, a public designation of
Managing Director is provided to the petitioner but he has
not been appointed as the Managing Director in terms of
Section 2(54) of the Companies Act. Therefore the
petitioner has never been and is not a member of the
Board of Directors of TCIPL. That the said fact is borne
out by the Company Master Data maintained by the
Authority and which fact is made available publicly on the
website of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs, a copy of
which is produced as Annexure-C. A bare perusal of
Annexure-C would reveal that the petitioner is not one of
the Directors amongst the three named in the master
data. It is also relevant to note that the address of the
registered office of TCIPL is described as C-20, G Block,
Mumbai City, Maharashtra – 400 051, India and the
address of the other office, where all or any books of
accounts and papers are maintained is described as Unit
India.   The    e-mail    ID  in   the   master   data   is
akapoor@twitter.com. The date of incorporation is shown
as 20.02.2013. The petitioner is discharging his duties as
an   employee    of  TCIPL   at  the  registered office at
Bengaluru and is also residing at Bengaluru in the address
detailed in the cause title.
3.    The circumstances compelling the petitioner to
A   complaint   came   to  be    registered  on
15.06.2021 at 23.20 hours on the information
furnished by one Sri. Naresh Singh, Sub-Inspector,
Thana Loni Border, Ghaziabad, U.P., India. In the
said complaint 9 accused were named and action
was sought against the accused on the ground that
they are responsible for      the transmission and
further transmission of certain tweets and video.
The allegation, in sum and substance, against
accused Nos. 8 and 9 is that they failed to stop the
transmission by removing the tweets despite being
made aware that the incident on which the tweets
are based is a false news and that false news should
not be propagated. The background of the incident
that led to the complaint and tweet is that there was
an incident of an aged person by name Sri. Abdul
Samad Saifi who was beaten and his beard was
forcibly chopped off. The physical occurrence of the
incident was videographed and the said video came
to be uploaded on the social media platform
popularly known as Twitter (8th accused). That the
video that was uploaded was a doctored video and
the manipulation involved purported act of forcing
the   victim to   chant  Jai Sri  Ram   and   Vande
Maataram. But, in fact, the group was a mix of
members from both Hindu and Muslim community
and that there was no coercion to chant Jai Sri Ram
or Vande Maataram and that the assailants had
assaulted the victim as they were unhappy with the
amulets distributed by him, claiming that they
possessed    certain  super-natural   powers.    The
doctored video was immediately taken up by some
of the accused with the sole intention of spreading
communal disharmony and accused Nos. 1, 2, 3, 5,
6 and 7 have re-tweeted knowing fully well that it is
a false news. That apart, the tweet by the aforesaid
accused, has been re-tweeted by several others also
due to which the doctored video and false news has
spread on a large scale leading to increasing
religious tension. Despite the clarification issued by
the Ghaziabad Police, neither the doctored video nor
the tweets have been deleted by the authorities who
run and maintain the social medial platform. In fact
the complaint against the petitioner’s employers as
“Apart from this, the said video has also
been retweeted by many others, due to
which the false news has spread on a large
scale. It is also worth mentioning that
despite     the    clarification    issued     by
Ghaziabad Police (correct facts) by the
accused,    their   tweets    have    not    been
deleted due to which religious tension is
increasing further. Additionally, Twitter Inc.
and Twitter Communication India Private
Limited (TCIPL) also did not take any steps
to remove the said tweets. 7- It is also
worth mentioning here that according to
mischievous elements and          there    is  no
community angle in the incident.
4.    It is also worth noting the relevant portion,
that despite clarification issued by the Ghaziabad Police
(correct facts), the tweets have not been deleted due to
which religious tension is increasing further. Additionally,
Twitter Inc (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Company’ for
the sake of brevity) and Twitter India Communication
Private Limited (TCIPL) also did not take any steps to
remove the said tweets. On the above allegations it was
prayed that case be registered against the petitioner’s
employer and the company, i.e., Twitter Inc, for the
offence punishable under Sections 153, 153-A, 295-A,
505, 120-B, 34 of IPC and the Company and the
petitioner’s employer were arraigned as accused Nos. 8
5.    Upon registration of the FIR, notice under
Section 160 of Cr.P.C., came to be issued to the
petitioner, copy of which is produced as Annexure F and it
is dated 17.06.2021. The notice is directed to one Manish
addressee is none other than the petitioner and the notice
Notice under Section 160 CRPC PS Loni Border
This is to inform the FIR No. 502/2021
under Section 153, 153A, 295A, 505, 120B
and 34 IPC has been registered against TCIPL
and Twitter Inc. Some people using there
twitter handles via TCIPL and Twitter Inc.
have spread communal hatred and animosity
in their tweets and Twitter has not taken
cognizance of the same. it has encouraged the
acts and texts which has the propensity to
spread enmity amongst religious groups and
to disturb the peace and harmony amongst
the people of the State and the Country; also
allowed such anti-social tweets to become
viral continuously. The aforesaid registered
crime is being investigated by me wherein it is
necessary to record your statement.
Therefore, for this purpose, you are required
receiving this notice in the PS Loni, Thaziabad,
6.    In response to the same the petitioner effected
a reply by electronic mail on 18.06.2021 which is
produced as Annexure G and it reads as under:
Your reference : Notice dated 17.06.2021
under Section 160 CrPC (“Notice”) in
Limited (TCIPL) has received your subject
Notice via e-mail, which is addressed to me,
asking me to appear before you within a
week.
2.    Since the investigation is with respect to
the content available on the Twitter Platform,
please note that the services on the Twitter
Platform are provided in India by Twitter.Inc.,
a company incorporated in the United States
of America. TCIPL does not exercise any
control over the services offered on Twitter
management of the said platform. Hence,
neither TCIPL nor any of its employees,
including myself, control any information/data
pertaining to any of the users of the services
I am not acquainted with the facts and
circumstances    of   the   case   and   have   no
information   relevant    to  this  investigation.
Therefore I am not the relevant person to
provide any details in relation to the subject
matter of the case under investigation.
4. Despite the above, should you still require
my attendance and as I am not a resident
within the limits of your police station, I would
like to request you to the interview via video
conference and I can make myself available
over a video conference facility on Monday,
21st June at a time of your convenience. The
Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in the cases of
Vinod Dua V. Union of India & Ors. [Order
14.06.2020 in W.P.Crl. No. 154 of 2020] and
Roshni   Biswas    V.   State  of   West   Bengal
[SLP(Crl.) No. 4937/2020] and the Delhi and
Calcutta High Courts in some cases, have
allowed     use    of   video   conferencing  for
investigation.”
7.   On the receipt of the reply and on the
petitioner failing to appear before the Investigating
Officer the impugned notice produced at Annexure A and
dated 26.06.2021 came to be issued by the respondent –
Police. The notice under Section 41-A reads as under:
18.06.2021. It is clear from your email that
you   are    avoiding    to  cooperate  with the
reasons/clarifications given in your reply are
not at all justified.
As per our information you being the MD
of Twitter India, you are a representative of
Twitter in India, for this reason you are bound
by law to cooperate with the investigation. In
order to maintain safety & harmony between
the people and the State, also in the larger
interest,   amongst   the  tweets   broadcasted
through Twitter in India, you have the power
to decide which tweets are to be taken down
in relation to India. The impugned malicious
tweets published on the Twitter Platform had
created a tense atmosphere in the society,
gave rise to animosity amongst the different
groups,    and   endangered   social  harmony.
Ghaziabad Police through its official Twitter
handle had tweeted that the impugned news
is fake and it was within your authority to
control spread of this fake news, but you
failed in taking steps.
By the FIR No. 502/2021 registered in
this office, you are directed to personally
appear before the Police Station Loni Border
on 24.06.2021 at 10.30 AM for recording your
statement in this regard. For all purposes, this
communication will be considered as a notice
under Section 41A CrPC. Your absence will be
considered as resistance to the procedure
established by law and an attempt to fail the
investigation, and further action will be taken
8.    It is this notice, which is sent by e-mail to the
petitioner is now the bone of contention in the instant
petition. It is in this background of facts the petitioner is
before this Court. Admittedly, there is no prescribed
9.    The learned counsel for the respondent, at the
outset, would protest regarding the maintainability of the
writ petition. He would submit that the reason or basis for
invoking the provisions of Section 41-A of Cr.P.C. is to be
found in unnumbered second paragraph of the notice. It
is contended that the petitioner has held himself out to
the general public and others, that he is the Managing
Director    of   TCIPL   and     that  the  petitioner    is   a
representative of Twitter Inc in India and hence the
petitioner    is  bound    in   law   to  cooperate    in    the
investigation. The Ghaziabad Police through their official
twitter handle has categorically asserted that the news is
a fake news and despite being the chief authority to
control the spread of the fake news, the noticee has failed
to take any steps in this regard. It is pertinent to note
that the Noticee, apparently is none other than the
petitioner, and it is not the corporate entities. The learned
counsel for    the    respondent would    submit    that  the
apprehension of the petitioner that he would be arrested
is baseless as Section 41-A of Cr.P.C. has been invoked
and the said invocation is in such cases where arrest is
not contemplated and hence there is no danger and the
apprehension about the deprivation of petitioner’s liberty
is baseless. The petitioner has not disclosed who is
actually responsible for the operations and it is for the
petitioner to disclose such information. The learned
counsel for the respondent would take the Court through
Annexure-C (Company Master Data) and would point out
that none of the named persons are residents of India
and that the petitioner being the Managing Director and
in-charge of the affairs of the Company, in terms of
Section 305 is required to cooperate with the Police. The
Corporate entities do not comply with the IT Rules and
they have no responsible head in India. No part of cause
of action arises within the territories of this High Court as
the notice addressed to noticee detailed in Annexures-A
and F are at New Delhi and Mumbai and on that ground
also there is no part of cause of action within the
territories of this Court and hence, the writ petition is not
maintainable before this Court.
10.   The learned counsel for the respondent would
further contend that the mere fact of the petitioner’s
residence is not suffice to confer jurisdiction on this Court
and in this regard he places reliance on the ruling
reported in (2015) 17 SCC 539 (State of Maharashtra
and another Vs. Sanjay Dalmia and others). He has
placed reliance on the observations made in paragraphs
Nos. 2 to 4 of the said judgment. From a reading of the
factual aspects of the matter, it is apparent that the
appellant State has registered a case of cheating under
Sections 420 and 120-B IPC. The appellant Police is
situated in Mumbai and the respondent accused had
approached the High Court of Delhi. The Apex Court
without entering upon the merits and/or settling the law,
has directed the accused therein to join the investigation
at Mumbai and was further pleased to direct the transfer
off all pending writ petitions (Criminal) from the Delhi
High Court to the Bombay High Court.
11.   Nextly the learned counsel for the respondent
would place reliance on the ruling reported in (1994) 4
SCC 711 (Oil and Natural Gas Commission Vs. Utpal
Kumar Basu and others), wherein a Three Judge Bench
of the Apex Court in the course of interpreting the phrase
`territorial jurisdiction’ and `cause of action’,         after
examining the facts involved in the said case was pleased
to hold that the mere fact of the petitioner having its
office in a particular city will not confer jurisdiction on the
High Court of that State and that in the light of the facts
involved there in it was concluded that no cause of action
arose within the jurisdiction of High Court of Calcutta and
was pleased to hold      accordingly. A perusal of the facts
would reveal that the writ petition was sought to be
maintained on the ground that the advertisement issued
by the appellant was viewed by the writ petitioner in
Calcutta. In the instant petition, what is asserted is the
breach of a fundamental right, that is, right to liberty.
12.   Nextly the learned counsel for the respondent
would place reliance on a ruling reported in (2000) 7 SCC
640    (Navinchandra      N.    Majithia   Vs.     State  of
Maharashtra and others). The learned counsel           would
place reliance on the observations made in paragraph
Nos. 22 and 43 and would contend that mere place of
residence would also not confer the jurisdiction on the
High Court of that State and that jurisdiction is conferred
only if the cause of action or part of cause of action is
arising in that State. That was a case where again the
petitioner, resident of Mumbai, a case was registered in
Shillong in respect of transaction that had taken in
Mumbai and the petitioner was named an accused in the
complaint at Shillong. The observations of the Apex Court
at paragraph Nos.27, 29, 33, 34 and 37 eloquently deals
with the subject matter. The observations in paragraph
Nos. 41 and 42 also leave no doubt with regard to the
direction the Hon’ble Apex Court desired to give to Clause
(2) of Article 226 of the Constitution of India. Even more
telling is the concluding paragraph No.43. It is relevant to
note here that there is no allegation of wrong-doing
against the petitioner in the compliant.
13.   Nextly, the learned counsel for the respondent
would place reliance on a decision reported in (2020) 10
SCC 766 (Shanta Devi alias Shanti Mishra Vs. Union
of India and others) by a Three Judge Bench, wherein
their lordships have interpreted the phrase `cause of
action’ in reference to the territorial jurisdiction of a High
Court and have reiterated that if part of cause of action
arises within the territorial jurisdiction of the High Court,
the said High Court will be vested with the jurisdiction to
entertain the petition. It is pertinent to note that the
above case arises out of an alleged violation of service
conditions and stoppage of pensionary benefits. Reliance
is placed on paragraph No. 8 wherein the Apex Court
while interpreting the words “cause of action” with
reference to Article 226 (2) of the Constitution, has been
pleased to hold that the said issue would depend upon the
nature of the impugned order and as to whether it would
give rise to a cause of action or not depends on the facts
of the said case. But, in a different set of facts, the Apex
Court was pleased to hold that mere service of notice on
the respondent therein at its registered office at Calcutta
would not give rise to cause of action. Reliance is placed
on this ruling to contend that mere receipt of notice by
the petitioner would not constitute a cause of action
thereby enabling the petitioner to approach this Court.
14.   Further, reliance is placed on orders passed in
CRWP No. 6427/20 (O & M) in the case of Lawrence
Bishnoi Vs. State of Haryana and reliance is placed on
paragraph Nos. 7 and 4. It is a case where the facts
involved and the reliefs sought therein have no bearing
on the instant case. The petition was by a person, who
was lawfully deprived of his liberty.
15.   Nextly, the learned counsel for the respondent
placing reliance on Section 2(e) read with Section 177 of
Cr.P.C. would contend that under the provisions of
Section 482 of Cr.P.C, inherent power vests with the High
Court and the High Court is the one as defined under
Section 2(e) of Cr.P.C. and would contend that the
petition is liable to be rejected as not being maintainable
and the High Court, in the instant case, would be the High
Court in Uttar Pradesh.
16.   In reply, learned Senior counsel Sri. C.V.
Nagesh would submit that the plea and the fact that the
petitioner is resident of Bengaluru is not denied. The fact
that the establishment of accused No. 9 i.e., the employer
of the petitioner being situated in Bengaluru and the
petitioner being employed in the Accused’s office in
Bengaluru is also not disputed. The learned Senior
counsel would invite the attention of the Court to the FIR
and more particularly to the last column relating to the
address of the accused and would submit that no address
of the accused named therein is detailed.
17.  He would submit that in contradiction of the
same, the address of the 9th accused, named as TCIPL,
the employer of the petitioner, is detailed in Annexure-C
as having its registered office at Mumbai and a place of
business   at  Bengaluru.   He   would   submit  that  the
petitioner has also placed on record his Adhaar Card,
which clearly demonstrates the place of his residence.
Elaborating further, he would submit that a bare perusal
of Annexure-C would reveal, who are the relevant
persons and would reiterate that the petitioner is only an
employee. He would further submit that not only the
summon under Section 41A of Cr.P.C. has been received
at Bengaluru, even the earlier Notice issued to the
petitioner by way of electronic mail invoking Section 160
of Cr.P.C. was served at Bengaluru only and in that view
of the matter, he would submit that this Court has
jurisdiction to entertain and consider the petition. He
would further submit that the FIR does not name the
petitioner nor does the complaint to do so. Inviting the
attention of the Court to Annexure-F, he would submit
that the petitioner is neither living nor working in Mumbai
and the Notice being addressed to Mumbai and Delhi is
18.   He would contend that the impugned Notice
under Section 41A of Cr.P.C. is vitiated by malafides as it
is only a retaliatory measure. That the provisions of
Section 41A of Cr.P.C. have been invoked as the
petitioner failed to comply with the earlier demand made
by the respondent – police, invoking Section 160 of
Cr.P.C. He would submit that initially on 17.06.2021, the
Notice under Section 160 Cr.P.C. came to be served on
the petitioner by electronic mail. Learned Senior counsel
would take the Court thorough the contents of the
Notice, which has been reproduced supra.
19.   Learned Senior counsel would contend that in
sum and substance, the allegation is that M/s. TCIPL and
Twitter   Inc.,  entities  registered  in India  and  USA
respectively, have been permitting some people to use
the twitter handle via TCIPL and Twitter Inc. to spread
communal       hatred    and    animosity  by   permitting
transmission and retransmission of the alleged doctored
video and false news thereby aiding the spread of enmity
among religious groups and that the accused have
permitted anti-social elements to tweet and re-tweet and
thereby become viral and that the crime is being
investigated by the signatory and that it is necessary to
record petitioner’s statement and accordingly, he was
ordered to appear within a week of receiving the Notice
by the Loni Border Police Station, Ghaziabad, Uttar
Pradesh. The petitioner, by reply mail dated 18.06.2021,
refuted the allegations that he is in-charge of Twitter
Inc., USA and that it is not within his authority or within
his means to controls the content of the social media
platform and thereby proclaimed his innocence with
regard to the operations and control over the contents on
the platform and basically conveyed his inability or lack
of any official authority to exercise control over the
contents in the platform.
20.  The statement effected by the petitioner in
sum and substance is that the services on the Twitter
platform are provided by Twitter Inc., a company
incorporated in USA. That TCIPL does not exercise any
control over the services offered by the Twitter Inc., USA
and it has no role in the operations and management of
the said platform. That neither TCIPL nor its employees,
including  the   petitioner,  exercise control  over   any
information or data pertaining to any of the users of the
services of Twitter. That he is an employee of TCIPL i.e.,
only an employee of TCIPL and that he is not acquainted
with the facts and circumstances of the case and that he
possesses no information that could be relevant for the
purpose of investigation and that he is not a person, who
can provide details sought in relation to the commission
of the offence. That he being a resident outside the limits
of the police station, in the event, the signatory i.e.,
investigating officer, desires to record his statement, it
may be facilitated by video conferencing and in this
regard, he would place reliance on the ruling of the
Hon’ble Apex Court in the case of Vinod Dua vs. UOI
and Others reported in 2021 SCC Online SC 414 and
Roshni Biswas       vs.  State    of West    Bengal    and
Another reported in 2020 SCC Online SC 881. Within
a few days thereafter, the respondent - Police invoked
the provisions of Section 41A of Cr.P.C., resulting in the
impugned Notice. The contents of the said Notice have
also been extracted supra for the sake of brevity and
21.   The respondent - Police acknowledge the
receipt of reply by e-mail dated 18.06.2021 produced as
Annexure-G.      The    first    unnumbered     paragraph
acknowledges the receipt of the reply made. It also
reflects the conclusion drawn by the signatory that the
petitioner is avoiding cooperation with the on-going
investigation. That the reasons/clarifications set-out in
the reply are not justified and the second unnumbered
paragraph gives the reasons why the investigating officer
deems it necessary to summon the petitioner and the
reason is that as per their information, the petitioner is
the    Managing    Director  of    Twitter  India  and   a
representative of Twitter in India (emphasis supplied)
and on account of his dual capacity, he is by law bound
to co-operate with the investigation. That the malicious
tweet and video published on the Twitter platform
created tense atmosphere in the Society and gave rise to
animosity amongst different groups and endangered
social harmony. That the respondent - police through its
official Twitter handle had tweeted that the impugned
news is fake. Despite the clarification and though it was
within the authority of the petitioner, to quote the words
of the respondents, “it was within your authority to
control spread of this fake news, but you failed in taking
any steps.” Thus, in sum and substance, the allegation is
that it was within the power and authority of the
petitioner to have stopped the spread of fake news and
circulation  of   doctored    video   and   despite  having
authority, the petitioner failed. Further, in the concluding
paragraph of the Notice, it is directed that the petitioner
shall keep himself present on 24.06.2021 at 10.30 a.m.
to record his statement. It is further stated that for all
purposes, the communication (impugned notice) will be
considered as Notice under Section 41A of Cr.P.C. It is
further stated that his absence would be considered as
resistance to the procedure established by law and an
attempt to fail the investigation and further action would
be taken accordingly. The use of the words “impugned
malicious tweets” is not without significance.
22.   Learned Senior counsel would take the Court
through Section 160 of Cr.P.C and contend that the said
Notice was one without jurisdiction and contrary to the
mandate of law. He would submit that from a reading of
Section 160 of Cr.P.C., it is apparent that the person
living beyond the territorial jurisdiction of the authority or
the limits of the adjoining police station cannot be
summoned      and  the   mandate      of  law   requires   the
investigating authority to visit the person, who is not an
accused for the purpose of recording statement. That
Notice under Section 160 of Cr.P.C. being without the
sanction of law, no duty was cast upon the petitioner.
Despite that, the petitioner addressed a reply setting-out
the facts and further also conveyed his willingness to co-
operate with the investigation. He would submit that it
was never the stand of the petitioner that he would not
make himself available to the investigators. On the
contrary, he has categorically assured to participate and
record his statement by virtual mode. Despite the same,
no efforts were made to examine and record the
statement of the petitioner. He would contend that it is
not the case of the respondent that they have progressed
with the investigation or that the progress in the
investigation  has   been    stalled   on   account   of   the
petitioner. Learned    Senior    counsel would draw the
attention of the Court to the concluding paragraph of the
Notice   and   would   submit   that   the  very  language
employed in the Notice makes it clear that they want to
lay their hands upon the petitioner i.e., arrest him, and
that if the respondent were to state that they will not
arrest the petitioner, the petitioner is willing to appear
before   the   investigating   authority.  Learned   Senior
counsel would contend that a bare reading of the
provisions of Section 41A of Cr.P.C., would demonstrate
that the provisions can be invoked against a distinct class
of persons only and not against all and sundry much less
against the petitioner.
23.  Learned Senior counsel would lay emphasis on
the language deployed therein, more particularly, to
contend that the person against whom a Section 41A
Notice is directed must be a person against whom a
reasonable    complaint    has  been    made   or   credible
information has been received or a reasonable suspicion
exists that he has committed a cognizable offence. He
would submit that sub-section (1) of Section 41A of
Cr.P.C. is not a guarantee against the arrest of the
petitioner and that sub-section (3) of Section 41A of
Cr.P.C. empowers the police officer to arrest such a
person, albeit for reasons to be recorded i.e., if the police
officer is of the opinion that he ought to be arrested and
hence, he would submit that sub-section (1) of Section
41A of Cr.P.C. is not a safeguard to the petitioner against
arrest. He would submit that the Notice and proceedings
are motivated and it is the object of the respondent -
police to put him behind bars as they have a axe to grind
against Twitter Inc., USA. He would contend that so long
as   there   is  no   compliance   with  the  mandate      or
prescription as provided under sub-section (1) of Section
41A of Cr.P.C., no authority is vested in the respondent
to invoke the provisions. He would submit that neither
the statement of the respondent nor the materials placed
before the Court demonstrate compliance with any of the
criterion prescribed in sub-section (1) of Section 41A of
Cr.P.C. If that be the admitted position, learned Senior
counsel would submit that the impugned Notice has to be
construed as one without jurisdiction or one without the
sanction of law and that if the impugned Notice is
construed to be as one without the sanction of law and is
one which enables the respondent to take coercive action
and if such action curtails the fundamental right of the
petitioner, then it certainly creates a cause of action
within the territorial jurisdiction of this Court.
24.  He would submit that the contention that the
petitioner is answerable in view of the mandate of
Section 305 of Cr.P.C. is without substance. He would
contend that Section 305 of Cr.P.C does not empower the
police to nominate a representative of a Company nor
does it enable the police to place reliance on the said
provision at the stage of investigation and that Section
305 of Cr.P.C comes into play only at the state of inquiry
or trial. He would submit that the concept of inquiry or
trial has been gone into by the Hon’ble Apex Court in the
case of Hardeep Singh vs. State of Punjab and
Others reported in 2014 (3) SCC 92 and would submit
neither is the stage in the case on hand. He would
contend that once the impugned proceedings are held to
be without the sanction of law, the same is a proceeding
without jurisdiction and would warrant interference. He
would submit that the very assertions of the respondent
in the Notice under Section 41A of Cr.P.C and its
contents are suffice to demonstrate the malicious intent
of the respondent. He would submit that the assertion by
the learned counsel for the respondent, that there is no
real threat of arrest is totally false. He would submit that
if the purpose of summoning the petitioner or putting the
petitioner on notice is to reveal the name of the
concerned persons then, the names of persons concerned
is very much available with the Registrar of Companies,
who have in fact issued the Company Master Data
Extract, which is produced as Annexure – C. That the
crime is not registered under the Information Technology
Act and is registered only for the offence under the
Indian Penal Code. Learned Senior counsel would take
this Court through the User Agreement of the 8th
accused, which is produced as Annexure-E, to contend
that the Company is an independent entity, established
and incorporated in United States of America and in
particular, he would invite the attention of the Court to
the last unnumbered paragraph in running page No.39,
“These terms are an agreement between you and
Francisco, CA 94103 U.S.A.      If you have any questions
about these Terms, please contact us.”
25.    He would contend that a reading of Annexure-
E would by itself demonstrate that the social media
platform is run and maintained by the 8th accused and
that it is an independent entity having its registered
office in the United States of America. That the employer
of the petitioner, who is arrayed as 9th accused, prima
facie, has no role nor has the authority attributed, in
particular, a role which either the petitioner or the
employer - 9th accused can perform, that is, to control
the contents of the platform. He would submit that the
petitioner cannot and does not have any complaint or
cause against the registration of the FIR as the petitioner
is neither an accused nor is he nominated by the
Company to defend the interest of 9th accused. Learned
Senior counsel would contend that the petitioner is a
third party and so long there is no complaint made
against the petitioner or so long as it is not a case of
receipt of any credible information of the involvement of
the petitioner or the existence of a suspicion based on
reasonable grounds that the petitioner has committed a
cognizable offence, the question of invoking Section 41A
of   Cr.P.C  to  summon     the   petitioner   to  join  the
investigation would not arise. It is further elaborated that
the allegation is against the employer of the petitioner,
who has office in Bengaluru and the allegation is that the
employer has omitted to carryout its duty of deleting the
tweet and the petitioner being in the employment of 9th
accused in Bengaluru and also being a resident and not
being an accused, the petition is maintainable before this
Court and this Court is fully empowered to consider and
dispose of the petition.
26.   Learned   Senior  counsel  would   also  place
reliance on Rule 39 of the Writ Proceedings Rules, 1977,
to contend that the provisions of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1973, are applicable as far as may be. In that
view of the matter, Section 20 of Code of Civil Procedure,
1908, which deals with cause of action is also invokable.
Rule 39 of the Writ Proceedings Rules, 1977, reads as
“39. Application of the High Court of Karnataka
Rules, etc.-The provisions of the High Court of
Karnataka Rules, 1959, the rules made by the
High Court of Karnataka under the Karnataka
Court Fees and Suits Valuation Act, 1958, and
the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908, shall apply, as far as may be, to
proceedings under 1[Article 226 and/or Article
227]1 and writ appeals in respect of matters for
which no specific provision is made in these
rules.”
27.   Learned Senior counsel would submit that the
impugned Notice being one without jurisdiction, the same
can be gone into and considered even in collateral
proceedings. Accordingly, prays to set-aside the same.
28.   Per contra, learned counsel for the respondent
would submit that the petitioner has canvassed three
grounds in support of their contention that the writ
petition is maintainable before this Court. He would
contend that reliance on the fact of the petitioner being
resident or the company being based in Bengaluru or he
being employed in Bengaluru and the fact that the Notice
is received in Bengaluru is immaterial. Interjecting the
learned Senior counsel for the petitioner would invite the
attention of the Court to the ruling of the Hon’ble Apex
Court in the case of Cement Workers’ Mandal vs.
and Others, reported in 2019 (20) SCC 517 and in
particular, would place reliance on the observations at
paragraph Nos.20 to 24.
29.   In   response,    learned  counsel    for  the
respondent would place reliance on the observations in
paragraph No.27 and contend that the Hon’ble Apex
Court has categorically held that Clause (2) of Article 226
of the Constitution of India can be equated with or read
in context with Section 20(c) of Code of Civil Procedure
only and in that view of the matter, he would submit that
the writ petition requires to be rejected as not being
30.   Placing reliance on the observations made in
paragraph Nos.20 to 24, learned Senior counsel would
contend that the petitioner is espousing his fundamental
rights and the petitioner is not impugning the FIR and
the investigation cannot be used as a tool to harass the
petitioner. In reply, learned Senior counsel would place
further reliance on the ruling rendered in the case of
Nawal Kishore Sharma vs. Union of India and
Others reported in (2014) 9 SCC 329 and in particular,
would invite the attention of the Court to observations in
paragraph Nos.9, 14, 15, 16, 18 and 19.
31.   Per contra, learned counsel for the respondent
would invite the attention of the Court to paragraph
No.13 and would in particular place reliance on the
observations made therein to submit that the facts
pleaded ought to have a nexus or relevance with the lis
involved in the case and would submit that it is not that
every and other fact, which has relevance or nexus with
the lis involved that could be considered for the purposes
of conferring the territorial jurisdiction of the Court and
would rest his case.
32.   In reply, Learned Senior counsel would take
the Court further to the observations of the Hon’ble Apex
Court in the case of Roshni Biswas vs. State of West
Bengal and Another reported in 2020 SCC Online Sc
881 and Vinod Dua vs. Union of India and Others
reported in 2021 SCC Online SC 414.
33.   Learned Senior counsel would take this Court
through paragraph Nos.6, 8, 9 and 11 of Roshni Biswas’s
“6. Mr. Mahesh Jethmalani, learned senior
counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner
submits that the petitioner has stated on oath
that she disclaims any association with the
Facebook post and that she does not operate
the web page which forms the subject matter
of the FIR. That apart, it has been submitted
that the petitioner is willing to cooperate with
the Investigating Officer to establish that she
has no connection with the post whatsoever.
However, it has been submitted that the
condition precedent for the exercise of the
power under Section 41A has not been met in
the present case because neither is there a
reasonable complaint nor credible information
or, for that matter, a reasonable suspicion that
the petitioner has committed a cognizable
8. There can be no gainsaying the fact that the
court in the exercise of judicial review does not
interfere with the conduct of investigation
under and in accordance with the provisions of
the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973. The
issue, however, is whether in the facts which
we have narrated above, it would constitute a
reasonable exercise of power within the
meaning of Section 41A for the Investigating
Officer to compel the petitioner to attend to the
Ballygunge Police Station, in the face of a post
suggesting that the lock down restrictions have
not been appropriately implemented by the
State of West Bengal in a particular area.
Cognizant as the Court is of the underlying
principles which restrain the exercise of judicial
review in the matter of police investigation,
equally, the court must safeguard the
fundamental right to the freedom of expression
under Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution.
There is a need to ensure that the power under
section 41A is not used to intimidate, threaten
and harass.
9. We should not, at this stage, be construed to
have expressed a view on the merits of the
petition for quashing which is pending before
the Calcutta High Court under Section 482 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973. The mere
filing of a petition to quash an FIR under
Section 482 is not sufficient in and of itself to
obviate compliance with a summons under
Section 41A. We are, however, of the
considered view that to require the petitioner at
this stage to comply with the summons under
Section 41A during the pendency of the
proceedings before the High Court would not be
justified in the facts as they have emerged in
this case. Hence we grant an ad-interim stay
against the implementation of the direction of
the High Court requiring the petitioner to
appear before the Investigating Officer at
Ballygunge Police Station. This is subject to the
condition that the petitioner undertakes to
respond to any queries that may be addressed
to her by the Investigating Officer and, if so
required, attend to those queries on the video
conferencing platform with sufficient notice of
twenty-four hours. Mr. Jethmalani, learned
senior counsel appearing on behalf of the
petitioner states that the petitioner would
cooperate in all respects though after the order
of 5 June 2020, no query was addressed to the
petitioner, despite five months having elapsed
since then. Mr. R. Basant, learned senior
counsel submits that liberty may be granted to
the Investigating Officer, if so required, to
come to Delhi for the purpose of eliciting
specific responses by way of clarification from
the petitioner in regard to the alleged Facebook
posts. Mr. Jethmalani states that there is no
objection to the Investigating Officer doing so
with twenty-four hours' notice. We accede to
the request of Mr. Basant.
11. The direction contained in the impugned
order of the High Court requiring the petitioner
to attend at the Ballygunge Police Station shall
accordingly remain stayed pending further
orders. The High Court may dispose of the
petition under Section 482 uninfluenced by the
pendency of these proceedings and nothing
contain in the present order shall amount to an
expression of opinion on the merits of the rival
contentions in the pending petition under
34.   Learned Senior counsel would contend that
the Notice under Section 41A of Cr.P.C. being in
complete violation of the mandate of the statute could
result in the deprivation of the person’s liberty and
consequently impact the fundamental rights of the
petitioner and as held by the Hon’ble Apex Court, it is the
duty of every Court to ensure and protect fundamental
rights guaranteed to the citizens under the Constitution
35.  Having given my anxious consideration to the
contentions advanced and the materials placed before
this Court, the Court formulates the following points for
i)     Whether the writ petition is maintainable ?
ii)    Whether this Court has jurisdiction to entertain
the writ petition and quash the impugned Notice
issued by respondent – Police in exercise of
powers under Section 41A of Cr.P.C?
36.  The facts are not in dispute. A plain reading of
the FIR produced as Annexure – B would not leave much
to imagination. The FIR can be read in two parts.
Primarily, the complaint being against the commission by
certain individuals, whose act it is alleged, has the
tendency of inciting tension and hatred among two
communities and which incitement can result in violence
and disturbance of law and order. The first part is
directed against seven named individuals and entities.
The second part of the complaint relates to omission or
in-action on the part of 8th and 9th accused, who it is
alleged, have failed to take note of the clarification issued
by the respondent – Police and have permitted the
continuation of the transmission and retransmission of
the alleged doctored video and false news in the form of
37.  It is not in dispute that the petitioner is not
named as an accused. Neither the complaint nor the FIR
would indicate any complaint or allegation as against the
instant petitioner. It is proclaimed by the petitioner that
he is an employee, employed in the services of 9th
accused. The proclamation is neither denied nor dented
by the respondent – Police. On the other hand, the very
notice, prima facie demonstrates the acknowledgment of
this fact by the respondent – Police. The initial Notice
under   Section   160    of  Cr.P.C.  would    describe   the
petitioner as Managing Director of 9th accused and
working out of Mumbai. The sum and substance of the
Notice is nothing but a reproduction of the complaint i.e.,
some people have used their twitter handle via TCIPL and
Twitter Inc. to spread communal hatred and animosity
with their tweets and Twitter has not taken cognizance of
the same (emphasis supplied). It is relevant to note that
Twitter Inc. is arrayed as 8th accused. If that be so, then
the only inescapable inference that can be drawn is that,
the investigating officer was fully aware that both the
corporate entities are independent entities.
38.   From a reading of the Notice, it can be
inferred that the signatory i.e., investigating officer was
or is conscious that it is Twitter Inc. or accused No.8,
who can or who could have controlled or regulated the
presence or continuation of the video or the tweets on
the platform. Notice would also clearly establish that the
investigating   officer is conscious   of   the  distinction
between Twitter India and Twitter Inc., which runs the
platform. It is also pertinent to note that the Notice is
issued under Section 160 of Cr.P.C. Assuming that the
petitioner could contribute, clarify or enlighten the
investigating authority with regard to certain aspects of
the crime, which he desires to investigate and admittedly
the avowed purpose of the Notice is to clarify as to why
the platform has not deleted the offensive video or
offensive tweet or why it has not prevented re-tweets.
39.   Then, it is beyond the realms of imagination,
as to how the petitioner, who has proclaimed that he has
no control over the operations of 8th accused, be
summoned under Section 41A of Cr.P.C in the absence of
any inculpatory or indictive or incriminating material.
Thus, it can be assumed that the scope of investigation
was made known to the petitioner. The petitioner in his
understanding, deemed it fit to reply to the same
electronically, since the Notice was also received by him
electronically at Bengaluru though it is addressed to
TCIPL, Mumbai. By his reply, the petitioner has clarified
the distinction between Twitter Inc. and Twitter India and
in paragraph No.2, it is categorically asserted by the
petitioner that the platform is run by Twitter Inc., a
company incorporated in USA. That TCIPL, including
himself, have no role much less, any control, in the
management of the said platform. That neither Twitter
India   nor   he,  are   in a   position   to   provide  any
information/data pertaining to the users or the said
service and that in paragraph No.3, he would submit that
he not being acquainted with the facts and circumstances
of the case, he would not be of much assistance to the
investigating officer and that despite the clarification if
the investigating officer desires, he is willing to come live
and record his statement virtually.
40.   The singular fact that emerges from a reading
of Notice under Section 160 of Cr.P.C. is the awareness
of the investigating officer with regard to the distinction
between Twitter Inc. and Twitter India. That Twitter Inc.,
is one which is responsible for the control and operation
of the social media platform on which the alleged
offensive video and messages were found. Further,
Annexures F and G i.e., Notice and reply, amplifies the
fact that whatever residuary doubts the investigating
officer entertained were further clarified by the petitioner
through    reply   by   e-mail,   which   also   categorically
amplifies the distinction between TCIPL and Twitter Inc.
and the petitioner has categorically asserted that neither
his employer i.e., 9th accused nor he have nor can
exercise any control over the social media platform,
which is in the exclusive domain of 8th accused i.e.,
Twitter Inc., USA. These aspects are dealt upon in little
detail, in view of the fact that no arguments have been
addressed by the respondent on the merits of these
contentions and the objections         and the arguments
canvassed have centered around the objections to the
jurisdiction of this Court to entertain the petition.
41.   From the short narration above, what emerges
is that, the petitioner is not arrayed as an accused nor is
it the case of the respondent that there is credible
information    received  by   them   with  regard   to  his
involvement     or  that  the   respondent   entertains   a
suspicion, which is based on reasonable grounds that he
has committed any cognizable offence. In the absence of
any of these three ingredients, the moot question that
arises, is as to whether the respondent could have
invoked Section 41A of Cr.P.C. at all? If the law
mandates that the act be performed in a particular
manner or if the law mandates that the vesting of right is
contingent upon certain condition precedent or only in
particular circumstances, it is needless to state that the
act can be performed only in that manner or the right
can be invoked only on compliance of the mandate. In
the absence of the pre-conditions being made out, then
the authority would necessarily be divested of the power
to invoke the statutory provisions. In the instant case, in
fact in the course of arguments, the respondent has
made a categorical statement that the petitioner is being
summoned not in his individual capacity but as a
representative of the Company. It was also submitted
that the purpose for which the petitioner has been
summoned has also been made known and that as the
reply has not satisfied or clarified the doubts entertained,
the respondent deemed it necessary to invoke the
provisions of Section 41A of Cr.P.C. On a reading of
Annexure – A, the impugned Notice, the only ground
which is made the basis for invoking Section 41A of
Cr.P.C. is that as per the information of the respondent,
the petitioner is the Managing Director of Twitter India
and that he is a representative of Twitter in India and
hence, for the said reason, the petitioner is bound by law
to co-operate with the investigation. That Twitter India
has the power to decide, which tweets are to be taken
out of circulation in relation to India and despite knowing
that the impugned news is fake news and despite it being
within the authority and control to stop the spread of
fake news, steps have not been taken by the petitioner.
42.   Thus, the crux appears to be the belief of the
respondent, that 9th accused and the petitioner are
competent/capable of regulating the contents on the
social media platform. This case appears to be an
improved version, as it is contrary to the version of the
investigating officer as stated in the Notice under Section
160 of Cr.P.C., wherein, it has been stated that Twitter
has failed to control the spread of the fake news. It is
pertinent to note that the improvement is not backed by
any material that is before this Court.
43.   Thus, this Court is required to examine as to
whether any of the condition precedent, stipulated under
Section 41A of Cr.P.C. are complied with or in other
words, the case of the petitioner falls in one of the three
distinct classes detailed therein. It is the specific case of
the petitioner that he is neither named as an accused nor
has any material been placed before the Court to
demonstrate that the respondent entertain a reasonable
suspicion   or  that   they   are  in   receipt of   credible
information. In the absence of any of these three pre-
conditions having not been met with, it is to be construed
that the Notice is without the sanction of law and
consequently      without   jurisdiction   and   that as  the
provision vests the authority in the investigating officer
to invoke the provisions of Section only in case where
either of the three pre-conditions are met with, it cannot
be    laconically    argued    that    the   petition is  not
44.  It cannot be gainfully contended that the
provisions of Section 41A of Cr.P.C can be invoked in any
or   every   situation.   The    mandatory     nature  of the
provisions of Section 41A of Cr.P.C is reflected by the
very provisions of Section 160 of Cr.P.C. in the statute
book. If it was the idea or intention of the law makers to
enable the investigating officer to seek the presence of
any or every person for the purpose of investigation, the
provisions of Section 160 of Cr.P.C. would have sufficed
and there was no need for the law makers to frame a
special provision insofar as it relates to summoning a
person to join the investigation as an accused. The
clarification or rather submission that the petitioner has
not been notified as an individual but as a representative
would again clearly demonstrate that, if it was the
intention of the investigating officer to summon the
accused or seek co-operation from the accused, notices
ought to have been addressed to the accused. On the
other hand, the Noticee is the petitioner and he has been
notified by name, though the designation is also detailed
in the Notices. That apart, the very submission that the
petitioner has been notified as a representative of the
accused - Company, would have demanded something
more to be placed before the Court, more so in the light
of the categorical assertions by the petitioner under
Annexure-G, wherein he has stated in categorical terms
that he has no role or control over the media platform
run by 8th accused. Despite his categorical assertions, the
respondent - police has just brushed it aside and under
the impugned Notice, it is stated ‘as per our information’,
the petitioner is the Managing Director of Twitter India
and a representative of Twitter Inc. in India. It needs no
reiteration that a mere information can never partake the
character of a or be equated with a “credible information”
as mandated as under Section 41A of Cr.P.C. Along with
the petition, the petitioner has also placed on record the
Company Master Data and today, along with a memo, a
copy of Form No. MGT-7, the Annual Return submitted
by the TCIPL, which demonstrates the share holding
pattern in TCIPL. The very approach of the respondent
that is, to not even resort to a preliminary investigation,
to secure records, which are available in the public
domain, is surprising and forces the Court to infer
otherwise.   It  is not   merely   the   failure to  obtain
information, which is available in the public domain and
very much with the statutory authorities but the ominous
silence maintained with regard to the merits of the
matter and an attempt to coax the Court to reject the
petition on the singular ground of jurisdiction. No doubt
the parties are entitled to agitate on the grounds of
territorial jurisdiction alone but the said issue by itself,
even as per the rulings placed before this Court on both
sides, is a question of applying the facts in the context of
the lis involved and the rights agitated by the parties and
the relief sought.
45.    It is not in doubt that the very impugned
notice itself threatens the petitioner with punitive action
and    deprivation    of  liberty,  which admittedly    is   a
fundamental right. Hence, if the rights of the petitioner is
viewed in the above background, it can be safely held
that the contention of the respondent is misplaced.
46.    In the light of the above discussion, with
regard to the authority of the respondent to invoke
Section 41A of Cr.P.C., it has been demonstrated in
unmistakable terms that the petitioner, who is not an
accused     and   there   being    no compliance   with    the
condition precedents imposed under Section 41A of
Cr.P.C., it can by no stretch of imagination be described
as a reasonable exercise of power and thereby rendering
it a colorable exercise. In that view of the matter, it can
be held that the invocation of power under Section 41A
of Cr.P.C. is without jurisdiction. Though a long list of
rulings are relied upon, the rulings involves persons, who
have either been arrayed as accused or the petition
involves lis in a civil domain. In view of the above, it has
to be concluded that the impugned Annexure-A Notice is
vitiated and can be the premise for the petitioner to
reasonably apprehend        breach  of his   constitutionally
guaranteed fundamental rights.
Navinchandra N. Majithia vs. State of Maharashtra
reported in (2000) 7 SCC 640 and Nawal Kishore
Sharma vs. Union of India reported in (2014) 9 SCC
329, it has been categorically held by the Hon’ble Apex
Court that a part cause of action would give rise or confer
jurisdiction on the High Court within which the cause of
action arises.
48.   Admittedly, in the instant case, the petitioner
is not arrayed as an accused. The material placed by the
petitioner and which remains uncontraverted and which
material is part of the records maintained by the
statutory authority and available in the public domain,
demonstrates    that   the  entity  Twitter  India, is   an
independent entity and the control over the affairs of the
company is in the hands of one Twitter International
Company, Ireland and Twitter Netherlands B.V., situated
in Netherlands. A bare perusal of the Annual Returns
submitted by TCIPL reveals the description of business
activity as advertising and market research. Prima facie,
this only further aids the case canvassed by the
petitioner that Twitter India has no control or authority
over the contents of the social media platform, which
even as per Annexure-F is operated and controlled by 8th
accused i.e., Twitter Inc. USA. The action of respondent
in trying to invoke Section 41A of Cr.P.C., leads to an
inevitable conclusion that the same is resorted to as an
arm-twisting method, as the petitioner refused to heed to
the command of the Notice under Section 160 of Cr.P.C.
and the respondent probably inferred it as a audacious
act i.e., refusal to bow to its command. The failure to
comply with the command of the respondent under
Section    41A   of   Cr.P.C.,would     necessarily  result  in
punitive action, which could result in the depriving the
petitioner of his liberty. That apart, complying with the
command of the respondent would also involve the
petitioner curtailing his day-to-day activities in practicing
of his profession compelling him to abandon the same
and travel to far away to Ghaziabad. It is not that the
respondent is deprived of any means to collect the
information from the petitioner. In fact, as pointed out,
the    information     or   the   clarification   sought,   are
clarifications that could have been easily accessed by the
investigating    officer  from    the    statutory  authorities
themselves. Annexure – C being the Company Master
Data maintained by the authorities clearly reveals as to
who are the persons, who are responsible for the
management of the Company. The mere fact that they
are non-residents, does not tie-down the hands of the
respondent. The said fact can also not be made a basis to
treat the petitioner as a sacrificial goat at the altar of
convenience. The Annual Returns, which was filed into
the Court is yet again a document, which is available in
the public domain and issued by the statutory authority,
which details the nature and conduct of business by the
9th accused. It also details the shareholders and none of
the information, either Annexure - C or Annual Returns
can be considered as even prima facie incriminating or
indicting or indicating the petitioner as capable of
controlling the contents of the social media platform run
by 8th accused. The provisions of a statute cannot be
permitted to become tools of harassment. Hearing has
been    conducted   for   the   past several    dates.  The
respondent has not even placed an iota of material,
which    would   indicate   otherwise,   or   which    would
demonstrate a prima facie involvement of the petitioner.
In that view of the matter, this Court is of the considered
opinion that the petitioner has made out a case.
49.   It is relevant and pertinent to note and
reproduce certain observations of the Hon’ble Apex Court
in various rulings relied upon by the parties. The
observations throw light on the issue raised in the
The Hon’ble Apex Court in the case of Om Prakash
Srivastava Vs. Union of India and Another, reported
in (2006) 6 SCC 207, has been pleased to observe in
“7.   The question whether or not cause of action
wholly or in part for filing a writ petition has
arisen within the territorial limits of any High
Court has to be decided in the light of the nature
and character of the proceedings under Article
226 of the Constitution.      In order to maintain a
writ petition, a writ petitioner has to establish that
a legal right claimed by him has prima facie either
been infringed or is threatened to be infringed by
the respondent within the territorial limits of the
Court's jurisdiction and such infringement may
take place by causing him actual injury or threat
thereof.
8. Two clauses of Article 226 of the Constitution
on plain reading give clear indication that the High
Court can exercise power to issue direction, order
or writs for the enforcement of any of the
fundamental rights conferred by Part III of the
Constitution or for any other purpose if the cause
of action wholly or in part had arisen within the
territories  in  relation   to  which    it   exercises
jurisdiction notwithstanding that the seat of the
Government or authority or the residence of the
person against whom the direction, order or writ
is issued is not within the said territories.
14.    The expression “cause of action” is generally
understood to mean a situation or state of facts
that entitles a party to maintain an action in a
court or a tribunal; a group of operative facts
giving rise to one or more bases of suing; a
factual situation that entitles one person to obtain
a remedy in court from another person (see
Dictionary a “cause of action” is stated to be the
entire set of facts that gives rise to an enforceable
claim; the phrase comprises every fact, which if
traversed, the plaintiff must prove in order to
obtain judgment. In Words and Phrases (4th Edn.)
the meaning attributed to the phrase “cause of
action” in common legal parlance is existence of
those facts, which give a party a right to judicial
interference on his behalf. (See Navinchandra N.
Majithia v. State of Maharashtra).”
The Hon’ble Apex Court in the case of Oil and
Others, reported in (1994) 4 SCC 711, has been
pleased to observe in paragraphs 5 and 6, as under:-
“5. Clause (1) of Article 226 begins with a non
obstante clause — notwithstanding anything in
Article 32 — and provides that every High Court
shall have power “throughout the territories in
relation to which it exercises jurisdiction”, to issue
to    any   person     or  authority,   including    in
appropriate cases, any Government, “within those
territories” directions, orders or writs, for the
enforcement of any of the rights conferred by Part
III or for any other purpose. Under clause (2) of
Article 226 the High Court may exercise its power
conferred by clause (1) if the cause of action,
wholly or in part, had arisen within the territory
over      which      it    exercises      jurisdiction,
notwithstanding that the seat of such Government
or authority or the residence of such person is not
within those territories. On a plain reading of the
aforesaid   two clauses of Article 226         of the
Constitution it becomes clear that a High Court
can exercise the power to issue directions, orders
or writs for the enforcement of any of the
fundamental rights conferred by Part III of the
Constitution or for any other purpose if the cause
of action, wholly or in part, had arisen within the
territories  in   relation   to  which   it  exercises
jurisdiction, notwithstanding that the seat of the
Government or authority or the residence of the
person against whom the direction, order or writ
is issued is not within the said territories. In order
to   confer   jurisdiction  on  the   High   Court  of
Calcutta, NICCO must show that at least a part of
the cause of action had arisen within the territorial
jurisdiction of that Court. That is at best its case
in the writ petition.
6. It is well settled that the expression “cause of
action” means that bundle of facts which the
petitioner must prove, if traversed, to entitle him
to a judgment in his favour by the Court.           In
Chand Kour v. Partab Singh, Lord Watson said:
“… the cause of action has no relation
whatever to the defence which may be set
up by the defendant, nor does it depend
upon the character of the relief prayed for
by the plaintiff. It refers entirely to the
ground set forth in the plaint as the cause of
action, or, in other words, to the media
upon which the plaintiff asks the Court to
arrive at a conclusion in his favour.”
Therefore, in determining the objection of lack of
territorial jurisdiction the court must take all the
facts pleaded in support of the cause of action into
consideration albeit without embarking upon an
enquiry as to the correctness or otherwise of the
said facts. In other words the question whether a
High Court has territorial jurisdiction to entertain
a writ petition must be answered on the basis of
the averments made in the petition, the truth or
otherwise whereof being immaterial. To put it
differently, the question of territorial jurisdiction
must be decided on the facts pleaded in the
petition. Therefore, the question whether in the
instant    case   the   Calcutta  High   Court   had
jurisdiction to entertain and      decide the writ
petition in question even on the facts alleged must
depend upon whether the averments made in
paragraphs 5, 7, 18, 22, 26 and 43 are sufficient
in law to establish that a part of the cause of
action had arisen within the jurisdiction of the
The     Hon’ble      Apex    Court   in   the    case of
Navinchandra N. Majithia Vs. State of Maharashtra
and Others, reported in (2000) 7 SCC 640, has been
pleased to observe in paragraph 43 as under:-
“43. We make it clear that the mere fact that FIR
was registered in a particular State is not the sole
criterion to decide that no cause of action has
arisen even partly within the territorial limits of
jurisdiction of another State. Nor are we to be
understood that any person can create a fake
cause of action or even concoct one by simply
jutting into the territorial limits of another State or
by making a sojourn or even a permanent
residence therein. The place of residence of the
person moving a High Court is not the criterion to
determine the contours of the cause of action in
that particular writ petition. The High Court before
which the writ petition is filed must ascertain
whether any part of the cause of action has arisen
within the territorial limits of its jurisdiction. It
depends upon the facts in each case.”
The Hon’ble Apex Court in Jagisha Arora Vs.
State of Uttar Pradesh and Another, reported in
(2019) 6 SCC 619, has been pleased to observe in
“2.   The fundamental rights guaranteed
under the Constitution of India and in particular
Articles 19 and 21 of the Constitution of India are
non-negotiable.”
50.   Thus, from the above, it can be gathered that
it is the duty of the Constitutional Courts to act and
protect against any assault on the fundamental right of a
citizen and the Constitutional Courts cannot be shackled
in the light of Article 226 (2) of the Constitution of India.
In the light of the above rulings and in the facts and
circumstances of this case, it is held that the writ petition
by the petitioner, who is not an accused and his liberties
not being governed by the Code of Criminal Procedure
and in the light of the fact that issuance of Section 41A of
Cr.P.C Notice being vitiated by malafides and being one
without jurisdiction, the writ petition is held to be
maintainable. The points for consideration are answered
51.   Accordingly,   the   Notice  dated   21.06.2021
produced as Annexure-A to the writ petition is quashed.
Annexure-A Notice shall be read as a Notice under
Section 160 of Cr.P.C.
In the event, the investigating officer desires to
secure the statement or such information, it is open for
the respondent to either require the petitioner to interact
on virtual mode or to meet the petitioner either at his
residence  or  at  the  office  address   as  detailed   in
The writ petition stands ordered accordingly. No