Present:-         Mr. Sandeep Sharma, Advocate for the appellant
None for the respondent.
This appeal has been filed by the appellant-husband against
the order dated 1.10.2016 passed by learned Additional District Judge,
Tarn Taran whereby the appellant’s petition under section 13-A of the
Hindu Marriage Act,1955 for dissolution of marriage by a decree of
divorce has been dismissed.
Briefly stated the facts of the case are that the marriage
between the parties was solemnized in the year 2009-2010. It is stated
to be a simple marriage with no exchange of gifts or dowry articles. No
child was born out of their wedlock. It is the appellant’s case that since
the very beginning the respondent did not want to live in the
matrimonial house along with his parents and wished to live separately.
The respondent also did not perform her matrimonial duties and would
pick up quarrels on trifle matters and would insult the parents of the
appellant. It is further alleged that the respondent has a “venom-oozing
tongue”. She even threatened to involve the appellant and his family
members in false dowry case. It is stated that on 13.10.2013 the father
of the respondent took her away and the respondent took all her
belongings and gold ornaments with her and never came back
thereafter. The appellant even convened a Panchayat; and on
10.11.2013, he along with his parents and other respectables went to
the house of the parents of the respondent for reconciliation, but to no
avail.
On the other hand, the respondent before the Family Court,
has stated that the appellant’s petition under Section 13 was a counter
blast to her petition under Section 125 Cr.PC; and the FIR No. 33 dated
25.3.2014 under Sections 406, 498-A, 120-B IPC, PS Patti, that she had
got registered against the appellant and his family. She stated that all
the demands of the appellant and his family members were met and
generous items of jewelry and other dowry articles were gifted to them,
however, the appellant and his family members mis-appropriated the
same and ill-treated her and beat her and their greed for more dowry
articles was endless, whereupon she was left with no alternative but to
register the abovesaid FIR against them. She further stated that she was
thrown out of the matrimonial home on 13.10.2013 with nothing except
the clothes she was wearing. Respondent also stated that her parents
and other relatives and other respectables had approached the appellant
and his parents for rehabilitation of the respondent in her matrimonial
house, however, the appellant had refused to take her back.
The following issues were framed by the learned Family
(i)    Whether the respondent has treated the petitioner with cruelty
after solemnization of their marriage? OPP
(ii)   Whether the respondent has deserted the petitioner for a
continuous period of more than two years preceding the filing
of the present petition? OPP
(iii)  Whether the petitioner has suppressed any material facts from
the court, if so, its effect? OPR
(iv)   Whether the petitioner is entitled to the dissolution of the
marriage as prayed for? OPP
The appellant led evidence and produced attested copy of
order dated 8.9.2014 passed in police challan case as Ex. PX ; attested
copy of complaint filed by Baldev Singh (father of the appellant)
against Manjit Singh and others as Ex. PY; copy of agreement dated
31.10.2013 Mark-A; and copy of application of Baldev Singh given to
SHO PS Valtoha as Mark-B.
The respondent appeared in the witness box as RW-1 and
further examined her father Darshan Singh as RW-2 and resident of her
village Darshan Singh son of Prem Singh as RW-3. The respondent
further produced attested copy of order dated 21.5.2016 passed in
complaint case titled as “Baldev Singh v Manjit Singh and others” as
Ex. R-1; attested copy of complaint dated 27.3.2016 titled as
“Rajwinder Kaur v Joginder Singh and others” as Ex. R-2; attested copy
of order dated 17.5.2016 as Ex. R-3; attested copy of application filed
under Order 33 CPC as Ex. R-4; attested copy of the Execution
application of maintenance as Ex. R-5; and attested copy of order dated
4.5.2016 passed in the same as Ex. R-6.
On the basis of the above pleadings and evidence led by the
parties, the learned trial Court vide impugned order dated 1.10.2016
dismissed the appellant’s petition primarily on the ground that the
appellant had failed to prove that the respondent had treated him with
cruelty or deserted him, and had failed to cite any specific instance of
cruelty meted out by the respondent to the appellant. Hence, the present
appeal.
Learned counsel for the appellant has vehemently stated
before us that the impugned order is erroneous inter alia on the ground
that the appellant had cited specific instances of cruelty by the
respondent and also proved the same by examining himself as PW-1
and examined respectable resident of the village Surjit Singh as PW-2;
and his father Baldev Singh as PW-4, however, the learned Court below
has not appreciated the evidence in the correct light/ right perspective.
Learned counsel has further urged that the learned trial Court has failed
to properly appreciate the fact that the respondent had deserted the
matrimonial home without any sufficient cause on 13.10.2013.
Learned counsel has further stated that the appellant and his father were
beaten by the father of the respondent and his companions, regarding
which a complaint was also given to Police Station, Valtoha on
31.10.2013 as Mark-B. It was accordingly prayed that the appeal be
allowed.
Heard counsel for the appellant and perused the records in
great detail. Though matter was passed over, yet no one has appeared
for the respondent even in the second round. Even on last date of
hearing no one had appeared for the respondent.
Be that as it may there are plethora of judgments of Hon’ble
Supreme Court as well as by this Court wherein it has been held that
filing of false cases by wife against husband and his family members
amounts to cruelty. Perusal of the record reveals that appellant had
filed CM 25981-CII of 2018 dated 27.11.2018 seeking to place on
record the judgment dated 30.8.2018 whereby the appellant and his
family members, namely Baldev Singh (father of the appellant),
Lakhwinder Kaur and Ramandeep Kaur (sisters of the appellant) and
Ninder Kaur wife of Kashmir Singh, had been acquitted in the
aforementioned FIR no. 33 dated 25.3.2014 registered under Sections
406, 498-A and 120-B IPC. Copy of the judgment dated 30.8.2018 has
been appended with the application as Annexure A-1. Said CM 25981-
CII of 2018 dated 27.11.2018 is allowed and judgment of acquittal
dated 30.8.2018 Annexure A-1 is taken on record.
During the pendency of this appeal, this Court had
attempted to reconcile the differences between the parties through
mediation, however, parties could not resolve their dispute amicably
and the mediation attempts had failed.
In our view, once criminal litigation is initiated between the
parties it leads to a point of no return. And if it is a false case filed by
the wife merely to harass and humiliate the husband and his family,
then the resultant bitterness rarely leaves any room or reason for
reconciliation. A perusal of the judgment at Annexure A-1 whereby
the appellant and his family members have been acquitted of the
charges under Section 406, 498-A 120-B IPC shows that ld. Trial Court
has returned very categoric findings holding that the prosecution
entirely failed to prove its case. DW-1 Baljinder Singh has stated on
oath that he had participated in the marriage between the parties as
mediator and nothing was demanded by the appellant or his family from
the respondent or her parents. The learned SDJM, Patti in his judgment
of acquittal has returned the finding that no medico-legal examination
was led by the respondent wife to prove the alleged beatings that she
had received at the hands of the appellant and his father.
This Court as well as the Hon’ble Supreme Court have
repeatedly held that if the wife files false complaint against her spouse,
it amounts to cruelty and is sufficient ground for divorce. In this regard
reference may be made to one such judgment passed by Hon’ble the
Supreme Court in the case ‘Rani Narsimha Sastry v Rani Suneela
Rani’ in SLP(Civil) 1981 of 2019, decided on 19.11.2019 wherein, in
para 13 Hon’ble Supreme Court held as follows:-
“13. In the present case the prosecution is launched by the
respondent against the appellant under Section 498A of IPC making
serious allegations in which the appellant had to undergo trial which
ultimately resulted in his acquittal.     In the prosecution under
Section 498A of IPC not only acquittal has been recorded but
observations have been made that the allegations of serious nature
are levelled against each other. The case set up by the appellant
seeking decree of divorce on the ground of cruelty has been
established……….
14………..But when a person undergoes a trial in which
he is acquitted of the allegation of offence under Section 498A of
IPC, levelled by the wife against the husband, it cannot be accepted
that no cruelty has meted on the husband. As per pleadings before
us, after parties having been married on 14.8.2005, they lived
together only 18 months and thereafter they are separately living for
more than a decade now.
15. In view of forgoing discussion, we conclude that
appellant has made a ground for grant of decree of dissolution of
marriage on the ground as mentioned in Section 13(1)(i-a) of the
In yet another case of ‘Kahkashan Kausar @ Sonam v.
State of Bihar (SC): Law Finder Doc Id # 1941423,’ the Hon’ble
Supreme Court held as follows:
“Further, it is submitted that the FIR in question has been made
with a revengeful intent, merely to harass the Appellant in-laws
herein, and should be dealt with accordingly. Reliance is placed
on Social Action Forum for Manav Adhikar & Anr. v. Union of
India, Ministry of Law And Justice & Ors., (2018) 10 SCC 443,
wherein it was observed:-
"4. Regarding the constitutionality of Section 498A IPC,
in Sushil Kumar Sharma v. Union of India and others, it
was held by the Supreme Court: -
"Provision of S. 498A of Penal Code is not unconstitutional
and ultra vires. Mere possibility of abuse of a provision of
law does not per se invalidate a legislation. Hence plea that
S. 498A has no legal or constitutional foundation is not
tenable. The object of the provisions is prevention of the
dowry menace. But many instances have come to light
where the complaints are not bona fide and have been filed
with oblique motive. In such cases acquittal of the accused
does not in all cases wipe out the ignominy suffered during
and prior to trial. Sometimes adverse media coverage adds
to the misery. The question, therefore, is what remedial
measures can be taken to prevent abuse of the well-
intentioned provision. Merely because the provision is
constitutional and intra vires, does not give a licence to
unscrupulous persons to wreck personal vendetta or
unleash harassment. It may, therefore, become necessary
for the legislature to find out ways how the makers of
frivolous complaints or allegations can be appropriately
dealt with. Till then the Courts have to take care of the
situation within the existing frame-work."”
Even this Court in the case of Sushma Taya v Arvind
2015(2) RCR 888 (P&H) held that filing of false criminal complaint by a
spouse invariably and inevitably amounts to matrimonial cruelty and
entitles the other to claim divorce.
Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of A. Jayachandra v
Aneel Kaur 2005 (2) SCC 22 has held that allegation of cruelty is of such
nature that resumption of marriage is not possible.
In ‘Raj Talreja v. Kavita Talreja’, (2017) 14 SCC 194,
the Hon’ble Supreme Court held as follows:
“Cruelty can never be defined with exactitude. What is cruelty
will depend upon the facts and circumstances of each case. In the
present case, from the facts narrated above, it is apparent that the
wife made reckless, defamatory and false accusations against her
husband, his family members and colleagues, which would
definitely have the effect of lowering his reputation in the eyes of
his peers. Mere filing of complaints is not cruelty, if there are
justifiable reasons to file the complaints. Merely because no
action is taken on the complaint or after trial the accused is
acquitted may not be a ground to treat such accusations of the
wife as cruelty within the meaning of the Hindu Marriage Act
1955 (for short `the Act'). However, if it is found that the
allegations are patently false, then there can be no manner of
doubt that the said conduct of a spouse levelling false accusations
against the other spouse would be an act of cruelty. In the present
case, all the allegations were found to be false.”
Even otherwise a perusal of the LCR as well as the present
appeal, reveals that there are great differences between both parties and
they are determined to live separately and to not reconcile the issues
between them. As stated above, mediation attempts between the parties
have failed. It is not in dispute that the parties have been living
separately since October 2013. In our view, this conduct of the parties
evidences that there are irreconcilable differences between them,
rendering the marriage, as of today, a mere legal fiction. Though
irretrievable breakdown of marriage is not available as a ground under
the statute, yet, the reality of it has been recognised by the Supreme
Court in a catena of decisions.
In these circumstances the following observations of the
Hon’ble Supreme Court in case of ‘K. Srinivas Rao vs. D.A. Deepa’
(2013) 5 SCC 226, cover the current controversy:
“25. It is also to be noted that the appellant-husband and the
respondent-wife are staying apart from 27/4/1999. Thus, they are
living separately for more than ten years. This separation has created
an unbridgeable distance between the two. As held in Samar Ghosh,
if we refuse to sever the tie, it may lead to mental cruelty.
26. We are also satisfied that this marriage has irretrievably
broken down. Irretrievable breakdown of marriage is not a ground
for divorce under the Hindu Marriage Act,1955. But where marriage
is beyond repair on account of bitterness created by the acts of the
husband or the wife or of both, the courts have always taken
irretrievable breakdown of marriage as a very weighty circumstance
amongst others necessitating severance of marital tie. A marriage
which is dead for all purposes cannot be revived by the court’s
verdict, if the parties are not willing. This is because marriage
involves human sentiments and emotions and if they are dried-up
there is hardly any chance of their springing back to life on account
of artificial reunion created by the court’s decree. …
28. In the ultimate analysis, we hold that the respondent-wife
has caused by her conduct mental cruelty to the appellant-husband
and the marriage has irretrievably broken down. Dissolution of
marriage will relieve both sides of pain and anguish. In this Court
has respondent-wife expressed that she wants to go back to the
appellant-husband, but, that is not possible now. The appellant
husband is not willing to take her back. Even if we refuse decree of
divorce to the appellant-husband, there are hardly any chances of
the respondent-wife leading a happy life with the appellant-husband
because a lot of bitterness is created by the conduct of the respondent
wife.”
Reference at this stage can be made to the case of ‘Naveen
Kohli v. Neelu Kohli’, (2006) 4 SCC 558 which was also a case of cruelty
(mental and physical) where the Hon’ble Supreme Court again considered
the concept of irretrievable breakdown of marriage. In that case too the
parties had been living separately since ten years and the wife was not
ready to grant divorce to her husband. However, notwithstanding this
factual position, Hon’ble Supreme Court was pleased to grant divorce in
said matter and has further noticed as follows:
“32. In ‘Sandhya Rani v. Kalyanram Narayanan’, (1994) Supp.
2 SCC 588, this Court reiterated and took the view that since the
parties are living separately for the last more than three years, we
have no doubt in our mind that the marriage between the parties has
irretrievably broken down. There is no chance whatsoever of their
coming together. Therefore, the Court granted the decree of divorce.
33. In the case of ‘Chandrakala Menon v. Vipin Menon’, (1993)2
SCC 6, the parties had been living separately for so many years. This
Court came to the conclusion that there is no scope of settlement
between them because, according to the observation of this Court,
the marriage has irretrievably broken down and there is no chance of
their coming together. This Court granted decree of divorce.
34. In the case of Kanchan Devi v. Promod Kumar Mittal,
1996(2) RCR (Criminal) 614 : (1996)8 SCC 90, the parties were
living separately for more than 10 years and the Court came to the
conclusion that the marriage between the parties had to be
irretrievably broken down and there was no possibility of
reconciliation and therefore the Court directed that the marriage
between the parties stands dissolved by a decree of divorce.”
Thus, in the conspectus of the peculiar facts and circumstances
of the present case, and in consonance with the aforesaid pronouncements
of the Hon’ble Supreme Court, with a view to do complete justice, and
put an end to the agony of the parties, this Court deems it appropriate to
allow the present appeal.
Before parting, though we have held that the acts of the
respondent-wife amount to cruelty against the appellant-husband, we are,
however, not oblivious to her requirements. It has come on record that the
appellant has been paying interim maintenance under section 125 CRPC
at Rs.2500/- per month, and Rs.3000 per month was granted by the trial
court under section 24 of the HMA. In these circumstances, we consider
it just to direct that the husband shall pay to the wife a sum of INR
10,00,000/- (Rupees Ten Lakhs only) as one-time permanent alimony as
full and final settlement of all disputes between the parties.
Accordingly, for the reasons stated above, this appeal is
allowed; impugned order dated 1.10.2016 passed by the learned
Additional District Judge, Tarn Taran is set aside; the petition for
divorce filed by the appellant- husband under Sections 13-A of the Act
is decreed and the marriage solemnized between the parties is dissolved
by a decree of divorce in the abovesaid terms. All pending applications,
if any, stand disposed of.