Heard learned counsel for the revisionists, learned A.G.A. for the State by means
of Video Conferencing and perused the record.
Challenge in this Revision is the judgement and order dated 3.11.2021 passed by
Additional Sessions Judge (Rape Cases & POCSO Act) Sambhal at Chandausi
in Appeal No. 20 of 2020 under Section 101 of Juvenile Justice (Care and
Protection of Children) Act wrongly filed under Section 374 (2) Cr.P.C. (Billu @
Anandi and Another Vs. State of U.P. and Another) whereby learned Appellate
Court dismissed the appeal on the ground of not pressed by counsel for
appellants and affirmed the conviction order dated 21.12.2020 passed by
Juvenile Justice Board, District Sambhal in Case Crime No. 536 of 2005 under
Sections 376, 506 I.P.C., P.S. Rajpura, District Sambhal convicting and
sentencing the appellants under Section 376 I.P.C. for a period of three years
each and under Section 506 I.P.C. convicted the appellants for two years each.
Further directed that both the sentences shall run concurrently.
Learned counsel for the Revisionists raised only one point that order dated
3.11.2021 is illegal as the appeal has been dismissed on the ground of not
pressed by the counsel for the Revisionists.
I agree with the aforesaid contention of learned counsel for the Revisionists.
Relevant portion of the order dated 3.11.2021 is quoted below:-
In State of Haryana v. Janak Singh, (2013) 9 SCC 431, Hon'ble Apex Court
has held that where Criminal Appeal preferred by the convict of offence under
pressed by the counsel for the appellant as regards the
judgement of conviction and had pressed only on the point of sentence and the
appellate court/High Court then reduced the sentence already undergone by the
convict in jail. It has been further held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court that even
when the appeal was not pressed on merits and only pressed only on the point of
sentence, appellate court has to see under Section 376 I.P.C. whether the
conviction was proper.
For the ready reference, relevant part of the afore-cited judgement of the Apex
"12. We notice that before the High Court the learned counsel for the respondents did not
challenge the conviction. At the same time, he stated that the circumstances of the case and
medical evidence indicated that this could be a case where the prosecutrix had gone with
respondent Joginder Singh of her own will. Therefore, it is not clear whether the respondents
had really instructed their counsel not to press the appeal on merits or whether the counsel on
his own thought that getting the respondents released on sentence already undergone by them
was an easy way out and, therefore, he preferred that option. We feel that the appeals were
heard in a slipshod manner. It was open for the respondents to press the appeals on merits
and pray for acquittal. Had the case been argued on merits, the High Court could have
acquitted the respondents if it felt that the prosecution had not proved its case beyond
reasonable doubt. Assuming the respondents did not press the appeals, the High Court had to
still consider whether the concession made by the counsel was proper because it is the duty of
the court to see whether conviction is legal. But, once the respondents stated that they did not
want to press the appeals and the High Court was convinced that conviction must follow,
then, ordinarily it could not have reduced the sentence to the sentence already undergone by
the respondents which is below the minimum prescribed by law. The High Court could have
done so only if it felt that there were extenuating circumstances by giving reasons therefor.
While reducing the sentence, the High Court has merely stated that it was "just and
expedient" to do so. These are not the reasons contemplated by the proviso to Section 376(1)
IPC. Reasons must contain extenuating circumstances which prompted the High Court to
reduce the sentence below the prescribed minimum. Sentence bargaining is impermissible in a
serious offence like rape. Besides, at the cost of repetition, it must be stated that such a course
would be against the mandate of Section 376(1) IPC.
13. In view of the above discussion, we hold that the impugned judgment [Janak Singh v.
State of Haryana, Criminal Appeal No. 648-SB of 2000, decided on 2-8-2010 (P&H)] is
legally unsustainable and is liable to be set aside and the matter deserves to be remanded to
the High Court for fresh disposal of the appeals filed by the respondents."
Recently in Criminal Appeal No. 1385-1386 of 2021, Gurjant Singh Vs. The
State of Punjab, Hon'ble Apex Court has again reiterated the aforesaid principle.
Accordingly it is held that Criminal Appeal cannot be dismissed on the ground
of not pressed.
In view of the above law of Hon'ble Apex Court in State of Haryana v. Janak
Singh (Supra), order passed by Additional Sessions Judge (Rape Cases &
POCSO Act) Sambhal at Chandausi dated 03.11.2021 dismissing the appeal on
the ground of not pressed by the learned counsel for the appellants deserves to
be set-aside and Revision deserves to be allowed.
Accordingly, Revision is allowed. Impugned order dated 03.11.2021 passed by
Additional Sessions Judge (Rape Cases & POCSO Act) Sambhal at Chandausi is
set-aside.
Matter is remitted to Additional Sessions Judge (Rape Cases & POCSO Act)
Sambhal at Chandausi to dispose of the matter in accordance with provisions of
law after providing adequate opportunity of hearing to the parties.
It is also directed that Additional Sessions Judge (Rape Cases & POCSO Act)
Sambhal at Chandausi shall dispose of the appeal within a period of three
months from the date of receipt of certified copy of this order as revisionist is
already in jail and matter relates to Section 376 I.P.C.