1.         By this petition, under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India and under section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 (for short "Cr.P.C"), the petitioner has made following prayers;
(a) That this Hon'ble Court be pleased to quash and/or
setting aside the FIR RCBD1/2019/E/001, Dt. 22 nd January,
2019 u/sec. 7, 13 (2) r/w 13(1) & (d) of PC Act, 420 & 120B
of IPC, being investigated by CBI, and the further
investigation be stayed;
(b) That this Hon'ble Court be pleased to issue a Writ of
Certiorari or a Writ in the nature of Writ of Certiorari, or any
other appropriate Writ, order or direction under Article
226/227 of the Constitution of India, quashing and/or setting
aside the Orders of the Hon'ble City Civil and Sessions Court,
CBI Special Judge dated 26th            December, 2022, 28th
December, 2022 and 29th December, 2022 in FIR
RCBD1/2019/E/001, Dtd. 22nd January 2019 u/sec. 7, 13 (2)
r/w 13 (1) & (d) of PC Act, 420 & 120B of IPC, being
investigated by CBI.
(c) That this Hon'ble Court be pleased to declare that the
arrest and remand to custody of the Petitioner was arbitrary,
illegal, without following due procedure of law and in gross
violation of Sections 41 and 41A of the CRPC and Article 14,
19 (1) (d) and 21 of the Constitution of India;
(d) That pending hearing and final disposal of the present
Petition, this Hon'ble Court be pleased to stay the operation
of the Orders of the Hon'ble City Civil and Sessions Court,
CBI Special Judge, Mumbai dated 26 th December 2022, 28th
December 2022 and 29th December 2022 in R.A
No.1271/2022 pursuant to FIR RCBD1/2019/E/001, Dtd.
22nd January 2019 u/sec. 7, 13(2) r/w 13 (1) & (d) of PC Act,
420 & 120B of IPC, being investigated by CBI. against the
Petitioner and release the Petitioner on bail, on such terms
and conditions as this Hon'ble Court may deem fit, necessary
and/or proper in the facts and circumstances of the present
2.     By way of interim relief, the petitioner seeks his release from
custody, pending the hearing and final disposal of the petition.
3.     Learned Counsel for the petitioner - Mr. Ladda and learned
Special P.P, Mr. Raja Thakare have restricted their arguments only
on prayer clause (c) of the petition, as above.
4.     A few facts germane for considering grant of interim relief are
as follows.
5.     The petitioner is the former Chairman and Managing
Director of the Videocon Group of Companies. On 22 nd January,
2019, a case was registered against (a) Videocon International
Electronics Limited, (b) Videocon Industries Limited, (c) the
Limited, (g) M/s. Supreme Energy Private Limited alongwith some
unknown private persons and unknown public servants under
section 120-B r/w section 420 of the I.P.C and under section 7, 13
(2) r/w 13(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act (for short "P.C
6.     An F.I.R was registered on the basis of a preliminary inquiry
conducted by the respondent No.1 – C.B.I (for short “respondent
No.1”) bearing PEBD1/2017/E/0001 dated 8 th December, 2017 at
New Delhi against the accused persons on the premise that during
the year 2011-2012, credit facilities of about Rs.3,250/- crores were
sanctioned by the I.C.I.C.I Bank in violation of banking regulations
and credit policy of the bank to M/s Trend Electronics Limited,
Industries Limited and M/s. Evan Fraser & Co., India Limited. All
companies belonging to Videocon Group were promoted by the
petitioner. We are not touching to the merits of the case.
7.     On 31st January, 2019, ECIR/02/HIU of 2019 was registered
by Directorate of Enforcement (for short "E.D."), New Delhi against
the petitioner, Chanda Deepak Kochhar and Deepak Virendra
Kochhar.    The petitioner was summoned by the E.D and the
respondent No.1.      In the month of February, 2021, the E.D.
completed it's investigation and filed a prosecution complaint
without arresting the petitioner.
8.     On 12th March, 2021, Sessions Court granted bail to the
petitioner in the P.M.L.A Special Case No.915 of 2020. The
petitioner was summoned by respondent No.1, time and again,
since 2017, for the purpose of investigation. On 15 th December,
2022, respondent No.1 issued a notice under section 41-A of the
Cr. P.C calling upon the petitioner to appear in it's office at New
Delhi on 19th December, 2022 for questioning in the matter of the
aforesaid F.I.R. The Petitioner sent Whats App message to the
Investigating Officer Mr. Nitesh Kumar informing him his correct
email id and requested to send him summons to attend the office
on 21st December, 2022 instead of 19th December, 2022, due to his
medical pre-schedule appointments.
9.     The petitioner attended the office of the respondent No.1 at
New Delhi on 21st December, 2022. However, he was asked to
attend the office on 22nd December, 2022. Accordingly, the
petitioner had attended the office of the respondent on 22 nd
December, 2022 at New Delhi. He was again summoned on 23 rd
December, 2022, however, since he was already called by the E.D.
on 23rd December, 2022, he informed the Investigating Officer of
respondent on WhatsApp to that effect.
10.    Meanwhile, on 23rd December, 2022, other accused named in
F.I.R viz: Chanda Deepak Kochhar and Deepak Virendra Kochhar
were arrested by the respondent pursuant to an order of the City
Civil Court. On 24th December, 2022, respondent No.1 issued a
notice under section 41-A of the Cr. P.C summoning the petitioner
to appear before it's office in Mumbai on 25 th December, 2022. A
notice was pasted on the wall of the petitioner's office building in
Mumbai.       The petitioner resides at Aurangabad.          When the
petitioner came to know about pasting of such notice on the wall of
his office at Mumbai, he addressed an email to the respondent No.1
in response to the notice dated 24th December, 2022, inter alia,
informing that he learnt about notice under section 41A for his
appearance on Sunday i.e on 25th December, 2022.
11.    On 25th December, 2022, respondent No.1 issued a notice
under section 41-A of the Cr.P.C calling upon the petitioner to
appear in it's office in Mumbai on 26 th December, 2022 at 9.00 a.m
for questioning in subject FIR. When the petitioner appeared in the
office of the respondent No.1 at Mumbai on 26th December, 2022
at 9.00 a.m, he was made to undergo RTPCR test. After that, the
petitioner was arrested by respondent No.1.        He was produced
before the Special Judge, C.B.I, City Civil and Sessions Court,
Mumbai on the same day.
12.    The petitioner's Advocate moved two applications for
declaring the arrest of the petitioner illegal and to grant ad-interim
bail for non compliance of due procedure under section 41-A of the
Cr.P.C and to provide the petitioner necessary medication.               The
learned Special Judge, C.B.I, however, declared the petitioner's
arrest legal by remanding him to the custody of the respondent till
29th December, 2022.      By an order dated 29 th December, 2022,
Special Judge, C.B.I, Mumbai extended the petitioner's remand till
10th January, 2023. The special Judge, C.B.I, City Civil and Sessions
Court, Mumbai, on 5th January, 2023 considered the petitioner's
application challenging the petitioner's arrest under section 41 and
41-A of the Cr. P.C and rejected the same by stating that the said
application has become infructuous.
13.    We have heard Mr. Ladda, learned Counsel for the petitioner
and Mr. Thakare, learned Special P.P, for respondent No.1.
14.    Learned Counsel for the petitioner has invited our attention
to the application seeking Police (CBI) Custody remand of the
petitioner by the respondent, more particularly, to paragraph 9 of
the application, which reads thus;
"That today FIR named accused Shri V.N. Dhoot,
Managing Director of Videocon Group (A-3), has been
arrested, as he has not been co-operating with the
investigation and despite issue of Notices u/s 41A
CrPC, he did not appear before the IO on 23.12.2022
and 25.12.2022. Further, there is inconsistency in his
statement. (Arrest Memo and personal search memo
enclosed). Medical examination of Shri V.N. Dhoot (A-
3) has been got conducted through Govt. Medical
Officer (Medical Report enclosed). He is produced
before this Hon'ble Court".
15.    The Counsel would submit that the application does not
indicate that the petitioner did not appear before the respondent.
The Investigating Officer had merely stated that the petitioner has
not been co-operating with the investigation, without mentioning
any detail particulars as to how there was non co-operation from
the petitioner in the investigation.   There are no particulars as
regards so-called inconsistencies in the statements.      The learned
Special Judge, C.B.I, according to the learned Counsel, has grossly
erred in not adhering to the mandate of the Supreme Court in case
of Arnesh Kumar vs State of Bihar1 and Satender Kumar Antil vs
CBI2. The arrest and consequent remand of the petitioner to the
custody of the respondent No.1 is in total violation of the tenets of
the Cr.P.C and the procedure prescribed in section 41 and 41-A of
the Cr.P.C. The Counsel would argue that the impugned orders
passed by the Special Judge, C.B.I, are mechanical sans application
of mind and in violation of principles of natural justice. The learned
Counsel would also submit that the remand application dated 26 th
December, 2022 does not give particulars as to what full and true
facts were not disclosed by the petitioner for the purpose of making
proper investigation and for taking the case to it's logical end. The
Counsel would emphasize that since the notice under section 41-A
of Cr.P.C came to be issued, which obviously means that the
respondent did not want to arrest the petitioner. As such, the
learned Counsel would pray for grant of interim bail to the
16.    Mr. Thakare, learned Special P.P. appearing for the respondent
No.1, on the other hand, would submit that the cases investigated
by the E.D. are altogether on different footing i.e. only in respect of
money laundering, whereas the investigation by the C.B.I is on a
larger canvass, especially, when section 120B of the I.P.C and the
sections under Prevention of Corruption Act are invoked. According
to Mr. Thakare, magnitude and dimensions of the offences and it's
investigation needs sufficient time and the Investigating Agency is
required to unearth and investigate each and every financial aspect
in a meticulous manner. There are innumerable transactions in the
given case. It is, therefore, obvious that the Investigating Agency
would require a considerable time to collect the entire material
which had already started in the year 2019. As such, he justified the
arrest of the petitioner after three years. According to Mr. Thakare,
had the petitioner been arrested in the year 2019 itself, the
Investigating Agency could not have completed it's investigation
effectively and meaningfully within ninety days period, resulting
into securing default bail by the petitioner.
17.    Mr. Thakare would further submit that during investigation,
evidence is required to be collected. During interrogation, series of
questions are put to the accused who are placed in their custody for
a considerable period of time and they are subjected to questioning
in an aggressive manner. Mr. Thakare has invited our attention to
the impugned order dated 26th December, 2022 justifying the
observations made by the learned Judge who had carefully gone
through the case diary and rightly remanded the petitioner in the
custody of the respondent No.1 till 28 th December, 2022 in light of
the fact that he had not been co-operating with the Investigating
Agency despite receiving several notices to attend the investigation.
Learned Judge, inter alia, observed that there was due compliance
of the provisions of section 41 and 41-A          of the Cr.P.C.        Mr.
Thakare has placed reliance upon a judgment of the Supreme Court
in case of State represented by the C.B.I Vs. Anil Sharma 3. He
invited our attention to paragraph 6 of the said judgment which is
extracted below:-
"We find force in the submission of the CBI that custodial
interrogation is qualitatively more elicitation oriented than
questioning a suspect who is well ensconded with a
favorable order under section 438 of the code. In a case
like this effective interrogation of suspected person is of
tremendous advantage in disinterring many useful
informations and also materials which would have been
concealed. Succession such interrogation would elude if the
suspected person knows that he is well protected and
insulted by a pre-arrest bail during the time he
interrogated. Very often interrogation in such a condition
would reduce to a mere ritual. The argument that the
custodial interrogation is fraught with the danger of the
person being subjected to third degree methods need not
be countenanced, for, such an argument can be advanced
by all accused in all criminal cases. The court has to
presume that responsible Police Officers would conduct
themselves in a responsible manner and that those
entrusted with the task of disinterring offences would not
conduct themselves as offenders”.
18.    It is submitted that on 22nd December, 2022, the petitioner
could not be confronted before the other accused viz. Chanda
Kochhar and Deepak Kochhar since the petitioner remained absent
on 23rd December, 2022. He remained absent on 25 th December,
2022 also.      However, on 26 th and 27th December, 2022, the
petitioner and the Kochhars' were confronted before each other. As
such, Mr. Thakare strongly objected granting any interim relief to
the petitioner.
19.    As noted earlier and as agreed between the learned Counsel
for the parties, this petition is heard only on a limited point of
interim relief sought i.e. for interim bail on the premise that the
petitioner’s arrest and detention with the respondent No.1 is in
contravention of the statutory provisions and the guidelines
enunciated in the judgments of Arnesh Kumar (supra) and Satender
20.    Before we proceed to decide as to whether the petitioner's
arrest and consequent remand is in consonance with Section 41 and
41-A of the Cr. P.C, it would be apposite to reproduce the relevant
provisions and judgments on this aspect.
“41. When police may arrest without warrant - (1) Any police
officer may without an order from a Magistrate and without
a warrant, arrest any person-
(a) who commits, in the presence of a police officer, a
cognizable offence;
(b) against whom a reasonable complaint has been made, or
credible information has been received, or a reasonable
suspicion exists that he has committed a cognizable offence
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may be less
than seven years or which may extend to seven years whether
with or without fine, if the following conditions are satisfied,
(i) the police officer has reason to believe on the basis of such
complaint, information, or suspicion that such person has
committed the said offence;
ii) the police officer is satisfied that such arrest is necessary-
(a) to prevent such person from committing any further
(b) for proper investigation of the offence; or
(c) to prevent such person from causing the evidence of the
offence to disappear or tampering with such evidence in any
(d) to prevent such person from making any inducement,
threat or promise to any person acquainted with the facts of
the case so as to dissuade him from disclosing such facts to
the Court or to the police officer, or
(e) as unless such person is arrested, his presence in the Court
whenever required cannot be ensured;
and the police officer shall record while making such arrest,
his reasons in writing:
Provided that a police officer shall, in all cases where the
arrest of a person is not required under the provisions of this
sub-section, record the reasons in writing for not making the
(ba) against whom credible information has been received
that he has committed a cognizable offence punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to more than
seven years whether with or without fine or with death
sentence and the police officer has reason to believe on the
basis of that information that such person has committed the
(c) who has been proclaimed as an offender either under this
Code or by order of the State Government; or
(d) in whose possession anything is found which may
reasonably be suspected to be stolen property and who may
reasonably be suspected of having committed an offence with
reference to such thing; or
(e) who obstructs a police officer while in the execution of his
duty, or who has escaped, or attempts to escape, from lawful
(f) who is reasonably suspected of being a deserter from
any of the Armed Forces of the Union; or
(g) who has been concerned in, or against whom a
reasonable complaint has been made, or credible information
has been received, or a reasonable suspicion exists, of his
having been concerned in, any act committed at any place out
of India which, if committed in India, would have been
punishable as an offence, and for which he is, under any law
relating to extradition, or otherwise, liable to be apprehended
or detained in custody in India; or
(h) who, being a released convict, commits a breach of any
rule made under sub-section (5) of section 356; or
(i)    for whose arrest any requisition, whether written or
oral, has been received from another police officer, provided
that the requisition specifies the person to be arrested and the
offence or other cause for which the arrest is to be made and
it appears therefrom that the person might lawfully be
arrested without a warrant by the officer who issued the
(2) Subject to the provisions of section 42, no person
concerned in a non-cognizable offence or against whom a
complaint has been made or credible information has been
received or reasonable suspicion exists of his having so
concerned, shall be arrested except under a warrant or order
of a Magistrate."
41-A. Notice of appearance before police officer. - (1) The
police officer shall, in all cases where the arrest of a person is
not required under the provisions of sub-section (1) of section
41, issue a notice directing the person against whom a
reasonable complaint has been made, or credible information
has been received, or a reasonable suspicion exists that he has
committed a cognizable offence, to appear before him or at
such other place as may be specified in the notice.
(2) Where such a notice is issued to any person, it shall be
the duty of that person to comply with the terms of the
(3) Where such person complies and continues to comply
with the notice, he shall not be arrested in respect of the
offence referred to in the notice unless, for reasons to be
recorded, the police officer is of the opinion that he ought to
be arrested.
(4)    Where such person, at any time, fails to comply with
the terms of the notice or is unwilling to identify himself, the
police officer may, subject to such orders as may have been
passed by a competent Court in this behalf, arrest him for the
offence mentioned in the notice.
“46. Arrest how made.- (1) In making an arrest the police
officer or other person making the same shall actually touch
or confine the body of the person to be arrested, unless there
be a submission to the custody by word or action.
Provided that where a woman is to be arrested, unless
the circumstances indicate to the contrary, her submission to
custody on an oral intimation of arrest shall be presumed
and, unless the circumstances otherwise require or unless the
police officer is a female, the police officer shall not touch the
person of the woman for making her arrest.
(2) If such person forcibly resists the endeavour to arrest
him, or attempts to evade the arrest, such police officer or
other person may use all means necessary to effect the arrest.
(3) Nothing in this section gives a right to cause the death
of a person who is not accused of an offence punishable with
death or with imprisonment for life.
(4)   Save in exceptional circumstances, no woman shall be
arrested after sunset and before sunrise, and where such
exceptional circumstances exist, the woman police officer
shall, by making a written report, obtain the prior permission
of the Judicial Magistrate of the first class within whose local
jurisdiction the offence is committed or the arrest is to be
made.
“60-A. Arrests to be made strictly according to the Code. No
arrest shall be made except in accordance with the provisions
of this Code or any other law for the time being in force
providing for arrest.”
21.    The Apex Court in the case of Satender Kumar Antil (Supra),
has issued certain directions to investigating agencies and the courts;
has discussed arrest in cognizable offences, the mandate of Section
41, effect of its non-compliance while considering the bail
application; has issued directions to ensure that police officers do
not arrest the accused unnecessarily and magistrates do not
authorize detention casually and mechanically; has held that
Sections 41 and 41-A are facets of Article 21 of the Constitution;
and has issued certain guidelines for avoiding unwarranted arrest,
amongst other directions/observations.
22.    The relevant paras of Satender Kumar Antil (Supra), with
which we are concerned, are reproduced hereinunder :-
“24. This provision mandates the police officer to record
his reasons in writing while making the arrest.
Thus, a police officer is duty-bound to record the reasons
for arrest in writing. Similarly, the police officer shall
record reasons when he/she chooses not to arrest. There
is no requirement of the aforesaid procedure when the
offence alleged is more than seven years, among other
25. The consequence of non-compliance with Section
41 shall certainly enure to the benefit of the person
suspected of the offence. Resultantly, while considering
the application for enlargement on bail, courts will have
to satisfy themselves on the due compliance of this
provision. Any non-compliance would entitle the accused
to a grant of bail.
26. Section 41A deals with the procedure for
appearance before the police officer who is required to
issue a notice to the person against whom a reasonable
complaint has been made, or credible information has
been received or a reasonable suspicion exists that he has
committed a cognizable offence, and arrest is not required
under Section 41(1). Section 41B deals with the
procedure of arrest along with mandatory duty on the
part of the officer.
27. On the scope and objective of Section 41 and 41A,
it is obvious that they are facets of Article 21 of the
Constitution. We need not elaborate any further, in light
of the judgment of this Court in Arnesh Kumar v. State of
“7.1. From a plain reading of the aforesaid provision,
it is evident that a person accused of an offence
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
be less than seven years or which may extend to seven
years with or without fine, cannot be arrested by the
police officer only on his satisfaction that such person
had committed the offence punishable as aforesaid. A
police officer before arrest, in such cases has to be
further satisfied that such arrest is necessary to
prevent such person from committing any further
offence; or for proper investigation of the case; or to
prevent the accused from causing the evidence of the
offence to disappear; or tampering with such evidence
in any manner; or to prevent such person from
making any inducement, threat or promise to a
witness so as to dissuade him from disclosing such
facts to the court or the police officer; or unless such
accused person is arrested, his presence in the court
whenever required cannot be ensured. These are the
conclusions, which one may reach based on facts.
7.2. The law mandates the police officer to state the
facts and record the reasons in writing which led him
to come to a conclusion covered by any of the
provisions aforesaid, while making such arrest. The
law further requires the police officers to record the
reasons in writing for not making the arrest.
7.3. In pith and core, the police officer before arrest
must put a question to himself, why arrest? Is it really
required? What purpose it will serve? What object it
will achieve? It is only after these questions are
addressed and one or the other conditions as
enumerated above is satisfied, the power of arrest
needs to be exercised. In fine, before arrest first the
police officers should have reason to believe on the
basis of information and material that the accused has
committed the offence. Apart from this, the police
officer has to be satisfied further that the arrest is
necessary for one or the more purposes envisaged by
sub-clauses (a) to (e) of clause (1) of Section 41 CrPC.
8.       An accused arrested without warrant by the police has
the constitutional right under Article 22(2) of the Constitution
of India and Section 57 CrPC to be produced before the
Magistrate without unnecessary delay and in no circumstances
beyond 24 hours excluding the time necessary for the journey:
8.2. Before a Magistrate authorises detention under Section
167 CrPC, he has to be first satisfied that the arrest made is
legal and in accordance with law and all the constitutional
rights of the person arrested are satisfied. If the arrest effected
by the police officer does not satisfy the requirements of
Section 41 of the Code, Magistrate is duty-bound not to
authorise his further detention and release the accused. In
other words, when an accused is produced before the
Magistrate, the police officer effecting the arrest is required to
furnish to the Magistrate, the facts,reasons and its conclusions
for arrest and the Magistrate in turn is to be satisfied that the
condition precedent for arrest under Section 41 CrPC has been
satisfied and it is only thereafter that he will authorise the
detention of an accused.
8.3. The Magistrate before authorising detention will record
his own satisfaction, may be in brief but the said satisfaction
must reflect from his order. It shall never be based upon the
ipse dixit of the police officer, for example, in case the police
officer considers the arrest necessary to prevent such person
from committing any further offence or for proper
investigation of the case or for preventing an accused from
tampering with evidence or making inducement, etc. the police
officer shall furnish to the Magistrate the facts, the reasons and
materials on the basis of which the police officer had reached
its conclusion. Those shall be perused by the Magistrate while
authorising the detention and only after recording his
satisfaction in writing that the Magistrate will authorise the
detention of the accused.
9. ...The aforesaid provision makes it clear that in all cases
where the arrest of a person is not required under Section
41(1) CrPC, the police officer is required to issue notice
directing the accused to appear before him at a specified place
and time. Law obliges such an accused to appear before the
police officer and it further mandates that if such an accused
complies with the terms of notice he shall not be arrested,
unless for reasons to be recorded, the police officer is of the
opinion that the arrest is necessary. At this stage also, the
condition precedent for arrest as envisaged under Section 41
CrPC has to be complied and shall be subject to the same
scrutiny by the Magistrate as aforesaid.
11. Our endeavour in this judgment is to ensure that police
officers do not arrest the accused unnecessarily and Magistrate
do not authorise detention casually and mechanically. In order
to ensure what we have observed above, we give the following
11.1. All the State Governments to instruct its police
officers not to automatically arrest when a case under
Section 498-A IPC is registered but to satisfy themselves
about the necessity for arrest under the parameters laid
down above flowing from Section 41 CrPC;
11.2. All police officers be provided with a check list
containing specified sub-clauses under Section 41(1) (b)
11.3. The police officer shall forward the check list duly
filled and furnish the reasons and materials which
necessitated the arrest,while forwarding/producing the
accused before the Magistrate for further detention;
11.4. The Magistrate while authorising detention of the
accused shall peruse the report furnished by the police
officer in terms aforesaid and only after recording its
satisfaction, the Magistrate will authorise detention;
11.5. The decision not to arrest an accused, be forwarded
to the Magistrate within two weeks from the date of the
institution of the case with a copy to the Magistrate which
may be extended by the Superintendent of Police of the
district for the reasons to be recorded in writing;
11.6. Notice of appearance in terms of Section 41-A CrPC
be served on the accused within two weeks from the date
of institution of the case, which may be extended by the
Superintendent of Police of the district for the reasons to
be recorded in writing;
11.7. Failure to comply with the directions aforesaid shall
apart from rendering the police officers concerned liable
for departmental action, they shall also be liable to be
punished for contempt of court to be instituted before the
High Court having territorial jurisdiction.
11.8. Authorising detention without recording reasons as
aforesaid by the Judicial Magistrate concerned shall be
liable for departmental action by the appropriate High
12.       We hasten to add that the directions aforesaid
shall not only apply to the cases under Section 498-A IPC
or Section 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, the case in
hand, but also such cases where offence is punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may be less than seven
years or which may extend to seven years, whether with
or without fine.”
28. We only reiterate that the directions aforesaid ought
to be complied with in letter and spirit by the
investigating and prosecuting agencies, while the view
expressed by us on the non-compliance of Section 41 and
the consequences that flow from it has to be kept in mind
by the Court, which is expected to be reflected in the
29. Despite the dictum of this Court in Arnesh Kumar
(supra), no concrete step has been taken to comply with
the mandate of Section 41A of the Code. This Court has
clearly interpreted Section 41(1)(b)(i) and (ii) inter alia
holding that notwithstanding the existence of a reason to
believe qua a police officer, the satisfaction for the need to
arrest shall also be present. Thus, sub-clause (1)(b)(i) of
Section 41 has to be read along with sub-clause (ii) and
therefore both the elements of ‘reason to believe’ and
‘satisfaction qua an arrest’ are mandated and accordingly
are to be recorded by the police officer.
32. We also expect the courts to come down heavily on
the officers effecting arrest without due compliance of
Section 41 and Section 41A. We express our hope that the
Investigating Agencies would keep in mind the law laid
down in Arnesh Kumar (Supra), the discretion to be
exercised on the touchstone of presumption of innocence,
and the safeguards provided under Section 41, since an
arrest is not mandatory. If discretion is exercised to effect
such an arrest, there shall be procedural compliance. Our
view is also reflected by the interpretation of the specific
provision under Section 60A of the Code which warrants
the officer concerned to make the arrest strictly in
accordance with Code.
100. In conclusion, we would like to issue certain
directions. These directions are meant for the
investigating agencies and also for the courts. Accordingly,
we deem it appropriate to issue the following directions,
which may be subject to State amendments.:
100.2. The investigating agencies and their officers are
duty-bound to comply with the mandate of Section 41
and 41A of the Code and the directions issued by this
Court in Arnesh Kumar (supra). Any dereliction on their
part has to be brought to the notice of the higher
authorities by the court followed by appropriate action.
100.3 The courts will have to satisfy themselves on the
compliance of Section 41 and 41A of the Code. Any non-
compliance would entitle the accused for grant of bail.”
(emphasis supplied)
23.    In Arnab Manoranjan Goswami v. State of Maharashtra 4, the
Apex Court in para 67 has held as under :-
“67. Human liberty is a precious constitutional value,
which is undoubtedly subject to regulation by validly
enacted legislation. As such, the citizen is subject to the
edicts of criminal law and procedure. Section 482
recognizes the inherent power of the High Court to
make such orders as are necessary to give effect to the
provisions of the CrPC ― or prevent abuse of the or prevent abuse of the
process of any Court or otherwise to secure the ends of
justice. Decisions of this court require the High Courts,
in exercising the jurisdiction entrusted to them under
Section 482, to act with circumspection. In emphasising
that the High Court must exercise this power with a
sense of restraint, the decisions of this Court are founded
on the basic principle that the due enforcement of
criminal law should not be obstructed by the accused
taking recourse to artifices and strategies. The public
interest in ensuring the due investigation of crime is
protected by ensuring that the inherent power of the
High Court is exercised with caution. That indeed is one
– and a significant - end of the spectrum. The other end
of the spectrum is equally important: the recognition by
Section 482 of the power inhering in the High Court to
prevent the abuse of process or to secure the ends of
justice is a valuable safeguard for protecting liberty. The
Code of Criminal Procedure of 1898 was enacted by a
legislature which was not subject to constitutional rights
and limitations; yet it recognized the inherent power in
Section 561A. Post Independence, the recognition by
Parliament37of the inherent power of the High Court
must be construed as an aid to preserve the constitutional
value of liberty. The writ of liberty runs through the
fabric of the Constitution. The need to ensure the fair
investigation of crime is undoubtedly important in itself,
because it protects at one level the rights of the victim
and, at a more fundamental level, the societal interest in
ensuring that crime is investigated and dealt with in
accordance with law. On the other hand, the misuse of
the criminal law is a matter of which the High Court and
the lower Courts in this country must be alive. In the
present case, the High Court could not but have been
cognizant of the specific ground which was raised before
it by the appellant that he was being made a target as a
part of a series of occurrences which have been taking
place since April 2020. The specific case of the appellant
is that he has been targeted because his opinions on his
television channel are unpalatable to authority. Whether
the appellant has established a case for quashing the FIR
is something on which the High Court will take a final
view when the proceedings are listed before it but we are
clearly of the view that in failing to make even a prima
facie evaluation of the FIR, the High Court abdicated its
constitutional duty and function as a protector of liberty.
Courts must be alive to the need to safeguard the public
interest in ensuring that the due enforcement of criminal
law is not obstructed. The fair investigation of crime is an
aid to it. Equally it is the duty of courts across the
spectrum – the district judiciary, the High Courts and the
Supreme Court – to ensure that the criminal law does not
become a weapon for the selective harassment of citizens.
Courts should be alive to both ends of the spectrum – the
need to ensure the proper enforcement of criminal law
on the one hand and the need, on the other, of ensuring
that the law does not become a ruse for targeted
harassment. Liberty across human eras is as tenuous as
tenuous can be. Liberty survives by the vigilance of her
citizens, on the cacophony of the media and in the dusty
corridors of courts alive to the rule of (and not by) law.
Yet, much too often, liberty is a casualty when one of
these components is found wanting.”
24.     In Santosh v. State of Maharashtra5, the Apex Court in para 6
has observed as under:-
“6. It appears, the IO was of the view that the custody of the
Appellant is required for recording his confessional statement
in terms of what the co-accused had already stated in the
Statement Under Section 161 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973. The IO was of the opinion that the
Appellant was not cooperating because he kept reiterating
that he had not purchased the food-grains. The purpose of
custodial interrogation is not just for the purpose of
confession. The right against self-incrimination is provided
for in Article 20(3) of the Constitution. It is a well settled
position in view of the Constitution Bench decision in Selvi
and Ors. v. State of Karnataka-(2010) 7 SCC 263, that Article
20(3) enjoys an "exalted status". This provision is an essential
safeguard in criminal procedure and is alsomeant to be a vital
safeguard against torture and other coercive methods used by
investigating authorities. Therefore, merely because the
Appellant did not confess, it cannot be said that the Appellant
was not cooperating with the investigation. However, in case,
there is no cooperation on the part of the Appellant for the
completion of the investigation, it will certainly be open to
the Respondent to seek for cancellation of bail.”
25.     In Joginder Kumar v. State of UP6, it is observed in Para 20 by
the Apex Court as under :
“20. In India, Third Report of the National Police
Commission at page 32 also suggested:
“An arrest during the investigation of a cognizable
case may be considered justified in one or other of the
following circumstances:
(i) The case involves a grave offence like murder; dacoity,
robbery, rape, etc., and it is necessary to arrest the
accused and bring his movements under restraint to
infuse confidence among the terror stricken victims.
(ii) The accused is likely to abscond and evade the
processes of law.
(iii) The accused is given to violent behaviour and is
likely to commit further offences unless his movements
are brought under restraint.
(iv) The accused is a habitual offender and unless kept in
custody he is likely to commit similar offences again.
It would be desirable to insist through
departmental instructions that a police officer making an
arrest should also record in the case diary the reasons for
making the arrest, thereby clarifying his conformity to
the specified guidelines....”
The above guidelines are merely incidents of personal
liberty guaranteed under the Constitution of India. No
arrest can be made because it is lawful for the Police
Officer to do so. The existence of the power to arrest is
one thing. The justification for the exercise of it is quite
another. The Police Officer must be able to justify the
arrest apart from his power to do so. Arrest and
detention in police lock-up of a person can cause
incalculable harm to the reputation and self esteem of a
person. No arrest can be made in a routine manner on a
mere allegation of commission of an offence made
against a person. It would be prudent for a Police Officer
in the interest of protection of the constitutional rights of
a citizen" and perhaps in his own interest that no arrest
should be made without a reasonable satisfaction reached
after some investigation as to the genuineness and
bonafides of a complaint and a reasonable belief both as
to the person's complicity and even so as to the need to
effect arrest. Denying a person of his liberty is a serious
matter. The recommendations of the Police Commission
merely reflect the constitutional concomitants of the
fundamental right to personal liberty and freedom. A
person is not liable to arrest merely on the suspicion of
complicity in an offence. There must be some reasonable
justification in the opinion of the Officer effecting the
arrest that such arrest is necessary and justified. Except in
heinous offences, an arrest must be avoided if a Police
Officer issues notice to person to attend the Station
House and not to leave Station without permission
would do”.
26.    In Mohd. Zubair v. State (NCT of Delhi)7, the Apex Court in
paras 28, 29, 30 has held as under:-
“28. Police officers are vested with the power to arrest
individuals at various stages of the criminal justice
process, including during the course of investigation.
However, this power is not unbridled. In terms of
Section 41(1)(b)(ii) of the CrPC, the police officer in
question must be satisfied that such arrest is necessary to
prevent the person sought to be arrested from
committing any further offence, for proper investigation
of the offence, to prevent the arrestee from tampering
with or destroying evidence, to prevent them from
influencing or intimidating potential witnesses, or when
it is not possible to ensure their presence in court
without arresting them.
29. Police officers have a duty to apply their mind to
the case before them and ensure that the condition(s) in
Section 41 are met before they conduct an arrest. This
Court has time and again, reiterated the importance of
doing so, including in Arnesh Kumar v. State of Bihar,9
where the Court observed:
“6. [...] The existence of the power to arrest is one
thing, the justification for the exercise of it is quite
another. Apart from power to arrest, the police
officers must be able to justify the reasons thereof.
No arrest can be made in a routine manner on a
mere allegation of commission of an offence made
against a person...”
30.We once again have occasion to reiterate that the
guidelines laid down in Arnesh Kumar (supra) must be
followed, without exception. The raison d'être of the
powers of arrest in relation to cognizable offences is laid
down in Section 41. Arrest is not meant to be and must
not be used as a punitive tool because it results in one of
the gravest possible consequences emanating from
criminal law: the loss of personal liberty. Individuals
must not be punished solely on the basis of allegations,
and without a fair trial. When the power to arrest is
exercised without application of mind and without due
regard to the law, it amounts to an abuse of power. The
criminal law and its processes ought not to be
instrumentalized as a tool of harassment. Section 41 of
the CrPC as well as the safeguards in criminal law exist
in recognition of the reality that any criminal proceeding
almost inevitably involves the might of the state, with
unlimited resources at its disposal, against a lone
individual.”
27.   The conditions, which necessitate arrest are stipulated in
Section 41(1)(b)(ii) clauses (a) to (e) of the Cr.P.C. as stated
hereinabove.    A Police Officer is not only expected to record
reasons for arrest in writing but even in cases where he chooses not
to arrest, he has to assign reasons. It is equally incumbent upon the
Courts to satisfy themselves that there is compliance of Section 41
and 41A of the Cr.P.C., failing which the same will enure to the
benefit of the person suspected of the offence, entitling him to be
released on bail. As a matter of fact, in each and every case, arrest
is not mandatory.     Whenever arrest of a person is not required
under the provisions of Sub-section (1) of Section 41 of the Cr.P.C.,
the Police Officer is required to issue a notice directing a person
against whom a reasonable complaint has been made, or credible
information has been received, or a reasonable suspicion exists that
he has committed a cognizable offence to appear before him or at
such place as may be specified in the notice for answering certain
28.   In view of the legal position, it is necessary to consider
whether the petitioner’s arrest and authorizing his detention with the
respondent No.1 is in consonance with the aforesaid legal position,
meaning thereby, whether his arrest, and authorizing detention with
the respondent No.1 is in violation of the provisions of Section
41and 41A of the Cr.P.C.?
29.   On 15th December 2022, respondent no.1 had issued first
notice under Section 41A of the Cr.P.C. to the petitioner, calling
upon him to appear in its office at New Delhi on 19 th December
2022 for questioning qua the subject FIR. A photostat copy of the
said notice is tendered on record. A bare look at the same would
reveal that it was not served on the proper address of the petitioner,
in the sense, it was not actually received by the petitioner but by a
person namely, Rohit Das, who had put his endorsement in Hindi
beneath the said copy. The petitioner, thereupon, on his own, sent a
whatsapp message to the Investigating Officer Mr. Nitesh Kumar,
providing him with his correct e-mail ID, inter alia, requesting him
to summon him (petitioner) on Wednesday i.e. 21 st December 2022
instead of 19th December 2022, due to his pre-schedule medical
appointments.     The photostat copy of the e-mail is annexed at
Exh.‘E’ of the petition.
30.   The petitioner attended the office of the respondent No.1 at
New Delhi on 21st December 2022. However, it is contended that
he was not allowed to enter into the office and was asked to attend
on 22nd December 2022. On 22nd December 2022, the petitioner
attended the respondent No.1’s office and was present over there for
the whole day. However, he was again called on 23 rd December
2022. Since the petitioner had already been summoned by the E.D.
on 23rd December 2022, he had informed the Investigating Officer
of the respondent No.1 through a WhatsApp message and, therefore,
could not attend the office of the respondent No.1. The copy of the
summons by the E.D. is at Exh. ‘F’.
31.   The petitioner attended the office of the E.D. on 23 rd
December 2022 in connection with an E.C.I.R. A copy of the gate-
pass is at Exh. ‘E’.
32.    It transpires from the record that on 23rd December 2022 itself
other co-accused named in the FIR i.e. Chanda Kochhar and Deepak
Kochhar were arrested by the respondent No.1 and produced before
the Special Judge, CBI on 24th December 2022 by the Investigating
Officer – Nitesh Kumar, in connection with the FIR No.RC
BD/2019E0001. The investigating Officer had sought custody of
Kochhars’ for 3 days on the ground that on 26 th August 2009 the
sanctioning committee headed by Mrs. Chanda Kochhar had
sanctioned a loan of Rs.300 crores to Videocon International
Electronics Ltd. in contravention of Rules and Policies of the bank
and abused her official position as a public servant by dishonestly
transferring Rs.64 crores on the very next day to the Videocon
company and others.
33.    On 24th December 2022, the respondent no.1 issued another
notice under Section 41A of the Cr.P.C. calling upon the petitioner
to appear before it in its office in Mumbai on 25 th December 2022
for questioning qua the subject FIR. Interestingly, the respondent
No.1, instead of serving the notice personally upon the petitioner or
by sending an e-mail which had already been furnished by the
petitioner, pasted the same on the wall of the petitioner’s former
office building in Mumbai.         Learned Counsel for the petitioner
submits that the petitioner resides at Aurangabad. Prima facie, this
seems to be nothing but a calculated move by the respondent No.1
to concoct non-attendance and non-cooperation by the petitioner.
However, on 25th December 2022 itself, the petitioner realized the
said fact and immediately addressed e-mails at 12:00 p.m. and 19:26
p.m. to respondent No.1 in response to the notice dated 24 th
December 2022 pasted on the walls of his former office building.
The diligence and bona-fide of the petitioner can be demonstrated
from the said e-mail, which is extracted below :-
“I have today morning learnt about your Notice dated
24.12.2022 u/sec 41A requiring my appearance today
Due to pre decided schedule I am out of Mumbai for my
treatment as I am unwell due to fever and high sugar level
around 440-460 and presently stuck out of Mumbai and
therefore it is difficult for me to attend your office today
at 1.30 p.m.
You will appreciate that in previous week ie on 15/12/222
You had issued me notice u/sec 41-A for appearing on
19/12/22 and accordingly I had appeared and answered
your all queries and thereafter was also present in CBI
office for two days. My all statements are already
recorded.
You will also appreciate that I have handed over all
documents to your office and have always cooperated in
the investigation by appearing at your offices in New
Delhi at your requests many times in spite of my
deteriorating health.
I shall continue to cooperate with the investigation.
However, considering urgency of matter I am cancelling
scheduled treatment and returning back to Mumbai
however I can be present at your office earliest by
tomorrow noon ie 26/12/12.
Therefore, I kindly request you to defer scheduled date
25.12.2022 to 26/12/2022 around 12 pm."
34.    From the language of the e-mail, it appears that the petitioner
had already handed over all the documents and had co-operated with
the Investigating Agency by appearing in its office at New Delhi on
several occasions despite his deteriorating health. He further made it
clear that he would be in a position to attend the office of the
respondent No.1 on 26th December 2022. The copy of the e-mail is
35.    One more notice under Section 41A of the Cr.P.C. came to be
issued by the respondent No.1 on 25 th December 2022 to the
petitioner calling upon him to appear before its Mumbai office on
26th December 2022 at 9:00 a.m. for questioning in the subject FIR.
The notice did not mention that it was the last notice and that the
respondent intends to arrest the petitioner for non-compliance.
Subsequently, the petitioner, on his own volition appeared in the
office of the respondent No.1 on 26th December 2022 where he was
made to undergo RTPCR test and was put under arrest.                  It is
submitted that no inquiry in relation to the investigation was
conducted nor any questions were asked to the petitioner.
36.    The respondent No.1 in its reply made a futile attempt to
justify arrest of the petitioner by stating that the petitioner had
appeared on 22nd December 2022 before the Investigating Officer,
however, since other co-accused Mrs. Chanda Kochhar and Deepak
Kochhar did not appear, the petitioner could not be confronted with
them. There is no material placed on record to that effect indicating
the said fact. It cannot be construed as a non-cooperation by the
petitioner since he had duly appeared before the respondent No.1 on
37.    When another notice under Section 41A came to be issued by
the respondent No.1 directing the petitioner to appear before it on
23rd December 2022, the respondent No.1’s stand is that despite
having acknowledged the receipt of the notice dated 22 nd December
2022, the petitioner deliberately did        not appear before the
Investigating Officer on that date to avoid confrontation with the co-
accused – Mrs. Chanda Kochhar and Deepak Kochhar. The falsity
of this statement is apparent from the facts already stated
hereinabove that on the same day, the petitioner had already been
summoned by the E.D. and he had attended its office, in support of
which, he has tendered the gate-pass of the E.D.’s office dated 23 rd
December 2022 which is at Exh. ‘F’. Why the respondent No.1 did
not tender any material to that effect or informed the remanding
Court by placing the extract of case diary? The respondent No.1 in
its reply stated about the third notice dated 24th December 2022
under Section 41A by stating that despite service of the said notice,
the petitioner did not appear before the Investigating Officer on 25 th
December 2022.        The respondent No.1 had not tendered any
acknowledgment or proof of service of the said notice.                 The
respondent No.1 had not even stated that the notice dated 24 th
December 2022 was pasted on the outer wall of the petitioner’s
former office.
38.    Mr. Thakare, contended that the petitioner came to be arrested
for investigation and confronted with the co-accused – Mrs. Chanda
Kochhar and Deepak Kochhar.            He contends that since the
petitioner did not appear on 19th December 2022 and 23rd
December 2022, he could not be confronted with the co-accused.
We are afraid, we cannot buy the arguments of Mr. Thakare that the
petitioner intentionally did not appear before the Investigating
Officer on the aforesaid dates to avoid the confrontation with the co-
accused.     This argument is to be accepted with a pinch of salt in
light of the observation already made hereinabove.
39.    The copy of the arrest memo of the petitioner is extracted
1. Case No.             RCBD1/2019/E/0001 dated
2. Section of Law       120-B r/w 420 IPC & Section 7
r/w section 13 (2) r/w 13 (1) (d)
4. Date, time &          26.12.2022, 10.30 AM, O/o
Place of arrest       Head of Branch & DIG of
5. Name, age,            Shri Venugopal Nandlal Dhoot,
Parentage and         S/o Late Nandlal Dhoot, R/o 1st
address of the        Floor, Videocon House, Malbar
arrestee              Hills, Mumbai-06.
Designation of        Police,. CBI, BSFB, New Delhi.
officer effecting
7. Ground of Arrest 1. He is an FIR named accused
person.
of witnesses          Trainee, Punjab National Bank,
10. Name            and Ms. Pooja Dhoot, Daughter-in-
particulars of the law of Sh. Venugopal Dhoot on
persons notified her mobile no.7021000019.
11. Whether         any Nil
12. Any identification A mole below right eye
(include peculiar
13. Whether personal Yes and No item has been found
(Signature/thumb impression of Arrestee)”
40.    A bare look at the grounds of arrest would indicate that
petitioner has been inconsistent in his statement before the
Investigating Officer / CBI and has kept on changing his versions, as
such, has not co-operated with the investigation in disclosing full
and true facts of this case.        The ground of arrest is sans any
particulars as to how his statements are inconsistent before the
Investigating Officer and how he had not co-operated with the
Investigating Agency in view of the fact that he had already attended
the office but could not be interrogated by the Investigating Agency
for want of the presence of the other co-accused for confrontation.
The ground of arrest is quite casual and without any substance,
which does not justify the mandate of Section 41(1)(b)(ii) from (a)
to (e) of the Cr.P.C. It is not the case of the respondent No.1 that the
petitioner was required to be arrested to prevent from committing
any further offence or that he was causing the evidence of the
offence to disappear or tampering with the evidence. It is not even
the contention that he was making any inducement, threat or
promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case. The only
contention of the respondent No.1 is that his arrest was required for
proper investigation and for confrontation. The grounds of arrest are,
therefore, not as per the mandate of said Section and in view of the
directions issued by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the judgments
referred to hereinabove. There is nothing on record demonstrating
that the Officer had a “reason to believe” and “satisfaction for an
41.    In case of Arnesh Kumar (supra) and Satender Kumar Antil
(supra), the Hon’ble Supreme Court interpreted Section 41(1)(b)(i)
and Section 41(1)(b)(ii) of the Cr.P.C. The elements of “reason to
believe” and “satisfaction for an arrest” as mandated in Section 41(1)
(b)(i)&(ii) of the Cr.P.C. have to be read together and as such,
recorded by the concerned Officer while arresting an accused. The
Officer cannot arrest the accused at his whims and fancies.
42.    Even the remanding Courts, it appears, have not adhered to
the ratio laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Arnesh Kumar
(supra) and Satender Kumar Antil (supra) by ignoring compliance
of Section 41 and 41A of the Cr.P.C.       Merely by mentioning in the
arrest memo that the petitioner has been inconsistent in his
statements before the Investigating Officer and has kept on changing
his versions and as such, has not co-operated with the investigation
in disclosing full and true facts, is not sufficient and the same cannot
be a ground of arrest as it is unacceptable and contrary to the
mandate of Section 41(1)(b)(i)&(ii) from (a) to (e) of the Cr.P.C..
This is in light of the fact that a person cannot be compelled to give a
self-incriminating statement in view of Article 20(3) of the
43.    In Selvi Vs. State of Karnataka8, the Hon’ble Supreme Court
reiterated that Article 20(3) is an essential safeguard in criminal cases
and is meant to be a vital safeguard against torture and other coercive
methods used by the investigating agency. Hence, merely because
an accused does not confess, it does not ipso facto mean that the
accused is not co-operating with the investigation. Article 20(3) of
the Constitution enjoys an “exalted status” and serves as an essential
safeguard against torture and coercive measures used by the
investigating Agency. The Courts have time and again reiterated the
role of Courts in protecting personal liberty and ensuring that
investigation is not used as a tool of harassment.
44.    Now, again turning to the impugned orders dated 26 th
December 2022, 28th December 2022 and 29th December 2022
passed by the remanding Courts.
45.    After his arrest when the petitioner was first produced before
the Sessions Court at Mumbai, Court No.53, on 26 th December
2022, the learned Judge after considering the submissions made by
the Investigating Officer and the Counsel for the petitioner, recorded
his satisfaction and observed thus :-
“I have heard both the sides and IO at the length of
considerable time. I have also carefully gone through case
diary. It is seen that the accused is arrested today in the
alleged crime for want of non-cooperation on his part. The
objection which is pointed out by the Ld. Advocate for the
accused appears to be not proper regarding his illegal
arrest. The IO submitted that instead of receiving multiple
notices to join investigation, the accused all the time non-
cooperated. The remand paper and the document attached
with it and the conduct of the accused of non cooperation
reflect that the IO nothing done wrong while arresting the
accused in respect of the alleged offence. Consequently, it
appears the compliance of mandate provision 41 and 41(d)
of Cr.P.C. on the part of IO. It is not disputed the fact that
the present accused is arrested today itself and produced
before the Court. Therefore, obviously, it is a first
production of the accused with remand report, which
certainly, required time for interrogation with the accused.
The nature and gravity of offence appears to be very
serious in respect of huge economic offence in respect of
multiple crores. It is seen that investigation is at the initial
stage, thus, this Court is of the considerable opinion that
custodial interrogation of the present accused with the IO
is certainly required. In view of the above facts and
circumstances, whatever objections raised by the Ld.
Advocate regarding illegal arrest of the accused deserves to
be non consideration. The accused therefore, required to
be remanded to CBI custody. Hence, order. ORDER
Accused Venugopal Nandlal Dhoot is remanded to CBI
custody till 28.12.2022. Exh. 5 Application for seeking
permission for home food, medicines and attendant
doctor/helper to administer medicines and food and others
for accused Shri. Dhoot filed by Adv. Ladda. ORDER Ld.
SPP to say. Matter adjd for say and hearing on Exh.5 to
27.12.2022. Matter adjd for hearing on Ad-interim BA
(Exh.3) to 28.12.2022. Authenticated copy of this
roznama is to be given to both sides.”
46.    Surprisingly, it can be seen from the order that the learned
remanding Judge observed that whatever objections raised by the
learned Advocate regarding illegal arrest of the accused deserves to
be non-consideration. The observations of the learned Judge that
there was a due compliance of the mandate of the provisions of
Section 41 and 41A of the Cr.P.C. are casual and appears to be based
upon ipse dixit of the Investigating Officer. It is apparent that the
remanding Court had not recorded its satisfaction as to what
persuaded him to authorize the detention of the petitioner after
going through the case diary produced by the respondent no.1.
47.    When the petitioner was again produced before the Special
Judge, CBI on 28th December 2022, the learned Judge observed
“2. Police custody of accused for 02 days is sought by
Investigating Officer on the grounds that on 26/08/2009
the Sanctioning committee headed by Mrs. Chanda
Kochhar sanctioned the term loan of Rs.300 crore to
Videocon International Electronics Limited in
contravention of rules and polices of the bank and abuse
her official position as a public servant dishonestly on the
very next day the Videocon company transferred Rs.64
crore to M/s. NRL managed by Deepak Kochhar who is
the husband of Chanda Kochhar. Therefore, she
committed criminal breach of trust punishable u/s. 409 of
IPC by sanctioning RTL of Rs.300 Crore and later of
converted the funds of Rs.64 Crore for her own use by
the investment in the company of the accused no.5.
Prosecution prayed for grant of CBI custody of the
accused for two days as accused Venugopal Dhoot who is
arrested on 26.12.2022 is required to be confronted with
the Co-accused Chanda Kochhar and Deepak Kochhar.
According to prosecution the custodial interrogation of
the accused is necessary for the same, Considering the
seriousness and gravity of the offence.”
48.   It appears that extension of custody was sought for the purpose
of confrontation of the petitioner with the co-accused – Chanda
Kochhar and Deepak Kochhar. There is no satisfactory answer from
the Investigating Agency as to why for a period of 3 years, the
Investigating Agency has neither confronted all the accused before
one another or demonstrated the progress of the investigation by
placing the case diary before the remanding Court. Non-compliance
of Section 41 and 41A of the Cr.P.C. is, therefore, apparent.
49.    The learned Judge in an order dated 28th December 2022 has
simply observed that he has perused the case diary and found that
the offence is of serious nature. He went on to observe that the
earlier orders passed by his predecessors indicate that the
Investigating Officer had complied with the requirements before
effecting the arrest of the petitioner. This is something which cannot
be in countenanced in light of the mandate of law. Merely stating in
the order that there is due compliance of Section 41 to 41A of the
Cr.P.C. is not sufficient in view of the guidelines of Arnesh Kumar
(supra) and Satender Kuamar Antil (supra). It is not an empty
formality. It is manifest from the impugned orders passed by the
remanding Courts that no serious efforts have been made to
scrutinize the application seeking detention of the petitioner as well
as the case diary tendered before the Court, particularly, in view of
the settled guidelines by the Hon’ble Supreme Court. The onus of
recording satisfaction, as already stated, not only lies on the
Investigating Officer but even on the remanding Judge.
50.    For the reasons stated hereinabove, the petitioner needs to be
enlarged on bail, pending the hearing and final disposal of the
51.    We, therefore, pass the following order :-
(i)   The petitioner be released on furnishing cash security in
the sum of Rs.1,00,000/-, for a period of two weeks;
(ii)  The petitioner shall execute a P.R. bond in the sum of
Rs.1,00,000/-, with one or more sureties in the like amount, to
the satisfaction of the Special Judge, CBI on or before
completion of two weeks as above;
(iii) The petitioner shall co-operate in the investigation
conducted by the respondent No.1 and shall attend the Office
of the respondent No.1, as and when summoned;
(iv) The petitioner shall not tamper with the evidence or
attempt to influence or contact the complainant, witnesses or
any person concerned with the case.
(v)   The petitioner shall not leave the Country without
permission of the trial Court.
52.    Writ Petition be listed on 6th February, 2023.
53.    All concerned to act on the authenticated copy of this order.
54.   At this stage, learned Counsel for the Intervenor appearing in
Interim Application, seeks stay of the order granting interim bail to
the petitioner. Request is rejected.