Case :- CRIMINAL REVISION No. - 452 of 2022
Counsel for Revisionist :- Upendra Kumar Pushkar
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
This application in revision has been filed by the
revisionist against the order dated 16.11.2021 passed by
Aligarh in Case No. 707 of 2017 (Smt Hasin Bano and
another Vs Mukis), under Section 125 Cr.P.C., P.S.
Akrabad, District Aligarh whereby the court below had
directed the revisionist to pay Rs. 3,000/- to opposite
party no. 2 and Rs. 2000/- to her son from the date of
It is very fairly contended by learned counsel for the
revisionist that the court below allowed the application of
maintenance filed under Section 125 Cr.P.C. by the
opposite party no. 2 by awarding total maintenance to the
tune of Rs. 5000/- per month from the date of application,
which could not be complied with by the revisionist on
account of financial difficulties. Learned counsel for the
revisionist at this stage submitted that the revisionist is not
in a position to pay the entire amount which is sought to
be recovered from him due to his poor financial condition
and some time may be given to him to deposit the said
Submissions have been made by the learned counsel for
the revisionist that opposite party no.2 is residing away
from her matrimonial house on her free will along with her
parents without any rhyme and reason. It was argued that
the revisionist has no permanent source of income and he
is not in a position to to give such huge amount of
maintenance to the opposite party no. 2 and his son and
the court below had wrongly assessed the income of the
revisionist while passing the impugned order. It was
further argued that the trial court has allowed
maintenance allowance to the opposite party no. 2 from
the date of application without assigning any specific
On the other hand, the learned AGA has supported the
impugned order and contended that the impugned order
is just and legal and there is no illegality or infirmity and
the present criminal revision is bereft of merits and is
liable to be dismissed.
Indisputably the opposite party no.2 is legally wedded
wife of the revisionist. The trial court has recorded finding
that opposite party no.2 is unable to maintain herself. It
has also been recorded by the court below that the
revisionist had turned her wife on account of non-
fulfillment of dowry demands. There is sufficient material
on record to prove that respondent no. 2 is simple house
wife who does not have any independent earning.
Therefore, it is incumbent upon the revisionist to provide
financial succor to the respondent no. 2. As far as
quantum of amount is concerned, it is apparent that family
court itself has provided a very meager amount to
respondent no. 2. Had respondent no. 2 been living with
revisionist, he would have had to spend at least this much
amount on her. Therefore, it cannot be said that exorbitant
amount has been allowed by the concerned court. To my
mind awarded maintenance allowance to the opposite
party No. 2 from the date of application is wholly justified.
It should be kept in mind that Section 125 Cr.P.C. is
enacted for social justice and specially to protect woman
and children and also old and infirm parents and falls
within the constitutional sweep of Article 14(3), re-
enforced by Article 39 of the Constitution of India. The
provision gives effect to the natural and fundamental duty
of a man to maintain his wife, children and parents so
long as they are unable to maintain themselves.
Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, I
find no scope for interference in the impugned order. The
impugned order is well in conformity in law and does not
suffer from material illegality, irregularity, perversity and
jurisdictional error.
The Criminal Revision is devoid of merit and is liable to be
dismissed. It is accordingly dismissed. However,
considering the averment of the counsel for the revisionist
that the revisionist is ready and undertakes to pay the
maintenance regularly in case the the amount sought to
be recovered from the revisionist is directed to be paid to
the opposite party no. 2 in easy installments.
Considering the aforesaid submission of the revisionist, to
which learned AGA also has no objection, revisionist is
directed to deposit the entire amount due against him in
three equal monthly installments within three months and
shall also pay regularly monthly maintenance of Rs.
5000/-. In case the revisionist deposits the first installment
by 15.4.2022 before the court below and further
undertakes before the court below that he will pay the
next installment by 10th of the each succeeding months,
no coercive measures shall be taken against him for a
period of three months. It is further provided that in case
of default in making payment of either the first installment
or the successive installments the benefit of this order
shall not be given to the revisionist and the court below
will be at its liberty to take appropriate steps in
accordance with law.
Location: High Court of Judicature at