Case :- APPLICATION U/S 482 No. - 1621 of 2022
Opposite Party :- State of U.P. and Another
Counsel for Applicant :- Gaurav Kakkar,Rishab Agrawal
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.,Amit Singh
Heard Sri Gaurav Kakkar, learned counsel for the applicant,
Sri Amit Singh, learned counsel for the opposite party no.2, Sri
Rajeshwar Singh and Sri Rakesh Chandra, learned A.G.A. for the
State and perused the material on record.
Brief facts of the case are that a first information report was
lodged by Hardeo Singh with the averments that on Thursday i.e.
21.06.2012 due to opening of city market, his mother had gone
to market to purchase some articles, on the way some quarrel
was going on between Mohan Singh (applicant) and Tikki both
sons of Hariya, whereupon his mother intervened in order to
pacify them and had asked them to finish the quarrel, due to
which, Mohan Singh accused-applicant abused and shot her, who
later  on    died.   With   regard   to  aforesaid    incident  dated
21.06.2012, a first information report was lodged by the opposite
party no.2 on 21.06.2012 in Case Crime No. 368 of 2012 under
Thereafter,    matter   was    entrusted    for  investigation  which
culminated in filing of charge sheet. Thereafter, the case was
committed to the Court of Sessions, which was registered as
Sessions Trial No. 573 of 2012 (State Vs. Mohan Singh) under
Section 302 I.P.C. in which, statements of the witnesses were
recorded, thereafter statement of the accused was recorded
under Section 313 Cr.P.C. and during the pendency of the trial,
the accused applicant moved an application dated 16.08.2021
under Section 233 Cr.P.C. stating therein that the prosecution
may be directed to provide the blood sample of the family
members of victim and be sent to Forensic Laboratory for
conducting the DNA test of the blood collected from earth to
ensure as to whether both are same or not, upon which objection
was filed and thereafter, said application has been rejected vide
order dated 11.10.2021, it is this order which is under challenge
before this Court.
Learned   counsel   for  the   applicant submits    that  an
application under Section 233 Cr.P.C. dated 16.01.2018 was filed
by the applicant stating therein that on the day of incident the
applicant had gone to Delhi with regard to payment of loan taken
from S.R.E.I. Equipment Finance Private Limited whereafter, he
had gone to Bijnor and purchased a mobile phone from CEC
Computers. It has also been stated that the deceased had died
somewhere else as such, the Investigating Officer had prepared
wrong Naksha Nazari of the place of incident. The Investigating
Officer did not send the samples of Blood stained earth (mud)
with the blood stained clothes of deceased for DNA test before
the Forensic Laboratory and thus prayer was made for DNA test
of blood stained earth (mud) and the wearing clothes of the
deceased, which application was partly allowed to the effect that
the SREL Equipment Finance Private Limited shall be present
along with record as well as owner of C.E.C. Computers, Nagina
Road, Bijnor was summoned but so far as grievance of the
applicant with respect to DNA test, the same has been rejected
vide order dated 16.07.2018, which order was challenged by the
applicant by way of filing Application U/s 482 No. 33291 of 2018
and the co-ordinate Bench of this Court vide order dated
05.10.2018 had quashed the order dated 16.07.2020 to the
extent it denies the permission of DNA test. Pursuant to the order
dated 05.10.2018, the learned Court below ordered for DNA test
of the blood stained earth with blood stained clothes of the
deceased but the same could not be done as the incident is of
the year 2012 and the clothes of the deceased was not possible
to be traced as the same has been misplaced from Malkhana, as
such the application was disposed of vide order dated 20.07.2021
with    further  direction  to  initiate proceedings   against   the
concerned erring police officials. Learned counsel further submits
that thereafter another application dated 16.08.2021 was moved
by the applicant to direct the prosecution to provide the blood
sample of family members of the victim and be sent to Forensic
Laboratory for conducting the DNA test of blood stained earth to
ensure that the blood of the stained earth and the blood of the
family members of the victim are same, to arrive at just decision
of the case and to prove the innocence of the aplicant, which
application has been rejected on the ground that the prosecution
has not been able to provide the blood sample of the family
members of the deceased as they have denied to provide the
same and further directed that the applicant may adduce any
documentary or oral evidence with respect to his innocence.
Learned counsel for the applicant submits that since the
deceased had died somewhere else and false Naksha Nazari was
prepared, thus it was absolutely necesary in the interest of
justice of justice to arrive a just conclusion of the trial that the
blood of the earth collected from the place of incident, as alleged,
and the blood of the family members of the victim are matched,
which can be ascertained by way of DNA test only.
Learned counsel for the applicant submits that although the
DNA test cannot be conducted where there is a violation of right
to life, or privacy of a person and the same should be exercised
after weighing all pros and cons and satisfying that the test is of
eminent need, whereas in the instant case by no stretch of
imagination violation of right to life or any stigma would be put
to privacy of the family members of the deceased and therefore
in the instant case, there is eminent need of DNA test to prove
the innocence of the applicant. He further submits that there
would be no adversity for the informant, in case, this Court
directs for DNA test of the family members of the victim with the
blood stained earth, thus the informant would not face any
adverse consequences. In support of his contention, learned
counsel for the applicant has relied upon a decision reported in
AIR 2003 SC 3450 in the matter of Sharda Vs. Dharmpal as well
as AIR 2010 SC 2851 in the matter of Bhabani Prasad Jena Vs.
Convenor Secretary Orissa State Commission for Women in
support of his contention.
Per contra, Sri Amit Singh, learned counsel for the opposite
party no.2 has submitted that the incident is of the year 2012
and we are in the year 2022, thus nothing remains in the blood
stained earth and in case DNA test would be permitted, no
concrete results may be aserctained due to passage of time, due
to which the accused-applicant may be benefited from the same
and thus the learned Court below has rightly rejected the
application of the accused-applicant. He further submits that if a
person refuses to undergo for DNA test, then he cannot be
forced/compelled to undergo for the same as such the informant
or his family members also cannot be forced to undergo for DNA
test as it relates to their privacy. Learned counsel has placed
reliance upon a reported Judgement of Hon’ble Apex Court in the
matter of Ashok Kumar Vs. Raj Gupta and others passed in Civil
Appeal No. 6153 of 2021 and has relied upon paragraph nos. 4,
5, 15, 16 and 17, which is quoted below:-
“4. In course of the proceedings before the learned
Addl. Civil Judge (Sr. Division), Kalka, on closure of
the plaintiff’s evidence, when the suit was slated
for the other side’s evidence, the defendants filed
an application on 19.4.2017 seeking direction from
the Court to conduct a Deoxyribonucleic Acid Test
(for short “DNA test”) of the plaintiff and either of
the defendants, to establish a biological link of the
plaintiff to the defendants parents i.e. late Trilok
Chand Gupta and Smt. Sona Devi.This application
was opposed by the plaintiff with the projection that
the defendants’ application is an abuse of the
process of law and that there are adequate
evidences placed before the Court by the plaintiff to
show that he is the son of Trilok Chand Gupta and
Sona Devi. The plaintiff in his opposition had
specifically pleaded that the mother of the plaintiff
and the defendants had submitted sworn affidavit
before the Municipal Committee, Kalka to transfer
the Property No. 496, Pahari Bazar, Kalka in her
name, mentioning the name of the plaintiff as her
son. The copy of the concerned affidavit was duly
placed on record in the suit proceedings. Similarly,
sworn affidavits of the three defendants regarding
transfer of the property No. 496, Pahari Bazar,
Kalka, where again the plaintiff was admitted to be
the son of late Trilok Chand Gupta and late Smt.
Sona Devi, were also brought on record in the suit.
With such projection of admission on his linkage to
the defendants’ parents, the plaintiff opposed the
DNA test suggested in the defendants’ application
and offered to rely on the already adduced evidence
to prove his case.
5. The defendants’ application for conducting the
DNA test for the plaintiff (at the cost of the
defendants) was disposed of by the Court by
referring to the fact that the CS No. 53/2013 is for
declaration of ownership of property left behind by
late Trilok Chand Gupta and late Sona Devi where
the defendants have denied that the plaintiff is their
brother or the son of their parents. The learned
Judge noted that the evidence was already led by
the plaintiff to prove his case and the application of
the defendants was filed at that stage of the Suit
when it was their turn to lay their evidence. Taking
these aspects into account, the Court opined that
onus is on the plaintiff to prove that he is a
coparcener amongst the defendants by way of his
birth in their family and such burden does not shift
to the defendants. Since the plaintiff had refused to
give the DNA sample, the view taken was that the
Court cannot force the plaintiff to provide DNA
sample and accordingly the defendants’ application
came to be dismissed by the order               dated
28.11.2017 by the learned Trial Judge.
15. Having answered these questions, additional
issue to be resolved is whether refusal to undergo
DNA Testing amounts to ‘other evidence’ or in other
words, can an adverse inference be drawn in such
situation. In Sharda vs. Dharmpal a three judges
bench in the opinion written by Justice S.B. Sinha
rightly observed in paragraph 79 that ”if despite an
order passed by the court, a person refuses to
submit himself to such medical examination, a
strong case for drawing an adverse inference” can
be made out against the person within the ambit of
Section 114 of the Evidence Act. The plaintiff here
has adduced his documentary evidence and is
disinclined to produce further evidence. He is
conscious of the adverse consequences of his
refusal but is standing firm in refusing to undergo
the DNA Test. His suit eventually will be decided on
the nature and quality of the evidence adduced. The
issue of drawing adverse inference may also arise
based on the refusal. The Court is to weigh both
side’s evidence with all attendant circumstances and
then reach a verdict in the Suit and this is not the
kind of case where a DNA test of the plaintiff is
without exception.
16. The respondent cannot compel the plaintiff to
adduce further evidence in support of the
defendants’ case. In any case, it is the burden on a
litigating party to prove his case adducing evidence
in support of his plea and the court should not
compel the party to prove his case in the manner,
suggested by the contesting party.
17. The appellant (plaintiff) as noted earlier, has
brought on record the evidence in his support which
in his assessment adequately establishes his case.
His suit will succeed or fall with those evidence,
subject of course to the evidence adduced by the
other side. When the plaintiff is unwilling to subject
himself to the DNA test, forcing him to undergo one
would impinge on his personal liberty and his right
to privacy. Seen from this perspective, the
impugned judgment merits interference and is set
aside. In consequence thereof, the order passed by
the learned Trial Court on 28.11.2017 is restored.
The suit is ordered to proceed accordingly.”
He lastly submits that the stage of 313 Cr.P.C. stage is over
and thus the application has been moved at a belated stage with
intention to linger on the trial. Apart from the same, the learned
Court below has rightly recorded reasons while rejecting the
application vide order dated 11.10.2021, thus there is no
illegality or infirmity in the impugned order which may call for
any interference by this Court in exercise of powers conferred
under 482 Cr.P.C. jurisdiction.
Lerned A.G.A. has supported the arguments advanced by
learned counsel for the opposite party no.2.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and after
perusing the averments made in the present application, this
Court has to examine firstly whether the scientific knowledge to
unearth the truth can be used ? Secondly, what would be the
effect in case, DNA is directed to be conducted, thirdly whether
the right to life or privacy of the informant can be violated?
Dealing with the first issue as to whether scientific
knowledge can be used to unearth the truth, relevant to our
discussion is the decision of the Hon’ble Apex Court in the matter
of Regina (Quantavalle) Vs. Secretary of State for Health [2003]
2 A.C. 687 wherein it has been held that the laws have to be
construed in the light of contemporary scientific knowledge and
in order to give effect to a plain parliamentaly purpose, the
statute may be held to cover a scientific development not known
when the statute was passed. Notice may be taken of the
amendment of the year 1976 to Section 75 of the CPC enabling
the Court to issue commissions to hold a scientific techinical or
expert investigation. The same is indicative of legislative intent to
keep pace with scientific advancements in the matter of judicial
Hon’ble Apex Court in the matter of Narayan Dutt Tiwari Vs.
Rohit Shekhar 2012 (12) SCC 554, has held in paragraph no. 24
24. Even the Constitution of India, while laying
down the Fundamental Duties by Article 51-A (h)
and (j) declares it to be the duty of every citizen of
India to develop a scientific temper and the spirit of
inquiry and reform and to strive towards excellence,
to reach higher levels of achivement. What we
wonder is that when modern tools of adjudication
are at hand must the Courts refuse to step out of
their dogmas and insist upon the long route to be
followed at the cost of misery to the litigants. The
answer obviously has to be no., The Courts are doing
for justice by adjudicating rival claims and
unearthing the truth and not for following the age
old practices and procedures when new, better
methods are available.
25. We, in the contest find the judgement of the
Court of Appeal (Civil Division) in Re G. (Parentage
Blood Sample) [1977] 1 F.L.R. 360 holding that the
Court should find proven forensically what the
person by his refusal had prevented from being
established scientifically to be apposite. It was
further held therein:-
establishgment of truth. No injustice is
done to him by conclusively establishing
paternity. If he is the father, his position is
put beyond doubt by the testing, and the
justice of his position is entrenched by the
destruction of the mother’s doubts and
aspersions. If he is not the father, no
injustice is done by acknowledging him to
be a devoted step father to a child of the
family. Justrice to the child, a factor not to
be ignored, demands that the truth be
known when truth can be established, as it
undoubetely can. Whilst, therefore, I do
not in any way wish to undermine the
sincerity of the father’s belieg that contact
is of a continuing good to the child and
beliefs prevail, that contact is the best
when taking place against the reality fact,
and fact can be established by these tests
being undertaken;
Thorpe LJ in his opinion, agreeing with Waite LJ
that the appeal should be allowed, said:
“A putative father may seek to avoid
his paternity which science could prove;
alternativel to cling on to a status that
science could disprove. In both cases
selfish motives or emotional anxieties and
needs may drive the refusal to co-operate
in the scientific tests which the court
directed.”
In view of the aforesaid, the rejection of the application for
DNA test and granted an opportunity to adduce documentary or
oral evidence in respect of his innocence by the court below is
nothing but an old aged practice inspite of availability of
scientific methods available before it and therefore scientific
method must be used to unearth the truth because justice is
best served by truth.
Secondly what would be the effect in case, DNA is directed
to be conducted. This Court is of the opinion that at the most,
the following result may be obtained:-
(A) D.N.A. may match.
In case, the DNA is directed to be conducted and DNA
matched, then the accused may be convicted. In case, DNA does
not match, then to arrive at just and fair decision of the case,
following the settled and basic principles that no innocent be
convicted else, ten culprits are left free. The contention that the
applicant is innocent would be proved if the DNA samples are
not matched and he is being falsely roped in the present case.
Thirdly, in case, the opinion comes to the disintegraded eroded
test, then the report would again be against the applicant.
Now the third question before this Court is that whether
right to life or privacy of the informant is violated in case DNA is
directed? The reliance of the learned counsel for the opposite
party no.2 upon paragraph nos 4, 5, 15, 16 and 17 in the matter
of Ashok Kumar Vs. Raj Gupta and others (supra) pertains to
dispute between the parties with regard to parentage, whereas
in the instant case,     the DNA test has not been asked to be
conducted to establish the relationship between the applicant
and informant rather the same has been requested to prove the
innocence of the applicant, therefore, there would be no impinge
on his personal liberty and his right to privacy of the informant
or his family members.
It is the case of the applicant that false naksha najri has
been prepared to implicate him as the incident has taken place
somewhere else and is shown to have occurred at the place
mentioned in the FIR, it would be primary to ascertain the place
of incident first so as to gain faith in the prosecution story as
narrated in the FIR. The said requirement can be best served by
obtaining DNA result of the blood sample of the informant or his
relative with the blood stained earth recovered from the alleged
place of occurrence. While making such observation, this Court
is mindful of the fact that DNA test is not to be directed as a
matter of routine and in only deserving cases where strong
prima facie case is made out, such direction may be given. Since
the life of the applicant is stake as he is accused of offence
under Section 302 IPC, it is must to ascertain and test the
truthfulness of the prosecution case.
Considering the facts and circumstances in entirety, this
Court is of the opinion that to arrive at just decision of the case
and to avoid any suspicion or doubt in the prosecution case, it
would be in the interest of justice that DNA test may be
conducted and thus the learned Court below has committed an
illegallity in passing the impugned order, therefore the same is
liable to be set aside.
Accordingly, the impugned order dated 11.10.2021 passed
by learned Additional District Judge, Court No.8, District Mathura
in Sessions Trial No. 573 of 2012 arising out of Case Crime No.
368 of 2012 under Section 302 I.P.C. Police Station Kosi Kalan,
District Mathura, is set aside and the blood sample of informant
or any of his family members be taken for conducting the DNA
test with the blood stained earth collected from the alleged place
of occurrence to unearth the truthfulness of the prosecution
case.
The aforesaid exercise may be completed within a period of
one month from the date of production of a certified copy of the
order before the concerned court below.
The instant application is allowed.