1.       The appellant is aggrieved by the judgment dated 31st May, 2022 passed by the
High Court of Judicature at Allahabad, Lucknow Bench upholding the order dated 9th
December, 2020 passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal1, Principal Bench, that had
turned down the challenge laid by him to an order dated 27th September, 2019, passed by
the Central Board of Direct Taxes, Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance,
Government of India communicating the decision of the President of India to compulsorily
retire him, in exercise of powers conferred under Rule 56(j) of the Fundamental Rules2.
2.       The present case has a chequered history with multiple rounds of litigations spewed
between the appellant and the respondents. To have an overview of the matter, we may
briefly refer to some facts relevant for deciding the present Appeal. The appellant was a
Permanent Commissioned Officer in the Indian Army, inducted in the year 1980. Due to a
physical disability suffered by him in the course of Army operations, he was demobilized
and released from service. In the year 1989, the appellant qualified the Civil Services
Examination. He was appointed as an Officer and allocated to the 1990 Batch in the Indian
Revenue Service. In due course of his service, the appellant was promoted to higher posts
and on 12th January, 2012, he was promoted to the rank of Commissioner, in the
Department of Income Tax. On 7th July, 2014, the appellant was selected and empanelled
for appointment as a Member of the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal 3 by the Selection
Committee headed by a sitting Judge of the Supreme Court nominated by the then Chief
Justice of India. On 15th July, 2015, the respondents forwarded the name of the appellant
to the Appointments Committee of the Cabinet 4 along with his vigilance clearance for
appointment as Member (Accountant), ITAT. In the year 2016, the appellant was
empanelled by the ACC for appointment as Joint Secretary to the Government of India.
From the year 2017 onwards, started a saga of litigations between the appellant and the
respondents, as a result whereof, his appointment as a Member of the ITAT, did not
3.       The first hurdle he faced was an adverse Intelligence Bureau5 report. This made
the appellant approach the Tribunal for relief. Vide judgment dated 10th February, 2017,
the Tribunal disposed of the Original Application filed by the appellant with a direction
issued to the respondents to resubmit his adverse IB Report to the Selection Committee
for it to take a final view on his appointment to the subject post. The said judgment passed
by the Tribunal was assailed by the respondents in a writ petition before the High Court,
which came to be dismissed on 30th May, 2017, with further directions issued to make the
entire process of reconsideration of the appellant’s candidature by the Selection
Committee, timebound. The Petition for Special Leave to Appeal preferred by the
respondent – Union of India against the order dated 30th May, 2017 passed by the High
Court, was also dismissed by this Court on 15th November, 2017.
4.       On 29th November, 2017, a vigilance inspection was carried out in the office of the
appellant. Based on the said vigilance inspection, the respondents issued a show cause
notice to him on 31st January, 2018. Ten days before that, on 21st January, 2018, the
vigilance clearance earlier granted in favour of the appellant, was withheld by the
respondents. Both the aforesaid orders were assailed by the appellant by filing separate
Original Applications before the Tribunal. Initially, an interim order was passed by the
Tribunal observing that the show cause notice issued by the respondents would not
impede the appellant’s consideration for appointment to the post of Member, ITAT. On 4th
May 2018, another interim order was passed by the Tribunal, observing that withholding
of the vigilance clearance of the appellant will not come in his way for appointment to the
subject post. In the interregnum, on 11th April, 2018, the appellant was placed in the
“Agreed List”, which is a list of Gazetted Officers of suspect integrity prepared by the
Department. Pertinently, a second Petition for Special Leave to Appeal filed by the
respondents against the interim relief granted by the Tribunal in favour of the appellant
and duly confirmed by the High Court in WP (C) No. 22179-22187 of 2018 on 06.08.2018,
was dismissed by this Court on 29.03.2019.
5.       Aggrieved by the aforesaid action taken by the respondents of placing his name in
the Suspect List, the appellant approached the Tribunal for a third time and in the said
proceedings, an interim order was granted in his favour. Finally, vide common judgment
dated 6th March, 2019, the Tribunal allowed two Original Applications filed by the appellant
[O.A. No.137 of 2018 and O.A. No.279 of 2018], quashing inclusion of his name in the
“Agreed List” and the consequential proceedings as also the decision taken by the
respondents to deny him vigilance clearance. The Tribunal also directed the respondents
to forward the name of the appellant to the appropriate Authority for selection/appointment
to the post of Member, ITAT. However, the respondents did not comply with the said order
and filed a writ petition before the High Court. Admittedly, no interim order was passed by
the High Court staying the operation of the judgment dated 06th March, 2019, passed by
6.       Aggrieved by the non-compliance of the order dated 30th May, 2017, passed by the
High Court in his favour, the appellant filed a contempt petition before the High Court. Vide
order dated 13th August, 2019, the High Court permitted impleadment of the then
Chairman of the Central Board of Direct Taxes6 in the contempt petition and issued him a
notice to show cause as to why he should not be punished for wilful disobedience of the
order dated 30th May, 2017, passed in the writ proceedings.
7.       Similar notices were issued by the Tribunal on two contempt petitions filed by the
appellant against the respondents for non-compliance of the orders dated 30th May, 2017
and 6th March, 2019. In the meantime, the respondents initiated disciplinary proceedings
against the appellant by issuing him a chargesheet on 17th June, 2019. In July 2019, a
Departmental Promotion Committee 7 was convened by the Union Public Service
Commission8 to consider promoting the appellant to the post of Principal Commissioner
but the decision taken qua him, was placed in the sealed cover due to the pending
disciplinary proceedings. The appellant had filed a writ petition before the High Court
against the charge memorandum issued to him wherein the High Court granted stay
orders in his favour. While the said proceedings were still pending, the respondents
proceeded to compulsorily retire the appellant on 27th September, 2019, which was about
three months short of the date of his superannuation in January 2020. The list of
promotions made to the post of Principal Commissioner was declared on 11.11.2019, by
which date the appellant was no longer in the reckoning.
8.       It may be noted here that the mechanism in place within the department for arriving
at a conclusion as to who amongst the Group-A Officers in the CBDT deserve to be
prematurely retired, starts with an assessment to be conducted by the Internal Committee
that identifies and recommends the names of the officers and places it before the Review
Committee. The next stage is before the Review Committee that includes the Chairman,
CBDT and the Revenue Secretary as Members. If satisfied by the records and comments
forwarded by the Internal Committee that the pre-mature retirement of a Group-A Officer
is desirable in public interest, the Review Committee makes a recommendation to the
Appointing Authority in this regard. The Appointing Authority is then required to examine
the recommendations of the Review Committee and if satisfied, pass an order of pre-
mature retirement of the concerned Officer. Once the Competent Authority passes an
order of pre-mature retirement under FR 56(j), the aggrieved Officer is entitled to submit
a representation to the Representation Committee. As per the records, the appellant had
submitted a representation to the Representation Committee, which was turned down on
9.       The appellant challenged the final order of compulsory retirement issued against
the appellant on 27th September, 2019 and the subsequent order dated 2nd January, 2020,
passed by the Representation Committee declining to interfere in the order of compulsory
retirement, before the Tribunal. The said petition was dismissed, vide judgment dated 9th
December, 2020 and upheld by the High Court by the impugned judgment dated 31st May,
10. A threefold challenge has been laid by the appellant to the impugned judgment.
Firstly, on the ground of serious prejudice caused to him due to the active participation of
the Additional Director General (Vigilance) as a Member of the Internal Committee when
he had a bias against the appellant and the participation of the then Chairman of the CBDT
in the meeting of the Review Committee, convened to examine the recommendations of
the Internal Committee for prematurely retiring him, when he ought to have recused
himself knowing that he was facing three contempt notices, one issued by the High Court
on 13th August, 2019 [Contempt Petition No.2681/2017] and two notices issued by the
Tribunal [CCP No.15/2019 and CCP No.25/2019] for failing to forward the appellant’s
vigilance clearance required for processing his case for appointment as Member, ITAT, to
the Selection Committee. Secondly, it has been argued that the impugned order of his
pre-mature retirement is punitive in nature and has been passed solely to deprive him of
an opportunity to be appointed as Member ITAT, a post for which he was selected by the
Selection Committee headed by a sitting Judge of the Supreme Court and his name was
placed at Serial No.1 in the All India Ranking, as long back as in the year 2014. This
selection of the appellant was reiterated by a subsequently constituted Selection
Committee in the year 2018, but did not reach fruition due to persistent obstructions
created by the respondents, who withheld his vigilance clearance without a valid reason
and subsequently placed his name in the “Agreed List”, followed by initiation of a
disciplinary enquiry against him on baseless charges which was not taken to its logical
conclusion, as he was prematurely retired in September, 2019. Lastly, it was urged that
the High Court has completely overlooked the fact that all the Annual Performance
Assessment Reports9 of the appellant over the past 30 years were blemishless. In fact,
the appellant was graded as ‘Outstanding’ and his integrity was assessed as ‘Beyond
Doubt’ for the immediately preceding 10 years’ APARs, after he was promoted to the post
of Commissioner, Income Tax in the year 2012.
11. Refuting the allegations levelled by the appellant and defending the impugned
judgment, Mr. Sanjay Jain, learned Additional Solicitor General10 who appeared for the
respondents – Union of India urged that the impugned judgment is a well-reasoned one
and does not deserve interference; that the order of compulsory retirement was passed
in the case of the appellant after duly considering his entire service record; that the
material relied upon by the respondents for passing an order under FR 56(j), was carefully
considered by the Tribunal before dismissing the Original Application filed by the
appellant, as meritless and that the allegations of institutional malice and bias levelled by
the appellant are ill-founded. Learned ASG contended that unlike departmental enquiries,
the scope of an enquiry under FR 56(j) is fairly limited and the standard of adjudication is
prima facie a subjective opinion as to the suitability of an officer to continue in service,
keeping in mind public interest. No stigma can be attached to an employee who is
compulsorily retired, as compulsory retirement does not amount to dismissal or removal.
The appellant is still entitled to all retiral benefits and also entitled to be considered for
other appointments. It was stated that a chargesheet was pending against the appellant
for major penalty proceedings which had been unsuccessfully challenged by him before
the Tribunal. Citing several decisions of this Court on the limited scope of interference in
an order of compulsory retirement, it was submitted on behalf of the respondents – Union
of India that courts should ordinarily refrain from returning findings on merits of the
allegations against the concerned officer. Once an order of compulsory retirement has
been passed bona fide and without any extraneous motive, there is no justification for
12. We have given our thoughtful consideration to the arguments advanced by learned
counsel for the parties, perused the records and the judgments cited by both sides.
13.      The provision of Fundamental Rule 56(j) reads as under:
“FR 56(j) :- The Appropriate Authority shall, if it is of the opinion that it is in the public interest so
to do, have the absolute right to retire any Government servant by giving him notice of not less
than three months in writing or three months' pay and allowances in lieu of such notice :-
(i)      If he is, in Group 'A' or Group 'B' service or post in a substantive, quasipermanent or
temporary capacity and had entered Government service before attaining the age of 35 years,
after he has attained the age of 50 years;
(ii)     In any other case after he has attained the age of 55 years.
14. As is apparent from a perusal of the aforesaid provision, it takes in its fold two
elements – the first one is the absolute right of the Government to retire an employee and
the second is the requirement of meeting the condition of public interest for doing so. The
provision also provides for a prior notice of at least three months to the outgoing employee
and mandates that the said provision can be invoked to retire a government servant only
after he has attained the age of 55 years.
15. We are conscious of the fact that the scope of judicial review in respect of an order
of compulsory retirement from the service, is fairly limited. The law relating to compulsory
retirement has been the subject matter of discussion in a number of cases where certain
settled legal principles have been laid down which are being elucidated hereinbelow.
16. The object of compulsory retirement of a government servant was highlighted by
this Court in Allahabad Bank Officers’ Association and Another vs. Allahabad Bank
and Others11in the following words: -
“5. The power to compulsorily retire a government servant is one of the facets of the
doctrine of pleasure incorporated in Article 310 of the Constitution. The object of
compulsory retirement is to weed out the deed wood in order to maintain efficiency and
initiative in the service and also to dispense with the services of those whose integrity is
doubtful so as to preserve purity in the administration. Generally speaking, Service Rules
provide for compulsory retirement of a government servant on his completing certain number of
years of service or attaining the prescribed age. His service record is reviewed at that stage and
a decision is taken whether he should be compulsorily retired or continued further in service.
There is no levelling of a charge or imputation requiring an explanation from the government
servant. While misconduct and inefficiency are factors that enter into the account where the order
is one of dismissal or removal or of retirement, there is this difference that while in the case of
retirement they merely furnish the background and the enquiry, if held – and there is no duty to
hold an enquiry – is only for the satisfaction of the authorities who have to take action, in the case
of dismissal or removal they form the very basis on which the order is made, as pointed out by
this Court in Shyam Lal v. State of U.P. and State of Bombay v. Saubhagchand M. Doshi. Thus,
by its very nature the power to compulsorily retire a government servant is dismissal etc. for
misconduct. A government servant who is compulsorily retired does not lose any part of the
benefit that he has earned during service. Thus, compulsory retirement differs both from dismissal
and removal as it involves no penal consequences.”
17.      The above discussion of case-law makes it clear that if the order of compulsory retirement
casts a stigma on the Government servant in the sense that it contains a statement casting
aspersion on his conduct or character, then the court will treat that order as an order of
punishment, attracting provisions of Article 311(2) of the Constitution. The reason is that as a
charge or imputation is made the condition for passing the order, the court would infer therefrom
that the real intention of the Government was to punish the government servant on the basis of
that charge or imputation and not to exercise the power of compulsory retirement. But mere
reference to the rule, even if it mentions grounds for compulsory retirement, cannot be regarded
as sufficient for treating the order of compulsory retirement as an order of punishment. In such a
case, the order can be said to have been passed in terms of the rule and, therefore, a different
intention cannot be inferred. So also, if the statement in the order refers only to the assessment
of his work and does not at the same time cast an aspersion on the conduct or character of the
Government servant, then it will not be proper to hold that the order of compulsory retirement is
in reality an order of punishment. Whether the statement in the order is stigmatic or not will have
to be judged by adopting the test of how a reasonable person would read or understand it.”
17.      In Union of India v. Col. J.N. Sinha and Another12 it has been observed that :
“Fundamental Rule 56(j) does not in terms require that any opportunity should be given to the
concerned government servant to show cause against his compulsory retirement. It says that the
appropriate authority has the absolute right to retire a government servant if it is of the opinion
that it is in the public interest to do so. If that authority bona fide forms that opinion the correctness
of that opinion cannot be challenged before courts though it is open to an aggrieved party to
contend that the requisite opinion has not been formed or the decision is based on collateral
grounds or that it is an arbitrary decision.”
18. On similar lines were the observations made by this Court in Swami Saran Saxena
“3. Several contentions have been raised in this appeal by the appellant, who appears in person.
In our judgment, one of them suffices to dispose of the appeal. The contention which has found
favour with us is that on a perusal of the material on the record and having regard to the entries
in the personal file and character roll of the appellant, it is not possible reasonably to come to the
conclusion that the compulsory retirement of the appellant was called for. This conclusion follows
inevitably from the particular circumstances, among others, that the appellant was found worthy
of being permitted to cross the second efficiency bar only a few months before. Ordinarily, the
court does not interfere with the judgment of the relevant authority on the point whether it is in the
public interest to compulsorily retire a government servant. And we would have been even more
reluctant to reach the conclusion we have, when the impugned order of compulsory retirement
was made on the recommendation of the High Court itself. But on the material before us we are
unable to reconcile the apparent contradiction that although for the purpose of crossing the
second efficiency bar the appellant was considered to have worked with distinct ability and with
integrity beyond question yet within a few months thereafter he was found so unfit as to deserve
compulsory retirement. The entries in between in the records pertaining to the appellant need to
be examined and appraised in that context. There is no evidence to show that suddenly there
was such deterioration in the quality of the appellant's work or integrity that he deserved to be
compulsorily retired. For all these reasons, we are of opinion that the order of compulsory
retirement should be quashed. The appellant will be deemed to have continued in service on the
date of the impugned order.
19. In Baldev Raj Chadha v. Union of India14, emphasizing the fact that exercise of
powers under Fundamental Rule 56(j) must be bona fide and promote public interest, this
“25. The whole purpose of Fundamental Rule 56(j) is to weed out the worthless without the
punitive extremes covered by Article 311 of the Constitution. But under the guise of ‘public
interest’ if unlimited discretion is regarded acceptable for making an order of premature
retirement, it will be the surest menace to public interest and must fail for unreasonableness,
arbitrariness and disguised dismissal. The exercise of power must be bona fide and promote
public interest.”
26. “An officer in continuous service for 14 years crossing the efficiency bar and reaching the
maximum salary in the scale and with no adverse entries at least for five years immediately before
the compulsory retirement cannot be compulsorily retired on the score that long years ago, his
performance had been poor, although his superiors had allowed him to cross the efficiency bar
without qualms.”
20. In Ram Ekbal Sharma v. State of Bihar and Another15 it was observed that in
order to find out whether an order of compulsory retirement is based on any misconduct
of the government servant or the said order has been made bona fide, without any oblique
or extraneous purpose, the veil can be lifted. Following are the pertinent observations
“32. On a consideration of the above decisions the legal position that now emerges is that
even though the order of compulsory retirement is couched in innocuous language
without making any imputations against the government servant who is directed to be
compulsorily retired from service, the court, if challenged, in appropriate cases can lift veil
to find out whether the order is based on any misconduct of the government servant
concerned or the order has been made bona fide and not with any oblique or extraneous
purposes. Mere form of the order in such case cannot deter the court from delving into the basis
of the order if the order in question is challenged by the concerned government servant as has
been held by this Court in ‘Anoop Jaiswal case’. This being the position the respondent-State
cannot defend the order of compulsory retirement of the appellant in the instant case on the mere
plea that the order has been made in accordance with the provisions of Rule 74(b)(ii) of the Bihar
Service Code which prima facie does not make any imputation or does not cast any stigma on
the service career of the appellant. But in view of the clear and specific averments made by the
respondent-State that the impugned order has been made to compulsorily retire the appellant
from service under the aforesaid rule as the appellant was found to have committed grave
financial irregularities leading to financial loss to the State, the impugned order cannot but be said
to have been made by way of punishment. As such, such an order is in contravention of Article
311 of the Constitution of India as well as it is arbitrary as it violates principles of natural justice
and the same has not been made bona fide. [emphasis added]
21. In State of Orissa and Others vs. Ram Chandra Das16 this Court observed as
“It is needless to reiterate that the settled legal position is that the Government is empowered and
would be entitled to compulsorily retire a government servant in public interest with a view to
improve efficiency of the administration or to weed out the people of doubtful integrity or who are
corrupt but sufficient evidence was not available to take disciplinary action in accordance with the
rules so as to inculcate a sense of discipline in the service. But the Government, before taking
the decision to retire a government employee compulsorily from service, has to consider the entire
record of the government servant including the latest reports.”
22. In State of Gujarat and Another vs. Suryakant Chunilal Shah17, a case where
the State Government had challenged the judgment of the Division Bench of the High
Court of Gujarat that had held that the order of compulsory retirement passed against the
respondent therein was bad, as there were no adverse entries in his Confidential Report
and his integrity was not doubtful at any stage, this Court held thus : -
“28. There being no material before the Review Committee, inasmuch as there were no adverse
remarks in the character roll entries, the integrity was not doubted at any time, the character roll
subsequent to the respondent’s promotion to the post of Assistant Food Controller (Class II) were
not available, it could not come to the conclusion that the respondent was a man of doubtful
integrity nor could have anyone else come to the conclusion that the respondent was a fit person
to be retired compulsorily from service. The order, in the circumstances of the case, was punitive
having been passed for the collateral purpose of his immediate removal, rather than in public
23. In State of Gujarat vs. Umedbhai M. Patel 18 , this Court has delineated the
following broad principles that ought to be followed in matters relating to compulsory
“11. The law relating to compulsory retirement has now crystallized into a definite principle, which
could be broadly summarized thus:
(i)      Whenever the services of a public servant are no longer useful to the general
administration, the officer can be compulsorily retired for the sake of public interest.
(ii)     Ordinarily, the order of compulsory retirement is not to be treated as a punishment coming
under Article 311 of the Constitution.
(iii)    For better administration, it is necessary to chop off dead wood, but the order of
compulsory retirement can be passed after having the regard to the entire service record of the
officer. (iv) Any adverse entries made in the confidential record shall be taken note of and be
given due weightage in passing such order. (v) Even uncommunicated entries in the confidential
record can also be taken into consideration.
(vi)     The order of compulsory retirement shall not be passed as a short cut to avoid
departmental enquiry when such course is more desirable.
(vii)    If the officer was given a promotion despite adverse entries made in the confidential record,
that is a fact in favour of the officer. (viii) Compulsory retirement shall not be imposed as a punitive
24. In Nand Kumar Verma v. State of Jharkhand and Others19 this Court has once
again highlighted the permissibility of ascertaining the existence of valid material by a
Court for the authorities to pass an order of compulsory retirement and observed thus: -
“34. It is also well settled that the formation of opinion for compulsory retirement is based
on the subjective satisfaction of the authority concerned but such satisfaction must be
based on a valid material. It is permissible for the Courts to ascertain whether a valid
material exists or otherwise, on which the subjective satisfaction of the administrative
authority is based. In the present matter, what we see is that the High Court, while holding that
the track record and service record of the appellant was unsatisfactory, has selectively taken into
consideration the service record for certain years only while making extracts of those contents of
the ACRs. There appears to be some discrepancy………..”
25. In a recent judgment in the case of Nisha Priya Bhatia v. Union of India 20 ,
confronted with the question as to whether action taken under Rule 135 of the Research
and Analysis Wing (Recruitment Cadre and Service) Rules, 1975 is in the nature of “a
penalty or a dismissal clothed as compulsory retirement” so as to attract Article 311 of the
Constitution of India, this Court has held that “the real test for this examination is to see
whether the order of compulsory retirement is occasioned by the concern of unsuitability
or as a punishment for misconduct”. For drawing this distinction, reliance has been placed
on the judgment in State of Bombay v. Saubhag Chand M. Doshi21, where a distinction
was made between an order of dismissal and order of compulsory retirement in the
“9 … Under the rules, an order of dismissal is a punishment laid on a government servant, when
it is found that he has been guilty of misconduct or inefficiency or the like, and it is penal in
character, because it involves loss of pension which under the rules would have accrued in
respect of the service already put in.
An order of removal also stands on the same footing as an order of dismissal, and involves the
same consequences, the only difference between them being that while a servant who is
dismissed is not eligible for re-appointment, one who is removed is. An order of retirement
differs both from an order of dismissal and an order of removal, in that it is not a form of
punishment prescribed by the rules, and involves no penal consequences, inasmuch as
the person retired is entitled to pension proportionate to the period of service standing to
his credit.”
26. We may now proceed to examine the facts of the case in hand in the light of the
case laws discussed above in order to find out as to whether the order of compulsory
retirement passed by the respondents in respect of the appellant was based on valid
material and was in public interest. First, we propose to examine the personal file and
character roll of the appellant. As per the material placed on record, the APARs of the
appellant reflect that over the past several years, his integrity was being regularly
assessed as “Beyond doubt” and this remained the position till as late as 31st July, 2019,
when his work performance was assessed for the period from 1st April, 2018 to 31st March,
2019 and found to be upto the mark. In his APARs for the past one decade, till the period
just prior to the order of his premature retirement, the respondents were consistently
grading the appellant as “Outstanding”. No adverse entries were made by his superiors in
the APARs of the appellant insofar as his work performance was concerned. No aspersion
was cast either on his conduct or character during all this period. As per the service
records, his efficiency and integrity remained unimpeachable throughout his career. The
inference drawn from the above is that the appellant’s service record being impeccable
could not have been a factor that went against him for the respondents to have
compulsorily retired him.
27. Coming next to the stand taken by the respondents that several complaints were
received against the appellant that had cast a cloud on his integrity, it is noteworthy that
the respondents have referred to nine complaints against the appellant, stated to be
pending in the Vigilance Directorate that have been pithily summarized by the Tribunal in
a tabulated format in para 30 of its judgment dated 6th March, 2019. Juxtaposed against
the said tabulated statement of complaints listed by the respondents, is a separate
tabulation of the response of the appellant to each of the said complaints. For ready
reference, the two tables of contents are extracted below :-
S. No.   Name of officer                               Status
1.       Sh. P.K. Bajaj Addl Shri O.P. Jangre          Charges       of   harassment      &
CIT, Range 6 (2),                             interference in work by subordinate
3.       Sh. P.K. Bajaj, CIT E, Complaint made by      Under examination
Lucknow                Driving Training and
4.       Sh. P.K. Bajaj, CIT E, Sh. Dharam Veer Kapil  ID issued dated 13.11.17. ID
Lucknow                IFS      Retd    Dated responded dt. 18.11.17 under
5.       Sh. P.K. Bajaj, CIT E, Sh. Balesh Singh,      ID issued dated 27.12.17
6.       Sh. P.K. Bajaj, CIT E, Shri Ashok Verma,      ID     issued     dated    08/04/16.
Lucknow                Lucknow                Reminder dated 11.05.16. ID
7.       Sh. P.K. Bajaj, CIT E, Sh. Jagat Pandey,      ID     issued     dated     03.08.16
Lucknow                28/42, Civil Lines,    Reminder dated 09.09.16 letter
Bareilly, U.P. Dated   received back undelivered till date.
29.06.16               Closed dated 07.10.16.
8.       Shri Pramod Bajaj, CIT Sh. Ashish Rastogi, A  ID     issued     dated    25.02.16.
(Exemption), Lucknow 70, Gandhi Nagar,        Reminder dated 11.05.16. ID
Prince           Road  Neither     received     back    nor
9.       CAPT. P.K. Bajaj Addl. Smt. Renu Bajaj W/o    Letter dated 28.01.15 to CIT, Ajmer
CIT                    Capt P.K. Bajaj        for providing information on case in
3 Sh. P.K. Bajaj Complaint made        Under              File taken for inspection
CIT (E), Lucknow by         Driving  Examination        on 03.02.2016 returned
Training      and                      after 17 months on
4 Sh. P.K. Bajaj Sh. Dharam Veer       ID issued dt.      Father in Law of Mrs.
CIT (E), Lucknow Kapil IFS Retd      13.112017      ID  Naina Kapil So in, IRS
Dated               responded      dt. posted earlier in DG(V)
5 Sh. P.K. Bajaj Sh.          Balesh   ID issued      dt. No details provided by
CIT (E), Lucknow Singh, through      27/12/17           Respondents. No query
PMOPG/E20                              ever raised till date.
6 Sh. P.K. Bajaj Shri         Ashok    ID issued dt.      Fictitious/Pseudo
CIT (Exemption), Verma, Lucknow      08/04/16           anonymous         complaint.
Lucknow                              Reminder       dt. Still connected files taken
7 Sh. P.K. Bajaj Sh.           Jagat   ID issued dated    Fictitious/Pseudo
CIT (Exemption), Pandey, 28/42,      03.08.16           anonymous          complaint
Lucknow          Civil       Lines,  Reminder       dt. still connected files taken
Bareilly,     U.P.  09.09.16.      ID  during inspection on
8             Sh. P.K. Bajaj Sh.        Ashish ID issued dated     Fictitious/Pseudo
CIT (Exemption), Rastogi, A 70,  25.02.16            anonymous        complaint
Lucknow          Gandhi Nagar,   reminder dated      still connected files taken
Prince    Road  11.05.16.        ID during inspection on
9             Sh. P.K. Bajaj Smt. Renu Bajaj Letter            dt. Divorced on 31.05.2008.
Addl. CIT        W/o Capt P.K. 28.01.15 to CIT,      No query ever raised by
Bajaj           Ajmer           for DGIT (V) till date but
28. As can be seen from the above, out of the aforesaid nine complaints, four
complaints mentioned at Sr. Nos. 2, 6, 7 and 8 had already been closed by the department
in the year 20162017. With regard to the complaint listed at Sr. No.1, is stated to have
been levelled by another officer of the department against the appellant, relating to
harassment and interference in work. The Tribunal has noted the submission of the
appellant, which has gone unrefuted that the Anti-Corruption Bureau of the Central Bureau
of Investigation22 had at a later date, arrested the said officer on charges of corruption.
The appellant has also stated in the remarks column that no explanation had ever been
called for from him on the said complaint, status whereof is shown as “Under examination”.
In respect of the complaints at Sr. Nos. 3 and 4, the respondents have stated that they
are “Under examination”. In reply, the appellant has stated that the complaint at Sr. No.3,
of the year 2016 was closed by the ADG (Vigilance)(NZ) on 10th February, 2016 and the
complaint at Sr. No.4, made by a relative of an officer within the Department, was rejected
because the complainant did not provide his PAN number despite being afforded two
opportunities. There is no rebuttal to the said assertions. Coming to the complaint at Sr.
No. 5, the Review Committee constituted by the respondents has recorded the status of
the said complaint as having been closed on 22nd January, 2019. This is apparent from a
perusal of para 26 of the judgment dated 09th December, 2020, passed by the Tribunal.
Now remains the complaint at Sr. No.9, which was made by the appellant’s ex-wife
alleging bigamy, moral turpitude etc. against the appellant. In the remarks column, the
respondents have stated that necessary information in respect of the said court
proceedings between the parties was sought by the department. The appellant has
clarified that a decree of divorce was granted to the parties by the concerned Court and a
copy of the said order was duly supplied to the department against receipt on 21st March,
29. Insofar as the matrimonial dispute of the appellant is concerned, the material placed
on record reveals that the same had attained quietus by virtue of a settlement arrived at
between him and his estranged wife, vide Settlement Agreement dated 18th June, 2016
recorded by the learned Mediator appointed by the Delhi High Court Mediation and
Conciliation Centre. The said Settlement Agreement was duly taken on record by the
Division Bench of the High Court of Delhi vide order dated 14th July, 2016 passed in MAT.
APP. (F.C.) Nos.148 of 2014, 34 of 2016 and 36 of 2016. Both the parties had agreed that
they would take joint steps to get their marriage dissolved by filing a petition before the
concerned Family Court. One of the terms and conditions of the Settlement was that the
appellant would arrange a residential flat for his wife, which his brother had agreed to
purchase in her name, as a one-time settlement towards all her claims of maintenance,
alimony, stridhan, etc. This condition was subsequently complied with and is borne out
from the Sale Document of the flat dated 3rd October, 2016 that records the fact that a
sum of ₹ 6,00,000/- (Rupees six lakhs) was paid by the appellant’s brother to the seller
towards the sale price of the flat.
30. Once the parties had arrived at a settlement and a decree of divorce by mutual
consent was passed by the concerned Court, the allegations of bigamy etc. levelled by
the appellant’s wife loses significance since the case was never taken to trial for any
findings to be returned by the Court on this aspect. In the above backdrop, there appears
no justification for the respondents to have raised the spectre of a series of complaints
received against the appellant during the course of his service that had weighed against
him for compulsorily retiring him, more so, when these complaints were to the knowledge
of the respondents and yet, his service record remained unblemished throughout. Nothing
has been placed on record to show a sudden decline in the work conduct of the appellant
so as to have compulsorily retired him.
31. We may now proceed to examine the background in which vigilance clearances
were initially given to the appellant and subsequently withheld by the respondents. It is
not in dispute that in the year 2013, the appellant had applied for the post of Member,
ITAT and in the year 2014, the Selection Committee had placed him on the top of the list
of 48 selected candidates. Based on the vigilance clearance issued by the department in
August, 2013 and once again on 15th July 2015, the appellant was recommended by the
respondents to the ACC for his appointment to the subject post.
32. However, sometime later, the respondents withheld the vigilance clearance given
earlier on the ground that there was an adverse IB Report against the appellant. It is not
out of place to mention here that the aforesaid adverse IB report had also arisen from the
complaint received from the appellant’s wife during the very same matrimonial dispute
which had already been amicably settled in Court. The factum of the said settlement was
well within the knowledge of the respondents, who had stated in O.M. dated 15th July,
2015 that “the alleged acts of bigamy against Shri Bajaj emanating from matrimonial
dispute is not established”. Aggrieved by the withholding of his vigilance report, the
appellant had approached the Tribunal for relief in OA No.95 of 2016. Vide interim order
dated 10th February, 2017, the Tribunal directed the respondents to resubmit the adverse
IB report in respect of the appellant before the Selection Committee within one month for
the said Committee to take a view in the matter. As noted earlier, the aforesaid order dated
10th February, 2017, passed by the Tribunal was upheld by the High Court, on 30th May,
2017 and affirmed by this Court, vide order dated 15th November, 2017.
33. Undeterred by the aforesaid judicial orders, the respondents continued to withhold
the vigilance clearance of the appellant, this time claiming that there were some adverse
findings against him in an Inspection Report dated 20th April, 2018 stated to have been
prepared on the basis of an inspection of the office of the appellant conducted on 29th and
30th November, 2017 which was done within a few days of this Court upholding the order
dated 10th February, 2017 passed by the Tribunal, calling upon the respondents to place
his adverse IB report before the Selection Committee, for it to take a view in the matter. It
is rather ironical that the irregularities noticed by the respondents in the Inspection Report
dated 20th April, 2018, that made them withhold the vigilance clearance of the appellant
were to their knowledge ten days before and yet they had issued a letter dated 11th April,
2018, giving him vigilance clearance.
34. It is noteworthy that the appellant had challenged the proceedings initiated against
him by the respondents on the basis of the inspections conducted on 29th and 30th
November, 2017 in OA No.77 of 2018. In the said proceedings, the Tribunal had passed
an interim order on 2nd February, 2018 directing that the said proceedings will not come
in the way of promotion, appointment and deputation prospects of the appellant.
Regardless of the above directions, the respondents not only denied vigilance clearance
to the appellant on 20th April, 2018 they went a step ahead and proceeded to place his
name in the “Agreed List” i.e., the list of suspected officers. This act of the respondents
was also assailed by the appellant before the Tribunal in O.A. No. 279 of 2018. Ultimately,
both the captioned Original Applications were collectively decided by the Tribunal in favour
of the appellant by a detailed judgement dated 6th March, 201, which has not been stayed
by any superior Court.
35. Aggrieved by a separate Memo dated 30th January 2018 issued by the respondents
on the basis of the aforesaid inspection of his office conducted on 29th and 30th November,
2017 calling for his explanation in respect of some orders passed by him in his
judicial/quasi-judicial capacity as Commissioner of Income Tax (Exemption), the appellant
had to file O.A. No.332 of 2018 that was decided by the Tribunal in his favour vide
judgment dated 28th May, 2019. In its judgment, the Tribunal relied on the order dated 15th
May 2018, passed by the High Court in W.P. No.13390 of 2018 (SB), declaring that the
inspection conducted by the Department was without jurisdiction and that there was no
justification for withholding the vigilance clearance of the appellant on the basis of the said
inspection. Noting that the Memo dated 30th January 2018 issued by the respondents
calling for an explanation from the appellant was premised on the very same inspection
conducted by the Department, the Tribunal reiterated the string of findings returned by it
in favour of the appellant in its earlier common judgment dated 6th March 2019 [passed in
O.A. No. 137 of 2018 and O.A. No. 279 of 2018] and proceeded to quash the Memo dated
30th January 2018 issued by the respondents. It was further held that the said order will
not adversely impact forwarding of the name of the appellant as Member, ITAT, in terms
of the recommendations made by the Selection Committee in its meeting held on 26th
36. In the teeth of the series of orders passed by the Tribunal and the High Court in
favour of the appellant, the respondents elected to withhold his vigilance clearance,
thereby compelling the appellant to file contempt petitions against the concerned officers
for non-compliance of the orders passed. Both, the High Court as well as the Tribunal,
issued notices for wilful disobedience of the orders passed. In the proceedings before the
High Court, on the one hand, the respondents kept seeking adjournments on the ground
that steps were being taken to forward the appellant’s name to the ACC for being
processed for his appointment as Member, ITAT, till as late as on 31st May 2019 on which
date they were granted one last opportunity for making compliances and at their request,
the matter was adjourned to 9th July 2019 and on the other hand, the respondents slapped
the appellant with a Charge Memorandum dated 17th June 2019 and suspended him on
37. Having regard to the fact that the respondents did not take the disciplinary
proceedings initiated against the appellant to its logical conclusion and instead issued an
order compulsorily retiring him, this Court does not deem it expedient to delve into the
allegations levelled in the said Charge Memorandum; all the same, we have cursorily gone
through the Charge Memorandum that mentions three charges – one alleging that the
appellant failed to seek permission from the department to purchase a flat in relation to
the matrimonial dispute between him and his estranged wife and the second one is in
respect of the allegation of bigamy levelled against him by his estranged wife. We have
already noted earlier that during the course of the matrimonial dispute, the parties had
arrived at a settlement and the flat that was agreed to be given to the wife, was not
purchased by the appellant but by his brother, which fact is amply borne out from the
documents placed on record. The matrimonial dispute between the parties stood closed
on a decree of divorce being granted on the basis of mutual consent. That the respondents
were also cognizant of the said fact, is apparent from the contents of O.M. dated 15th July,
2015 which records inter alia that the said allegations levelled by the wife had not been
established. The third charge was relating to the appellant having attended Court hearings
without sanctioned leave. However, the disciplinary proceedings initiated against the
appellant on 17th July, 2019 were abandoned by the respondents on the order of
compulsory retirement being passed against him in less than three months reckoned
therefrom, on 27th September, 2019.
38. The appellant has made allegations of institutional bias and malice against the
respondents on the plea that the Chairman, CBDT who was a Member of the Review
Committee, was facing three contempt proceedings relating to the appellant’s service
dispute, wherein notices had been issued by the High Court as well as the Tribunal. There
is no doubt that rule of law is the very foundation of a well-governed society and the
presence of bias or malafides in the system of governance would strike at the very
foundation of the values of a regulated social order. The law relating to mala fide exercise
of power has been the subject matter of a catena of decisions [Refer: S. Pratap Singh v.
State of Punjab23; Jaichand Lal Sethia v. State of W.B24; J.D. Srivastava v. State of
M.P And Others25; and Express Newspapers Pvt. Ltd. And Others v. Union of India
And Others26]. It has been repeatedly held that any exercise of power that exceeds the
parameters prescribed by law or is motivated on account of extraneous or irrelevant
factors or is driven by malicious intent or is on the face of it, so patently arbitrary that it
cannot withstand judicial scrutiny, must be struck down. In the instant case, though the
appellant has levelled allegations of institutional bias and prejudice against the
respondents, particularly against the then Chairman, CBDT who was a Member of the
Review Committee, the said officer was not joined by the appellant as a party before the
Tribunal or the High Court, for him to have had an opportunity to clarify his stand by filing
a counter affidavit. Hence, these allegations cannot be looked into by this Court.
39. Dehors the aforesaid allegations of institutional bias and malice, having perused the
material placed on record, we find merit in the other grounds taken by the appellant. It is
noticed that though FR 56(j) contemplates that the respondents have an absolute right to
retire a government servant in public interest and such an order could have been passed
against the appellant any time after he had attained the age of fifty years, the respondents
did not take any such decision till the very fag end of his career. The impugned order of
compulsory retirement was passed in this case on 27th September, 2019 whereas the
appellant was to superannuate in ordinary course in January, 2020. There appears an
apparent contradiction in the approach of the respondents who had till as late as in July,
2019 continued to grade the appellant as ‘Outstanding’ and had assessed his integrity as
‘Beyond doubt’. But in less than three months reckoned therefrom, the respondents had
turned turtle to arrive at the conclusion that he deserved to be compulsorily retired. If the
appellant was worthy of being continued in service for little short of a decade after he had
attained the age of 50 years and of being granted an overall grade of 9 on the scale of 1
- 10 on 31st July, 2019 it has not been shown as to what had transpired thereafter that
made the respondents resort to FR 56(j) and invoke the public interest doctrine to
compulsorily retire him with just three months of service left for his retirement, in routine.
In such a case, this Court is inclined to pierce the smoke screen and on doing so, we are
of the firm view that the order of compulsory retirement in the given facts and
circumstances of the case cannot be sustained. The said order is punitive in nature and
was passed to short-circuit the disciplinary proceedings pending against the appellant and
ensure his immediate removal. The impugned order passed by the respondents does not
pass muster as it fails to satisfy the underlying test of serving the interest of the public.
40. In view of the above discussion, it is deemed appropriate to reverse the impugned
judgment dated 31st May, 2022 and quash and set aside the order dated 27th September,
2019 passed by the respondents, compulsorily retiring the appellant. Resultantly, the
adverse consequences if any, flowing from the said order of compulsory retirement
imposed on the appellant, are also set aside. The appeal is allowed and disposed of on
the aforesaid terms while leaving the parties to bear their own costs.