and IA No.72920/2021-EXEMPTION FROM FILING O.T.
(FOR ADMISSION and I.R.)
(FOR ADMISSION and I.R.)
(FOR ADMISSION and I.R.)
(FOR ADMISSION and I.R.)
(FOR ADMISSION and I.R.)
(FOR ADMISSION and I.R.)
(FOR ADMISSION and I.R.)
(FOR ADMISSION and I.R.)
(FOR ADMISSION and I.R.)
(FOR ADMISSION and I.R.)
(FOR ADMISSION and I.R.)
(FOR ADMISSION and I.R.)
(I.A.No.107174/2021- Exemption from filing C/C of the impugned
I.A. No.107176/2021- Exemption from filing O.T.
I.A. No.107178/2021- Exemption from filing Affidavit)
Date : 05-10-2021 These petitions were called on for hearing today.
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
An affidavit has been filed by the High Court of Judicature at
Allahabad that it is in agreement with the suggestions/ proposals
listed as criteria for bail by the Government.
If we peruse the said suggestions, in our view, it will make
the exercise of grant of bail even more cumbersome. The fact of the
matter is that if an appeal is pending at the High Court stage and
the convict has already undergone eight years of actual sentence,
exceptions apart, in most cases bail would be the rule. Despite
this the cases are not coming up for consideration. We are not
clear as to how much time does it take for a bail application to be
listed in such a case. There may be convicts who may not be able to
have the requisite access to legal advice for moving the bail
application. The High Court must explore whether in all cases where
convicts  have  undergone  a  sentence   of  actual  eight years,  the
convicts can be considered for grant of bail.
In these suggestions, there are some exceptions sought to be
carved out which have been extracted as under:-
“1. Heinous nature of Crime:
(a) Prohibited categories: To ensure public peace and the
well-being of the society, life convicts who are hardened
criminals, repeat offenders, kidnappers, in crimes related
to massacre (three or more than three murders), habitual
criminals, and fall in prohibited categories as per the U.P.
Jail Standing Policy – no bail should be granted.”
We are also conscious of a scenario where an appeal comes up
for hearing and the appellant may be seeking adjournment rather
than arguing the appeal. That case certainly would not be one for
grant of bail as the Court is willing to bestow consideration on
the merits of the appeal.
We are also in agreement that the convict must approach the
High  Court  first  as otherwise   this   Court  is  being unnecessary
burdened but then there must be a mechanism to see that if he
approaches  the  High  Court,  those   bail   applications are  listed
In the conspectus of our broad observations, it is incumbent
on the High Court to place before us as to how they propose to see
that the cases mentioned aforesaid are taken up for consideration
for grant of bail.
We may note that there may be even convicts in custody in
cases other than life sentence cases and in those cases again the
broad parameter of 50 per cent of the actual sentence undergone can
be the basis for grant of bail.
We grant four weeks’ time to the High Court to place before us
their policy strategy in this behalf.
We would not like to derail the consideration of all these
matters pending before us and thus consider it appropriate that
all these matters are placed before the Bench of the High Court
promptly so that their bail applications are considered.
In order to facilitate further examination of this problem, a
separate Suo Moto petition can be registered and placed before the
Court for further directions.
The Registry to register the Suo Moto proceeding and place it
before Court on 16th November, 2021.
The petitions listed before us for bail be transferred to the
High Court of Allahabad to be taken up urgently.
List after four weeks.