“What can you do to promote world peace. Go home and
love your family.” These are the words of mother Teresa.
Families are like branches on a tree. We grow in different
directions yet our roots remain as one. Family is also like music,
some with high notes and some with low notes but always makes
a beautiful song.
2. in this case, the petitioner purchased a brand-new motor
car (KIA-CARENS) from the second respondent, who is the
authorised distributor for KIA MOTORS. The Number ‘5252’ is the
favorite number of the petitioner because it was the number of
her old vehicle. The number of the vehicles of                   her loving
husband and daughter is also ‘5252’.              The petitioner intends to
get ‘KL-07-DA-5252’ which would be available for bidding only
after three months in the light of Rule 95 of The Kerala Motor
Vehicle Rules 1989 (for short the ‘Rules, 1989’). The petitioner
purchased the vehicle and paid one time motor vehicle tax and
also took out an insurance policy. Ext P1 is the tax invoice issued
by the second respondent, Ext P2 is the temporary certificate of
registration issued to the petitioner, Ext P3 is the E-Receipt
showing the payment of one time motor vehicle tax and Ext P4 is
the insurance policy taken by the petitioner from 9.11.2022 to
8.11.2025.        The  grievance  of   the  petitioner is that  after
purchasing the vehicle and paying all the amount due to the
dealer and other statutory authorities, the vehicle is not delivered
due to the instructions from the 1 st respondent, The Regional
Transport Officer (Registering Authority, Ernakulam) that the
vehicle cannot be plied using a temporary registration number.
Hence, this writ petition.
3. Heard the counsel for the petitioner and the Government
Pleader, who appeared for the 1st respondent.
4. After hearing both sides, I am of the prima facie opinion
that the stand taken by the 1st respondent is sheer injustice to
the petitioner. Section 43 of the Motor Vehicles Act 1988 (for
short the ‘Act, 1988’) provides for temporary registration of a
motor vehicle. The above Section was substituted with effect
from 1.4.2021 as per Act 32 of 2019. Ext P2 temporary
certificate for registration was issued to the petitioner under the
Act, 1988. An application for temporary certificate of registration
is to be made in Form 20 appended to the Central Motor Vehicles
Rules, 1989. According to the 1st respondent, the vehicle cannot
be      delivered  to   the petitioner   until it is registered, i.e.
permanently registered. The respondents are relying on the 2 nd
proviso to Section 41(1) of the Act, 1988. The proviso to Section
41(6) of the Act, 1988 states that in case of a new motor vehicle,
the application for the registration of which is made under the
second proviso to sub-section (1) of Section 41, such motor
vehicle shall not be delivered to the owner until such registration
mark is displayed on the motor vehicle in such form and manner
as may be prescribed by the Central Government. The 2 nd proviso
to Section 41 of the Act, 1988 states that in case of new motor
vehicle, the application for registration in the State shall be made
by the dealer of such motor vehicle, if the new motor vehicle is
being registered in the same State in which the dealer is
situated.
5. A reading of Section 43 of the Act, 1988 will show that
the temporary certificate of registration also carries a registration
mark which is prescribed by the Central Government under Rule
53C of the Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989. In other words,
the term ‘registration’ employed in the two provisos quoted
above clearly takes within its ambit a temporary certificate of
registration as well. Moreover, as per Rules 47 of the Central
Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989 an application for registration, i.e.
permanent registration of a motor vehicle shall be in Form 20
and shall be accompanied by temporary registration, if any.
Therefore, a combined reading of the provisions referred above
prima facie shows that the dealer can deliver a new motor vehicle
to the owner on the strength of a temporary certificate of
registration issued under Section 43 of the Act 1988, after
assigning a temporary registration mark under Rule 53C of the
6. Admittedly, the petitioner has got a right to participate in the
bid for getting the number of her choice as per Rule 95 of the
Rules, 1989. The number of her choice is available only after
three months. In other words, those who purchased a vehicle
and obtained a permanent registration number can ply their
vehicle immediately and those who purchased the vehicle and
want a fancy number as per Rule 95 of the Rules, 1989 have to
wait       indefinitely. This in my    opinion, is  a  prima   facie
discrimination. The petitioner is entitled to participate in the bid
as per Rule 95, but he cannot ply the vehicle even after paying
the entire consideration, tax and obtaining      insurance policy. I
think the petitioner made out a prima facie case. This Court
appreciates the family bonding the petitioner has with her family
for getting their favorite number to her vehicle.
Therefore, there will be a direction to the 1 st respondent to
issue appropriate direction to the 2 nd respondent within three
days from the date of receipt of this order to the effect that the
vehicle purchased by the petitioner as per Ext P1 can be
delivered to the petitioner based on the temporary permit of
registration certificate as evident by Ext P2 and petitioner can ply
the vehicle based on Ext P2 temporary permit.
Hand over.