This petition is filed by the petitioner-accused under
Section 482 of Cr.P.C. for quashing the criminal proceedings in
C.C.No.3944/2019 arising out of Crime No.56/2019 registered
by the Hassan City Police Station, Hassan for the offence
punishable under Section 188 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860
(for short 'IPC') and Section 126 of Representation of People of
Act, 1950 (for short 'R.P. Act'), pending on the file of Prl. Civil
Judge and JMFC, Hassan.
2.    Heard the arguments of learned counsel for the
petitioner and learned High Court Government Pleader for the
3.    The case of the prosecution is that the complainant-
Balakrishna G.M., who is said to be the flying squad of the
election was appointed for monitoring the violation of election
rules at Lok Sabha M.P. elections, deputed to the Hassan
Constituency has filed a complaint alleging that on 17.04.2019,
CRL.P No. 10435 of 2022
the complainant came to know that the petitioner who is said
be the BJP Lok Sabha candidate for Hassan constituency said to
be conducted press meet at Mallige Hotel, Hassan. In spite of
imposing curfew under Section 144 of Cr.P.C., the petitioner by
violating the order has said to be conducted the press meet and
thereby violated the promulgation of the Authority which is
punishable under Section 188 of IPC and 126 of R.P. Act. The
Police after registering the FIR filed the charge-sheet, which is
under challenge.
4.   The    learned   counsel    for  the   petitioner has
contended that as per Section 195 of Cr.P.C., the Police cannot
register FIR, the complainant required to file a complaint before
the Court under Section 200 of Cr.P.C. and the FIR cannot be
registered by the Police and there is a gross violation of the
procedure stated in the Cr.P.C. and further contended that
Section 126 of the R.P. Act is non-cognizable offence. Without
permission of the Court, the FIR cannot be registered and
charge-sheet cannot be filed and thereby, the charge-sheet is
not sustainable. Hence, prayed for quashing the same.
CRL.P No. 10435 of 2022
5.   Learned counsel also submits that in view of the
violation of Section 195 of Cr.P.C., the proceedings cannot be
continued which is abuse of process of law. In the similar
matter, the Co-ordinate Bench of this Court has quashed the
criminal proceedings in respect of the same petitioner in
W.P.No.16510/2018 dated 09.08.2021.
6.   Per contra, learned High Court Government Pleader
objected the petition and however, fairly admits that the
complainant required to file complaint under Section 200 of
Cr.P.C.   The complaint under Section 154 of Cr.P.C. is not
sustainable in view of the bar under Section 195 of Cr.P.C.
7.   Having heard the arguments and on perusal of the
records, admittedly, the FIR has been registered by the Police
on the complaint of one Balakrishna G.M. who is said to be
appointed as a Flying Squad for the M.P election of Lok Sabha,
Hassan Constituency. It is alleged that on 17.04.2019, the
petitioner said to be held the press meet by violating the order
of the Authority. Admittedly, the Police registered FIR and filed
charge-sheet. Section 195(1)(a)(i) of Cr.P.C. states, of any
offence punishable under sections 172 to 188 (both inclusive)
CRL.P No. 10435 of 2022
of the Indian Penal code, where except on the complaint in
writing of the Court or by such officer of the Court as that Court
may authorize in writing in this behalf, or of some other Court
to which that Court is subordinate. Section 195 of Cr.P.C. reads
"195. Prosecution for contempt of lawful authority
of public servants, for offences against public
justice and for offences relating to documents given
in evidence.
(a) (i) of any offence punishable under sections
172 to 188 (both inclusive) of the Indian Penal
Code (45 of 1860), or
(ii) of any abetment of, or attempt to commit, such
(iii) of any criminal conspiracy to commit such
offence, except on the complaint in writing of the
public servant concerned or of some other public
servant     to   whom      he    is   administratively
In view of the bar under Section 195(1)(a)(i) and (iii) of
Cr.P.C., the Magistrate is barred to take cognizance without
filing complaint by the complainant under Section 2(d) read
with Section 200 of Cr.P.C. The Police have no authority to
CRL.P No. 10435 of 2022
register the FIR without permission of the Court for non
cognizable offence. Therefore, the criminal proceedings against
the petitioner is not sustainable under the law and have to be
8.     It is noticed by this Court in various cases,
especially in the cases registered by the police on the complaint
of public authorities, especially by the Election Commission of
flying squad during the period of election, there were number
of FIRs registered by the Police on the complaint filed by the
flying squad and it is noticed by this Court that these
complaints were directly registered by the Police and issuing
FIR even without obtaining the order of the Magistrate in the
non-cognizable offence as required under Section 155 of
Cr.P.C. Most of the cases were registered by the Police on the
complaint filed by the flying squad, it remains only as an empty
formality during the election and finally in most of the cases,
the Police used to file 'B' final report when the candidate
elected in the election as a winning candidate or files the
charge-sheet against the loosing candidate, even though the
police knowing very well that in a non-cognizable offence, the
FIR cannot be registered without permission of the Magistrate.
CRL.P No. 10435 of 2022
There is a gross violation of the procedures by the police in
spite of this Court quashes the criminal proceedings and
despite the quashing of FIRs, the police registering the FIRs
without obtaining permission from the Magistrate under Section
155    of   Cr.P.C.  in non-cognizable      offence  and    they   are
facilitating the accused persons to escape from the clutches of
law even though huge amounts were seized by the flying squad
apart from other articles etc. Therefore, it is necessary for this
Court to issue direction to the Higher Police Authority as well as
Chief     Election  Commission      of   India   and    the   Election
Commission of Karnataka to provide proper training to the
officials as mentioned below:
(i)    If any such non-cognizable offences were found
committed, the informant have to obtain permission
under Section 155(2) of Cr.P.C. by very informant
shall approach the Magistrate under Section 155(1)
of Cr.P.C. and thereafter, the Magistrate shall accord
permission under Section 155(2) of Cr.P.C. by
application of mind by following the judgment of the
Co-ordinate Bench in the case of Vaggeppa Gurulinga
Jangaligi (Jangalagi) vs. The State of Karnataka, Through
PSI, Kagwad Police Station, Belagavi reported in ILR 2020
KAR 630    and then the police to register the FIR and
file the charge sheet.
(ii) In respect of offences punishable under Section
188 of IPC, though it is cognizable offence, the
complainant or the flying squad shall not file any
complaint before the Police under Section 154(1) of
Cr.P.C., but, the complainant can seize the materials
by    preparing  panchanama       in  the  presence   of
witnesses, based upon the power conferred by the
Election Commission of India and thereafter, the
Election Commission of India may authorize the
complainant to file the complaint under Section 2(d)
read with Section 200 of Cr.P.C. along with the
documents before the Magistrate as per Section
195(1)(a)(iii) of Cr.P.C. Then, the Magistrate can
take cognizance and dispensed with the recording of
sworn statement of the complainant-public servant
and then pass the order by issuing the process under
Section 204 of Cr.P.C. in accordance with law.
9.     With the above said observations and directions, I
proceed to pass the following order:
The criminal petition is allowed.
The criminal proceedings against the petitioner
in    C.C.No.3944/2019       arising   out   of   Crime
No.56/2019 registered by the Hassan City Police
CRL.P No. 10435 of 2022
Station, Hassan, pending on the file of Prl. Civil
Judge and JMFC, Hassan is hereby quashed.
The Registry is directed to send the copy of
this order to the following:
1)       The Election Commission of India;
2)       The Election Commission of Karnataka;
3)       The Additional Chief Secretary to the
Government of Karnataka, Department of
4)       Director General and Inspector General of
Police, Bengaluru, for compliance and to follow
the procedures mentioned at paragraph
No.8(i) and (ii) in future, without fail.