UT of Jammu and Kashmir through SHO PS                       ...Respondent(s)
1.   The present petition has been filed by the petitioner seeking bail in
anticipation of his arrest in FIR No. 45/2020 registered with Police
Station Mendhar for offences punishable under Section 304/34 IPC.
2.   According to the prosecution version, on 03.01.2019 an information
was received on telephone at Police Station Mendhar that the body of
one Imran Ahmed S/o Mohd Razaq R/o Ari Mendhar Poonch, is lying
at SDH Mendhar having died in mysterious circumstances requiring
initiation of inquest proceedings in order to ascertain the cause of
death, whereupon inquest proceedings were initiated under DDR No.
06 dated 03.01.2019 at Police Station Mendhar and after conducting
inquest proceedings including post-mortem of dead body and
recording of the statements of witnesses under Section 175 CrPC the
dead body of the deceased was handed over to his legal heirs for last
rites.
3. According to the prosecution version, a SIT came to be constituted on
21.01.2019 and upon taking over the investigation of the matter,
Investigating Officer seized the CD file of the inquest proceedings of
the deceased along with the documents consisting of site plan, memo
and statements of the witnesses and case diaries etc and besides
sending the mobile phone of the deceased to CFSL Pune for expert
opinion and according to post-mortem, FSL report and statements of
the witnesses suggested that the deceased had financial dispute with
the accused petitioner herein Amit Kumar Gupta and that the
petitioner along with one Mohd Shakeel alias Bolla S/o Mohd Majeed
with common and criminal intention give over doze of drug to the
deceased resulting into his death as per the FSL and medical report
establishing commission of offences under Sections 304/34 IPC by
the accused/petitioner, whereafter the charge sheet was laid before the
competent court on 06.02.2021.
4. According to the prosecution version, the accused Shakeel Ahmed
alias Bolla was taken into custody, whereas, the accused/petitioner
had been absconding and evading his arrest resulting into issuance of
general warrant of arrest against the petitioner herein after the
presentation of challan before the competent court.
5. It is being contended in the instant petition that the petitioner has been
falsely implicated in the case having resulted from a highly unfair,
shady, motivated and inconclusive inquest proceedings.
6.  It is being further stated in the petition that respondent has presented
challan against the accused/petitioner and the co-accused Shakeel
Ahmed on the basis of flimsy, concocted and manipulated evidence.
The petitioner claims to be an innocent having not committed any
offence and having no criminal track record.
7.  It is being next stated that the petitioner is a grocery retailer and is a
member of respectable and law abiding family and that police are hell
bent to arrest the accused/petitioner in execution of general warrant of
arrest issued by the Sessions judge Poonch.
8.  It is being further stated that petitioner has called in question FIR
supra and the final report laid under Section 173 CrPC as also the
process issued thereupon by the trial court.
9.  Per contra, objections have been filed by the respondent to the instant
petition wherein petition is being resisted and controverted inter-alia
on the grounds that the accused/petitioner is involved in the
commission of a heinous offence and that the petitioner has been
evading arrest since long.
Heard and considered the rival submissions made by appearing
counsel for the parties and also perused the record.
10. The accused/petitioner is alleged to have committed the offences
punishable under Section 304 IPC which provides and reads as under:
“304. Punishment for culpable homicide not
amounting to murder._ Whoever commits culpable
homicide not amounting to murder, shall be punished
with imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for either
description for a term which may extend to ten years,
and shall also be liable to fine, if the act by which the
death is caused is done with the intention of causing
death, or of causing such bodily injury as is likely to
or with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to ten years, or with fine, or
with both, if the act is done with the knowledge that it
is likely to cause death, but without any intention to
cause death, or to cause such bodily injury as is likely
to cause injury.”
11.  What emerges from above is that Section 304 IPC, Part-I applies to a
case where act by which death is caused is done with the intention of
causing death or causing such bodily injury as is likely to cause death
and Part-II thereof applies when it is likely to cause death, but without
any intention to cause death or to cause such bodily injury as is likely
to cause death.
12. Before adverting to the question as to whether the petitioner is entitled
to the concession of bail in anticipation of his arrest, it becomes
imperative in the first instance to refer to law laid down by the Apex
court on the subject of bail/anticipatory bail and issues connected
thereto. Apex court in case tilted as “Naresh Kumar Mangla Vs.
Anita Agarwal” reported in 2020 SCC online SC 1031, has laid
“92.1…. The application seeking anticipatory bail
should contain bare essential facts relating to the
offence, and why the applicant reasonably apprehends
arrest, as well as his side of the story. These are
essential for the court which should consider his
application, to evaluate the threat or apprehension, its
gravity or seriousness and the appropriateness of any
condition that may have to be imposed.
92.3….While considering an application (for grant of
anticipatory bail) the court has to consider the nature of
the offence, the role of the person, the likelihood of his
influencing the course of investigation, or tampering
with    evidence    (including     intimidating witnesses),
likelihood of fleeing justice (such as leaving the
country), etc.
92.4…….Court sought to be generally guided by
considerations such as the nature and gravity of the
offences, the role attributed to the applicant, and the
facts of the case, while considering whether to grant
anticipatory bail, or refuse it.
Further the Apex court in case titled as “Anil Kumar Yadav
Vs. State (NCT of Delhi) and Anr., reported in 2018 (12) SCC
129”, has noticed at Para 15, following:-
15. “As held in Puran case [2001(6) SCC 338], while
considering the question of grant of bail, court should
avoid consideration of details of evidence as it is not a
relevant consideration. While it is necessary to
consider    the   prima     facie    case,  an exhaustive
exploration of the merits of the case should be avoided.
We, therefore, consciously refrain from considering the
merits of the materials/ evidence collected by the
prosecution.”
13. Admittedly, (the deceased) a young person has died which death of
the deceased is attributed to the accused/petitioner and his co-accused
namely Shakeel Ahmed alias Bolla. Prima-facie there is material on
record connecting the accused/petitioner herein with the commission
of alleged offence which cannot be overlooked or ignored by this
court while dealing with the instant bail application. A general
contention of the petitioner that he did not commit any offence and is
innocent cannot per-se discredit or discard either the investigation
conducted or else evidence on record collected during the course of
the investigation.
14. It is settled position of law that this court can neither go into the
evidence in such a depth to ascertain the probability of conviction of
the accused/petitioner, nor can it be said at this stage that the case
foisted against the petitioner, is totally false, in that, the detailed
examination of evidence and elaborate documentation of the merits of
the case cannot be undertaken, while considering a bail application.
This court also cannot remain oblivious of the fact that the
accused/petitioner is absconding and proceedings in this regard have
been initiated against him by the trial court.
15. It is significant to mention here that the provisions of Section 438
CrPC which provide for direction for grant of bail to person
apprehending arrest, is an extraordinary power vested in this court and
it has to be exercised only in exceptional cases where it appears that
person may be falsely implicated or there are reasonable grounds for
holding that a person accused of an offence is not likely otherwise to
misuse his liberty.
16. From the perusal of the record, it is clear that petitioner though
initially had got associated with the inquest proceedings in the matter
yet subsequently remained unavailable during the course of
investigation and the position remains same uptill the filing of challan
and commencement of trial as well. It is also an admitted fact that a
general warrant of arrest has been issued against the petitioner herein.
It is a consistent view of the courts that a person against whom a
warrant who is absconding and evading the execution of a warrant, is
not entitled to the concession of anticipatory bail. A reference in this
regard to the judgement of the Apex court passed in the case titled as
“Prem Shankar Prasad V. State of Bihar and Anr.”, reported in
2021 Cri.L.R. (SC) 1538, would be relevant, wherein following has
“…………..Normally, when the accused is „absconding‟
and declared as a „proclaimed offender‟, there is no
question of granting anticipatory bail. We reiterate that
when a person against whom a warrant had been issued
and is absconding or concealing himself in order to
avoid execution of warrant and declared as a proclaimed
offender in terms of Section 82 of the Code he is not
entitled to the relief of anticipatory bail.”
17.    Viewed in the context what has been observed, considered and
discussed above, the instant petition entails dismissal and is,
accordingly dismissed.
18.    It is made clear that nothing hereinabove shall be construed to be
expression of any opinion about the guilt or innocence of the accused
petitioner herein.