(Petition under Article 32 of the Constitution of India read with
Order XXXVIII of the Supreme Court Rules, 2013)
…All are Contesting Respondents
1.  The Petitioner is a citizen of India and is working for gain at
the address mentioned above. The Petitioner is a journalist by
profession and the Editor-in-Chief of Republic TV, one of the
leading English news channels in India and the Managing
Director of ARG Outlier Media Asianet News Private Limited
(ARG). ARG also owns and operates a Hindi news channel in
the name of R. Bharat on which the Petitioner anchors news
shows.
2.  The Petitioner is filing the present petition in extremely urgent
circumstances as several FIRs have been registered against
him in different parts of the country and has reasonable and
tangible grounds to believe that other FIRs will also be
registered at the behest of the Indian National Congress
(Congress) members in gross violation of his fundamental
rights, including but not limited to the right of freedom of
speech and expression as guaranteed under Article 19 (1) (a)
and right to life and personal liberty guaranteed under Article
21 of the Constitution of India, 1950. The FIRs which have
been already registered against the Petitioner and the ones
which are anticipated are in relation to the broadcasts aired on
Republic TV on 16 April 2020 and R. Bharat on 21 April
2020, which were in connection with the comments given by a
member of Congress in relation to India's COVID-19 testing
measures and the unfortunate lynching of 3 individuals
(including 2 priests) in Palghar on 16 April 2020.
3. In relation to the broadcasts, multiple complaints have been
filed and FIRs have been registered against the Petitioner all
over the country. The details of the FIRs registered against the
FIR No. 238 of 2020, dated 22 April 2020, registered at Police
Station Sadar, District Nagpur City, Maharashtra, under
sections sections 153, 153-A, 153-B, 295-A, 298, 500, 504 (2),
506, 120-B and 117 of the Indian Penal Code 1860.
(i)   FIR No. 245 of 2020, dated 22 April 2020, registered at
under sections 153-A, 295-A and 505 (2) of the Indian
(ii)  FIR No. 180 of 2020, dated 23 April 2020, registered at
under sections 153-B, 188, 290 and 505 (1) of the
(iii) FIR No. 176 of 2020, dated 22 April 2020, registered at
under sections 153-A, 295-A and 505 (2) of the Indian
It may be noted that the FIRs which have been registered
against the Petitioner are in states ruled by the Congress
government or its alliances.
4. The Complaints and the FIRs are false, vindictive, frivolous,
malicious, precipitated with malice, untenable in law and have
been filed with mala-fide intent by the Congress activists to
coerce, harass and intimidate the Petitioner in order to muzzle
the media and in particular the Petitioner, from carrying these
news reports and conducting investigative journalism to bring
the truth before the public. The Complaints and FIRs are a part
of well-coordinated and malicious campaign by the Congress
and its members of instituting false and baseless complaints
against the Petitioner before different police stations
simultaneously in various parts of the country with request to
register FIR and investigate the matter in relation to same set
of facts. The present petition has been filed in the facts and
circumstances mentioned below:
5. On 16 April 2020, three individuals which included two Hindu
sadhus aged 70 years and 35 years, in the presence of 10
policemen and forest guards, were brutally lynched and killed
by a mob in Gadchinchle village in Palghar district in
Maharashtra. This lynching of the Hindu priests by a mob,
while the priests were in the custody of policemen, has still not
been investigated as to the actual cause and reason behind this
killing. This unfortunate incident was widely reported by the
print and electronic media including by the news channels of
the Petitioner. In fact, a video recording of this actual lynching
by the mob is in public domain and within the full knowledge
of the investigating authorities, government and media
personnel.
6. On 21 April 2020, the Petitioner hosted a debate on R. Bharat
in relation to the Palghar incident in a news show called
'Poochta hai Bharat'. This show is popular among the masses
and is known to raise questions warranting discourse on
matters of public interest. The debate was attended by various
panelists to put across their point of view in relation to the
Palghar incident. Copy of the broadcast aired on R. Bharat on
21 April 2020 will be produced at the time of hearing and is
at    https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C2i4MMpKu9I.
7. A review of the above debate would show that its thrust was to
question the tardy investigation, inconsistent versions of the
authorities and the administration and the State Government's
silence on the Palghar incident given that the unfortunate
incident happened in Maharashtra which is presently under
rule of an alliance government jointly formed by Shiv Sena,
the Congress and the Nationalist Congress Party. The debate
highlighted the manner in which the incident was being
portrayed by the authorities, including the glaring fact that the
incident occurred in the presence of numerous police officials
which fact was initially suppressed.
8. Following the above broadcast, there was a well-coordinated,
widespread, vindictive and malicious campaign launched by
the Congress and its activists against the Petitioner. This
campaign was carried out online through news reports and
tweets indicating that members of the Congress have filed
multiple complaints simultaneously, against the Petitioner
before various police stations in the country, seeking
registration of FIR and investigation into the offences
allegedly committed by the Petitioner in connection with the
reporting of the Palghar incident and the questions raised in
the debate. Various members of the Indian National Congress
demanded the immediate arrest of the Petitioner by using the
#ArrestAntiIndiaArnab. Some of the news reports and
tweets are annexed hereto and marked as Annexure P-1 .
These news reports and tweets clearly demonstrate the
malicious, vindictive and sinister campaign by the Indian
National Congress to muzzle the media and to stop the
Petitioner from raising pertinent questions concerning a matter
of public interest.
9. To the best of Petitioner's knowledge, complaints have also
been filed against him by members of the Congress in
different parts of the country (including multiple complaints in
the same state) before different police stations in Chhattisgarh,
Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Jharkhand, Jammu and Kashmir
and Telangana. Incidentally, all these states are presently
under the rule of the Congress and the Petitioner believes that
the machinery of these State(s) have been set in motion with
an oblique and ulterior motive and without due and proper
application of mind. A list of the complaints filed by Congress
activists against the Petitioner in different States is annexed
hereto and marked as Annexure P-2.
10. On 22 April 2020, two FIRs were registered against the
Petitioner in respect of the complaints filed by Congress
activists in Raipur (FIR No. 176 of 2020 - Civil Lines police
station) and Nagpur (FIR No. 238 of 2020 - Nagpur city police
station) in relation to the Petitioner's reporting of the Palghar
incident. Various other complaints alleging the similar
offences have also been filed by other members of the
Congress against the Petitioner in other states as well which
the Petitioner undertakes to produce at the time of hearing. All
of this was done to intimidate the Petitioner and to stop the
Petitioner from asking pertinent factual questions to the Chief
of the Indian National Congress and other members on his
shows which are aired on Republic TV and R Bharat, and
watched by the whole country.
11. Notwithstanding the multiple complaints and FIRs against
him, the Petitioner continued to conduct his regular shows on
Republic TV/R. Bharat. On 23 April 2020 at around 12:30 - 1
A.M., the Petitioner and his wife, while returning from their
news studio in Worli by car, were attacked by two individuals
on a motorcycle, who when confronted by Petitioner's security
officials, claimed to be Congress members. Immediately
thereafter, the Petitioner went to the NM Joshi police station in
Mumbai to file a complaint, requesting the police to take
appropriate action against the individuals who had attached
him and his wife. While the police initially refused to take
Petitioner’s complaint, after some persistence, a FIR was
registered by the police on 23 April 2020 against unknown
persons, a copy of which is annexed hereto and marked as
Annexure P-3. In light of this attack which has compromised
the safety and security of the Petitioner and his family
members, the Petitioner strongly apprehends that similar
attacks may be planned against hi, his family and his
colleagues at Republic TV/R. Bharat. Accordingly, it is just
and expedient that the Petitioner seeks appropriate protection
from the Central Government to the offices of the Petitioner in
New Delhi and Mumbai.
12. Contrary to the tenor of allegations in the complaints filed
against the Petitioner, the Petitioner has time and again
encouraged and used the platform of its channel to foster
communal harmony, especially in the present critical time of
the COVID-19 pandemic. In fact, the Petitioner has been
strongly opposed to any propagation of any communalization
by various other political parties for their own vested interests.
It is inconceivable that the broadcast aired on 21 April 2020 in
relation to the Palghar incident could have incited any
communal tension and it is apparent that only one political
party is taking offence on the broadcast.
13. The above-mentioned facts clearly demonstrate that a
prominent national level political party and its members
harbor ill-well, hatred and personal vendetta against the
Petitioner. The complaints have been filed and FIRs registered
with the sole intention to wreak vengeance against the
Petitioner on account of personal animosity of the Chief of the
Congress against the Petitioner for the following reasons:
(i)    The Petitioner's news channels have been at the
forefront for seeking justice for the Palghar victims,
including    posing   tough   questions  to   the   State
Government in Maharashtra and its allies.
(ii)   The Petitioner has been instrumental in exposing fake
news spread by the Indian National Congress in relation
to the treatment of COVID-19 patients in Ahmedabad,
number of COVID-19 tests conducted by India,
availability of hydroxychloroquine in India etc.
14. Under these circumstances, the Petitioner begs to approach
this Hon’ble Court for urgent relief of quashing of the FIRs,
pending this petition, no coercive action against the Petitioner
in respect of the FIRs, including any FIRs which may be
registered pursuant to the present Complaints or which may be
filed in the future on the basis of the same broadcasts, on the
following amongst other grounds, which are without prejudice
(a)  FOR THAT various Complaints have been filed and FIRs
registered on politically motivated grounds, precipitated with
malice against the Petitioner. In particular, these complaints
have been filed at the behest of a political party to muzzle the
fundamental right to free speech and expression guaranteed
under Article 19 (1) (a) of the Constitution of India, 1950 and
to infringe upon his right to life and personal liberty
guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution.
(b)  FOR THAT the Complaints and the FIRs are a part of a well-
coordinated and orchestrated, widespread and malicious
campaign against the Petitioner by a political party, which is
evident from multiple complaints, filed within a short period
of time, in the country predominantly in States where that
very political party is in power either on its own or with
allies, with requests to register FIR’s and investigate the
matter.
(c) FOR THAT the members of the youth wing of the same
political party brutally attacked the Petitioner and his wife,
also an Editor of Republic TV, when they left the studio early
morning on 23 April 2020 in their car and even though the
Mumbai police personnel appointed as the security detail of
the Petitioner confirmed to the officers of the NM Joshi Marg
Police Station, who were witness to the attack, that the
attackers stated that they were members of the same political
party, the police refused to cooperate and diluted the
allegations in the FIR, indicating pressure from the State
(d) FOR THAT it is respectfully submitted that Complaints /
FIRs ought not to lodged to gag the media and prevent
freedom of the press, which is a fundamental right under the
Constitution of India.
(e) FOR THAT the Complaints and the FIRs contain baseless
and unsubstantiated allegations which are not borne out from
the broadcasts aired on the Petitioner's news channels in
relation to the Palghar incident.
(f) FOR THAT the allegations in the Complaints and the FIRs
are merely conjectures and surmises based on a complete and
vindictive misreading of only a miniscule part of the
broadcast.
(g) FOR THAT the Complaints and FIRs have been filed in
quick succession against the Petitioner in various parts of the
country.
(h) FOR THAT the Petitioner has every right to debate upon to
the unfortunate Palghar incident, which is a matter of public
importance involving murder of two priests and their driver
by a frenzy mob in the presence of more than 10 police
personnel .
(i) FOR THAT none of the ingredients of the offences as
mentioned in the complaint and the FIR are made out and the
present is a fit case for this Hon’ble Court to quash all such
FIR’s in the interests of justice.
(j)  FOR THAT this Hon’ble Court has taken the view in
Satinder Singh Bhasin Vs. Government (NCT of Delhi) &
Others [2019 (10) SCC 800] that in cases where there are a
group of cases in different States, this Hon’ble Court can
exercise jurisdiction under Article 32 of the Constitution and
grant necessary relief.
(k)  FOR THAT multiple Complaints and FIRs have been
filed/registered against the Petitioner before various police
stations across the country. The Petitioner would not be in a
position to individually approach each such court, apart from
the fact that there may be conflicting orders of various courts.
15. No other application is filed by the Petitioner in this Hon’ble
court or the Hon’ble Supreme court touching the subject
matter of the present application.
16.   The Petitioner craves leave to produce additional documents in
support of this application as and when required.
This Hon'ble Court may be pleased to issue the following prayers:
The Petitioner, therefore, prays that-
(a)   Issue    a   writ   of   certiorari quashing    the  following
Complaints/FIRs filed against the Petitioner as mentioned in
(b)   Issue a writ of mandamus to the effect that no cognizance of
any complaint would be taken by any court nor any FIR
registered by the police on the cause of action in the present
(c)   Issue a writ of mandamus directing the Union of India to
provide adequate safety and security to the Petitioner and his
family members and his family and his colleagues at Republic
TV/R. Bharat at various locations in the country. Accordingly,
it is just and expedient that the Petitioner seeks appropriate
protection from the Central Government to the offices of the
Petitioner in New Delhi and Mumbai.; AND/OR
(d)   Issue or pass any writ, direction or order which this Hon’ble
Court may deem fit and proper under the facts and
circumstances of the case.
I, Arnab Goswami working for gaint NBW building,
bombay dyeing mill compound, pb marg, worli, mumbai-
400025, R/o , do hereby solemnly affirm and state as under:
1. That I am Petitioner in this case and as such I am
well acquainted with the facts of the case. Hence, I
am competent to swear this affidavit.
2. That I have read and understood the contents of
the accompanying Synopsis and List of Dates
(Pgs. A to     A     ) and the contents of the Writ
Petition (Pgs.    1 to    19     ) and accompanying
I.A.s. I say that the same are true and correct to my
knowledge and best belief and nothing material has
been concealed therefrom.
3. That the annexures are true copies of their
respective originals.
Verified at              on this the 23____ day of
2020, that the content of the above Affidavit are true to
my knowledge and best belief. No part of it is false and
nothing material has been concealed therefrom.