For the petitioner:      Mr. Ankush Dass Sood, Sr. Advocate,
rt        with Ms. Leena Guleria and Mr.
For the respondents:     Mr. Anup Rattan, Advocate General
with Mr. Rakesh Dhaulta, Additional
Advocate General, for respondent Nos.
1 to 3 and 5 to 7­State.
ig  h                        Mr. V.B. Verma, Advocate, for
respondent No. 4.
Present in Person.
The above PIL has been filed highlighting the in­
discriminate and haphazard constructions, including
multi­storeyed buildings, on either side of the road
stretching an area of 6 Kilometers between Village Kheel
Jhalsi to Village Kainthari (including Village Koro) in
In our order dated 27.09.2022, we have recorded
that in the Affidavit of the Chief Secretary, it was can­
didly stated that the area in which the construction activi­
ties are reported is not covered under the provisions of the
Himachal Pradesh Town and Country Planning Act, 1977
(hereinafter referred to as “the Act”) and does not fall in
any planning area. The said Affidavit further stated that
a Committee was appointed to ascertain the quantum and
ig  hnature of construction activities and the Committee was
directed to submit a fact finding inquiry report. In the re­
H    port submitted by the Committee, it was inter alia stated
that no department or authority is vested with the powers
to grant sanction for construction of buildings in the said
area, at present. The said report further stated that the
joint site inspection was carried out by the Committee and
it was observed that multi­storeyed buildings have come
up on either side of the said road ranging from 4 to 9
storeys for different uses, such as residential and commer­
cial/tourism. Paragraphs 6 to 8 of the said order dated
27.09.2022 read as follows:­
We have also perused the affidavits filed by the Di­
rector, Town & Country Planning Department. HP on
behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2, the Deputy Commis­
sioner, Solan on behalf of respondent No.3, Member Sec­
retary, H.P State Pollution Control Board on behalf of
ourespondent No.4, Conservator, Forest Circle, Solan on
behalf of respondent No.5. The stand of the respondents
in the said affidavits is essentially that there are no reg­
ulations in place in respect of the area of 6 kilometers be­
tween Village Kheel Jhalsi to Village Kainthari (includ­
C       ing village Koro) which is the subject matter of the
present writ petition and therefore construction activities
ig  h         in the area is not being regulated. From the stand of the
respondents, it appears that constructions can be carried
out in the area in question with impunity and at the
whims and fancies of the owners/developers. None of the
H             affidavits deal with the issue of cutting and chopping of
hills which are ecologically sensitive zones and affect the
environment.
7.    We are constrained to observe that the stand of the
respondents clearly brings out the sorry state of affairs
and shocks the conscience of the Court. The stand of the
respondents suggests that despite the constructions/con­
struction activities being carried out by cutting and
chopping hills in the subject area, no action can be taken
unless the area falls in planning area. Such stand can­
not be countenanced.
Having regard to the stand of the respondents and
considering the public interest involved in the matter,
we find that if the stand of the respondents is accepted,
there would be several areas in the State of Himachal
Pradesh where constructions can be carried out with im­
punity by cutting and chopping of hills, as has been
done in the present case. We therefore propose to expand
the scope of this Public Interest Litigation to include the
entire State of Himachal Pradesh, so as to ensure that
the constructions and, in particular, constructions by
cutting and chopping of Hills, is regulated by the Au­
thorities.”
Thus, by the aforesaid order dated 27.09.2022, we
ig  hhave extended the scope of the above PIL to include
the entire State of Himachal Pradesh, so as to ensure
H    that the constructions/development activities, in par­
ticular, by cutting and chopping the hills, is regulated
by the State and its functionaries.
3.         We have heard the matter from time to time
on various dates. Having regard to the importance of
the issue involved, we deem it necessary to monitor the
actions of the State authorities as also the compliances
of the directions that we have issued by this order and
earlier orders as also such directions that may be is­
sued in future dates. Hence, we issue Rule. Learned
Counsel for the respective Respondents waive service.
Situate in the lap of Himalayan ranges, the
State of Himachal Pradesh is a region of scenic splen­
dor offering multi­textured display of snow­clad moun­
tains, deep gorges, thickly forested valleys, large lakes,
terraced fields and cascading streams. The State, how­
ever, is one of the most multi­hazard prone regions of
India, owing to its sensitive ecology and geology. About
ig  h1/3rd area of the State falls under Zone­V or the very­
high damage zone and about 2/3rd of the area of the
H    State falls under Zone­IV or the high damage zone.
About 97% of the total geographical area of the State is
prone to landslides.
5.        Over the years, there has been an increase
in the demand for construction activities in the State.
Majority of such constructions are being carried out in
rural areas. A large number of building collapses have
occurred in various regions of the State. Poor quality of
constructions is one of the reasons. A building height
that does not take into account the slope stability and
sub­soil conditions, would be an unsafe building. Un­
controlled and unsafe construction of buildings over the
years over slopes, by cutting hills which mostly in­
volves felling of trees, lead to landslides and has cre­
ated extremely vulnerable environment in the State.
Large number of trees are being felled or damaged in
the process of carrying out such constructions, which
adversely impacts the environment and ecology of the
ig  harea.
6.        Reckless and excessive unsafe constructions
H    by cutting hills and felling of trees which are the root
cause of landslides, not only destroy property, but take
a toll on human lives. Landslides are therefore mostly
man­made in the fragile area of this mountain State.
Unregulated, indiscriminate and hazardous construc­
tions of buildings, particularly, by cutting and chopping
of hills, which are ecologically sensitive zones, by ex­
ploitation of natural resources, makes it vulnerable to
disasters. For conservation and preservation of envi­
ronment, the principle of sustainable development
must be followed. We note that by various Notifications
dated 23 August 2016, the powers of the Director, Town
and Country Planning, have been extended to each of
the Districts of the State of Himachal Pradesh.
Reference may be made to Articles 48A and
51A(g) of the Constitution. Article 48A of the Constitu­
tion mandates that the State shall endeavour to protect
and improve the environment and to safeguard the
ig  hforests and wildlife of the country. Article 51A(g) of the
Constitution enjoins upon the Indian citizens a funda­
H    mental duty to protect and improve the natural envi­
ronment including forests, lakes, rivers and wild life
and to have compassion for living creatures.
8.        Development activities in the State are
therefore required to be compatible with the mountain
eco­systems considering aspects such as fragility, cli­
matic peculiarities, carrying capacity, etc.               The term
environment encompasses air, water, soil, flora and
and is a complex mix of various inter relationships,
fauna, communities, their habitats and livelihoods, etc.
which these facets of environment have amongst one
another. These need to be preserved not only for the
present generation, but for our future generations. We
owe it to them!
In Citizens For Green Doon & Ors vs.
Union of India & Ors, 2021 SCC OnLine SC 1243,
a three­judge Bench of the Supreme Court has consid­
ered the Principles of Sustainable Development and
ig  hEnvironment Rule of Law. Speaking for the Bench, His
Lordship Dr Justice Chandrachud, has stated in para­
H    graphs 30 to 37 as under:
“30. E.1 Principles of Sustainable Development and En­
vironment Rule of Law
31. Sustainable development is a common benchmark through
which all development projects are judged. Arguably finding
its origin in global policy from the Bruntland Report in 1987,
it is often defined as “development that meets the needs of the
present without compromising the ability of future generations
to meet their own needs”. Adopted globally as the standard for
development by nations, it is the bedrock upon which the Sus­
tainable Development Goals have been laid out. Their latest it­
eration, consisting of 17 SDGs, was adopted by all United Na­
tions member States in 2015. Titled as the “2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, these SDGs are broad, with their
focus being on overall development of society in a manner
which comports with environmental preservation now and in
trust for the future. SDG13 specifically focuses on “Climate
Action”, which is to be balanced with the other SDGs (such as
SDG9, which encourages “Industry, Innovation and Infra­
structure”).
32. The principle of sustainable development has found consis­
tent application in matters of environmental law. Sustainable
development has a multidimensional approach, with a focus
on the development of the economy, protection of individual
C  rights and environmental concerns, while ensuring both inter
and intra­generational equity. This allows the principle of
ig  h   sustainable development to look beyond creating policy goals
(which necessarily seek specific outcomes) towards creating
policy approaches (which rather seek to provide better frame­
works). The principle of sustainable development has been ex­
H       plicitly recognized in multiple judgments of this Court.
33. In Indian Council for Enviro­Legal Action v. Union of In­
dia, a three­judge Bench of this Court described the principle
of sustainable development in the following terms:
“31...While economic development should not be allowed
to take place at the cost of ecology or by causing wide­
spread environment destruction and violation; at the
same time, the necessity to preserve ecology and environ­
ment should not hamper economic and other develop­
ments. Both development and environment must go hand
in hand, in other words, there should not be development
at the cost of environment and vice versa, but there
should be development while taking due care and ensur­
ing the protection of environment. This is sought to be
achieved by issuing notifications like the present, relat­
ing to developmental activities being carried out in such
a way so that unnecessary environmental degradation
does not take place. In other words, in order to prevent
ecological imbalance and degradation that developmen­
ou tal activity is sought to be regulated.”
34. In Essar Oil Ltd. v. Halar Utkarsh Samiti, a two­judge
Bench of this Court referred to the Stockholm Declaration
while elucidating on the principle of sustainable development.
It noted that while socio­economic needs could be fulfilled
C  through development, environmental concerns will always re­
main. However, these concerns should not be seen as a dead­
ig  h   lock between development and the environment but as an op­
portunity to harmonize both, through the principle of sustain­
able development. Speaking through Justice Ruma Pal, this
Court observed:
H           “27. This, therefore, is the aim, namely, to balance eco­
nomic and social needs on the one hand with environmen­
tal considerations on the other. But in a sense all develop­
ment is an environmental threat. Indeed, the very existence
of humanity and the rapid increase in the population to­
gether with consequential demands to sustain the popula­
tion has resulted in the concreting of open lands, cutting
down of forests, the filling up of lakes and pollution of wa­
ter resources and the very air which we breathe. However,
there need not necessarily be a deadlock between develop­
ment on the one hand and the environment on the other.
The objective of all laws on environment should be to cre­
ate harmony between the two since neither one can be sac­
rificed at the altar of the other...”
35. In N.D. Jayal v. Union of India, a three­judge Bench held that
a balance between developmental activities and environmental pro­
tection could only be maintained through the principle of sustain­
able development. Doing this was held to be necessary, without
which the future generations could be in jeopardy. Justice S Rajen­
dra Babu (speaking for himself and Justice Mathur) held:
“22. Before adverting to other issues, certain aspects pertaining
to the preservation of ecology and development have to be no­
ticed. In Vellore Citizen’' Welfare Forum v. Union of India
[(1996) 5 SCC 647] and in M.C. Mehta v. Union of India
C   [(2002) 4 SCC 356] it was observed that the balance between en­
vironmental protection and developmental activities could only
ig  h    be maintained by strictly following the principle of “sustainable
development”. This is a development strategy that caters to the
needs of the present without negotiating the ability of upcoming
generations to satisfy their needs. The strict observance of sus­
H        tainable development will put us on a path that ensures devel­
opment while protecting the environment, a path that works for
all peoples and for all generations. It is a guarantee to the
present and a bequeath to the future. All environment­related
developmental activities should benefit more people while
maintaining the environmental balance. This could be ensured
only by strict adherence to sustainable development without
which life of the coming generations will be in jeopardy.”
36. Justice Babu also noted that while the right to a clean environ­
ment is guaranteed as an intrinsic part of the fundamental right to
life and personal liberty, the right to development can also be de­
clared as a component of Article 21:                    .P.
“24. The right to development cannot be treated as a mere
right to economic betterment or cannot be limited as a mis­
nomer to simple construction activities. The right to develop­
ment encompasses much more than economic well­being, and
includes within its definition the guarantee of fundamental
human rights. The “development” is not related only to the
growth of GNP. In the classic work, Development As Free­
dom, the Nobel prize winner Amartya Sen pointed out that
“the issue of development cannot be separated from the con­
ceptual framework of human right”. This idea is also part of
the UN Declaration on the Right to Development. The right to
development includes the whole spectrum of civil, cultural,
C      economic, political and social process, for the improvement of
people’' well­being and realization of their full potential. It is
ig  h        an integral part of human rights. Of course, construction of a
dam or a mega project is definitely an attempt to achieve the
goal of wholesome development. Such works could very well
be treated as integral component for development.”
H    37. More recently, in Rajeev Suri v. Delhi, a three judge Bench of this
Court had to decide on the permissibility of the Central Vista Project.
In considering the use of the principle of sustainable development,
Justice A M Khanwilkar observed that the principle of sustainable
development necessarily incorporates within it the principle of devel­
opment ­ development which is sustainable and not environmentally
degrading. He holds thus:
“507. The principle of sustainable development and precau­
tionary principle need to be understood in a proper context.
The expression “sustainable development” incorporates a
wide meaning within its fold. It contemplates that develop­
ment ought to be sustainable with the idea of preservation of
natural environment for present and future generations. It
would not be without significance to note that sustainable
development is indeed a principle of development— it posits
controlled development. The primary requirement underly­
ing this principle is to ensure that every development work is
sustainable; and this requirement of sustainability demands
that the first attempt of every agency enforcing environmen­
tal rule of law in the country ought to be to alleviate environ­
mental concerns by proper mitigating measures. The future
generations have an equal stake in the environment and de­
velopment. They are as much entitled to a developed society
C  as they are to an environmentally secure society. By Declara­
tion on the Right to Development, 1986, the United Nations
ig  h   has given express recognition to a right to development. Arti­
cle 1 of the Declaration defines this right as:
“1. The right to development is an inalienable human right
by virtue of which every human person and all peoples are
H       entitled to participate in, contribute to, and enjoy economic,
social, cultural and political development, in which all hu­
man rights and fundamental freedoms can be fully real­
ized.”
508. The right to development, thus, is intrinsically con­
nected to the preservance of a dignified life. It is not limited
to the idea of infrastructural development, rather, it entails
human development as the basis of all development. The ju­
risprudence in environmental matters must acknowledge
that there is immense inter­dependence between right to de­
velopment and right to natural environment. In Interna­
tional Law and Sustainable Development, Arjun Sengupta
in the chapter “Implementing the Right to Development [In­
ternational Law and Sustainable Development— Principles
and Practice, Edn. 2004, pg. 354]” notes thus:
“... Two rights are interdependent if the level of enjoy­
ment of one is dependent on the level of enjoyment of the
In paragraph 44 of the judgment, His Lordship said:
ou In Bengaluru Development Authority v. Sudhakar
Hegde48, a two­judge Bench of this Court observed that there
was no winner in environmental litigation, since both ­ develop­
ment and protection of environment ­ are necessary. The Court
clarified that a framework created by environmental rule of law
C  has to balance both these considerations by creating transparent
and accountable institutions, while allowing for participatory
ig  h        democracy. Justice DY Chandrachud, speaking for the Court,
“94. The adversarial system is, by its nature, rights based.
H                    In the quest for justice, it is not uncommon to postulate a
winning side and a losing side. In matters of the environ­
ment and development however, there is no trade­off be­
tween the two. The protection of the environment is an in­
herent    component       of   development       and      growth.
95. The protection of the environment is premised not only
on the active role of courts, but also on robust institutional
frameworks within which every stakeholder complies with
its duty to ensure sustainable development. A framework
of environmental governance committed to the rule of law
requires a regime which has effective, accountable and
transparent institutions. Equally important is responsive,
inclusive, participatory and representative decision­mak­
ing. Environmental governance is founded on the rule of
law and emerges from the values of our Constitution.
Where the health of the environment is key to preserving
the right to life as a constitutionally recognised value un­
der Article 21 of the Constitution, proper structures for en­
vironmental decision­ making find expression in the guar­
antee against arbitrary action and the affirmative duty of
fair treatment under Article 14 of the Constitution. Sus­
tainable development is premised not merely on the redres­
sal of the failure of democratic institutions in the protec­
tion of the environment, but ensuring that such failures do
C     not take place.”
ig  h11.        Having noticed the law laid down by the
Supreme Court in the above judgment on issue of sus­
tainable development, let us now examine the statu­
H    tory framework and some of the provisions in relation
to development/constructions in the State of Himachal
Pradesh viz. (1) Himachal Pradesh Town and Country
Town and Country Planning Rules, 2014 (hereinafter
referred to as “the Rules”), and (3) Himachal Pradesh
Panchayati Raj Act, 1994 (hereinafter referred to as
The Himachal Pradesh Town and Country Plan­
The preamble and some of the relevant sections of
the Act are reproduced hereunder:
“An Act to make provision for planning and development and use
of land; to make better provision for the preparation of develop­
ment plans and sectoral plans with a view to ensuring that town
planning schemes are made in a proper manner and execution is
made effective; to constitute the Town and Country and Develop­
ment Authority for proper implementation town and country de­
C velopment plan; to provide for development and administration
of special areas through the Special Area Development Authority;
to make provision for the compulsory acquisition of land re­
ig  h      quired for the development pans and for purposes connected with
the matters aforesaid”.
H        1. Short title, extent, commencement and application –
(2) It extends to the whole of the State of Himachal
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the State Gov­
ernment may, by notification, appoint and different
dates may be appointed for different areas and for dif­
ferent provision of this Act.
(3A) It shall apply to a real estate project proposed to
be developed on an area of more than 2500 M2 for
plotting or plotting and construction of apartment or
any building or buildings having more than eight
apartments for the purpose of selling outside the noti­
fied planning areas or special areas constituted under
this Act and such areas shall be deemed to be plan­
ning areas.
(4) Nothing in this Act shall apply to –
Thus, it is required to be noted that real estate projects
proposed to be developed on an area of more than 2500 sq
mts and buildings having more than eight apartments for
the purpose of selling outside the notified planning areas
or special areas constituted under this Act are ‘deemed’ to
be planning areas.
ig  h      4. Establishment of regions. – (1) The State Gov­
ernment may, by notification,­
H          (a) declare any area in the State to be a region for the purpose
(b) define the limits of such area; and
(c) specify the name by which such region shall be
known.
5. Director to prepare regional plan.­ Subject to the
provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, it
shall be the duty of the Director:­
(i)    to carry out a survey of the regions;
(ii) to prepare an existing land use map indicating the natural haz­
ard proneness of the areas; and
(iii) to prepare a regional plan keeping in view the regulation for
land use zoning for natural hazard prone area.
7. Contents of regional plan,­ The regional shall indi­
cate the manner in which land in the region should be
used, the phasing of development, the net work of com­
munication and transport, the proposals for conservation
and    development
ig  h       (a) allocation of land to such purposes as residen­
tial, industrial, agricultural or as forests or for mineral
exploitation;
(e) allocation of areas to be developed as “Special
Areas” wherein new towns, townships, large industrial
estates or any other type of large development projects
may be established.
(f) landscaping and preservation of areas in their
natural state;
10. Restriction on use of land or development
thereof.­ (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other
law for the time being in force, on or after the date of publication of
the draft regional plan, no person, authority, department of Govern­
ment or any other person shall change the sue of land for any pur­
pose other than agriculture, or carry out any development in respect
of any land contrary to the provisions of the draft plan, without the
prior approval of the Director or any officer next to him authorized
by the Director, in this behalf.
13. Planning Area.­ (1) The State Government may, by notifica­
tion, constitute planning areas for the purposes of this Act and define
ig  h    the limits thereof
15. Existing Land use Maps. – (1) The Director shall carry
H   out the survey and prepare an existing land use map and forthwith pub­
lish the same in such manner as may be prescribed together with public
notice of the preparation of the map and of the place or places where the
copies may be inspected, inviting objections and suggestions in writing
from any person with respect thereto within thirty days from the date of
publication of such notice.
15­A. Freezing of land use pending preparation of existing
land use map under section 15.­ (1) Wherever the State Govern­
ment, after the constitution of the planning area under section 13 or
the special planning area under section 66 but before the publica­
tion of the existing land use map under section 15, is satisfied that
in any planning area or part thereof or the special area or part
thereof, as the case may be, the change of the land use on any build­
ing operation therein­
(a) is likely to cause injurious disturbances of the surface or
any land or soil, or is considered detrimental to the preser­
vation of the soil, prevention of land slips or protection
against erosion; or
(b) is likely to make it difficult to plan and develop the area
in question in accordance with the provisions of the Act;
the State Government may, by notification published in the
C freeze the existing land use, for a period not exceeding five
years.
ig  h(2) On the issuance of a notification under sub­section (1)­
(a) no person shall change the use of any land or carry
out any development of land (other than the change for the pur­
pose of agriculture without the written permission of the Direc­
(b) no local authority or officer or other authority shall,
notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for
the time being in force, grant permission for the change in
use of land without the written permission of the Director.
17. Interim development plan. – (1) As soon as may be, after
the declaration of a planning area, the Director shall, within
such time as may be necessary, prepare, after consultation with
local authorities concerned, if any, and submit to the State Gov­
ernment an interim development plan for the planning area or
any of its parts and such other area or areas contiguous or adja­
cent to the planning areas as the State Government may direct to
be included in the Interim Development Plan.
The interim development plan shall­
(a) indicate broadly the land use proposed in the planning
(b) allocate broadly areas or sector of land for­
(i) residential, industrial, commercial or agricultural
(e) make proposal for general landscaping and preserva­
tion of natural areas;
C      (g) propose broad based regulations for sectoral develop­
ment, by way of guide­lines, within each sector of the loca­
ig  h      tion, height, size of buildings and structures, open spaces,
court­yards and the use of which such buildings and
structures and land may be put including regulations for
façade control and sloping roof conforming to the hill ar­
H          chitecture and environs;
(j) indicate measures for flood control and protection
against land slide, prevention of air water pollution, dis­
posal of garbage and general environmental control.
18. Development plan – A development plan shall­
(a) indicate broadly the land use proposed in the planning areas;
19. Publication of draft development plan,­ (1) The Director
shall forth­with publish the draft development plan prepared un­
der section 18 in such manner as may be prescribed together with
notice of the preparation of the draft development plan and the
suggestions in writing from any person with respect thereto,
within thirty days form the date of publication of such notice.
Such notice shall specify in regard to the draft development plan
the following particulars, namely,­
21. Director to prepare sectoral plan.­ The Director may,
on his own motion, at any time after the publication of the de­
velopment plan, or thereafter, if so required by the State Gov­
ernment shall, within six months of such requisition, prepare
a sectoral plan.
25. Director to control land use,­ The overall control of devel­
opment and the use of land in the planning area shall, as from
the date of publication in the official Gazette of a notification by
ig  hthe State Government, vest in the Director.
27. Prohibition of development.­ After coming into opera­
tion of the development plan, no person shall change the use
of any land or carry out any development of land without the
H    permission in writing of the Director.
30. Application for permission for development by others, ­
(1) Any person, not being the Union Government, State Govern­
ment, a local authority or a special authority constituted under
this Act intending to carry out any development on any land,
shall make an application in writing to the Director for permis­
sion to carry out any development on any land, shall make an
application in writing to the Director for permission, in such
form and containing such particulars and accompanied by such
documents as may be prescribed.
30­A. Exemption from development in rural areas falling
within Planning or Special Areas,­ (1) Any person who
owns land in rural areas, falling within Planning or Special
Areas wherein neither Interim Development Plan nor Develop­
ment Plan has been notified, shall be exempted from permission
under this Act for the following development activities upto the
may            be            prescribed:­
(i) Residential activities such as farm­houses and residential
houses upto three storeys, cattle shed, toilet, septic tank,
kitchen, store, parking shed or garage and rain shelter;
(ii)Commercial activities such as basic commercial activities
like shops of general merchandise, cobbler, barber, tailoring,
fruit, vegetable, tea or sweet, eating places and dhabas, chemist
Cand farm produce sale depot;
(iii) Service Industries such as cottage or house­hold, service in­
ig  h dustries like carpentry, knitting, weaving, blacksmith, gold­
smith, atta­chakki with capacity upto five horse­power,water
mill, agriculture equipments or machinery repair,electrical,
electronic and house­hold appliances;
H     (iv) Public amenities such as public amenities like panchayat
offices, schools, mahila mandals, yuvak mandals, community
halls, post offices, dispensaries and clinics (including health,
veterinary and Indian System of Medicines) information tech­
nology kiosks, patwar khanas, guard huts, anganwaries, elec­
tricity and telephone installations and connections, roads and
paths, ropeways, water tanks, rain harvesting tanks,overhead
or underground water tanks, pump houses,check dams, tem­
ples,    churches,   mosques,    graveyards,cemeteries,cremation
grounds and other religious buildings, bathing ghats, crema­
tion shelters, rest sheds, baths,drainage,toilets,latrines, urinals,
posal bins, depots and other installations;
sewerage installations, wells, tube wells,baulies, garbage dis­
(v) Agriculture and horticulture related activities including
rain harvesting structures, milk chilling plant, farm level
godowns, seeds and fertilizer stores, farm clinics, pre­cooling
units, primary processing units, green houses and poly houses;
(vi) Heritage related activities such as lakes, reservoirs,dams,
baulies, wild life sanctuaries, cemeteries, graveyards,railway
lines.
(2) Any person who owns land in areas falling outside urbanis­
able areas, as shown in the Interim Development Plans or De­
velopment Plans of Planning or Special Areas, shall be ex­
empted from permission under this Act for the development ac­
tivities specified under sub­section (1) upto the limits as may be
ig  hprescribed.
31­A. Structural Stability Certificate.­ “The applicant shall
submit a Structural Stability Certificate of the building before
putting the same into use, in the manner prescribed including
H    soil investigation report and structural design basis report as
per provisions for safety against natural hazard.
66. Constitution of special areas, ­ (1) If any area, town or
township is designated as a special area in the regional plan
or if the State Government is otherwise satisfied that it is ex­
pedient in the public interest that any area, town or township
should be developed as a special area, it may, by notification,
designate the area as a special area, which shall be known by
such name as may be specified therein.
83­A. Restrictions on grant of Electricity, Water or Sewer­
age connection.­ No electricity, water or sewerage connection
shall be given to any person within the Planning or Special area
constituted under the Act, unless a No Objection Certificate has
been obtained by such person from the Director or the Special
Area Development Authority, as the case may be.
Himachal Pradesh Town and Country Planning Rules,
13. In the Planning Areas constituted under section 13 of the Act
and the Special Areas designated under section 66 of the Act,
where no Interim Development Plan (I.D.P.) or Development
Plan (D.P.) has been prepared either under section 17 or under
section 18 of the Act, the Director shall permit the sub­division of
land or change of land use or the development of land or con­
struction of buildings, apartments, colonies, as the case may be,
ig  hin conformity with the Regulations as given in Appendix­1 to 9 of
these rules.
14. In the Planning Areas constituted under section 13 of the Act
and the Special Areas designated under section 66 of the Act,
H    where Interim Development Plan or Development Plan has been
prepared either under section 17 or section 18 of the Act,
the Director shall permit sub­division of land or change of land
use or development of land or construction of buildings, apart­
ments, colonies, as the case may be, in conformity with the Regu­
lations contained in the Interim Development Plan or Develop­
ment Plan. In case Regulations as given in Appendix­ 1 to 9 are
not contained in the said Interim Development Plan or Develop­
ment Plan, the same shall be considered in addition to the Regu­
lations as contained in the Interim Development Plan or Devel­
opment Plan while granting permission by the Director.
18. The prescribed limits for the development activities exempted
from permission under section 30­A of the Act shall be as given
in Appendix­8 of these rules. For carrying out all the develop­
ment activities by Union Government or State Government or
Authority or a Local Authority or any person which are beyond
the prescribed limits shall apply for permission to the Director
under rule 15 and sub­rule (1) of rule 16 of these rules.
Appendix 8 referred to in Rules 13, 14 and 18 provides for
regulations of prescribed limits for development activities ex­
empted under Section 30­A of the HPT&CP Act, 1977.                       Ap­
pendix 8 reads thus:
1.      Residential Buildings and Farm Houses
(i) Maximum floor area                          600.00 M²
(ii) Maximum number of storeys             3 Nos +1 Parking
floor wherever feasible.
Note: The applicant may have a maximum floor area of 600.00
M² distributed over not more than three storeys.
(i) Maximum floor area             of       100.00 M²
(ii) Maximum number of storeys
(ii) Minimum access
For loading, un­loading and parking
ou purpose suitable community parking space
has to be arranged by the Shop owners.
Note: The applicant may have a maximum floor area of 100.00
M² distributed over not more than two storeys.
(i) Maximum floor area              100.00 M²
(ii) Number of storeys              1 No.
H   (iv) Parking             For loading, un­loading and parking
purpose suitable community parking
space shall have to be ensured by the
(i) Maximum floor area        As per requirement of the
particular amenity.
(ii) Maximum Number of storeys             3 Nos.
(iii) Minimum access                       3.00 M
@0.50 to 1.50 equivalent car space per
100 M² of floor area.             .
0.20 Hectare to 1.60 Hectare is
Desirable, however, as peravailability
(i) Structural safety and seismic proofing including soil inves­
tigation should be ensured.
(ii) Attic and basement shall be counted as a storey.
(iii) Sloping roof shall have to be ensured. (iv) No construction
shall be raised within a distance of 3.00 Metre from the edge of
C  the roads in respect of village roads,
(v) No construction shall be raised within the controlled width
of major District roads.
ig  h        (vi) Minimum Set Back of 3.00 M from the controlled width of
National Highways, State Highways and Scheduled Roads
under the Himachal Pradesh Road Side Land Control Act,
1968 shall be kept.
H            (vii) Minimum Set Back of 2.00 M in front and 1.50 M in sides
and rear side and from the adjoining property, Government
land and 5.00 M from Forest land shall have to be main­
tained.
(viii) Adequate distance from all the electric lines including
HT/LT lines as per the requirement of Himachal Pradesh
State Electricity Board Limited (HPSEB Ltd.) Rules shall
have to be maintained. A Self Declaration/Certificate to this
effect shall be submitted by the applicant in this regard
(ix) The applicant shall endeavor to develop the colony along
the slopes of hill without much disturbance to the natural hill
profile. In no case hill cut at any level shall not exceed 3.50
(x) Provision of Rain Water Harvesting structure @ 20 Liters
per M² of roof area should be made.
(xi) Septic Tank and Soak Pit should be constructed.
(xii) Preference shall be given for Solar Passive Building Design.
(xiii) Locational attributes, aesthetics, local building material,
heritage and environmental aspects should also be taken into
account. Remarks:
(i) The benefit of above exemptions shall only be available to the resi­
dents and original inhabitants of the areas, who owned the property at
the time of commencement of the Act and their natural heirs only and
not to the persons who purchased land in rural areas.
(ii) Any person intending to carry out development activities exempted
under section 30­A of the Himachal Pradesh Town and Country Plan­
ning Act, 1977 (Act No. 12 of 1977) shall give information on simple pa­
per alongwith a copy of original jamabandi and original tatima to the
concerned Panchayay before carrying out development activities. The
concerned Panchayat after verifying the documents, shall grant No Ob­
H   jection Certificate for releasing Service Connections or Completion Cer­
tificate to the applicant under Section 83­A of the Himachal Pradesh
Town and Country Planning Act, 1977 (Act No. 12 of 1977) for obtain­
ing service connections.
(iii) In case of any constraints as per the site conditions in maintaining
setbacks, or any other regulations the Director or the concerned of­
ficer vested with the powers of the Director may relax the same. In
case of any clarification with reference to any proviso or if there is
no any specific provision, the provisions as envisaged in the Urban
and Regional Development Plans Formulation and (URDPFI)
Guidelines 2014 of the Government of India or the National Build­
ing Code of India shall have to be adhered to.             .P.
41. The Regulations for development of Real Estate Projects shall be as
specified in Appendix­7.
Functions of the Gram Panchayat,­ (1) The Gram Pan­
chayat shall perform the functions specified in Schedule­I.
Schedule­I above, provides the list of functions of the Gram
Panchayats. One of the functions of the Gram Panchayat listed
at item (5) of Schedule­I, interalia speaks of regulating the con­
struction of buildings.
ig  h      14. Control on erection of buildings.­ (1) The Gram Pan­
chayat, after preparing a model plan for the village which has
been approved by the Gram Sabha and the prescribed authority
H          by written order, may­
(a) direct that before erecting, re­erecting or adding to a building,
wall or a platform every person shall present an application to
the Gram Panchayat and that no building, wall or platform
shall be erected, re­erected or added to in conflict with the model
plan or in advance of an alignment to be specified on land de­
marcated by the Gram Panchayat; and
(b) specify the space which shall intervene between any new or
enlarged building and the building next adjacent or any road in
the village.
(2) The Gram Panchayat shall have the power to modify, return
for modification or reject the proposed plan for erection, re­erec­
tion or addition to a building, wall, or platform.
(3) Where any building, wall or platform has been erected, re­
erected or added to in contravention of any order passed under
sub­section (1), the Pradhan may report to the Sub­Divisional
Officer and the said Officer may make an order­
(i) directing that the work done or so much of the same as has
been executed in contravention of the order passed under sub­sec­
tion (1) shall be demolished by the owner of the building, wall or
platform or that it shall be altered by him to the satisfaction of
the Gram Panchayat within such time as may be fixed by him; or
(ii) directing that the work done or so much of the same as has
been executed in contravention of the order passed under sub­sec­
tion (1) shall be demolished or altered by the Gram Panchayat at
ig  hthe expense of the owner within such time as may be fixed by
Provided that the Sub­Divisional Officer shall not make
any such order without giving the owner full opportunity of ad­
H    ducing evidence and of being heard.
184. Preparation of Development Plan,­ (1) Every Panchayat
shall prepare every year a development plan to perform functions
specified in Schedule­I and Schedule­II and such other functions
as             may            be            specified                by
the State Government, in so far as the Panchayat funds allow to
perform such functions within its respective area.
185. District Planning Committee.­(1) The Government shall
constitute in every district a District Planning Committee to
consolidate the plans prepared by the Zilla Parishad, Panchayat
Samitis, Gram Panchayats, Municipalities in the district and to
prepare a draft development plan for the district as a whole.
We are informed that presently there are 12 Zilla Parishads,
78 Panchayat Samitis and 3226 Gram Panchayats in the
Having perused the above provisions, we find that for
lands falling within urbanisable areas shown in Interim De­
velopment Plan/Development Plan of a planning area or spe­
cial area, development activities can be regulated. In rural
areas falling within planning areas and special areas, where
there is no Interim Development Plan/Development Plan in
place, development activities are regulated only to a limited
extent, in that, exemptions are provided from applying for
H   permission for development activities in the said areas vide
Section 30­A read with Rule 18 and Appendix 8 to the Rules.
The only provision made in respect of these areas (i.e where
are notified planning area or notified special area, but there
is no Interim Development Plan/Development Plan in place)
is found in Regulation 6 (under head “Remarks”) of Appendix
A, wherein it is provided that a person intending to carry out
development activities exempted under section 30­A is re­
quired to give information on simple paper alongwith copy of
jamabandi and tantima to the concerned panchayat before
carrying out development activities. It is it further provided
therein that the service connections (i.e. water, electricity or
sewerage connections) or Completion Certificate shall not be
issued unless a “No Objection Certificate” is issued by the
concerned Gram Panchayat as provided under section 83­A of
the Act. Under Regulation 6(1) of Appendix A (under the
head ‘Remarks)’, it is stated that the benefit of exemptions
shall only be available to the residents and original inhabi­
tants of the areas, who owned the property at the time of
commencement of the Act and their natural heirs only and
not to the persons who purchased land in rural areas. It is
provided/clarified that for all development activities ex­
empted from permission under section 30­A, ‘beyond’ the pre­
scribed limits/restrictions in Appendix 8 of the Rules, are re­
quired to apply for permission to the Director under rule 15
and sub­rule (1) of rule 16 of the Rules. It is also required to
H   be noted that the provisions of the Panchayati Raj Act envis­
age preparation of a model plan and Development Plan. We
are told that no such model plan or Development Plan is in
place at present and the provisions of the Panchayati Raj Act
have remained on paper.      However, what is rather worri­
some, is that the areas beyond planning areas and special ar­
eas are left totally unregulated. The 6­kilometer stretch,
which is the subject matter of the PIL, as filed, is a case in
point. It is admitted in the Affidavit of the Chief Secretary
that no department or authority is vested with the powers to
grant sanction for construction of buildings in the said area.
The said report of the fact­finding Committee appointed by
the Government brings out that multi­storeyed buildings
have come up on either side of the road, ranging from 4 to 9
storeys for different uses, such as residential and commer­
cial/tourism. From the photographs annexed to the PIL from
page 84 onwards, it appears that hills have been cut and
trees felled for the purposes of constructing the buildings.
In the facts and circumstances of the case, we find
that there has been inaction and failure on the part of the
State Government and its authorities, including the local au­
thorities, to control the haphazard and indiscriminate develop­
ment activities and in discharging their statutory duties under
H   the Act, Rules, the Panchayati Raj Act and the Environment
(Protection) Act, 1988 and the constitutional obligations under
Article 48­A of the Constitution of India. The State, as a
trustee, is under a legal duty to protect the natural resources
and the environment and prevent its degradation under the
‘Public Trust Doctrine’. Moreover, there has been non­obser­
vance of principles of ‘sustainable development’ as well as ‘pre­
cautionary principle” by the State which envisages that if
there is risk of severe damage to humans and environment, ab­
sence of incontrovertible conclusive or definite scientific proof
would not be a reason for inaction.
We find that there are several areas in the State
where constructions/development activities are being carried
out with impunity at the whims and fancies of the owner/de­
veloper without there being any regulations in place. The
Court cannot turn a blind eye and is constrained to step in, so
as to ensure that development activities in the State, including
by cutting hills, are regulated and the principle of sustainable
development is adhered to. Hence, we pass the following in­
The Director, Town and Country Planning, shall take
steps to prepare and publish the draft Regional Plans
for all the Districts in the State of Himachal Pradesh
(which Districts are already notified as ‘regions’ under
various Notifications issued, as far back as on 23 Au­
gust, 2016), after carrying out necessary survey of the
regions and preparing an existing land use map (inter­
alia indicating the natural hazard prone areas), which
exercise the Director is duty bound to carry out under
Section 5 of the Act. We direct that the Regional Plans
shall inter alia also indicate/provide for “No Develop­
ment Zones” for conservation and preservation of areas
in their natural state, particularly the hills. This exer­
cise shall be carried out and completed within a period
of 1 year from today. We are told that in respect of two
Districts ie. Solan and Lahaul & Spiti, steps have al­
ready been taken for preparation of the Regional Plans.
The State Government shall take immediate steps to
identify areas and issue appropriate Notifications so as
to include such areas (as may be specified in the said
Notifications), as planning areas and special areas (so
as to extend the existing planning areas and special ar­
eas already notified) and/or constitute further planning
C       areas under Section 13(1) and designate further special
areas under Section 66(1) of the Act (apart from the 55
ig  h        notified planning areas and 35 notified special areas),
more particularly areas which have high potential of
development/growth, like tourists areas and areas hav­
ing proximity with tourist areas, as also areas having
H            valley views. This shall be done within a period of 4
months from today.
(iii)   After the Notifications are issued as directed in clause
(ii) above, the Director shall prepare and publish or
cause to be prepared and published (through Special
Area Development Authorities in special areas, if per­
missible) appropriate Interim Development Plans/De­
velopment Plans in respect of these areas or part thereof
after following due process including consultation with
the local authorities, if any. This exercise shall be com­
pleted within 4 months from the date of issuance of the
Notifications as directed in clause (ii) above. The In­
terim Development Plans/Development shall inter alia
also indicate/provide for “No Development Zones” for
conservation and preservation of areas in their natural
state, particularly the hills/hills having valley views.
In respect of those areas which are already notified as
planning areas or special areas, but there is no Interim
Development Plans/Development Plans in place, the Di­
rector shall prepare and publish or cause to be prepared
and published (through Special Area Development Au­
thorities in special areas, if permissible) appropriate In­
terim Development Plan/Development Plan in these ar­
eas or part thereof after following due process including
C      consultation with the local authorities, if any. The In­
terim Development Plans/Development shall inter alia
ig  h       also indicate/provide for “No Development Zones” for
conservation and preservation of areas in their natural
state, particularly the hills/hills having valley views.
This exercise shall in the first instance be carried out for
H           at least 3 Districts having high potential of develop­
ment/growth and shall be completed within 6 months
from today. In rest of the Districts, this exercise shall be
completed within 1 year from today. We are told that
there is already an Draft Development Plan for Shimla
District and proceedings in respect whereof are now
pending before the Supreme Court and NGT.
(v)     After the Development Plans are notified and published,
steps may be taken to prepare and publish Sectoral
Plans, where deemed necessary.
The State Government is directed to frame a policy doc­
ument in respect of conservation and preservation of
hills and cutting of hills in the State, in consultation
with Department of Environment, Science and Technol­
ogy and such other Departments, as may be necessary,
including the Pollution Control Board. This shall be
done within 2 months from today. We direct that the
Pollution Control Board shall play an active role in
bring out the above policy document. This direction is
necessary as we find that in the affidavit in reply filed
by the Pollution Control Board, it has sought to extri­
cate itself, as if it has no role to play, despite the specific
stand of the petitioner that the constructions were being
carried out by cutting of hills.
We direct that there shall be no cutting of hills in the
ig  h        entire State of Himachal Pradesh, unless permission is
obtained from the Director, who shall call for a report
and “No Objection Certificate” from the Pollution Con­
trol Board, before granting such permission.
H    (viii) In respect of areas beyond planning areas and special
areas, the concerned competent authorities/local au­
thorities are directed to prepare or cause to be prepared
model plan(s) and development plan(s) in terms of the
provisions of the Himachal Pradesh Panchayati Raj
Act, 1994 providing for control on erection of buildings.
After following due procedure, the same shall be sub­
mitted to the State Government not later than 3 months
from today. The State Government shall examine and
approve the same with or without such modification/s,
as it deems appropriate. This entire exercise shall be
carried out and completed within 6 months from today.
While preparing the model plan(s) and development
plan(s), the authorities shall consider all aspects includ­
ing environment concerns.
Till the model plan(s) and development plan(s) in terms
of the above direction are prepared and approved, the
limitations/restrictions laid down in Section 30­A of
the H.P. Town and Country Planning Act read with
Rule 18 and Appendix 8 of the Rules shall operate even
in areas of the State which are outside/beyond the plan­
ning areas and special areas. Liberty is granted to the
owners who are affected by this interim order and
whose land falls outside/beyond the planning area or
C      special area, to apply to this Court for consideration of
their proposal/Application by the Director, Town and
ig  h       Country Planning, if such proposal/Application is
made to the Director under Rule 15 and 16(1) of the
Rules, (notwithstanding the fact the land is located in
an area outside the planning area or special area). We
H           make it clear that in respect of all areas falling outside
the Interim Development Plan/Interim Development
Plan, irrespective of whether they fall ‘within’ the plan­
ning area or special area or ‘outside’ the planning area
or special area, as stated in Regulation 6(1) of Appendix
A (under the head ‘Remarks)’, the benefit of exemptions
shall only be available to the residents and original in­
habitants of the areas, who owned the property at the
time of commencement of the Act and their natural
heirs only and not to the persons who purchased land in
rural areas.
We hope and trust that the authorities of the State Gov­
ernment comply with this order in letter and spirit so as
to save this beautiful State of Himachal Pradesh from
further        haphazard        and          indiscriminate
constructions/development activities, particularly by
cutting hills, which is causing immeasurable harm to
the environment and which is in violation of the princi­
ouples of sustainable development, not to mention the risk
to the lives and property of occupants on account of any
possible mishap of such building whose construction
may be sub­standard and/or the building being con­
structed without taking into account the slope stability
C        and sub –soil conditions.
ig  h(xi)       We make it clear that any constructions/development
in violation of this order shall entail an order of demoli­
tion.
(xii) We may not be understood to be against development in
H             any manner. Our endeavour in issuing the above direc­
tions is only to see that the development activities in the
State are regulated.
(xiii)    The Director shall file an Action Taken Report every
two months setting out the progress made in respect of
the above directions and the directions issued by earlier
orders passed by the Court.
(xiv)    The time­lines directed by this order shall not be ex­
tended unless an appropriate Application is made by
the Respondents.
This interim order would be subject to such further in­
terim orders/directions as may be modified by the
Court. We also make it clear that we have not gone into
the issue of arbitrariness or reasonableness of exemp­
tions from permissions and/or the limits prescribed in
section 30­A or Rule 13/18 and Appendix to the Rules.
(xvi) The ad­interim directions issued by earlier orders
passed by the Court would continue to operate.
List on 27.3.2023 for reporting compliance and the
steps taken.