When the matter came up for admission, on 21.12.2022, we
passed the following order:-
“Instant writ petition has been filed by the petitioners,
seeking the following reliefs:-
“i. Call for the records leading to submission
ii. Issue a writ of mandamus any other
appropriate writ or order compelling the 1st respondent
to immediately constitute the Metropolitan Planning
Committee for the Metropolitan area of Kochi, as
mandated in Article 243 ZE, through the 74 th
constitutional amendment of the Constitution of India;
iii. Issue a writ of mandamus or any other
appropriate writ directing the 1st respondent to take
immediate steps for the formation of Kochi
Metropolitan Development Authority, for the purpose
of implementing, coordinating and supervising the
orderly development of the Kochi Metropolitan area;
iv. Direct the 1st respondent to consider Ext.
P1 representation and pass appropriate orders thereon,
within a time frame to be fixed by this Hon'ble Court,
in the interest of justice.”
2. Short facts leading to the filing of the writ petition are
W. P. (C) No. 41627 of 2022
2.1. Petitioners have submitted that the 74th Constitutional
amendment introduced Article 243 ZE to the Constitution of
India, which mandated the States to constitute a Metropolitan
Planning Committee (MPC), for preparing a draft development
plan for metropolitan areas as a whole in every metropolitan area
in India, with a population of 10 lakhs or more. The Kochi
metropolitan area qualifies the stipulation for the purpose of
constitution of MPC.
2.2. Petitioners have further submitted that the State of
Kerala, represented by its Chief Secretary, Thiruvananthapuram,
the 1st respondent, has failed to undertake the constitutional
mandate, in spite of the lapse of 30 years of the amendment.
Petitioners, natives of the city of Kochi, and being public
spirited, submitted Ext. P1 representation dated 03.09.2022
before the 1st respondent, with a request to establish a MPC for
undertaking the urban planning for the orderly development of
the Kochi metropolitan area, with an additional prayer to
establish    a    statutory   body    called  Kochi     Metropolitan
Development         Authority    (KMDA),       for    implementing,
coordinating, and supervising the orderly development of Kochi
region within the Kochi Metropolitan area.
2.3. Petitioners have also submitted that the 1 st
respondent has failed to fulfill the constitutional mandate on its
own, nor acted on being prompted through Ext. P1 representation
dated 03.09.2022.
3. Ms. K. R. Deepa, learned Special Government Pleader,
takes notice on behalf of the State of Kerala, represented by the
Chief Secretary, Thiruvananthapuram, the Additional Chief
Secretary    to    the  Government,     Local  Self  Government
Department, Thiruvananthapuram, and the Principal Director,
respondents 1, 3 and 4 respectively.
4. Mr. Jaishankar V. Nair, learned Central Government
Counsel, takes notice for the Union of India, represented by its
Secretary, Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, New Delhi,
the 2nd respondent.
Ms. K. R. Deepa, learned Special Government Pleader
submitted that as on today, Committee as envisaged under Article
243ZE has not been constituted. She seeks time to get
instructions.
2. On 13.02.2023, when the matter came up for further hearing,
we passed the following order:-
“Earlier, in our order dated 21.12.2022, we have pointed
out the constitutional mandate under Article 243ZE of the
Constitution of India, to constitute Metropolitan Planning
Committee in every Metropolitan area. Needless to state, the
opening sentence of Article 243ZE dealing with the Constitution
of Committee for Metropolitan Planning reads as follows: “There
shall be constituted in every Metropolitan area a Metropolitan
Planning Committee to prepare a draft development plan for the
W. P. (C) No. 41627 of 2022
Metropolitan area as a whole”.
2. On this day, when the matter came up for hearing,
Ms.K.R. Deepa, learned Senior Government Pleader submitted
that, in this regard, policy decision has to be taken.
3. Per contra, referring to the Constitutional amendment,
which came into existence on 1993, Mr. Sunil Jacob Jose, learned
counsel for the petitioners submitted that, though nearly two
decades is over, Government does not come with a positive
direction to constitute a committee, as stated supra.
4. It is expected that the Constitutional mandate has to be
implemented in letter and spirit and in this regard, we direct the
respondents to come out with appropriate instructions.”
3. A detailed counter affidavit dated 01.03.2023 has been filed
by the Additional Chief Secretary to the Government, Local Self
Government Department, Thiruvananthapuram, the 3 rd respondent,
which is reproduced:-
4. Having given due consideration to the material on record, in
particular, the averments that steps have been taken to constitute a
Metropolitan Planning Committee for the Metropolitan area of Kochi,
as mandated under Article 243ZE, taking note of the length of time,
i.e. nearly 2 decades, we direct the Chief Secretary, Secretariat,
Thiruvananthapuram,         the Additional   Chief   Secretary  to  the
Thiruvananthapuram,         and the   Principal  Director,  Local  Self
Government Department, respondents 1, 3 and 4 respectively, to
finalize the preparation of the process already undertaken and as
explained in the foregoing paragraphs of the counter affidavit filed by
the 3rd respondent, and constitute the Metropolitan Planning
W. P. (C) No. 41627 of 2022
Committee for Kochi, as mandated under Article 243ZE, and also to
take immediate steps for the formation of Kochi Metropolitan
Development Authority, for the purpose of implementing, coordinating
and supervising the orderly development of Kochi Metropolitan area,
within four months from the date of receipt of a copy of this judgment.
5. Having regard to the inordinate delay, directions issued should
be implemented in letter and spirit, without there being any application
for extension of time.
With the above directions, writ petition is disposed of.
Post on 18.07.2023 for compliance report.