the agreement with the respondent no.5 who is surrogate mother on
27.12.2021 and it was decided that immediately after the birth of the
child, the custody of the child would be handed over to the petitioners i.e.
the intended parents. It is further submitted that after following the due
procedure and as per the agreement entered into between the parties, the
respondent no.5 has delivered a girl child. At this stage, learned advocate
for the petitioners submitted that before the due date of the delivery, the
respondent no.5 was arrested by the police in connection with the FIR
being C.R.No.11191018220235 of 2022 registered with Gomtipur police
station Ahmedabad city on 18.2.2022 and she was taken to the judicial
custody. Thereafter, the petitioners learnt that on 20.6.2022, there was a
natural labour pain to the respondent no.5 as the due date was coming
nearer and therefore she was taken to the Civil Hospital Ahmedabad
considering her medical condition and thereafter on 21.6.2022, the
respondent no.5 had delivered a baby girl at the civil hospital.
4.              It is further submitted that the petitioners came to know that
respondent no.5 had immediately conveyed to the medical staff and the
police officers that as per the surrogacy agreement entered into between
the petitioners and respondent no.5, the respondent no.5 was under
obligation to hand over the custody of the newly born child to the
intended parents i.e. the present petitioners. Accordingly, the concerned
officers of the respondent no.3-hospital have contacted the petitioners
through Wings hospital and on 21.6.2022, the petitioners along with the
consulting and administrative staff of Wings hospital have rushed to the
civil hospital for taking custody of the newly born baby girl. Thereafter,
the custody was given to the petitioners in presence of the medical staff
and the concerned doctor.
5.              At this stage, learned advocate submits that now the
grievance of the petitioners is that the concerned medical officer and staff
of the civil hospital conveyed the petitioners to bring back the newly born
baby girl to the civil hospital as the respondent no.2 i.e. Superintendent of
Police, Sabarmati jail is insisting for the custody of the child. It was also
orally informed that unless and until there is an order of any court of law,
the custody of the newly born child would not be given to the petitioners.
6.              Learned advocate for the petitioners thereafter submitted that
the respondent no.5-biological mother i.e. surrogate mother has also
given her consent to hand over the custody of the child to the present
petitioners. Inspite of that, the custody of the child is not given by the
respondent nos.2 and 4 to the petitioners. It is, therefore, urged that
appropriate direction be issued to the concerned respondent authorities
for handing over the custody of the corpus i.e. the newly born child to the
petitioners who are intended parents as per the agreement.
7.              On the other hand, learned advocate Ms.Mehta appearing for
respondent no.5 has placed on record the affidavit of the respondent no.5
wherein the respondent no.5 has categorically stated that by virtue of
surrogacy agreement executed between her and the petitioners, she is
under a statutory and contractual obligation to hand over the custody of
the minor child to the petitioners being the intended parents. It is further
submitted in the affidavit that she confirms the contents of the surrogacy
agreement and also given the consent that if the custody of the child is
given to the petitioners, she has no objection.
8.              Learned APP has fairly submitted after referring to The
Surrogacy Regulation Act, 2021 (hereinafter referred to as `the Act’) that
there is no provision in the Act that for a particular period, the custody of
the child is to be retained by the surrogate mother for the purpose of
breast feeding. Learned APP has also fairly submitted that as per the
agreement entered into between the parties, the custody of the child is
required to be handed over to the intended parents immediately.
However, learned APP has referred to the National Guidelines on Infant
and Young child Feeding issued by the Ministry of Human Resource
Development Department of Women and Child Development (Food and
Nutrition Board), Government of India, in which there is a reference with
regard to the importance of breast feeding of the child for first six months
from the date of birth.
9.              Learned APP, therefore, urged that in the facts of the present
case, this Court may pass appropriate order in the interest of justice.
10.             Having heard learned advocates for the parties and having
gone through the material placed on record, it would emerge that the
present petitioners who are intended parents have executed surrogacy
agreement on 27.12.2021 with the present respondent no.5. As per the
said agreement, the respondent no.5 has agreed to all the terms and
conditions stated in the said agreement. Copy of the said agreement is
placed on record at page no.16. It is further revealed from the record that
as per the said agreement, respondent no.5 has delivered the child
recently on 21.6.2022. However, prior thereto, the respondent no.5 has
been arrested in connection with the FIR registered with Gomtipur police
station and she was in judicial custody. She was brought to the Civil
Hospital Ahmedabad on 20.6.2022 where she had given birth to a baby
girl. It is further revealed from the record that the respondent no.5 has
filed affidavit before this Court wherein she has categorically admitted
the contents of the agreement entered into between the parties and also
stated that if the custody of the child is handed over to the petitioners, she
has no objection.
11.     Now, the dispute in the present case is with regard to the custody
of the corpus i.e. the newly born baby girl. It is alleged that the
respondent nos.2 and 4 are not granting the custody of the newly born
child to the petitioners on the ground that there is no order of the Court
for handing over the custody of the child to the petitioners and therefore
as the respondent no.5 is required to be sent in judicial custody, the
custody of the newly born child will not be handed over to the petitioners,
who are now biological parents of the child as per the provisions
contained in the Act of 2021 and as per the agreement entered into
between the parties.
12.     In view of the aforesaid background, this Court would like to refer
the relevant clauses of the agreement entered into between the parties
dated 27.12.2021 and the relevant sections of the Act of 2021, which are
Clause 1(J) provides as under:
“1(J) . Except as otherwise specifically stated herein in this
Agreement, the Intended parents shall take immediate, full and
absolute custody of the child upon birth, notwithstanding any
congenital, physical or mental abnormality of child.”
Clause 1(O) provides as under:
“1(O). Any child conceived and born as a result of the conduct
contemplated by this Agreement shall have all testamentary and
inheritance rights from Intended parents as their natural child, and
the child shall have no testamentary right with Surrogate or her
husband. The Intended parents or each of them shall have
testamentary and inheritance rights from the child as parents,
neither the Surrogate nor her husband shall have those rights.”
Clause 6(B) provides as under:
“6(B). The Surrogate agrees to give immediate custody of child to
Intended parents for their parental rights.”
Section 2(zd) of Act of 2021 provides the definition of surrogacy
“2(zd). “surrogacy” means a practice whereby one woman bears
and gives birth to a child for an intending couple with the intention
of handing over such child to the intending couple after the birth.”
Section 8 of the Act of 2021 provides as under:
“8. A child birth born out of surrogacy procedure, shall be deemed
to be a biological child of the intending couple or intending woman
and the said child shall be entitled to all the rights and privileges
available to a natural child under any law for time being in force.”
13.    Keeping in view the aforesaid clauses provided in the agreement
entered into between the parties and the provisions of Act of 2021, it is
clear that after giving birth to the child, the respondent no.5 is required to
hand over the custody of the newly born child to the present petitioners
who are intended parents and child born out of the surrogacy procedure
shall be deemed to be the biological child of the intended couple and the
said child shall be entitled to all the rights and privileges available to a
natural child under any law for the time being in force.
14.    At this stage, this Court would like to refer to the decision rendered
by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Navjot Singh Sidhu v/s State
of Punjab and Another reported in (2007) 2 SCC 574, wherein the
Hon’ble Supreme Court has observed in paragraphs 20 and 21 as under:
“20. Shri Rakesh Dwivedi, learned senior Counsel for the
complainant has submitted that in order to maintain purity and
probity in public bodies, criminalisation of politics has to be
stopped and persons who have been convicted of any offence
should not be allowed to enter Parliament. He has elaborated his
argument by submitting that irrespective of quantum of sentence if
a person is convicted for an offence referred to in sub-section (1) of
Section 8 where the punishment imposed may be only a fine, a
person will incur the disqualification from the date of conviction
which will remain for a period of six years and this evinces the
intention of the legislature that a convict should not enter the
precincts of Parliament or legislature of a State. In our opinion the
contention raised cannot be accepted. The Representation of the
People Act, 1951 is a complete code. The preamble of the Act is -
“An Act to provide for the conduct of elections to the Houses of
Parliament and to the House or Houses of the legislature of each
State, the qualifications and disqualifications for membership of
those Houses, the corrupt practices and other offences at or in
connection with such elections and the decision of doubts and
disputes arising out of or in connection with such elections.”
21. The Act provides not only the eligibility and qualification for
membership of the House of People and Legislative Assembly but
also for disqualification on conviction and other matters.
Parliament in its wisdom having made a specific provision for
disqualification on conviction by enacting Section 8, it is not for
the Court to abridge or expand the same. The decisions of this
Court rendered in Rama Narang v Ramesh Narang and Ravikant S
Patil v. Sarvabhouma S Bagali having recognized the power
possessed by the court of appeal to suspend or stay an order of the
conviction and having also laid down the parameters for exercise
of such power, it is not possible to hold, as a matter of rule, or, to
lay down, that in order to prevent any person who has committed
an offence from entering Parliament or the Legislative Assembly
the order of the conviction should not be suspended. The courts
have to interpret the law as it stands and not on considerations
which may be perceived to be morally more correct or ethical.”
From the aforesaid decision rendered by the Hon’ble Supreme Court, it
can be said that the Courts have to interpret the law as it stands and not on
considerations which may be perceived to be morally more correct or
15.             We have considered the National Guidelines on Infant and
Young child Feeding issued by the Ministry of Human Resource
Development Department of Women and Child Development (Food and
Nutrition Board), Government of India. We have also considered the
interest of the child and the aforesaid decision rendered by the Hon’ble
Supreme Court.         In absence of any provision contained in the Act of
2021 providing that for the purpose of breast feeding, the custody of the
child is to be retained by the surrogate mother for a particular period, this
Court is of the view that the custody of the corpus i.e. newly born child is
required to be handed over to the present petitioners.
16.             In view of the aforesaid discussion, this petition is allowed.
The respondent nos.2 and 4 are hereby directed to hand over the custody
of the corpus i.e. the newly born child delivered by the respondent no.5
on 21.6.2022 to the present petitioners -intended parents immediately.
Direct service today is permitted.