 Mr. Rishi Bhuta a/w. Ms. Ankita Bamboli i/by Mr. Sagar Shahani,
Advocates for the Appellant
 Ms. Rekha Musale, Advocate for Respondent No.3
2.        The Appellant is apprehending arrest in C.R. No.7 of 2022
registered at Nehru Nagar Police Station for the offence punishable
under Section 3(1)(r) of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
(Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989 (for short "Atrocities Act").
3.        The first informant-complainant is a school teacher, serving
in Swami Vivekanand School (for short "the said school").                       The
Appellant is Head Mistress / Principal of the said school. The First
Information Report (for short "FIR") has been lodged on 09.02.2022.
cri apeal 513-22.doc
It is stated in the FIR that in the year 2021 several mistakes were
found in the marksheets and evaluation of students of 10 th standard;
that the Appellant therefore sought explanation from all teachers; that
except two teachers rest of the teachers did not submit their
explanation; that after going through the explanation all teachers were
asked to give a letter of apology. It is alleged that on 15.08.2021 after
the flag hoisting ceremony the Appellant scolded some teachers for not
submitting the apology letter and insulted the complainant by stating
that she was unfit to teach English subject. It is alleged that the
complainant approached the school trustee Shri. Asrani of 17.08.2021
with a written complaint about the incident of 15.08.2021, but was
orally told that the Appellant shall be issued a strict warning.
4.         It is alleged that on 18.08.2021, a notice was served upon
the complainant citing several instances about her derelictions and
also warning her about her aggressive behaviour. On the next day the
complainant wanted to give a written reply to the notice, but the reply
was not received by the Appellant.
5.         Thereafter it is alleged that on 05.10.2021, between 12 noon
and 12.30 p.m. the complainant was summoned in the cabin of the
Appellant and informed that she had not given the apology letter; that
she had made several mistakes in English Teaching; that she belongs
cri apeal 513-22.doc
to a lower caste and therefore she is fit to teach the lower classes in
the said school. It is further alleged that thereafter two other teachers
namely Mr. Bhagwan Patil and Mr. Ravi Mishra were also summoned
into the cabin by the Appellant and in their presence the Appellant
continued her tirade against the complainant in the same manner.
However, it is stated that the complainant at that time did not take
this incident seriously. On 29.10.2021, a memo was issued to the
complainant informing that her explanation was not satisfactory and
further mistakes on her part will not be tolerated.
6.         On 01.12.2021, a letter was issued to the informant on the
instructions of the trustees of the said school stating that the informant
was never insulted; that in fact her work as an English teacher was not
satisfactory and therefore she was being transferred to teach the 5 th
and 6th Standards. Being aggrieved the informant lodged a report on
23.12.2021 about the above incidents. On the basis of the report the
police registered the FIR on 09.02.2022.
7.         As seen the actual incident which forms the basis of the FIR
has been stated to have occurred on 05.10.2021 between 12 noon
and 12.30 p.m. in the cabin of the Appellant. Admittedly, there is a
substantial delay in lodging the report as also the FIR which can be
ascertained from the dates of various incidents. Perusal of the FIR
cri apeal 513-22.doc
shows that there is no specific casteist remark attributable to the
complainant about her caste.
8.         Mr. Bhuta, learned counsel appearing for the Appellant has
placed before me a copy of the reasoned order dated 09.05.2022. It
was received on 18.05.2022. He submits that if the chain of events
narrated in the FIR are perused it is obvious that the actual incident
stated in the FIR pertaining to 05.10.2022 cannot be the reason for
filing the FIR. He submits that the FIR was lodged on 23.12.2021 i.e.
after a substantial delay. He submits that the report has been filed
only due to vengeance and vendetta. He submits that the complainant
was serving as an English teacher initially for 9th and 10th standards.
Pursuant to her evaluation as a teacher as also her performance level
which was evaluated over a period of time, the complainant was
issued the letter on 01.12.2021, inter alia, informing her that she
would have to take English classes of 5th and 6th standards. He
submits that it is only after the issuance of this letter that the
complainant has filed the report of the incident of 05.10.2021. He
submits that the complainant has also published a public banner
seeking arrest of the Appellant photo of which is produced at page 153
of the Appeal proceedings. Mr. Bhuta has laboriously argued with
reference to the FIR and the documentary evidence appended to the
Appeal proceedings to drive home the point that there is no personal
cri apeal 513-22.doc
animosity or acrimony of the Appellant with the complainant; that
based on the evaluation of the performance of the complainant a
conscious decision has been taken to ask the complainant to teach the
5th and 6th standards and this has irked the complainant. That apart,
Mr. Bhuta submits that there is no reference whatsoever to the caste of
the complainant in the alleged utterance narrated in the FIR which is
attributable to the Appellant. Further in so far as the issue of eye
witness to the incident is concerned, admittedly the two teachers were
never present in the cabin when the first incident between the
Appellant and complainant took place and later when they were
present, the report lodged by the complainant does not mention the
specific utterance by the Appellant. He submits that custody of the
appellant is not required as the Appellant being the Head mistress of
the school has willingly cooperated with the investigation. He submits
that the learned Trial court in paragraph No.8 has come to the
conclusion that the actual caste of the complainant was not refered to
by the Appellant and only on the basis of assumption that the incident
took place in the presence of two eye witnesses the learned Trial court
has rejected the Anticipatory Bail Application of the Appellant. He
submits that while arriving at the conclusion that the actual caste of
the informant was never referred and assuming that there were eye
witnesses, it is erroneously held that the Appellant has insulted the
complainant. On the contrary it is to be seen that according to the
cri apeal 513-22.doc
complainant's version, when the alleged incident took place, only the
Appellant and complainant were present in the cabin. Even if this is
taken to be true which the Appellant denies, it cannot be held that the
Appellant has insulted the complainant on the basis of her caste which
never finds mention in any of the pleadings. He therefore submits that
the Appellant deserves mercy of this Court and appropriate relief be
granted in accordance with law.
9.        Ms. Musale, learned counsel appearing for the complainant
has vehemently opposed grant of any relief to the Appellant. She
submits that the complainant for the first time approached the
management on 05.10.2021 and lodged an oral complaint. Thereafter
on 20.11.2021 the complainant lodged her first written complaint
with the management, inter alia, stating that the Appellant was
repeatedly misbehaving with her and taunting her on the basis of her
caste.  She submits that thereafter on 03.12.2021 the complainant
filed her written complaint with the Education Department against the
Appellant, inter alia, stating that the Appellant was repeatedly using
improper words against her about her caste, and only thereafter the
complainant lodged the report in December 2021 and the FIR was
registered on 09.02.2022. She submits that in so far as the incident in
question is concerned, there are two eye witnesses namely Mr.
Bhagwan Patil and Mr. Ravi Mishra and their testimony of what
cri apeal 513-22.doc
transpired on 05.10.2021 should be considered by this Court. She
submits that the Appellant is guilty of repeatedly insulting the
complainant on the basis of her caste and therefore the present Appeal
deserves to be rejected.
10.       Ms. Ambekar, learned APP appearing on behalf of the
prosecution has supported the submissions advanced by Ms. Musale
and in addition thereto submits that in the present case as recorded in
the FIR there have been series of incidents during which the Appellant
has been repeatedly insulting the complainant on the basis of her caste
and this Court should take cognizance of the same while deciding the
11.       I have heard the learned counsel appearing for the
respective parties and perused the material on record. Submissions
made by the learned counsel are on pleaded llines. In the FIR it is
stated that on 05.10.2021 between 12.00 noon and 12.30 p.m. the
complainant was called inside the cabin of the Appellant and the
Appellant stated as under:-
“rw lkWjh ysVj fnys ukgh o rw baxzth e/;s pqdk djrs] rlsp rw yksvj dkLV vkgs] rqyk
yksvj Dyklyk f'kdok;yk ikBors-"
11.1.     That apart it is alleged that thereafter two other teachers
were called inside the cabin and in front of those two teachers, the
Appellant has repeated the same tirade against the complainant.
cri apeal 513-22.doc
Prima facie it is seen that there is no reference to the caste of the
informant by the Appellant in the statement which has been alleged to
be insulting according to the complainant. What is pertinent to note is
the fact that though it is claimed that there were two eye witnesses to
the incident, what was stated in front of the eye witnesses is not stated
/ narrated or complained of in the FIR. Save and except the incident
on 05.10.2021, there is no other specific incident about which the
informant has made a grievance and which could remotely attract the
provisions of the Atrocities Act.
11.2.      Perusal of the material on record however suggests that the
complaint letters addressed by the informant between August 2021
and December 2021 are however interspersed with          several letters
addressed by the management of the said school and the Appellant as
Headmistress of the said school to the complainant on the basis of her
evaluation and performance as an English teacher.            Just as the
complainant has referred to the aforementioned complaints, the letters
addressed    by   the management to the          informant about         her
performance, mistakes committed by her in her work are also
important and cannot be lost sight of. The mistakes committed by the
complainant and the letters addressed by the management and the
Appellant to the complainant are annexed to the present Appeal.
Reading of the letter dated 18.08.2021 (on        page No. 123), letter
cri apeal 513-22.doc
dated 29.10.2021 (on        page No. 136), show-cause notice dated
18.07.2014 (on page 137) and letter dated 01.12.2021 (on page No.
144) clearly show that the performance of the complainant with
respect to her work was not satisfactory. Hence on 01.12.2021 the
complainant was asked to teach the lower standards (5th and 6th
standards). It is only after this, that the complainant has reacted and
filed the report with the police. If the complainant was genuinely hurt
on 05.10.2021, she would have immediately lodged the complaint as
any prudent person is expected to do, if she was right in her
11.3.      At this stage, I need not detain myself with going into the
nittygritty of the specific complaints against the complainant but a
reasonable case is made out by the Appellant that the report filed by
the complainant may be an outcome of vengeance and vendetta
against the Appellant and the management of the school on the basis
of reasons stated hereunder.
11.4.      I am prima facie convinced to make this observation because
there is adequate material placed on record to show the indictment
and action being initiated against Mr. Bhagwan Patil and Mr. Ravi
Mishra, the two teachers by the management of the said school and
the Appellant for their derelictory performance also. The letters are
cri apeal 513-22.doc
on record from page No. 146 to page No. 151 in respect of several
lapses on their part. The case of the complainant is heavily reliant on
these two teachers as eye witnesses to the incident on 05.10.2021.
However from the material placed on record and the statement
recorded in the FIR it is clear that when the Appellant had uttered the
objectionable utterance to the complainant both the aforesaid two
teachers were not present in the cabin.        The informant has not
specifically stated in the report as to what was uttered by the
Appellant when the above two teachers were summoned and entered
into the cabin. Material in the form of muster roll / attendance sheet
has also been produced on record to show that the complainant has
never attended the school between 04.10.2021 and 09.10.2021.
There is a clear ambiguity about the signature of the complainant on
the muster roll produced on record.
12.        In the pleadings however there is one consistency i.e. about
the performance of the complainant as an English teacher which has
been repeatedly taken cognizance of by the said school on various
dates. Prima facie, it appears that because of the issue of performance
of the complainant in delivering and teaching English subject to the
higher classes (9th and 10th standard) she has being repeatedly
censured by the said school.       Perusal of the order passed by the
learned Trial court dated 13.02.2022 reveals that the complainant had
cri apeal 513-22.doc
published a banner for seeking arrest of the Appellant and that is how
the Appellant had knowledge about her prosecution. This approach of
the informant in publishing a banner certainly would emanate from
the thought for seeking vengeance against the Appellant. The date of
publication of this banner which is at page No. 153 of the Appeal
proceedings is not known. Probably it could be around 14.04.2022.
Once the complaint is lodged, FIR registered, the publication of the
banner is uncalled for.      Complainant cannot seek extra judicial
remedies to pressurize the prosecution. Prosecution will carry out the
investigation on the basis of cogent material on record and its
investigation process. Parties should desist from such acts and allow
the prosecution to do its duty in accordance with law.
13.        It is an admitted position on the part of the complainant
that the objectionable / insulting statement was spoken to the
complainant when she was alone in the cabin of the Appellant and no
one else was there.       The prosecution has stated that thereafter
because of the verbal altercation between the Appellant and the
complainant, the two eye witnesses teachers entered into the
Appellant's cabin and the Appellant repeated the same words in the
presence of the eye witnesses. In this context, the FIR therefore needs
to be seen carefully. The FIR states that after the two eye witnesses
entered the cabin, the Appellant spoke to the complainant in the
cri apeal 513-22.doc
similar manner. It is extremely critical that what was uttered ought to
have been stated in the FIR.
14.        What is further interesting to note from the pleadings is that
the Appellant has pleaded that on the date of the incident no such
incident in fact occurred or took place. The Appellant has stated that
the the said school had commenced physical classes from 04.10.2021
with strict adherence to Government Rules after the Covid-19
pandemic. In fact it is the Appellant's case that the complainant did
not attend the said school for her duty and has not signed the muster
roll between 04.10.2021 to 09.10.2021. The copy of the attendance
muster is placed at Exhibit "T" (page No. 265 of the appeal
proceedings).    It shows that between 4th October and 12th October,
the timing on the muster roll pertaining to the complainant is absent.
Even the signature on 4th, 5th and 6th October differ from the
signatures made on 7th to 30th October. This aspect needs proper
investigation. Save and except the above discrepancies observed in
respect of the complainant in the muster roll, the muster roll has been
signed by all other teachers by putting the incoming time and
signature and outgoing time and signature.
15.        In view of the above discussion and findings, I am of the
considered opinion that the Appellant has made out a case for grant of
cri apeal 513-22.doc
anticipatory bail. Hence, the following order is passed:-
(i)     In the event of arrest in connection with investigation
of C.R. NO. 7 of 2022 registered with Nehru Nagar
Police Station, the Appellant be released on bail on
executing a P.R. bond in the sum of Rs. 25,000/- with
one or more sureties in the like amount;
(ii) The Appellant shall attend the concerned Investigating
Officer as and when called for;
(ii) The Appellant shall co-operate with the Investigating
Agency and shall not tamper with the prosecution
evidence / witnesses.
16.           In view of the above directions, the Criminal Appeal stands
disposed of.