W.M.P(MD).Nos.8834 and 8837 of 2021
Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Department,
Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Department,
Madathipathi of Munchirai Madam,
PRAYER: Petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India seeking issuance
of a writ of Mandamus directing the respondents 2 and 3 to engage the
respondents 5 and 6,thereby restoring the Pushpaanjali rituals including Anujha,
Pushpanchali, Mandapa Jebam, Nei Jebam, Sri Padanamaskaram mandated in the
Register of Poojakramas for Adhikesavan Temple as per the Agamams of the
temple in the daily poojakramam at par with Padmanabhaswamy Temple at
Thiruvananthapuram, on the basis of the petitioner's representation dated
05.03.2021 within a reasonable time frame as fixed by this Court.
For respondents               : Mr.A.K.Manickam,
Standing Counsel for Government
[Order of the Court was made by T.S.SIVAGNANAM, J.]
This writ petition has been filed as a public interest litigation by
Mr.K.Suresh, who states that he is the Vice President of an Organization, called as
Dharma Sena, which is said to be a Social Organization.
2. The petitioner has filed this writ petition praying for a direction upon the
official respondents to engage the respondents 5 and 6 for performing
Pushpaanjali rituals including Anujha, Pushpanchali, Mandapa Jebam, Nei Jebam,
Sri Padanamaskaram, which according to the petitioner is a mandate written
down in the Register of Poojakramas for Adhikesavan Temple as per the
Agamams of the temple in the daily poojakramam at par with Padmanabhaswamy
Temple at Thiruvananthapuram. In this regard, the petitioner has sent a
representation on 05.03.2021 and has approached this Court, because the
representation has not been considered.
3. We have elaborately heard Mrs.L.Victoria Gowri, learned counsel
appearing for the petitioner; Mr.A.K.Manickam, learned Government Counsel
appearing for the respondents 1, 2 and 4 and Mr.K.Sathiya Singh, learned counsel
appearing for the respondents 3 and 5.
4. During the course of argument, Mrs.L.Victoria Gowri, learned counsel
appearing for the petitioner, with utmost passion and reverence narrated in detail
about the sanctity of the said temple and the heritage attached to the said temple
and expressed anguish over the manner in which the temple and deity are being
mandate.
5. It is further submitted that the people of the locality hold the deity with
utmost reverence and they are very sad to see that the temple has not been
maintained properly and the rituals and the poojas are not performed as per the
Agamams. This aspect of the matter regarding the preservation, restoration and
maintenance of the temple is a separate issue and the same cannot be rolled into
the relief sought for by the petitioner, wherein, the petitioner seeks for the
Pushpaanjali ritual to be conducted by the respondents 6 and 7.
6. Insofar as the maintenance of the temple is concerned, it is undoubtedly
the duty of the HR & CE Department, to maintain the temple and preserve the
heritage value of the temple for the posterity to be aware of the rich heritage.
Nevertheless, there are lot of issues as to how the funds have to be deployed for
such preservation, restoration and maintenance.
7. We agree with the submissions of the learned counsel appearing for the
petitioner that in several temples in the State of Tamil Nadu, due to lack of funds,
poojas are not even performed, once in a day in those temples. The question
would be that, who is to be blamed for this. In our considered view, there are
several people who have contributed to this issue resulting in the temples being
funds starved. The poojaris not being paid in time, rituals unable to be performed
for lack of funds etc. The lessees of the temple are one of the main persons, who
are to be blamed for the temples being left without sufficient funds. Several cases
are filed before this Court by the lessees claiming that they are entitled to
continue indefinitely in temple property paying a paltry sum as a rent or license
8. The Authorities' unmindful of the heritage value of various temples had
licensed and leased out the temple property as well as the pragarams and verandas
of the temples to traders to carry on trading activity by selling articles which are
unrelated and unconnected with the temple and the worshipping public. These
shops have virtually become shopping centres, if not, shopping malls. In spite of
a very severe fire accident occurred in Madurai, still people have not learn a
lesson and even today, there was a writ appeal listed before us for admission, at
the instance of the licensee, stating that he is entitled to continue to run a shop
within the temple, rather the shop is embedded in the temple's wall. If such is the
situation, obviously, the temple will be without funds and sorry state of affairs
cannot be avoided. Therefore, the HR & CE Department alone is not to be
blamed, but there are several persons to be blamed for such sorry state of affairs.
9. Therefore, if the petitioner has material with him as to how the
Arulmighu Adhikesavan Temple has to be preserved, restored and maintained, he
can share the details with the Authorities by way of detailed representation. So far
as the relief sought for in the writ petition is concerned, this in our opinion is a
civil right and if according to the petitioner, a particular sect of people have to
perform that particular ritual as recorded in the Register of Agamams, then the
petitioner's remedy lies else where and not by way of writ petition .
10. We are informed by Mr.Sathiya Singh, learned counsel appearing for
the respondents 3 and 5 that ritual is now being performed by another Mutt and
poojaris attached to the said Mutt. If such is the situation, then it is all the more
necessary to approach the appropriate Forum for such a prayer. Furthermore, the
learned counsel appearing for the respondents informed the Court that neither the
sixth respondent nor the seventh respondent, at any point of time made a request
stating that as per the Register of Agamams, they have to perform the poojas.
Thus the petitioner cannot canvass the case as a third party. Nevertheless, if the
petitioner is a public spirited person and the worshipper of the said temple, he can
always approach the Authority by way of an appropriate application under the Act
and seek for appropriate relief and therefore, we cannot issue a Writ of
Mandamus as sought for. However, we dispose of this writ petition, with
aforementioned observations. No costs. Consequently, connected miscellaneous
petitions are closed.
1. In view of the present lock down owing to
COVID-19 pandemic, a web copy of the
order may be utilized for official purposes,
but, ensuring that the copy of the order that
is presented is the correct copy, shall be the
responsibility of the advocate/litigant
concerned.
Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Department,
Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Department,