The State of Maharashtra & Ors                         …Respondents
Mr AA Siddiquie, i/b, AA Siddiquie & Associates, for the Petitioner.
Mr LT Satelkar, AGP, for Respondent/State.
Mr AR Gole, for Respondents Nos. 2 to 5/Railways.
Ms Shilpa Redkar, for Respondent No.8/MCGM.
1.       The Respondent Nos. 2 to 5 are represented and waived
service. We have explained to their Advocate that we urgently
require an affidavit explaining what, if any, steps the Railways have
taken following the orders of the Supreme Court annexed to this
Petition, and in particular the order dated 16th December 2021 of a
three Judge Bench in SLP (C) Diary No. 19714 of 2021.
2.       We think it would be appropriate to reproduce the relevant
portion of that order from page 57 to 63.:
“According to Western Railways, the primary
responsibility to ensure that no encroachment takes place
on any property is that of the local Government and also of
the State Government, in equal measure.
Although, the submission seems to be attractive at the first
blush, does not commend to us. For, there is a special
enactment which enables the Railway authorities to protect
its property. That is its statutory and public trust obligation.
It was open to the concerned Authority to invoke the
provisions of special enactment including the Public
Premises Act. For that, the Estate Officers should have
moved into action in right earnest at the earliest
opportunity. Even that option is not being invoked for
reasons best known to the Authorities. Besides, the Railway
establishment maintains a Railway police force whose
services could be utilized to safeguard the Railways
property, wherever it is situated.
As a result, the nuanced distinction made by the learned
counsel for Western Railways does not commend to us. We
hold that the Railways are equally responsible for the
situation; and for which reason, it is also equally liable to
provide some support to the persons likely to be affected by
the removal of their structures.
Hence, keeping in mind the dictum of this Court in
Khan reported in (1997) 11 SCC 121, on that analogy, we
propose to issue following directions:
(i)    The Respondent - Western Railways do immediately
issue notices to the occupants of the concerned structures
which are failing within the belt which is required
immediately for commencing the remaining project work by
giving two weeks' time to the concerned occupant (s) to
vacate the respective premises;
(ii)    In respect of the remaining land owned by Railways,
even though it may not be immediately required for the
project, similar notice be given to the occupants of
structures standing thereon by giving six weeks' time to
vacate the respective premises; and 59 falling
(iii) In either case (i) and (ii) above, the notices be issued
within one week from today and if the occupants fail to
vacate the unauthorized structure, it will be open to the
Respondent-Western Railways to initiate appropriate action
to forcibly dispossess them and to demolish or remove the
unauthorized structure (s) by taking assistance of the local
police force. The Superintendent/ Commissioner of Police
of the concerned area shall ensure that adequate police
force is deployed on the site and surrounding areas
including to provide protection to the officials/staff
engaged in the demolition of unauthorized structures and to
facilitate them to commence the eviction process and
demolition of the unauthorized structures, referred to in
the eviction notices on the specified date and time;
(iv) Before commencing the process of eviction and
removal of the structures, the Collector of the concerned
District must ensure that necessary details about the names
and number of persons occupying the concerned structure,
including their identity and profile should be duly recorded,
which record should be preserved Collector for considering
the eligibility of those persons for being provided suitable
residential accommodation after being evicted owning to
proposed demolition action;
(v)     The entity, who is the owner of the land, namely,
Western Railways in this case as well as the local
Government and the State Government shall be jointly and
severally liable to pay a sum of Rs. 2,000/- per month per
demolished structure for a period of six Months from the
date of demolition of their structure as ex-gratia amount to
the head of family/occupants of the concerned
unauthorized structure removed during demolition action.
That amount shall be initially paid by the Collector for a
period of six months "only" (not beyond six months each)
and shall be later on shared equally by the entity (owner of
the land), local Government and State Government;
(vi) In the event, the local Government has any
rehabilitation scheme, the affected persons may apply for
being rehabilitated under said scheme, if eligible and subject
to verification of eligibility and complying with all other
terms and conditions of the prevalent scheme. The local
Government may provide them suitable residential
accommodation in lieu of rehabilitation owing to demolition
of their structure.
(vii) If no rehabilitation scheme has been formulated by
the local Government or is in force, the persons likely to be
affected by the action of demolition can apply for allocation
of residential premises under the Pradhan Mantri Awas
Yojna Scheme, which application be processed not later
than six months from the date of its receipt and taken to its
logical end, application-wise within such period.
(viii) Be it a case of rehabilitation under clause (vi) or (vii)
above, the persons affected by demolition action by the
Authorities cannot insist for allotment of alternative
residential accommodation at the same place from where
they have been evicted (as it is not in situ rehabilitation
programme). The eligible persons be allotted
accommodation wherever available in the same or even in
neighbouring districts.
(ix) In addition, since the Railways have power to initiate
civil/criminal action against the unauthorised occupants on
the Railway property, must resort to those proceedings
against the concerned persons immediately after it is
brought to the notice to the concerned official of the
Further, the Railways being the owner of the
property, as also the local Government and State
Government must initiate appropriate action against the
erring persons, including the officials of the concerned
establishment for allowing and tolerating such
encroachment and for not taking corrective action of
removal of encroachments in right earnest and at the
earliest opportunity.
(x)    The status report of the action taken by the Railway
Board as also by the local Government and State
Government be furnished to this Court before the next
date.”
3.     At present, there is no information available to us on sub-
paragraphs 1 to 7 of this order. By a later order of 14th July 2022, it
was noted that encroachments on the Western Railway property and
in relation to the Surat Municipal Corporation had been cleared.
The Supreme Court was told that the persons affected would be
accommodated or rehabilitated under the Prime Minister Awas
Yojana Scheme (PMAYS). There was to be some form of scrutiny
for the purposes of eligibility. The eligible persons were to be given
accommodation under this PMAYS. The Supreme Court made
further directions in that regard.
4.     In the present case, none of that seems to have been done.
Notices have been issued for demolition but these do not point out
any rehabilitation scheme nor any requirements of eligibility or how
these are to be met or within what time. These are not even notices
under the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants)
Act, 1971. They are simply eviction notices. It is even now unclear,
whether Western Railways has taken up the matter of rehabilitation
(MMRDA), Respondent No. 7 to this Petition. This is of relevance
because the Supreme Court order dated 16th December 2021,
quoted above, makes reference to, a local government. This means a
local government that has a rehabilitation scheme. Both sides seem
to agree that in the present case, the expression local government
must mean the MMRDA. We do not necessarily accept this as a
limitation. It may well mean the Municipal Corporation of Greater
Mumbai (“MCGM”) too. It is Respondent No.8 before us, and is
represented by Ms Redkar.
5.     Today, the MMRDA is not represented before us. We request
the learned Advocate for the Petitioner to send the copy of the
Petition and this order to Ms Kiran Bagalia who routinely appears
for MMRDA and request her to take instructions so that further
time is not lost.
6.     We clarify that we have not indicated that MMRDA or
MCGM are necessarily bound to rehabilitate those ousted in
7.     We also seek information at this stage as to, whether Western
Railways, MMRDA and MCGM have in place any rehabilitation
policy or system, and what the eligibility criteria are. Throughout,
we bear in mind that merely labelling these persons as
“encroachers” is not going to answer the problem. This is a serious
problem in the city and it is a problem of human displacement.
Sometimes, the scale of the displacement is beyond the imagination.
It has to be addressed in a more considered fashion than by merely
deploying bulldozers on the site.
8.     We take on record a joint demolition report dated 7th
February 2023 signed by various authorities that shows that about
101 structures were demolished. The report also says that the debris
generated after demolition and unserviceable released material were
broken and thrown outside the railway land at a low -lying area but
no personal belongings were taken from the site.
9.     While we note this report, the disposal of this material raises
more questions than it answers, because by throwing this material
into a low-lying area, apparently the presumption is that it will get
washed into the Arabian Sea. We most emphatically do not approve
of this approach. A copy of this joint demolition report is scanned
and annexed to this order. The report does not indicate whether any
survey was done of the 101 unauthorized structures. It does not
indicate whether any process of eligibility was undertaken. In no
sense is this in keeping with even the letter, let alone the spirit, of
the Supreme Court orders referred to above.
10.    No further demolitions are to be carried out until the next
date in contravention of the Supreme Court order anywhere on
Western Railway lands in Greater Mumbai.
12.    It seems there is some anxiety expressed on behalf of railways
regarding further demolition. Liberty to the learned Advocate for
the Railways to mention the matter for an earlier date provided this
is with notice to the Petitioners’ advocate and the advocates for the