                        1.     Petitioner impugns order dated 21.09.2022 whereby, the
                        Original Application (‘OA’) filed by the petitioner has been dismissed
                        by the Central Administrative Tribunal (hereinafter, referred to as the
                        ‘Tribunal’).
                        2.     Petitioner had applied for consideration for a post of Medical
                        Physicist, Safdarjung Hospital, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
Signature Not Verified
Signing Date:07.10.2022   W.P.(C) 14099/2022                                                1
                        under the Un-reserved Category.
                        3.     The essential qualification, as prescribed by the notice
                        published advertising the vacancies, is as under :
                               “ESSENTIAL QUALIFICATIONS: EDUCATIONAL: (i)
                               Post Graduate degree in Physics from a recognised University plus
                               Post M.Sc. Diploma in Radiological or Medical Physics from a
                               recognised University and Internship of minimum twelve months in a
                               recognised well equipped Radiation Therapy Department. OR
                               (ii)….”
                        4.     The educational qualification prescribed is Post Graduate
                        degree in Physics plus Post M.Sc. Diploma in Radiological or Medical
                        Physics both from a recognized University and an Internship of
                        minimum 12 months in a recognized well equipped Radiation Therapy
                        Department.
                        5.     It is an admitted case of the petitioner that petitioner has not
                        undergone requisite internship of minimum 12 months in a recognized
                        well equipped Radiation Therapy Department.
                        6.     The contention of learned counsel for the petitioner is that for
                        obtaining a Diploma, prior to 2012, there was no requirement of a one
                        year internship and requirement has been introduced only post 2012,
                        and since this qualification is prior to 2012, one year internship is not
                        required.
                        7.     We are unable to accept this contention for the reason that the
                        advertisement, in addition to prescribing an educational qualification
                        of a Post Graduate degree and a Post M.Sc. Diploma also requires an
                        internship of a minimum 12 months in a recognized well equipped
                        Radiation Therapy Department, which admittedly the petitioner does
                        not possess.
                        8.     In that view of the matter, petitioner does not satisfy the
                        requisite essential qualification and, as such is not qualified for the
                        post.
                        9.     It is open to an organization while advertising its vacancies to
                        prescribe qualifications as may be suitable, in the view of the
                        Organization for appointment to the said post. Courts cannot substitute
                        its view for the requirements prescribed by the organization.
                        10.    As noticed hereinabove, since the petitioner does not satisfy the
                        prescribed educational qualification, we find no infirmity in the order
                        of the Tribunal rejecting the Original Application of the petitioner.
                        11.    The petition is accordingly without merit and is dismissed.
