1.    Heard Sri N.I. Jafri, learned Senior Advocate assisted by Sri Abdul
Saleem Ahamad, learned counsel for the applicant and Sri Gyan Prakash,
Senior Advocate assisted by Sri Sanjay Kumar Yadav, learned counsel for the
CBI and perused the material on record.
2.    This bail application under Section 439 of Code of Criminal Procedure
has been filed by the applicant Ramkrit Yadav, seeking enlargement on bail
during trial in connection with R.C. No. 10(S)/2021, under Sections 302,
394, 452, 504 IPC registered at P.S. C.B.I./S.S.B. Lucknow, District
3.    The First Information Report of the present case was lodged on
12.02.2021 as Case Crime No. 0038 of 2021, under Sections 302, 394, 452,
504 IPC, P.S. Baksa, District Jaunpur in connection with an incident which is
said to have taken place from 11.02.2021 to 12.02.2021 by Ajai Kumar
Yadav against S.O.G. Team, Jaunpur, Ajai Kumar Singh S.O., Baksa Jaunpur
and the accompanying persons of the S.O. of Police Station Baksa, District
Jaunpur alleging therein that on 11.02.2021 at about 03:00 am, the S.O.G.
Team, Ajai Kumar Singh S.O. Baksa along with his accompanying police
force came to the house of the first informant and took his brother Krishna
Kumar Yadav @ Pujari son of Tilakdhari aged about 24 years to the Police
Station in spite of the fact that there was no criminal case lodged against his
brother in any Police Station in the District. His brother was a friendly
person. His brother has been taken by the S.O.G. Team and S.O. Baksa Ajai
Kumar Singh for being falsely implicated in a case and was detained at the
Police Station. Further, in the night at about 08:00 pm, the S.O. Baksa with
his accompanying police team and other police personnels being about ten
in number barged in his house and broke upon the lock of the box and took
away Rs. 60,000/- and the articles. On being stopped, they abused the
ladies. Again at about 12:30 am, the S.O.G. Incharge and the S.O. Baksa
along with 10-12 police personnels came on a Bolero vehicle and
motorcycles and brought his brother to the house. His brother was not in a
position to stand and was shouting loudly to his mother to save him and
was stating that the police personnels will kill him. They took away a
motorcycle which was in the house. The first informant went to the Police
Station but the police personnels did not let him meet his brother. In the
morning, he received information that his brother has died in police
custody. He states that his brother has been murdered by the police
personnels and requests that S.O. Baksa be directed to lodge the First
Information Report against the then S.O. Baksa, S.O.G. Team and other
accompanying police personnels for murder and loot and appropriate
action be taken. The said application was addressed to the Superintendent
4.     The postmortem examination of Krishna Kumar Yadav @ Pujari
was conducted on 12.02.2021 from 09:10 pm. The doctor found the
following ante-mortem injuries on his persons:-
“a) Contusion present on both buttocks of size 30x20 cm, which is
Bluish Brown in colour.
b) Contusion present in both scapular regions of size 15x8 cm
which is Bluish Brown.
c) Contusion present on left arm laterally of size 10x8 cm which is
Bluish Brown in colour.”
The doctor after noting the ante-mortem injuries gave his opinion as
“Above injuries are not sufficient for death.”
The cause of death was opined as due to shock and syncope as a
result of ante-mortem myocardial infarction.
5.     During investigation, the police sought an expert opinion on the
injuries and actual cause of death of the deceased. The Joint Director
Medico Legal, State Medico Legal Cell, Lucknow vide his letter opined as
“The cause of death established is shock, that is not due to
Myocardial Infarction but it can be precipitated by vasovegal
inhibition or ante-mortem injuries present on the victim’s body
especially the big ones which is not checked in PM examination.”
6.     A judicial inquiry was also ordered which was taken up by the Chief
Judicial Magistrate, Jaunpur being Judicial Inquiry No.1 of 2021 which
was inconclusive in so far as the purpose of it was concerned. It was stated
therein that after the detailed inquiry, the conclusion which comes is that
the injuries received on the body of the deceased were as a result of
beating and tortured by the police or were received on 11.02.2021 at about
02:00 pm in village Birhadpur due to an accident with a motorcycle and
then by assault of passer-by. The inquiry was thus concluded. The said
report is annexure 5 to the affidavit.
7.     A writ petition being Crl. Misc. Writ Petition No. 2998 of 2021
(Ajay Kumar Yadav Vs. State of U.P. and another) was filed by the first
informant before this Court with regards to his grievances in which by a
detailed order dated 08.09.2021 a Division Bench of this Court directed the
CBI to investigate the present matter and ordered the transfer of the matter
to the CBI forthwith. The said writ petition is still pending disposal before
this Court. The said order dated 08.09.2021 is quoted herein-below:-
“1. Heard Sri Sarvesh Chaubey, learned counsel for the petitioner,
Sri S.K. Pal, learned Government Advocate assisted by Sri Roopak
Chaubey, learned AGA for the State-respondent Nos. 1, 2, 3 & 4 and
Sri Gyan Prakash, assisted by Sri Sanjay Kumar Yadav, learned
counsel for the respondent no. 5.
2.      It is a case of custodial death of a young boy aged about 24
years, namely, Krishna Yadav @ Pujari. As per FIR No.0038/21,
dated 12.02.2021 under Sections 302, 394, 452 & 504 I.P.C. P.S. -
Baksa, District - Jaunpur, the SOG team and SO Baksa, Ajay Kumar
Singh came to the house of the deceased on 11.02.2021 about 03:00
P.M. and took away the deceased with an intent to implicate him
falsely and the deceased was detained at the police station. At about
08:00 P.M. the S.O. Baksa and other policemen (ten in numbers)
forcibly entered in the house of the informant and after breaking lock
of the box took away Rs.60,000/- and other articles and used filthy
language against women family members of the deceased. At about
12.30 P.M. the incharge SOG and SO Baksa, Ajay Kumar Singh and
10 - 12 policemen brought the deceased who was not even able to
stand and was loudly crying "माँ -माँ मु झे बचा लो पुलिस वाले मुझे जान बचा लो पुलिस वाले मुझे जान पु लिलस वाले मुझे जान वाले बचा लो पुलिस वाले मुझे जान मु झे बचा लो पुलिस वाले मुझे जान जान
स वाले मुझे जाने बचा लो पुलिस वाले मुझे जान मार देगें। दे बचा लो पुलिस वाले मुझे जान गें।" Policemen also took away the motorcycle kept in the
house and when the informant went to the police station he was not
allowed to meet with his brother (deceased) and in the morning,
information was received that his brother Krishna Yadav @ Pujari
died in police custody who has been murdered by the policemen.
3.                                                     On the other hand, the police has developed a story that as
per G.D. Entries Nos.05 and 06, dated 12.02.2021, the deceased was
apprehended while he was driving a motorcycle who fell, received
injuries and could not fled away and he told that in the afternoon of
11.02.2021 he was hit by a motorcycle and the public beaten him.
The arrest of the deceased has been shown at 10:25 P.M. on
11.02.2021. As per G.D. the deceased was brought to the police
station Baksha at 01:30 A.M. on 12.02.2021 and at the same time he
was sent for first aid alongwith Sub Inspector Sunil Kumar Tiwari,
constable Manish Kumar and constable Samir Kumar and the Doctor
at the CHC referred the deceased for treatment to District Hospital,
Jaunpur and by the time they reached at the District Hospital
Jaunpur, Krishana Yadav @ Pujari died and thus he was brought to
the District Hospital as dead. Copy of G.D. No.05 dated 12.02.2021
has been filed by the respondent no.2 as Annexure C.A. -2 to the
counter affidavit dated 01.09.2021 and the G.D. Entry No.06 of even
date and time i.e. 12.02.2021 time 01:30 A.M., has been produced
today by the learned A.G.A. before us stating that inadvertently these
pages could not be annexed with the counter affidavit. In G.D. No.05
dated 12.02.2021 time 01:30 A.M. it has been mentioned that :
4.         The F.I.R. lodged by the brother of the deceased being the first
information report No.0038/21, dated 12.02.2021 (at 16:35 hours)
Jaunpur, (in which SOG Team Jaunpur, Station House Officer Baksa,
namely, Ajay Kumar and police personnel of police station Baksa are
named as accused), is reproduced below:
5.        As per the alleged post mortem report, the injuries are as
1. Contusion present in both buttocks of size 30X 20 cm which
bluish brown in colour.
2. Contusion present in lower scapular region of size 15 X 8
cm which is bluish brown colour.
3. Contusion present Lt. Arm lateral of size 10X 3 cm which is
bluish brown colour.
6.        As per post mortem report, the cause of death of deceased
was "shock and Syncope as a result of ante mortem, myocardial and
7.        Due to custodial death, a judicial inquiry was entrusted in the
matter to the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Jaunpur, who recorded
statements of 16 inquiry witnesses. The first set of inquiry witnesses
are the family members of the deceased, the second set of inquiry
witnesses are independent witnesses and the 3rd set of inquiry
witnesses are doctors and the policemen including the Sub-Inspector
Constable Samir Kumar (IW-13). The statement of inquiry witnesses
IW-12 Constable Manish Kumar, IW 13 Constable Samir Kumar and
IW-14 Sub-Inspector Sunil Kumar Tiwari as recorded by the Chief
Judicial Magistrate and incorporated by him in his report dated
25.06.2021 filed as Annexure CA -12 to the counter affidavit of the
respondent no.2 dated 01.09.2021, are reproduced below :
8.         The IW 16 Kansraj Yadav (an independent witness) has stated
before the Judicial Magistrate on 11.02.2021 as under :
9. IW-2 (Smt. Satta mother of the deceased) and IW-3 (Ajay Kumar
Yadav informant and brother of the deceased) and IW-4 (Pradip
Yadav, brother of the deceased) have stated before the Chief Judicial
(1) Contusion of size 30 x 20 cm  size 30 x 20 cm  30 x 20 cm  20 cm  दो नेA भिनेताम्बाA परा
(2) Contusion of size 30 x 20 cm  size 30 x 20 cm  15 x 20 cm  08 cm  लग ग उपरा प-ठा परा
(3) Contusion of size 30 x 20 cm  size 30 x 20 cm  10 x 20 cm  08 cm  लग ग बा यु         ज परा
Ve 30 x 20 cm ntricle 30 x 20 cm ' क1 विपछल- किदो$ रा परा 2 x 20 cm  1 cm  क साफीदो =ब्बा था । ज
10.                 As per story developed by the police, the deceased was
brought to the police station at about 01:30 A.M. on 12.02.2021 after
his arrest at about 10:25 P.M. on 11.02.2021 and he was sent to CHC
Naupedwa, Jaunpur, at about 02:00 AM on 12.02.2021 for first aid,
where Doctor referred him for District Hospital and when the
deceased was brought to District Hospital by ambulance he was
found dead.
11.                 Learned A.G.A. has produced before us case diary to impress
that as per an alleged slip issued by the Doctor on emergency duty in
Amar Sahid Uma Nath Singh District Hospital Jaunpur dated
12.2.2021, the deceased Krishna Yadav was brought dead at the
Hospital at about 03:35 A.M. by the Constable Manish Kumar and
12.                 A supplementary affidavit dated 09.08.2021 has been filed by
the petitioner annexing therewith three photographs of the dead body
of the deceased Krishna Yadav. Averments in this regard have been
made by the petitioner in paragraph 3 of the supplementary affidavit
dated 09.08.2021 which have not been denied or disputed by the
respondent No.2 and the respondent No.3 in separate counter
affidavits filed by them. The counter affidavit has been filed on behalf
of respondent no.2 by Chaub Singh, Circle Officer Badlapur, District
- Jaunpur who replied the contents of paragraphs 2 and 3 of the
aforesaid supplementary affidavit, in paragraph 33 of his counter
"That the contents of paragraph nos. 2 & 3 of the
supplementary affidavit refer to post mortem report dated 12.02.2021
and colour photographs of the deceased Krishna Yadav @ Pujari and
as per the post mortem report there were three injuries on the person
of the deceased and as per opinion of the doctor the said injuries are
not sufficient for death and the cause of death of deceased is Shock &
Syncope as a result of ante-mortem myocardial infraction and the
viscera was preserved for any intoxication. As per the viscera report
dated 01.07.2021 issued by the Forensic Science Laboratory, Ram
Nagar , Varanasi no Chemical poison was found in viscera."
13.     In his counter affidavit dated 06.09.2021, Sri Ajay Kumar
Sahani, Superintendent of Police, Jaunpur, has replied paragraph 3
of the aforesaid supplementary affidavit, as under :
"That in reply to the contents of paragraph no.3 of the
supplementary affidavit, it is submitted that the post-mortem report
shows that there were 3 injuries on the person of deceased and as per
the penal of doctors these injuries were not sufficient for death. The
cause of death was due to shock and syncope as a result of ante-
mortem myocardial infarction."
14.     On 03.09.2021 this writ petition was heard at length and a
detailed order dated 03.09.2021 was passed, observing as under :-
Despite all these facts well on record and for the reasons best
known to the respondents, they have not taken any action against the
accuseds pursuant to the impugned FIR but as a matter of eye wash
transfer or suspension or attachment order of accuseds were passed.
The custodial death of deceased is undisputed. Serious allegations
supported by the inquiry witnesses are well on record and and yet for
the reasons best known to the respondents, no action has been taken
against the accused, instead, it prima facie appears that effort is
being made to linger the investigation and carry it in a direction so
the accused policemen may escape.
15.     When this matter was heard on 06.09.2021 in presence of the
Superintendent of Police Jaunpur, this court noted in the order the
admission and submissions made by the State-respondents, as under :
"Heard Sri Sarvesh Chaubey, learned counsel for the
petitioner, Sri S.K. Pal, learned Government Advocate assisted by Sri
Roopak Chaubey, learned AGA for the State-respondents.
On oral request, learned counsel for the petitioner is permitted to
implead Central Bureau of Investigation through its Director as
respondent no. 5 in the array of parties. He undertakes to serve a
copy of the writ petition along with supplementary affidavit and a
copy of this order upon the counsel appearing on behalf of C.B.I.,
during course of the day.
Counter affidavit on behalf of respondent no. 3 dated 6.9.2021 has
been filed today, which is taken on record. Sri Ajay Kumar Sahni,
Superintendent of Police, Jaunpur is present in the Court in
compliance of the order dated 3.9.2021.
Learned Government Advocate admits that the photographs of the
deceased filed along with the supplementary affidavit dated 9.8.2021
is undisputed. The contents of paragraph no. 3 of the supplementary
affidavit dated 9.8.2021 regarding the aforesaid photographs, have
neither been disputed nor denied by the respondent no. 3 in
paragraph no. 43 of the counter affidavit dated 6.9.2021. He states
that accused police men are absconding and efforts are being made
for their arrest. He submits that the present Superintendent of Police
namely Sri Ajay Kumar Sahni has taken the charge on 17.6.2021 and
thus he was not the Superintendent of Police at the time of
registration of first information report no. 0038 of 2021 dated
12.2.2021 under Section 302, 394, 452, 504 IPC in which the SOG
team Jaunpur, S.O. Baksa, Ajay Kumar Singh and S.O. Hamrah,
Thana Baksa Jaunpur were the accused. He states that one Sri
Rajkaran Naiyar was the then Superintendent of Police, Jaunpur.
Learned counsel for the petitioner prays for and is granted a day's
time to file rejoinder affidavit.
Put up as fresh on 8.9.2021 at 10:00 A.M. for further hearing before
16.     The facts as briefly noted above prima facie reveal that the
deceased was lifted by the S.H.O. Police Station Baksa and other
policemen on 11.02.2021 and, thereafter he remained in the custody.
The story of accident of the deceased in the afternoon of 11.02.2021
is a story prima facie developed by the police so as to give a different
colour for the death of the deceased. As per own case of the police
and G.D. entry, the deceased was arrested at about 10:25 A.M. on
11.02.2021 but he was brought to the police station at about 01:30
A.M. on 12.02.2021 and no treatment was required. Surprisingly,
telephone calls were made to Sub-inspector Sunil Kumar Tiwari,
Constable Manish Kumar and Constable Sameer Kumar between
01:30 A.M. to 01:45 A.M. requiring them to come to the police
station to carry the deceased for first aid/ treatment. As per statement
given by these three police personnel before the C.J.M., Jaunpur, they
took the deceased at about 02:00 A.M. on 12.02.2021 to bring him to
17.     As per police story, the aforesaid S.I. Sunil Kumar Tiwari,
Constables Manish Kumar and Sameer Kumar also brought the
deceased to District Hospital, Jaunpur. But perusal of their statement
before the C.J.M. reveals that they had neither carried nor brought
the deceased to the District Hospital rather they returned from
C.H.C. Nawpedwa. As per photo-stat copy of the entry in the register
at C.H.C. Nawpedwa, Jaunpur at serial No.E-3092, Krishna Yadav,
when brought to the C.H.C., Naupedwa, Jaunpur, was unconscious
and his B.P. and P.P. were not found and after thorough examination,
the doctor referred him to District Hospital, Jaunpur at 01:55 A.M.
The aforesaid photo stat copy of the register of C.H.C. Naupedwa,
Jaunpur, has been produced before us by the learned A.G.A. stating it
to be part of the case diary. Thus, when as per own case of the
respondents, they took the deceased Krishna Yadav at about 02.00
A.M. on 12.02.2021 from the police station Baksa, then how it is
possible that the doctor after thorough examination, has referred the
deceased for District Hospital at 01:55 A.M. That apart, the doctor
at the C.H.C. has found the deceased in an unconscious condition
and his B.P. and P.P. were not found whereas the G.D. entry shows
that the deceased was merely making some complain of pain in
stomach. Surprisingly, the aforesaid three policemen who brought
Krishna Yadav to C.H.C. Naupedwa, have stated that they have not
seen any scratch or injury on the body of Krishna Yadav who has
also not told about injuries and who told the doctor about pain in
stomach, WHEREAS as per entries made by the doctor in the register
at the C.H.C. Naupedwa, the Krishna Yadav was unconscious and his
B.P. and P.P. were not found. Thus, the police story and G.D. entries
are prima facie false and a criminal act to divert investigation in a
wrong direction by manipulating evidences so as to defeat the rule of
law and fair investigation. The respondents have set up a case that
the deceased was carried by the aforesaid Sub Inspector Sunil Kumar
Tiwari, Constable Manish Kumar and Constable Sameer Kumar from
the police station to C.H.C. Naupedwa, Jaunpur and thereafter from
the C.H.C., Naupedwa to the District Hospital Jaunpur, but these
three persons have stated in their statement before the C.J.M.,
Jaunpur that they carried the deceased only upto C.H.C. Naupedwa
Jaunpur and thereafter, they came back. Thus, the story developed by
the respondents that the deceased was brought to District Hospital,
Jaunpur by the aforesaid Sub Inspector and Constable, is itself not
supported by their statements.
18.     It is admitted case of the respondents that the deceased had
received various injuries, which is reflected from the G.D. Entry No.
05. The statement made by the mother and brother of the deceased
before the C.J.M., Jaunpur regarding brutal beating by the police
and consequent injuries to the deceased, prima facie corroborates
with the photographs of the deceased and a little reference in the
G.D. entry No. 5. Surprisingly, the post mortem report does not
contain the injuries present on vital part of the body of the deceased
which can be easily seen in the undisputed photographs filed
alongwith the supplementary affidavit. Thus, prima facie, post
mortem report also appears to be manipulated or procured under
undue influence.
19.       In paragraph 6 of the writ petition the petitioner has stated
that the incident of lifting the deceased by the Police on 11.02.2021
was informed to the Superintendent of Police Jaunpur over telephone
(mobile phone) and by sending messages but no action was taken.
Copy of call details and messages have been filed as Annexure No.3
which have not been disputed by the Respondent Nos. 2 & 3 both in
their counter affidavits. In paragraph 5 of the writ petition the
petitioner has stated about some independent eye witnesses and some
family members who submitted their notarized statement before the
District Magistrate and the Superintendent of Police, Jaunpur.
Copies of statements of Ajay, Kanshraj, Chandrabhan and Saraswati
Devi have been filed collectively as Annexure No.2. But in their
counter affidavits the respondent Nos. 2 and 3 vaguely denied it
without denying the fact of statements and its contents. From the
records of the writ petition and the report of the C.J.M., Jaunpur
dated 25.6.2021 it appears that the deceased was preparing for
election of Village Panchayat and he was threatened by the SHO
20.       The statements given by witness and filed alongwith the writ
petition as referred in paras above, are reproduced below :-
Statement of Ajay Kumar Yadav
S/O tate 30 x 20 cm m e 30 x 20 cm nts of size 30 x 20 cm  Kanashraj Yadav Yadav
S/O tate 30 x 20 cm m e 30 x 20 cm nts of size 30 x 20 cm  Chandrabadan Yadav
S/O tate 30 x 20 cm m e 30 x 20 cm nts of size 30 x 20 cm  S/O araswati De 30 x 20 cm vi
21.         Call details filed alongwith the writ petition prima faice
showing the complaint made by the petitioner to the Superintendent
of Police, Janupur on 11.02.2021, as referred in paragraph 19 of this
order, is reproduced below :-
"Messages and calls are end-to-end encrypted. No one outside of this
chat, not even WhatsApp can read or listen to them. Tap to learn
Sir mai Ajay Yadav pakadi chak mirjapur se mera chota bhai chunav
ki taiyari kar raha hai prachar prasar kar raha tha chetra me baksha
thana utha ke le gai hai muje asanka hai kahi farji mukada na laga
de sir hamari madad kare praadam sir
22.     As per the alleged Hospital slip being part of the case diary
produced today in court by the learned Government Advocate in
presence of the respondent No.3, the deceased was brought dead by
the Police at District Hospital Jaunpur at about 3:35 A.M. On
12.02.2021, whereas, the Superintendent of Police Jaunpur and the
District Magistrate Jaunpur have stated in their letters all dated
12.02.2021 sent to the National Human Rights Commission New
Delhi and the District Judge Jaunpur that KRISHNA Yadav had died
during treatment at 03:35 P.M. at District Hospital, Jaunpur. These
facts have been mentioned by us only as instances.
23.     Sri Gyan Prakash, learned counsel for the respondent No.5
submits that if this court directs then investigation shall be carried by
the respondent No.5.
24.     Perusal of the counter affidavit and copy of the case diary as
produced before us by the learned G.A. Prima facie shows that entire
effort of the police is to some how give clean chit to the accuseds and
for this purpose important evidences are being left and some
evidences are being created and manipulated. But presently we do
not want to comment any more since fair investigation is yet to be
carried by an independent and impartial Agency.
25.     The facts mentioned above have been noted by us and brief
discussion has been made by us only for the purposes to see as to
whether investigation by the police has been carried honestly, fairly,
diligently or attempt is being made to shield guilty police
officers/policemen and to manufacture/create false evidences.
Ultimately, whether the accused policemen have committed offence of
murder and other offences and whether the then Superintendent of
Police, Jaunpur and Circle Officer, Jaunpur were influencing the
investigation and are creating false evidences, are matters of
investigation. There are sufficient material on record which prima
facie reveal commission of offence by the accuseds and involvement
of higher officers in consiperacy, destroying evidences and creating
false evidences to protect the accuseds. Fair investigation is the
foundation for a fair trial. In the present set of facts fair investigation
by State Police appears to be not possible in view of all the brief facts
and circumstances noted above.
26.     This court in writ jurisdiction does not intend to enter into
these areas, but with the sole purpose as to whether fair investigation
is being done or not, the facts in brief have been noted by us.
Therefore, the investigation by any agency in a fair manner, shall not
be influenced by any of the observations made by us.
27.     Today, learned Government Advocate has stated before us
that from the last three days, efforts are being made for arrest of the
accused, but they are absconding and therefore, N.B.Ws. have been
obtained for their arrest, but they could not be arrested so far.
28.     The facts as briefly noted above would further prima facie
reveal that officers of the I.P.S. rank also have some involvement in
the murder/death of the deceased Krishna Yadav, who died in police
custody, allegedly due to brutal beating by the accused policemen.
29.     Post mortem report as well as alleged slip dated 12.02.2021
issued by the District Hospital also prima facie appears to have been
managed/fabricated. Serious allegations have been made against the
police personnel, which cannot be said to be completely without
30.     In the case of K.V. Rajendran vs. Superintendent of Police vs.
CBCID, South Zone, Chennai and others (2013) 12 SCC 480 (Paras-
13, 14 and 17), Hon'ble Supreme Court observed that investigation
can be transferred from the State Investigating Agency to any other
independent agency like CBI and the power of transferring such
investigation should be exercised in rare and exceptional cases where
the court finds it necessary in order to do justice between the parties
and to instil confidence in the public mind or where investigation by
the State Police lacks credibility and it is necessary for having "a
fair, honest and complete investigation" and particularly when it is
imperative to retain public confidence in the impartial work of the
State Agencies. In the aforesaid case, Hon'ble Supreme Court
referred to its decision in Rubabbuddin Sheikh v. State of Gujarat &
Ors (2010) 2 SCC 200 and observed that in order to do justice and
instil confidence in the minds of the victims as well of the public, the
State Police Authorities could not be allowed to continue with the
investigation when allegations and offences were mostly against top
officials. It was further observed that where high officials of State
authorities are involved, or the accusation itself is against the top
officials of the investigating agency thereby allowing them to
influence the investigation, and further that it is so necessary to do
justice and to instil confidence in the investigation or where the
investigation is prima facie found to be tainted/biased, the court
could exercise its Constitutional powers for transferring an
investigation from the State investigating agency to any other
independent investigating agency like CBI only in rare and
exceptional cases.
31.     In Mithilesh Kumar Singh vs. State of Rajasthan and others
(2015) 9 SCC 795 (Para-15), Hon'ble Supreme Court while
emphasizing the need of fair, proper and impartial investigation,
considered the transfer of investigation to CBI and held as under:
"15. Suffice it to say that transfers have been ordered in
varied situations but while doing so the test applied by the Court has
always been whether a direction for transfer, was keeping in view the
nature of allegations, necessary with a view to making the process of
discovery of truth credible. What is important is that this Court has
rarely, if ever, viewed at the threshold the prayer for transfer of
investigation to CBI with suspicion. There is no reluctance on the
part of the Court to grant relief to the victims or their families in
cases, where intervention is called for, nor is it necessary for the
petitioner seeking a transfer to make out a cast-iron case of abuse or
neglect on the part of the State Police, before ordering a transfer.
Transfer can be ordered once the Court is satisfied on the available
material that such a course will promote the cause of justice, in a
given case."
32.     The criminal justice system mandates that any investigation
into the crime should be fair, in accordance with law and should not
be tainted. It is equally important that interested or influential
persons are not able to misdirect or hijack the investigation, so as to
throttle a fair investigation resulting in the offenders escaping
punitive course of law. These are important facets of the rule of law.
Breach of rule of law amounts to negation of equality under Article
14 of the Constitution of India. Article 21 of the Constitution of India
makes it clear that the procedure in criminal trials must be right, just
and fair and not arbitrary, fanciful or oppressive, vide Menka Gandhi
vs. Union of India AIR 1978 SC 597 (para-7) and Vinubhai Haribhai
Malviya and others vs. State of Gujrat and another AIR 2019 SC
5233 (paras-16 and 17) and Subramanian Swamy vs. C.B.I. (2014) 8
SCC 682 (para-86). Article 21 enshrines and guarantees the precious
right of life and personal liberty to a person which can only be
deprived on following the procedure established by law in a fair trial
which assures the safety of the accused. The assurance of a fair trial
is the first imperative of the dispensation of justice, vide
Commissioner of Police, Delhi vs. Registrar, Delhi High Court, New
Delhi AIR 1997 SC 95 (para-16). The ultimate aim of all
investigation and inquiry whether by the police or by the Magistrate
is to ensure that those who have actually committed a crime, are
correctly booked and those who have not, are not arraigned to stand
trial. This is the minimal and fundamental requirement of Article 21
of the Constitution of India. Interpretation of provisions of Cr.P.C.
needs to be made so as to ensure that Article 21 is followed both in
letter and in sprit. "A speedy trial" is the essence of companion in
concept in "fair trial". Both being inalienable jurisprudentially, the
guarantee under Article 21 of the Constitution of India embraces
both life and liberty of the accused as well as interest of the victim,
his near and dear ones as well as of the community at large and,
therefore, cannot be alienated from each other. A fair trial includes
fair investigation as reflected from Articles 20 and 21 of the
Constitution of India. If the investigation is neither effective nor
purposeful nor objective nor fair, the courts may if considered
necessary, may order fair investigation, further investigation or
reinvestigation as the case may be to discover the truth so as to
prevent miscarriage of justice. However, no hard and fast rules as
such can be prescribed by way of uniform and universal invocation
and decision shall depend upon facts and circumstances of each case.
33.      Fair and proper investigation is the primary duty of the
investigating officer. In every civilized society, the police force is
invested with powers of investigation of a crime to secure punishment
for the criminal and it is in the interest of the society that the
investigating agency must act honestly and fairly and not resort to
fabricating false evidence or creating false clues only with a view to
secure conviction because such acts shake the confidence of the
common man not only in the investigating agency but in the ultimate
analysis in the system of dispensation of criminal justice. Proper
result must be obtained by recourse to proper means, otherwise it
would be an invitation to anarchy, vide Rampal Pithwa Rahidas vs.
State of Maharastra 1994 Suppl, (2) SCC 73 (para-37). Investigation
must be fair and effective and must proceed in the right direction in
consonance with the ingredients of the offence and not in a
haphazard manner moreso in serious case. Proper and fair
investigation on the part of the investigating officer is the backbone
of rule of law vide Sasi Thomas vs. State (2006) 12 SCC 421 (para-
15 and 18).
34.      Therefore, considering the fact and circumstances of the case
in its entirety and applying the principles of law aforenoted, we direct
the respondent no.5 to investigate forthwith in FIR No. 0038/2021,
dated 12.02.2021 under Sections 302, 394, 452 & 504 I.P.C. P.S. -
Baksa, District - Jaunpur, and accordingly investigation is
transferred/entrusted forthwith to the respondent No.5. The
respondent nos. 1, 2, 3 & 4 shall ensure that the entire evidences and
papers relating to the aforesaid case crime/FIR are transferred to
Investigating Officer of the respondent No.5 for investigation. An
affidavit of compliance shall be filed on behalf of the respondent no.5
and also by the State-respondents on or before the next date fixed.
35.    Put up as a fresh case on 20.09.2021 at 02:00 P.M. before this
bench for further hearing.”
8.     The CBI then took up the case and lodged a First Information Report
on 17.09.2021 at 06:15 pm as RC0532021S0010, under Sections 302, 394,
452, 504 IPC, P.S. S.C.B. Lucknow, District Lucknow against S.O.G.
Team, Ajai Kumar Singh S.O. Baksa along with police personnels of
9.     The CBI completed the investigation and has submitted a charge
sheet under Section 34 read with Sections 302, 330, 331, 218 read with
Section 120-B IPC on 22.02.2022 in the court of Special Judicial
Magistrate, CBI Lucknow against 19 police officials including the
applicant. The pleading regarding the same has been given in para 8 of the
counter affidavit filed by the CBI.
10.    Learned counsel for the applicant argued that the applicant has been
falsely implicated in the present case. It is argued that the applicant is a
police personnels and since 2015 he is serving at Surveillance Cell,
Jaunpur and has been awarded with various commendation certificates for
his distinguished services. Para 19 has been placed before the Court to
buttress the same.
11.    It is argued that the applicant joined his services in the Police
Department in the year 1998 and was actively involved in the encounter of
famous Kallu Najju Gang in Shahjahanpur in which he received a bullet
injury in his left eye and lost his vision in November, 2002. He was
admitted for treatment from 09.11.2000 to 02.12.2000 in K.G.M.U.,
Lucknow. Para 18 and annexure 6 of the affidavit being some newspapers
cutting have been placed before the Court to buttress the said arguments. It
is argued while placing para 23 of the affidavit that the applicant has been
made an accused in the present case by the CBI intentionally as he was
interrogated on 26.11.2021 before his arrest and was offered to become an
“approver” in the case which was declined by him after which he has been
falsely implicated in the present case.
12.    It is next argued while placing para 16 and 17 of the affidavit that
the involvement of the applicant in the present case has been shown on the
basis of GD No. 005 dated 12.02.2021 allegedly transcribed at 01:30 hrs at
Police Station Baksa, District Jaunpur pertaining to the arrest of the
deceased in which the name of the applicant finds place and he is shown to
be a signatory of the arrest and recovery memo of the deceased. The copy
of the said GD has been placed before the Court which is annexure S.A.2
to the supplementary affidavit dated 28.05.2022. While placing para 17 of
the affidavit in support of the bail application, it is argued that the
signature of the applicant in the said recovery memo is a forged signature
and the applicant has also given his sample to the CBI for forensic analysis
which if done would clear the doubts. It is further argued while placing
para 24 of the affidavit that the applicant has no previous criminal history
and is not previous convict in any case. The applicant is in jail since
13.    Per contra, learned counsel for the CBI has vehemently opposed the
prayer for bail. It is argued that the present case is a case of custodial
death. There are eye witness account of the police taking away the
deceased from his house and committing robbery. It is further argued that
looking to the seriousness and the gravity of the offence, a Division Bench
of this Court vide order dated 08.09.2021 transferred the investigation to
the CBI from the local police by a detailed order after having being fully
satisfied that the present case is a case of custodial death.
14.    It is argued that the deceased was brutally beaten by police
personnels while being in police custody. An opinion was taken from the
department of Forensic Medicine AIIMS, New Delhi which was given vide
letter dated 10.01.2022 of its Professor and Head of the Department in
which the Board opined as follows:
“The body of the deceased had multiple blunt force injuries as
described above (Image 1-3). In such type of injuries,
capillaries and other blood vessels get ruptured leading to
internal bleeding in the underlying muscular layers and tissues
causing excessive and fatal internal blood loss from the
circulatory system, which then leads to circulatory collapse and
shock.
The Medical Board is of the opinion that the cause of the death
is ‘Shock due to cumulative effects of multiple blunt force
injuries sustained to the body. All injuries are antemortem in
nature and fresh in duration. These injuries are only
collectively sufficient to cause death in the ordinary course of
nature.”
15.   It is further argued that the opinion of the Forensic Department of
AIIMS is specific to the fact that the injuries received by the deceased,
were collectively sufficient to cause his death in the ordinary course of
nature. It is argued that the applicant was one of the police personnels who
had brought the deceased from his house as is evident from the arrest and
recovery memo and the GD entry of the concerned Police Station. He is
one of the signatories of the said memo.
16.   It is argued that the Medical Board of AIIMS has opined that the
nature of injuries as received were caused by cylindrical objects like a rod,
baton or lathi which are the common articles of assault by the police. It is
argued that as such the present bail application of the applicant thus
deserves to be rejected.
17.   Custodial violence, custodial torture and custodial deaths have
always been a concern for civilized society. Times and again the judicial
verdicts of the Apex Court and other Courts have shown their concern and
anguish in such matters.
18.   In the celebrated case of D.K. Basu Vs. State of West Bengal :
(1997) 1 SCC 416 the Apex Court while expressing its anguish in cases of
custodial deaths has observed as follows:-
"22. Custodial death is perhaps one of the worst crimes in
a civilised society governed by the rule of law. The rights
inherent in Articles 21 and 22(1) of the Constitution require
to be jealously and scrupulously protected. We cannot wish
away the problem. Any form of torture or cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment would fall within the inhibition of Article
21 of the Constitution, whether it occurs during investigation,
interrogation or otherwise. If the functionaries of the
Government become law breakers, it is bound to breed
contempt for law and would encourage lawlessness and
every man would have the tendency to become law unto
himself thereby leading to anarchanism. No civilised nation
can permit that to happen. Does a citizen shed off his
fundamental right to life, the moment a policeman arrests
him? Can the right to life of a citizen be put in abeyance on
his arrest? These questions touch the spinal cord of human
rights jurisprudence. The answer, indeed, has to be an
emphatic "No". The precious right guaranteed by Article 21
of the Constitution of India cannot be denied to convicts,
undertrials, detenues and other prisoners in custody, except
according to the procedure established by law by placing
such reasonable restrictions as are permitted by law.
23.     In Neelabati Bahera v. State of Orissa, (1993) 2 SCC
746 (to which Anand, J. was a party) this Court pointed out
that prisoners and detenues are not denuded of their
fundamental rights under Article 21 and it is only such
restrictions as are permitted by law, which can be imposed
on the enjoyment of the fundamental rights of the arrestees
and detenues. It was observed: (SCC p. 767, para 31)
"It is axiomatic that convicts, prisoners or undertrials
are not denuded of their fundamental rights under Article 21
and it is only such restrictions, as are permitted by law,
which can be imposed on the enjoyment of the fundamental
right by such persons. It is an obligation of the State to
ensure that there is no infringement of the indefeasible
rights of a citizen to life, except in accordance with law, while
the citizen is in its custody. The precious right guaranteed by
Article 21 of the Constitution of India cannot be denied to
convicts, undertrials or other prisoners in custody, except
according to procedure established by law. There is a great
responsibility on the police or prison authorities to ensure
that the citizen in its custody is not deprived of his right to
life. His liberty is in the very nature of things circumscribed
by the very fact of his confinement and therefore his interest
in the limited liberty left to him is rather precious. The duty of
care on the part of the State is strict and admits of no
exceptions. The wrongdoer is accountable and the State is
responsible if the person in custody of the police is deprived
of his life except according to the procedure established by
law."
24.     Instances have come to our notice where the police
has arrested a person without warrant in connection with the
investigation of an offence, without recording the arrest, and
the arrested person has been subjected to torture to extract
information from him for the purpose of further investigation
or for recovery of case property or for extracting confession
etc. The torture and injury caused on the body of the
arrestee has sometimes resulted into his death. Death in
custody is not generally shown in the records of the lock-up
and every effort is made by the police to dispose of the body
or to make out a case that the arrested person died after he
was released from custody. Any complaint against such
torture or death is generally not given any attention by the
police officers because of ties of brotherhood. No first
information report at the instance of the victim or his kith and
kin is generally entertained and even the higher police
officers turn a blind eye to such complaints. Even where a
formal prosecution is launched by the victim or his kith and
kin, no direct evidence is available to substantiate the
charge of torture or causing hurt resulting into death, as the
police lock-up where generally torture or injury is caused is
away from the public gaze and the witnesses are either
police men or co-prisoners who are highly reluctant to
appear as prosecution witnesses due to fear of retaliation by
the superior officers of the police. It is often seen that when
a complaint is made against torture, death or injury, in police
custody, it is difficult to secure evidence against the
policemen responsible for resorting to third degree methods
since they are in charge of police station records which they
do not find difficult to manipulate. Consequently, prosecution
against the delinquent officers generally results in acquittal.
State of Madhya Pradesh v. Shyamsunder Trivedi & Ors.,
(1995) 4 SCC 262 is an apt case illustrative of the
observations made by us above. ......…"
19. Further in the case of Shakila Abdul Gafar Khan Vs. Vasant
Raghunath Dhoble and another: (2003) 7 SCC 749 the Apex
Court has again shown its anguish in the matters of custodial
violence, torture and abuse of police powers. It has been observed as
"If you once forfeit the confidence of our fellow citizens you
can never regain their respect and esteem. It is true that you
can fool all the people some of the time, and some of the
people all the time, but you cannot fool all the people all the
time", said Abraham Lincoln. This Court in Raghbir Singh v.
State of Haryana (1980 (3) SCC 70), took note of these
immortal observations (SCC p. 72, para 4) while deprecating
custodial torture by the police.
2.      Custodial violence, torture and abuse of police power
are not peculiar to this country, but it is widespread. It has
been the concern of international community because the
problem is universal and the challenge is almost global. The
Universal Declaration of Human Rights in 1948 which marked
the emergence of a worldwide trend of protection and
guarantee of certain basic human rights stipulates in Article 5
that "no one shall be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment of punishment". Despite this pious
declaration, the crime continues unabated, though every
civilized nation shows its concern and makes efforts for its
3.      If it is assuming alarming proportions, now a days, all
around it is merely on account of the devilish devices adopted
by those at the helm of affairs who proclaim from roof tops to
be the defenders of democracy and protectors of people's
rights and yet do not hesitate to condescend behind the
screen to let loose their men in uniform to settle personal
scores, feigning ignorance of what happens and pretending to
be peace loving puritans and saviours of citizens' rights.
4.      Article 21 which is one of the luminary provisions in the
Constitution of India, 1950 (in short "the Constitution") and is a
part of the scheme for fundamental rights occupies a place of
pride in the Constitution. The article mandates that no person
shall be deprived of his life and personal liberty except
according to the procedure established by law. This sacred
and cherished right i.e. personal liberty has an important role
to play in the life of every citizen. Life or personal liberty
includes a right to live with human dignity. There is an inbuilt
guarantee against torture or assault by the State or its
functionaries. Chapter V of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 (for short "the Code") deals with the powers of arrest of
persons and the safeguards required to be followed by the
police to protect the interest of the arrested person. Articles 20
(3) and 22 of the Constitution further manifest the
constitutional protection extended to every citizen and the
guarantees held out for making life meaningful and not a mere
animal existence. It is therefore difficult to comprehend how
torture and custodial violence can be permitted to defy the
rights flowing from the Constitution. The dehumanizing torture,
assault and death in custody which have assumed alarming
proportions raise serious questions about the credibility of rule
of law and administration of criminal justice system. The
community rightly gets disturbed. The cry for justice becomes
louder and warrants immediate remedial measures. This
Court has in a large number of cases expressed concern at
the atrocities perpetuated by the protectors of law. Justice
Brandies' observation which have become classic are in
following immortal words:
Government as the omnipotent and omnipresent
teacher teaches the whole people by its example, if the
Government becomes a lawbreaker, it breeds contempt for
law, it invites every man to become a law into himself. (In
Olmstead v. United States, 277 US 438, US at p. 485, quoted
in Mapp v. Ohio, 367 US 643, US at p. 659)
5. The diabolic recurrence of police torture resulting in a
terrible scare in the minds of common citizens that their lives
and liberty are under a new and unwarranted peril because
guardians of law destroy the human rights by custodial
violence and torture and invariably resulting in death. The
vulnerability of human rights assumes a traumatic torture
when functionaries of the State whose paramount duty is to
protect the citizens and not to commit gruesome offences
against them, in reality perpetrate them. The concern which
was shown in Raghubir Singh case (1980 (3) SCC 70) more
than two decades back seems to have fallen to leaf ears and
the situation does not seem to be showing any noticeable
change. The anguish expressed in Gauri Shanker Sharma v.
State of U. P. (AIR 1990 SC 709), Bhagwan Singh and Anr. v.
State of Punjab (1992 (3) SCC 249), Smt. Nilabati Behera @
Lalita Behera v. State of Orissa and Ors. (AIR 1993 SC 1960),
Pratul Kumar Sinha v. State of Bihar and Anr. (1994 Supp. (3)
SCC 100), Kewal Pati (Smt.) v. State of U. P. and Ors. (1995
(3) SCC 600), Inder Singh v. State of Punjab and Ors. (1995
(3) SCC 702), State of M. P. v. Shyamsunder Trivedi and Ors.
(1995 (4) SCC 262) and by now celebrated decision in D. K.
Basu v. State of West Bengal (1997 (1) SCC 416) seems to
have caused not even any softening attitude to the inhuman
approach in dealing with persons in custody.
6.      Rarely, in cases of police torture or custodial death,
direct ocular evidence of the complicity of the police personnel
alone who can only explain the circumstances in which a
person in their custody had died. Bound as they are by the
ties of brotherhood, it is not unknown that the police personnel
prefer to remain silent and more often than not even pervert
the truth to save their colleagues - and the present case is an
apt illustration - as to how one after the other police witnesses
feigned ignorance about the whole matter.
7.      The exaggerated adherence to and insistence upon the
establishment of proof beyond every reasonable doubt by the
prosecution, at times even when the prosecuting agencies are
themselves fixed in the dock, ignoring the ground realities, the
fact-situation and the peculiar circumstances of a given case,
as in the present case, often results in miscarriage of justice
and makes the justice delivery system suspect and
vulnerable. In the ultimate analysis the society suffers and a
criminal gets encouraged. Tortures in police custody, which of
late are on the increase, receive encouragement by this type
of an unrealistic approach at times of the courts as well
because it reinforces the belief in the mind of the police that
no harm would come to them if one prisoner dies in the lockup
because there would hardly be any evidence available to the
prosecution to directly implicate them with the torture. The
courts must not lose sight of the fact that death in police
custody is perhaps one of the worst kind of crimes in a
civilized society, governed by the rule of law and poses a
serious threat to an orderly civilized society. Torture in custody
flouts the basic rights of the citizens recognized by the Indian
Constitution and is an affront to human dignity. Police
excesses and the maltreatment of detainees/under - trial
prisoners or suspects tarnishes the image of any civilised
nation and encourages the men in "khaki" to consider
themselves to be above the law and sometimes even to
become law unto themselves. Unless stern measures are
taken to check the malady of the very fence eating the crops,
the foundations of the criminal justice delivery system would
be shaken and the civilization itself would risk the
consequence of heading, towards total decay resulting in
anarchy and authoritarianism reminiscent of barbarism. The
courts must, therefore, deal with such cases in a realistic
manner and with the sensitivity which they deserve, otherwise
the common man may tend to gradually lose faith in the
efficacy of the system of judiciary itself, which if it happen will
be a sad day, for anyone to reckon with."
20.    After having heard learned counsels for the parties and perusing the
records and as per the judgments of the Apex Court as referred to above, it
is evident that the present case is a case of custodial death. The case of the
prosecution is of the deceased being taken away from his house to Police
Station Baksa, District Jaunpur which is not in dispute. An arrest memo
was prepared regarding his arrest by the officials of the police after which
a GD was also drawn regarding the same. In the arrest memo, the applicant
is one of the persons arresting him and is also a signatory to it. His name as
such finds place in the corresponding GD No. 005 dated 12.02.2021. The
injuries as received by the deceased cover basically the entire back side of
his body. The opinion of the Board of AIIMS, New Delhi is specific to the
fact that he died due to collective effect of the injuries received by him.
The same would go to show that the death was not natural. The present
case is a case of custodial torture and death with robbery in a well planned
conspiracy. The applicant is in the police force which is considered to be
disciplined force and enshrined with the pious duty of maintaining law and
order and protecting the citizens. The present case is not a case of police
excess but a clear cut case of abuse of police powers and police high
handedness. I do not find it a fit case for bail.
21.    Considering the totality of the case in particular, nature of evidence
available on record, the order of the Division Bench of this Court and the
dictum of the Apex Court, I am not inclined to release the applicant on
bail.
22.    The bail application is, accordingly, rejected.