1.     By way of this appeal, the appellant has challenged the Judgment
and order dated 08.12.2009 passed by Additional Session Judge,
Special Court (Dakaity Affected Area), District Kanpur Dehat in S.T.
No.68 of 2009, State v. Raggu Baniya @ Raghvendra, (arising out of
Case Crime No.413 of 2008), under Sections 376 of IPC, Police Station
Ghatampur, District Kapur Dehat whereby the accused-appellant was
convicted under Section 376 IPC and sentenced to imprisonment for
life imprisonment with fine of Rs.5,000/-, and in case of default of
payment of fine, to undergo further rigorous imprisonment for six
2.     The brief facts as per prosecution case are that on 24.8.2008 at
about 9:00 a.m., the prosecutrix was going alone from her house to
break the cucumber in the field of Bhaiyadin Yadav, when she reached,
accused- Raggu Baniya @ Raghwendra son of Chandra Pal Sankhwar
who had caught hold of her with bad intention and he committed rape
with her and on the sound of her screaming, complainant with his
brother (Baburam) came running to the place of the incident and tried to
nab the accused, but accused ran away from the place of offence. The
complainant reached the police station for reporting the said incident as
a case of rape. Sub Inspector Ramraj Shukla, Chauki Incharge
registered the First Information Report and started the investigation,
visited the spot (namely place of offence), prepared site plan, recorded
statements of the prosecutrix and witnesses and after completing
investigation submitted charge sheet against the accused.
3.    The prosecution so as to bring home the charges examined five
4.    In support of the ocular version of the witnesses, following
documents were produced and contents were proved by leading
4.   Statement of Pinki (prosecutrix)    Ext. Ka-1
5.    Heard Shri Amit Tripathi, learned counsel for the appellant and
learned AGA for the State and also perused the record.
6.    Learned counsel for appellant has relied on the following
decisions of the Apex Court rendered in the case of Sadashiv Ramrao
Hadbe Vs. State of Maharashtra, 2006(10)SCC 92 and the judgment
of High Court of Andhra Pradesh in the case of Manne Siddaiah @
Siddiramulu Vs. State of Andhra Pradesh, 2000(2) Alld(Cri) so as to
contend and submit that in fact no case is made out so as to convict the
accused under Section 376 I.P.C. and the prosecutrix has roped in the
accused with ulterior motive i.e. because of dispute between her father
(Sukhram) and the accused and in the alternative contends that reliance
on the aforesaid decision is placed so as to demonstrate that life
imprisonment is too harsh a punishment.
7.     It is submitted by learned counsel for the State that the judgment
of learned Trial Judge cannot be found fault with.
8.     Learned counsel for the appellant Shri Amit Tripathi has stated
that the accused is in jail since 24.8.2008. The accused who at the time
of incident was a young age of 19 years he should be given chance of
rehabilitation. Learned counsel for appellant has relied on the decision
of Sadashiv Ramrao Hadbe Vs. State of Maharashtra (supra) and
has submitted that she presses for clean acquittal of the accused. The
appellant has been in jail since 24.08.2008. In support of his
submission, he presses into service the judgment in the case of Manne
Siddaiah @ Siddiramulu (supra) rendered by Andhra Pradesh High
Court, though it is a judgment of Single Bench, i.e. by Justice B.
Sudershan Reddy (as he then was). Learned counsel has relied on
findings returned in paragraphs 14 and 15 of the said judgment, which
“14. In nutshell the version given by P.W.5 is not supported
by even P.Ws. 1 and 2. P.W.1 in his evidence in categorical
terms states that he caught hold of the appellant herein as
his wife informed him that the appellant has raped her.
P.W.5 in her evidence does not state that she has informed
P.W.1 about the rape at any time. These major
inconsistencies and contradictions in the evidence of
material witnesses - P.Ws. 1, 2 and 5 create a lot of
suspicion and doubt about the prosecution case. Added to
that, P.W.10 - the Civil Assistant Surgeon who examined
P.W.5, in her evidence clearly states that she did not find
any external injuries on the body of P.W.5. She has also not
noticed any semen and spermatozoa in the vaginal slides.
15. In the aforesaid circumstances, it would not be safe to
convict the appellant herein on mere suspicion. The
inconsistencies and contradictions noticed above are fatal
to the case of the prosecution and create any amount of
doubt. Obviously, it is the appellant who is entitled for the
benefit of doubt.
9.    Learned counsel for appellant presses into service the judgment
in the case of Sadashiv Ramrao Hadbe Vs. State of Maharashtra
(supra) more particularly observations in paras 9, 10, 11 of the said
judgment, which are verbatim reproduced as follows :-
“9. It is true that in a rape case the accused could be
convicted on the sole testimony of the prosecutrix, if it is
capable of inspiring of confidence in the mind of the court.
If the version given by the prosecutrix is unsupported by
any medical evidence or the whole surrounding
circumstances are highly improbable and belie the case set
up by the prosecutrix, the court shall not act on the
solitary evidence of the prosecutrix. The courts shall be
extremely careful in accepting the sole testimony of the
prosecutrix when the entire case is improbable and
unlikely to happen.
10. In the present case there were so many persons in
the clinic and it is highly improbable the appellant would
have made a sexual assault on the patient who came for
examination when large number of persons were present in
the near vicinity. It is also highly improbable that the
prosecutrix could not make any noise or get out of the
room without being assaulted by the doctor as she was an
able bodied person of 20 years of age with ordinary
physique. The absence of injuries on the body
improbablise the prosecution version.
11. The counsel who appeared for the State submitted
that the presence of semen stains on the undergarments of
the appellant and also semen stains found on her petticot
and her sari would probablise the prosecution version and
could have been a sexual intercourse of the prosecutrix.
12. It is true that the petticot and the underwear
allegedly worn by the appellant had some semen but that
by itself is not sufficient to treat that the appellant had
sexual intercourse with the prosecutrix. That would only
cause some suspicion on the conduct of the appellant but
not sufficient to prove that the case, as alleged by the
prosecution.”
10.    We are unable to convince ourselves with the submission made
by learned AGA for State that the prosecutrix has been a victim of
atrocity as well as rape and, therefore, the accused should not be
leniently dealt with.
11.    We have been taken through the evidence and the deposition
mainly of prosecution witnesses and judgment of Trial Court. We have
read the same and are discussing the same.
12.    PW-1, namely, the prosecutrix has been examined on oath who
was made to understand that she was in a court of law, she understood
the importance of her testimony, she understood why she was
summoned to the Court where she answered that as the accused had
committed bad work with her, she was summoned and that she was
capable of answering or the questions. According to her, when she was
11 years of age and when she went with Pooja (sister of accused) for
eating cucumber in the field of Bhaiyadin. Raghvendra-accused sent
his sister from the field of Bhaiyadin to fetch water. When she also tried
to leave the place, he conveyed that he would give her cucumber, he
took her to the maize field, she started screaming but the accused
forcibly shut her mouth by cloth and he had forcible intercourse. She
was brought to the police station by her grand father. She was
hospitalized for three days. She was taken to the hospital by her grand
father and the police personnel. Her statement under Section 164
Cr.P.C. was recorded before the concerned Magistrate. In her cross
examination, she stated that on the date or day of incident she did not
go to the school as it was a Sunday. She was playing at her home and
when Pooja came, her grand-father and father were not in the house.
Her grand-father had gone just three fields ahead of Bhaiyadin’s field
(the place of incidence). The incident occurred when Pooja called the
prosecutrix at 9.00 a.m.
13.    Sukhram, was examined as PW-2, who is the uncle of the
prosecutrix,who had given the FIR. The prosecutrix was bleeding and
so he took her on his shoulder and took her to police station and from
there she was taken to hospital. She was hospitalized in Urshila
Hospital, Kanpur, where she was hospitalized for three days. PW-2
when he was in his field, he heard the screaming of a girl, she was not
able to speak because her mouth was forcibly shut by cloth. He brought
the prosecutrix to their home and at 12.30 he took her to the police
14.    Dr. Geeta Yadav, PW-3 in her ocular version mentioned that
hyman was ruptured and was bleeding the vaginal smear for the
determination of the age of the prosecutrix was prepared. The matter
was sent to the Radiologist and the injured, she was kept in emergency
ward. Doctor in her ocular version did not give any finding of opinion
about the sexual intercourse or rape committed on the prosecutrix. The
prosecutirx was sent for getting her age examined by the C.M.O.,
Kanpur Nagar. The Injury, according to the doctor could be caused even
otherwise then rape the hyman may ruptured not be because of the rap.
15.    As far as PW-4, Chief Pharmacist is concerned, he is also a
medical officer and he was summoned so as to prove the medico legal
cases. The prosecutrix was referred to Kanpur accept the records he did
not throw much light on the other facts.
16.    PW-5 is the Officer who had conducted the investigation.
17.    We now would to sift the evidence threadbare of the prosecution
story, the evidence led and discussed before the trial court and
appreciated as by the learned Trial Judge.
18. Provision of Section 376 I.P.C. read as follows :
(1) Whoever, except in the cases provided for by sub-section
(2), commits rape shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which shall not be less than seven years
but which may be for life or for a term which may extend to ten
years and shall also be liable to fine unless the women raped is
his own wife and is not under twelve years of age, in which
cases, he shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years or with
fine or with both: Provided that the court may, for adequate and
special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, impose a
sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than seven years.
(i) within the limits of the police station to which he is
(ii) in the premises of any station house whether or not
situated in the police station to which he is appointed; or
(iii) on a woman in his custody or in the custody of a
(b) being a public servant, takes advantage of his official
position and commits rape on a woman in his custody as such
public servant or in the custody of a public servant
(c) being on the management or on the staff of a jail, remand
home or other place of custody established by or under any
law for the time being in force or of a woman’s or children’s
institution takes advantage of his official position and
commits rape on any inmate of such jail, remand home, place
(d) being on the management or on the staff of a hospital,
takes advantage of his official position and commits rape on
(e) commits rape on a woman knowing her to be pregnant; or
(f) commits rape on a woman when she is under twelve years
(g) commits gang rape, shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten
years but which may be for life and shall also be liable to
fine: Provided that the Court may, for adequate and special
reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, impose a
sentence of imprisonment of either description for a term
of less than ten years. Explanation 1.—Where a woman is
raped by one or more in a group of persons acting in
furtherance of their common intention, each of the persons
shall be deemed to have committed gang rape within the
meaning of this sub-section. Explanation 2.—“Women’s or
children’s institution” means an institution, whether called
an orphanage or a home for neglected woman or children
or a widows’ home or by any other name, which is
established and maintained for the reception and care of
woman or children. Explanation 3.—“Hospital” means the
precincts of the hospital and includes the precincts of any
institution for the reception and treatment of persons during
convalescence or of persons requiring medical attention or
rehabilitation.”
19.   In respect of the victim, the doctor in medical report has opined
“In the x-Ray of both wrist A.P., all eight carpal bones were
found present. The lower epiphyses of both wrist joints have not
fused. In the x-Ray of both elbow joints, all the bony epiphyses
In her supplementary report, lady doctor opined that no
spermatozoa was seen by her. According to physical appearance,
age of the prosecutrix was 15 to 16 years. No definite opinion
about rape was given”
20.   The evidence as discussed by learned Judge discusses all the
aspects and he has held that the mere fact that no external marks of
injury wew found by itself would not throw the testimony of the
prosecutrix over board as it has been found that at the time of
occurrence as she was a minor girl. We also do not give any credence to
that fact and would like to go through the merits of the matter.
21.    As far as the commission of offence under Section 376 IPC is
concerned, the learned Judge has relied on the judgments of (1) Rafiq
Versus State of U.P., AIR 1981 SC page 559, (2) Nawab Khan
Versus State, 1990 Cri.L.J. Page 1179 and the judgment in (3)
Bharvada Bhogin Bhai Hirji Bhai Versus State of Gujarat, AIR
1983 SC page 753.
22.    We venture to discuss the evidence of the prosecutrix on which
reliance is placed by trial court and whether it inspires confidence or
not so as to sustain the conviction of accused. There were concrete
positive signs from the oral testimony of the prosecutrix as regards the
commission of forcible sexual intercourse. In case of Ganesan Versus
State Represented by its Inspector of Police, Criminal Appeal No.
680 of 2020 ( Arising from S.L.P. ( Criminal ) No.4976 of 2020)
decided on 14.10.2020 wherein the principles of accepting the evidence
of the minor prosecutrix or the prosecutrix are enshrined the words may
be that her testimony must be trustworthy and reliable then a conviction
based on sole testimony of the victim can be based. In our case when
we rely on the said decision, it becomes clear that the testimony of the
prosecutrix can be said to be that of a sterling witness and the medical
evidence on evaluation prove the fact that case is made out against the
23.    Though the evidence of Dr. Geeta Yadav, Medical Officer, PW-3,
Mahila Hospital Kanpur Dehat who medically examined the prosecutrix
on 22.10.2009, Auxiliary and public hair was not present. The breasts
was not developed. The height of prosecutrix was 131 c.m. and her
weight was 23 kg., teeth were present in her mouth. There was no
injury on the breast. There was no injury and bleeding on the vaginal
but hymen was torn and heeled vagginal smear was collected and was
sent to the Pathologist. No living or dead spermatozoa were found in
the vaginal smear. As per medical examination report no external or
internal injury were visible on the whole body of the prosecutrix. On
perusal of the medical report it appears that the victim was about 11
years old at the time of incident.
24.    In the x-ray examination, both wrist A.P., all eight carpal bones
were found present. Lower epiphyses of both writst joints were not
fused. All the bony epiphyses around both elbow joints were fused. In
the supplementary report, the docotr opined that no spermatozoa was
seen by her and according to the physical appearance, age of the victim
was appearing to be 15 to 16 years and no definite opinion about rape
could be given.
25.    As far as the medical evidence is concerned, there are three facts
which emerge. Firstly, no injury was found on the person of the victim.
We are not mentioning that there must be any corroboration in the
prosecution version and medical evidence. The judgment of the Apex
Court rendered in the case of Bharvada Bhogin Bhai Hirji Bhai
Versus State of Gujarat, AIR 1983 SCC page 753, which is a
classical case reported way back in the year 1983, on which reliance is
placed by the learned Session Judge would be helpful to the
prosecution. The medical evidence should show some semblance of
forcible intercourse, the prosecutrix was gagged and hospitalised for
three days even if we go as per the version of the prosecutrix that the
accused had gagged her mouth for ten minutes and had thrashed her on
ground, there would have been some injuries to the fully grown lady on
the basis of the body.
26.    In our finding, the medical evidence goes to show that doctor did
not find any sperm. The doctor opined that no signs of forcible sexual
intercourse were found. This was also based on the finding that there
were no internal injuries on the girl who was minor girl.
27.    The factual data also goes to show that there are several
contradictions in the examination-in-chief as well as cross examination
of the witnesses. The prosecutrix in her examination-in-chief, she states
that incident occurred at about 9:00 a.m. but nowhere in her ocular
version or the FIR, she has mentioned that she was going to the fields to
eat cucumber.
28.    For maintaining the conviction under Section 376 Cr.P.C.,
medical evidence has to be in conformity with the oral testimony. We
may rely on the judgment rendered in the case of Bhaiyamiyan @
Jardar Khan and another Versus State of Madhya Pradesh , 2011
SCW3104. The chain of incident goes to show that the prosecutrix was
raped as would be clear from the provision of section 375 read with
Section 376 of IPC.
29.    The judgment relied on by the learned counsel for the appellant
will also permit us to concur with the judgment impugned of the
learned Trial Judge where no perversity has crept in. Learned Trial
Judge has given any finding as to fact as to how commission of offence
under Section 376 IPC was made out in the present case, but the
learned Judge further has not put any question in the statement recorded
under Section 313 Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 of the accused
relating to rape or statement which is against him.
30.    In view of the facts and evidence on record, we are convinced
that the accused has been convicted for life, hence, the judgment and
order impugned is reversed and the accused is convicted for period
undergone. The accused appellant, if not wanted in any other case, be
set free forthwith.
31.    Appeal is partly allowed accordingly.
32.    A copy of this judgment be sent to the Law Secretary, State of
U.P. who shall impress upon the District Magistrates of all the districts
in the State of U.P. to reevaluate the cases for remission after 14 years
of incarceration as per mandate of Sections 432 and 433 of Cr.P.C. even
if appeals are pending in the High Court.
33.    The accused, if not wanted in any other case, may be released
34.    We are thankful to learned counsel for the parties for ably
assisting this Court.
35.    Record be sent to Session Court.