1.   Instant application, bearing CM No.2668/2022, has been filed by the
applicants, seeking following reliefs:
“In the premises, it is respectfully submitted that the respondent
No.1 may be directed to initiate the process of amendment of
constitution of JKCA and hold its election thereby electing its
office bearer as they are guilty of disobedience of the order of
the court dated 23/03/2021 passed in LPAW No 14/2019 and
other connected matters as they have failed to conduct in a
manner as called for by this Hon‟ble Court to amend the
constitution and hold the elections and remove respondent no.2
to 5 as they are conflict of interest as per the Lodha
recommendation approved by the Hon‟ble Supreme Court and
appoint independent committee having no conflict of interest.
In alternative this Hon‟ble court is requested to fix time line for
amendment of the constitution and holding its elections or in
alternative order passed on 23/03/2021 in LPAW No 14/2019
and connected matters may be reconsidered in the light of the
basic judgment/order passed in OWP No 787/2017 dated
13/10/2017 which was later on confirmed by division bench of
this court in LPA No 196/2017 dated 6/12/2017 and punished
them for contempt for disobeying the order of this Hon‟ble
Court by not amending constitution of JKCA.”
2. As is clear from the perusal of the application, applicants seek fresh
directions as during the course of the arguments learned counsel for
the applicants has categorically stated that he is not pressing for
review of the order, but, seeks directions as prayed for in the
application.
3. The arguments were heard on the question of the maintainability of
the present application.
4. Admittedly, the present application has been filed in WP(C) No. 4524
of 2019 titled Des Rattan Dubey Vs. Board of Control of Cricket in
India and others. The said writ petition along with connected LPA as
also other petitions came to be decided by the Division Bench of this
Court vide its judgment dated 23.03.2021. Certainly, the applicants
are seeking fresh directions in the application including fixing of
timeline for amendment of the constitution of Jammu & Kashmir
Cricket Association (hereinafter in short, „JKCA‟) and holding its
elections as is clear from the prayer made in the application.
5. On the question of maintainability of present application, learned
counsel for the applicants relied upon the judgments passed by the
Apex Court in K.K.Velusamy Vs. N.Palaanisamy decided on
30.03.2011, Shipping Corporation of India Ltd. Vs. Machado
Brothers and others decided on 25.03.2004 besides banking on Rule
67(2) of J&K High Court Rules, 1999 to contend that even after
disposal of the writ petition, an application is maintainable.
6. A bare perusal of the judgments (supra) relied upon by the learned
counsel for the petitioners would show that none of the judgments
provides for exercise of powers under Section 151 of the Code of
Civil Procedure when there is no lis pending before the Court and as
such has no applicability to the case in hand.
7. Learned counsel for the respondents 1 to 5 has argued that the
application is not maintainable as the same has been filed by the
persons, who were not party to the original petition which was
disposed off by the Division Bench of this Court vide judgment dated
23.03.2021, as such, the applicants have filed this application without
filing application seeking impleadment.         It is further argued that
application can be filed in a disposed off matter under 67(2) of the
High Court Rules but that application can be filed only by the parties
to the petition for correction in case of any typographical error only in
the original judgment. Here in this case neither there is error in the
judgment nor the application has been filed by any of the party to the
petition so this application is not maintainable and requires to be
dismissed.
8.  On the other hand, learned Senior counsel for the respondent No.6,
Mr. Pant, has relied upon a judgment of the Apex Court in State of
UP V. Shri BrahmDatt Sharma and another reported as AIR 1987
SC 943; wherein in paragraph No.10, it has been laid as under:-
“10. The High Court's order is not sustainable for yet another
reason. Respondents‟ writ petition challenging the order of
dismissal had been finally disposed of on 10.08.1984, thereafter
nothing remained pending before the High Court. No
miscellaneous application could be filed in the writ petition to
revive proceedings in respect of subsequent events after two
years. If the respondent was ag- grieved by the notice dated
29.1.86 he could have filed a separate petition under Art. 226 of
the Constitution challenging the validity of the notice as it
provided a separate cause of action to him. The respondent was
not entitled to assail validity of the notice before the High Court
by means of a miscellaneous application in the writ petition
which had already been decided. The High Court had no
jurisdiction to entertain the application as no proceedings were
pending before it. The High Court committed error in
entertaining the respondent's application which was founded on
a separate cause of action. When proceedings stand terminated
by final disposal of writ petition it is not open to the Court to
reopen the proceedings by means of a miscellaneous application
in respect of a matter which provided a fresh cause of action. If
this principle is not followed there would be confusion and
chaos and the finality of proceedings would cease to have any
meaning.”
9.  Taking a cue from the aforesaid judgment, it can safely be concluded
that no miscellaneous application could be filed in a writ petition after
its disposal as the High Court has no jurisdiction to entertain the
application as no proceedings are pending before it.
10. Similarly, learned counsel for the respondent No.6 has also relied
upon a recent judgment of the Supreme Court rendered in a case titled
Ghanasyam Mishra and sons Private Limited Vs. Edelweiss Asset
Reconstruction Company Limited and others reported as 2022
Live Law (SC) 771 decided on 17.08.2022 wherein the Apex Court
has deprecated indirectly seeking review of the orders of the Court by
filing applications either seeking modification or clarification of the
orders by filing applications that are nothing, but, a total abuse of
process of law. In yet another titled Supertech Limited Vs. Emerald
Court Owner Resident Welfare Association and others dated
04.10.2021, the Apex Court has held as under:-
8. In successive decisions, this Court has held that the filing of
applications styled as “miscellaneous applications” or
“applications for clarification/modification” in the guise of a
review cannot be countenanced. In Gurdip Singh Uban
(supra), Justice M Jagannadha Rao, speaking for a two-
Judge Bench of this Court observed:
“17. We next come to applications described as applications
for “clarification”, “modification” or “recall” of judgments
or orders finally passed. We may point out that under the
relevant Rule XL of the Supreme Court Rules, 1966 a
review application has first to go before the learned Judges
in circulation and it will be for the Court to consider whether
the application is to be rejected without giving an oral
hearing or whether notice is to be issued.
“3. Unless otherwise ordered by the Court, an application for
review shall be disposed of by circulation without any oral
arguments, but the petitioner may supplement his petition by
additional written arguments. The Court may either dismiss
the petition or direct notice to the opposite party….”
In case notice is issued, the review petition will be listed for
hearing, after notice is served. This procedure is meant to
save the time of the Court and to preclude frivolous review
petitions being filed and heard in open court. However, with
a view to avoid this procedure of “no hearing”, we find that
sometimes applications are filed for “clarification”,
“modification” or “recall” etc. not because any such
clarification, modification is MA 1572/2021 indeed
necessary but because the applicant in reality wants a review
and also wants a hearing, thus avoiding listing of the same in
chambers by way of circulation. Such applications, if they
are in substance review applications, deserve to be rejected
straight away inasmuch as the attempt is obviously to bypass
Order XL Rule 3 relating to circulation of the application in
chambers for consideration without oral hearing. By
describing an application as one for “clarification” or
“modification”, — though it is really one of review — a
party cannot be permitted to circumvent or bypass the
circulation procedure and indirectly obtain a hearing in the
open court. What cannot be done directly cannot be
permitted to be done indirectly. (See in this connection a
detailed order of the then Registrar of this Court in Sone Lal
v. State of U.P. [(1982) 2 SCC 398] deprecating a similar
practice.)
18. We, therefore, agree with the learned Solicitor General
that the Court should not permit hearing of such an
application for “clarification”, “modification” or “recall” if
the application is in substance one for review. In that event,
the Court could either reject the application straight away
with or without costs or permit withdrawal with leave to file
a review application to be listed initially in chambers.”
8 Considering the settled proposition of law, the present application
which is not only misconceived, but, also amounts to abuse of process
of law needs to be dismissed.
9 Insofar as reference to Rule 67(2) of the J&K High Court Rules, 1999,
is concerned, the same does not give any right to file the application
of instant nature seeking fresh directions after disposal of the writ
petition in as much as the same deals only with the applications as are
maintainable after disposal of any appeal/petition or reference or other
matters connected with it. In some cases, after the disposal of the
petition/appeal or reference, there may be some kind of arithmetical or
technical errors may require correction for which application may be
maintainable, but, in the present application, applicants are seeking
fresh directions, which is not permissible. The directions sought by
the applicants do even travel beyond the main proceedings/writ
petition as also the judgment dated 25.03.2021 passed by the Division
Bench of this Court in LPAOW No.14/2019 and other connected
petitions including petition WP(c) No.4524/2019 titled Des Rattan
Dubey Vs. Board of Control for Cricket in India and others, in which
present application has been filed. Moreover, most of the parties
impleaded in the present application were not the parties before the
writ Court besides the locus to file present application is not clear as it
is not coming forth from the application filed by the applicants as to
whether they were parties to any petition/appeal decided by the
Division Bench vide its judgment dated 25.03.2021 or not.
10       In view of the settled proposition of law as enunciated (supra) the
present application is misconceived and total abuse of process of law,
as such, the same being not maintainable is dismissed.