1.      These are two applications filed under section 11 of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (for short “ACA”) whereby the
applicants have prayed for appointment of an arbitral tribunal to
adjudicate the disputes and differences between the parties, which have
arisen under Sub-Contract Agreements dated 10 August, 2017 and 22
September, 2018 respectively, under which the applicants have been
appointed by the respondent as a sub-contractors for the work of
excavation of soil/muck/rock/debris at Hutatma Chowk and Churchgate
Station, which was in execution of the contract as awarded to the
respondent for the Mumbai Metro Rail Corporation Ltd. The arbitration
agreement between the parties is contained in Clause 60.1 of the
Agreements in question in regard to which there is no dispute.
2.     The applicants contended that the applicants were awarded work
by the respondent under the sub-contracts in question primarily for
excavation of the soil from the sites in question.        According to the
applicants, the work having being undertaken amounts had become due
and payable by the respondent to the applicant, however, the
respondent refused to make payment of such amounts.
3.     It is case of the applicants that on or about October, 2020, as the
applicants were in financial difficulties, the applicant was requesting the
respondent to release funds at the earliest. The applicants contend that
the respondent however coerced the applicants to agree to their
settlement terms for release of the said outstanding payments.          It is
contended that the respondent unilaterally drafted Minutes of the
meeting and forced the applicant to accept all the terms of the
respondent. The applicant has contended that despite signing of the
Minutes of Meeting on 21 May, 2021, the respondent did not release any
payment. Accordingly, the applicant on 21 May, 2021 made a request to
the respondent to look into the matter and make payment.                It is
contended that ultimately on 25 June, 2021, the applicant by its
advocate’s notice invoked the arbitration agreement and called upon the
respondent to appoint an arbitral tribunal for adjudicating the disputes
and differences between the parties.        The applicants however have
contended that on 2 July, 2021, the applicant addressed a letter of
unconditional withdrawal of its notice invoking arbitration. It is next
contended that the respondent despite this has refused to make any
payment although demanded by the applicant by its email dated 15
August, 2021 as also letter dated 23 September, 2021 as addressed to
the respondent. It is the applicant’s case that consequently by its notice
dated 18 October, 2021 the applicant invoked the arbitration agreement
calling upon the respondent to appoint an arbitral tribunal.           It is
contended that as the respondent did not agree for appointment of the
arbitral tribunal, the present applications were required to be filed.
4.     A reply affidavit has been filed on behalf of the respondent
denying the case of the applicants that there exists an arbitration
agreement. The case of the respondent is of an accord and satisfaction.
The primary contention of the respondent is to the effect that there was
a Settlement Agreement dated 31 October, 2020 as entered between the
parties, which came to be signed on 2 July, 2021 which according to the
respondent is not disputed on behalf of the respondent. The primary
contention as urged on behalf of the respondent is that although such
Settlement Agreement was entered between the parties and all disputes
in regard to the contract in question were put to an end, there is a clear
suppression of these facts as revealed from the documents not annexed
by the applicants. It is the respondent’s contention that in invoking the
jurisdiction of this Court under section 11(6) of ACA, the applicant
ought to have approached this Court with clean hands and ought to
have necessarily placed on record the document of settlement. It is the
case of the respondents that the case of coercion or duress as pleaded by
the applicant is ex-facie and patently untenable. It is contended that in
fact the averments as made in the memo of the application would go to
show that the applicants are guilty of suppressio veri suggestio falsi. It
is contended that there was a settlement between the parties which has
been deliberately suppressed by the respondent and that too in a
systematic manner.     It is hence the respondent’s contention that the
application needs to be dismissed on such count alone. In support of his
contentions, Mr. Kapadia, learned counsel for the respondent has placed
reliance on the decisions rendered by learned Judge of Delhi High Court
in Sugam Construction (P) Ltd. vs. Northern Railway Administration,
2012 SCC Online Del 5242 and in Fiberfill Engineers vs. Indian Oil
5.     On behalf of the applicant responding to such case of the
respondent, it is submitted that as there exists an arbitration agreement
between the parties as also there is invocation of the arbitration
agreement. It is submitted that in regard to the issues as to whether
there was accord and satisfaction or whether there was settlement
between the parties, is required to be gone into and adjudicated by the
arbitral tribunal. In support of such contention, reliance is placed on the
the decisions of the Supreme Court in Mayawati Trading Pvt. Ltd. vs.
vs. Dicitex Furnishing Ltd., (2020) 4 SCC 621; Union of India vs.
Pradeep Vinod Construction Co., (2020) 2 SCC 464 and Sanjiv Prakash
6.      I have heard learned counsel for the parties and with their
assistance, I have perused the record.
7.     At the outset, it needs to be borne in mind that the contracts in
question are commercial contracts in the execution of works pertaining
to the metro rail at Mumbai. The persons who have entered into the
contract in question are persons of commerce who are well aware of the
contractual terms and conditions, as also, who have all means to legally
understand the consequences of their actions within the contract. In the
matters as they stand, it is difficult to conceive that the applicants were
unaware of the consequences of its own actions as being discussed
8.     From what has been observed above, in my opinion, there is much
substance in the contentions as urged by Mr. Kapadia that there was
accord and satisfaction between the parties and the attempt on the part
of the applicants to arbitrate is absolutely to espouse a deadwood. It is
quite clear that there was a settlement which had taken place between
the parties on 31 October, 2020. The terms and conditions of such
settlement were completely known to the applicants, which itself is clear
from the Settlement Agreement dated 31 October, 2020. However, it
appears that after about eight months of the settlement, the applicants
intended to wriggle out from such settlement and accordingly a notice
dated 25 June, 2021 invoking arbitration agreement came to be issued
on behalf of the applicants by its advocate, in which in paragraph 14 it
was contended that the amount which was agreed between the parties
under the terms and conditions of Settlement at Rs.1.75 crores was not
an appropriate settlement and in fact the claim of the applicant would
be at an amount of Rs. 10 crores. This can be seen to be clearly a legal
ingenuity as clear from paragraphs 14 and 23 of the invocation notice
dated 25 June, 2021, which reads thus:
“14.   Finally, after almost a year of our client pressing you for its
promised compensation, you attempted to take advantage of the
desperate financial condition of our client and sought to settle the
compensation amount of a meagre sum of Rs.1.75 crores as against the
sum of approximately Rs.10 crores that had been agreed earlier (which
was due under the present project as well as another project for
Churchgate station that had been subsequently awarded to out client).
Our client was also threatened with encashment of its bank guarantee.
In furtherance of this malafide design, you also unilaterally drafted a
Minutes of Meeting dated 23.10.2020 and coerced our client to accept
such terms since, as indicated above, our client was on the brink of
bankruptcy and desperately needed some funds to be released in order
to continue working. However, since you had exercised undue influence
and coercion, our client refused to treat the determined amount of
Rs.1.75 crores as binding and did not sign any Settlement Agreement
that was proposed by you to finalize this forced and coerced
understanding.
23.      Since disputes have evidently arisen between the parties, our
client attempted to at first mutually resolved such disputes though
negotiations amongst the authorized representatives of the parties.
However, on account of lack of cooperation from your end, our client
was eventually constrained to request your top management to resolve
such disputes and a detailed letter dated 21.05.2021 was issued to you
in this regard. But no reply to such letter has also been received.”
9.    However, what is most astonishing is that subsequent to the above
invocation      immediately,      i.e.,   on    2    July,   2021,    the   applicant
unconditionally withdrew the said notice invoking arbitration.                    It is
material to note the contents of the said letter of the applicant, which
Sub : Unconditional Withdrawal of Notice of Arbitration and any further
claims.
Ref: 1) Sub-contract Agreement dated 10.08.2017 between L & T –
Stec JV Mumbai and Vishwajit Sud & Co. for excavation of
soil/muck/rock/debris from Hutatma Chowk Station including entry-
exit area and its disposal at disposal yards.
With reference to the Notice of Arbitration served upon L & T Stec JV by
our lawyer M/s. PBA Legal LLP. Since, the dispute/claim is already
concluded in the Settlement Agreement dated 31 October, 2020. I
deeply regret for the Arbitration Notice, which was inadvertently sent.
As the matter now is amicably settled and the Notice of Arbitration is
being unconditionally withdrawn. I am making this withdrawal of the
Arbitration Notice in my complete sound mind and without any
coercion or duress.
Further, I expressly confirm that I do not have any dispute/claim
whatsoever of any nature with L&T Stec JV, Mumbai for the work
carried out by us covered under the said work order as per
measurement recorded and accepted by me including any
debits/recovery made in the bills paid so far and in the final bill.
I further confirm that as mentioned in the Settlement Agreement dated
31 October, 2020, we will not raise and claim/dispute, neither we will
go for any arbitration/legal proceedings in future for the above referred
10.    The above letter of the applicants confirming that the dispute
stood amicably settled and the notice of arbitration issued by the
applicants’ advocate was inadvertently sent makes it as clear as the
sunlight that the settlement agreement dated 31 October, 2020 as
entered between the parties was conclusive and the whole bogey of
allegations of coercion and undue influence as alleged in the applicants’
advocate’s notice dated 25 June., 2021 were false.
11.    It appears that despite such unconditional withdrawal of the
invocation notice by the applicants above letter dated 2 July, 2021, the
applicant by its letter dated 23 September, 2021 addressed to the
respondent reagitated its demand of a further payment. It is material to
note the contents of the applicant’s letter dated 23 September, 2021:-
“This is mot unfortunate and unbecoming of any entity such as you. We
accordingly declare that all the papers submitted by us such as our
letters dated 02.07.2021 and any settlement agreement are treated as
withdrawn with immediate effect. The effort of mutual amicable
settlement has been a misleading and deceitful attempt by you and we
no longer have any faith in you for ensuring amicable settlement. We
have to therefore retrace our path of having settlement through
Arbitration as per contract terms and law of the land.
12.    It is on such backdrop and as the respondent did not accept the
request of the applicant, a fresh notice invoking arbitration dated 18
October, 2021 was issued by the applicants’ advocate to the respondent,
inter alia taking a plea that the applicant was forced to withdraw all the
claims and sign letters, deeds and documents by signing on dotted lines
without any protest or demur.             It is necessary to note the relevant
contents of the applicant’s said notice dated 18 October, 2021, which
“6.     This was clearly done to harass and intimidate our client and
your agenda was evident when, upon our client approaching you with
a request to not encash the bank guarantees, you forced our client to
withdraw all his claims and sign letters, deeds and documents on
dotted lines without any protest or demur.
8.      It was under such tremendous pressure that our Client was
compelled to execute such letters, deeds and documents as you
desired. The extent of such coercion is also evident from the fact that
all such events took place within a period of one week from the notice
dated 25.06.2021 being served upon you.
9.      It is pertinent to mention that while coercing our client to sign
such letters, deeds and documents to unconditionally withdraw all his
claims against you, our client had also been promised and assured that
within a period of seven days, all his accounts, including the final bill
and other withheld payments such as retention money, would be duly
settled and cleared. Our client was also informed that even the bank
guarantees will be duly returned to our client.”
13.    Such invocation notice was replied by the respondent by its letter
dated 15 November, 2021 inter alia denying the claims as made by the
applicants. The respondent denying any coercion or duress whatsoever
and recorded that the applicants had entered into Settlement Agreement
which was signed and executed by the parties out of their free will and
volition and the same was based on mutual negotiations of amicable
resolution of the claims as made. The respondent also recorded that
once a contract was discharged by way of settlement, neither the
contract nor any dispute arising therefrom survived for consideration,
hence no occasion had arisen for appointment of an arbitral tribunal.
The relevant contents of the said letter are required to be noted, which
“4.     We state that, Your Client had communicated certain disputes
vide its letter dated 19 December, 2019. Immediately thereafter, in
terms of the T & C, L & T-STEC engaged into negotiation with your
client for amicably settling the said disputes. Accordingly, a meeting
dated 23.10.2020 was convened, where representative of your client
Mr. Vishwajeet Sood, Proprietor and L & T STEC’s representatives
attended the meeting. The Minutes of the said meeting was recorded
in writing vide the 2nd referred MOM dated 23.10.2020, which is also
duly signed by your client’s representative. Subsequent thereto, in
good faith and bonafide belief in your client’s representaions and
assurance L&T-STEC had entered into the 3 rd referred Settlement
Agreement with your client wherein all past and future claims are
settled. In view of the said facts, your client’s act of issuing the alleged
notice has no validity in the eyes of the law and the same amounts to
criminal breach of trust and cheating on the part of your client.
5.      We state that all the allegations and averments made in your
Notice and all the narrations contained therein are false and they are
made with a malicious intent and ulterior motive. We state that we are
not aware of your client’s communication with you and it is not clear
as to what made you to learn that your client was giving instructions
under a facts and circumstance unsubstantiated by any documents. We
state that there is no coercion or duress on your client and the
Settlement Agreement was signed and executed by your client out of
its free will and its own volition and the same was based on only on
the mutual negotiation of amicable resolution of the claims made by
your client vide its aforesaid letter.
6.      We call upon you to note that the settled position of law is that
once a contract is discharged by way of settlement, neither the
contract, nor any dispute arising therefrom survives for consideration.
We state that in view of the aforesaid facts, there is no occasion arisen
for appointment of arbitrator as the dispute raised in your Notice has
already been settled and withdrawn.            Accordingly, your client’s
contention to invoke arbitration proceedings post reaching a
settlement, does not hold any merits. Under such circumstances, your
notice calling for appointment of arbitrator is not valid and the same is
not acceptable.
9.      Hence, the claim raised under your notice is infructuous and
against the settled position of law. We vehemently deny the claim
raised from L&T-STEC, as demanded in your Notice giving any scope
for any legal action against L&T-STEC. We also reserve our right to
give further detailed reply. Further, we request you to advise your
client to desist from proceeding in the manner threatened in your
notice, which if initiated shall be defended by L&T-STEC at your
client’s sole risk and costs.”
14.    It needs to be noted that the Settlement Agreement dated 31
October, 2020 has not been annexed to the memo of the applications.
The respondent has contended this to be a suppression on behalf of the
applicants. It has been annexed by the respondent to the reply affidavit.
A perusal of the Settlement Agreement shows that it is a document
executed on a stamp paper of Rs.500/- dated 31 October, 2020, which
has been signed on behalf of both the parties. It is also agreed between
the parties that such document was actually signed and executed on 2
15.    From the perusal of the pleadings and documents on record, in
my opinion, in the commercial position the parties stand and more
particularly the invocation notice of the applicants’ advocate, it is not
possible to accept the applicants case that there was any coercion or
duress exercised by the respondent on the applicant for getting the
settlement document executed. It is also not possible for the Court to
believe the bald plea of the applicants that the applicants were called
upon to sign letters and documents and/or sign on dotted lines. Such a
plea has been taken only when the advocates were asked by the
applicants to address an invocation notice. Such plea was taken in the
absence of slightest of any material that there was any existing
complaint of coercion or duress of the applicants, as the law would
understand a prudent party to make such complaint. From the perusal
of the record, it clearly appears that the applicant was aware of the
terms and conditions of Settlement Agreement as far back on 31
October, 2020. Moreover such false plea of the applicants is belied from
its own letter dated 2 July, 2021 as noted above whereby the applicants
unconditionally had withdrawn the arbitration invocation notice
recording such settlement as arrived between the parties.
16.    As seen not only from the averments as made in the memo of
arbitration application, but also from the invocation notice which has
been prepared taking up false pleas of coercion and duress by the
respondent without an iota of supporting material, the conduct of the
applicants in pursuing the present proceedings is clearly reprehensible
which needs to be deprecated. The conduct of the applicants is also far
from bonafide making such allegations of coercion or duress on the
respondent. This for more than one reason. The Settlement Agreement
was admittedly conceived on 31 October, 2020 and it was actually
executed on 2 July, 2021 as conceded by the learned counsel for the
applicants. The present applications were filed on 8 December, 2021,
that too without making an appropriate disclosure in the pleadings to
the fact of settlement as also without annexing a copy of the settlement
agreement. There is no material to show that a copy of the settlment
agreement was not available with the applicants. Thus, from the perusal
of the pleadings as also the documents as placed on record, it is quite
clear that the intention of the applicants was to suppress materials and
misguide the Court in believing the false case put up by the applicants.
17.    As noted above, these applications came to be filed on 8
December, 2021. Even if the case of the applicants is to be believed that
a copy of the settlement agreement was not available with the applicants
(it is difficult to so believe), there is not a whisper of any
communication/letter of the applicant calling upon the respondent to
furnish a copy of such document and much less a specific copy of the
Settlement Agreement. There is thus a clear attempt on the part of
applicant appears to be to wriggle out of the settlement and drag the
respondent into unwarranted arbitration so as to resurrect dead issues.
The Court cannot be oblivious to such conduct of the applicants in which
considering the reliefs as prayed for as such conduct of the applicants is
certainly not a conduct of a bonafide litigant. In such context, learned
counsel for the respondent has rightly relied on the decisions of the
learned Single Judge of the Delhi High Court in Sugam Construction (P)
Ltd. vs. Northern Railway Administration (supra) and in Fiberfill
Engineers vs. Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. (supra) , which are also in the
context of adjudication of proceedings under section 11 of the ACA
wherein the Court had held that the party who conceals or suppress
facts is disentitled to relief under section 11 of the Act. The Court has in
fact observed that on such ground itself, the proceedings are liable to be
18.      In my opinion, the present case is a clear case of accord and
satisfaction, wherein the parties under the settlement agreement in
question had decided to discharge the contract(s) in full and final
19.       The legal position which would be brought about by virtue of a
settlement agreement as entered between the parties is that such
settlement would discharge the contract by mutual agreement which is a
process akin to the process the parties having entered into a contract,
thereafter decide to discharge the contract by mutual agreement. Such
eventuality is well-known in common law as accord and satisfaction by
substituted agreement.
20.    The Supreme Court in The Union of India Vs. Kishorilal Gupta &
Bros.1, had considered the legal principle of accord and satisfaction. The
Supreme Court examining the legal position as observed by the Privy
Council in Payana Reena Saminathan v. Pana Lana Palaniappa 2 and
quoting Lord Moulton as also the decision of the House of Lords in
Norris v. Baron and Company3, and the celebrated commentary. Chitty
on Contracts (31st Edn., at p. 286) observed that when there is an
accord and satisfaction, the arbitration clause itself would perish with
the original contract. It is also observed that it is for the Court to decide
in the facts of the case before it ‘as to whether any cause of action at all
would survive, not only under the contract but also under the arbitration
agreement. The observations of the Court in paragraphs 5, 8 and 11
need to be noted which would clarifies the entire concept of accord and
satisfaction, which are as follows:
“5.     The law on the first point is well-settled. One of the modes by
which a contract can be discharged is by the same process which
created it, i.e., by mutual agreement; the parties to the original contract
may enter into a new contract in substitution of the old one. The legal
position was clarified by the Privy Council in Payana Reena Saminathan
v. Pana Lana Palaniappa [1914] A.C. 618 622. Lord Moulton defined
the legal incidents of a substituted contract in the following terms at p.
“The 'receipt' given by the appellants, and accepted by the
respondent, and acted on by both parties proves conclusively
that all the parties agreed to a settlement of all their existing
disputes by the arrangement formulated in the 'receipt'. It is a
clear example of what used to be well known in common law
plea ding as " accord and satisfaction by a substituted
agreement ". No matter what were the respective rights of the
parties inter se they are abandoned in consideration of the
acceptance by all of a new agreement. The consequence is
that when such an accord and satisfaction takes place the
prior rights of the parties are extinguished. They have in fact
been exchanged for the new rights; and the new agreement
becomes a new departure, and the rights of all the parties are
fully represented by it. "
The House of Lords in Norris v. Baron and Company [(1918) A.C. 1.
26] in the context of a contract for sale of goods brought out clearly the
distinction between a contract which varies the terms of the earlier
contract and a contract which rescinds the earlier one, in the following
“In the first case there are no such executory clauses in the
second arrangement as would enable you to sue upon that
alone if the first did not exist; in the second you could sue on
the second arrangement alone, and the first contract is got rid
of either 2 by express words to that effect, or because, the
second dealing with the same subject-matter as the first but
in a different way, it is impossible that the two should be both
performed."
Scrutton, L.J., in British Russian Gazette and Trade Outlook Limited v.
Associated Newspaper, Limited [1933] 2 K.B. 6i6, 643, 644., after
referring to the authoritative text-books on the subject, describes the
concept of 11 accord and satisfaction " thus at p. 643:
“Accord and satisfaction is the purchase of a release from an
obligation whether arising under contract or tort by means of
any valuable consideration, not being the actual performance
of the obligation itself. The accord is the agreement by which
the obligation is discharged. The satisfaction is the
consideration which makes the agreement operative.
Formerly it was necessary that the consideration should be
executed …………... Later it was conceded that the
consideration might be executory……….. The consideration
on each side might be an executory promise, the two mutual
promise making an agreement enforceable in law, a contract
………………. ‘An accord, with mutual promises to perform,
is good, though 'the thing be not performed at the time of
action; for the party has a remedy to compel the
performance', that is to say, a cross action on the contract of
accord. ……….
“If, however, it can be shown that what a creditor accepts in
satisfaction is merely his debtor's promise and not the
performance of that promise, the original cause of action is
discharged from the date when the promise is made. "
The said observations indicate that an original cause of action can be
discharged by an executory agreement if the intention to that effect is
clear. The modern rule is stated by Cheshire and Fifoot in their Law of
Contract, 3rd Edn., at p. 453:
"The modern rule is, then, that if what the creditor has
accepted in satisfaction is merely his debtor's promise to
give consideration, and not the performance of that promise,
the original cause of action is discharged from the date
when the agreement is made.
This, therefore, raises a question of construction in each case,
for it has to be decided as a fact whether it was the making of the
promise itself or the performance of the promise that the creditor
consented to take by way of satisfaction. "
So too, Chitty in his book on Contracts, 31st Edn., states at p. 286:
"The plaintiff may agree to accept the performance of a
substituted consideration in satisfaction, or he may agree to
accept the promise of such performance. In the former there
is no satisfaction until performance, and the debtor remains
liable upon the original claim until the satisfaction is
executed. In the latter, if the promise be not performed, the
plaintiff's remedy is by action for the breach of the
substituted agreement, and he has no right of resort to the
From the aforesaid authorities it is manifest that a contract may be
discharged by the parties thereto by a substituted agreement and
thereafter the original cause of action arising under the earlier contract
is discharged and the parties are governed only by the terms of the
substituted contract. The ascertainment of the intention of the parties is
essentially a question of fact to be decided on the facts and
circumstances of each case.
8.      Uninfluenced by authorities or case-law, the logical outcome of
the earlier discussion would be that the arbitration clause perished with
the original contract. Whether the said clause was a substantive term or
a collateral one, it was none the less an integral part of the contract,
which had no existence de hors the contract. It was intended to cover
all the disputes arising under the conditions of, or in connection with,
the contracts. Though the phraseology was of the widest amplitude, it
is inconceivable that the parties intended its survival even after the
contract was mutually rescinded and substituted by a new agreement.
The fact that the new contract not only did not provide for the survival
of the arbitration clause but also the circumstance that it contained
both substantive and procedural terms indicates that the parties gave
up the terms of the old contracts, including the arbitration clause. The
case-law referred to by the learned Counsel in this connection does not,
in our view, lend support to his broad contention and indeed the
principle on which the said decisions are based is a pointer to the
contrary.
11.     We have held that the three contracts were settled and the third
settlement contract was in substitution of the three contracts; and,
after its execution, all the earlier contracts were extinguished and the
arbitration clause contained therein also perished along with them. We
have also held that the new contract was not a conditional one and
after its execution the parties should work out their rights only under
its terms. In this view, the judgment of the High Court is correct. This
appeal fails and is dismissed with costs.”
21.      In Union of India & Ors. vs. Onkar Nath Bhalla & Sons 4, the
Supreme Court was considering whether an order passed by the High
Court appointing an arbitrator would be justified when there was accord
and satisfaction. The Court referring to the decision in P.K. Ramaiah &
Co. vs. NTPC, 1994 Supp (3) SCC 126 observed that the appellants in
the said case had made the full and final payment of the final bill and to
which the respondent certified by signing the bill without any protest or
reservation. The respondent, however, with an intention of receiving
further payments, after two years, raised another claim and tried to
bring up a dispute and when the claim was denied by the appellants, the
respondent was requested to appoint an arbitrator to resolve the
dispute. In such context, it was observed that the respondent could not
have raised another claim, as the respondent after signing the final bill
without any protest or reservation had waived its rights as per the
conditions of the contract. It was held that the High Court without
considering whether any dispute existed between the parties could not
have appointed an arbitrator and was not justified in appointing a sole
arbitrator in such circumstances. The relevant observations of the Court
in paragraphs 6, 8, 11 and 12 are required to be noted, which read thus:
“6.      It is further contended by the learned counsel for the appellants
that when the agreement provided for arbitration by serving officer
having degree in Engineering or equivalent, then a Retired High Court
Judge cannot be appointed as an Arbitrator. To support his contentions
he would rely on the decision of this Court in P. K. Ramaiah & Co. v.
N.T.P.C., 1994 (3) SCC 126, wherein this Court has held that:
"8..........Admittedly the full and final satisfaction was
acknowledged by a receipt in writing and the amount was
received unconditionally. Thus there is accord and
satisfaction by final settlement of the claims. The subsequent
allegation of coercion is an afterthought and a device to get
over the settlement of the dispute, acceptance of the
payment and receipt voluntarily given. In Russell on
Arbitration, 19th Edn., p. 396 it is stated that "an accord and
satisfaction may be pleaded in an action on award and will
constitute a good defence. Accordingly, we hold that the
appellant having acknowledged the settlement and also
accepted measurements and having received the amount in
full and final settlement of the claim, there is accord and
satisfaction."
8)   In the present case, appellants made the full and final payment of
the final bill and to which respondent certified by signing the bill
without any protest or reservation. The respondent with the intention
of receiving further payments, after two years, raised yet another claim
and tried to bring up a dispute. And when the claim was denied by the
appellants, respondent requested to appoint an Arbitrator.
11) It is the specific case of the appellants, respondent could not have
raised yet another claim, as the respondent after signing on the final
bill without any protest or reservation has waived his right as per the
conditions of the contract. The Court without considering that whether
any dispute exists between the parties, could not have appointed an
12) Therefore, the Court was not justified in appointing a Retired High
Court Judge as the sole Arbitrator in the present case.”
22.      In National Insurance Company Ltd. vs. Boghara Polyfab Pvt.
Ltd.5, the Supreme Court in extenso considered the concept of accord
and satisfaction referring to the decision of Payana Reena Saminathan
vs. Pana Lana Palaniappa (supra) held that the arbitration agreement
contained in a contract cannot be invoked to seek reference of any
dispute to arbitration in three circumstances as noted in paragraph 29,
the circumstances being firstly that where inter alia the obligations
under a contract are fully performed and discharge of the contract by
performance       is  acknowledged         by   a    full  and    final   discharge
voucher/receipt. Nothing survives in regard to such discharged contract;
secondly that where the parties to the contract, by mutual agreement,
accept performance of altered, modified and substituted obligations and
confirm in writing the discharge of contract by performance of the
altered, modified or substituted obligations; and thirdly where the
parties to a contract, by mutual agreement, absolve each other from
performance of their respective obligations and consequently cancel the
agreement and confirm that there is no outstanding claims or disputes.
Paragraph 29 of the decision is required to be noted, which reads thus:
“21. It is thus clear that the arbitration agreement contained in a
contract cannot be invoked to seek reference of any dispute to
arbitration, in the following circumstances, when the contract is
discharged on account of performance, or accord and satisfaction,
or mutual agreement, and the same is reduced to writing (and signed
by both parties or by the party seeking arbitration) :
(a) Where the obligations under a contract are fully performed and
discharge of the contract by performance is acknowledged by a full
and final discharge voucher/receipt. Nothing survives in regard to
such discharged contract.
(b) Where the parties to the contract, by mutual agreement, accept
performance of altered, modified and substituted obligations and
confirm in writing the discharge of contract by performance of the
altered, modified or substituted obligations.
(c) Where the parties to a contract, by mutual agreement, absolve
each other from performance of their respective obligations (either
on account of frustration or otherwise) and consequently cancel
the agreement and confirm that there is no outstanding claims or
disputes.”
23.     The above said decision of the Supreme Court also considers a
situation and the consequent position in law, wherein the Court after
considering the facts, finds that there was a full and final settlement
resulting in accord and satisfaction. In reaching such conclusion that
there was no substance in the allegations of coercion/undue influence
and in such case, the Court has held that it would not make a reference
of the disputes to arbitration. In such context, the Court referred to its
decision in State of Maharashtra vs. Nav Bharat Builders, 1994 Supp
(3) SCC 83 and Nathani Steels Ltd. vs. Associated Constructions
(supra), 1995 Supp (3) SCC 324. The observation of the Supreme Court
in such context as contained in paragraph 42 of the decision are
required to be noted, which reads thus:
“42. We thus find that the cases referred fall under two categories. The
cases relied on by the appellant are of one category where the court
after considering the facts, found that there was a full and final
settlement resulting in accord and satisfaction, and there was no
substance in the allegations of coercion/ undue influence.
Consequently, this Court held that there could be no reference of any
dispute to arbitration. The decisions in Nav Bharat and Nathani Steels
are cases falling under this category where there were bilateral
negotiated settlements of pending disputes, such settlements having
been reduced to writing either in the presence of witnesses or
otherwise. P.K. Ramaiah is a case where the contract was performed
and there was a full and final settlement and satisfaction resulting in
discharge of the contract. It also falls under this category.”
24.    In Union of India & Ors. vs. Master Construction Company 6, the
Supreme Court referring to the decision in Boghara Polyfab (P) Ltd.
(supra) in the context of Section 11(6) of the Act observed that there is
no rule of the absolute kind that when in a case the claimant contends
that a discharge voucher or no-claim certificate has been obtained by
fraud, coercion, duress or undue influence and the other side contests
the correctness thereof, the Chief Justice/his designate must not at all
look into this aspect to find out at least, prima facie, whether or not the
dispute is bona fide and genuine. It was observed that where the dispute
raised by the claimant with regard to validity of the discharge voucher
or no-claim certificate or settlement agreement, prima facie, appears to
be lacking in credibility, there may not be necessity to refer the dispute
for arbitration at all. It was observed that the case before it, was of a
nature that financial duress or coercion or nothing of such kind was
established prima facie. It was hence observed that mere allegation that
no-claim certificates have been obtained under financial duress and
coercion, without there being anything more to suggest that, does not
lead to an arbitrable dispute and the Court accordingly set aside the
order appointing an arbitrator. The relevant observations of the Court in
paragraphs18 and 23 needs to be noted, which reads thus:
“18.     In our opinion, there is no rule of the absolute kind. In a case
where the claimant contends that a discharge voucher or no-claim
certificate has been obtained by fraud, coercion, duress or undue
influence and the other side contests the correctness thereof, the Chief
Justice/his designate must look into this aspect to find out at least,
prima facie, whether or not the dispute is bona fide and genuine.
Where the dispute raised by the claimant with regard to validity of the
discharge voucher or no-claim certificate or settlement agreement,
prima facie, appears to be lacking in credibility, there may not be
necessity to refer the dispute for arbitration at all.
23. The present, in our opinion, appears to be a case falling in the
category of exception noted in the case of Boghara Polyfab Private
Limited (Para 25, page 284). As to financial duress or coercion, nothing
of this kind is established prima facie. Mere allegation that no-claim
certificates have been obtained under financial duress and coercion,
without there being anything more to suggest that, does not lead to an
arbitrable dispute. The conduct of the contractor clearly shows that `no
claim certificates' were given by it voluntarily; the contractor accepted
the amount voluntarily and the contract was discharged voluntarily.”
25.    In New India Assurance Company Ltd. vs. Genus Power
Infrastructure Ltd.,7 the Supreme Court referring to the decisions in
Union of India vs. Master Construction Co. (supra) and National
Insurance Co. Ltd. vs. Boghara Polyfab (P) Ltd. (supra) observed that it
was a case that the respondent therein (claimant) after receiving
payment under insurance policy from the appellant and signing letter of
subrogation in favour of the insurance company in full and final
settlement of its claim under the policy has sought appointment of
arbitrator on the ground that it had signed the said letter due to extreme
financial difficulties and under duress, coercion and undue influence
exercised by the insurance company. Examining the facts, it was held
that such plea raised by the respondent was bereft of any details and
particulars, and was a bald assertion.        It was observed that the
respondent never made any protest or demur when letter of subrogation
was signed. The Court, therefore, held that the discharge and signing of
letter of subrogation was voluntary and free from any coercion or undue
influence and hence recognizing the full and final settlement, it was held
that no arbitrable dispute existed so as to exercise jurisdiction under
section 11 of the Act.
26.      In Cauvery Coffee Traders, Mangalore vs. Hornor Resources
(International) Co. Ltd.8, the Supreme Court again reiterating the well
settled position in law as laid down in State of Maharashtra vs. Nav
Co. Ltd. vs. Boghara Polyfab (P) Ltd. (supra) as also in R.N. Gosain vs.
Yashpal Dhir9 as also expounding on the rule of estoppel, held that when
a person knowingly accepts the benefits of a contract or conveyance or
an order, he is estopped to deny the validity or binding effect on him of
such contract or conveyance or order. In the facts of the case, the Court
observed that the transaction in question had stood concluded between
the parties, not on account of any unintentional error, but after extensive
and exhaustive bilateral deliberations with a clear intention to bring
about a quietus to the dispute. It was observed that these negotiations,
therefore, are self-explanatory steps of the intent and conduct of the
parties to end the dispute and not to carry it further. The Court also
observed that a party cannot be permitted to "blow hot and cold", "fast
and loose" or "approbate and reprobate". It was observed that when
one knowingly accepts the benefits of a contract or conveyance or an
order, he is estopped to deny the validity or binding effect on him, of
such contract or conveyance or order. It was observed that such rule is
applied to do equity, however, it must not be applied in a manner so as
to violate the principles of right and good conscience.
27.      In ONGC Mangalore Petrochemicals Ltd. vs. ANS Constructions
Ltd. & Anr.,10 the Supreme Court was considering whether the orders of
the High Court appointing arbitrator would be justified when there was
a full and final settlement between the parties and there was no
surviving dispute for the reason that the respondent therein had
submitted no-dues/no-claim certificate against the contract. The Court
taking a review of the law on the issue, held that if the party which
executes discharge agreement/discharge voucher, alleges that the
execution of such discharge agreement or voucher was on account of
fraud, coercion, undue influence practised by the other party but is not
able to establish such a claim or appears to be lacking in credibility, then
it is not open to the Courts to refer the dispute to arbitration at all. In
coming to such conclusion.
28.      A three Judges Bench of the Supreme Court in Vidya Drolia &
Ors. vs. Durga Trading Corporation11 has again reiterated that in a case
where there is no claim certificate and accord and satisfaction, such
cases need not be referred to arbitration. To this effect, it would be
appropriate to extract the observations of the Supreme Court in
paragraph 154.4, which reads thus:
“154.4 Rarely as a demurrer the court may interfere at the Section
8 or 11 stage when it is manifestly and ex facie certain that the
arbitration agreement is non- existent, invalid or the disputes are
non-arbitrable, though the nature and facet of non-arbitrability
would, to some extent, determine the level and nature of judicial
scrutiny. The restricted and limited review is to check and protect
parties from being forced to arbitrate when the matter is
demonstrably ‘non-arbitrable’ and to cut off the deadwood. The
court by default would refer the matter when contentions relating
to non-arbitrability are plainly arguable; when consideration in
summary proceedings would be insufficient and inconclusive; when
facts are contested; when the party opposing arbitration adopts
delaying tactics or impairs conduct of arbitration proceedings. This
is not the stage for the court to enter into a mini trial or elaborate
review so as to usurp the jurisdiction of the arbitral tribunal but to
affirm and uphold integrity and efficacy of arbitration as an
alternative dispute resolution mechanism.”
29.     Adverting to the position in law as being consistently held by the
Supreme Court in the decisions as noted above, in the facts of the
present case, it is crystal clear that the applicants with open eyes had
entered into a settlement agreement with the respondent. If there was
to be any apprehension of a fraud, coercion, undue influence or duress,
the settlement agreement which was conceived on 31 October, 2020
could not have have ever been signed by the applicants on 2 July, 2021.
After a long lapse of about eight months and when the applicants called
upon their lawyers to invoke arbitration, such plea of coercion or duress
appears to have been clearly taken including in the last invocation notice
in question and that too without a semblance of material to incorporate
such plea of undue influence, duress or coercion against the respondent.
Thus, as held by the Supreme Court in the above decisions, such
allegations being ex facie false, it cannot be accepted that such pleas
would require adjudication. The ingenuity of the applicants to arbitrate
has no legs to stand in view of the complete accord and satisfaction in
terms of the settlement agreement whereunder the contract itself stood
30.     In view of the above discussion, the submission as urged on
behalf of the applicants even relying on the judgments which are
discussed above that the issue of accord and satisfaction needs to be left
to be decided by the arbitral tribunal, in my opinion, cannot be accepted
in the facts of the present case, as the present case is a clear case of
accord and satisfaction which was systematically sought to be
suppressed by the applicant. It also clearly appears that the attempt of
the applicants is to resurrect the dead issues and foist an unwarranted
31.    In the light of the above discussion, both the applications are
dismissed, however, with cost of Rs.50,000/- to be paid by the applicants
to the respondent on each of the applications.