1. This matter is taken up through hybrid mode.
2. Heard learned counsel for the appellant and
learned counsel for the State.
3. The appellant has filed this appeal in the matter of
Jenapur P.S. Case No.40 of 2021 corresponding to
C.T. (Spl) Case No.16 of 2021 pending in the court
of the learned District and Sessions Judge-cum-
Special Judge, Jajpur. The appellant has been
charge    sheeted  for   commission     of   offences
punishable under Sections 376, 493, 417 and 506
of IPC read with section 3(1)(r)(s) and 2(va) of the
4. The   prosecution   story,  in   brief, is  that    on
11.02.2021, the informant/ victim lodged a written
complaint    before  the     Jenapur  police  station
wherein she submitted that the appellant and the
victim were in a romantic relationship since last
one year. The appellant had given assurance to
marry the victim. On 08.02.2020, the appellant
took her to a Padia (open field) where he had
sexual intercourse with her against her consent.
Thereafter he took her to his house at Hatibari,
Sukindra.     He    and       his  family   members
subsequently backtracked from agreeing for the
marriage proposal.
5. Learned Counsel for the appellant submits that
the appellant has been languishing in custody
since 23.03.2020. He further submits that all the
allegations against him are false, baseless and the
appellant is no way connected to the matter. On
perusal of the FIR and the other connected
materials, no prima facie case, can be made out
against the appellant. Both the individuals have
attained the age of majority and the sexual
relationship   between      them   was    consensual.
Moreover, the medical report does not show any
sign or symptoms of rape. Hence, the appellant
should be released on bail.
6. In the case of Kaini Rajan v. State of Kerala1,
this Court has explained the essentials and
parameters of the offence of rape. In the said
decision, the Court observed and held as under:
“12. Section 375 Indian Penal Code defines
the expression “rape”, which indicates that
the first Clause operates, where the
woman is in possession of her senses, and
therefore, capable of consenting but the act
is done against her will; and second,
where it is done without her consent; the
third, fourth and fifth, when there is
consent, but it is not such a consent as
excuses the offender, because it is
obtained by putting her on any person in
whom she is interested in fear of death or
of hurt. The expression “against her will”
means that the act must have been done in
spite of the opposition of the woman. An
inference as to consent can be drawn if
only based on evidence or probabilities of
the case. “Consent” is also stated to be an
act of reason coupled with deliberation. It
denotes an active will in the mind of a
person to permit the doing of an act
complained of. Section 90 Indian Penal
Code refers to the expression “consent”.
Section 90, though, does not define
“consent”, but describes what is not
consent. “Consent”, for the purpose of
Section      375,      requires   voluntary
participation not only after the exercise of
intelligence based on the knowledge of the
significance and moral quality of the act
but after having fully exercised the choice
between resistance and assent. Whether
there was consent or not, is to be
ascertained only on a careful study of all
relevant circumstances.”
7. The Supreme Court in the case of State of M.P.
vs. Madanlal2 has held as under:
“18. The aforesaid view was expressed while
dealing with the imposition of sentence. We
would like to clearly state that in a case of
rape or attempt to rape, the conception of
compromise under no circumstances can
really be thought of. These are crimes
against the body of a woman which is her
own temple. These are the offences which
suffocate the breath of life and sully the
reputation. And reputation, needless to
emphasise, is the richest jewel one can
conceive of in life. Dignity of a woman is a
part of her non-perishable and immortal self
and no one should ever think of painting it in
clay. There cannot be a compromise or
settlement as it would be against her honour
which matters the most. It is sacrosanct.
Sometimes solace is given that the
perpetrator of the crime has acceded to enter
into wedlock with her which is nothing but
putting pressure in an adroit manner; and
we say with emphasis that the courts are to
remain absolutely away from this subterfuge
to adopt a soft approach to the case, for any
kind of liberal approach has to be put in the
compartment of spectacular error. Or to put it
differently, it would be in the realm of a
sanctuary of error.
19. We are compelled to say so as such an
attitude reflects lack of sensibility towards
the dignity, the elan vital, of a woman. Any
kind of liberal approach or thought of
mediation in this regard is thoroughly and
completely sans legal permissibility. It has to
be kept in mind, as has been held in Shyam
Narain v. State (NCT of Delhi)3 that:
“27. Respect for reputation of women in
the society shows the basic civility of a
civilised society. No member of society
can afford to conceive the idea that he
can create a hollow in the honour of a
woman. Such thinking is not only
lamentable but also deplorable. It would
not be an exaggeration to say that the
thought of sullying the physical frame of
a woman is the demolition of the
accepted civilised norm i.e. 'physical
morality'. In such a sphere, impetuosity
has no room. The youthful excitement has
no place. It should be paramount in
everyone's mind that, on the one hand,
society as a whole cannot preach from
the pulpit about social, economic and
political equality of the sexes and, on the
other, some perverted members of the
same society dehumanise the woman by
attacking her body and ruining her
chastity. It is an assault on the
individuality and inherent dignity of a
woman with the mindset that she should
be elegantly servile to men.””
8. Considering    the   nature      and   gravity  of   the
accusation,    character     of   evidence    appearing
against the appellant, the stringent punishment
prescribed and that there are reasonable grounds
for believing that the appellant is not guilty of the
offence alleged or not likely to commit any such
offence, which is not possible to record in this
case. Hence, the prayer for bail is devoid of any
merit. Accordingly, the prayer for bail of the
appellant stands rejected.
9. The CRLA is, accordingly, disposed of.
10. Urgent certified copy of this order be granted on
proper application.