1.     The petitioner is before this Court seeking for the
following reliefs:
a. Issue Writ of Certiorari or any other appropriate writ
or direction quashing the general establishment
Order       No.533/2002         vide       Reference      No.
¨ÉAªÀÄ¸Á¸ÀA:PÉÃPÉ:¹§âA¢:3151:2002 dated 04.09.2022, the
true copy of which is produced and marked as
Annexure-A         and    the      office   Order    bearing
dated 15.03.2014 issued by the Second Respondent
the, original of which is produced and marked as
Annexure-'M' to the extent the Petitioner is aggrieved.
b. Issue a Writ of Mandamus or any other appropriate
writ or direction directing the respondents to restore
the pay of the petitioner applicable to the post of
driver which the petitioner was drawing as on
04.09.2002 and to pay the arrears of salary and
extend all other consequential benefits, such as annual
increments, revision of pay scales, grant of selection
grade, promotion as Senior Driver, etc. to meet the
ends of justice.
c. Pass such other order or orders as this Hon'ble Court
may deem fit in the interest of justice.
WP No. 31943 of 2014
2. The petitioner was appointed as a driver in the then
BTS Division, KSRTC, during the year 1984.        Upon
formation of new Corporation-BMTC, the services of
the petitioner stood assigned to the BMTC i.e.,
respondent     herein.    While   the  petitioner  was
discharging his duties as a driver, on 04.07.1999, the
vehicle met with an accident wherein the petitioner
sustained severe injuries viz., fracture of right
transverse process of T6, T7 and T8, fracture of
posterior part of right T7 Rib, fracture of middle
column of T6 and anterior wedge compression
fracture of T8 vertebra. The petitioner was admitted
to St.John’s Medical College Hospital where he
underwent major surgery and was absent from duty
for   a   period   of  11    months   on   account   of
hospitalization.
3. In view of the petitioner not being in a position to
discharge    his   duties   in  the   Road    Transport
WP No. 31943 of 2014
Corporation as a driver, the petitioner sought for
awardal of light work. In pursuance thereto, in July
2002, the case of the petitioner was referred to the
Bangalore Medical College and Victoria Hospital for
detailed medical examination and report.
4. In pursuance of the notice received from the Medical
Board, the petitioner appeared before the Board.
The Board examined the petitioner and a report was
given    to   the  respondent     –   Road   Transport
Corporation declaring that the petitioner is unfit to
discharge his duties as a driver and recommended
for light work.
5. In furtherance of the same, the Board exercising
powers under Regulation 20 (3) of the KSRTC (Cadre
and    Recruitment)  Regulations,    1982  (for short,
‘Regulations’) referred the request of the petitioner
to the Committee. The Committee recommended the
case of the petitioner for light work and by way of its
WP No. 31943 of 2014
report dated 13.08.2002 directed for change of cadre
of the petitioner from driver to that of office
attender.
6. This   report  was   accepted    and   the    competent
authority, in terms of order dated 04.09.2002, the
cadre of the petitioner was changed from driver to
that of the office attender and assigned duties in a
depot.    The said order was passed in terms of the
Circular No.681 dated 09.09.1987 and pursuant
thereto, the petitioner’s pay was ordered to be re-
fixed in the pay scale applicable to the office attender
and the difference if any in the basic pay was
directed to be treated as personal pay.
7. Disciplinary proceedings having been initiated as
regards the accident, an enquiry being held, the
Enquiry Officer reported that there was no negligence
on the part of the petitioner and absolved him of any
negligence.
8. The change of cadre of the petitioner having been
done    in   terms    of  the  Regulation   20   (3)  of
Regulations, the basic pay of the petitioner was
reduced retrospectively and it is aggrieved by the
same that the petitioner submitted a representation
on 22.01.2013, which was not considered. As such,
the petitioner filed a W.P.No.31161/2013 when the
counsel for the respondent agreed to consider the
representation of the petitioner in accordance with
9. The    petitioner    submitted   one    more    detailed
representation on 30.07.2013. Since the same was
not   considered,     contempt   proceedings   in   CCC
No.2615/2013 were initiated.       During the pendency
of the said contempt proceedings, the respondent
directed the petitioner to be examined by the Medical
Board in terms of the Persons with Disabilities (Equal
Opportunities,     Protection   of   Rights   and    Full
WP No. 31943 of 2014
Participation) Act, 1995 (for short, ‘Disabilities Act’)
and submitted a medical certificate vide endorsement
dated 04.12.2013.
10. The     petitioner   also    received   a   letter    dated
16.11.2013 addressed to the Chief Medical Officer,
BMTC      Hospital,    Bangalore    requesting    for   the
examination of the petitioner. In furtherance of the
same, the petitioner appeared before the Medical
Board, who inturn submitted a report.              In view
thereof, the contempt proceedings came to be
dropped      on    the   understanding     that     medical
certificate    would   be   considered.     The     medical
certificate    was   accepted    on   15.03.2014.       But
however      the   representation    was   not   positively
answered by the respondent and the same came to
be rejected.       It is aggrieved by the same, the
petitioner is before this Court.
WP No. 31943 of 2014
11. Sri.V.S.Naik, learned counsel for the petitioner would
11.1.It   is   during  the  course     and   scope     of
employment that an accident had occurred,
which resulted in disability being caused to the
petitioner.
11.2.The     employer    accepting     the    disability,
downgraded the petitioner’s cadre from that of
a driver to the cadre of an office assistant and
the petitioner has been discharging duties
therein.
11.3.It is on account of the retrospective application
of downgrading order that the representation
was submitted which has not been properly
considered by the authorities.
11.4.The pay of the petitioner was required to be
protected from being downgraded.      Regulation
20 (3) does not in any manner speak of
downgrading or any effect on the pay and as
WP No. 31943 of 2014
such, Section 47 of the Disabilities Act which
would be applicable requiring the pay of the
persons     like the   petitioner   suffering  from
disability to be protected. This not having been
done,    rejection   of   the    representation    is
improper and is required to be set aside and
the pay of the petitioner as a driver be required
to be granted with due increments and all other
consequential     benefits    subsequent    to   the
downgrading of the cadre as also before since
the order at Annexure-A had made the fixation
of pay and cadre retrospective in nature.
12. Ms. H.R.Renuka, learned counsel for the respondent
– Road Transport Corporation would submit that
12.1. It is in terms of the Circular bearing No.681
that the case of the petitioner has been
considered and in terms of the said Circular, on
downgrading of the cadre, the pay of the
WP No. 31943 of 2014
workman would have to be fixed as per the
downgraded post and therefore, no fault can be
found with the Road Transport Corporation.
12.2.The pay having been fixed in the year 2002 and
the representation having been made in the
year 2013, the petitioner not having challenged
the same, could not have challenged after a
period of nearly 11 years.
12.3.Section 47 of the Disabilities Act would require
an application of Section 2(i) read with Section
2(t) of the Disabilities Act and it is the only
disabilities which have been enumerated in
Section 2(i) of the Disabilities Act, which can be
taken    into consideration    for  application of
Section 47 of the Disabilities Act subject to
however the percentage of disability as has
been fixed under Section 2(t) of the Disabilities
Act viz., 40%.
12.4.This disability is required to be ascertained as
on the date of downgrading the cadre which
happened in the year 2002.          There being no
particular certificate which has been placed on
record to indicate the disability of the petitioner
in the year 2002 being 40% or more, Section
2(t) of    the  Disabilities    Act  would  not   be
applicable.     Therefore,     Section  47   of  the
Disabilities Act would not be applicable and it is
only the Circular bearing No.681 which would
be   applicable.        The   downgrading   to   the
attendant post was sought for by the petitioner
himself, even though he had an option to drive
a    light    motor       vehicle,   as   per    the
recommendation of the medical board and the
petitioner having chosen office assistant cadre
knowing fully well the pay scale thereof, no
representation could have been submitted for
WP No. 31943 of 2014
making a pay scale of a driver applicable to the
petitioner.
12.5.On these grounds, she submits that there is no
infirmity in the order of rejection passed by the
respondent and the present Writ Petition is
required to be dismissed.
13. Heard Sri.V.S.Naik, learned counsel for the petitioner
and     Ms.H.R.Renuka,        learned    counsel     for  the
respondent and perused papers.
14. It is not in dispute that the petitioner has suffered an
accident     during   the    course    and     scope   of his
employment.       It is also not in dispute that various
injuries were caused to the petitioner and that he
suffered     from   locomotor      disability.     Locomotor
disability is a disability in terms of Section 2 (i) (v) of
the    Disabilities   Act.       The   contention     of  the
respondent is that it is not only disability but the
percentage of disability in terms of Section 2(t) of
WP No. 31943 of 2014
the Disabilities Act which would be required to make
Section 47 of the Disabilities Act applicable.
15. Section 47 of the Disabilities Act reads as under:-
47. Non-discrimination of Government
employments.(1) No establishment shall
dispense with, or reduce in rank, an employee
who acquires a disability during his service:
Provided that, if an employee, after
acquiring disability is not suitable for the post he
was holding, could be shifted to some other post
with the same pay scale and service benefits:
Provided further that if it is not possible to
adjust the employee against any post, he may
be kept on a supernumerary post until a suitable
post is available or he        attains the age of
superannuation, whichever is earlier.
(2) No promotion shall be denied to a
person merely on the ground of his disability.
Provided that the appropriate Government
may, having regard to the type of work carried
on in any establishment, by notification and
subject to such conditions, if any, as may be
specified in such notification, exempt any
sestablishment from the provisions           of this
section.
16. Section 2 (t) of the Disabilities Act reads as under:-
2(t) “person with disability” means a person
suffering from not less than forty per cent of
any disability as certified by a medical authority;
WP No. 31943 of 2014
17. Section 2 (t) of the Disabilities Act defines a person
with disability to mean a person suffering from not
less than 40% of any disability.       This definition is
relating to a person with reference to disability in
terms of Section 2(i) of the Disabilities Act.
18. Section 47 of the Act deals with non-discrimination in
government employments and further mandates that
no establishment shall dispense with or reduce in
rank an employee who acquires a disability during
his service.
19. The first proviso to the said Section makes it clear
that if an employee were to acquire disability and is
not suitable for the post that he was holding, he
could be shifted to some other post with the same
pay scale and service benefits.
20. The second proviso makes it clear that if it is not
possible to adjust the employee against any post, a
WP No. 31943 of 2014
supernumerary post would be created till he attains
the age of superannuation or a suitable post is
available, whichever is earlier.   Thus, Section 47 of
the   Disabilities Act   categorically mandates   that
merely because a person suffers from disability,
he/she shall not be reduced in rank but can only be
shifted to another post subject to the pay-scale and
the service benefit that he/she was entitled to as on
that date being protected.
21. Section 47 does not make any reference to Section 2
(t) or to a person with disability requiring the
ascertainment of percentage of disability to be 40%.
22. What Section 47 only speaks of is that no person
shall be discriminated on account of disability and/or
service not be dispensed with. In the event of that
person being shifted to some other post, the same
pay-scale and service benefits as are being drawn
are made available.
23. The Disabilities Act having come into force on
07.02.1996, the said Act would be applicable to the
present case since the accident occurred in the year
1999 and the order of downgrading the cadre of the
petitioner was passed in the year 2002 and the
concerned endorsement which is under challenge
was issued in the year 2013.
24. Once   the Disabilities Act came     into  force, the
question of Road Transport Corporation referring to
and relying upon a Circular issued by Road Transport
Corporation in Circular No.681 to contend that in
terms of the said Circular, the Corporation was
entitled to downgrade the cadre as also to fix the
pay-scale   as   per    downgraded    cadre,   in my
considered opinion would stand foul of Section 47 of
the Act and once the Act had come into force, the
Road Transport Corporation could not have relied
upon the Circular for that purpose.
WP No. 31943 of 2014
25. It  was    but  required      for the  Road   Transport
Corporation to make Section 47 of the Act applicable
and once an employee’s cadre is downgraded and/or
he is shifted to some other post, the pay-scale and
service benefits as mandated under first proviso to
Section 47 be protected.
26. The second contention raised by Ms.H.R.Renuka,
learned counsel for Road Transport Corporation is
that the disability has to be ascertained as on the
date of the order that is the year 2002.         In the
present case, when the petitioner was referred to the
medical board, there was no such condition, which
had been imposed by Road Transport Corporation or
instructions given to the Medical Board in the letter
issued by the Road Transport Corporation to the
Medical Board to give a certificate as on the year
27. When no demand specifying the date was made by
the Road Transport Corporation, the Medical Board
issued the certificate as on the date on which the
examination was made. At this length of time, it is
not permissible for the Road Transport Corporation to
contend that the certificate was to be of the year
2002 when no such demand or condition had been
imposed     in  the  reference   made    by  the   Road
Transport Corporation itself of the petitioner to the
Medical Board. Thus, this contention is also rejected.
28. The   last   contention    of  Ms.H.R.Renuka,   learned
counsel    for   the  respondent    -  Road   Transport
Corporation is that it is only on humanitarian ground
without looking into the percentage of disability that
the Road Transport Corporation has downgraded the
cadre of the petitioner from that of the driver to the
office assistant and in terms of Regulation 23 of the
Regulations that the cadre of the petitioner has been
WP No. 31943 of 2014
downgraded from that of a driver to office assistant
more so since there was a request made by the
petitioner to that effect.
29. I am of the considered view that once the Disabilities
Act come into force Circular No.681 would not be
applicable, the powers under regulation 20(3) of the
Regulation can only be exercised in the event of the
requirement under Section 2(t) of the Disabilities Act
being fulfilled that is to say that the disability has to
be 40% or more.         In the event of the employee
suffering from disability of 40% or more as a matter
of right such an employee would be entitled for the
benefit of Section 47 and for downgrading of the
cadre without any adverse impact on the pay and the
benefits.     Needless to say in the event of the
disability being less than 40% then Section 2 (t) of
the Disabilities Act not being applicable, such a
person not being a person with disability, Regulation
WP No. 31943 of 2014
20 (3) cannot be brought into force to downgrade
the cadre of such an employee.
30. In the light of peculiar facts of this case, it is also
required to make a mention that whenever a request
is   made     under   Regulation   20(3),   necessary
instructions would have to be issued by the Road
Transport Corporation to the Medical Board as also to
the concerned employee that the certification of
disability has to be obtained as on the date on which
the request for downgrading of the cadre is made
and if no such information is conveyed to the Medical
Board or to the employee and the Road Transport
Corporation were to act on it, then subsequent
thereto, the Road Transport Corporation cannot be
heard to contend that the certificate of the Medical
Board has to be on the date on which the application
for downgrading has to be made.
WP No. 31943 of 2014
31. In view of the above discussions, it is clear that the
impugned endorsement issued by the respondent in
the present case is not in accordance with law and
falls foul of Section 47 of the Disabilities Act. Hence,
I pass the following:
i)     The Writ Petition is allowed.
ii)    A    certiorari  is      issued.    The    General
Establishment      Order      No.533/2002    dated
04.09.2002 at Annexure-A and Office Order
dated 15.03.2014 at Annexure-M are hereby
quashed.
iii)   A mandamus is issued, the respondents are
directed to restore the pay of the petitioner as
applicable to the post of driver which the
petitioner was drawing as on the date of
downgrading cadre i.e., 04.09.2002 prior to and
subsequent thereto and make payment of all
arrears of salary and consequential benefits
from the time of his appointment within a
period of three months from the date of receipt
WP No. 31943 of 2014
of    copy of   this     order  from   the  date  of
downgrading of the post.
iv)     Respondents     to    act   on  a  printout  of  the
uploaded copy of this order on the website of
this Court, if so furnished by the petitioner,
without waiting for certified copy thereof.        If
respondents have any doubt about the order,
respondents may verify the contents of the
order from the website of this Court and/or
from the learned panel advocate appearing in
the matter.    The QR code on this order could
also be scanned to view the website of the High
Court to verify the order.