2.     This writ petition has been filed seeking the
following reliefs:-
"i) Issue Writ of Certiorari or any other
appropriate writ or order quashing the report
bearing No.B4/KaGaGu/CR-109/2018-19, dated
30/07/2021        and      endorsement       dated
08/02/2022 issued by Respondent no.3 as per
ii) Issue writ of mandamus directing the
Respondent No.3 to permit the petitioner to do
stone quarrying in his land.
iii) Issue Writ of Certiorari or any other
appropriate writ or order directing the
Respondent No.4 to issue quarrying license to
the Petitioner.
iv) Issue any other appropriate writ order
or direction to meet the ends of justice."
3.     The short question involved in the writ petition
is whether the respondents can treat any land as "deemed
4.     This Court, vide judgment and order dated
12.06.2019      passed    in W.P.No.54476/2016      (GM-MM-S)
C/w    W.P.No.51135/2016        (Dhananjay     vs.   State   of
Karnataka and others), has categorically held that there
is no concept of "deemed forest". The Court was of the view
that the land can either be a "forest" or a "forest land", but
there cannot be any "deemed forest" in absence of any
provision under the Act.
5.     There is consensus between learned counsel for
the petitioner and learned Additional Government Advocate
appearing for the respondents that the judgment passed by
this Court in the case of Dhananjay (supra) squarely
covers the controversy involved in the present writ petition.
6.     In   this view   of  the matter,   we   deem    it
appropriate to allow this writ petition without calling for any
statement of objections from the respondents as the
judgment passed by this Court in the case of Dhananjay
(supra) holds good. Paragraphs 18 and 19 are relevant
which, on reproduction, reads as under:-
"18. For the reasons which we have
recorded above, the applications made by the
petitioners will have to be reconsidered.
Whether the applications can be reconsidered
or not in the light of the amendment to the said
Rules is an issue to be decided by the
concerned      authority    while  deciding   the
applications. As no inquiry is made by the
concerned authorities on the question whether
the lands are covered by the wide concept of
“forest” or “forest land” adopted by the Apex
court by the order dated 12th December 1996,
we cannot grant a declaration that the
properties subject matter of the petitions are
not forest. We, however, make it clear that as
the concept of ‘deemed forests’ appears to be a
foreign to the law, the applications cannot be
rejected only on the ground that the lands
subject matter are ‘deemed forests’.
19. Accordingly, we dispose of          the
petitions by passing the following order:
(i) The impugned order in both the
petitions are hereby quashed and set
aside and the applications made by the
petitioners for grant of the quarrying
licence/lease or the renewal thereof, as
the case may be, shall be decided afresh
by the concerned competent authority in
the light of what is held in the judgment
and order. Appropriate decision shall be
taken within a period of two months from
the date on which a copy of this order is
provided to the concerned authority. We
make it clear that while considering the
applications    afresh,    the   concerned
authority will have to consider whether
the subject lands are “forest” or “forest
land” as laid down in the decision of the
Apex Court in GODAVARMAN (supra).
(ii) Needless to add that the if the
authority concerned finds that the land is
a “forest” or a “forest land”, lease or
extension of lease cannot be granted
unless the consent of the Central
Government is obtained as per section 2
of the Forest Act.
(iii) We also make it clear that we
have made no adjudication about the
applicability of the said Rules as
amended with effect from 12th August
2016 and all the issues are left out to be
decided by the concerned authority.
(iv) The petitions are allowed in the
above terms with no order as to costs."
7.    In view of the above, the writ petition is
allowed. The order impugned bearing No.B4/KaGaGu/CR-
109/2018-19 dated 30.07.2021 and the endorsement dated
08.02.2022 issued by respondent No.3, the copies of which
are  annexed    at    Annexures-L   and   N respectively are
quashed with a direction to the concerning Competent
Authority to consider the application made by the petitioner
for grant of quarrying lease afresh in the light of the
judgment of this Court in the case of Dhananjay (supra)
and take appropriate decision within a period of two months
from the date a copy of the order is produced before him.
We make it clear that while considering the application
afresh, the concerned Authority will have to consider
whether the subject land is "Forest" or "Forest Land" as laid
down in the decision of the Apex Court in the case of
T.N.Godavarman Thirumulkpad vs. Union of India and
8.      It is needless to observe that if the concerned
Authority finds that the land is a "forest" or a "forest land",
lease or extension of lease cannot be granted unless the
consent of the Central Government is obtained as per
Section 2 of the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980. The
decision so taken shall be communicated to the petitioner.
9.      It is made clear that we have not adjudicated
the right of the petitioner for grant of lease and the
concerned Authority has to consider the same after making
an enquiry as to whether the land in question is a "forest"
or a "forest land".