The petitioner is before this Court calling in question order
dated 11-07-2022 passed in Criminal Miscellaneous No.625 of 2021
pending before the IV Additional Principal family Judge, Mysore in
an application filed under Section 125(1) of the Cr.P.C.
2. Heard Sri M. Vikas, learned counsel appearing for the
petitioner and Sri D.J. Govindaraju, learned counsel appearing for
the respondent.
3. Brief facts that lead the petitioner to this Court in the
subject petition, as borne out from the pleadings, are as follows:-
The petitioner aged 66 years old and the respondent aged 60
years old got married on 13-03-2020 when they were 64 and 58
years old respectively. The averments in the petition are that the
petitioner was wanting a companion and the respondent, a divorcee
was also wanting a companionship and accordingly by mutual
consent got married.     On 29-04-2020 the innings of the couple
began and on 29-05-2020 the respondent deserted the petitioner
and leaves the matrimonial home.       After leaving the matrimonial
home after staying for one month, the respondent institutes two
proceedings – one seeking divorce from the hands of the petitioner
and the other under Section 125 of the CrPC seeking maintenance.
It appears that the petition seeking divorce in M.C.No.424 of 2021
was withdrawn by the complainant. The criminal miscellaneous
petition so filed seeking maintenance is considered on a application
filed under Section 125(1) of the CrPC and an order is passed
directing payment of interim maintenance of Rs.7,000/- per month
from the date of the application till disposal of the petition. The
petitioner challenges the said order before this Court in the subject
4. The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner submits
that interim maintenance is to be paid to a wife who has been
neglected and deserted by the husband, but even as on date the
petitioner is ready and willing to welcome the respondent back and
lead a happy married life as both of them got married only for
companionship and would submit that despite these submissions
interim maintenance is granted by the trial Court and the divorce
case filed is also withdrawn by the respondent.
5. On the other hand, the respondent would refute the
submissions to contend that though she stayed for a month with
the petitioner it becomes impossible for her to live with him as he
was constantly harassing the respondent/wife and therefore, a
notice was caused upon the petitioner prior to registration of the
claim for divorce which was also replied to by the petitioner. The
affidavit on assets and liabilities of the respondent is also filed
before the concerned Court as is necessary in law. Therefore, the
counsel for the respondent would submit that the subject petition
be dismissed and interim maintenance so awarded be confirmed.
6. I have given my anxious consideration to the submissions
made by the respective learned counsel and perused the material
on record.
7. The factum of marriage between the petitioner and the
respondent on 13-03-2020 is not in dispute and the wife/
respondent begins to live with the petitioner on 29-04-2020 and
leaves the matrimonial house a month thereafter is also not in
dispute. The allegation of the wife is constant torture from the
hands of the husband and therefore she has left the house. Both
the proceedings are instituted by the wife against the petitioner –
one seeking divorce in M.C.No.424 of 2021 and the other seeking
maintenance in Criminal Miscellaneous No.625 of 2021.              The
divorce petition being withdrawn by the wife is of no avail as the
wife is still in the matrimonial fold with the husband. So long as the
respondent remains a legally wedded wife of the petitioner and the
fact  that     she   has  been  deserted    by  the  husband,  interim
maintenance is a matter of right to the wife.
8. The order of the trial Court on an application filed by the
wife under Section 125(1) CrPC cannot be taken exception merely
because the petitioner is ready and willing to take her back. If that
be so, the petitioner could have preferred a petition for restitution
conjugal rights, which he has not preferred till date. So long as the
respondent remains the wife, it is the duty of the petitioner to
maintain his wife. Any other interpretation that the learned counsel
for the petitioner would seek to render to the provision i.e., Section
125 of the CrPC or the order passed by the concerned Court
answering the application under Section 125(1) of the CrPC would
defeat the object of the provision        itself.  The petitioner has not
placed on record his assets or liabilities.              The amount of
maintenance awarded is Rs.7,000/-. The Court while awarding such
maintenance has taken note of the fact that the petitioner and the
respondent both are senior citizens. The reason rendered by Family
Court reads as follows:
“10. It is relevant to note that the allegation made by
both the parties against each other has to be looked into only
after full pledged trial. At this stage, it is to be taken into
consideration that the respondent is admitted that he is legally
wedded husband of the petitioner and he has also admitted
that the petitioner is residing separately in Bangalore with her
sister. Further, it is admitted that the petitioner had filed a
petition for divorce which is numbered as M.C.No.424 of 2021.
No doubt, the respondent has not denied the fact that since
29-05-2020 the petitioner is living separately from the
respondent and there is no contact between them. Further,
the respondent has specifically stated that he is aged about 67
years and he is not having any source of income to pay interim
maintenance to her. In this regard, it is very important to
note that, maintenance laws have been enacted as a
measure of social justice to provide recourse to
dependent wifes and children for their financial support,
so as to prevent them from falling into destitution and
vagrancy. So, the respondent, being the legally wedded
husband of the petitioner, he has the bounden duty to
maintain his wife. Further, the petitioner has produce
documents such as certified copy of Partition Deed pertaining
to the lands belonging to the respondent and mutation register
extract. These documents show that during the family
partition, the respondent was allotted the land of more than 5
acres to his share. On the other hand, the respondent has
denied that he is an LIC agent. Further, it is to be taken into
consideration that the respondent is a senior citizen, who is
aged about 67 years, and the petitioner is also aged about 60
years. Hence, this Court is of the clear view that, the
respondent being the legally wedded husband of the
petitioner, he has the bounden duty to maintain his wife.
Accordingly, if the respondent is directed to pay an interim
maintenance of Rs.7,000/- per month pending disposal of the
petition, then it will meet the ends of justice. Hence, I answer
the above point accordingly. Consequently, I proceed to pass
I.A.No.2 filed by petitioner U/Sec.125(1) of Cr.P.C. is
hereby allowed in part.
The respondent is directed to pay interim maintenance
of Rs.7,000/- (Rupees seven thousand only) per month to the
petitioner from the date of application pending disposal of the
petition.”
A perusal at the reason so rendered would demonstrate application
of mind on the part of the learned Judge to the issue before him
and by balancing the right of both the petitioner and the respondent
has awarded a sum of Rs.7,000/- to be paid to the respondent as
interim   maintenance. The reasons          rendered     are  cogent and
coherent which would not call for any interference at the hands of
9. Finding no merit in the petition, the petition stands