1. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned common judgment and order
dated 06.05.2016 passed by the Division Bench of the High Court of Judicature for
Rajasthan, Jaipur Bench Jaipur in D.B. Special Appeal (Writ) No. 1883/2014 and other
connected appeals, by which the Division Bench of the High Court has allowed the
said appeals and has quashed and set aside the respective judgments and orders
passed by the learned Single Judge of the High Court and held that the three years
Nursing Course by the in-service candidates could not be treated as a period on
deputation and be treated only on leave whatever due to the candidates and
consequently has reserved the liberty in favour of the State to recover the excess
amount paid to the original writ petitioners treating the period of training as a period
of leave permissible to him/her in easy equal installments, the original writ petitioners
have preferred the present appeals.
2. That the original writ petitioners are working either as ANM (Auxiliary Nursing &
Midwifery) or Lab Technician, Multi-Purpose Worker, Accounts Clerk or other similarly
situated posts. They are the members of the Rajasthan Medical & Health Subordinate
Service Rules, 1965. They applied for the course of General Nursing Training which
is of three years duration and is regulated according to the General Nursing Training
Course Rules, 1990 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Rules 1990’).
2.1 That all the original writ petitioners submitted their applications, in the prescribed
proforma as in-service candidates, seeking admission to the course of General
Nursing as envisaged under Rule 9 of the Rules 1990. That all the in-service
candidates were required to be considered eligible to seek admission provided they
fulfilled the criterion for admission and eligibility under Rule 11 of the Rules 1990. All
the original writ petitioners submitted their applications for seeking study leave
knowing it fully well that joining three years Nursing Course cannot be treated on
deputation for the in-service candidates. All the original writ petitioners completed their
course or some of them were either doing their internship or a few, after completion
of their internship, filed writ petitions before the learned Single Judge of the High Court
and prayed that the study leave sanctioned to them by the competent authority may
be treated as on deputation. That the learned Single Judge allowed the batch of writ
“Looking to the aforesaid, these writ petitions are being disposed of with the following directions:
1. Respondents are directed to comply with the observations and expectations of the Hon’ble Apex
Court as given in the case of Sushil Sharma (supra) [State of Rajasthan vs. Sushil Sharma, Civil
Appeal No. 5283/2001, dated 10.08.2001], thereby, they will not allow benefit of deputation
allowance to anyone in violation of rule 112 read with rule 97 of the RSR. This is irrespective of the
2. If there is shortage of Junior Specialist, endeavour should be to amend the Rules so that direct
recruitment can be made, as presently aforesaid post is filled up by promotion only. However, on
the pretext of shortage of Junior Specialist, respondents cannot be allowed to violate or circumvent
the rules. This is more so when it goes even against the observations and expectations of the
Hon’ble Apex Court in the case of Sushil Sharma (supra). The respondents will accordingly allow
study leave and benefit thereupon as per rule 111 and 112 read with rule 97 of the RSR;
3. Since for many posts, benefit of study leave with full salary has been allowed, hence, to avoid
discrimination, respondents have agreed to extend similar benefit to the petitioners also, however,
arrangement aforesaid would be limited to those who have already joined the training course of
GNM and now onwards nobody would be allowed study leave benefit in violation of the provision of
4. Compliance of the aforesaid order may be made within a period of one month from the date of
receipt of copy of this order.”
2.2 That thereafter the State preferred intra-court appeals before the Division Bench.
The Division Bench permitted the State to file review applications. The State filed
review applications before the learned Single Judge, which came to be dismissed.
Subsequently, the State again filed intra-court appeals before the Division Bench
against the judgment(s) and order(s) passed by the learned Single Judge, allowing
the writ petitions and holding that the original writ petitioners are entitled to treat their
period of training as the period on leave permissible to him/her. By the impugned
common judgment and order, the Division Bench of the High Court has allowed the
intra-court appeals and while approving the earlier decision of the learned Single
Judge has held that the period spent on training course by the in-service candidates
shall not be treated as a period on deputation and be treated only on leave whatever
due to the candidates. That as during the pendency of the intra-court appeals, under
threat of the contempt of the judgment and order passed by the learned Single Judge,
the original writ petitioners were paid the amount and holding that the period of training
is to be treated as period on leave permissible to him/her, the Division Bench also
directed that the State shall be at liberty to recover the excess amount paid to the
original writ petitioners during their period of training as a period of leave permissible
to him/her in easy equal installments.
2.3 Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned common judgment and
order passed by the Division Bench of the High Court reserving liberty in favour of the
State to recover the excess amount paid, the original writ petitioners have preferred
the present appeals.
3. At the outset, it is required to be noted that this Court issued notice in the present
special leave petitions/appeals limited to the aspect of the recovery of the amounts
from the original writ petitioners, as directed in the impugned judgment and in the
meanwhile directed stay of recovery. In that view of the matter, the only issue which
is now required to be considered is, whether there shall be recovery of the amounts
from the original writ petitioners, as directed in the impugned judgment and order
passed by the Division Bench of the High Court.
4. Shri R.K. Singh, learned Advocate appearing on behalf of the original writ
petitioners has heavily relied upon the decision of this Court in the case of State of
Punjab v. Rafiq Masih, reported in (2015) 4 SCC 334. Relying upon the aforesaid
decision, it is vehemently submitted that as observed and held by this Court, recovery
from the employees belonging to Class III and Class IV service (Group C and Group
D service) is impermissible.
4.1 Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the original writ petitioners has prayed
and submitted that as the respective original writ petitioners are serving on Class III
and Class IV posts, the amount already paid in excess may not be recovered by the
State. In the alternative, it is prayed that the original writ petitioners may be given
reasonable monthly installments to repay the amount which is paid in excess to them.
5. Dr. Manish Singhvi, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the State has
submitted that the decision of this Court in the case of Rafiq Masih (supra), which
has been relied upon by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the original writ
petitioners, is not applicable to the facts of the case on hand. It is submitted that in
the aforesaid case the amount was paid to the employees mistakenly by the
State/State authorities which was sought to be recovered and under those
circumstances this Court observed and held that the recovery of the excess amount
paid is impermissible in case of employees belonging to Class III and Class IV service
(Group C and Group D service). It is submitted that in the present case, it is not the
case where the amount in excess was paid mistakenly by the State or the State
authorities. Rather the excess amount was paid pursuant to the order passed by the
learned Single Judge, under the threat of the contempt proceedings, which order has
now been set aside by the Division Bench. It is submitted that once the order passed
by the learned Single Judge, pursuant to which the original writ petitioners were paid
the amount, came to be set aside by the Division Bench, the necessary consequences
shall follow and on the principle of restitution, the State shall be entitled to recover the
amount paid in excess.
5.1 Reliance is placed on the decision of this Court in the case of Indore
Development Authority v. Manohar Lal, reported in (2020) 8 SCC 129 (paragraphs
334 to 336) and the decision of this Court in the case of South Eastern Coalfields
Ltd. v. State of M.P., reported in (2003) 8 SCC 648 (paragraphs 25 to 30), on the
principle of restitution.
5.2 Making the above submissions and relying upon the aforesaid decisions, more
particularly the decisions of this Court on the principle of restitution, learned Senior
Advocate appearing on behalf of the State has submitted that in the facts and
circumstances of the case, the Division Bench of the High Court has not committed
any error in permitting the State to recover the excess amount paid. However, the
learned Senior Advocate has fairly stated that the original writ petitioners may be
given reasonable installments, which even the Division Bench has observed in the
impugned judgment.
6. We have heard the learned counsel for the respective parties at length.
At the outset, it is required to be noted that in the present case the amount paid
in excess to the appellants was not due to any mistake on the part of the State/State
authorities. The excess amount has been paid pursuant to the order passed by the
learned Single Judge, which has been subsequently set aside by the Division Bench.
Therefore, on quashing and setting aside the judgment and order passed by the
learned Single Judge under which the original writ petitioners were paid the excess
amount, the necessary consequences must follow. Therefore, considering the fact
that the amount already paid in excess was not paid by the State mistakenly but was
paid pursuant to the order passed by the learned Single Judge which has been set
aside subsequently, the decision of this Court in the case of Rafiq Masih (Supra)
shall not be applicable. The said decision of this Court may be applicable only in a
case where the amount has been paid by the State/State Authorities mistakenly and
it is found that there was no fault and/or any misrepresentation on the part of the
employee and that the concerned employee is not found responsible for such excess
amount paid mistakenly. The amount paid in excess pursuant to the order passed by
the learned Single Judge which has been set aside by the Division Bench has to be
refunded and/or returned by the original writ petitioners which the State is entitled to
recover from them on the principle of restitution.
6.1 At this stage, the decision of this Court in the case of Indore Development
Authority (supra) on principle of restitution is required to be referred to. In the said
decision, a Constitution Bench of this Court after considering the earlier decision in
the case of South Eastern Coalfields (supra) and other decisions on the principle of
restitution, has observed and held in paragraphs 335 to 336 as under:
“335. The principle of restitution is founded on the ideal of doing complete justice at the end of
litigation, and parties have to be placed in the same position but for the litigation and interim order,
if any, passed in the matter. In South Eastern Coalfields Ltd. v. State of M.P. [South Eastern
Coalfields Ltd. v. State of M.P., (2003) 8 SCC 648], it was held that no party could take advantage
of litigation. It has to disgorge the advantage gained due to delay in case lis is lost. The interim order
passed by the court merges into a final decision. The validity of an interim order, passed in favour
of a party, stands reversed in the event of a final order going against the party successful at the
interim stage. Section 144 of the Code of Civil Procedure is not the fountain source of restitution. It
is rather a statutory recognition of the rule of justice, equity and fair play. The court has inherent
jurisdiction to order restitution so as to do complete justice. This is also on the principle that a wrong
order should not be perpetuated by keeping it alive and respecting it. In exercise of such power, the
courts have applied the principle of restitution to myriad situations not falling within the terms of
Section 144 CPC. What attracts applicability of restitution is not the act of the court being wrongful
or mistake or an error committed by the court; the test is whether, on account of an act of the party
persuading the court to pass an order held at the end as not sustainable, resulting in one party
gaining an advantage which it would not have otherwise earned, or the other party having suffered
an impoverishment, restitution has to be made. Litigation cannot be permitted to be a productive
industry. Litigation cannot be reduced to gaming where there is an element of chance in every case.
If the concept of restitution is excluded from application to interim orders, then the litigant would
stand to gain by swallowing the benefits yielding out of the interim order. This Court observed in
South Eastern Coalfields [South Eastern Coalfields Ltd. v. State of M.P., (2003) 8 SCC 648] thus:
“26. In our opinion, the principle of restitution takes care of this submission. The word “restitution” in
its etymological sense means restoring to a party on the modification, variation or reversal of a
decree or order, what has been lost to him in execution of decree or order of the court or in direct
consequence of a decree or order (see Zafar Khan v. Board of Revenue, U.P. [Zafar Khan v. Board
of Revenue, U.P., 1984 Supp SCC 505] ). In law, the term “restitution” is used in three senses : (i)
return or restoration of some specific thing to its rightful owner or status; (ii) compensation for
benefits derived from a wrong done to another; and (iii) compensation or reparation for the loss
caused to another. (See Black's Law Dictionary, 7th Edn., p. 1315). The Law of Contracts by John
D. Calamari & Joseph M. Perillo has been quoted by Black to say that “restitution” is an ambiguous
term, sometimes referring to the disgorging of something which has been taken and at times
‘Often, the result under either meaning of the term would be the same. … Unjust impoverishment,
as well as unjust enrichment, is a ground for restitution. If the defendant is guilty of a non-tortious
misrepresentation, the measure of recovery is not rigid but, as in other cases of restitution, such
factors as relative fault, the agreedupon risks, and the fairness of alternative risk allocations not
agreed upon and not attributable to the fault of either party need to be weighed.’
The principle of restitution has been statutorily recognised in Section 144 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908. Section 144 CPC speaks not only of a decree being varied, reversed, set aside
or modified but also includes an order on a par with a decree. The scope of the provision is wide
enough so as to include therein almost all the kinds of variation, reversal, setting aside or
modification of a decree or order. The interim order passed by the court merges into a final decision.
The validity of an interim order, passed in favour of a party, stands reversed in the event of a final
decision going against the party successful at the interim stage. …
27. … This is also on the principle that a wrong order should not be perpetuated by keeping it alive
and respecting it (A. Arunagiri Nadar v. S.P. Rathinasami [A. Arunagiri Nadar v. S.P. Rathinasami,
1970 SCC OnLine Mad 63] ). In the exercise of such inherent power, the courts have applied the
principles of restitution to myriad situations not strictly falling within the terms of Section 144.
28. That no one shall suffer by an act of the court is not a rule confined to an erroneous act of the
court; the “act of the court” embraces within its sweep all such acts as to which the court may form
an opinion in any legal proceedings that the court would not have so acted had it been correctly
apprised of the facts and the law.
… the concept of restitution is excluded from application to interim orders, then the litigant would
stand to gain by swallowing the benefits yielding out of the interim order even though the battle has
been lost at the end. This cannot be countenanced. We are, therefore, of the opinion that the
successful party finally held entitled to a relief assessable in terms of money at the end of the
litigation, is entitled to be compensated by award of interest at a suitable reasonable rate for the
period for which the interim order of the court withholding the release of money had remained in
336. In State of Gujarat v. Essar Oil Ltd. [State of Gujarat v. Essar Oil Ltd., (2012) 3 SCC 522 :
(2012) 2 SCC (Civ) 182] , it was observed that the principle of restitution is a remedy against unjust
enrichment or unjust benefit. The Court observed : (SCC p. 542, paras 61-62)
“61. The concept of restitution is virtually a common law principle, and it is a remedy against unjust
enrichment or unjust benefit. The core of the concept lies in the conscience of the court, which
prevents a party from retaining money or some benefit derived from another, which it has received
by way of an erroneous decree of the court. Such remedy in English Law is generally different from
a remedy in contract or in tort and falls within the third category of common law remedy, which is
called quasi-contract or restitution.
62. If we analyse the concept of restitution, one thing emerges clearly that the obligation to restitute
lies on the person or the authority that has received unjust enrichment or unjust benefit (see
Halsbury's Laws of England, 4th Edn., Vol. 9, p. 434).”
In the said decision, it is further observed and held that the restitution principle
recognizes and gives shape to the idea that advantages secured by a litigant, on
account of orders of court, at his behest, should not be perpetuated.
6.2 In the case of Ouseph Mathai v. M. Abdul Khadir, reported in (2002) 1 SCC
319, it is observed and held that after the dismissal of the lis, the party concerned is
relegated to the position which existed prior to the filing of the petition in the court
which had granted the stay.
6.3 Even otherwise, no one can be permitted to take the benefit of the wrong order
passed by the court which has been subsequently set aside by the higher forum/court.
As per the settled position of law, no party should be prejudiced because of the order
of the court.
7. Even, Section 144 of the Code of Civil Procedure provides for restitution. Section
“144. Application for restitution – (1) Where and insofar as a decree or an order is varied or reversed
in any appeal, revision or other proceeding or is set aside or modified in any suit instituted for the
purpose, the Court which passed the decree or order shall, on the application of any party entitled
in any benefit by way of restitution or otherwise, cause such restitution to be made as will, so far as
may be, place the parties in the position which they would have occupied but for such decree or
order or such part thereof as has been varied, reversed, set aside or modified; and, for this purpose,
the Court may make any orders, including orders for the refund of costs and for the payment of
interest, damages, compensation and mesne profits, which are property consequential on such
variation, reversal, setting aside or modification of the decree or order.
Explanation – For the purposes of sub-section (1) the expression “Court which passed the decree
(a) Where the decree or order has been varied or reversed in exercise of appellate or revisional
(b) Where the decree or order has been set aside by a separate suit, the Court of first instance which
(c) Where the Court of first instance has ceased to exist or has ceased to have jurisdiction to execute
it, the Court which, if the suit wherein the decree or order was passed were instituted at the time of
making the decree or order was passed were instituted at the time of making the application for
restitution under this section, would have jurisdiction to try such suit.
2. No suit shall be instituted for the purpose of obtaining any restitution or other relief which could
be obtained by application under subsection (1).”
8. In the present case, the order passed by the learned Single Judge has been set
aside by the Division Bench of the High Court and therefore by applying Section 144
CPC also, the amount paid pursuant to the order passed by the learned Single Judge
which has been set aside by the Division Bench is required to be refunded/returned
by the original writ petitioners.
Therefore, in the facts and circumstances of the case, narrated hereinabove,
the Division Bench of the High Court is absolutely justified in reserving liberty in favour
of the State to recover the amount paid in excess to the original writ petitioners. It is
required to be noted that even while reserving liberty to recover the amount paid in
excess, the Division Bench has observed that the same be recovered in easy equal
9. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, the Division Bench of the
High Court has not committed any error in reserving liberty in favour of the State to
recover the amount paid in excess to the original writ petitioners. However, at the
same time, considering the prayer made on behalf of the original writ petitioners to
recover the amount in easy equal installments, we direct that whatever amount is paid
in excess to the original writ petitioners, pursuant to the order passed by the learned
Single Judge, be recovered from the original writ petitioners in thirty-six equal monthly
installments, to be deducted from their salary commencing from April, 2022.
10. The instant appeals are accordingly disposed of in the aforesaid terms. No costs.