Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 22305 of 2021
Opposite Party :- State of U.P.
Counsel for Applicant :- Santosh Kumar Shukla
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Heard Sri Santosh Kumar Shukla, learned counsel for the
applicant and learned AGA for the State through video
conferencing mode.
A first information report was lodged against the applicant as
Case Crime No. 725 of 2020 at Police Station- Kotwali
Auraiya, District- Auraiya on 14.09.2020 under Section 394
The bail application of the applicant was rejected by learned
Judge, Auraiya, on 02.03.2021.
The applicant is in jail since 26.09.2020, pursuant to the said
Sri Santosh Kumar Shukla, learned counsel for the applicant
contends that the applicant has been falsely implicated in the
instant case. He contends that the F.I.R. was lodged seven days
after the incident. The delay is fatal to the case of the
prosecution. The applicant was not named in the F.I.R. There
are no independent witnesses to the recovery. False recovery of
some articles has been shown from the applicant. The applicant
has satisfactorily explained his criminal history. Lastly it is
submitted by Sri Santosh Kumar Shukla, learned counsel for
applicant that the applicant shall not abscond, and will fully
cooperate in the criminal law proceedings. The applicant shall
not tamper with the evidence nor influence the witnesses in any
Learned A.G.A could not satisfactorily dispute the aforesaid
submissions from the record. Learned A.G.A. does not have any
instructions from the police authorities who failed to provide
instructions to the learned A.G.A. despite ample time being
given for the same.
This Court repeatedly noticed failure of the police authorities to
provide instructions to the learned Government Advocate of
bail applications from time to time as repeatedly observed.
Once the police authorities have been alerted to the fact that
there failure to provide instructions in time strikes at the root of
law. It often leads to unjustified incarceration of an accused in
jail. In this regard the following order is being extracted
"Instructions from the police authorities were not available with the
Additional Government Advocate. Consequently the Additional
Government Advocate was not in a position to present the full and true
facts of the case and the bail application could not be heard. No
explanation was given for failure on part of the police authorities to
furnish the appropriate instructions to the AGA, despite ample time being
given to the police authorities. The Court was constrained in the
circumstances to direct the SSP/ DIG to be present before the Court
through video conferencing.
In compliance of the order of this Court dated 19.05.2021, Sri Amit
Pathak SSP/ DIG, Ghaziabad is present through video conferencing.
Sri Vinod Kant, learned Additional Advocate General submits that
instructions are now available. It is further submitted on behalf of the
State that an enquiry has been ordered into the failure of the concerned
official to send timely instructions to the Government Advocate in this
case for the purposes of contesting the bail application.
The purpose of giving advance notice of bail applications to the office of
Government Advocate is to ensure that police authorities/ prosecution are
able to furnish timely instructions in the case to the Government Advocate.
The Government Advocate/ A.G.As can assist the Courts in the hearing of
the bail applications only if full and complete instructions are available
with them before the bail applications is taken up for hearing. The right of
an accused to have his bail application heard by the Court within a
reasonable time has been entrenched as a constitutional liberty. The right
flows from Article 21 according to pronouncements of Constitutional
Courts. (See: Ajeet Chaudhary Vs. State of U.P. and another reported at
With a view to streamlining the procedure for providing timely instructions
to the GA/AGA certain directions were issued by this Court in Ajeet
Chaudhary (supra). The aforesaid case was related to offences under the
SC/ST Act. However, an analogous procedure can also be created for
other criminal cases as well. Failure of the police authorities to provide
timely instructions to the GA/ AGA in bail applications causes delay in the
hearing of the bail applications, and often leads to unjustified
incarceration of an accused in jail. The concerns expressed in Ajeet
Choudary (supra) are applicable to all bail applications. The timelines in
the procedure to provide instructions may vary as per the provisions of
law. But the timeline has to be defined to ensure that hearing of the bail
applications is not delayed indefinitely to the detriment of the accused/
bail applicant.
Sri Vinod Kant, learned Additional Advocate General could not inform the
Court about compliance of directions issued by this Court to the
competent police authorities in Ajeet Chaudhary (supra), despite grant of
opportunity. Sri Vinod Kant, learned Additional Advocate General
however categorically assured the Court that the State Government has an
unconditional commitment to uphold the rule of law and to comply with
the orders passed by this Court in letter and spirit.
The Court has good reason to trust the statement of the learned Additional
Advocate General made at the bar regarding implementation of Court
orders; but equally the Court has strong cause to verify the actions of the
state officials to comply with the Court orders. Sri Vinod Kant, learned
Additional Government Advocate also states that the police authorities
will streamline the process of imparting instructions to the GA/AGAs in
bail applications and have no objection to create a procedure for the
The statement of Sri Vinod Kant, learned Additional Advocate General
regarding expeditious compliance of directions issued in Ajeet Chaudhary
(supra) is reassuring. The surest foundation of the rule of law and stability
of constitutional order lies not only in the existence of an independent
judiciary; but equally in the regard shown by every constitutional organ of
governance to the fundamental rights of all citizens, and actions of state
officials to diligently comply with the orders passed by the Court.
The process of furnishing instructions to the GA/ AGA before hearing of
bail applications has to contain safeguards which protect the
constitutional liberties of the bail applicants/ accused persons. To achieve
the aforesaid, the procedure has to be transparent, with well defined
responsibilities, and definite timelines. The responsible officials should be
accountable for failures to adhere to the said procedure and timelines
stated therein.
The Director General of Police, U.P. Police is directed to ensure that a
fair, transparent and clear procedure for supplying instructions to the
GA/AGA in bail applications before the High Court is created and
implemented across the State of U.P. The procedure shall include the
designation of the officials, the tasks or duties which they have to
discharge, and a definite time frame for such purpose. It shall be ensured
that there is constant oversight of the implementation of such procedure
and appropriate departmental action as per law is taken against officials
who without good cause fail to discharge their assigned duties therein.
The Director General of Police, U.P. Police, is commanded to comply with
the directions within a period of eight weeks as suggested by Sri Vinod
Kant, learned Additional Advocate General. The affidavit regarding
compliance of the directions passed in this order, as well in Ajeet
Chaudhary (supra) shall be filed on behalf of DG, U.P. Police before the
Registrar General on or before 06.08.2021.
Put up this matter on 26.05.2021 in the list of fresh cases before
appropriate Bench to enable the learned counsel for the applicant to
explain the criminal history of the applicant, as disclosed by the learned
Additional Advocate General on basis of instructions.
Creation of a similar procedure for all District Courts may also be
considered if deemed appropriate.
Presence of D.I.G/ S.S.P, Ghaziabad is exempted on future dates"
It may be added that disregard shown by the senior most
officials to the orders passed by the Court has grave
consequences on the rule of law in the country.
It was assured by the learned A.G.A. in Criminal Misc. Bail
Application no. 19839 of 2021, that the State Government is
committed to uphold the rule of law in the State even it is taken
on its face value. However this repeated deviation merely
reflect aberrations in the system and faults on the part of
individual officials who need to be appropriately counselled in
this regard.
It is hoped that expeditious steps are being taken by the police
authorities for compliance of the directions given to the
Director General of Police, U.P. Police in the above said case.
A copy of this order to be served upon the Director General of
Police, U.P. Police through Government Advocate.
Courts have taken notice of the overcrowding of jails during the
current pandemic situation (Ref.: Suo Motu Writ Petition (c)
No. 1/2020, Contagion of COVID 19 Virus in prisons before
the Supreme Court of India). These circumstances shall also
be factored in while considering bail applications on behalf of
accused persons.
I see merit in the submissions of Sri Santosh Kumar Shukla,
learned counsel for the applicant and accordingly hold that the
applicant is entitled to be enlarged on bail.
In the light of the preceding discussion and without making any
observations on the merits of the case, the bail application is
Let the applicant- Sanjay@ Mausam be released on bail in Case
Crime No. 725 of 2020 at Police Station- Kotwali Auraiya,
District- Auraiya registered on 14.09.2020 under Sections 394,
411, 420, 467, 468, 471 IPC, on his furnishing a personal bond
and two sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction of
the court below. The following conditions be imposed in the
(i) The applicant shall remain present before the trial court on
each date fixed, either through his counsel or personally as and
when directed by the learned trial court. In case of his absence,
without sufficient cause, the trial court may proceed against him
in accordance with law.
(ii) The applicant shall remain present, in person, before the
trial court on the dates fixed for (i) opening of the case, (ii)
framing of charge and (iii) recording of statement under Section
313 Cr.P.C. If in the opinion of the trial court absence of the
applicant is deliberate or without sufficient cause, then it shall
be open for the trial court to treat such default as abuse of
liberty of bail and proceed against him in accordance with law.
(iii) In case, the applicant misuses the liberty of bail during
trial, the trial in order to secure his presence may issue a
proclamation under Section 82 Cr.P.C. In case the applicant
fails to appear before the court on the date fixed in such
proclamation, then, the trial court shall initiate proceedings
against him, in accordance with law, under Section 174-A of the
(iv) The party shall file computer generated copy of such order
downloaded from the official website of High Court Allahabad.
(v) The computer generated copy of such order shall be self
attested by the counsel of the party concerned.
(vi) The concerned Court/Authority/Official shall verify the
authenticity of such computerized copy of the order from the
official website of High Court Allahabad and shall make a
declaration of such verification in writing.