Date of Decision: 9th February, 2023
Through: Ms. Tusharika Mattoo and Mr. Kunal
Negi, Advocate with Petitioners (M:
Through: Mr. Gautam Narayan, ASC with Mr.
1.     This hearing has been done through hybrid mode.
2.     The instant writ petition was filed by the Petitioners- Ms. Natasha
Narwal and Ms. Devangana Kalita, two undertrial persons, who were lodged
in Tihar Jail at the time when the writ petition was filed. The petition was filed
during the COVID-19 pandemic. They had sought several reliefs in this writ
petition in view of the suspension of certain prison rules, change in prison
rules owing to the pandemic and the requirement for isolation which was
prescribed during the said period.
3.     The reliefs sought in the writ petition are as under:
“(i) Issue a writ of mandamus directing the Respondent
No.1 in consultation with the Respondent Director
General of Prisons to amend/ formulate rules in terms
of the table set out hereinabove;
(ii) Issue a writ of mandamus directing the Respondent
No.2 to allow Petitioners as also other inmates of jails
Digitally Signed        W.P.(C) 2087/2021                                                           Page 1 of 14
within the NCT of Delhi to have the choice to have
physical or virtual mulaqaats to communicate with
family and friends regularly as is mandated by the
(iii) Issue a writ of mandamus directing the Respondent
No.2 to permit the Petitioners and other inmates of jails
within the NCT of Delhi access to accredited doctors,
therapists, and other medical professionals through
video-conferencing facilities;
(iv) Issue a writ of mandamus directing the Respondent
No.1 in consultation with the Respondent Director
General of Prisons to amend/ formulate rules to permit
adherence to norms of natural justice and prisoner
participation in disciplinary proceedings;
(v) Issue a writ of mandamus directing the Respondent
No.2 to make mandatory/ compulsory the viewing of a
video introducing new inmates to prison life;
(vi) Issue a writ of mandamus directing the Respondent
No.2 to permit the Petitioner access to resource
persons/ research supervisors/ other professionals
through video-conferencing facilities as required for the
purpose of completing education;
(vii) Issue a writ of mandamus setting aside Rule
1268(k) as violative of the right to food and to suitably
amend the same to permit access to eggs/
non-vegetarian food; and to
(viii) Pass such other Order(s) as this Hon’ble Court
may deem fit in the facts and circumstances of the
case.”
4.      Notice was issued on 17thFebruary, 2021 in this case and a report was
sought from the Respondent No. 1- GNCTD. On the said date, a direction was
issued to the Jail Superintendent, Tihar Jail to arrange for video conferencing
facilities to the Petitioners in order to enable them to join the Court
proceedings through video conferencing. Thereafter, on 13 thApril, 2021, the
GNCTD had filed its status report pursuant to which detailed directions were
Digitally Signed        W.P.(C) 2087/2021                                                       Page 2 of 14
issued in respect of provisions for the following:
(i)     Physical mulaqaats,
(iii)   Legal aid for the Petitioners.
5.    The relevant extract of the said order dated 13th April, 2021 reads as:
“3. On 17th February, 2021, the issues raised by the
Petitioners in respect of Physical mulaqats, VC
facilities etc. were recorded in the order passed on the
said date and a status report was called-for from the
4. The said status report has been placed on record,
along with various annexures. The counsels for the
Petitioner and the Respondents have made their
respective submissions. The Petitioners have also
joined the hearing through video-conferencing from
Jail. At this stage, the three issues that the Petitioners
highlight are as under:-
(i) Physical mulaqats: In respect of physical mulaqats,
the status report indicates that at least 8 physical
mulaqats for 30 minutes per month were being
permitted prior to the outbreak of the Covid-19
pandemic for each under trial prisoner. Post the
outbreak of the pandemic, physical mulaqats have been
stopped and e-mulaqats are currently prevalent.
Currently 3 e-mulaqats of 15 minutes per month are
permitted. For a brief period, physical mulaqats were
re-started but again w.e.f. 15th April, 2021, they were
stopped.
The Petitioners submits that various under-trial
prisoners and their family members may not have
sufficient gadgetry, such as smart phones, laptops,
tablets or computers, to do an effective e-mulaqat. It is
further submitted that even in physical mulaqats, the
prisoner does not have physical contact with the family
member as they are separated by fibre glass.
Considering these submissions, Id. counsel for the
Digitally Signed        W.P.(C) 2087/2021                                                      Page 3 of 14
Respondents shall seek instructions on weather physical
mulaqats can be started even during the pandemic for
under-trial prisoners who request for the same, for a
duration of 30 minutes at least once a week, by ensuring
that any family member who. attends the physical
mulaqat is wearing a mask/any other PPE Kit which
may be required, while maintaining social distancing.
(ii) Computer Centre: Insofar as access to the status of
the cases, orders, FlRs etc. for under trials, it is
submitted that there is a computer centre available in
the jail premises which consists of 10 computers.
However, the same is not operational. The Petitioners
submit that internet facilities can be made available in
those computers to enable under trial prisoners who
have not been able to visit the Courts or talk to their
lawyers to access the information relating to their own
cases.
Accordingly, Id. counsel for the Respondents shall seek
instructions on the steps that can be taken to make the
Computer Centre operational, along with proper
internet connectivity, with access being limited to
websites of District Courts, High Courts and the
Supreme Court, along with a proper printing facility.
(iii) Legal Aid: In so far as legal aid is concerned, the
status report records that efficient legal aid is being
provided by deputing three panel Advocates by the
DSLSA and two Advocates of the DHCLSC, who work
with the female inmates for drafting their bail petitions
and other applications and also counsel them on
various legal issues.
It is not disputed that there is a legal aid room in the Jail
premises. However, it is submitted that the same has
only one computer with no internet connectivity.
Accordingly, Id. counsel for the Respondents would
seek instructions as to whether the number of computers
in the legal aid room could be increased along with
internet connectivity and a proper printing facility
provided, so that the legal aid panel lawyers have a
Digitally Signed        W.P.(C) 2087/2021                                                       Page 4 of 14
proper room to assist the under trial prisoners in an
efficient manner.”
6.    Subsequently, the matter came to be considered on 3rd May, 2021
when vide an application bearing, CM APPL. 15720/2021 the Petitioners
were seeking further reliefs and had flagged a set of additional issues in
respect of the inmates in the women’s jail. The following issues were
considered in the said application:
(iv) Monthly charges for calling facilities
(v) Other Reliefs prayed for in the Application
7.    The portion of the order dated 3rd May, 2021 in respect of these issues
“i) Tele-calling facilities
4. The first issue that has been highlighted by Mr. Adit
S. Pujari, ld. Counsel for the Petitioners, is in respect of
telephonic calling facilities for prisoners who are being
quarantined, due to them having symptoms of
COVID-19 or due to having been tested positive for
5. Mr. Pujari, ld. Counsel submits that the inmates do
not have any telecalling facilities, and they are able to
use the telephone to call only once in a week, which is
not sufficient, considering the fact that the relatives of
these prisoners would be concerned about their medical
condition and their symptoms as also their treatment in
respect of COVID-19.
6. In response to this issue, Mr. Gautam Narayan, ld.
ASC appearing for the GNCTD, submits that a separate
mobile number has now been obtained in order to
enable such prisoners to be able to make telephone
Digitally Signed        W.P.(C) 2087/2021                                                      Page 5 of 14
calls, and a specific dedicated staff has been nominated
to visit the COVID-19 ward to facilitate the same, and
enable the said prisoners to speak with their family. He
further submits that the Office of Superintendent of Jail
is in fact intimating the relatives of the inmates as to
their medical condition on a daily basis.
7. Mr. Gautam Narayan, ld. ASC to obtain instructions
as to what is the frequency of such visits being made by
the said dedicated staff, as also the frequency of such
telephone-calls that have been permitted to be made by
the inmates, who are currently quarantined due to
Covid-19 symptoms and those who are quarantined due
to having tested positive and are undergoing treatment.
ii) Vaccination of inmates
8. Mr. Pujari, ld. Counsel, has also in this application
under ground (f), raised an issue concerning the
vaccination of the inmates in the prison, in order to
prevent an outbreak as the jail is overcrowded.
9. Mr. Narayan, ld. ASC, on this issue, submits that, at
this stage, only 12 prisoners/inmates who are over the
age of 45 years have been vaccinated.
10. Considering that there are greater chances of
spreading of the COVID-19 infection, within the
enclosed premises of the prison, let Mr. Gautam
Narayan, ld. ASC, take instructions as to the
vaccination policy, that is being proposed for
vaccinating the inmates in the Central Jail-6, Tihar.
ii) E-Mulaqaats
11. The application also prays for resumption of the
E-Mulaqat facility for the inmates to interact with their
family members. The same is a part of ground (d) of the
application.
12. Insofar as physical mulaqats of inmates with their
family members, the same is stated to have been entirely
suspended currently. However, Mr. Gautam Narayan,
ld. ASC, has informed the Court that E-Mulaqats are
Digitally Signed        W.P.(C) 2087/2021                                                   Page 6 of 14
being resumed from today i.e., 3rd May, 2021.
13. Let the same be confirmed by ld. Counsel for the
Petitioner on the next date.
iv) Monthly charges for calling facilities
14. Ld. counsel for the Petitioner also prays that, as was
done in May/June 2020, the monthly calling charges
amounting to Rs. 150 to Rs. 300, imposed upon the
prisoners, be waived due to the prevalent situation.
15. Mr. Gautam Narayan ld. ASC, submits that a
decision qua the same has to be taken by the Prison
HQs, as was done previously. Let the same be done, and
placed on record before the next date.
v) Other reliefs prayed for in the Application
16. Apart from these, Mr. Narayan, ld. ASC, may peruse
the remaining issues raised in the application and may
attempt to seek instructions in the matter, to assist the
court on the next date.”
8.     In order dated 3rd May, 2021, the issues which were flagged by the
Petitioners and recorded in order dated 13th April, 2021 were considered. The
extract of the order dated 3rd May, 2021 read as:
“(i) Physical mulaqats:
19. In respect of physical mulaqats, considering the
current wave of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is stated in
the status report filed by the Respondents that even after
wearing the PPE kits, it is not advisable to have a
physical meeting/mulaqats. 20. To this effect, the status
report is taken on record and is accepted by the Court,
subject to the condition that e-mulaquats would
commence and all the facilities qua the same shall be
provided to all the inmates in Central Jail-6, Tihar.
21. Insofar as the computer centre is concerned, the
status report states that once the second wave of the
Digitally Signed        W.P.(C) 2087/2021                                                     Page 7 of 14
COVID-19 pandemic subsides, the computer centre
would be opened and re-operationalized in a phased
manner. Mr. Gautam Narayan submits that in the
computer centre, COVID19 protocols may not be fully
maintained, and hence the same is currently not
operational.
22. Moreover, insofar as the internet connectivity in the
said computer centre is concerned, the Jail
Superintendent would not have the authority to decide
as to which websites should be made accessible to the
inmates.
23. Accordingly, the Jail Superintendent, Central Jail
No.6, Tihar, may co-ordinate with the concerned
Director at the NIC, who is providing the internet
connection to Tihar Jail, in order to seek assistance as
to whether limited access to only a certain permissible
number of portals can be given in the computer centre
at the jail or not, and whether the system can be
installed in such a manner that there is no access to
other non-permissible internet portals. For this
purpose, the Jail Superintendent may directly contact
the Director, NIC, and a status report in this regard be
placed on record before the next date
24. Insofar as the issue concerning legal aid is
concerned, the status report states that the legal aid
room is available, and the empanelled counsels of the
Delhi State Legal Services Authority (DSLSA) visit the
said jail and utilise these computers between 3:00 PM
to 6:00 PM five days a week. The status report further
states that the number of computers and printers are
being made available can be increased, if required.
25. Since the requirement of these computers would be
based on the quantum of work which the DSLSA panel
lawyers would be undertaking in the said room, let the
Secretary, DSLSA, Mr. Kawaljeet Arora, place a report
on record, after assessing as to how many computers
Digitally Signed        W.P.(C) 2087/2021                                                   Page 8 of 14
and printers would be required in the said legal aid
room.
26. A copy of the present order be communicated to Mr.
Kawaljeet Arora, Secretary- DSLSA, and the concerned
Director, NIC, who shall be served through the Jail
Superintendent, Central Jail No.6 itself.
27. Let status report in respect of issues (ii) and (iii) be
filed by the Respondents within a period of 10 days from
today.
28. Insofar as the issues relating to tele-calling and
vaccination are concerned, instructions may be
obtained by Mr. Gautam Narayan, ld. ASC urgently.
For the rest of the issues matter would be taken up after
two weeks. List this petition, as also CM Appl.
15721/2021, on 5th May, 2021.”
9.    Details directions have also been passed on 5thMay, 2021 on the
following issues:
(iv) Monthly calling charges and intermingling issues
10.   The relevant extract of the order dated 5th May, 2021 reads as:
4. Currently, as per the submissions made, there are
three types of wards: one is the recovery ward, one is
the isolation ward and the third is COVID-19 positive
quarantine ward, respectively housing 18 inmates, 21
inmates and 9 inmates. The calling facilities are stated
to have been activated in all these wards with effect
from 4th May, 2021.
5. In view thereof, insofar as the activation of calling
facilities is concerned, no further direction needs to be
issued, except for the fact that the said calling facilities
would be continued.
Digitally Signed        W.P.(C) 2087/2021                                                      Page 9 of 14
6. However, there is a further issue that has been raised
in this petition, as to the inmates who can make these
calls, and to the kind of numbers which the said calls
are allowed to be made to.
7. Firstly, it is submitted that the daily calling facilities
are only available to those inmates who have verified
their biometric data and also have submitted various
documents in respect of the postpaid number, the
address and the bill, of the person, to whom the call is to
be made. It is further submitted that the daily calling
facilities are available only to numbers which are
postpaid, and not to prepaid numbers. This requirement
was suspended during the first wave of the COVID-19
pandemic, as a large number of relatives of the inmates
do not have postpaid facilities and only have prepaid
connections.
8. Considering this fact and the current situation of the
pandemic, where a large number of families seem to be
affected, the daily calling facilities would henceforth be
extended, during the current second wave of the
COVID-19 pandemic, even to prepaid numbers so long
as the number to which the said call being made is
verified, and the person who is receiving the call is
verified in some manner, to be a close relative of the
inmate concerned.
9.     Further,      insofar    as     the    inmates      in
recovery/isolation/COVID-19 positive wards are
concerned, daily calling would be permitted for a
maximum of 5 minutes for these inmates, considering
that they would wish to update their family members as
to their medical condition.
10. The directions to this effect are issued to the Jail
Superintendent, CJ-6, Tihar Jail, to make the same
operational within the next 2-3 days.
ii) Vaccination of inmates
11. On the issue of vaccination, insofar as the inmates
who are 45+ years of age are concerned, there are a
total of 136 inmates for whom vaccines are already
Digitally Signed        W.P.(C) 2087/2021                                                       Page 10 of 14
stated to have been received by the Jail Superintendent.
Out of them only 12 inmates have already been
vaccinated. However, the impediments in the
administration of vaccination appear to be due to
various factors such as hesitance in the inmates to get
vaccinated, non-availability of identity cards such as
Aadhar Card, PAN Card, and the non-availability of a
mobile number which is to be put in the CoWIN portal.
12. Considering that for inmates who are 45+ years of
age, vaccines are already available and are with the
Jail Superintendent, it is directed that proper
counselling shall be done for these inmates, and they
would be encouraged to obtain vaccination, at the
earliest.
13. Considering the density of occupancy in jail
premises, vaccination is almost a necessity for all
inmates. If an identity card, in the form of an Aadhar
card or a PAN card is not available, the Prison ID
number may be used as the identification number, for
being put on the concerned portal/App. Insofar as the
mobile number is concerned, if the inmate himself or
herself does not have a mobile number, he or she is
permitted to use the mobile number of a close relative,
like a parent or a sibling or child, for the purpose of
registration for the vaccine.
14. The Prison Authorities have assured this Court that
all the 136 inmates, who are 45+ years of age, would be
vaccinated by 31st May, 2021.
15. Insofar as the 18 - 44 age group of inmates are
concerned, there are a total of 279 inmates. Currently,
the Jail Superintendent has not received vaccines for the
said group.
16. Accordingly, let a request be made by the Jail
Superintendent within a period of 48 hours to the
Disaster Management Office (West) which shall be
forwarded to the Ministry of Home Affairs. The request
of the Jail Superintendent shall be considered
expeditiously, and the requisite vaccines shall be
Digitally Signed        W.P.(C) 2087/2021                                                   Page 11 of 14
supplied within a period of 15-30 days, for the purpose
of vaccination of the said group of 279 inmates who
belong to the 18-44 age group.
17. If there is any impediment in respect of the same, an
appropriate application may be moved by the Jail
Authorities before the court.
18. Insofar as E-mulaqaats are concerned, the physical
mulaqaats earlier were for half an hour per week.
However, E-mulaqaats are being permitted only once
for 15 minutes, every ten days.
19. Considering the current pandemic situation, there
could be relatives and family members of the inmates,
who may wish to be in touch with the inmates.
Accordingly, e-mulaqaats for at least half an hour, each
week, would be permitted by the Jail Authorities, to all
the inmates.
iv) Monthly calling charges and intermingling issues
20. Insofar as the monthly calling charges are
concerned, Mr. Gautam Narayan, ld. ASC, informs the
Court that the same has been waived until 31st May,
2021. It is also submitted that further intermingling of
the isolated/recovering COVID-19 positive patient is
being completely avoided, and separate water facilities
and other common facilities are being made available
through dedicated staff to the recovery, COVID positive
and isolation wards. The said submissions are taken on
record.
21. Insofar as the remaining issues captured in the
order dated 3rd May, 2021 are concerned, the same
would be taken up on the next date of hearing i.e., 24th
May, 2021. On the said next date, the Jail
Superintendent shall arrange for video-conferencing
facilities so that the Petitioners can join the Court from
jail, if they are in custody.”
11.    It has also been observed that subsequent to the filing of the writ
petition, both the Petitioners have also been released on bail in July, 2022.
Digitally Signed        W.P.(C) 2087/2021                                                       Page 12 of 14
12.    Today, ld. Counsel for the Petitioner, on being queried as to if there are
any other additional issues in this matter, has raised a concern relating to
e-mulaqaats facilities and inmates in case of relatives who are foreigners. In
respect thereof, the circular dated 26th December, 2022 has been placed on
record which states that for the category of foreign inmates unless they are
covered by the exception, the said facility would be available. The relevant
portion of the said circular is extracted herein below:
The E-Mulakat facility will not apply to foreign inmates
involved in terrorist activities, offences against the
State. The information with regard to this facility to be
provided to the rest of the category of foreign inmates
shall be shared with the investigating agency and the
facility will be allowed once in a fortnight only.”
13.    In addition, it is also clarified, if any inmates have foreign relatives,
e-mulaqaats would be permitted as per the applicable Rules. Considering the
fact that the restrictions imposed due to the COVID-19 pandemic are not
applicable any more, no further orders would be called for in this particular
petition which primarily dealt with conditions in prisons and sought reliefs for
prison inmates during the COVID-19 pandemic.
14.    Ld. counsel for the Petitioner expresses an apprehension that the grant
of bail to the Petitioners, has been challenged and the same is pending before
the Supreme Court. Liberty is accordingly granted to the Petitioners to
approach, in case there is any change of circumstances.
15.    It is also recorded that vide order dated 14thJuly, 2022, the Court had
called for a response to the Delhi State Legal Services Authority (DSLSA)
report where certain issues were highlighted in terms of providing IT
infrastructure in the jails. The DSLSA, in its affidavit dated 17th September,
Digitally Signed        W.P.(C) 2087/2021                                                       Page 13 of 14
2022 had stated that in respect of inkjet printers, desktop computers, printers,
scanners and UPS, orders have already been placed. The submission of Mr.
Narayan, ld. ASC today is that the said equipment has already been supplied
to Tihar Jail.
16.   Petition is disposed of in these terms. All pending applications are
disposed of.
Digitally Signed        W.P.(C) 2087/2021                                                      Page 14 of 14