1.      The applicant has approached this Court with an application under
Section 439 Cr.P.C. r/w section 31 of the POCSO Act with a prayer for grant
of bail to the accused person Shri Silvester Khonglah.
2.      Annexure I to this application is the FIR dated 18.12.2020 lodged by
Smti Jushila Mawiong before the Officer-In-Charge, Pynursla Police Station,
which contents revealed that a complaint was made against the accused person
Silvester Khonglah of Iarbamon village who is said to have picked up the
minor daughter of the Complainant on 16.12.2020 at about 12.00 am and has
taken her to one place called Nongshyrngan near Bri War Resort and there he
had sexually assaulted her and dropped her back to her place of stay. The act
of sexual assault was also committed on 11.12.2020. This was narrated to the
said Complainant by her said minor daughter. However, the said minor
daughter has also stated that when the said act was committed, it was with her
(minor daughter) consent. The Complainant though has objected to their
relationship as according to her knowledge, underage marriage is illegal.
3.      On lodgment of the said FIR, the police of Pynursla immediately took
action and the accused person Silverter Khonglah was arrested on 18.12.2020
itself in connection with Pynursla P.S. Case No 70(12) 2020 u/s 5(l)/6 POCSO
Act and investigation was launched accordingly.
4.      In due course, the investigation was completed, including the recording
of statement of the Complainant, the victim and other relevant witnesses under
section 161 and 164 Cr. P.C. respectively. The IO then filed the Charge Sheet
on 10.03.2021 finding that a prima facie case was duly established against the
accused person and prayer was made to put him up for trial. A regular case
being Special(POCSO) Case No 10 of 2021 was then registered and the matter
is now pending before the learned Special Judge(POCSO), Shillong.
5.      Heard Ms. C.B. Sawian, learned counsel for the Applicant who has
submitted that from the FIR and the statements of the Complainant, the victim
and the Teacher with whom the victim was residing, it can be seen that there
is a relationship between the victim and the accused and that both of them are
teenagers, the accused person being 19 years old.
6.      Ms. Sawian has also submitted that the accused person being a teenager,
therefore he is incapable of understanding the consequences of his action and
keeping him incarcerated with other inmates, some of whom may be harden
criminals will have an impact on his future career.
7.      Again, it is submitted that the POCSO Act has been enacted to prevent
cases of sexual assault on children, however, the Act does not contemplate
punishment of teenagers who are involved in romantic love.
8.      Referring to the case of “Vijayalakshmi and Anr. v. State represented
by the Inspector of Police and Another” Crl. O.P. No 232 of 2021 and
Crl.M.P. No 109 of 2021, para 11,12 and 18, Ms. Sawian has submitted that
many High Courts have taken a lenient view in such cases where the accused
involved is a teenager and in this regard, charges under POCSO Act and even
conviction was set aside and quashed.
9.     Another limb of argument raised by Ms. Sawian is that the accused
person is in judicial custody for almost 11 months and the POCSO Act
stipulates that cases under this Act has to be disposed of within one year which
could not be done so in this case and as such, the accused person may be
released on bail with any conditions.
10.    Mr. B. Bhattarcharjee, learned AAG in his opposition to this application
has submitted that the judgment cited by the learned counsel for the Petitioner
will have no bearing in this instant case inasmuch as the fact that the accused
person is a major, whether he is 19 years or 40 years would make no difference
in the eyes of the Law.
11.    It is also submitted that the provisions of the POCSO Act does not
distinguished the severity of the offence whether it is a result of romantic love
or otherwise. The offence committed by the accused person herein is serious
in nature and even if it is a consequence of romantic love, it would not entitle
the accused to be enlarged on bail. Reference to the order dated 17.11.2021
passed by this Court in the case of “Pankaj Kumar Bhardwaj v. State of
Meghalaya” BA No. 13 of 2021 was made by the learned AAG to highlight
the fact that this Court on hearing submission of the parties that the case
involves a romantic relationship between the accused therein and the victim,
has decline to allow the prayer made for grant of bail.
12.    Having heard the learned counsels for the parties, this Court is to
consider as to whether under the facts and circumstances of this case the
accused person can be enlarged on bail.
13.    The facts as stated above need not be repeated but only for the purpose
of cross reference with the contents of the records which was duly produced
before this Court and has been perused.
14.    The learned counsel for the Petitioner has at the outset maintained that
the relationship between the accused person and the alleged victim is one of
romantic love. There is no denial of the fact that the parties were involved in a
physically intimate relationship resulting in the lodging of the FIR by the
Complainant who is the mother of the alleged victim. It is a matter of evidence
as to whether the alleged act constitutes sexual assault as per the provision of
15.     It is also borne out from the record that the investigation has been
completed and the charge sheet have been filed. On the Special Court
(POCSO) taking cognizance of the said charge sheet, charges were accordingly
framed against the accused and the case is now at the stage of evidence.
16.     The contention of the learned AAG on the applicability of the relevant
provision of the POCSO Act and the severity of the offence involved would be
subject to the appreciation of evidence adduced in the case. However, this
Court while taking into the account the nature and gravity of the alleged
offence has also to consider other aspects as far as consideration for grant of
bail is concerned.
17.     On perusal of the records, particularly the statement of the victim and
the accused, prima facie it is apparent that there is a romantic relationship
between the two and that the sexual act involved between them was one of
consensual, notwithstanding the fact that in the case of an alleged victim being
a minor, consent has no legal validity, however, this aspect of the matter cannot
be lost sight of while a plea for grant of bail is being considered by the court.
18.     Bail jurisdiction particularly u/s 439 Cr.PC, is one where the power of
discretion has been conferred on the Court to exercise the same judiciously
under the facts and circumstances of the case. In the case of “ Ram Govind
Upadhyay v. Sudarshan Singh” (2002) 3 SCC 598, at paragraph 3, the
“ 3. Grant of bail though being a discretionary order- but, however, calls
for exercise of such a discretion in a judicious manner and not as a
matter of course. Order for bail bereft of any cogent reason cannot be
sustained. Needless to record, however, that the grant of bail is dependent
upon the contextual facts of the matter being dealt with by the court and
facts, however, do always vary from case to case. While placement of the
accused in the society, though may be considered but that by itself cannot
be a guiding factor in the matter of grant of bail and the same should and
ought always to be coupled with other circumstances warranting the
grant of bail. The nature of the offence is one of the basic considerations
for the grant of bail- more heinous is the crime, the greater is the chance
of rejection of the bail, though, however, dependent on the factual matrix
of the matter.”
19.    The Hon’ble Supreme Court while discussing the concept of bail in the
case of “Ash Mohammad v. Shiv Raj Singh” (2012) 9 SCC 446 at Paragraphs
“ 20. Having said about the sanctity of liberty and the restrictions imposed
by law and the necessity of collective security, we may proceed to state as to
what is the connotative concept of bail. In Halsbury’s Laws of England it   11
“166. Effect of bail.- The effect of granting bail is not to set the
defendant [(accused) at liberty], but to release him from the custody of law
and to entrust him to the custody of his sureties, who are bound to produce
him to appear at his trial at a specified time and place. The sureties may
seize their principal at any time and may discharge themselves by handing
him over to the custody of law, and he will then be imprisoned….”
21. In Sunil Fulchand Shah v. Union of India       12 Dr. A.S. Anand, learned
Chief Justice, in his concurring opinion, observed: (SCCpp.429-30, para
“24 … Bail is well understood in criminal jurisprudence and Chapter
33 of the Code of Criminal Procedure contains elaborate provisions relating
to grant of bail. Bail is granted to a person who has been arrested in a non-
bailable offence or has been convicted of an offence after trial. The effect
of granting bail is to release the accused from internment though the court
would still retain constructive control over him through the sureties. In case
the accused is released on his own bond such constructive control could still
be exercised through the conditions of the bond secured from him. The
literal meaning of the word ‘bail’ is surety.”
20.    In the case of “Vijayalakshmi” (supra) cited by the learned counsel for
the Petitioner, this Court is persuaded to respectfully agree with the
observation made therein with special reference to the observations made
therein at paragraphs 12 & 18 which are reproduced below as: -
“ 12. As rightly recognized by the Learned Single Judge of this Court in
Sabari’s Case (cited supra), incidences where teenagers and young adults
fall victim to offences under the POCSO Act being slapped against them
without understanding the implication of the severity of the enactment is an
issue that brings much concern to the conscience of this Court. A reading
of the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the POCSO Act would show that
the Act was brought into force to protect children from offences of sexual
assault, sexual harassment and pornography, pursuant to Article 15 of the
Constitution of India, 1950 and the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
However, a large array of cases filed under the POCSO Act seems to be
those arising on the basis of complaints registered by the families of
adolescents and teenagers who are involved in romantic relationships with
each other. The scheme of the Act clearly shows that it did not intend to
bring within its scope or ambit, cases of the nature where adolescents or
teenagers involved in romantic relationships are concerned.
18. In the present case, the 2nd Petitioner who was in a relationship with the
2nd Respondent who is also in his early twenties, has clearly stated that she
was the one who insisted that the 2nd Respondent take her away from her
home and marry her, due to the pressure exerted by her parents. The 2nd
Respondent, who was placed in a very precarious situation decided to
concede to the demand of the 2nd Petitioner. Thereafter, they eloped from
their respective homes, got married and consummated the marriage.
Incidents of this nature keep occurring regularly even now in villages and
towns and occasionally in cities. After the parents or family lodge a
complaint, the police register FIRs for offences of kidnapping and various
offences under the POCSO Act. Several criminal cases booked under the
POCSO Act fall under this category. As a consequence of such a FIR being
registered, invariably the boy gets arrested and thereafter, his youthful life
comes to a grinding halt. The provisions of the POCSO Act, as it stands
today, will surely make the acts of the boy an offence due to its stringent
nature. An adolescent boy caught in a situation like this will surely have no
defense if the criminal case is taken to its logical end. Punishing an
adolescent boy who enters into a relationship with a minor girl by treating
him as an offender, was never the objective of the POCSO Act. An
adolescent boy and girl who are in the grips of their hormones and
biological changes and whose decision-making ability is yet to fully develop,
should essentially receive the support and guidance of their parents and the
society at large. These incidents should never be perceived from an adult’s
point of view and such an understanding will in fact lead to lack of empathy.
An adolescent boy who is sent to prison in a case of this nature will be
persecuted throughout his life. It is high time that the legislature takes into
consideration cases of this nature involving adolescents involved in
relationships and swiftly bring in necessary amendments under the Act. The
legislature has to keep pace with the changing societal needs and bring
about necessary changes in law and more particularly in a stringent law
such as the POCSO Act.”
21.      In the light of the above, this Court is of the considered opinion that at
this juncture the prayer of the Petitioner for grant of bail to the accused person
Silvester Khonglah can be allowed.
22.      Accordingly, the accused person Silvester Khonglah is hereby directed
to be released on bail on compliance with the following conditions:-
i)       That he shall execute a personal bond of ₹ 20,000/- (rupees twenty
ii)      That he shall not tamper with the witnesses on the case;
iii)     That he shall not abscond or leave the jurisdiction of the Trial court
iv)      That he shall appear before the court as and when called upon to do
23.      With the above, this petition is hereby disposed of.
24.      Registry is directed to return the case record forthwith.