4.     This court vide order dated 25.07.2018 passed in Special Civil
Application No. 12537 of 2011 in case of employees like the petitioners
who prayed for a direction to regularize their services and treat them at
par with similarly situated persons and grant them regularization from the
date of their initial appointments as Multi-purpose Health Workers
(Male) with consequential and incidental benefits held as under:
7. It is admitted that initially, petitioners were given contractual
appointment for 11 months and thereafter, they have been continued
for all these years. Some of these petitioners have joined way back in
the year 2004 and 2005 and working on fixed remuneration of
Rs.2500/-. The main ground of the respondents in denying the regular
appointment to the petitioners and terminating their services is that
initial appointment was on contractual basis.
8. This Court is of the considered opinion that such stand of the State
Government in terminating the services of the petitioners, despite the
fact that, petition of similarly situated other petitioners was allowed
way back in the year 2011 and 2016. In these proceedings, respondents
were party and decision was in the knowledge of the respondents. Case
of the petitioners for increasing of remuneration from Rs.2500/- to
Rs.9400/- was forwarded by Health and Family Welfare Department
for consideration to the Finance Department. Finance Department in
place of taking decision in favour of the employees have passed an
order vide which the District Panchayats have been directed to
terminate the services of the petitioners who have been working for
considerable long time.
9. While disposing of Special Civil Application No.6289 of 2011, this
Court has held as under.
25. It may be true that in the case of District Rajkot, similarly
situated MPHW(M) have been regularized by the concerned
District Panchayat. However, it is obvious that in the case of
Sabarkantha District Panchayat, the services of MPHW (M),
who are identically situated to the petitioners, have been
regularized, with restrospective effect, by the State
Government, itself. The State Government has taken a policy
decision in this regard, confined only to the MPHW (M) of
Sabarkantha District. Why all similarly situated MPHW (M) in
other Districts of the State have not been covered under a
uniform policy, is certainly baffling. Multi Purpose Health
Worker (Male) such as petitioners, who were appointed on
adhoc basis but have been denied the fruits of regular
appointment only because the regular selection process was not
fhled until they had crossed the permissible age-limit, from a
distinct class of employees. Different categories in a single
class cannot be carved out by taking piecemeal decisions
benefiting only a section of such employees. This would
amount to sub-classification that would not be permissible in
law, as there is no rational nexus to the object sought to be
achieved by confirming the decision only to MPHW (M) in
Rajkot and Sabarkantha districts. They, therefore, cannot be
accorded discriminatory treatment. The respondent authorities
are not only trying to take advantage of the situation but are
also trying to put the blame on each other which cannot be
permitted, to the detriment of the petitioners.
10. From the aforementioned judgment, it is clear that Multi Purpose
Health Worker (Male) who have worked continuously for so many
years cannot be discriminated by taking one excuse or the other. There
is no rationale in discriminating the present petitioners by treating them
as employees on contractual basis when initial contract for which they
were appointed is over after 11 months and thereafter, without any
break, they are continued for all these years. This is particularly so,
when clear cut finding has been recorded by co-ordinate Bench of this
Court in Special Civil Application No.6289 of 2011 and respondents
were party in these proceedings.
11. As a result of aforementioned discussion, termination order dated
6.1.2018 is quashed and set aside and this petition is allowed in the
same terms as Special Civil Application No.6289 of 2011 decided on
10th August, 2016. Petitioners will be regularized in the same manner
from the same date as in the aforementioned oral order. Rule is made
absolute.
5.     Further, a co-ordinate bench of this court in Special Civil
Application No. 2207 of 2014, relying on the aforesaid decision,
considering the submissions of the respective parties held as under vide
order dated 23.01.2019:
“ 7. Having heard learned advocates appearing for the parties and
having gone through the material on record, the Court found that
respondents have not been able to point out any dissimilarity or
discriminatory feature than what has been decided by coordinate
Bench of this Court and, therefore, with limited scope of an issue, the
Court found that the case is made out by the petitioner. While arriving
at this conclusion, the Court is considering the observations
which have been made by a decision in case of Special Civil
Application No.6289 of 2011 reported in case as referred
above [J.N.Jagani vs. State of Gujarat reported in 2016 (0) AIJEL –
HC 236643], the relevant paras contained therein are
“26. It is a settled position of law, that does not require any
further elaboration, that equals are required to be treated
equally and dissimilar treatment cannot be accorded to the
same class of people.
27. The action of the respondent authorities in not regularizing
the services of the petitioners, as has been done in the case of
other similarly situated MPHW(M) by the concerned
District Panchayats and the State Government in Sabarkantha
District, is not only arbitrary but also discriminatory and
unjust and is, therefore, in violation of Article 14 of the
Constitution of India. The petitioners are being deprived of the
fruits of regularization in spite of having worked continuously
for a period of about twentyfive years, or more. As such, the
action of the respondents is also in violation of the provision of
Articles 16 and 21 of the Constitution of India.
31. In the present case as well, the action of the respondents
District Panchayat as well as the State Government is required
to be tested on the principle of reasonableness in executive
action. In the view of this Court, the action of respondent No.3
in not issuing the advertisement for the regular selection
procedure expeditiously, especially after imposing a
condition in the appointment orders of the petitioners that
they have to undergo the regular selection process and
then not conducting the selection process for years together
until the petitioners cross the permissible agelimit, is highly
unreasonable. Respondent No.3 bided time for a period of six
years before initiating the regular selection process ensuring,
by this action that the petitioners become agebarred in
the meanwhile. The initiation of the selection process
was not in the hands of the petitioners and they cannot be
blamed for the plight they find themselves in.
33. As held by this Court in the above judgment, aging is a
process which nobody can stop. This aspect ought to have been
considered by respondent No.3 while including Condition
No.10 in the appointment orders of the petitioners and while
issuing the advertisement for regular selection in the year 1996.
It was not in the hands of the petitioners to have
stopped the clock from running. However, it was very much
in the hands of respondent No.3 to have held the selection
process well in time, so that persons such as the petitioners,
who have been appointed by it subject to the condition that they
would have to participate in the regular selection process,
would have got a fair chance. The petitioners cannot be
made to suffer for the totally unconcerned and casual approach
on the part of the District Panchayat.
34. At the same time, the Court cannot overlook the fact that
the State Government is supposed to be a model employer. It
would have behoved the State Government to have framed a
uniform policy for MPHW(M) such as the petitioners, covering
the entire State of Gujarat, instead of confining the decision
only to those MPHW(M) working in Sabarkantha District, as
has been done vide the order dated 13.10.2009. This would
have ensured equal treatment to all similarly situated
MPHW(M) throughout the State, irrespective of the District
in which they are working. The fact that a decision has not been
taken for all MPHW(M) but only for those working in a
particular District, has caused a great deal of anguish and
heartburning to the petitioners, which is quite understandable,
considering that they have been discriminated for no fault of
their own.
35. As a result of the above discussion and for the aforestated
reasons, this Court is of the view that the petitioners deserve to
be granted the benefits of regularization with retrospective
effect, as have been granted by the order dated 13.10.2009,
passed by the State Government in the case of similarly situated
persons in Sabarkantha District.”
8. The Court also found that similar observations have been
considered by yet another coordinate Bench in a decision delivered on
25.07.2018 in Special Civil Application No.12537 of 2011. The Court
is also taking note of said decision while coming to this conclusion in
the present case on hand. From the aforesaid observations and
in view of the fact that here also the petitioner is a Multipurpose Health
Worker (Male) and the dissimilarity is not reflecting at all, the case is
made out by the petitioner for seeking the benefit of regularisation with
retrospective effect. Accordingly following order would meet the end
of justice while disposing of the petition.
8.1 The respondents are directed to consider the case of
petitioner for regularisation of their services from the initial date of
appointment as has been done in similarly situated cases with all
consequential benefits and the needful to be done by the concerned
authorities within a period of three months from the date of receipt of
this Court.
9. With the above observation and direction, petition stands
allowed, with no order as to costs.”
6.     Accordingly, the respondents are directed to consider the case of
the petitioners for their entitlement to regular payscale on the post of
Multi-purpose Health Workers (Male) from their original date of
appointment and consequential benefits which have been paid to the
similarly situated employees namely petitioners of Special Civil
Applications No. 12537 of 2011 and 2207 of 2014. The petitioners shall
be granted such benefits as referred to hereinabove within a period of ten
weeks from the date of receipt of the writ of the order of this court.
Petitions are accordingly allowed. Rule is made absolute. Direct service
is permitted.