Kumar and Mr. Naved Ahmed,
Kapila Aloria, Sr. Assistant from Sub-
Registrar     office       in    person.
1.      This hearing has been done through hybrid mode.
CM APPL.959/2023 (for exemption)
2.      Allowed, subject to all just exceptions. Application is disposed of.
3.      The present petition has been filed by Petitioners seeking directions to
the Respondents to make an enquiry about the missing record of volume
8486 and 8487 of additional book no. 1 of the Respondent No.4 - Sub-
Registrar-III, District-Central, Asaf Ali Road, New Delhi having recording
of execution and registration of lands of the Petitioner No. 1 and also to re-
construct the said missing volumes. The petition has been filed arraying the
following respondents:
• Respondent No.1 - Govt. of NCT of Delhi (GNCTD) through
• Respondent No.2 - Inspector General of Registration (GNCTD)
• Respondent No.3 - The Registrar of Assurances (Central)
• Respondent No.5 - Department of Delhi Archives (GNCTD)
4.      The present petition raises extremely serious and perturbing issues in
respect of land and property related documents and the manner in which the
same are being registered, certified and preserved by the Sub-Registrars in
5.      The case of the Petitioner is that it registered six sale deeds in
November, 1994 in respect of certain agricultural lands. The mutation in
respect of the said lands is stated to have been carried out in favour of the
Petitioner No.1 – Monk Estates Pvt. Ltd. on 15th February, 1995 and the
registered copies of the registered sale deeds were obtained. Unfortunately,
however, as per the Petitioners, the said original registered sale deeds were
lost in 2013. An FIR was registered. The Petitioners then applied for
certified copies of the sale deeds from Respondent No. 4 and requisite
charges were also deposited on 2nd December, 2013. Pursuant to the said
application of the Petitioner No.1 before Respondent No.4 only one Sale
Deed registered in volume no.8337 was supplied. In respect of the remaining
sale deeds, vide letter dated 31st December, 2013, Respondent No.4 replied
that the same are not traceable. One such communication sent to Petitioner
by Respondent No.4 is set out below:
Sub: Application for Certified True Copy of the
document having registration number 8410,
Additional Book No. 1, Volume No. 8486, and page
No. 176-185, dated 21/11/1994.
This has reference to your application No. 18782
dated 02/12/2013 on the subject mentioned above. In
this regard, it is to inform that as per available records
in this office the above said document is not traceable
readily. If, the same is traced out, the certified copies of
the same shall be supplied to you. Information is being
provided to you against your application for certified
copy.
6.      The Petitioner, after not having received any communication from the
Respondent No. 4 for a long time, filed an application for certified copies of
the registered sale deeds with the Department of Delhi Archives on 1st
March, 2021. However, no copies were issued to the Petitioner.                 The
Petitioner filed RTI application dated 14th September, 2021 seeking
information about the status of its applications dated 1st March, 2021 for the
issuance of certified copies. The response to the said RTI application was
provided by the Department of Delhi Archives on 30th September, 2021,
W.P.(C) 254/2023                                                          Page 3 of 5
wherein the matter was transferred to Respondent No.4. Thereafter,
Respondent No. 4, vide letter dated 18th October, 2021, informed the
Petitioner that the documents sought by the Petitioner are contained in
volume 8486 and 8487 and that the same are not available with the
Respondent No. 4. It was also informed that an FIR has been lodged with
the police on 1st May, 2019 regarding the loss/ non-availability of the said
records. Two pages of the FIR were also attached with the said reply dated
18th October, 2021 to the RTI application.
7.      On 23th December, 2021, the Petitioners filed a complaint/ request
application before the The Registrar of Assurances (Central) seeking
reconstruction of the record and requesting for certified copies thereof.
Reminder was also sent on 14th December 2022, however, no reply to the
same was received. Thus, the Petitioners have filed the present Petition.
8.      Ld. Counsel for the Petitioner has emphasised on the basis of the copy
of the FIR that a large volume of documents are missing for several years
but the Respondents have not made any effort to trace out the documents.
Mr. Avishkar Singhvi, ld. Counsel appearing for the Respondents submits
that instructions were sought from the concerned Sub-Registrar i.e.
Respondent No. 4. One of the staff member Ms. Kapila Alohia, Sr. Assistant
from the office of the Respondent No.4 is also present in person. However,
the said staff member is unable to answer questions asked by this Court and
submits that she has joined office only one month ago.
9.       A perusal of the record placed before the Court shows that several
volumes from the office of the Respondent No.4 had gone missing in the
year 2005 and it is only 14 years later in 2019 that an FIR had been
registered.
10.     This petition raises issues of enormous concern, inasmuch as the FIR,
which has been registered, reveals that a large volume of records of the Sub-
Registrar office have gone missing. The function of the Sub-Registrars is
for registering various documents relating to assets of the citizens and the
same cannot be treated in a cavalier and negligent manner. The fact that an
FIR has been registered after a 14 years delay goes to prove that the
documents are not being kept in safe custody and a large number of officials
would be liable to be blamed for the said missing documents. Moreover,
considering that these documents could be misused for sale-purchase
transactions also raises serious concerns about the credibility and integrity of
preservation of land records related to citizens.
11.     Despite having knowledge of all the facts, none of the authorities
appear to have be taken any action in this regard. Accordingly, Inspector
General of Registration (GNCTD) shall remain present in the Court on the
next date of hearing. The Principal Secretary, Revenue (Govt. of NCT of
Delhi) shall also join proceedings on the next date of hearing.
12.     In the meanwhile, the Respondents shall place on record the list of
Sub-Registrars and other officials, who were deputed in the office of
Respondent No.4 i.e. Sub-Registrar-III, District Central, 4/7, Asaf Ali Road,
New Delhi since 1st January, 2005. In addition, status of the FIR dated 1st
May, 2019 shall also be placed on record by the Respondents.
13.     List on 8th February, 2023.