Haryana Vidyut Prasaran Nigam Limited (HVPNL) and others
Present:     Mr. Suneel Ranga, Advocate, for the petitioner.
Mr. Ashish Sanghi, Advocate, for the respondents.
In the present case, the prayer of the petitioner is that he retired
from service on attaining the age of superannuation on 30.09.2015 but all
the pensionary benefits for which he is entitled for, have not been released
to him but were withheld by the respondents and have been released now.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that though, at the
time when the petitioner retired from service, one FIR bearing No.148 dated
26.06.2015 registered at Police Station Israna, District Panipat was pending,
apart from this another charge-sheet was also pending against the petitioner
regarding the same allegations. Due to the pendency of the criminal as well
as departmental proceedings, the pensionary benefits of the petitioner were
withheld.     Learned counsel for the petitioner further submits that the
petitioner was acquitted by the competent Court in FIR No.148 dated
26.06.2015 in the year 2016 but the departmental proceedings were kept
pending and the same was only dropped on 12.07.2018.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that once the
petitioner has not been found guilty of the allegations being alleged either
before the criminal Court or the departmental proceedings, the same cannot
cause prejudice to the petitioner and he is entitled for the grant of interest on
the delayed release of the pensionary benefits.
Learned counsel for the respondents submits that at the time
when the petitioner retired, some of the pensionary benefits of the petitioner
were withheld keeping in view the criminal as well as departmental
proceedings pending against the petitioner, hence, the respondents were
well within their right to withhold certain pensionay benefits available to
the petitioner upon retirement.
Learned counsel for the respondents further submits that after
the criminal as well as departmental proceedings ended, the benefits were
released to the petitioner without there being any further delay and hence,
the grievance of the petitioner stands satisfied.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that once the
petitioner was exonerated of the allegations before the criminal Court as
well as in the departmental proceedings, the petitioner is entitled for the
grant of interest on the delayed release of the pensionary benefits as, the
gratuity, has been released to the petitioner in the year 2022 whereas, the
criminal proceedings ended in acquittal of the petitioner in the year 2016
and the departmental proceedings were dropped against him four years ago
in the year 2018.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and have gone
through the record with their able assistance.
It is a conceded position that when the petitioner retired from
service on 30.09.2015, there were criminal as well as departmental
proceedings pending against the petitioner and the respondents were well
within their right to withhold certain pensionary benefits admissible to the
petitioner after retirement but after those proceedings ended, there was no
valid justification to retain the same especially when the petitioner was
exonerated of the allegations before the Criminal Court as well as in the
departmental proceedings.
Once the Department alleged allegations against the petitioner
and on the basis of those allegations, the amount for which the petitioner
became entitled upon his superannuation was withheld, and thereafter, the
Department failed to substantiate those allegations, hence, the issuance of
the charge sheets or pendency of the same at the time of retirement cannot
be a reason to cause prejudice to the petitioner. The acts which are
attributable to the respondents cannot cause prejudice to an employee by
firstly withholding his pensionary benefits on the basis of pendency of the
charge sheets issued by the Department alleging certain allegations and
thereafter, by denying him grant of interest on the delayed payments, despite
the fact that the employee was found innocent as the Department concerned
failed to prove those allegations.
Keeping in view the facts and circumstances of this case, once
the petitioner is found innocent of the allegations alleged and has suffered
prejudice only due to the actions of the respondent-Department as the
petitioner was prevented from availing his pensionary benefits upon his
retirement for a sufficient long period of time and also petitioner could not
use those financial benefits to his benefit, the petitioner becomes entitled for
the grant of interest on the delayed payments to mitigate the
prejudice/hardship suffered by him, which is in consonance of settled
principle of law.
A Coordinate Bench of this Court in of J.S. Cheema Vs. State
of Haryana, 2014(13) RCR (Civil) 355, has held that where an amount
belonging to an employee, has been retained and used by the respondents,
the employee is entitled for the grant of interest. The relevant paragraph of
J.S. Cheema's case (supra) is as under: -
“The jurisprudential basis for grant of interest is the fact
that one person's money has been used by somebody else. It is
in that sense rent for the usage of money. If the user is
compounded by any negligence on the part of the person with
whom the money is lying it may result in higher rate because
then it can also include the component of damages (in the form
of interest). In the circumstances, even if there is no negligence
on the part of the State it cannot be denied that money which
rightly belonged to the petitioner was in the custody of the
State and was being used by it.”
In the present case, the amount of gratuity and other benefits
were retained by the respondents with them and used and therefore, the
petitioner will be entitled for the grant of interest on the said amount.
Hence, the retiral benefits, if already paid, will also carry interest @ 6% per
annum from the date the amount became due till the release of the same. Let
the amount of interest be calculated by the respondents within a period of
two months from the receipt of copy of this order and the same be released
to the petitioner within a period of four weeks thereafter.
The present writ petition is allowed in above terms.