The petitioner has approached this Court by way of filing the
present revision petition impugning the order dated 7.3.2022 passed by the
learned Principal Judge (Family Court), Ambala, whereby maintenance of
Rs.2,500/- per month from the date of filing of the petition till the date of
the order i.e. 7.3.2022 and thereafter @ Rs.3,600/- per month from the date
of passing of that order, was awarded.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that as per the
facts of the case the marriage of the petitioner took place with the
respondent on 26.11.2016 as per Sikh rites. After marriage, matrimonial
discord took place between the petitioner-husband and respondent-wife and
as a result, she left the matrimonial home. The respondent-wife filed
petition under Section 125 Cr.P.C. for grant of maintenance. It was pleaded
by respondent that she had no source of income to maintain herself nor any
movable or immovable property in her name, whereas, the petitioner is
doing business of medicines and is earning Rs.50,000/- per month. The
petitioner appeared after issuance of notice and filed his written statement.
The allegation of the respondent-wife of spending Rs.20 lacs in marriage
was denied by him. It was denied that he had never taken istridhan, gold
articles etc. However, it was submitted that the respondent-wife took away
all the gold articles alongwith her. The allegations of demand of dowry and
taunting etc. were denied same being fabricated and concocted. He has
submitted that the petitioner is working as a Helper in Kisan Medicals and is
getting salary of Rs.4,000/- per month. Learned counsel for the petitioner
submits that the learned Family Court has drawn a wrong conclusion in
awarding maintenance to the tune of Rs.2,500/- per month from the date of
filing of the petition till 7.3.2022 and Rs.3,600/- per month from the date of
passing the said order. Learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that
the respondent-wife has levelled false and frivolous allegations of
harassment, cruelty and demand of dowry. He submits that in fact the wife
was never satisfied with her marriage with the petitioner and she deserted
the petitioner of her own. He submits that in view of Section 125(4) Cr.P.C.
as the wife has herself left the matrimonial home without any rhyme and
reason, she is not entitled for any maintenance as awarded by the learned
Family Court. He submits that the respondent-wife is well educated having
Masters degree in Hindi and her father is working as a Clerk with a
practising Lawyer. He submits that the learned Family Court illegally struck
off the defence of the petitioner and thus, he was prevented from leading his
evidence. He further submits that the petitioner is getting a meagre salary of
Rs.4,000/- per month and thus, the maintenance granted by the learned
Family Court deserves to be set aside.
Heard learned counsel for the petitioner and perused the record.
The relationship between the petitioner and the respondent is
admitted. The precise submission made before this Court by learned counsel
for the petitioner is that the respondent-wife was not satisfied with her
marriage with the petitioner and she left the matrimonial home of her own
and hence, in view of the provision of Section 125(4) Cr.P.C., she is not
entitled for the maintenance granted. As per the evidence on record, there
was nothing on record showing that the respondent-wife has deserted the
petitioner without any rhyme and reason. The other submission of learned
counsel for the petitioner that the respondent-wife is well educated and MA
in Hindi and thus, she is not entitled for the maintenance, is without any
merit. The petitioner is an able bodied man and as per the law settled by
Hon'ble Supreme Court in plethora of judgments, the husband is legally and
morally responsible to look after his wife and children. The submission of
learned counsel for the petitioner that defence of the petitioner was struck
off, carries no merit. Admittedly, the petitioner has never challenged the
order of the learned Family Court by virtue of which his defence was struck
off. Once, the petitioner himself has chosen not to assail the same, the order
becomes final and the grievance made by the petitioner has no legal
sanctity. The provisions of Section 125 Cr.P.C. are there to prevent the
destitution and vagrancy. In view of the judicial precedent set by Hon'ble
Supreme Court in case of Rajnesh Vs. Neha, 2021(2) SCC 324, there is no
straight jacket formula for granting maintenance, however, the same
depends on various factors like status of the parties; and the independent
income and property of the claimant etc. Weighing the facts and
circumstances of the case on the anvil of law settled, this Court finds that
the maintenance granted to the wife in view of the income of the petitioner
is reasonable and suffers from no illegality. In the overall facts and
circumstances,this Court finds no infirmity in the order passed by the
learned Family Court, thus, the petition being devoid of any merit, is hereby