The petitioner Sanju, who claims to be the friend of
Ms.Chinmayi, the detenue filed the present writ petition habeas
corpus, praying to direct the respondent No.2-police to produce
petitioner’s partner Chinmayi, daughter of Manjunath, resident
of YNH Hoball Sarvatapura, Budibatta, Tumakuru before this
Court. It is the case of the petitioner that he is aged 23 years,
WPHC No.57 of 2022
a transgender, self identified as male and prefers the name
Sanju.     The daughter of respondent Nos.3 and 4, i.e.,
Ms.Chinmayi,     aged   18    years  has  been    in  consensual
relationship with the petitioner, since 2019.    The respondent
Nos.3 and 4 did not approve Chinmayi’s relationship with the
petitioner since beginning and have resorted her to physical
and emotional abuse        for being in relationship    with the
petitioner. Ms Chinamayi being unable to withstand the abuse
inflicted on her, decided to leave her parents’ house and came
to petitioner’s house to stay with him on 09.05.2022.        The
respondent Nos.3 and 4 were well aware of Ms.Chinmayi’s
desire to live with the petitioner. The next day, 2nd respondent
police called the petitioner and informed that Chinmayi’s
parents had filed a kidnapping case against petitioner and
therefore, asked the petitioner to bring Chinmayi to Police
Station.    When the petitioner and Chinmayi went to police
station, the family members of Chinmayi, forcefully separated
her from petitioner and took away Chinmayi. It is further case
of the petitioner that he is unaware of Chinmayi’s whereabouts,
her safety and well being. The illegal and unlawful separation
and confinement of Chinmayi is without the authority of law
WPHC No.57 of 2022
and is in blatant violation of Article 21 of the Constitution of
India. Therefore, petitioner filed the present writ petition.
2.     The    respondent  No.2-jurisdictional    police   produced
Chinmayi, aged 18 years, along with her parents. When query
was made by this Court, Chinmayi stated that petitioner is only
her friend and she is not willing to go with petitioner and denied
the allegation made in the writ petition that she is in
consensual relationship with the petitioner since 2019 and
further stated that she is willing to stay with her parents. The
statement made by Chinmayi in the presence of learned
counsel for the petitioner, learned Government Advocate and
respondent Nos.3 and 4(parents of Chinmayi) is placed on
3.     In view of the above, the writ petition filed by the
petitioner is not maintainable and is liable to be dismissed with
4.     At this stage, Smt.Jaina Kothari, learned Senior Counsel
submits that the petitioner may be permitted to withdraw the
writ petition.
5.    Since we have already taken a decision to dismiss the
writ petition, question of permitting the petitioner to withdraw
the writ petition would not arise. Though we were inclined to
impose cost, at the intervention of learned Senior Counsel, we
deem it proper to dismiss the writ petition, with a warning to
the petitioner not to repeat such acts of violating the rights of a
person as contemplated under Article 21 of the Constitution of
India, in future.
Accordingly, writ petition is dismissed.