Heard learned counsel for the applicant and Mr. Shreesh Srivastava, learned
counsel for the opposite party.
Learned counsel for the applicant submitted that applicant is residing at District
Etawah. She has also filed Case No. 301 of 2019, under Section 125 Cr.P.C and
Case No. 227 of 2019, under Section 12 of Domestic Violence Act at there. He
next submitted that only to harass the applicant, opposite party has filed Divorce
Petition No. 46 of 2019 before the Principal Judge, Family Court, Auraiya. He
further submitted that while she was visting at Auraiya alongwith her father, she
was misbehaved and threatened to face dare consequences. For which, applicant
has also moved an application before the Senior Superintedent of Police,
Auraiya. Lastly, he submitted that under such facts and circumstances, direction
may be issued to Court below to transfer her case from Auraiya to Etawah.
Mr. Shreesh Srivastava, learned counsel for the opposite party has vehemently
opposed the submission of learned counsel for the applicant and submitted that
applicant is still residing at District Auraiya, which may be verified from the
correspondence between the applicant and S.S.P., Auraiya. Further, pursuant to
her alleged application before S.S.P., Auraiya, no FIR has been lodged. He next
submitted that in the divorce petition, applicant has also filed written statements
and testimony of P.W.-1 and P.W.-2 have also been recorded. He further
submitted that during the pendency of divorce petition, applicant has filed an
application under Section 24 of Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 (hereinafter referred
to as Act, 1955) for pendente lite maintenance and litigation expenses, which
was partly allowed vide order dated 6.4.2021. Opposite party is paying the
litigation expenses to the applicant as directed by the Court below vide order
dated 6.4.2021. He also submitted that except the testimony of defence
witnesses, nothing remains to be recorded for adjudication of the case. In
support of his contention, he has placed reliance upon the judgment of the Apex
Court in the case of Abhilasha Gupta vs. Harimohan Gupta reported in 2021 9
SCC 730 decided on 24.9.2021 in which Apex Court has taken the view that
once the application under Section 24 of Act, 1955 is allowed and case is at the
verge of final decision, no interference is required.
In his rejoinder argument, learned counsel for the applicant submitted that she is
facing problem in appearing before the Family Court, Auraiya, but he could not
dispute this fact that she is receiving the litigation expenses upon her application
under Section 24 of Act, 1955 as directed by this Court vide order dated
I have considered the rival submissions of learned counsel for the parties and
perused the record as well as judgment of Apex Court. Facts of the case are
undisputed that applicant has filed written statements before the Court below
and testimony of P.W.-1 & P.W.-2 have also been recorded. It is also not
disputed that applicant is receiving litigation expenses on month to month basis
awarded by the Court below vide order dated 6.4.2021 upon her application
under Section 24 of Act, 1955. In the matter of Abhilasha Gupta (Supra), the
very same controversy is before the Apex Court in which Apex Court has
refused to interfere the transfer application. The said judgment of Apex Court
"The present petition has been filed by the petitioner- wife praying inter alia for
transfer of a petition for divorce filed by the respondent-husband under Section
13(a) (ia) of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 bearing H.M. Case No. A-130 of 2019
titled "Harimohan Gupta vs. Abhilasha Gupta", pending before the Court of the
Additional District and Sessions Judge, Susner, Madhya Pradesh to the Family
Court at Kota, Rajasthan. Counter affidavit in opposition to the present petition
has been filed by the respondent.
Ms. Ranu Purohit, learned counsel for the respondent- husband states that the
divorce petition filed by the respondent-husband is at an advance stage. She
draws the attention of this Court to the date-wise tabulated statement Signature
Not Verified Digitally signed by Dr. Mukesh Nasa Date: 2021.09.29 17:35:56 IST
Reason: enclosed with the counter affidavit, marked as Annexure R-1 and states
that the evidence of the husband has concluded and the wife has not cited any
other witness except for herself. The matter was last listed on 06.08.2021, for
recording her testimony but due to the stay order granted in the present
proceeding on 20.07.2021, the said matter has been adjourned.
The learned counsel further stated that the distance between present place of
residence of the petitioner-wife and the Family Court at Kota, Rajasthan is less
than 200 kilometers and offers that the respondent-husband is willing to pay the
expenses towards commuting to the petitioner-wife to enable her to appear before
the learned Family Court at Kota, Rajasthan for expeditious conclusion of her
evidence and final arguments.
The learned counsel for the respondent-husband draws the attention of this Court
to the order dated 14.10.2019, passed by the learned Court of the Additional
District and Sessions Judge, Susren, Madhya Pradesh which recorded the request
of the petitioner-wife to the effect that she may be paid a sum of Rs. 3,000/-
(Rupees Three Thousand only) as transportation charges to appear in the Court
alongwith an attendant.
Having regard to the advance stage of the divorce petition filed by the
respondent-husband against the petitioner- wife at Kota, this Court is not inclined
to allow the present petition. However, it is deemed appropriate to direct the
respondent-husband to pay a sum of Rs. 4,000/- (Rupees Four Thousand Only) to
the petitioner-wife for appearance on each date of hearing before the Court of
Additional District and Sessions Judge, Susren, Madhya Pradesh, towards
transportation charges.
The transfer petition is disposed of with the aforesaid orders. Interim order dated
From the perusal of the aforesaid judgment, it is apparent that present
controversy is squarely covered with the judgment of Apex Court in the case of
Once the applicant has moved application under Section 24 of Act, 1955, which
was allowed and uninterrupted litigation expenses is paid to her, she cannot
move transfer application on the ground of distance and financial stress.
Similarly, in case the proceedings is at the verge of final hearing, any
interference in transfer application would only delay the proceedings. Therefore,
under such circumstances, no interference is warranted and transfer application
is liable to be dismissed.
Accordingly, in light of facts mentioned hereinabove as well as law settled by
the Apex Court, transfer application lacks merit and is accordingly, dismissed.
No order as to costs.
However, in case of threat perception, liberty is given to the applicant to move
application before the S.S.P., Etawah alongwith order of this Court for security
for the date of appearance. In case, any such application is moved before the
S.S.P., Etawah, he shall provide ample security to applicant or other witnesses
on the date of their appearances before the Principal Judge, Family Court,
This order of security shall be confined to only dates of appearance of applicant
and other witnesses before the Court and not for any other purpose.
Principal Judge, Family Court, Auraiya is directed to make all endeavour to
decide the aforesaid case maximum within a period of three months from the
date of production of certified copy of this order.