Case :- APPLICATION U/S 482 No. - 2180 of 2018
Opposite Party :- State of U.P. and Another
Counsel for Applicant :- Rama Kant Dixit
Counsel for Opposite Party :- Govt. Advocate
1.      Heard learned counsel for petitioners and learned A.G.A. for the
State and perused the material available on record.
2.      By means of this petition under Section 482 Cr.P.C. the petitioner
have sought following reliefs:-
"Wherefore, it is most respectfully prayed that this
Hon'ble Court may graciously be pleased to set aside
impugned order dated 08.02.2018 passed by learned
Sessions Judge, Shravasti whereby revision of the
petitioners against the judgment and order dated
19.12.207 passed by learned Chief Judicial Magistrate
Shravasti has been rejected without application of
judicious mind."
The revenue record i.e. Khatauni was inspected by Tehsildar Bhinga
(first informant) of Village Panchayat Bechuwa and it was found that Khata
No. 313/4.381 acre was recorded in the name of Awadh son of Mohan in 1395
to 1400 Fasli but the said land was fraudulently, intentionally and illegally was
recorded/mutated in the name of Smt. Belwa D/o Awadh, wife of Chhavi Ram
as legal heirs by Naib Tehsildar Druv Nath Pandey on 28.12.1989 and also
mentioned the fake caste in column 13. Likewise Khata No. 482/4.062 acre
was also mutated in the name of Smt. Pushpa Devi alias Prema Devi showing
the daughter of Ram Pheran S/o Jamuna Prasad also interring the fake caste in
Column 13. It was further narrated that the Investigating Officer investigated
the matter and recorded the statement under Section 161 Cr.p.C. and submitted
the charge sheet against the petitioners and also other co-accused persons on
31.08.1992 and 26.12.1992 in Case No. 2724 of 2002 (State Vs. Chhavi Lal
and others) arising out of Case Crime No. 138 of 1992, under Sections 167,
218, 466, 467, 468, 471, 420 and 120-B IPC, Police Station Kotwali Bhinga
District Shravasti. Thereafter the petitioners appeared before the court
concerned and bail was granted to them.
4.      Learned counsel for petitioners has submitted that the trial court as
well as revisional court without application of judicious mind rejected the
discharge application of the petitioner. Further submission is that no
disclosed offence is made out against the petitioner. The petitioner
moved an application for discharge on 6.11.2016 stating therein that no
such material evidence has been collected by the Investigating Officer
against the petitioners on which very basis no offence is made out and
main author of the crime is co-accused Naib Tehsildar Dhruv Nath who
made entry in the revenue record without calling the report from Lekhpal
of concerned village and the petitioners have not given any application
or evidence before him for mutating their names under the proceedings
of Section 34 of the Land Revenue Act.
5.     Further submission is that since there is no cogent and reliable
evidence against the petitioners, so the petitioners filed discharge
application before the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Shravasti by
means of order dated 19.12.2017. Learned Chief Judicial Magistrate,
Shravasti rejected the discharge application without considering the
aspect of the matter that the petitioner never moved any application for
name of the petitioners to be recorded in the revenue record before the
Naib Tehsildar but the learned trial court wrongly rejected the discharge
application of the petitioners. Being aggrieved with the said order, the
petitioners also filed revision before the Sessions Court, Shravasti
bearing Criminal Revision No. NIL of 2018 (Chhavi Lal V. State) but
learned Sessions Court also rejected the revision of the petitioners
without considering the material aspect available on record and
dismissed the revision vide order dated 08.02.2018. It is further
submitted that the main accused i.e. Dhruv Nath Pandey, who is the main
author of this crime has not been arrested and he is also not attending the
court in the garb of order dated 25.09.1992 passed in Writ Petition No.
6788 (SB) of 1992 while the said petition has been dismissed for want of
prosecution vide order dated 23.12.2010.
6.     It is vehemently argued by learned counsel for petitioners that
since the aforesaid writ petition of co-accused Dhruv Nath Pandey has
already been dismissed by this Court but still learned trial court has not
summoned the co-accused Dhruv Nath Pandey and the petitioners are
unnecessarily suffering trauma of trial as the whole proceedings against
the petitioners have been initiated due to malafide intention and no
disclosed offence is made out against the petitioners. Thus, this is the
abuse of the process of law. Learned counsel for petitioners prays to
allow this petition and set aside the entire proceedings.
7.     I have heard learned counsel for parties and perused the material
available on record.
8.     "Section 239 in The Code Of Criminal Procedure, 1973
239. When accused shall be discharged. If, upon
considering the police report and the documents
sent with it under section 173 and making such
examination, if any, of the accused as the
Magistrate thinks necessary and after giving the
prosecution and the accused an opportunity of
being heard, the Magistrate considers the charge
against the accused to be groundless, he shall
discharge the accused, and record his reasons for
so doing."
9.      Hon'ble the Apex Court in the catena of judgment has provided
that at the time of discharge application, only it is to be seen whether
prima facie case is made out or not? The detailed inquiry is not required
at the time of framing of charge, the accuse can be discharged only when
the charge is groundless.
10. In the case of Dilawar Balu Kurane Vs. State of Maharashtra
reported in (2002) Supreme Court Cases 135, the Apex Court has
examined the ambit and scope of section 227 Cr.P.C. and held:-
"In exercising powers under section 227 Cr.P.C., the
settled position of law is that the Judge while
considering the question of framing the charges
under the limited purpose of finding out whether or
not a prima facie case against the accused has been
made out; where the materials placed before the
court disclose grave suspicion against the accused
which has not been properly explained the court will
be fully justified in framing a charge and proceeding
with the trial; by and large if two views are equally
possible and the Judge is satisfied that the evidence
produced before him gave rise to some suspicion but
not grave suspicion against the accused, he will be
fully justified to discharge the accused, and in
exercising jurisdiction under section 227 Cr.P.C., the
Judge cannot act merely as a post office or a
mouthpiece of the prosecution, but has to consider
the broad probabilities of the case, the total effect of
the evidence and the documents produced before the
court but should not make a roving enquiry into the
pros and cons of the matter and weigh the evidence
as if he was conducing a trial."
11. In case of Yogesh alias Sachin Jagdish Joshi reported in (2008)
10 SCC 394, the Apex court has almost propounded the same principles
in the following terms:-
"It is trite that the words "not sufficient ground for
proceeding against the accused" appearing in
section 227 Cr.P.C., postulate exercise of judicial
mind on the part of the Judge to the facts of the case
in order to determine whether a case for trial has
been made out by the prosecution. However, in
assessing this fact, the Judge has the power to sift
and weigh the material for the limited purpose of
finding out whether or not a prima facie case
against the accused has been made out. The test to
determine a prima face case depends upon the facts
of each case and in this regard it is neither feasible
nor desirable to lay down a rule of universal
application. By and large, however, if two views are
equally possible and the Judge is satisfied that the
evidence produced before him gives rise to suspicion
only as distinguished from grave suspicion, he will
be fully within his right to discharge the accused. At
this stage, he is not to see as to whether the trial will
end in conviction or not. The broad test to be
applied is whether the materials on record, if
unrebutted, make a conviction reasonably possible."
12. In the case of Palwinder Singh Vs. Balwinder Singh and others
reported in (2009) 2 SCC (Cri) 850, the Apex Court reiterated the
aforesaid principles and held:-
"The jurisdiction of the learned Sessions Judge
while exercising power under section 227 Cr.P.C is
limited. Charges can also be framed on the basis of
strong suspicion. Marshalling and appreciation of
evidence is not in the domain of the Court at that
13. Apart from the aforesaid cases, in the case of Sajjan Kumar vs.
Central Bureau of Investigation, JT 2010(10) SC 413, the Apex Court
has formulated the following guidelines with regard to the question as to
how a matter for framing a charge against the accused is to be dealt with:
"(i) The Judge while considering the question of
framing the charges under Section 227 of the Cr.P.C.
has the undoubted power to sift and weigh the
evidence for the limited purpose of finding out
whether or not a prima facie case against the
accused has been made out. The test to determine
prima facie case would depend upon the facts of
each case.
ii) Where the materials placed before the Court
disclose grave suspicion against the accused which
has not been properly explained, the Court will be
fully justified in framing a charge and proceeding
with the trial.
iii) The Court cannot act merely as a Post Office or
a mouthpiece of the prosecution but has to consider
the broad probabilities of the case, the total effect of
the evidence and the documents produced before the
Court, any basic infirmities etc. However, at this
stage, there cannot be a roving enquiry into the pros
and cons of the matter and weigh the evidence as if
he was conducting a trial.
iv) If on the basis of the material on record, the
Court could form an opinion that the accused might
have committed offence, it can frame the charge,
though for conviction the conclusion is required to
be proved beyond reasonable doubt that the accused
has committed the offence.
v) At the time of framing of the charges, the
probative value of the material on record cannot be
gone into but before framing a charge the Court
must apply its judicial mind on the material placed
on record and must be satisfied that the commission
of offence by the accused was possible.
vi) At the stage of Sections 227 and 228, the Court is
required to evaluate the material and documents on
record with a view to find out if the facts emerging
therefrom taken at their face value discloses the
existence of all the ingredients constituting the
alleged offence. For this limited purpose, sift the
evidence as it cannot be expected even at that initial
stage to accept all that the prosecution states as
gospel truth even if it is opposed to common sense or
the broad probabilities of the case.
vii) If two views are possible and one of them gives
rise to suspicion only, as distinguished from grave
suspicion, the trial Judge will be empowered to
discharge the accused and at this stage, he is not to
see whether the trial will end in conviction or
acquittal."
14. The aforesaid decisions have almost settled the legal position that
at the stage of charge the court is not required to consider pros and cons
of the case and to hold an enquiry to find out truth. Marshalling and
appreciation of evidence is not in the domain of the court at that point of
time. What is required from the court is to sift and weigh the materials
for the limited purpose of finding out whether or not a prima facie case
for framing a charge against the accused has been made out. Even in a
case of grave or strong suspicion charge can be framed. The court has to
consider broad probabilities of the case, total effect of the evidence and
the documents produced including basic infirmities, if any. If on the
basis of the material on record, the court could form an opinion that the
accused might have committed offence, it can frame the charge, but the
court should not weigh the evidence as if it were holding trial. Accused
can be discharged only when the charge is groundless.
15. In my considered opinion, learned Chief Judicial Magistrate
Shravasti as well as learned Sessions Judge has taken into account all the
relevant material and passed the impugned orders keeping in view the
parameters laid down by Hon'ble Apex Court. It does not appear to be a
case which is to be closed at the stage of charge. Therefore, the
submission of the learned counsel for applicant that no charge was made
out has no substance.
16. For the reasons discussed above, the application under Section
482 Cr.P.C. no merits and is accordingly dismissed.
17.    Interim order, if any, stands vacated.
18. Since the matter is pending since long time before the trial court,
therefore, it is directed that the trial court take endevour to expedite the
present case expeditiously.