4.      Learned advocate for the appellant has submitted that,
the appellant and the so-called victim are husband and wife
and they have two children from this relationship. It is
submitted that, the conviction is unsustainable and the same
be quashed and set aside.
5.      Learned Additional Public Prosecutor for the State has
submitted that, the Sessions Court has rightly arrived at the
conclusion         by convicting  the      appellant     for    the      offence
committed          by the   appellant.      It is   submitted         that        no
interference be made by this Court.
6.      Having heard learned advocates for the respective
parties and having considered the material on record,                          this
Court finds as under.
6.1     It is an admitted position that the appellant and victim
are in relationship.
6.2     It is not in dispute that the victim, on her own, had
walked out of home with the appellant.
6.3     The appellant and the victim stayed together since then
at the house of the appellant, as husband and wife.
6.4     Out of their relationship, she has given birth to two
children, one on 29.06.2019 and second on 22.01.2021.
6.5     Neither the mother nor the father of these two children
disown their birth nor paternity.
6.6     The victim has deposed (in camera) at Exh.20 that she
has left her parental home on her own and she started to live
together with the appellant at appellant’s house. Further she
has stated that, the appellant has kept physical relation with
her consent.
6.7     The complaint is registered on 20.05.2018 with the
6.8     The appellant is arrested by the police on 09.01.2019.
The case was tried before the Special Judge (POCSO), Junagadh
and the Trial Court vide judgment dated 15.07.2021 convicted
the appellant as noted above.
7.      The glaring aspect of the matter is that, there is evidence
Exh.76, which - because of legal requirement needs to be
called as evidence of “the victim”, who stated that, she on her
own, because of her wish had walked out of home and she
started living with the present appellant and with that relation
she has given birth to two children, one on 29.06.2019 and
second on 22.01.2021. Neither the mother nor the father of
these two children disown their birth nor paternity and still the
father is convicted inter alia under Section 376 of the Indian
Penal Code and is ordered to undergo RI for 10 years. The
Sessions Court is also conscious of this fact, since even in the
operative part of the judgment in para:4, it is noted that since
these two persons are staying as           husband and wife, any
compensation       /  assistance    received   from       any       of     the
Government(s) need to be refunded. It is under these
circumstances, this Court finds that the conviction recorded by
the Sessions Court needs to be set aside. Standing at the place
of law enforcement agencies, in the peculiar facts of the case,
this can be termed as an offence under the Prohibition of Child
Marriage Act, which is observed more in breach than in
compliance, more particularly in the lower strata of society.
Non-interference by this Court would reduce the lady and two
children without shelter of husband / father, which in no way
would be in furtherance of justice.
8.      For the reasons recorded above, the following order is
8.1     This appeal is allowed.
8.2     The judgment and order of the Special Judge (POCSO)
and 3rd Additional Sessions Judge, Junagadh, dated 15.07.2021
in Special (POCSO) Case No.31 of 2019 is quashed and set