Present:      Mr. Manish Goel, petitioner in person.
Petitioner is an individual claiming to be involved for more
than 14 years in the Securities Market and also claims to have expertise in
Equity Research and Market Assessment.
On 16.05.2017, he had got registered himself with the
Securities & Exchange Board of India (for short “the Board”) as a Research
The Board, in exercise of powers conferred by sub-section (1)
of Section 30 read with Clause (b) of sub-section (2) of Section 11 of the
Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (for short “SEBI Act”),
had issued a notification on 01.09.2014 notifying the Securities and
Exchange Board of India (Research Analyst) Regulations, 2014 (for short
The petitioner’s grievance is that on account of these
Regulations, he has been deprived of his fundamental right of freedom of
speech and expression guaranteed under Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution
I attest to the accuracy and
of India, the right to practice profession/business of his choice guaranteed
under Article 19(1)(g) and 19(6) of the Constitution of India, and also right
to liberty guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution of India due to the
alleged unreasonable restrictions imposed by the said Regulations on the
petitioner.
The petitioner alleges that the impugned Regulations restrict
his fundamental Right of free speech and expression guaranteed by Article
19(1)(a) of the Constitution of India by making it mandatory for the
petitioner to take Licence/Registration from the respondents just to speak or
write    regarding     listed   stocks,   and    for  sharing   stock    related
recommendations with others and on social media.
According to him, the citizens have a right to receive
information and ideas, and if petitioner is prevented from exercising his
right of free speech by making stock related recommendations, it would
amount to denial to the general public of its right to receive information and
ideas. He also alleges that the restrictions imposed by the said Regulations
do not fall within the ambit of Clause (2) of Article 19 of the Constitution
of India which permits certain reasonable restrictions to be imposed on the
fundamental Right of free speech and expression.
It is his further grievance that his right to equality guaranteed
by Article 14 of the Constitution of India is also violated because there are
many businesses in India where citizens are doing consultancy, but which
are not regulated by any Regulator. He gives illustration of the Astrologers
and Management Consultancy done by the persons possessing qualification
of the Masters in Business Administration.
I attest to the accuracy and
According to him, the impugned Regulations are also not in
pursuance to the directive principles of the State Policy guaranteed by Part
IV of the Constitution of India.
Further his contention is that Article 19(1)(g) of the
Constitution of India gives him a right/freedom to practice any profession
or to carry on any occupation, trade or business; that such a freedom can
only be curtailed to some extent by Article 19(6) of the Constitution of
India which permits the State to impose, in the interest of the general
public, reasonable restrictions in the exercise of right conferred by Article
19(1)(g), but the impugned Regulations including Regulations 2, 16(3), 27
and 31 do not fall within the purview of Article 19(6) of the Constitution
of India as they are unreasonable, and are not in the interest of the general
public.
As regards the challenge to Regulation 2 is concerned, the
petitioner contends that the explanation to the definition of the word
“Research Analyst” defined in Regulation 2(u) (which includes even
people working in the office of the Research Analyst and mandating them
also to get registered) violates Article 19(1)(g).
According to him, even providing opinion on specific stocks to
Facebook friends or Twitter followers through Facebook and Twitter comes
within the purview of Regulation 2(u), and the Regulations are arbitrary
permitting the respondents to interpret them in any way they want and
harass the general public.
Challenge to Regulation 27 (which empowers the Board to
cause inspection of the books of accounts, records and documents relating
I attest to the accuracy and
to a Research Analyst or a Research Entity) is alleged by the petitioner to
be conferring excessive powers and unfettered discretion to harass anyone
to settle personal scores. According to him, though there were no
complaints against him, in November 2021, an inspection was launched
against him under Regulation 27 to settle personal scores with him since he
had earlier complained against the respondents to the higher authorities. He
however admits that the respondents had launched an inspection based on a
complaint received against him.
His challenge is also to Regulation 31 of the Regulations
which entitles the Board, after consideration of the inspection report, and
after giving reasonable opportunity of hearing to a Research Analyst or a
Research Entity or its authorized representative to issue direction as it
deems fit in the interest of securities market or the investors including a
direction requiring the Research Analyst or Research Entity not to provide
research recommendation for a particular period, requiring him or it to
refund any money collected as fees, charges or commissions to from the
clients along with requisite interest, and prohibiting the Research Analyst
or Research Entity from operating in the capital market or accessing in the
capital market for a specified period.
In his opinion, this amounts to conferring of unfettered,
excessive and complete discretion on the respondents to take excessive and
unreasonable action against the Research Analyst.
The doctrine of proportionality also, according to the
petitioner, is violated by these Regulations.
I attest to the accuracy and
We may point out that the SEBI Act was enacted to provide
for the establishment of the Board to protect the interests of the investors in
securities, and to promote the development of, and to regulate, the
securities market, and for the matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
Section 11 of the SEBI Act provides that inter alia it is the
duty of the Board to protect the interests of the investors in securities, and
to promote the development of, and to regulate securities market, by such
measures as it deem fit which would include regulation of substantial
acquisition of shares, and taking over of companies.
Coming to the impugned Regulations, before issuing the same,
a consultation paper on the proposed Regulations of Research Analyst was
issued by the Board for inviting public comments on 29.11.2013.
This document reveals that International Organizations of
Security Commissions (IOSCO), in it’s objectives and principles of
Securities Regulation, recognized that the entities that offer investors
analytical or evaluative services should be subject to oversight and
regulation appropriate to the impact their activities have on the market or
the degree to which the regulatory system relies on them.
It further reveals that the Board of the SEBI in it’s 138th Board
meeting held on 28.7.2011 had approved a proposal that SEBI may
consider the IOSCO principles on analytical services and may consider
regulating research analysts in Indian securities market through an
exclusive and comprehensive regulation.
I attest to the accuracy and
According to the said document, the International Advisory
Board of SEBI, in it’s meeting held on 3.11.2012, discussed the issue of
regulation of research analysts and a view emerged that the analysts
providing services for a fee may be considered for regulation under the
Investment Advisor Regulations and that for other analysts, a separate code
or set of guidelines may be considered.
It was felt necessary to address the question of analysts’
conflict of interest issue.
The consultancy paper recognizes the important role which
Research Analysts play in providing timely and accurate information about
investment products for making investment decisions by potential
investors. It also recognizes that such advice from the investment analysts
is many times prone to conflicts of interests that may prevent them from
offering independent and unbiased opinions.
According to the consultation paper, these conflicts would
hamper the neutrality of a research report which affects the investment
decision of the investors; if some entity produces a biased research report to
inflate the price artificially, the market at large gets affected; secondly, the
quality of the analysis depends on the market and the industry experience of
the Research Analyst, and it may be preferable to have appropriate
regulations of Research Analysts that will not only ensure the neutrality of
the research reports, but also improve the quality of the reports.
The consultative paper recognizes that there was no guideline
to identify and deal with the conflict of interests by Research Analyst who
are not registered by the Board, and absence of an exclusive and
I attest to the accuracy and
comprehensive regulations to deal with the conflicts of interest by the
Research Analyst posed regulatory gaps in the management and mitigation
of possible conflicts of interest that may arise in their activities in the
securities market.
According to the consultative paper, there was a need to have
mechanism to ensure that business relationship of the intermediary or
financial or trading interest of the Research Analyst or intermediary or
compensation arrangement of the Research Analyst etc. do not prejudice
research report or the recommendations. It was felt that the comprehensive
regulatory framework would be required to address conflicts of interest and
to minimize market malpractices so that at the end of the day, impartiality
in the research reports is largely ensured.
With the above noble objectives in mind, the impugned
Regulations have been enacted by the Board.
Regulation 2 (u) defines the term “Research Analyst” as
“(u) “research analyst” means a person who is primarily
i. preparation or publication of the content of the
research report; or
iii. making 'buy/sell/hold' recommendation; or
iv. giving price target; or
v. offering an opinion concerning public offer,
with respect to securities that are listed or to be listed
in a stock exchange, whether or not any such person has the
job title of 'research analyst' and includes any other entities
engaged in issuance of research report or research analysis.
I attest to the accuracy and
Explanation.-The term also includes any associated person
who reports directly or indirectly to such a research analyst
in connection with activities provided above;”
Regulation 2 (v) defines the term “Research Entity” as under:-
“(v) "research entity" means an intermediary registered with
Board who is also engaged in merchant banking or
investment banking or brokerage services or underwriting
services and issue research report or research analysis in
its own name through the individuals employed by it as
research analyst and includes any other intermediary
engaged in issuance of research report or research
Regulation 2 (w) defines the term “Research Report” as
“(w) “research report” means any written or electronic
communication that includes research analysis or research
recommendation or an opinion concerning securities or
public offer, providing a basis for investment decision and
does not include the following communications:-
(i) comments on general trends in the securities market;
(ii) discussions on the broad-based indices;
(iii) commentaries on economic, political or market
(iv) periodic reports or other communications prepared for
unit holders of mutual fund or alternative investment
fund or clients of portfolio managers and investment
(v) internal communications that are not given to current
or prospective clients;
(vi)   communications that constitute offer documents or
prospectus that are circulated as per regulations made
(vii) statistical summaries of financial data of the
I attest to the accuracy and
(viii) technical analysis relating to the demand and supply
in a sector or the index;
(ix) any other communication which the Board may specify
Regulation 3 of the Regulations makes it necessary for the
Research Analyst to obtain a Certificate of Registration from the Board
under the Regulations after their commencement.
Regulation 7 of the Regulations prescribes the minimum
qualifications to be possessed by an individual registered as Research
Analyst or by individuals employed as Research Analyst and partners of
Research Analyst. It states as under:-
(1) An individual registered as research analyst under these
regulations, individuals employed as research analyst
and partners of a research analyst, if any, engaged
in preparation and/or publication of research report
or    research    analysis    shall   have    the  following
minimum qualifications, at all times:
(i)A professional qualification or post-graduate degree or
post graduate diploma in finance, accountancy, business
management, commerce, economics, capital market,
financial services or markets provided by:
(a) a university which is recognized by University Grants
Commission             or        by         any         other
commission/council/board/body established under an Act
of Parliament in India for the purpose; or
(b) an institute/association affiliated with such university;
(c) an institute/ association/university established by the
central government or state government; or
I attest to the accuracy and
(d) autonomous institute falling under administrative
control of Government of India; or
(ii)     professional qualification or post-graduate degree or
post graduate diploma which is accredited by All Indian
Council for Technical Education, National Assessment
and Accreditation Council or National Board of
Accreditation or any other council/board/body set up
under an Act of Parliament in India for the purpose; or
(iii)    a graduate in any discipline with an experience of at
least five years in activities relating to financial products
or markets or securities or fund or asset or portfolio
management.
(2) An individual registered as research analyst under these
regulations, individuals employed as research analyst
and partners of a research analyst, if any, shall have, at
all times, a NISM certification for research analysts as
specified by the Board or other certification recognized
by the Board from time to time:
Provided that research analyst or research entity
already engaged in issuance of research report or
research analysis seeking registration under these
regulations shall ensure that it or the individuals
employed by it as research analyst and/or its partners
obtain such certification within two years from the date
of commencement of these regulations:
Provided further that fresh certification must be
obtained before expiry of the validity of the existing
certification to ensure continuity in compliance with
certification requirements.”
It is settled law that the power to impose restrictions on
fundamental rights is essentially a power to ‘regulate’ the exercise of these
rights; and in fact ‘regulation’ and not ‘extinction’ of that which is to be
I attest to the accuracy and
regulated is, generally speaking, the extent to which permissible restrictions
may go in order to satisfy the test of reasonableness.
In Bennett Coleman & Co. v. Union of India1 , the Supreme
“100. Permissible restrictions on any fundamental right, even where
they are imposed by duly enacted law, must not be excessive, or, in
other words, they must not go beyond what is necessary to achieve the
objects of the law under which they are sought to be imposed. The
power to impose restrictions on fundamental rights is essentially a
power to “regulate” the exercise of these rights. In fact, “regulation”
and not extinction of that which is to be regulated is, generally
speaking, the extent to which permissible restrictions may go in order to
satisfy the test of reasonableness. The term “regulate” has come up for
interpretation on several occasions before American Courts which have
held that the word “regulate” means “to adjust by rule, method, or
established mode; to direct by rule or restrictions; to subject to
governing principles or laws.” (See: Words and Phrases, Vol. 36, p.
687 by West Publishing Co.).”
The Court held in the said case that the true test is whether the
effect of the impugned action is to take away or abridge fundamental rights.
Where more than fundamental right guaranteed by Part II of
the Constitution is alleged to have been violated, the true test for
determining the validity of a restriction imposed by a regulation/action is
‘against which of the freedoms is the restriction directly leveled against?2’
This is what the Supreme Court held in the decision of
Hamdard Dawakhana v. Union of India3. In that case there was a
challenge to the Drug and Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisement)
Act (21 of 1954) on the ground that it violated Art.19(1) (a) of the
(1972) 2 SCC 788, at page 828
See Commentary on the Constitution of India by Sri Durga Das Basu , 8th Edition,2007 vol.2 pg.2431
I attest to the accuracy and
Constitution of India. The preamble of the Act stated that the object of the
Act was to control the advertisement of drugs in certain cases i.e. diseases
and to prohibit advertisements relating to remedies pretending to have
magic qualities and provide for other matters connected therewith, and the
title of the Act also shows that it is directed against objectionable
advertisements. The definition section (Section 2) in clause (a) defines
advertisements and in clause (b) drugs which include (i) medicines for use
of human beings and animals, (ii) substances for use of diagnosis, treatment
or prevention of diseases in human beings and animals, (iii) articles other
than food which affect the organic functions of the body of human beings
or animals, and (iv) articles intended for use as a component of any
medicine etc., clause (c) defines magic remedies to include a talisman,
mantra, kavacha and other charms and (d) relates to the publication of any
advertisement and (e) what a venereal disease is. Section 3 prohibits
advertisement of drugs for treatment of diseases and disorders. Clause (a)
of Section 3 deals with procurement of miscarriage in women or prevention
of conception, clause (b) with maintenance or improvement of capacity of
human beings for sexual pleasure, clause (c) with diagnosis and cure of
venereal and other diseases. Section 4 prohibits misleading advertisements
relating to drugs. Section 5 similarly prohibits advertisements of magic
remedies efficacious for purposes specified in Section 3. Section 6 prohibits
the import into and export from India of certain advertisement. Section 14
is a saving clause which excludes registered practitioners, treatises or
books, advertisements sent confidentially to medical practitioners,
wholesale or retail chemists for distribution among registered medical
I attest to the accuracy and
practitioners or to hospitals or laboratories. It also excludes advertisements
printed or published by Government or with the previous sanction of the
Government. Section 15 gives the Government the power to grant
exemptions from the application of Sections 3, 4, 5 and 6 in certain cases.
The Supreme Court repelled the contention that the Act
abridges the right to freedom of speech holding as under:
“17. An advertisement is no doubt a form of speech but its true character is
reflected by the object for the promotion of which it is employed. It assumes the
attributes and elements of the activity under Article 19(1) which it seeks to aid
by bringing it to the notice of the public. When it takes the form of a
commercial advertisement which has an element of trade or commerce it no
longer falls within the concept of freedom of speech for the object is not
propagation of ideas — social, political or economic or furtherance of
literature or human thought; but as in the present case the commendation of
the efficacy, value and importance in treatment of particular diseases by
certain drugs and medicines. In such a case, advertisement is a part of business
even though as described by Mr Munshi its creative part, and it was being used
for the purpose of furthering the business of the petitioners and had no
relationship with what may be called the essential concept of the freedom of
speech. It cannot be said that the right to publish and distribute commercial
advertisements advertising an individual’s personal business is a part of
freedom of speech guaranteed by the Constitution.
It cannot be said therefore that every advertisement is a matter dealing with
freedom of speech nor can it be said that it is an expression of ideas. In every
case one has to see what is the nature of the advertisement and what activity
falling under Article 19(1) it seeks to further. The advertisements in the instant
case relate to commerce or trade and not to propagating of ideas; and
advertising of prohibited drugs or commodities of which the sale is not in the
interest of the general public cannot be speech within the meaning of freedom
of speech and would not fall within Article 19(1)(a). The main purpose and true
intent and aim, object and scope of the Act is to prevent self-medication or self-
I attest to the accuracy and
treatment and for that purpose advertisements commending certain drugs and
medicines have been prohibited. Can it be said that this is an abridgement of
the petitioners’ right of free speech. In our opinion it is not.
19. In the present case therefore (1) the advertisements affected by the Act
do not fall within the words freedom of speech within Article 19(1)(a); (2) the
scope and object of the Act, its true nature and character is not interference
with the right of freedom of speech but it deals with trade or business; and (3)
there is no direct abridgement of the right of free speech and a mere incidental
interference with such right would not alter the character of the law;”
Coming to the impugned regulations, they deal with regulation
of “Research Analysts” as defined in Regulation 2(u) of the Regulations.
A Research Analyst is essentially seeking to provide
information of a specific area in which the public are interested, and claims
to have professional expertise in the said area of interest namely the stock
market related activities. He is, thus, professing to provide a professional
advice/ service of a specialized nature. Such activities would undoubtedly
fall under Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution of India. In our opinion,
considering the scope and object of the impugned regulations and their true
nature and character, there is no direct abridgement of the right of free
speech. There might be only an incidental interference with the said right.
So the restrictions sought to be imposed by the impugned
regulations have to considered from the said perspective and so ought to be
tested as to their reasonableness under Art.19(6) of the Constitution of
Clause (6) of Article 19 of the Constitution of India empowers
the State to make a law relating to the professional or technical
I attest to the accuracy and
qualifications necessary for practicing any profession or carrying on any
occupation, trade or business.
As regards the contention of the petitioner that the explanation
to Clause (u) of Regulation 2 includes in the definition of the ‘Research
Analyst’ ‘even an associate person who reports directly or indirectly to
such Research Analyst in connection with the activities mentioned in the
said regulation’ is concerned, it appears that such explanation is included in
order to ensure that only professionally qualified people registered pursuant
to the regulations are engaged and associated with a Research Analyst for
preparation of research reports. This is obviously intended to maintain high
quality and neutrality of the reports and to discourage people with sketchy
or no knowledge of the subject from getting associated with the Research
Analysts and contributing his views which form part of the reports of the
Research Analysts for consumption of the public.
Regulation 7 which prescribes professional qualifications is
also undoubtedly in public interest in view of the fact that the person who
professes to be a Research Analyst should possess proper qualifications
which would ensure that the research report which he authors maintains
quality, and investors can rely on such professional advice with confidence.
Regulation 16(3) is challenged by the petitioner on the ground
that it prohibits independent Research Analysts, individuals employed as
Research Analysts by Research Entities or their associates from dealing or
trading directly or indirectly in securities that he reviews in a manner
contrary to his given recommendation. This provision occurs in Chapter III
of the Regulations which deal with the Management of Conflicts of Interest
I attest to the accuracy and
and Disclosure Requirements. Such a restriction is imposed for
management of the issue of conflict of interest, and cannot be said to be in
any way violative of Art.19(1) (g).
Regulation 27 deals with the power of the Board, upon receipt
of information or complaint, to appoint one or more persons as inspecting
authority to undertake inspection of books of accounts, records and
documents relating to the Research Analyst or Research Entity for the
reasons mentioned as under:-
(i) to ensure that the books of account, records and
documents are being maintained in the manner specified
in these regulations;
(ii) to inspect into complaints received from any person, on
any matter having a bearing on the activities of a
(iii) to ascertain whether the provisions of the Act and these
regulations are being complied with by the research
analyst or research entity;
(iv) to inspect into the affairs of research analyst or
research entity in relation to research activities, in the
interest of the securities market or in the interest of
investors.”
Before ordering such inspection, Regulation 28(1) prescribes
giving of 7 days’ notice, though Clause (2) of Regulation 28 also permits
the Board to dispense with such notice if it is in the interest of the investors.
Regulation 31 states as under:
The Board may after consideration of the inspection report
and   after     giving  reasonable opportunity  of   hearing   to
research     analyst or   research    entity or  its  authorized
representatives, without prejudice to any other action under
I attest to the accuracy and
the Act, issue such directions as it deems fit in the interest
of securities market or the investors including requiring research
analyst    or   research    entity  not    to  provide    research
recommendation for a particular period;
(i) requiring the research analyst or research entity to refund
any money collected as fees, charges or commissions or
otherwise to the concerned clients along with the requisite
interest.
(ii) prohibiting the research analyst or research entity from
operating in the capital market or accessing the capital market
for a specified period.”
A wide the range of powers is conferred on the Board under
Regulation 31 since different corrective actions may have to be taken
depending on the nature of the violation committed by the Research
In a given case if such powers are exercised arbitrarily or
disproportionately to the misconduct committed by a Research Analyst, the
affected party can approach the Securities Appellate Tribunal or invoke the
jurisdiction under art.226 of the Constitution of India. But the mere
possibility of abuse of such a power cannot be ground to declare them as
violative of Art.19(1) (g) of the Constitution of India.
In our opinion, Regulation 27 or Regulation 31 are not
violative of rights conferred on the Research Analyst under Articles
19(1)(a) & 19(1)(g) or Art.14 of the Constitution of India.
The fact that the Astrologers or Management consultants are
allowed to give consultancy, and are not regulated, does not mean that
Research Analysts who provided investors with information on the basis of
I attest to the accuracy and
which investment decisions are made, should also be excluded from
regulation. So the plea based on Article 14 of the Constitution of India in
that regard cannot be countenanced.
In this view of the matter, we do not find any merit in this Writ
Petition. Accordingly, the same is dismissed.
No costs.
Pending application(s), if any, is disposed of accordingly.