It is yet another case, where the Authorities under the
State are showing disrespect to the Court orders passed in the
2. The complainant is a senior citizen, aged 69 years, has
filed the present contempt petition under the provisions of
Sections 11 and 12 of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971, to
take action against the accused for willful disobedience of the
order dated 24-7-2014 made in Writ Petition No.9606 of 2014
(KLR-RR/SUR), wherein the learned Single Judge directed the
respondents or the competent authority to conduct survey,
phodi and durasthi work in respect of land bearing Survey
CCC No. 2019 of 2018
No.123/PAI-P4      of  Vadesamudra    Village,   Kasaba   Hobli,
Pandavapura Taluk, Mandya, in accordance with law, within a
period of nine months from the date of receipt of a certified
copy of the order.
3.  Since the accused have not complied with the order
passed by the learned Single Judge, the complainant was
forced to file the present contempt petition on 24-9-2018.   On
Mandya, has filed Affidavit. At paragraph Nos.4 to 6, she has
"4. It is submitted that Assistant Director of Land
Records has concluded the Phodi and Durasthi work
as per Government Circular No.RD93 LGP 79 dated
20.03.1980 and based upon actual possession and
enjoyment Phodi and Durasthi work is completed
and Survey No.287 is reassigned to an extent of 2
acres and 3 guntas. Copy of the Government
Circular and copy of the sketch are herewith
produced at Annexures - R1 & R2 respectively. Also
the complaint at the time of spot inspection has
given consent for completion of phodi and durasthi
work as per actual possession of enjoyment. Copy
CCC No. 2019 of 2018
of the said consent letter is produced at Annexure -
5. I most respectfully state that in compliance of
the order passed by this Hon'ble Court wherein
completed the entire process of Phodi and Durasthi
and have reassigned the survey number of the land
of  the   complainant    as   Survey  No.287.   After
completion of the process of Phodi and Durasthi,
we have also passed necessary Mutation Register
orders and now reassigned Sy.No.287 to an extent
of 2 acres 3 guntas is also entries in the Mutation
Registrar   extracts   are   produced   herewith   at
Annexures - R4 & R5 respectively.
6. I most respectfully submit that there is some
delay in complying with the order passed by this
Hon'ble Court. The said delay is primarily on
account of administrative exigencies and since
survey had to be conducted on the very vast extent
of land including adjacent forest land, some time
was consumed in completing the process of Phodi
and Durasthi work. The delay caused is not
intentional, but due to aforesaid reason."
4. The order passed by the learned Single Judge as long
back as on 24-7-2014 directing the respondents or the
competent authority to conduct survey, phodi and durasth work
CCC No. 2019 of 2018
in   respect   of    land   bearing  Survey     No.123/PAI-P4   of
Mandya, in accordance with law, within a period of nine months
from the date of receipt of a certified copy of that order.   The
complainant has sent the certified copy of that order along with
the representation on 23-9-2014 to the Tahasildar and the
Tahasildar    ought    to   have  passed    order  on  or   before
25-6-2015.      Since     the  same   has   not  been  done,   the
complainant was forced to file the present contempt petition as
last resort.
5.    A careful perusal of the affidavit filed by the
Tahasildar, who took charge on 29-4-2022, clearly depicts that
sketch was prepared as per Anneuxre-R2 on 10-2-2022 and
mutation entries as per Annexures-R4 and R5 were made on
7-9-2022, i.e. after lapse of eight years from the date of
original order and four years from the date of filing of the
present contempt petition.
6. This clearly indicates that Authorities, under the State
Government have no respect for the Court orders. In view of
the orders passed by this Court, the State Government issued
CCC No. 2019 of 2018
Circular on 31-1-2022 directing the Authorities to comply with
the order within time and any person violating the order, he
has to face the Departmental Enquiry music. The Circular
dated    31-1-2022 issued by the State Government consist of
twelve guidelines, which reads as under:
Bengaluru, dated: 31.01.2022
Sub: Fixing of time limits and responsibilities at
each stage of court cases where the
Government, Boards/Corporations or Authorities
or Autonomous Institutions are the party - reg
In view of the directions of the Hon'ble High Court of
Karnataka in the order dated 13.1.2022 in CCC (Civil)
No.560/2021, Government of Karnataka in order to
protect the rule of law and to protect the rights of the
citizens under Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution of
India and to protect the Interest of State, the following
guidelines are issued:-
1.     Whenever the Court passes orders, if the orders are
not   In  consonance   with   law,  the   authorities
aggrieved should file an appeal within the time
stipulated.
2. Once the order passed by any Court or authority
reaches finality, the       authorities     are bound to
implement the order in letter and spirit, unless, it is
set aside by the higher authorities or higher courts
in    the    interest   of   the     citizens,  to    clean
administration and in the interest of the State
3. The aggrieved persons approaches the Court by
filing a contempt proceedings as a last resort
considering the Court as temple of justice and the
authorities unnecessarily cannot be allowed to
adopt delay tactics on the ground to file appeal or
to file review or to seek time before the Court,
which is impermissible.
4. Ignorance of Court orders by the authorities of the
State Government has to be deprecated and dealt
with seriously to protect the rule of law.
5. If there is no compliance of direction within the
time stipulated, it amounts to willful disobedience
of the order and will result in contempt of court.
Even if there is compliance of order after initiation
of contempt proceedings, it will not absolve the
officer concerned from his/her liability under the
Contempt of Court Act.
6. The     Principal    Secretaries    of    the  department
concerned      shall  direct   initiation   of disciplinary
CCC No. 2019 of 2018
proceedings against the erring officers who neglect
to comply with the orders of the court willfully.
7.  The misconduct of a Government servant in non
compliance of the directions issued by the court
shall be dealt with firmly and it shall be entered in
the service records of the Government Servant
concerned.
8.  If the officer concerned involve in two or more such
contempt of court/s by disobeying the court orders,
necessary action shall be initiated against him
departmentally.
9.  The officer concerned shall be held personally liable
for any fine and consequences thereof, as the State
Government is not liable to pay fine from out of the
tax payers money (citizens).
10. When an undertaking/submission is made by the
learned counsel representing the Government with
instructions from the officer/official concerned, non-
compliance of such undertakings/submission will be
viewed very seriously.
11. All the activities and actions shall be done in due
conformity and in accordance with "The Karnataka
Conduct of Government Litigation Rules, 1985".
12. The step by step responsibilities, time limits and
machinery to follow-up on cases including the
compliance of any interim or other orders of
CCC No. 2019 of 2018
Court  of   India   and    Hon'ble  Karnataka    State
Administrative    Tribunal   shall  be   as  per   the
dated 6.12.2020 and addendum dated 16.12.2020.
Secretaries to Government and Heads of Departments are
requested to follow these instructions strictly and monitor
the   government     litigation   pending    before  District
Judiciary, Hon'ble High Court of Karnataka and Supreme
Court of India.
7.   Unfortunately, Authorities or the State Government
has issued Circular only on paper. The Authority, namely the
Tahasildar, has not implemented the Circular, or the Court
8. Though the order passed by the learned Single Judge
is of the year 2014, we are now in the end of November, 2022,
More than eight years have been lapsed, the Authorities never
acted to comply with the order, within the time stipulated
thereby they have shown deliberate willful disobedience to the
CCC No. 2019 of 2018
order passed by this Court.    It is well settled that Authorities of
the State Government, namely the Tahasildars, who are acting
as Revenue Authorities under the provisions of Land Revenue
Act are under constitutional duty coupled with power.          Every
public servant is a trustee of the society and in all facets of
public administration, every Government servant has to exhibit
honesty, integrity, sincerity and faithfulness in implementation
of the political, social, economic and constitutional policies to
integrate the nation, to achieve excellence and efficiency in the
public administration.    Government or its authorities, who are
entrusted with duty and power to implement constitutional
policy under Articles 14, 21 and 300 of Constitution of India.
and all inter-related directive principles of state policy under
the Constitution, should exhibit transparency in implementation
and of accountable for due effectuation of constitutional goals.
9. Though Circular was issued by the State Government
and repeated orders having been passed by this Court, the
State Government has not taken any action against any of the
Officers, who have not implemented the Court order in time
including the concerned Officer in the present case. After lapse
CCC No. 2019 of 2018
of four years of filing of the present contempt petition, now, the
accused filed compliance affidavit, that too, after several
hearing dates before this Court and thereby, this Court has
become executing Court in the contempt proceedings.          It is
high time for the State Government to implement its own
Circular dated 31-1-2022 against the erring Officer and to
ensure that orders of the Court shall be complied with,
otherwise, people will lose confidence in the judicial system.
10.   Like any other organ of the State, the judiciary is
also manned by human beings, but the function of the judiciary
is distinctly different from other organs of the State-in the
sense its function is divine. Today, the judiciary is the
repository of public faith. It is the trustee of the people. It is
the last hope of the people. After every knock at all the doors
fail, people approach the judiciary as the last resort. It is the
only temple worshipped by every citizen of this nation,
regardless of religion, caste, sex or place of birth. Because of
these kinds of Officers in the State and because of the inaction
on the part of the Authority-Tahasildar in non-implementation
of the Circular by the State Government from time to time, the
CCC No. 2019 of 2018
people will lose confidence in the judicial temple and it should
not happen. It is high time for the State Government to raise
an occasion to    take stringent action against such Officers of
the State. Otherwise, there will be no end for such litigations
and welfare to the citizens of the State.
11. In the present case, the learned Single Judge passed
order on 24-7-2014 directing the accused or the competent
authority to conduct survey, phodi and durasthi work in the
land in question within nine months, i.e. on or before 25-7-
2015. However, the same has been complied with, after lapse
of eight years.    The complainant who is senior citizen was
forced to file the present contempt petition by engaging the
services of the counsel by spending litigation expenses,    and
faced mental trauma because of not implementing the court
order for more than eight years.        Thereby   the concerned
Tahasildars have willfully disobeyed the orders from 24-7-2014
till 10-2-2022. For the said act of dereliction of the duty, the
Tahasildars, who were holding posts from 24-7-2014 till 10-2-
2022, are proportionately liable to pay cost of Rs.3,00,000/-
from their personal pockets to the complainant and the Deputy
CCC No. 2019 of 2018
Commissioner, Mandya,       shall collect the said litigations costs
from the concerned Tahasildars and to record the same in their
respective Service Records, and to ensure to pay the said costs
to the complainant within one month from the date of receipt of
a copy of this order, failing which, serious action will be taken
against the Deputy Commissioner, who is also a party to this
contempt petition.
12. In view of the above, we pass the following:
i.  The contempt proceedings are hereby dropped,
subject to deposit of costs of Rs.3,00,000/- (Rupees
three lakh only) by the Tahasildars concerned, who
were holding posts from 24-7-2022 till 10-2-2022.
The Deputy Commissioner shall collect the said
costs proportionately and pay the same to the
complainant within one month from the date of
receipt of a certified copy of this order and file an
acknowledgment before this Court, failing which, list
this matter after one month for further orders.
CCC No. 2019 of 2018
ii.   Further, the costs collected from the Tahasildars
concerned shall be recorded in their respective
13.   The Registrar Judicial is directed to send the copy of this
a)     The Chief Secretary to State Government ;
b)     Principal Secretary to Government, Revenue
c)     The Deputy Commissioner, Mandya; and
d)     The Tahasildar, concerned for implementation
of this order within the time stipulated.