Dated this the      6th day of June, 2022
The petitioner is a Law Graduate, pursuing
her      post     graduate      studies      (LLM)    at   Cochin
University          of    Science      and     Technology.     She
completed       her     LL.B   (Hons)     from   Government    Law
College,       Thrissur      with    an   average    of  70%.   In
December 2021, the second respondent (NTPC Ltd),
published             Ext.P3        notification         inviting
applications          for   appointment       to   the   post   of
Assistant           Law    Officer.        The     qualification
prescribed for the post is Bachelor Degree in Law
(LL.B      or    equivalent-full         time    degree   from   a
recognised          Indian     University/Institute)          with
minimum 60% marks. The candidate should also be
registered         with   the    Bar    Council.    As   per   the
notification, the selection is confined to only
those candidates who have appeared for CLAT-2021
programme conducted by the Consortium of National
Law Universities. Based on their performance in
the test, the candidates will be shortlisted for
document verification. The petitioner being a law
graduate       with      the   requisite      minimum    marks  is
desirous of applying for the notified vacancy,
but is prevented from doing so, as she had not
appeared       for     the    CLAT-2021     PG   programme.    The
petitioner          therefore       assails      the     selection
process on the ground that it is discriminatory
and violates Article 16 of the Constitution of
India.       Finding       prima       facile    merit    in   the
challenge,          an     interim       order    was     passed,
directing        the     competent       among   respondents    to
accept the petitioner's application, subject to
the final outcome of the writ petition.
2.      Aggrieved        by      the     interim     order,
respondents         2   to   6  went     in  appeal,    which  the
Division       Bench     disposed     of,  directing     a  final
decision to be taken in the writ petition.
3. Heard Advocate Maitreyi S.Hegde for the
petitioner, Senior Advocate Tushar Mehta, learned
Solicitor General of India, assisted by Advocate
Adarsh       Tripathi,      for   respondents     2   to   6  and
Assistant Solicitor General Advocate S.Manu, for
the first respondent.
4.     Adv.Maitreyi       S.Hegde,     learned     Counsel
appearing for the petitioner contended that the
clause        in     Ext.P2     notification,       imposing    a
precondition          that   the    candidates     should    have
appeared       for     CLAT  2021     PG  programme    and   that
selection will be based on the marks secured in
CLAT      2021,      militates     against    the    fundamental
right       to    equality     of     opportunity     in   public
employment          guaranteed      under    Article     16.   In
elaboration, it is submitted that the offensive
clause defeated the chance of majority of the
aspirants,        since     only  very   few    law   graduates
pursue       post     graduate    course    in   National   Law
Universities,           the  fees    in  those    institutions
being much higher than in other Law Colleges.
Even the fee for participating in the CLAT-2021
PG    programme       is   much  higher    than   the  fee  for
admission tests conducted by other law colleges.
By the offensive clause, the zone of eligible
applicants is reduced to a small fraction, from
among the multitude of law graduates aspiring for
public employment. The offensive clause therefore
discriminates between those having the financial
capacity       for     pursuing   their   higher    studies  in
National       Law     Universities    and   others   like  the
petitioner, who opt to join law colleges with
lesser       fees.      The  selection     process    is  hence
liable to be interfered with and opened up for
all candidates with requisite qualification. The
decision       Lt.Col.Nitisha       and  others    v  Union  of
India and others [(2021) SCC OnLine SC 261] is
pressed        into      service      to contend    that   the
inclusion        of    a    restrictive   selection    process
amounts to indirect discrimination which the Apex
Court has held to be a ground for interference.
5. Learned Counsel pointed out that earlier,
the     public      sector    undertakings    like   NTPC  had
resorted        to    campus     interview   as   a   mode  of
selection. The challenge against that process was
upheld by the High Court of Bombay, through a
detailed and well considered judgment in Sonali
Pramod Dhawade and others v Central Bank of India
and another [(2013) SCC OnLine Bom 525], Campus
selection of candidates from few chosen Colleges
was      held     to     be   against    the   constitutional
guarantee        and     the    concept   of   constitutional
morality. By resorting to the selection process
in Ext.P3 notification, the NTPC is adopting the
same methodology, but in a different manner. The
illegality is manifest from the fact that Ext.P3
Notification          was  published  in  December,   2021,
while CLAT-2021 PG programme was conducted much
prior to that, in June 2021. The petitioner and
scores of other aspirants cannot be expected to
participate in an examination on the hope and
expectation that some public sector undertaking
may, on a future date, make participation in the
CLAT      2021       PG   programme   its   criterion   for
selecting candidates.
6. The clause is assailed also on the ground
that it has no rational nexus with the objective
sought to be achieved, viz; selection of the most
competent from among the law graduates. In this
regard, it is submitted that the admission test
for     PG    course     conducted  by  the   National  Law
University is an academically oriented test and
candidates who have secured higher marks in that
test cannot be termed the most suited for the
post of Law Officer.
7.     Finally,      it   is    contended   that   the
Consortium        of    National   Law  Universities,   which
conducts the CLAT PG programme every year, is a
Society registered under the Karnataka Societies
Registration Act, 1960. Selection and appointment
to a Public Sector Undertaking cannot be based on
the test conducted by such a Society, that too,
for the purpose of admission to the Post Graduate
courses conducted by its member institutions.
8. In reply, the learned Solicitor General
put forth the following contentions;
The     additional     criterion    that   eligible
candidates must have appeared for CLAT-2021 PG
programme was incorporated in the notification,
finding CLAT to be the most suitable method for
assessing the skill set required of candidates to
be    appointed        as   Assistant    Law  Officers.   The
procedure and criteria for recruitment included
in    Ext.P3       is    the    most   widely    accepted   norm
adopted by other PSUs like IOCL, ONGC, Power Grid
Corporation           etc.      In     fact,    the     previous
recruitment of Law Officers in the NTPC was also
conducted        in     the    same    manner.    Further,   the
notified posts being only 10, conducting a pan
India selection test will be a cumbersome and
time consuming process.
9.    Learned       Solicitor      General   assertively
argued that it is the prerogative of the employer
to fix the eligibility criteria and that which
right      cannot      be    interfered     with   lightly.   In
Exhibit P3 notification,                qualification of LL.B
or equivalent is prescribed as a cut off level,
whereas       participation       and   performance    in  CLAT-
2021 PG programme is essential for assessing the
knowledge and skill of the candidates. Reliance
is placed on the decisions in Surinder Singh v
Union of India            [(2007) 11 SCC 599],        State of
Gujarat       and    others   v   Arvindkumar     T.Tiwari  and
another [(2012) 9 SCC 545] and the judgment in
Nisha A.B v State of Kerala [WPC 21794 of 2020]
to    buttress       the   argument     with  respect   to  the
employers         prerogative       in    fixing    eligibility
criteria       and     the   limited     scope   for   judicial
10. No doubt, the precedents cited by the
learned Solicitor General lays down the position
that, fixing the eligibility of a particular post
is within the domain of the employer and cannot
be the subject matter of judicial review, unless
found to be arbitrary, unreasonable or having no
rational       nexus     to  the   objective     sought  to  be
achieved.       The     essential     difference   between  the
facts involved in the cited precedents and the
case at hand is that, here the challenge is not
against qualification or eligibility, but focused
on the selection process. The challenge is mainly
on      the    ground       that,       incorporation         of  the
restrictive         selection       criteria      is    nothing   but
indirect          discrimination.            In      Lt.Col.Nitisha
(supra), the Apex Court has explained the meaning
of    the     term     'indirect      discrimination'          in the
“61. We must clarify here that the use
of   the   term   ‘indirect     discrimination’     is
not   to   refer   to   discrimination      which   is
remote,    but   is,  instead,     as   real   as  any
other     form    of   discrimination.       Indirect
discrimination       is     caused     by    facially
neutral      criteria     by    not    taking     into
consideration the underlying effects of a
provision, practice or a criterion.
62. The facts of this case present an
opportune      moment     for     evaluating      the
practices of the respondents in evaluation
for the grant of PC. In this segment of the
judgment,     we    will     first    outline     the
theoretical foundations of the doctrine of
indirect     discrimination.       We    will    then
survey comparative jurisprudence concerning
the doctrine, with a view to understand its
key constituents and the legal questions
surrounding     its   application,      namely    the
evidentiary      burden    to   be   discharged    to
invoke the doctrine and the standards of
justification to be applied. We will then
offer    a    roadmap    for    understanding     and
operationalizing indirect discrimination in
Indian antidiscrimination law.
63. In evaluating direct and indirect
discrimination,        it     is    important      to
underscore that these tests, when applied
in  strict     disjunction     from   one    another,
may end up producing narrow conceptions of
equality      which    may     not    account     for
systemic flaws that embody discrimination.
Therefore, we will conclude this section
with an understanding of a systemic frame
of   analysis,      in    order    to     adequately
redress    the    full    extent    of    harm   that
certain groups suffer, merely on account
of  them     possessing     characteristics      that
are prohibited axles of discrimination.
Theoretical      Foundations      of   Indirect
64. Hugh Collins and Tarunabh Khaitan
explain        the    concept        of      indirect
discrimination using Aesop's fable of the
fox and the stork. They note:
“Aesop's fable of the fox and the
stork    invokes     the    idea    of    indirect
discrimination. The story tells how the
fox invited the stork for a meal. For a
mean    joke,   the  fox   served  soup   in  a
shallow dish, which the fox could lap up
easily, but the stork could only wet the
end of her long bill on the plate and
departed still hungry. The stork invited
the fox for a return visit and served
soup in a long-necked jar with a narrow
mouth,    into   which   the   fox  could   not
insert his snout. Whilst several moral
lessons might be drawn from this tale,
it is often regarded as supporting the
principle that one should have regard to
the needs of others, so that everyone
may be given fair opportunities in life.
Though    formally   giving   each   animal  an
equal opportunity to enjoy the dinner,
in practice the vessels for the serving
of   the    soup   inevitably    excluded   the
guest    on   account   of   their  particular
characteristics.”
65. Another excellent formulation of
the doctrine can be found in the opinion
of Advocate General Maduro of the Court of
Justice of the European Union (CJEU). He
notes that the distinctive attribute of
direct      discrimination      is    that    the
discriminator      explicitly     relies   on   a
suspect classification (prohibited ground
of  discrimination)       to   act   in  a  certain
way.    Such    classification      serves   as   an
essential premise of the discriminator's
reasoning. On the other hand, in indirect
discrimination,       the    intention     of    the
discriminator,      and   the   reasons    for   his
actions     are   irrelevant.      He   pertinently
“In fact, this is the whole point
of     the      prohibition       of    indirect
discrimination : even neutral, innocent
or   good    faith   measures      and  policies
adopted    with   no   discriminatory     intent
whatsoever      will   be   caught     if  their
impact on persons who have a particular
characteristic      is   greater     than  their
impact on other persons.”
66. Thus, as long as a court's focus
is  on    the   mental   state    underlying    the
impugned      action     that      is    allegedly
discriminatory, we are in the territory
of direct discrimination. However, when
the focus switches to the effects of the
concerned action, we enter the territory
of indirect discrimination. An enquiry as
to indirect discrimination looks, not at
the form of the impugned conduct, but at
its  consequences.      In   a   case   of  direct
discrimination, the judicial enquiry is
confined to the act or conduct at issue,
abstracted    from   the    social    setting  or
background    fact-situation      in   which  the
act or conduct takes place. In indirect
discrimination,     on  the    other   hand,  the
subject    matter   of   the    enquiry   is  the
institutional      or     societal      framework
within which the impugned conduct occurs.
The doctrine seeks to broaden the scope
of  antidiscrimination       law   to  equip  the
law to remedy patterns of discrimination
that are not as easily discernible.”
It is pertinent to note that, from out of the
1721 law colleges in India, only 23 are members
of the Consortium of National Law Universities.
The     argument       that,    apart       from    law   graduates
passing out from NLUs, graduates from other law
colleges would also have appeared for the CLAT-
2021 PG programme,            cannot also be countenanced,
since such candidates would only be a minuscule
minority among the law graduates. Added to this
is the fact that the selection is based on a test
conducted much prior to the issuance of Exhibit
P3     notification.         As    rightly    contended,     law
graduates        aspiring     for     appointment    in   public
sector undertakings cannot be expected to appear
for an admission test, hoping that in future that
test will be made the criterion for selection and
appointment to PSUs. Yet another crucial aspect
is that,       consideration for selection is confined
to candidates who had appeared for CLAT-2021 PG
programme alone. Even candidates who had appeared
for the previous year’s CLAT PG programme and
performed        well    are   kept    out   of  the    zone  of
consideration.           As     such,     the    notification,
confining         the     selection      process    in    Ext.P3
notification only to candidates who had appeared
for      the    CLAT-2021      PG    programmme    amounts    to
indirect discrimination.
11.    The    justification      offered   is  that   the
selection process adopted was found to be the
most suitable filtering mechanism for assessing
the skill set required for the candidates. In
this context, it may be apposite to read Clause
1.1.3      in    the     Bye-laws      of   the   Consortium    of
"1.1.3. “CLAT” means all India Common
Law Admission Test conducted for students
seeking admission to the undergraduate or
postgraduate      degree   programme   offered  by
various member institutions."
The focus of the test therefore is on academics
and not assessment of the skill set expected of
future Law Officers. Hence, there is merit in the
contention        that     the   selection      process    has  no
rational       nexus      with    the     objective.    In   fact,
similar contention was urged by the PSUs in their
attempt        to     justify      campus      selections.     The
contention was repelled by the Bombay High Court.
The following exposition in Sonali Pramod Dhawade
(supra) assumes relevance:
administrative expediency or departure
of the norm in the name of enhancing
professionalism and value addition, by
making      appointments       through  campus
recruitment, is not available to the
State. Those factors are and ought to
be    subservient      to    the   fundamental
rights of equality guaranteed to all
the citizens similarly placed and more
particularly        possessing       requisite
qualification       and     eligibility    for
being     considered    in     the  matter  of
public employment. That guarantee is
far    superior     and     intended    to  do
justice-social, economic and political
and    also    to    provide      equality  of
opportunity. This right, as enshrined
in Article 16, negates the argument of
expediency      and    business     compulsion
even if the stated activities of the
State     or   Instrumentalities       of  the
State     are   commercial      ventures.  The
professionalism in business does not
come    only    by   appointing     “freshers”
from premier selected institutes, by
resorting to campus recruitment. There
is no guarantee that all high ranking
students from such institutions would
do   better     in    practice,     albeit  in
relative terms. They may have initial
advantage      of   wide    exposure    to   the
latest      gadgets    and     techniques     of
business. Those skills and techniques,
however,      can   be    acquired    even    by
others     in   due    course    after     being
appointed      in   the    public    posts    by
undertaking      refresher     courses   suited
to the need of the business activities
to be handled by them. Further, there
is also no guarantee that the students
of premier institutions would not end
up in leaving the organisation sooner
or later on finding better pastures
elsewhere.       The   attrition      rate    at
senior       managerial        positions      is
certainly      high    in    private    sector,
which is a well known fact.”
I am in respectful agreement with the reasoning
and the findings above. Even if the argument that
students graduating from NLUs acquire more skill
and knowledge than their less fortunate brethren
is accepted, that is no reason to deny a level
playing field to the others. There is no logical
basis for the assumption that professionalism and
competence is the fiefdom of only those passing
from elite institutions. The process now adopted
is    more    like     a  walkover     to  the   finals   for  a
chosen         few,       without      competing      in     the
12. The argument that it is inexpedient to
conduct selection test across India for filling
up    ten    posts      also  fails,    when   tested    on  the
touchstone          of   Article     16.   As   long    as   the
Constitution guarantees equality of opportunity
to       the       citizens,      the      State     and     its
instrumentalities          have   a   corresponding     duty  to
ensure such opportunity to all.
13. The above discussion leads me to the only
conclusion that Ext.P3 notification insofar as it
confines the selection process to only candidates
who      had     participated       in    the   CLAT-2021     PG
programme,           violates      Article      16    of     the
Constitution          of  India.   Having    held   so,   rather
than     upsetting       the  whole    selection    process,   I
deem it more appropriate to direct the second
respondent to accept the petitioner's application
and conduct a selection test or interview for
testing her eligibility for appointment to the
notified post. Further action with respect to the
appointment          shall  be   taken   depending   on   the
outcome       of    such   selection   test/interview.    The
above direction shall be given effect to within
one month of receipt of a copy of this judgment.
The writ petition is disposed of accordingly.