Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 42918 of 2021
Counsel for Applicant :- Abrar Ahmad Siddiqui,Abhishek Kumar
Counsel for Opposite Party :- Ashish Pandey
1. Heard Sri Daya Shankar Mishra, Senior Advocate assisted by Shri
Chandrakesh Mishra Advocate, the learned Counsel for the applicant
and Sri Ashish Pandey Advocate, the learned counsel for the Narcotic
2. The present application has been filed for release of the applicant on
bail in N.C.B. Crime No. 28 of 2021, under Section 8(C)/21/29 of
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, P.S. N.C.B.
3. The search, seizure-cum- recovery memo dated 04-07-2021 states that
an information was received in the N.C.B. Office at Lucknow on 03-
07-2021 at 21:30 hours that a person was carrying Heroin in Coach
No. 9 of Train No. 02357 from Gaya, Bihar to Bareilly, U.P. and the
train would reach Bareilly junction on 04-07-2021 between 06:00
hours to 07:00 hours. In furtherance of the aforesaid information, a
team of Officers of N.C.B consisting of the Intelligence Officer
Hridesh Kumar and Driver Brijesh Kumar was constituted. The team
assembled in its office at Lucknow and started its journey on 03-07-
2021 at 22:30 hours from Lucknow office and reached Bareilly
junction on 04-07-2021 at about 05:00 hours. No person agreed to
become a witness to the proposed seizure proceedings. The Inspector
R.P.F. junction was requested to provide independent witnesses, who
deputed two constables of R.P.F. to act as witnesses.
4. When the train reached Bareilly junction, the N.C.B. team
apprehended the applicant and from a bag kept near him about 300
gms. brown coloured narcotic powder kept in a white transparent
polythene was recovered. However, in personal search of the
applicant, no objectionable substance was recovered. Upon testing the
narcotic substance with a Drug Detection Kit, it was found to be
Heroin. The NCB team conducted a repeat test with the kit and in that
also, the substance was found to be Heroin. It is alleged that the
applicant also told that the substance was Heroin. It’s gross weight
along with the double white transparent polythene in which it was
packed, was found to be 391 gms.
5. The seizure memo contains a narration that the seizure proceedings
commenced on 04-07-2021 at 07:45 hours and continued till 12:20
hours, the seizure memo consisting of four pages was prepared, read
over to the applicant and it was signed by the Intelligence Officer,
NCB, Lucknow, the Inspector R.P.F., the witnesses and the applicant.
6. The applicant filed an application for being released on bail before the
learned Additional Sessions Judge/Special Judge, N.C.B., Bareilly,
which was rejected by means of an order dated 04-09-2021 on the
ground that commercial quantity of Heroin was recovered from his
possession in presence of the witnesses.
7. In the affidavit filed in support of the bail application it has been
stated that the applicant is innocent and he has been falsely implicated
in the present case and that nothing was recovered from him. It has
also been stated in the affidavit that the applicant does not have any
criminal history.
8. A counter affidavit has been filed on behalf of the N.C.B. in which it
has been stated that the substance found in the bag of the applicant
was tested with the help of the DD Kit and as per the test report the
substance was Heroin. It’s net weight was found to be 358 gms and
gross weight was 391 gms and the statement of the applicant was
recorded and he confessed that he was carrying Heroin to be delivered
to a person as per the instruction of his cousin Manish Kumar.
9.  In paragraph 15 of the counter affidavit it has been stated that a
sample of the seized contraband substance was sent to the
Government Laboratory and after chemical examination, the
Chemical Examiner submitted a report stating that the sample under
reference answered positive test for Heroin.
10. A rejoinder affidavit and a supplementary rejoinder affidavit have
been filed on behalf of the applicant and a copy of the test report dated
09-11-2021 issued by the Central Revenues Control Laboratory,
Hillside Road, Pusa, New Delhi, mentions that the sample did not
answer positive test for Heroin (Diacetylmorphine); however, the
sample under reference answers positive test for Morphine.
11. Sri Daya Shankar Mishra, the learned Senior Advocate appearing for
the applicant has submitted that the conduct of the N.C.B. Officers in
the present case raises suspicion against the genuineness of their
allegations. He has submitted that as per the averments made in the
recovery memo itself, the officers of N.C.B. had received an
information at Lucknow that the applicant was carrying Heroin from
Gaya, Bihar to Bareilly through Train No. 02357, which train passes
through Lucknow and their conduct in not apprehending the applicant
at Lucknow rather the entire team travelled the whole night from
Lucknow to Bareilly to apprehend the applicant at Bareilly, is not a
natural course of conduct and it raises doubts against their story. He
has further submitted that although the alleged search and seizure was
conducted at a Railway Station, which is a public place, filled with
independent persons, there is no independent witness of the alleged
recovery. The constables of Railway Police Force, who witnessed the
alleged recovery, search and seizure, cannot be said to be independent
witnesses.
12. Sri. Misra has further submitted that it is mentioned in the search and
seizure memo that in test and re-test of the substances conducted by
the DD kit, both times it was found to be Heroin. In paragraph 15 of
the counter affidavit also, the Intelligence Officer, N.C.B. Zonal Unit
Lucknow, has stated on oath “that the samples which were drawn
from the seized contraband was sent to the Government Laboratory
with the permission of the remand Court and after chemical
examination the chemical examiner submitted the report stating there
in that the samples under reference answered positive test for
Heroin’, but he has not annexed a copy of the said test report. The
copy of test report filed with the rejoinder affidavit states that the
substance was not found to be Heroin but it was Morphine. This
contradiction in the test reports makes the prosecution case self-
contradictory and doubtful. He further submitted that the test memo
mentions the weight of the samples to be 5 gms. each whereas the test
report mentions gross weight of sample received to be 8.4 gms and the
gross weight of remnant returned with plastic pouch to be 6.5 gms and
this discrepancy in the weights has not been explained, which too
makes the prosecution case doubtful.
13. Per contra, Sri Ashish Pandey, the learned counsel for the N.C.B. has
submitted that the search was conducted in the presence of a Gazetted
Officer. He has further submitted that the difference in test results of
the DD Kit and that of the Government Laboratory are insignificant
because Heroin and Morphine, both are narcotic substances and
irrespective of the fact whether the substances being found with the
applicant was Heroin or Morphine, he would be liable to be
prosecuted under the NDPS Act.
14. Sri. Pandey has further submitted that the search has been conducted
in presence of a Gazzetted Officer and, therefore, there is no
reasonable ground for doubting the genuineness of the search and
deizure.
15. The applicant is charged with offences under Sections 8 (c) / 21 / 29
of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, which carry a
rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten
years but which may extend to twenty years, and shall also be liable to
fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may
extend to two lakh rupees and in which bail can be granted only after
the stringent conditions of Section 37 of the Act are fulfilled.
16. In Makhan Singh v. State of Haryana, (2015) 12 SCC 247 while
dealing with a case under the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances Act, the Supreme Court reiterated that “…It is a well-
settled principle of the criminal jurisprudence that more stringent the
punishment, the more heavy is the burden upon the prosecution to
prove the offence.”
17. In Union of India v. Rattan Mallik, (2009) 2 SCC 624, the Hon’ble
Supreme Court explained the principles applicable in grant of Bail in
offences under the NDPS Act as follows: -
“11. Section 37 of the NDPS Act, as substituted by Act 2 of 1989
with effect from 29-5-1989 with further amendment by Act 9 of
2001 reads as follows:
“37. Offences to be cognizable and non-bailable.—(1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974),—
(a) every offence punishable under this Act shall be cognizable;
(b) no person accused of an offence punishable for offences
under Section 19 or Section 24 or Section 27-A and also for
offences involving commercial quantity shall be released on bail
or on his own bond unless—
(i) the Public Prosecutor has been given an opportunity to
oppose the application for such release, and
(ii) where the Public Prosecutor opposes the application, the
court is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for believing
that he is not guilty of such offence and that he is not likely to
commit any offence while on bail.
(2) The limitations on granting of bail specified in clause (b) of
sub-section (1) are in addition to the limitations under the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), or any other law for
the time being in force on granting of bail.”
12. It is plain from a bare reading of the non obstante clause in
Section 37 of the NDPS Act and sub-section (2) thereof that the
power to grant bail to a person accused of having committed
offence under the NDPS Act is not only subject to the limitations
imposed under Section 439 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, it is also subject to the restrictions placed by clause (b) of
sub-section (1) of Section 37 of the NDPS Act. Apart from giving
an opportunity to the Public Prosecutor to oppose the
application for such release, the other twin conditions viz. (i) the
satisfaction of the court that there are reasonable grounds for
believing that the accused is not guilty of the alleged offence;
and (ii) that he is not likely to commit any offence while on bail,
have to be satisfied. It is manifest that the conditions are
cumulative and not alternative. The satisfaction contemplated
regarding the accused being not guilty, has to be based on
“reasonable grounds”.
13. The expression “reasonable grounds” has not been defined
in the said Act but means something more than prima facie
grounds. It connotes substantial probable causes for believing
that the accused is not guilty of the offence he is charged with.
The reasonable belief contemplated in turn, points to existence of
such facts and circumstances as are sufficient in themselves to
justify satisfaction that the accused is not guilty of the alleged
offence (vide Union of India v. Shiv Shanker Kesari. (2007) 7
SCC 798). Thus, recording of satisfaction on both the aspects,
noted above, is sine qua non for granting of bail under the NDPS
14. We may, however, hasten to add that while considering an
application for bail with reference to Section 37 of the NDPS
Act, the court is not called upon to record a finding of “not
guilty”. At this stage, it is neither necessary nor desirable to
weigh the evidence meticulously to arrive at a positive finding as
to whether or not the accused has committed offence under the
NDPS Act. What is to be seen is whether there is reasonable
ground for believing that the accused is not guilty of the
offence(s) he is charged with and further that he is not likely to
commit an offence under the said Act while on bail. The
satisfaction of the court about the existence of the said twin
conditions is for a limited purpose and is confined to the
question of releasing the accused on bail.”
18. Analyzing the facts of the present case for the purpose of deciding the
applicants claim for bail in light of the aforesaid law, I find the
following facts to be relevant at this stage: -
(i)   Although the search and seizure was conducted at Bareilly
Railway Station there is no independent witness of the alleged
recovery.
(ii)  The constables of Railway Police Force cannot be said to be
independent witnesses.
(iii) Although it is mentioned in the recovery memo that search was
conducted in presence of a Gazzetted Officer Sri. Harjeet Singh
‘ADEN / BE’, but the recovery memo does not bear signatures
of the Gazetted Officer.
(iv)   The recovery memo claims that in test and re-test of the
substances conducted by the DD kit, both times it was found to
be Heroin.
(v)    The Intelligence Officer, N.C.B. Zonal Unit Lucknow, has
stated on oath that the sample was tested by the Government
Laboratory and the report states that the samples under
reference answered positive test for Heroin. However, a copy of
the said test report has not been filed by the NCB.
(vi)   The test report filed by the applicant categorically states that the
substance was not found to be Heroin but it was Morphine.
(vii) Heroin and Morphine are different and distinct substances.
Heroine ((Diacetylmorphine)) is mentioned at Serial No. 56 of
the Notification dated 16-07-1996 specifying small quantity and
commercial quantity issued under Section 2 (vii) (a) and 2
(xxiii) (a) of the Act and Morphine is mentioned at Serial No.
77 thereof.
19. The aforesaid facts raise doubts against the prosecution case and it
gives rise to a reasonable ground for prima facie believing at this stage
that the applicant may not be held guilty of the alleged offences.
20. Moreover, the applicant has no criminal history and, therefore, there is
no ground to believe that in case the applicant is released on bail, he
would again indulge in committing similar offences.
21. All the witnesses in the present case are officers and officials of
Narcotic Control Bureau and personnel belonging to Railway
Protection Force, therefore, there appears to be no reasonable
apprehension that in case the applicant is released on bail, he would
influence the witnesses.
22. No other material has been placed by the respondent-Narcotic Control
Bureau, which may indicate that the applicant is not entitled to be
released on bail.
23.         Keeping in view the aforesaid facts and without making any
observations on merits of the case, I am of the view that the applicant
is entitled to be released on bail pending conclusion of the trial. The
bail application is accordingly allowed.
24.         Let the applicant – Aditya Kumar, be released on bail in N.C.B.
Crime No. 28 of 2021, under Section 8(C)/21/29 of Narcotic Drugs
and Psychotropic Substances Act, P.S. N.C.B. Lucknow, on his
furnishing a personal bond and two reliable sureties each of the like
amount to the satisfaction of the court concerned subject to following
(i)    The applicant will not tamper with the evidence during the trial.
(ii)   The applicant will not influence any witness.
(iii)  The applicant will appear before the trial court on the dates
fixed, unless personal presence is exempted.
(iv)   The applicant shall not directly or indirectly make inducement,
threat or promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the
case so as to dissuade him from disclosing such facts to the
Court to any police officer or tamper with the evidence.
25.         In case of breach of any of the above conditions, the prosecution shall
be at liberty to move an application before this Court seeking
cancellation of bail.