1.  On 17.06.2022 I directed the West Bengal Board of
Primary Education to produce
The applications made by 2787 candidates who
wanted their OMR sheets are to be reviewed/ re-
examined as they alleged that there had been one
question which was wrong for which they should
be given full marks:-
Today no such application, not even a single
one, has been produced before this court.     I ask the
counsel for the Board as to whether these applications
have been seized by CBI in course of its investigation
and I am told that perhaps CBI has not seized these
documents. That CBI has or has not seized such
documents is not known to be the Board? Such
submission is nothing but a last ditch effort to
suppress fact which, if comes to light, will go against
the Board. Thus it is ruled out that there was any such
application by any person for review/re-examination of
the OMR answer sheet.
I hold that the Board’s report in this regard and
the    submissions    made     earlier as  to  receiving
applications are wholly untrue and baseless to say the
least.
2. On that day I also directed the Board to produce
The second panel of 273 candidates spread over
the State under different district primary school
councils as has been stated in paragraph 13 of the
report filed before this court on 15.06.2022:-
No second panel of 273 candidates spread over
the State under different district primary school
councils (as has been stated in paragraph 13 of the
report of the Board filed before this court on
15.06.2022) has been produced before this court
despite specific direction of the this Court. What has
been produced is one letter signed by one R. C.
Bagchi, Secretary of the Board dated 04.12.2017 with
a computer generated list containing names and roll
numbers of persons as a panel.       I wholly disbelieve
that this is a panel. Therefore, there is no existence of
the said second panel. A panel in original without the
signature of authorized person is not a panel. In such
a case nobody takes the responsibility of the names of
empanelled persons and several such lists of names
can be shown as a panel. This is absurd.
3. In this regard learned advocate for one of the
petitioners Mr. Dasgupta has drawn my attention to
some Rules of West Bengal Primary School Teachers’
Recruitment Rules, 2016 (‘Recruitment Rules’ in
short).   Under Rule 7 of the said Rules, he has
submitted, there should be a selection committee for
the purpose of selection of eligible candidates and the
preparation of panel. In such produced documents
stating that it is a panel, there is no whisper of such
selection   committee    or  panel   prepared    by  the
Committee. Mr. Dasgupta also submitted from Rule 8
of Recruitment Rules that the selection committee
makes the prima facie scrutiny of the duly filled
application forms submitted by the candidates having
qualifications    which   has   not    been   done    for
preparation of the second panels; as it could not be
done also because preparation of second panel was
not at all permitted under the Recruitment Rules.
4. In this regard Mr. Gupta, learned senior counsel for
Board has submitted that Board not only has the
power but also has the duty to publish more than one
panel if Board finds that for doing justice to the
candidates who have not been given appointment,
such publication is required. However, from Rule 2 (f)
which defines panel it is found that “panel means       a
list of names of the eligible and selected candidates for
appointment as teacher in primary school, published
by the Board, according to Rules”.       Mr. Gupta has
submitted that though expression is ‘a list’ in the
definition clause, under the General Clauses Act
singular includes plural and this ‘a list’ means several
lists and more than one list.
5. I am not ready to accept such submission because
applying the golden Rule of interpretation of statute,
which is also applicable for interpretation of Statutory
Rules, there is no doubt that a list of names of the
eligible and selected candidates for appointment
would be published by the Board. There is no scope
for holding that ‘a list’ in this Rule means more that
one panel. Had that been so there was no impediment
for the Rule makers to make such clarification. ‘A list’
is not an expression which can be interchangeably
used with ‘list’. ‘A list’ means one list and only one
list. From the Recruitment Rules no other meaning
can be given to the expression ‘A list’.
6. On that day (17.06.2022) I also directed the Board to
produce the Board’s resolution to send the question
and the answer key to the expert committee of School
Education Department, Government of West Bengal to
whom it was sent to ascertain whether the        question
/ answer key provided in TET 2014 in respect of one
question was correct or not.
Some     papers    terming   it  as   the   Board’s
Resolution have been produced before this court from
which it appears that the documents prepared on
those papers if at all created in the year 2017 would
not have been so bright and also the hand writing of
so-called experts including the Board’s proceedings
would not have been so clean without any dust or
sign of any dusting in last 5 (five) yeas. I direct CBI to
take original of these papers as has been produced for
sending it to Central Forensic Science Laboratory to
know whether the page numbers one to forty were
actually prepared in the year 2017 (i.e. if those were
five years old) or new.
(I have given direction to learned advocate Mr.
Biswas for the Board to paginate those papers by ink
and to hand it over to this court again after
pagination, which has been done.)
7.  Apart from the above it is found that there was
existence of no such expert committee for examining
the questions and its answers to opine whether it was
wrong or right. One expert committee was constituted
in the year 2011 consisting of 21 persons for the
purpose of syllabus and curriculum etc. tenure of
which committee was extended from time to time but
this  committee    never   was    given  any  power   or
authority to examine the questions and answers of
any examination to opine whether the question and
answer was correct or not. Therefore, the story built
up by the Board as to sending the question and
answer to an expert committee is wholly fabricated.
There was no such committee at all. From             the
Gazette Notification dated 3rd August, 2011 it is found
in another set of documents which have been handed
over in respect of other requisition of documents made
by this court in paragraph no. (iv) of order dated
17.06.2022. Apart from the above, it is found from the
Board’s    so-called  proceedings     that  except   the
President of the Board none of the members present
in the said meeting dated 20.11.2017 has signed in
the resolution taken. It is not understood why a
proceeding of the Board will not be signed by the
members present as members of the Board.
8. The names of the members of the Board present apart
from the President are (i) Sister Emilia of Loreto RC,
I direct the above named three persons to be
added as party respondents in this matter         is the
address    of  the   West   Bengal Board    of  Primary
Education. The above three persons are directed to file
separate affidavits stating why they did not sign the
proceedings     of  the   emergent  meeting    held   on
20.11.2017. The petitioners are directed to add these
three persons as party respondents in the address as
has been stated above immediately and after receiving
their   residential  addresses  from   the  Board    the
residential   address   would   be   put   by   way    of
amendment of cause title by the petitioners for which
liberty is granted.
9. In my order dated 17.06.2022        I gave direction to
produce the names of the members of the expert
committee and the date of constitution of the said
expert       committee     by  the  School     Education
Department, Government of West Bengal:-
10.    In this regard I have found the names of only two
persons: one is Mr. Abhik Majumder and the other is
Ritwik Mallick. In the bunch of papers where the
proceedings of the emergent meeting of the Board has
been attached at the first page (pagination whereof has
been done till page 40) I find that there is a date of
16.11.2017 singed by those two experts of the so-
called expert committee but the said proceedings say
that on 20.11.2017 a meeting was held in the chamber
of the President     (of the Board) and there is no
reference that on 16.11.2017 some opinion was given
by the said so-called expert-committee. However, one
expert Mr. Ritwik Mallick has signed on a white paper
without any date giving his opinion and another expert
Mr. Abhik Majumder has signed on two papers (his
Letterheads) giving date as 23.11.2017. But these
papers show that all those papers used by Mr. Ritwik
Mallick and Mr. Abhik Majumder are very fresh and
clean and without any sign of any dusting which raises
a serious doubt in my mind as to whether these
documents were signed contemporaneously in the
month of November, 2017. There is no sign of natural
aging of those papers for last 5 years or so.
I also direct the CBI to send these bunch of
papers to Central Forensic Science Laboratory to obtain
a report as to the age of the papers and the ink and
signature thereon. In any event the expert committee
was constituted on 3rd August, 2011 by 21 persons.
Thereafter the constitution of the committee was
changed from time to time and extension was given on
several times but this court and this matter do not
have any relationship with such expert committee of 21
members or so and their functions as to curriculum,
syllabus and text books for primary, secondary and
higher secondary courses formulated by the respective
Boards and Councils as appears from the said Gazette
Notification dated 3rd August, 2011. Therefore, the so-
called expert committee for giving an opinion or
correctness of a question of question and answers is a
big hoax given to this court by the Board for clearly
misleading the court which has not been possible as
the fully untrue statement are fully exposed from
produced documents. The said expert committee was
constituted with 21 members for seeing syllabus etc.
but the Board’s story only speaks about the above
named 2 (two) persons out of 21 persons and these two
persons was not at all a two-persons-committee. The
President of the Board is not only making those
misleading and untrue statements but also there are a
conscious effort on the part of the Board’s President to
hoodwink this Court-if possible.
This Court has taken very serious exception to this
dishonest and sharp practice on the part of the
Chairman of the Board.
11. On 17.06.2022 I directed the West Bengal Board
of Primary Education to produce the resolution of the
Board in the meeting dated 20.11.2017 to award one
mark to the unsuccessful candidates who submitted
their representations along with testimonials:-
In this regard I have already expressed my doubts
as to the meeting where the members of the Board other
than the President did not sign in the resolution and,
therefore, I have called for affidavits from the three
members who attended the said meeting and as of now
this court is not ready to believe that any such
proceeding was     at all held because of the prima facie
observation that such resolution was not signed by the
other   members      present    as   aforesaid   and   some
documents have been shown which are fresh, clean and
without any sign of dust.           A document or some
documents of nearly five years old are so clean and so
dustless that it is difficult to believe that it was created
contemporaneously i.e. in the month of November, 2017.
Those papers/documents are to be sent to CFSL for a
report as indicated above.
12. By my order dated 17.06.2022 I directed also to
intimate     the  view  of  the   department  of School
Education, Government of West Bengal, accepting the
recommendation of awarding one mark as has been
stated in the report filed by the Board.
In this regard one note sheet has been
produced before me with prominent signature of the
President and the two identical signatures of one
person and it is not understood who is he and one
signature of J. S. (E.E.) dated 22.11.2017. Though the
learned senior counsel for the Board has submitted
that this is the signature        of the then Education
Minister of West Bengal and thus the Board wants to
show    that    the  Department    of  School Education
expressed its view in favour of giving one mark to the
candidates in respect of whom the second panel (which
is quite illegal) was published.
In this respect I am of the view that in the
Government’s note sheets of government departments
if something is approved, the word “approved” is
prominently written and thereunder the authorized
officer including, where necessary, the Minister-in-
charge puts his signature. In this note sheet there is
no such approval. I am not ready to believe that such
an endeavor to give one mark to the 273 persons were
at all approved by the Department of School Education,
Government of West Bengal. The Board has clearly
made     one  untrue   statement   as  to  government’s
approval for giving one mark to some candidates.
13. I directed the Board to produce all documents in
original and only two documents purported to be
original have been produced but I disbelieve it for the
reasons stated.    In respect of other four documents,
two were not produced at all and in respect of other
documents what has been produced are not original
documents but the Board tried to pass them off as the
original documents and the panel which has been
shown as the second panel is not a panel at all, first for
the reason that there is no power of the Board to
publish a second panel and secondly a panel is
prepared by a selection committee of the Board and not
by the Board.
14. Learned advocate Mr. Firdous Samim has submitted
that the marks obtained in TET by the candidates does
not have a direct relationship with their selection
because on the basis of the marks of TET only a
percentage of marks is given and the 273 persons were
unsuccessful    candidates   of  TET   and   under     no
circumstances and under no law they were required to
be given one mark for declaring them as successful
and, therefore, appointment in different vacancies is
wholly illegal.
15. In this regard though I invited the Board to make
submissions, Mr. Gupta has submitted that in this
regard Board would not make any submission. Mr.
Gupta wanted to file one affidavit and in my view no
affidavit is required in respect of failure to produce the
original documents as the documents produced speak
for themselves and some statements have already been
filed as a report and today on the basis of the report
some documents were to be produced as was directed
by Court.      This court does not require any further
affidavit on the same facts and issues.
16. In the facts and circumstances as aforesaid I find that
the President of the West Bengal Board of Primary
Education is responsible for filing the documents most
of which are purportedly not original and those which
are   original    are  seriously   doubtful    and   some
documents are fully incoherent in the back drop of the
direction   given   by  this  Court    to  the Board    on
I hold the President of the West Bengal Board of
Primary Education is fully responsible for misleading
the Court and making a dishonest and unscrupulous
attempt in producing documents most of which were
not original and some which are highly questionable
and there is blatant lie in respect of the expert
committee as no such committee was constituted at all
for giving opinion as to a question and answer whether
it was right or wrong. There was no approval of the
government in respect of awarding one mark to some
candidates-this is another false statement by the
President of the Board.
17. Section 20 of West Bengal Primary Education Act (the
Act, in short) shows the power and duties of the Board.
Sections 23,24,25,26 26A and 26B shows that in all of
the committees named in those sections of the Act the
President of the Board is the first number. Therefore I
hold that the President of the Board responsible for
such     dishonest   Act  and   without the   President’s
instruction the Secretary cannot work. The Secretary is
fully controlled by the President. Therefore, I hold that
the President of the Board is responsible for producing
misleading      statements,    committed    conspicuous
illegality in preparing the illegal second panel and
giving appointment, creating a hoax about the expert
committee- which are all unscrupulous acts committed
by the     President of the Board. Such a person cannot
remain the President of a statutory authority. He is
wholly unfit for the post of President of the Board.
Therefore, this court removes Mr. Manik Bhattacharya
from the post of President of the West Bengal Board of
Primary    Education    forthwith  and   I direct   the
Government to appoint any other fit person as
President of the Board and till the new President is
appointed, the Secretary of the Board namely, Ratna
Chakraborty Bagchi will perform the function of the
President of the Board.
18. This Court shall not tolerate such an unscrupulous
person as President of West Bengal Board of Primary
19. I also direct said Manik Bhattacharya to appear before
this court personally tomorrow (21.06.2022) at 2 p.m.
for facing some questions from this court.
20.   Learned advocate for the petitioners has prayed for
copies of the documents which have been produced
today which will be given to them later and all the
documents handed over to this court today will be
handed over to CBI for taking further steps by Central
Forensic Science Laboratory and for other purposes.
21.   Learned advocate Mr. Gupta has submitted for the
Board that when CBI is enquiring into the matter, the
court should not enquire further in the some matter
which, in my view, is wholly baseless      submission
because the aspect which is being seen by the court in
respect of the documents were directed to be produced
after going through the report filed by the Board and
such    action   of  production  of   original of same
documents are not interfering with the investigation by
22. The matter will be heard further tomorrow at 2 p.m.
and I direct the learned advocate for the Board to
intimate Mr. Manik Bhattacharya to appear personally
before this court tomorrow.
List this matter tomorrow at 2 p.m.