“Majesty of law continues to hold its head high
notwithstanding such scurrilous attacks made by
persons who feel that the law courts will absorb
anything and everything, including attacks on their
honesty, integrity and impartiality. But it has to be borne
in mind that such divinity and magnanimity is not its
weakness but its strength. It generally ignores
irresponsible statements which are anything but
legitimate criticism. It is to be noted that what is
permissible is legitimate criticism and not illegitimate
insinuation. No court can brook with equanimity
something which may have tendency to interfere with
the administration of justice”…………. observed the
Honourable Supreme Court in Haridas Das v. Usha
2.      The      petitioner         seeks    the    transfer   of
O.P.No.619/2017 (Annexure-1) from the Family Court,
Irinjalakuda, on the allegation of bias against the
learned Judge. The petitioner is the wife of the
respondent.          The     respondent        has   filed   Annexure-1
petition to declare his marriage with the petitioner null
and void.
3.      The concise case of the petitioner in the
transfer petition is as follows:
(i)     The petitioner is the wife of the respondent.
She is a lawyer by profession.
(ii)    The respondent has filed Annexure-1 petition
to pass a decree of divorce. The petition is
fabricated and false and is not maintainable in
(iii) The respondent had also filed a fabricated
original petition before this Court as O.P.
(FC)No.66/2021 for the expeditious disposal of
the Annexure-1 petition. The learned counsel
appearing for the respondent has colluded with
the respondent and averred falsehood in the
said original petition to mislead this Court.
(iv) The respondent and his lawyer have committed
the offences under Sections 120(B), 191, 193
and 209 of the Indian Penal Code,1808 and
Section 2(c) of the Contempt of Courts Act,
(v)     Immediately     on   receipt   of    the   notice   in
Annexure-1     petition,    the    petitioner    filed
M.C.No. 86/2017 before the Judicial First-Class
Magistrate Court, Irinjalakuda, against the
respondent, invoking the provisions of the
Protection of Women from Domestic Violence
Act,   2005.   The    respondent’s      counsel   had
admitted that the petitioner’s ornaments are
with   the   respondent,     which     is a   judicial
admission. However, the respondent filed a
fabricated counter affidavit in the said case.
Hence, the petitioner filed a petition before the
learned    Magistrate      to    initiate    criminal
proceedings against the respondent and his
lawyer under Section 340 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (in short, ‘Cr. PC’).
(vi) The      respondent     had   filed    I.A.No.381/2018
(Annexure-13) to deliver interrogatories on the
petitioner. The petitioner filed Annexure A15
affidavit to Annexure-13 application. A bare
reading of Annexure-15 affidavit would prove
that   the   respondent     has    filed   fabricated
petitions.
(vii) On 23.10.2021, the learned Judge considered
and has passed Annexure-22 common order on
the same day. The learned Judge has failed to
comply with the Supreme Court rulings on
perjury and has allowed the respondent to
poison the stream of justice. The above act of
the   learned   Judge    is    an   indication    of
extraneous consideration, and tantamounts to
gross judicial impropriety, indiscipline, lack of
integrity,  gross    misconduct     and    an    act
unbecoming of a judicial officer.
(viii) The     petitioner    had    filed    I.A.No.8/2021
(Annexure-24) to refer the respondent to a
medical    board.       The     respondent     filed
Annexure-25 objection to the application. The
learned Judge dismissed the application by
Annexure-27 order. The learned Judge has
passed a string of illegal orders on extraneous
consideration,   which    amounts      to criminal
misconduct and dereliction of duty.
(ix) The petitioner had filed a complaint before the
Registrar of this Court to remove the learned
Judge from office, but the complaint was
closed.
(x)     Again, the petitioner filed an application before
the Family Court for perjury, which was
dismissed by Annexure-32 order.
(xi) The petitioner has lost faith in Family Court
because the learned Judge is colluding with the
respondent’s lawyers. His acts are adversely
affecting the administration of justice.
(xii) The respondent and his lawyers have no
regard for the truth and have deliberately
defrauded this Court. Hence, Annexure-1 may
be    transferred    from   the  Family    Court,
Irinjalakuda, to the Family Court, Ernakulam.
4. The respondent has filed a counter affidavit
denying the allegations in the transfer petition and
contending as follows:
(i)    The application filed by the petitioner under
Section 340 Cr. PC., to initiate proceedings
against him, his relatives and his lawyers, has
been dismissed by the learned Magistrate.
(ii) The petitioner had made similar insinuations
against the learned Magistrate for passing
Annexure R1(a) order.
(iii) On    the    request     made    by  the learned
Magistrate, the case was transferred by the
learned Sessions Judge to the Judicial First-
(iv) The petitioner has challenged Annexure R1(a)
order by filing Crl. Appeal No.150/2018.
(v) The      petitioner   is   suffering  from  Bipolar
Affective Disorder, as evidenced by Annexures
R1(c) and R1(d), which material fact was
suppressed at the time of marriage.
(vi) The petitioner has complained against the
respondent’s counsel appearing before the
Family Court and this Court.
(vii) The petitioner’s antecedents show that she
accuses all the Presiding Officers who pass
orders against her. She also accuses the
respondent’s lawyers.
(viii) The trial in Annexure-1 petition is scheduled.
(ix)     The respondent is physically disabled, as
evidenced      by   Annexure       R1(f)    medical
certificate, and has difficulty in travelling.
(x)      The petitioner’s intention is only to protract
the   determination     of  Annexure-1     petition.
There are no grounds to transfer Annexure-1
petition.   The   transfer    petition    may     be
dismissed.
5.      The petitioner has filed a reply affidavit
denying the allegations in the counter affidavit. She has
reiterated the contentions in the transfer petition. She
has prayed that the transfer petition may be allowed.
6.      When     the  transfer   petition   came    up   for
admission, this Court had called for a report from the
Family Court on finding that allegations of bias and
favouritism have been imputed against the learned
7.      The      learned    Judge,  by    report    dated
10.08.2022, has informed this Court that Annexure-1
petition is filed by the respondent on 03.07.2017 for a
decree to declare his marriage with the petitioner null
and void or, in the alternative to pass a decree of
divorce. The petitioner has filed her objection.             The
petitioner has filed several applications in the original
petition, including an application under Section 340 Cr.
PC. All the applications were dismissed on 20.06.2022
and the order is appended to the report. Subsequently,
the respondent filed I.A.No.3709/17 to amend the
original        petition,    which    was allowed.   Then,   the
petitioner          filed   I.A.No.2664/2019   to   direct   the
respondent to return her gold ornaments. Thereafter,
this Court directed Annexure-1 to be disposed of
expeditiously. As per the knowledge of the learned
Judge, none of the orders has been challenged. The
allegations         raised  against     the  learned   Judge are
incorrect. The sole intention of the petitioner is to
prolong the determination of the petition on one pretext
or the other. The learned Judge has no objection in the
case being transferred. He is discharging his duties to
the best of his conscious and as per law.
8.      Heard;                                     ., the
party-in-person and Sri. T.N. Manoj, the learned Counsel
appearing for the respondent.
9.      It is well-nigh settled in a myriad of judicial
precedents that the power to transfer under Section 24
of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, is discretionary.
10. It is trite; the convenience of the women and
children        has    to  be given      due   consideration and
preference while considering a petition for transfer.
Nevertheless, the above principles do not apply in the
present case because the petitioner has sought the
transfer of the petition on the allegation of bias against
the learned Judge of the Family Court.
11. The            petitioner’s       grievance        is    that the
respondent has filed a false case against her, and the
learned Judge has passed a string of adverse orders
against her in a biased and prejudicial manner, in
collusion with the respondent and his counsel on
extraneous consideration. The learned Judge lacks
integrity and propriety, and his acts are unbecoming of a
judicial officer.
12. In State of W.B. v. Shivananda Pathak
[(1998) 5 SCC 513], the Honourable Supreme Court has
succinctly stated what bias is in the following manner:
“25. Bias may be defined as a preconceived opinion or
a predisposition or predetermination to decide a case or an
issue in a particular manner, so much so that such
predisposition does not leave the mind open to conviction. It
is, in fact, a condition of mind, which sways judgments and
renders the judge unable to exercise impartiality in a
particular case.
26. Bias has many forms. It may be pecuniary bias,
personal bias, bias as to subject-matter in dispute, or policy
bias etc”.
13. Again, in Govt. of T.N. v. Munuswamy
Mudaliar [1988 Supp SCC 651], the Honourable
Supreme Court has held thus:
“12. ……... A predisposition to decide for or against
one party, without proper regard to the true merits of the
dispute is bias. There must be reasonable apprehension of
that predisposition. The reasonable apprehension must be
based on cogent materials. See the observations of Mustill
and Boyd, Commercial Arbitration 1982 Edn., p. 214.
Halsbury’s Laws of England, 4th Edn., Vol. 2, para 551, p.
282 describe that the test for bias is whether a reasonable
intelligent man, fully apprised of all the circumstances,
would feel a serious apprehension of bias”.
14. While dealing with the transfer of cases, on the
ground of bias, the Honourable Supreme Court in
R.Balakrishna Pillai v. State of Kerala [(2000) 7 SCC
129], held as follows:
“10. …………....It is true that one of the principles of
administration of justice is that justice should not only be
done but it should be seen to have been done. However, a
mere allegation that there is apprehension that justice will
not be done in a given case is not sufficient. Before
transferring the case court has to find out whether the
apprehension appears to be reasonable. To Judge the
reasonableness of the apprehension, the state of mind of
the person who entertains the apprehension is no doubt
relevant but that is not all. The apprehension must appear
to the court to be reasonable, genuine and justifiable. In
the present day scenario, if these types of applications are
entertained, the entire judicial atmosphere would be
polluted with such frivolous petitions for various reasons”.
15. Almost          on     the      above      identical      lines, the
Honourable Supreme Court in Harita Sunil Parab v.
State of NCT of Delhi and Others, [(2018) 6 SCC
358] has reiterated the proposition on the law of
transfer of a case on the ground of bias, thus:
“8. The apprehension of not getting a fair and
impartial enquiry or trial is required to be reasonable and
not imaginary, based upon conjectures and surmises. No
universal or hard and fast rule can be prescribed for
deciding a transfer petition which will always have to be
decided on the facts of each case.”
16. Recently, in Abraham Thomas Puthooran v.
Manju Abraham [2022 (1) KLT 317], a Division Bench
of this Court held as follows:
“32. When transfer of a case is sought on the
allegation of bias of the Presiding Officer of a court or on
the ground of fear of not getting justice, it becomes the
bounden duty of the court to ascertain as to whether the
ground of transfer has been substantiated by the litigant
or not, since transfer of a case on such grounds casts
aspersion upon integrity and competence of the
Presiding Officer. A petition filed under Section 24 of the
Code seeking transfer of case shall not be based on
conjectures and mystic maybes. The onus is on the
person who alleges bias to substantiate that his
apprehensions are reasonable genuine and justifiable”.
17. The exposition of law casts the onus of proof
on the shoulders of the person alleging bias to
substantiate that his apprehensions are reasonable,
genuine and justifiable.
18. The petitioner has made a scathing attack on
the learned Judge, questioning his integrity, honesty and
impartiality. The reason; the learned Judge has passed a
string of orders against her. There is no foundation or
material to corroborate the accusation other than the
bald and wild allegations in the transfer petition.
19. Irrefutably, the petitioner has not challenged
any of the adverse orders passed against her, and the
orders have attained finality. Thus, it is to be inferred
that the petitioner is indirectly attacking the orders
through the transfer petition.
20. There are abundant precedents on the point
that an erroneous order cannot be labelled as an order
passed with ‘bias’ or ‘favouritism’.
21. In L.D. Jaikwal v. State of U.P. [(1984) 3 SCC
405], the Honourable Supreme Court observed as
“7. We have yet to come across a Judge who can
take a decision which does not displease one side or the
other. By the very nature of his work he has to decide
matters against one or other of the parties. If the fact
that he renders a decision which is resented to by a
litigant or his lawyer were to expose him to such risk, it
will sound the death knell of the institution. A line has
therefore to be drawn somewhere, someday, by
someone”.
22. On a comprehensive appreciation of the factual
matrix and in the background of the principles laid
down in the above-referred precedents, the inevitable
conclusion is that the petitioner has miserably failed to
substantiate the allegation of bias.          The petitioner
cannot arm twist and browbeat the learned Judges to
get things done in her own way.           This Court sternly
warns the petitioner to stop her habit of levelling
unsubstantiated insinuations against the learned Judges
and undermining their dignity and the majesty of law.
With reluctance, I refrain from imposing costs on the
petitioner on the faintest perception that the party in
person has been ill-advised.
23. In Haridas Das v. Usha Rani Banik [(2007)
14 SCC 1], the Honourable Supreme Court observed
that      Judge     bashing and     using   derogatory   and
contemptuous language against Judges has become a
favourite pastime of some people. These statements
tend to scandalise and lower the authority of the courts
and cannot be permitted because, for functioning of
democracy, an independent judiciary to dispense justice
without fear and favour is paramount. Its strength is the
faith and confidence of the people in that institution.
That cannot be permitted to be undermined because
that will be against the public interest. Judiciary should
not be reduced to the position of flies in the hands of
wanton boys. Judge bashing is not and cannot be a
substitute for constructive criticism”
The transfer petition sans substance or merits and
is hence dismissed.