Case :- APPLICATION U/S 482 No. - 23361 of 2022
Opposite Party :- State of U.P. and Another
Counsel for Applicant :- Raju Kumar,Rajeev Sawhney
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Heard Sri Rajeev Sawhney, learned counsel for the applicants
and Sri Jhamman Ram, learned AGA for the State-respondent.
The instant application u/s 482 Cr.P.C., has been filed by the
applicants with a prayer for quashing the charge sheet dated
6.6.2020 arising out of case crime No. 372 of 2019, under
295A IPC and 7 Crl. Law Amendment Act, pending in the court
Learned counsel for the applicants submitted that applicants
have been falsely implicated in the present matter by opposite
party not. 2 due to previous enmity with the local police. He
next submitted that applicants neither pelted stones nor they
caused any injury to anyone including any police personnel. He
next submitted that even as per, FIR, applicants were gathered
at the place of incident as a protestors against Citizenship
Amendment Act (Bill) but in spite of that, FIR of the present
case was lodged against the applicants and after investigation,
charge sheet has also been submitted against them. He next
submitted that only applicant nos. 1 and 2 were named in the
FIR and name of other applicants were disclosed during
investigation. Learned counsel further submitted that the
Division Bench of this Court was pleased to stay the arrest of
applicant nos. 1 and 2 during investigation. Learned counsel
vehemently submitted that applicant not. 1 is an Engineer and
he never indulged in such anti social activities and the protest is
the constitutional right of a citizen and if a person involved in a
peaceful agitation then he cannot be implicated in any criminal
case, therefore, impugned charge sheet as well as entire
criminal case pending against the applicants is bad.
Per contra, learned AGA submitted that from the perusal of the
FIR, it appears that when police personnel tried to disperse the
mob with the announcement that section 144 Cr.P.C. has been
invoked in the city then instead of dispersion, they started stone
pelting and due to their assault one constable Umesh Kumar
sustained injury, therefore, it cannot be said that no offence
against the applicants is made out. He next submitted that other
argument of the enmity cannot be appreciated, at this stage, and
the same can only be appreciated by the court below during
trial.
I have heard learned counsel for both the parties and perused
the record of the case.
The FIR of the present case was lodged on 16.12.2019 and
according to FIR, huge mob gathered at a public place to raise
agitation against Citizenship Amendment Act (Bill) and when
police arrived there and informed them that as section 144
Cr.P.C. has already been invoked in the city, therefore, no
procession can be commenced then instead of dispersal, mob
suddenly started attack on police and due to their stone pelting
one police personnel, namely, Umesh Kumar sustained injuries,
therefore, in my view as FIR disclosed, prima facie, cognizable
offences against the applicants, therefore, charge sheet pending
against the applicants cannot be quashed.
However, learned counsel for the applicants, vehemently
submitted that applicant nos. 1 and 2 who are named in the FIR
have been made accused in the present matter as they were
having enmity with Investigating Officer of the case but on that
ground proceeding pending against the applicants cannot be
quashed, therefore, in view of the matter the instant application
u/s 482 Cr.P.C. is devoid of merit and is, accordingly,
dismissed.