This writ petition is filed seeking the following prayers:
“(ia) Issue a writ of certiorari or any other appropriate
writ, order or direction, calling for Ext.P6 and quash the
same to the extent the 3rd respondent directs respondents 1
and 2 to reduce the pay of the petitioner by the amount of
pension he has been receiving as mentioned in Ext.P5 on
appointment as Ombudsman as per Ext.P1.
(ii) Issue a writ of certiorari or any other appropriate writ,
order or direction to call for the records leading to Ext.P5
and to quash the same in so far as it arbitrarily deny the
petitioner his legitimate right to get full salary and
allowances on appointment as Ombudsman without
reducing the amount of pension paid to him.
(iii) Issue a writ of mandamus or any other appropriate
writ, order or direction, commanding the respondents to
authorize and disburse forthwith, the arrears of salary and
allowances due to the petitioner for service rendered as
Ombudsman on appointment as per Ext.Pl w.e.f.
22.12.2017 to 21.12.2020 without reducing the pension
received by him, as expeditiously as possible, and within a
time frame to be stipulated by this Hon’ble Court.
(iv) Declare that the petitioner is entitled for interest on the
arrears of salary as Ombudsman on appointment as per
Ext.P1 reckoned from the dates the said amounts became
due.”
2.    Heard the learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioner and
the learned Government Pleader appearing for the respondents.
3.    It is submitted by the learned senior counsel for the petitioner that
the petitioner was appointed as an Ombudsman under the Kerala
Panchayat Raj Act and Rules by Ext.P1 order dated 01.12.2017. He was
sworn in as Ombudsman on 22.12.2017 and discharged his duties as
such till 21.12.2020. The learned senior counsel for the petitioner
submits that Section 271 G of the Panchayat Raj Act provides for the
terms and conditions of service of the Ombudsman. The provision
“271 G. Term of office and conditions of Service of
(1) There shall be an authority for Local Self Government
Institutions, at State Level known as ‘Ombudsman’ for
making investigations and enquiries, in respect of charges
on any action involving corruption or maladministration or
irregularities in the discharge of administrative functions,
in accordance with the provisions of this Act by Local Self
Government Institutions and Public Servants working
under them and for the disposal of such complaint in
accordance with Section 271 Q.
(2) The Governor shall, on the advice of the Chief Minister,
appoint a person who has held the post of a Judge of the
High Court as Ombudsman.
(3) A person appointed to be the Ombudsman shall, before
he enter upon his office, make and subscribe before the
Governor or some person appointed in that behalf by him,
an oath or affirmation according to the form set out below:
“I,A.B. having been appointed as the Ombudsman for
Local Self Government Institutions under the Kerala
Panchayat Raj Act, 1994, do swear in the name of
God/Solemnly affirm that I will bear true faith and
allegiance to the Constitution of India and I will duly and
faithfully and to the best of my ability, knowledge and
judgement perform the duties of my office without fear or
favour, affection or ill-will”
(4) A person appointed as Ombudsman shall hold office for
a term of three years from the date on which he enters upon
his office: Provided that, - (a) the Ombudsman may, by
writing under this hand addressed to the Governor, resign
his office; and (b) the person appointed as Ombudsman
may be removed from his office in the manner provided in
(5) The person appointed as Ombudsman shall be entitled
for salary and allowances as are admissible to a Judge of
the High Court of Kerala.
(6) On expiry of his term of office as Ombudsman, he shall
not be eligible for reappointment as Ombudsman or for
further appointment to any office of profit under the
Government of Kerala or in any corporation, company,
society or university by or under the control of the
Government of Kerala.]”
It is contended that the petitioner, on his appointment as
Ombudsman, was entitled to salary and allowances as are admissible to
a judge of the High Court of Kerala. However, it is submitted that the
petitioner was paid only the salary of a High Court Judge after
deducting the pension being received by him. The petitioner submitted
Ext.P3 representation before the Accountant General for fixation of
salary as Ombudsman equivalent to the salary and allowances drawn by
a High Court Judge. This Court by Ext.P4 judgment directed the
consideration of Ext.P3 representation adverting to the Act and Rules.
However, though the direction was specifically to the Accountant
General, Kerala to consider the representation, Ext.P5 order dated
05.05.2021 was rendered by a Senior Accounts Officer relying on a
Government letter and fixing the salary deducting the pension drawn by
the petitioner. Ext.P6 is the letter referred to and relied on in Ext.P5. In
the said letter, which is signed by a Special Secretary for the Additional
Chief Secretary to Government addressed to the Deputy Accountant
General in the Office of the Accountant General, it is stated that the
petitioner is entitled to fixation of his salary by reducing the amount of
pension he has been receiving for his service as Judge in the High
Court of Kerala and Upalokayukta. No reason, whatsoever, is stated for
the said opinion expressed by the said officer.
4.    The learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioner would
contend that the provisions of Section 271 G as well as Rule 4 of the
Ombudsman for Local Self Government Institutions (Inquiry of
Complaints and Service Conditions) Rules, 1999 specifically provide
that the Ombudsman shall be entitled for salary and allowances
equivalent to that of a High Court Judge. It is submitted that there is
absolutely no provision, whatsoever, for making deductions of the
pension paid on account of earlier service rendered as a Judge of the
High Court from the amounts payable to the petitioner for service
rendered by him as Ombudsman. It is further contended that in case of
enactments where identical provisions were existing, Exts.P7 and P8
orders have been issued in respect of Chairperson and Judicial and
Administrative Members of the Kerala Real Estate Appellate Tribunal
stating that the payment should be made without making any deduction,
since the Act and the Rules did not provide for any deduction. The
learned senior counsel for the petitioner would also contend that since
there is no provision in the enactment or the rules for making any
deduction of the pension drawn by the petitioner as a Judge of the High
Court, there can be no such deduction on the strength of an erroneous
understanding by respondents 2 and 3.
5.    The learned senior counsel would also place reliance on a
decision of the Apex Court in V.S. Mallimath v. Union of India and
another [2001 (4) SCC 31] to contend that it is only in cases where the
Act or the Rules provides for deduction of the pension already drawn
being made from the salary payable that such reductions would be
possible.
6.    Detailed counter affidavits have been placed on record by the
respondents. In the counter affidavit filed on behalf of respondents 1
and 2, it is contended that since the petitioner is a retired Judge of the
High Court of Kerala and is drawing pension for his prior service, his
pay and allowances are to be fixed less the pension drawn as was done
in the case of other judges who are reemployed after retirement. It is
stated that earlier persons functioning as Ombudsman were also paid
the salary applicable to High Court Judges after deducting pension
alone. It is further contended that by letter dated 22.04.2020, the
Principal Secretary to Government, Local Self Government (IA)
Department clarified that as the petitioner is a retired High Court Judge,
he is eligible for pay and allowances as per Rule 100 Part III, KSR and
that his pay and allowances shall be fixed as stipulated therein. With
regard to the direction in Ext.P4 to the Accountant General to consider
the representation submitted by the petitioner, it is stated as follows:
“10. It is respectfully submitted that the second respondent,
being the Accounts Officer of the State of Kerala, is being
impleaded as one of the respondents in a large number of
cases filed by the employees/pensioners of the State
Government including educational institutions aided by the
State Government before the Hon’ble High Court, Hon’ble
Kerala Administrative Tribunal and in various judicial and
quasi-judicial fora. With a view to ensure timely
compliance of judgments/orders of the Hon’ble Courts, on
receipt of Judgments/Orders, etc. where there is a direction
to the Principal Accountant General (A&E), Kerala, this
office being the implementing authority, the functional
wing/section concerned in this office will examine the
matter and in cases where consultation with the State
Government/Department is required, final decision is taken
based on the communication received from the State
Government/Department concerned. In all such cases, the
decision taken by this office is communicated to the
petitioner/applicant. This was the circumstance that led to
the issuance of Exhibit P5 to the petitioner.
11. Regarding the contention of the petitioner that the first
respondent is incompetent to take final decision on Exhibit
P3, it is respectfully submitted that the circumstances that
led to the issuance of Exhibit P5 to the petitioner by the
first respondent has already been explained in para 10
ibid. It is also submitted that as already stated, the
Principal Accountant General (A&E) Kerala being only an
implementing authority of the Rules and orders issued by
the Government from time to time, could not deviate from
the orders of the Government while taking a final decision
on Exhibit P3.”
7.   A further counter affidavit has been filed by the 3 rd respondent
wherein it is contended that Section 271 G of the Panchayat Raj Act
and Rule 4 of the Ombudsman for Local Self Government Institutions
(Inquiry of Complaints and Service Conditions) Rules, 1999 provide
that the person appointed as Ombudsman shall be entitled for salary
and allowances as are admissible to a Judge of the High Court of
Kerala. It is stated that the said Act as well as Rules does not specify
the pay and allowances admissible to the Ombudsman, if the person
appointed is a retired Judge, who is in receipt of pension. Since the
petitioner is a retired judge of the High Court of Kerala and was
drawing pension, the Accountant General had authorized him pay and
allowances of High Court Judge less pension drawn. It is further
contended that “an employee cannot retire with a view to being
reemployed and drawing pension in addition to pay whether in the
service of the Government or of a Local Fund”. It is further contended
that in the case of reemployed Supreme Court/High Court Judges
appointed as Commissions/Committees of Enquiry, the Central
Government had issued Office Memoranda stating that the pay together
with pension and pension equivalent or other forms of retirement
benefits should be restricted to Rs.2,25,000/month in case of retired
High Court Judges and Rs.2,50,000/month in case of retired Chief
Justice of High Courts/Judges of Supreme Court. It is further contended
that it was clarified vide Ext.P6 that as per Section 271 G (5) of the
Kerala Panchayat Raj Act, 1994, Ombudsman shall be entitled for
salary and allowances as are admissible to a Judge of the High Court of
Kerala and petitioner’s pay as Ombudsman is to be reduced by the
amount of pension he has been receiving. It is submitted that,
accordingly, the office of the Accountant General fixed the pay of the
petitioner.
8.    The leaned Government Pleader also placed reliance on a decision
of the Apex Court in Accountant General, M.P. v. S.K. Dubey and
another [2012 (4) SCC 578] with regard to the pension payable to
President and Members of the Consumer Disputes Redressal
Commission as well as the judgment of the Apex Court in Justice
P.Venugopal v. Union of India [2003 (7) SCC 726].
9.    I had considered the contentions advanced. I notice that the
provisions of the Act and the Rules are quite clear in as much as the
provision specifically provides that a person appointed as Ombudsman
would be entitled to salary and allowances equivalent to that of a High
Court Judge. The Act or the Rules, admittedly, do not provide for any
deduction of pension. It is also not in dispute before me that in identical
situations, the pay of the Chairperson of the Kerala Real Estate
Appellate Tribunal who was appointed as such and assumed charge on
21.04.2020 has been fixed without making any deductions for the
pension drawn by him by Ext.P7 order dated 14.06.2020. The reason
for granting the pay and allowances without making any deductions is
explained in the additional affidavit by stating that the provisions of the
Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Act, 2016 and the Kerala
Real Estate (Regulation and Development) Rules, 2018 do not permit
any such deduction and that the monthly salary payable to the
Chairperson is the salary equivalent to the last drawn salary by such
person as a Judge of High Court.
10. In the instant case, I notice that the provisions of the Act and the
Rules do not permit any deduction of the pension drawn in the capacity
of a High Court Judge from the amount payable to the petitioner. The
contention that the petitioner is a reemployed pensioner who is, in any
manner, governed by the provisions of the Kerala Service Rules is a
completely erroneous assumption which I am surprised that officers
like respondents 2 and 3 are still laboring under. A High Court Judge
draws pension in terms of the specific provisions of the High Court
Judges (Salaries and Conditions of Service) Act, 1954 as amended from
time to time as well as the High Court Judges Rules, 1956. The pension
payable to a High Court Judge is deferred payment for his service as
such and unless there is a specific provision in the enactment or the
Rules which provides for the appointment of Ombudsman for
deducting the amount drawn by the appointee as pension for his service
as a High Court Judge, there can be no deduction on the basis of the
subjective satisfaction of the officers occupying the post of respondents
2 and 3 or any of their subordinate officers.
11. I notice that Ext.P4 judgment specifically directed the 2nd
respondent to consider the representation submitted by the petitioner.
However, it is clear from the pleadings on record and the documents
that there has been no such exercise by the 2 nd respondent to consider
and pass a speaking order on the petitioner’s claim. It is clear that
relying on Ext.P6, which is a communication issued by an officer in the
Department to the Deputy Accountant General, Ext.P5 exercise has
been done by the 1st respondent.
12. Article 166 of the Constitution of India reads as follows:
“166. Conduct of business of the Government of a State
(1) All executive action of the Government of a State shall
be expressed to be taken in the name of the Governor
(2) Orders and other instruments made and executed in the
name of the Governor shall be authenticated in such
manner as may be specified in rules to be made by the
Governor, and the validity of an order on instruction which
is so authenticated shall not be called in question on the
ground that it is not an order or instrument made or
executed by the Governor
(3) The Governor shall make rules for the more convenient
transaction of the business of the Government of the State,
and for the allocation among Ministers of the said business
in so far as it is not business with respect to which the
Governor is by or under this Constitution required to act in
his discretion.”
The exercise of the executive power of the State has to be in the
manner as provided under Article 166 and a subjective decision or an
opinion expressed by an officer in a letter in the nature of Ext.P6 to the
Deputy Accountant General, can, by no stretch of imagination, do duty
for an executive order passed by the State Government.
13. I notice that the issue raised has not been considered either by the
Government or by the Accountant General and, therefore, the
communications issued are vitiated by total want of application of
mind. In the result, I find that Exts.P5 and P6 orders are completely
unsustainable and are liable to be set aside. With regard to the specific
contention of the petitioner that he is entitled to payment of the salary
applicable to a High Court Judge at the relevant time, I am of the
opinion that the said contention is well founded especially in view of
Ext.P7 order passed by the Government itself in the case of a similarly
situated person where the provisions of law are also similarly worded.
In the above view of the matter, I am of the opinion that the contentions
raised by the respondents and the decisions relied on by them have
absolutely no application in the facts of the instant case where the Act
and the Rules specifically provide for payment of the salary of a High
Court Judge to a person appointed as Ombudsman.
In the result, this writ petition is ordered setting aside Exts.P5 and
P6 and directing the Government to pass an appropriate order granting
the benefit of pay and allowances of a High Court Judge to the
petitioner as has been done in Ext.P7. Appropriate orders shall be
passed within a period of one month from the date of receipt of a copy
of this judgment. Arrears thereof shall also be disbursed to the
petitioner, without delay, at any rate, within a period of three months
thereafter.
Exhibit R1 (a)          True copy of the Government letter