27.07.2022 passed by the High Court of Delhi at New Delhi in Letters Patent Appeal (LPA)
No. 442/2022, by which, the Division Bench of the High Court has dismissed the said LPA
and has confirmed the judgment and order passed by the learned Single Judge in Writ
Petition (C) No. 4129/2022, the original writ petitioner – original applicant has preferred
the present petition for Special Leave to Appeal.
2.      The facts leading to the present petition for Special Leave to Appeal in a nutshell
2.1     That the petitioner herein preferred an RTI application before the Central Public
Information Officer (CPIO), Supreme Court of India. The petitioner sought the following
(i)     Please provide a copy of the agenda of the meeting of the Collegium of the Supreme Court
held on December 12, 2018.
(ii)    Kindly provide a copy of the decisions taken on the meeting of the Collegium of the
Supreme Court held on December 12, 2018.
(iii)   Kindly provide a copy of the resolutions of the Collegium meeting held on December 12,
2.2     Vide communication dated 11.03.2019 the prayer of the petitioner came to be
turned down. That thereafter the petitioner preferred the first appeal before the First
Appellate Authority under the RTI Act, 2005 being Appeal No. 75/2019. The First Appellate
Authority rejected the said appeal by observing that as such there was no final decision(s)
taken in the Collegium meeting held on 12.12.2018 and there was no final decision which
culminated into the resolution and therefore, in absence of such resolution the information
need not be supplied. The appellant preferred second appeal which also came to be
dismissed. The learned Single Judge also dismissed Writ Petition No. 4129/2022 by
reiterating that in the Collegium meeting held on 12.12.2018 there was no final decision
taken and even as observed in the subsequent resolution meeting held on 10.01.2019, it
was so stated that the then Collegium on 12.12.2018 took certain decisions, however, the
required consultation could not be undertaken and completed. Therefore, the learned
Single Judge was of the opinion that as there was no formal resolution came to be drawn
up, there is no question of providing any decision taken in the meeting held on 12.12.2018.
The order passed by the learned Single Judge dismissing the writ petition has been
confirmed by the Division Bench of the High Court by the impugned judgment and order.
Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment and order, the petitioner
preferred the present petition.
3.     Shri Prashant Bhushan, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner has
vehemently submitted that in fact certain decisions were taken by the Collegium in the
meeting held on 12.12.2018 and therefore, the decisions which were taken, were required
to be uploaded in the public domain and the decisions which were taken by the Collegium
in the meeting held on 12.12.2018 were required to be informed and the particulars of
which are required to be given under the RTI Act.
3.1    Shri Prashant Bhushan, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner has
heavily relied upon one article published on the website of the Bar and Bench wherein it
was mentioned that one of the members of the Collegium stated that he was disappointed
that decision taken in the meeting on 12.12.2018 was not uploaded on Supreme Court’s
website. It is submitted that as per the information disclosed in the Press by one of the
members of the Collegium, who was part of the meeting dated 12.12.2018, it was
specifically stated that certain decisions were taken, however, in the subsequent meeting
of the Collegium on 10.01.2019 earlier decisions were changed. Shri Prashant Bhushan,
learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner has submitted that therefore, it may
not be accepted that no decision(s) was/were taken in the Collegium meeting held on
12.12.2018. It is submitted that everybody has a right to know the decision(s) taken by the
Collegium even as per the earlier Resolution of the Supreme Court dated 03.10.2017, by
which, it was resolved that the decision(s) taken by the Collegium shall be uploaded on
the Supreme Court’s website.
4.     We have heard Shri Prashant Bhushan, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
petitioner at length.
5.     At the outset, it is required to be noted that the petitioner asked for the information
on the decision(s) taken by the Collegium in its meeting held on 12.12.2018. Reliance is
placed upon the Resolution dated 03.10.2017, by which, it was resolved to upload the
decision/resolution of the Collegium on Supreme Court’s website. Relying upon some
article published in the media and the interview given by one of the members of the
Collegium who was part of the Collegium held on 12.12.2018, it is asserted by the
petitioner that in fact some decision(s) were taken by the Collegium on the elevation of
two Chief Justices of the High Courts to the Supreme Court. However, from the
subsequent Resolution passed by the Collegium on 10.01.2019, it appears that as such
no final decision was taken on the elevation to the Supreme Court. Some discussions
might have taken place. But unless and until, a final decision is taken after due
consultation and on the basis of such a final decision a final resolution is drawn, whatever
discussions had taken place cannot be said to be a final decision of the Collegium. The
actual resolution passed by the Collegium only can be said to be a final decision of the
Collegium and till then at the most, it can be said to be a tentative decision during the
consultation. It is to be noted that a final decision is taken by the Collegium only after due
consultation. During the consultation if some discussion takes place but no final decision
is taken and no resolution is drawn, it cannot be said that any final decision is taken by
the Collegium. Collegium is a multi-member body whose decision embodied in the
resolution that may be formally drawn up and signed. When in the subsequent Resolution
dated 10.01.2019, it is specifically mentioned that in the earlier meeting held on
12.12.2018 though some decisions were taken but ultimately the consultation was not
completed and concluded and therefore, the matter/agenda items was/were adjourned.
Therefore, as no final decision was taken which was culminated into a final resolution
drawn and signed by all the members of the Collegium, the same was not required to be
disclosed in the public domain and that too under the RTI Act. Whatever is discussed shall
not be in the public domain. As per the Resolution dated 03.10.2017 only the final
resolution and the final decision is required to be uploaded on the Supreme Court’s
5.1      Now so far as the reliance placed upon some of the news item/article published in
the media in which views of one of the members of the Collegium is noted, is concerned,
we do not want to comment upon the same. The subsequent Resolution dated 10.01.2019
is very clear in which it is specifically stated that in the earlier meeting held on 12.12.2018,
the process for consultation was not over and remained un-concluded. At the cost of
repetition, it is observed that after due deliberation and discussion and after completing
the consultative process, when a final decision is taken and thereafter, the resolution is
drawn and signed by the members of the Collegium can be said to be a final decision and
till then it remains the tentative decision. Only after the final resolution is drawn and signed
by the members of the Collegium, which is always after completing the due procedure and
the process of discussion/deliberations and consultation, the same required to be
published on the Supreme Court website as per Resolution dated 03.10.2017.
5.2      In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, no reliance can be placed
on the news report and/or some article in the media. What is required to be seen is the
final resolution which is ultimately drawn and signed by the members of the Collegium.
6.       In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, there is no substance in the
present Special Leave to Appeal and the same deserves to be dismissed and is
accordingly dismissed.