This writ petition is filed by the Kerala Public Service
Commission (for short, the 'KPSC') to declare that the State
Commissioner for Persons with Disabilities has no power or
authority to issue an order in the nature of Ext.P1 dated
05.08.2017 and further to declare that Ext.P1 order is issued
beyond the powers and jurisdiction vested with the first
respondent as per the Right of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016
(for short, the 'Act, 2016').
2.      Brief material facts for the disposal of the writ petition
The second respondent namely, one Anseer N.A.,
apparently        a     person differently-abled,   has    submitted    an
application seeking to have an examination center near the house
of differently-abled persons before the local MLA, who has
forwarded it to the State Government and the State Government
has delivered the same to the State Commissioner for Persons
with Disabilities. The State Commissioner as per Ext.P1 has
issued a direction to the KPSC that candidates with disabilities,
who are participating in the selection process of the KPSC shall
be provided with examination centres near their residences. It is
further specified in the order that the said order is issued by virtue
of the power conferred on the Commissioner as a civil court. It is
thus challenging the legality and correctness of Ext.P1, this writ
petition is filed.
3.     I have heard learned counsel for the petitioner
Sri P.C. Sasidharan, and learned Senior Government Pleader,
Sri Joby Joseph, and perused the pleadings and material on
record. Even though notice is served on the party respondent,
there is no appearance.
4.      Section 82 of the Act, 2016 deals with powers of State
Commissioner, which reads thus:-
“82. Powers of State Commissioner.—(1) The State Commissioner
shall, for the purpose of discharging their functions under this Act,
have the same powers of a Civil Court as are vested in a Court under
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) while trying a suit, in
respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a)   summoning and enforcing the attendance of
(b)   requiring the discovery and production of any
(c)   requisitioning any public record or copy thereof
(d)    receiving evidence on affidavits; and
(e)    issuing commissions for the examination of
witnesses or documents.
(2) Every proceeding before the State Commissioner shall be a
judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) and the State Commissioners shall be
deemed to be a Civil Court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter
XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).”
5.      Merely because a power is conferred on the State
Commissioner to follow the procedure contained under the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908 while trying a suit in respect to
summoning and enforcing the attendance of witnesses; requiring
production of documents and others, that does not mean that the
Commissioner is exercising the substantive powers under the Act,
2016, as if, it is a civil court.
6.      Section 80 of the Act, 2016 deals with the functions of
the State Commissioner, which reads as follows:-
“80. Functions of State Commissioner.—The State Commissioner
(a) identify, suo motu or otherwise, provision of
any law or policy, programme and procedures, which
are inconsistent with this Act, and recommend
necessary corrective steps;
(b) inquire, suo motu or otherwise deprivation of
rights of persons with disabilities and safeguards
available to them in respect of matters for which the
State Government is the appropriate Government and
take up the matter with appropriate authorities for
corrective action;
(c) review the safeguards provided by or under
this Act or any other law for the time being in force for
the protection of rights of persons with disabilities and
recommend         measures       for     their     effective
implementation;
(d) review the factors that inhibit the enjoyment of
rights of persons with disabilities and recommend
appropriate remedial measures;
(e) undertake and promote research in the field of
the rights of persons with disabilities;
(f) promote awareness of the rights of persons
with disabilities and the safeguards available for their
(g) monitor implementation of the provisions of
this Act and schemes, programmes meant for persons
with disabilities;
(h) monitor utilisation of funds disbursed by the
State Government for the benefits of persons with
disabilities; and
(i) perform such other functions as the State
Government may assign.”
7.      Therefore, on a reading of Section 80 of the Act, 2016
it is clear that the powers of the Commissioner are confined to
what is conferred under Section 80. Section 81 of the Act, 2016
further makes it clear that whenever the State Commissioner
makes a recommendation to an authority in pursuance of Clause
(b) of Section 80 of the Act, 2016, that authority shall take
necessary action on it, and inform the State Commissioner of the
action taken within three months from the date of receipt of the
recommendation. The case put forth by the KPSC is that no notice
was issued to the KPSC. When the representation submitted by
the second respondent was forwarded by the State Government to
the Commissioner, the Commissioner has unilaterally passed the
order and issued the directions. On a perusal of Section 80, it is
clear that the Commissioner under the Act, 2016 is not vested
with any such powers. If the Commissioner wanted to consider
the grievances highlighted in the representation submitted by the
second respondent, it ought to have made a recommendation to
the KPSC as empowered under Section 80 of the Act, 2016.
Therefore, it is clear that the Commissioner has over reached the
powers conferred on it under the Act, 2016.
8.      The deliberation of the facts, law and circumstances
made above would make it clear that Ext.P1 order passed by the
Commissioner is without any jurisdiction and power conferred on
the Act, 2016. The Commissioner, in my view, is not a civil
court, even though powers are conferred on the Commissioner to
exercise the powers conferred on the civil court for summoning
and enforcing the attendance of witnesses etc., and for other
consequential aspects, in accordance with Section 82 of the Act,
2016. In that view of the matter, I am of the considered opinion
that Ext.P1 order suffers from vice of arbitrariness and illegality,
liable to be interfered with under Article 226 of the Constitution
Accordingly, I quash Ext.P1. However, I make it clear that
this will not stand in the way of the Commissioner for making any
suitable recommendation to the KPSC, or the Government in
order to protect the interest of persons with disabilities in the
matter of their appearance in the selection process conducted by