Counsel for Applicant :- Niraj Kumar Dwivedi,Adya Prasad
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.,Rajesh Kumar Roy
1. Heard Mr. Adya Prasad Tewari and Mr. R.K. Dubey, learned
counsel for the applicants, Mr. R.K.R. Sharma, learned counsel
for the Informant and Mr. Amit Singh Chauhan, learned AGA
for the State.
2. The present application has been moved seeking anticipatory
bail in Case Crime No. 102 of 2022, under Section 306 IPC,
P.S.Kydganj, District-Prayagraj with the prayer that in the
event of arrest, applicant may be released on bail.
3. As per the first information report lodged by the uncle of the
deceased, namely, Vinod Kumar Dwivedi (informant) on
16.06.2022 at about 12:29 hrs, marriage of nephew of the
informant, namely, Akash Kumar Dwivedi was solemnized with
applicant no.3, namely, Arti Dwivedi on 27.02.2020, according
to Hindu Rituals and Rites. After the marriage, the accused
persons, namely, Anand Shankar Pandey (father-in-law), Smt.
Pushpa Pandey (mother-in-law), Sweta Pandey (elder daughter)
and Dhananjay Pandey (son-in-law) and Dablu Pandey s/o Girja
Shankar Pandey, Pappu Mishra s/o Uma Shankar have
physically, mentally and economically tortured the informant's
nephew and abetted him to commit suicide, due to which, the
deceased committed suicide on 16.06.2022 by jumping from the
4. Learned counsel for the applicants submits that the applicants
are innocent and they have an apprehension that they may be
arrested in the above-mentioned case, whereas there is no
credible evidence against them. He further submits that the
applicant nos. 1 to 3 are the father-in-law, mother-in-law and
wife of the deceased respectively and they have been falsely
implicated in the present case due to ulterior motive. The real
fact is that the marriage of applicant no.3 was solemnized with
informant's nephew on 27.07.2020, after marriage, the deceased
and his family members demanded dowry from the applicants
and on non-fulfilment of the aforesaid demand, the applicant
alongwith his family members committed maarpeet with the
applicant no.3. However, the applicant no.3 did not take any
legal action and always compromised with the deceased and his
family members as she wanted to live happily with them. Out of
the wedlock, she was blessed with a child, who is about eight
months old at the time of incident. On 12.06.2022, the deceased
alongwith his family members committed maarpeet with the
applicant no.3 and forced her to leave the house. Thereafter, the
applicant no.3 after informing her father (applicant no.1) went
to her parents' house and lodged a complaint against the
deceased and his family members on 13.06.2022. On such
complaint being lodged, the S.H.O. concerned called the
deceased and his family members, but they did not turn up.
5. Learned counsel for the applicant further submits that earlier,
the other co-accused persons had approached before this Court
by means of filing Cri. Misc. Writ Petition No.8296 of 2022
(Shweta Pandey and 3 others vs. State of U.P. and 3 Ors.)
wherein vide order dated 30.06.2022, protection was given to
the applicant till submission of police report under Section
173(2) Cr.P.C. Thereafter, the applicants had filed another Cri.
Misc. Writ Petition No.9291 of 2022 (Anand Shankar Pandey
and 2 others vs. State of U.P. and 3others) and prayed for a
similar relief as granted to the other co-accused persons. The
aforesaid writ petition was dismissed by the Co-ordinate Bench
of this Court vide order dated 20.07.2022 leaving it open for the
petitioners therein to apply before the competent court for
anticipatory bail/bail as permissible under law and in
accordance with law. He further submits that the applicants
have no previous criminal history and have not been summoned
or convicted in any case. The applicant nos.1&2 are old and
infirm persons aged about 60 years. The applicants have never
abetted the deceased to commit suicide. He further submits that
there is no credible evidence against the applicants to show that
there is abetment from the side of the applicants instigating the
deceased to commit suicide. On the basis of some suicide note,
the applicants are being held guilty for the act of deceased to
commit suicide, whereas there is no whisper about any such
suicide note in the FIR, as to who provided the suicide note.
Also, there is no mention about the suicide note in the case
6. Learned counsel for the applicant further submits that there is
nothing on record to show that the applicants have abetted or
instigated the deceased to commit suicide, therefore, no offence
under the relevant section is made out. In support of his
contention, he has relied upon the judgements of the Apex
Court in the cases of Umang Singhar vs. State of Madhya
Pradesh and another reported in 2022 LawSuit(MP) 3,
Mariano Anto Bruno and another vs. The Inspector of Police
reported in 2022 0 Supreme(SC) 1034, Sunilkumar
Rajeshwarprasad Sinha vs. State of Gujarat reported in 2022
LawSuit(Guj) 1774 and Daxaben vs. State of Gujarat and
others reported in 2022 0 Supreme(SC) 633. He further submits
that applicants undertake to co-operate during investigation and
trial and they would appear as and when required by the
investigating agency or Court. It has been stated that in case,
the applicants are granted anticipatory bail, they shall not
misuse the liberty of bail and will co-operate during
investigation and would obey all conditions of bail.
7. Per contra, learned AGA as well as learned counsel for the
informant opposed the prayer for granted anticipatory bail to
the applicants by contending that the applicants are named
accused persons. The investigation is going on and the
applicants are not co-operating in it. They further submit that
the real fact is that the money was taken from the deceased by
the applicant promising him to provide him Government Job,
however, when did not provide any job, he demanded back his
money from the applicant no.1 and he was threatened for being
killed in case he demands money in future. After sometime, the
deceased Akash was called by the applicants to their house and
was offered sweets which contained some poisonous
substances, due to which the deceased was admitted in Saket
Hospital on 20.07.2021 in I.C.U. After being discharged from
the Hospital, the deceased moved an application before the
Senior Superintendent of Police, Prayagraj on 22.07.2021 but
nothing was done, therefore, an application under Section
156(3) Cr.P.C. was filed by the deceased on 05.08.2021, copy of
the said application has been annexed as Annexure no.S.C.A.-2
to the counter affidavit filed in support of bail application.
Subsequently, after recording the statements under Sections 200
and 202 Cr.P.C., the aforesaid application U/s 156(3) Cr.P.C.
has been treated as complaint case.
8. Learned A.G.A. as well as learned counsel for the informant
further submits that the Investigating Officer has checked the
call details of the deceased Akash, collected the suicide note,
recorded the statements of the independent witness, which go to
show the involvement of the applicants in the present case.
They further submit that from the suicide note, it is clear that
the applicant no.1 &2 have been held responsible for harassing
the deceased to such an extent that they did not permit the
deceased to meet his child, which amounts to abetment. They
further submit that the necessary ingredients of the offence are
made out by the suicide note. The case does not fall under the
category of section 438 Cr.P.C. They further submit that as per
the report of S.S.P., Prayagraj, the court below has issued Non-
bailable Warrants and intiated the proceedings under Section 82
Cr.P.C. against the applicants, which goes to show that the
applicants are not co-operating in the investigation. Therefore,
the relief as prayed cannot be granted.
9. Considering the submissions made by learned counsel for the
parties and perused the record, this Court finds that from the
allegations made in the FIR, prima facie offence is made out
against the applicant. Having regard to nature of allegations and
stage of investigation, held, investigating agency must be given
sufficient freedom in process of investigation.
10. Object of section 438 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, is
that a person should not be unnecessarily harassed or
humiliated in order to satisfy personal vendetta or grudge of
complainant or any other person operating the things directly or
from behind the curtains. It is well settled that discretionary
power conferred by the legislature on this court can-not be put
in a straitjacket formula, but such discretionary power either
grant or refusal of anticipatory bail has to be exercised carefully
in appropriate cases with circumspection on the basis of the
available material after evaluating the facts of the particular
case and considering other relevant factors (nature and gravity
of accusation, role attributed to accused, conduct of accused,
criminal antecedents, possibility of the applicant to flee from
Justice , apprehension of tampering of the witnesses or threat to
the complainant, impact of grant of anticipatory bail in
investigation, trial or society, etc.) with meticulous precision
maintaining balance between the conflicting interest, namely,
sanctity of individual liberty and interest of society.
11. Grant of anticipatory bail may hamper the custodial
interrogation and will lead to nondisclosure of useful
information and material facts and information. In the case of P.
Chidambaram vs. Directorate of Enforcement, reported in
(2019) 9 SCC 24, the Apex Court held as under:-
"74. Ordinarily, arrest is a part of the process of the investigation
intended to secure several purposes. There may be circumstances in
which the accused may provide information leading to discovery of
material facts and relevant information. Grant of anticipatory bail may
hamper the investigation. Pre-arrest bail is to strike a balance between
the individual's right to personal freedom and the right of the
investigating agency to interrogate the accused as to the material so far
collected and to collect more information which may lead to recovery of
relevant information. In State Rep. By The CBI v. Anil Sharma (1997) 7
SCC 187, the Supreme Court held as under:-
"6. We find force in the submission of the CBI that custodial interrogation
is qualitatively more elicitation-oriented than questioning a suspect who is
well ensconced with a favourable order under Section 438 of the Code. In
a case like this effective interrogation of a suspected person is of
tremendous advantage in disinterring many useful informations and also
materials which would have been concealed. Success in such
interrogation would elude if the suspected person knows that he is well
protected and insulated by a pre-arrest bail order during the time he is
interrogated. Very often interrogation in such a condition would reduce to
a mere ritual. The argument that the custodial interrogation is fraught
with the danger of the person being subjected to third-degree methods
need not be countenanced, for, such an argument can be advanced by all
accused in all criminal cases. The Court has to presume that responsible
police officers would conduct themselves in a responsible manner and that
those entrusted with the task of disinterring offences would not conduct
themselves as offenders."
81. Grant of anticipatory bail at the stage of investigation may frustrate
the investigating agency in interrogating the accused and in collecting
the useful information and also the materials which might have been
concealed. Success in such interrogation would elude if the accused
knows that he is protected by the order of the court. ........."
12. In another judgment of Apex Court in case of Sadhna
Chaudhary Vs. State of Rajasthan & Anr., reported in 2022
(237) AIC 205 (SC), the Apex Court had held as under:-
"14. Law on the applicability or grant of anticipatory bail under section
438 Cr.P.C. may be briefly summarised as under:
14.1. In Shri Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia and Others v. State of Punjab1, a
Constitution Bench of this Court, Chief Justice Y.V. Chandrachud,
speaking for the Court dealt with in detail on the considerations for grant
of anticipatory bail.
14.2. In Siddharam Satlingappa Mhetre vs. State of Maharashtra and
Others2; this Court relying upon the Constitution Bench judgment in Shri
Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia laid down in paragraph 112 of the report the
following factors and parameters to be considered while dealing with an
application for anticipatory bail:
"(i) The nature and gravity of the accusation and the exact role of the
accused must be properly comprehended before arrest is made;
(ii) The antecedents of the applicant including the fact as to whether the
accused has previously undergone imprisonment on conviction by a court
in respect of any cognizable offence;
(iii) The possibility of the applicant to flee from justice;
(iv) The possibility of the accused's likelihood to repeat similar or other
(v) Where the accusations have been made only with the object of injuring
or humiliating the applicant by arresting him or her;
(vi) Impact of grant of anticipatory bail particularly in cases of large
magnitude affecting a very large number of people;
(vii) The courts must evaluate the entire available material against the
accused very carefully. The court must also clearly comprehend the exact
role of the accused in the case. The cases in which the accused is
implicated with the help of Sections 34 and 149 of the Penal Code, 1860
the court should consider with even greater care and caution because
overimplication in the cases is a matter of common knowledge and
(viii) While considering the prayer for grant of anticipatory bail, a
balance has to be struck between two factors, namely, no prejudice should
be caused to the free, fair and full investigation and there should be
prevention of harassment, humiliation and unjustified detention of the
(ix) The court to consider reasonable apprehension of tampering of the
witnesses or apprehension of threat to the complainant;
(x) Frivolity in prosecution should always be considered and it is only the
element of genuineness that shall have to be considered in the matter of
grant of bail and in the event of there being some doubt as to the
genuineness of the prosecution, in the normal course of events, the
accused is entitled to an order of bail."
14.3. In yet another recent Constitution Bench judgment in the case of
Sushila Aggarwal and Others vs. State (NCT of Delhi) and Another3, in
paragraph 85 of the report Justice Ravindra Bhatt laid down the guiding
principles in dealing with applications under Section 438. Justice M.R.
Shah had authored a separate opinion. Justice Arun Misra, Justice Indira
Banerjee and Justice Vineet Saran agreed with both the opinions. The
concluding guiding factors stated in paragraphs 92, 92.1 to 92.9 are
"92. This Court, in the light of the above discussion in the two judgments,
and in the light of the answers to the reference, hereby clarifies that the
following need to be kept in mind by courts, dealing with applications
92.1. Consistent with the judgment in Shri Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia and
others v. State of Punjab4, when a person complains of apprehension of
arrest and approaches for order, the application should be based on
concrete facts (and not vague or general allegations) relatable to one or
other specific offence. The application seeking anticipatory bail should
contain bare essential facts relating to the offence, and why the applicant
reasonably apprehends arrest, as well as his side of the story. These are
essential for the court which should consider his application, to evaluate
the threat or apprehension, its gravity or seriousness and the
appropriateness of any condition that may have to be imposed. It is not
essential that an application should be moved only after an FIR is filed; it
can be moved earlier, so long as the facts are clear and there is
reasonable basis for apprehending arrest.
92.2. It may be advisable for the court, which is approached with an
application under Section 438, depending on the seriousness of the threat
(of arrest) to issue notice to the public prosecutor and obtain facts, even
while granting limited interim anticipatory bail.
92.3. Nothing in Section 438 Cr. PC, compels or obliges courts to impose
conditions limiting relief in terms of time, or upon filing of FIR, or
recording of statement of any witness, by the police, during investigation
or inquiry, etc. While considering an application (for grant of anticipatory
bail) the court has to consider the nature of the offence, the role of the
person, the likelihood of his influencing the course of investigation, or
tampering with evidence (including intimidating witnesses), likelihood of
fleeing justice (such as leaving the country), etc.
The courts would be justified - and ought to impose conditions spelt out in
Section 437 (3), Cr.P.C. [by virtue of Section 438 (2)]. The need to impose
other restrictive conditions, would have to be judged on a casebycase
basis, and depending upon the materials produced by the state or the
investigating agency. Such special or other restrictive conditions may be
imposed if the case or cases warrant, but should not be imposed in a
routine manner, in all cases. Likewise, conditions which limit the grant of
anticipatory bail may be granted, if they are required in the facts of any
case or cases; however, such limiting conditions may not be invariably
92.4. Courts ought to be generally guided by considerations such as the
nature and gravity of the offences, the role attributed to the applicant, and
the facts of the case, while considering whether to grant anticipatory bail,
or refuse it. Whether to grant or not is a matter of discretion; equally
whether and if so, what kind of special conditions are to be imposed (or
not imposed) are dependent on facts of the case, and subject to the
discretion of the court.
92.5. Anticipatory bail granted can, depending on the conduct and
behaviour of the accused, continue after filing of the chargesheet till end
of trial.
92.6. An order of anticipatory bail should not be "blanket" in the sense
that it should not enable the accused to commit further offences and claim
relief of indefinite protection from arrest. It should be confined to the
offence or incident, for which apprehension of arrest is sought, in relation
to a specific incident. It cannot operate in respect of a future incident that
involves commission of an offence.
92.7. An order of anticipatory bail does not in any manner limit or restrict
the rights or duties of the police or investigating agency, to investigate
into the charges against the person who seeks and is granted prearrest
92.8. The observations in Sibbia regarding "limited custody" or "deemed
custody" to facilitate the requirements of the investigative authority, would
be sufficient for the purpose of fulfilling the provisions of Section 27, in
the event of recovery of an article, or discovery of a fact, which is
relatable to a statement made during such event (i.e deemed custody). In
such event, there is no question (or necessity) of asking the accused to
separately surrender and seek regular bail. Sibbia (supra) had observed
that "if and when the occasion arises, it may be possible for the
prosecution to claim the benefit of Section 27 of the Evidence Act in
regard to a discovery of facts made in pursuance of information supplied
by a person released on bail by invoking the principle stated by this Court
in State of U.P. v Deoman Upadhyaya."
92.9. It is open to the police or the investigating agency to move the court
concerned, which grants anticipatory bail, for a direction under Section
439 (2) to arrest the accused, in the event of violation of any term, such as
absconding, non cooperating during investigation, evasion, intimidation
or inducement to witnesses with a view to influence outcome of the
investigation or trial, etc."
13. From these materials and information, it is clear that the
present applicants were not available for interrogation and
investigation and the proceedings under Section 82 Cr.P.C. have
been initiated against them and non-bailable warrants issued
against them, therefore, a person against whom a warrant has
been issued and, is absconding or concealing himself in order to
avoid execution of warrants and proceedings under Section 82
of the Code have been initiated against him, is not entitled to
the relief of anticipatory bail. The aforesaid has been held by
the Apex Court in the case of Prem Shankar Prasad vs. The
State of Bihar and another reported in AIR (2021) SC 5125.
Relevant paragraph no.16 of the afroresaid judgment is as
"16. Recently, in Lavesh v. State (NCT of Delhi) [(2012) 8 SCC 730] ,
this Court (of which both of us were parties) considered the scope of
granting relief under Section 438 vis-à-vis a person who was declared as
an absconder or proclaimed offender in terms of Section 82 of the Code.
In para 12, this Court held as under : (SCC p. 733) "12. From these
materials and information, it is clear that the present appellant was not
available for interrogation and investigation and was declared as
'absconder'. Normally, when the accused is 'absconding' and declared as a
'proclaimed offender', there is no question of granting anticipatory bail.
We reiterate that when a person against whom a warrant had been issued
and is absconding or concealing himself in order to avoid execution of
warrant and declared as a proclaimed offender in terms of Section 82 of
the Code he is not entitled to the relief of anticipatory bail."
It is clear from the above decision that if anyone is declared as an
absconder/proclaimed offender in terms of Section 82 of the Code, he is
not entitled to the relief of anticipatory bail."
Thus the High court has committed an error in granting anticipatory bail
to respondent No.2 – accused ignoring the proceedings under Section 82-
83 of Cr.PC."
14. In the light of above, looking to the facts and circumstances
of this case, submissions of learned counsel for the parties,
taking into consideration the role assigned to the applicant as
per prosecution case, gravity and nature of accusation as well as
reasons mentioned above, this court is of the view that no case
for exercising its discretionary power under section 438 Code
of Criminal Procedure is made out in favour of applicant.
15. Accordingly this application under section 438 Cr.P.C. is
rejected.
16. It is clarified that observations made in this order at this
stage is limited for the purpose of determination of this
anticipatory bail application and will in no way be construed as
an expression on the merits of the case. The investigating
officer of this case shall be absolutely free to arrive at its
independent conclusions according to law on the basis of
materials / evidences on record.