1. The short issue that arises for consideration in the instant writ petition
is whether show cause notice issued to the petitioner seeking explanation
as to why it should not be black listed and debarred from entering into
contracts for next two years is a valid notice or not.
2. The petitioner-Company was given contract of “Door to Door Meter
Reading, Bill Generation and Serving through SBM/Mobile App/Other
Suitable Means with Downloading” by the respondent-Corporation on
23.7.2018 for a period of three years. Subsequently it was extended for
two months more.       On 6.06.2020, the petitioner was issued a notice
threatening to blacklist it on account of alleged irregularities on its part. It
was replied by the petitioner on 19.6.2020 and according to the case of the
petitioner, the notice was dropped, as no action was taken in pursuance
thereof. After about a year and a half, another notice dated 13.8.2021 was
issued with the same/similar allegations. It was replied by the petitioner
company on 23.8.2021 but thereafter no further action was taken. Yet
another notice dated 18.8.2021 with the same allegations was issued,
again threatening the petitioner to blacklist it. It was replied to by the
petitioner company on 30.10.2021. The respondent-Corporation after
considering the explanation arrived at a definite finding that the
explanation offered is unsatisfactory and the alleged irregularities and
breaches committed by the Company has resulted in tarnishing the image
of the respondent-Corporation. Accordingly, the petitioner company has
been called upon to show cause as to why it should not be black
listed/debarred for a period of two years.
"It is urged by Sri Prashant Chandra, learned Senior Advocate, assisted
by Sri Kartikeya Dubey and Sri Ujjawal Satsangi, that the impugned
show cause notice is illegal as it has been issued with premeditation to
debar and blacklist the petitioner-firm for a period of two years,
inasmuch as, the respondents have already disclosed their mind by
recording finding to the effect that the explanation submitted by the
petitioner-firm in response to earlier notice, has not been found to be
satisfactory. In support of the said contention, learned counsel for the
petitioner has placed reliance upon the judgment of Supreme Court in
Siemens Ltd. vs. State of Maharashtra and Others, 2006 (13) SCALE
297 and ORYX Fisheries Private Ltd. vs. Union of India and Others,
Sri Udit Chandra, learned counsel for the respondent corporation, seeks
time to obtain instructions by tomorrow.
4. Sri Udit Chandra, learned counsel for the respondent-Corporation, after
seeking instructions, states that he does not wish to file any counter
affidavit. He submitted that the notice is strictly valid inasmuch as the
respondent-Corporation has only examined the explanation offered by the
petitioner-Company and having found the same to be unsatisfactory,
issued fresh notice for black listing the petitioner firm.
5. In Siemens Ltd. vs. State of Maharashtra and Others, 2006 (13)
SCALE 297 a challenge was made to a show cause notice on the ground
that if it has been issued with pre-meditation then issuing notice and
seeking explanation would not serve any purpose as the person issuing
notice had already made up its mind. The contention was upheld. The
relevant observations made in this behalf in Paragraphs No. 8, 9 and 10
"8. Although ordinarily a writ court may not exercise its discretionary
jurisdiction in entertaining a writ petition questioning a notice to show
cause unless the same inter alia appears to have been without jurisdiction
as has been held by this Court in some decisions including State of Uttar
Pradesh v. Brahm Datt Sharma and Anr. MANU/SC/0711/1987: [1987]
2SCR444, Special Director and Anr. v. Mohd. Ghulam Ghouse and Anr,
MANU/SC/0025/2004: 2004(164) ELT141 (SC) and Union of India and
another      v.     Kunisetty      Satyanarayana     MANU/SC/5137/2006:
AIR2007SC906 but the question herein has to be considered from a
different angle, viz, when a notice is issued with pre-meditation, a writ
petition would be maintainable. In such an event, even if the courts
directs the statutory authority to hear the matter afresh, ordinarily such
hearing would not yield any fruitful purpose [See K.I. Shephard and Ors.
v. Union of India and Ors. MANU/SC/0643/1987: (1988) ILLJ162SC ].
It is evident in the instant case that the respondent has clearly made up its
mind. It explicitly said so both in the counter affidavit as also in its
purported show cause.
9. The said principle has been followed by this Court in V.C. Banaras
Hindu University and Ors. v. Shrikant MANU/SC/8170/2006:
AIR2006SC2304, stating:
The Vice Chancellor appears to have made up his mind to impose the
punishment of dismissal on the Respondent herein. A post decisional
hearing given by the High Court was illusory in this case.
In K.I. Shephard and Ors. etc. etc. v. Union of India and Ors, MANU/SC/
0643/1987 (1988): ILLJ162SC, this Court held:
...It is common experience that once a decision has been taken, there is
tendency to uphold it and a representation may not really yield any
fruitful purpose.
[See also Shri Shekhar Ghosh v. Union of India and Anr.
MANU/SC/8616/2006 : (2007)1SCC331 and Rajesh Kumar and Ors. v.
D.C.I.T. and Ors. MANU/SC/4779/2006 : ]2871TR91(SC) ]
10. A bare perusal of the order impugned before the High Court as also
the statements made before us in the counter affidavit filed by the
respondents, we are satisfied that the statutory authority has already
applied its mind and has formed an opinion as regards the liability or
otherwise of the appellant. If in passing the order the respondent has
already determined the liability of the appellant and the only question
which remains for its consideration is quantification thereof, the same
does not remain in the realm of a show cause notice. The writ petition, in
our opinion, was maintainable."
6. Again in ORYX Fisheries Private Ltd. vs. Union of India and
Others, 2010 (13) SCC 427, the Supreme Court held as follows:
"28. It is no doubt true that at the stage of show cause, the person
proceeded against must be told the charges against him so that he can
take his defence and prove his innocence. It is obvious that at that stage
the authority issuing the charge- sheet, cannot, instead of telling him the
charges, confront him with definite conclusions of his alleged guilt. If
that is done, as has been done in this instant case, the entire proceeding
initiated by the show cause notice gets vitiated by unfairness and bias and
the subsequent proceeding become an idle ceremony."
"32. Therefore, while issuing a show-cause notice, the authorities must
take care to manifestly keep an open mind as they are to act fairly in
adjudging the guilt or otherwise of the person proceeded against and
specially when he has the power to take a punitive step against the person
after giving him a show cause notice."
7. In the case at hand, the situation is similar as the respondent-
Corporation in the impugned show cause notice has already expressed its
mind that the explanation offered is unsatisfactory and the petitioner-
Company is guilty of the charges levelled against it.
8. In the above backdrop, even if the petitioner offers its explanation, it
would be an empty formality and a futile exercise. Fairness demanded that
the respondent should have taken care to keep their mind open to the
issues while seeking the explanation. The respondent-Corporation having
already held that the explanation is not worthy of acceptance, it could not
be treated to be a show cause notice but a decision already taken. We
accordingly quash the impugned notice leaving it open to the respondent-
Corporation to issue fresh notice in accordance with law, if so advised.
9. The petition stands allowed to the extent indicated above.