1.          An appeal having come to be filed U/S.374(2)
of Cr.P.C. by the appellants assailing their conviction for
offence U/Ss.7 and 8 of Essential Commodities Act, 1955
(in short the E.C. Act) respectively and sentence to
undergo Rigorous Imprisonment each for a period of six
CRA No.297 of 1994                                   Page 1 of 9
months as passed/recorded on 18.08.1994 by the learned
Special Judge, Special Court, Mayurbhanj at Baripada in
G.R. Case No.243 of 1992.
2.          In the course of hearing of the appeal, Mr. S.D.
Das, learned Senior Counsel submits that the appellants
does not intend to challenge their conviction, but they
carves for sympathetic consideration for their sentence
and accordingly, learned Senior Counsel urges to modify
the sentence of the convict-appellants by releasing them
under beneficial provision of Probation of Offenders Act,
1958 (in short, “P.O. Act”) instead of sentencing them at
once. Learned counsel for the State does not oppose such
prayer of the appellants.
3.          In view of the specific submission made by the
learned Senior Counsel for the appellants, this Court
clarifies it not to recapitulate the facts of the case in
extenso, but limits itself to state the necessary facts for
disposal of this appeal as, the convict-Hrusikesh Sahoo
CRA No.297 of 1994                                    Page 2 of 9
being the owner of the rice stock was transporting 77
bags of rice each weighing one quintal in the Truck driven
by other convict-Bhagaban Patra and, accordingly, the
learned    trial   Court found   them  for  the   facts      of
transporting such quantity of rice violating the Clause-3
of the Orissa Rice and Paddy Control Order, 1965 and,
accordingly, convicted and sentenced the appellants as
indicated above.
4.          Law is fairly well settled for sentencing the
convict for an offence not punishable with imprisonment
for life or death by extending the beneficial provision of
P.O. Act. In this regard, this Court considers it profitable
to refer to the following decisions.
5.          In Harivallabha and another Vrs. State of
M.P.; (2005) 10 SCC 330, upon noticing the conviction
of the appellant for Sec.7 of the E.C. Act and High Court
reducing the sentence of imprisonment to three months,
the Apex Court in Paragraph 3 has held that:-
CRA No.297 of 1994                               Page 3 of 9
“A Court can refuse to release a person on
probation of good conduct U/S.360 of the
Cr.P.C., but in the facts and circumstances of
the case, the appellants should have been
dealt with under the provisions of Sec.360 of
the Cr.P.C.”
5.1         In Som Dutt and others Vrs. State of
Himachal Pradesh; (2022) 6 SCC 722, the Apex Court
in Paragraph-6 has held as under:-
“Having regard to sentence imposed by the
Courts below on the appellants for the
offence U/S.379 r/w Section-34 of IPC, and
having regard to the fact that there are no
criminal antecedents against the appellants,
the Court is inclined to give them the benefit
of releasing them on probation of good
conduct.”
5.2         In Lakhvir Singh Vrs. State of Punjab;
(2021) 2 SCC 763, while extending the benefit of Sec.
4 of P.O. Act to the convict, the Apex Court has held the
following in Para-6:-
“We may notice that the Statement of
Objects and Reasons of the said Act explains
the rationale for the enactment and its
amendments: to give the benefit of release
of offenders on probation of good conduct
instead of sentencing them to imprisonment.
Thus,     increasing    emphasis     on    the
reformation and rehabilitation of offenders as
CRA No.297 of 1994                                        Page 4 of 9
useful and self-reliant members of society
without subjecting them to the deleterious
effects of jail life is what is sought to be
subserved.”
5.3         In Vipul Vrs. State of Uttar Pradesh;
(2022) SCC Online SC 1686, the Apex Court at
Paragraph-30 has held as under:-
“Section 360 pertains to an order after
conviction, to be passed by the Court after
admonition, facilitating a release and also
probation of good conduct. It is to be
exercised on two categories of persons. The
first category consists of persons attaining
21 years and above with the proposed
punishment for a term of 7 years or less.
While the other for a larger term except
punishable with death or imprisonment for
life. This is made applicable to a convict
aged under 21 years or any woman. The
Court has to weigh the age, character and
antecedent of       the convict    with the
circumstances leading to the offence
committed. If satisfied, it can release the
convict entering into a bond while a direction
to keep the peace and maintain good
behavior can be ordered during the said
period. As discussed, this provision can be
pressed into service while dealing with
chapter-XXIA other than convicting a person
after trial. Like the other two provisions
involving plea bargaining and compounding,
Sec. 360 of the Code is also a forgotten
one.”
Online Ori 144, while extending the benefit of Sec. 360
of the Cr.P.C. to the convict-petitioner after confirming
her conviction in a case where she was sentenced to
undergo RI for six months with payment of fine of
Rs.1,000/- (Rupees One Thousand) in default whereof to
undergo further RI for one month for offence U/S.7(1)(a)
of the E.C. Act, this Court has held in Paragraph-8 as
“There is no doubt that the provisions of the
Essential   Commodities Act in certain
circumstances prescribed imposition of a
minimum sentence and it is undoubtedly a
special statute, but neither of those two
conditions totally bars the discretion of the
Court to grant probation to the convict either
under the criminal procedure code or even
under the relevant Sections of the Probation
of Offenders Act.”
6.          In scrutinizing the facts of the case in the
backgrounds of the scope and object of P.O. Act and
authoritative pronouncements made in the cases referred
to above, it appears that the learned trial Court had
CRA No.297 of 1994                                        Page 6 of 9
stated in the impugned judgment that appellants are
convicted in this case for commission of offence U/Ss.7
and 8 of E.C. Act without specifying the particular clause
of the penalties prescribed in the aforesaid Sections of
the E.C. Act, but taking into consideration the guilt of the
convicts for contravention of Orissa Rice and Paddy
Control Order, 1965 which is punishable U/Ss.7(1)(a)(ii)
of E.C. Act which prescribes with minimum punishment of
three months, but which may extend to seven years and
fine and, therefore, the benefit of Sec.3 of P.O. Act
cannot be extended to the convicts-appellants. However,
the convicts are first time offenders and no previous
conviction of the appellants has been proved against
them and more than 29 years have elapsed in the
meantime after conviction of the appellants and the
convicts were aged about 34 and 39 years as on the date
of their conviction and now they would be more than 63
and   68     years. This  Court,  therefore,  considers      it
CRA No.297 of 1994                               Page 7 of 9
unnecessary to send the convicts-appellants to jail
custody to suffer their sentence at this point of time. The
State, however, has not come up with any convincing
materials to show that the convicts are incorrigible and
cannot be reformed and as has already been discussed
that the object of punishment is also reformative. Hence,
in the above circumstances, this Court considers it proper
to give the benefit of Sec.4 of P.O. Act to the convicts-
appellants inasmuch as the offence with which the
appellants are convicted does not prescribes punishment
for life or death, and having regard to the circumstances
of the cases including the nature of offence and the
character of the appellants, it is considered expedient to
release the appellants on probation of good conduct.
7.          In the result, the appeal is dismissed on
contest, but in the circumstance, there is no order as to
cost and, accordingly, the conviction of the appellants is
maintained, but instead of sentencing them to suffer any
CRA No.297 of 1994                                   Page 8 of 9
punishment, it is directed that the appellants be released
U/S.4 of the P.O. Act for a period of one year upon their
entering       into    a   bond      of  Rs.10,000/-(Rupees     Ten
Thousand) without any surety to appear and receive
sentence, when called upon during such period and in the
meantime, to keep the peace and be of good behavior.
The appellants shall remain under the supervision of the
concerned Probation Officer during the aforesaid period.
The sentence is, accordingly, modified.
Dated the 9th day of February, 2023/Subhasmita
CRA No.297 of 1994                                     Page 9 of 9