dealership for dealing in Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) and a
dealership agreement was entered into between the parties on
25.7.1983. During the year 2020 i.e. on 3.3.2020 and 17.3.2020,
an inspection team had conducted the inspection                 and after
noticing several irregularities, same was pointed out by the
inspection team to the petitioner by communication dated
20.3.2020. Petitioner is said to have replied to said irregularities.
4.        It is the grievance of petitioner that without issuing any
show cause notice, a letter was addressed to the petitioner
imposing a penalty of Rs.2,40,979/-. Hence, contending a dispute
has arisen between the parties is relatable to agreement dated
25.7.1983, a         notice came to be issued on 17.9.2020 to
respondent and same having not been replied, present petition
has been filed seeking appointment of arbitrator.
5.     Learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has reiterated
the grounds/contentions urged in the petition.
6.     Whereas the learned counsel appearing for respondent has
submitted that dispute which is said to be raised by the
petitioner relates to interpretation of policy decision and it would
not be amenable for being resolved through arbitration and
remedy of the petitioner is elsewhere. He would also submit that
validity of guidelines cannot be questioned before the arbitrator
and as such, there is no need or necessity for appointment of
arbitrator. He would also draw attention of the Court to Clause 37
of agreement dated 25.7.1983 to contend that arbitrator, if any
to be appointed, shall be as indicated thereunder and as such, he
prays for suitable orders being passed.
7.     Having heard learned counsel appearing for the parties and
on perusal of the record, it would emerge therefrom that
undisputedly, parties have agreed for resolution of dispute
through arbitration namely, in respect of a dispute arising out of
agreement dated 25.7.1983. The arbitration clause so agreed
“Any dispute or difference of any nature whatsoever or
regarding any rights, liability, act, omission or account
of any of the parties hereto arising out of or in relation
to this agreement shall be referred to the sole
arbitration of the DIRECTOR (MARKETING) of the
Corporation or of some Officer of the Corporation who
may be nominated by the DIRECTOR (MARKETING). The
Distributor will not be entitled to raise any objection to
any such arbitrator on the ground that the arbitrator is
an officer of the Corporation or that he has to deal with
the matters to which the contract relates or that in the
course of his duties as an officer of the Corporation he
had expressed views on all or any other matters in
dispute or difference. In the event of the arbitrator to
whom the matter is originally referred being transferred
or vacating his office or being unable to act for any
reasons, the DIRECTOR (MARKETING) as aforesaid at the
time of such transfer vacation of office or inability to
act, shall designate another person to act as arbitrator
in accordance with the terms of the agreement. Such
persons shall be entitled to proceed with the reference
from the point at which it was left by his predecessor. It
is also a term of this contract that no person other than
the DIRECTOR (MARKETING) or a person nominated by
such DIRECTOR (MARKETING) of the Corporation as
aforesaid shall act as arbitrator hereunder. The award of
the arbitrator so appointed shall be final, conclusive and
binding on all parties to the agreement, subject to the
provisions of the Arbitration Act, 1940 or any statutory
modification or re-enactment thereof and rules made
thereunder for the time being in force shall apply to
arbitration proceedings under this clause.”
8.     A plain reading of the above clause would indicate that
parties have agreed that disputes arising out of said agreement
would be resolved through alternate dispute redressal forum
namely, arbitration. It would be apt and appropriate at this
juncture to note the contention raised by learned counsel
appearing for respondent namely, that there is no arbitrable
dispute. By elaborating his submission, it has been contended
that penalty imposed is on the basis of policy guideline which
was in force as on the date it was imposed on petitioner and
correctness, legality and validity of the policy guidelines cannot
be the subject matter of arbitration. As to whether there is an
arbitrable dispute or not and whether the Arbitral Tribunal has
got jurisdiction to decide the dispute is again an issue which can
be decided by the arbitrator himself/herself       by ruling on the
jurisdiction as contemplated under Section 16 of the Act. As
such, without going into the merits of said case and rejecting the
contention regarding interpretation of policy guidelines as sought
to be canvassed by learned counsel appearing for the petitioner,
prayer for referring the matter to arbitration cannot be denied.
9.     Insofar as the contention regarding the person named in
the arbitration agreement alone should be nominated is a
contention which cannot stand the test of law in the teeth of Sub-
Section (5) of Section 12 of the Act read with Seventh Schedule
namely, where officials or persons interested in the outcome of
the dispute cannot be held as persons competent to arbitrate. In
that view of the matter, contention raised by the learned counsel
appearing for the respondent stands rejected.
10.    For the reasons afore-stated, I proceed to pass the
Court, BhavnagarI having his address at          Hinglaj
360001, is hereby appointed as Sole Arbitrator to
arbitrate the dispute between the parties pursuant
to agreement dated 25.7.1983. It is made clear that
said arbitrator would be at liberty to decide the
issue with regard to jurisdiction and arbitrability of
the dispute and all contentions in that regard are
kept open.
(iii) Registry to communicate this order to Sole
Arbitrator forthwith by speed post.
(iv) No order as to costs.
(v) Civil Application No.1 of 2022 does not survive for
consideration and it stands rejected.