This interlocutory application has been filed by one Mr. Lakhan
Sharma pursuant to an order dated 17.05.2021 passed by this Court in
W.P. No.9405/2021 (Lakhan Sharma vs. The State of M.P. and others)
thereby granting him liberty to intervene in Suo Motu Writ Petition
The petitioner, in the aforesaid W.P. No.9405/2021, had made
various prayers including a prayer that the respondents-State
authorities be directed to provide the recovered/seized Remdesivir
injections for being distributed to general patients after obtaining
approval from medical experts that they are fit to be used. In the
interlocutory application, it has been submitted that since various lots
of Remdesivir injections, which have been seized by the police at
different places of the State, happen to be the case property, the State
authorities are not taking any steps to get them released from the
Court concerned with reference to the provisions contained in Section
451 read with 457 of the Cr.P.C.
Learned    Advocate     General   submitted     that   the   State
Government, in this respect, shall take appropriate steps to move the
court concerned for obtaining delivery of different lots of seized
Remdesivir injections.
In view of the nature of the prayer made and considering that if
not used timely, the Remdesivir injections are likely to go waste, we
deem it appropriate to allow the present application with a direction to
the State authorities to get the seized Remdesivir injections tested
through the State Forensic Science Laboratory or any other
appropriate agency, to find out whether or not, the drugs, which have
been seized, are genuine Remdesivir injections and to the extent the
seized vials of the Remdesivir are found to be genuine, the Chief
Medical & Health Officer of the concerned district would make an
application before the appropriate Court for taking delivery of such
seized drugs, which shall pass the required orders in that behalf,
within a period of three days from the date of filing of the application,
so that the medicine can be provided to needy patients before its
expiry.
Accordingly, I.A. No.4854/2021 stands disposed of.
This application has been filed by Mr. Naman Nagrath, learned
Amicus Curiae stating that the following ventilators are either lying
uninstalled or unused in different parts of the State:
(i)     76 ventilators at Bundelkhand Medical College, Sagar;
(ii)    24 ventilators at Government Hospital, Shahdol;
(iii)   2 ventilators at Alirajpur;
(iv)    2 ventilators at Katni.
Learned Amicus Curiae submitted that most of these ventilators
could not be used on account of non-availability of expert technicians.
Mr. P.K. Kaurav, learned Advocate General submitted that out of
76 ventilators situated at Bundelkhand Medical College, Sagar, 70
ventilators have already been made operational and report from the
Superintendent of the Government Hospital, Shahdol has already been
called regarding 24 ventilators lying there. He submitted that efforts
are being made to make all these ventilators functional in the entire
State. He undertakes to apprise the Court about the current situation of
these and other ventilators lying at Alirajpur and Katni on the next
date of hearing.
The respondent-State shall place on record a report showing as to
how many ventilators were obtained under the PM Cares Fund and
how many are procured by the State Government on its own and how
many of them are functional. The data shall be produced on record as
to the availability of ventilators in all the Government/District
Hospitals of the State.
On the next date of hearing, the learned Advocate General shall
give specific response as to why direction No.5 contained in earlier
order of this Court dated 19.04.2021 has not been complied with so
far and what the State Government proposes to do with regard to
rationalization of the charges by the private hospitals and for fixation
of the capping thereof.
Matter to come up on 24.05.2021.