1.    This intra Court Appeal, (for short ―Appeal‖) is directed against the
judgment/final order dated 27.06.2022, (for short “Impugned
Order”), passed by the Writ Court in writ petition bearing WP(C) No.
2020/2021, whereby, the writ petition filed by the petitioners has been
allowedin the following manner:-
(i)    That the petitioner no. 1 is held entitled to admission in the
MDS Course in the discipline that was last leftover after the
Open Merit Category candidates 20 in number were allotted
the seats in various disciplines as per their merit and
preference. It would be discipline which, in the instant
selection, has been offered to the candidate figuring at serial
No.21 of the Open Merit Category.
(ii)   That since the cutoff date for admission to the PG Courses is
a long back over, it would, therefore, be not in the fitness of
things to grant admission to the petitioner no.1 at this point of
time. More so, when all the seats notified for admission stand
filed up and there is no seat left vacant.
(iii)  That with a view to undo the wrong done to the petitioner
no.1 and give effect to his right to admission, as upheld by
this Court, respondents are directed to keep one seat of MDS
reserved in the next session in the discipline to which the
petitioner no.1 was entitled to in the instant admission but
was not granted because of fault attributable exclusively to
the respondent-BOPEE.
(iv)   The respondent-BOPEE shall do well to set aforesaid
discipline apart and not to make it part of selection or
admission of MDS Course-2022.
(v)    The petitioner is also held entitled to a compensation of Rs.
Five Lakhs to be paid by the respondent-BOPEE to
compensate the petitioner no.1 for the loss of one year of his
career.
2. To understand the controversy in proper perspective, the brief resume
of the facts in question that led to the filing of the aforesaid appeal are
enumerated as under:-
3.  The petitioners were aggrieved of and have challenged the selection
list of NEET-MDS-2021, candidates belonging to UTs of J&K and
Ladakh, issued by the Board of Professional Entrance Examination
(BOPEE), vide notification No. 100-BOPEE of 2021 dated
03.10.2021, to the extent it denies the reservation quota in the MDS
Course provided for the reserved category of Children of Defence
Personal/Military Forces and State Police Personal (for short
“CDP/JKPM‖). The petitioner no.1 before the Writ Court, claims to
be a candidate belonging to CDP/JKPM category, being next in the
order of merit to Dr. Rasiq Mansoor, who, by the dint of his merit,
was placed in the general category. The petitioner nos. 2, 3 and 4,
before the Writ Court, were candidates belonging to RBA category.
The learned counsel for the petitioner nos. 2, 3 and 4, before the Writ
Court made a categoric statement that since the aforementioned
petitioners were allocated the disciplines and have got the admission
or have otherwise lost interest to pursue the petition before the Writ
Court and, accordingly, arguments were raised on behalf of petitioner
no.1 only.
4. It was the specific stand of the petitioner no.1 before the Writ Court
that as per the provisional merit list of NEET-MDS-2021, he figured
at S. No.52 in the overall merit and would be at S. No. 2 in the
category of CDP/JKPM, next only to Dr. Rasiq Mansoor. It was the
specific stand of the petitioner no.1, before the Writ Court that so far
as Dr. Rasiq Mansoor, is concerned, he figured at S. No. 5 of the merit
list and, therefore, was in the selection zone in the general category.
The grievance which was projected by the petitioner no.1 before the
Writ Court was that in terms of the impugned selection list, the
BOPEE has filled up only 41 seats by selection of equal number of
candidates for different specialities of MDS Courses, but in doing so,
the official respondents have not given 2% reservation earmarked for
CDP/JKPM Category. It was further pleaded that out of 42 seats
notified for admission, 1 seat was allocable to the category of
CDP/JKPM. However, no candidate from CDP/JKPM Category was
selected, therefore, the mandate of reservation provided under the
J&K Reservation Act, 2004 and Rules framed thereunder, was
violated.
5. The aforesaid petition was vehemently opposed by the BOPEE
(appellants herein). It was pleaded by the respondents (appellants
herein) before the Writ Court that after the conduct of entrance
examination by the National Board of Examination (NBE) and receipt
of result, the BOPEE proceeded further in accordance with the Rules
for conducting counselling of the candidates and allotment of streams
in various disciplines/Colleges. It was further pleaded that NBE
declared the result of NEET PG-MDS-2021 on 30.08.2021 and after
receipt of result by the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir, online
registration of candidates was done and provisional UT List was
notified vide notification No.94-BOPEE of 2021 of 2021 dated
25.09.2021. It was the further stand of the appellants before the Writ
Court that by a subsequent notification bearing No.100-BOPEE of
2021 dated 03.10.2021, the provisional select list on the basis of
merit-cum-preference      exercised   by   the  eligible   participating
candidates in physical round of counselling and by operation of
relevant reservation rules for admission to MDS Courses in
Government Dental College, Srinagar (GDC, Srinagar) and Indira
Gandhi Government Dental College, Jammu (IGDC, Jammu), was
issued. It was further stand of the respondents (appellants herein) that
14 candidates were recommended for admission in IGDC, Jammu,
whereas 27 candidates were recommended for GDC, Srinagar. It was
further pleaded that the selected candidates have joined their courses
and there was no short fall in any of the aforesaid institutions. The
respondent-Board, has further pleaded that out of 28 seats available in
GDC, Srinagar, 14 were filled up from open merit category, 2 from
EWS Category and 12 from the reserved category. Similarly, in
IGDC, Jammu, out of 14 seats available in the College, 7 have been
filled up from open merit category and 7 from the Reserved Category.
The petitioner no.1 before the Writ Court was having UT rank of 52
under JKPM Category, which was clubbed with CDP Category as per
S.O 127 dated 20.04.2020 and the said category has 2% reservation,
meaning thereby that out of 42 seats, 1 seat is allocable to the category
of CDP/JKPM. It was further pleaded that the lone seat earmarked for
the said category has been utilized/filled up by selection/admitting the
candidate having UT rank 5.It was, thus, urged that only seat
earmarked for the category of CDP/JKPM has been exhausted and,
therefore, the petitioner no.1, should have no grievance on this
account.
6. The stand with regard to petitioner nos. 2, 3 and 4, have explained by
the respondents as to how the seats earmarked for RBA Category,
have been filled up by selecting and admitting candidates on the basis
of theirinter se UT rank. The petitioner no.2 was allotted the stream
of Oral Pathology and Microbiology under open merit category as per
merit/preference given by him. The petitioner no.3, was UT rank 33,
whereas RBA Category was exhausted at rank 25. Similar was the
position with regard to petitioner no.4, who, was having UT rank 27
and has been given the discipline of Oral Pathology & Microbiology
in GDC, Srinagar, as per his merit/preference in open merit category.
7. It was the specific stand of the Board that with regard to denial of seat
under CDP/JKPM Category to the petitioner no.1, was that, as per the
reservation provided vide S.O. No.127 dated 20.04.2020, 2%
reservation is available to the said category which in view of
availability of total 42 seats, comes to one. It was pleaded before the
Writ Court that the only seat that was allocable to the category of
CDP/JKPM was filled up by admitting Dr. Rasiq Mansoor in the Post
Graduate Course of Orthodontics & Dentofacial Orthopaedics, and,
therefore, the petitioner no.1, could not be considered. It was the
emphatic case of the BOPEE that Rule 17 of the Reservation Rules
was not applied. It was further pleaded that since Dr. Rasiq Mansoor,
a JKPM Category candidate, who had made it to the select list in the
general category, had made only one choice in the order of preference
and, therefore, was allotted the discipline and college as per his merit
and preference. He did not leave any discipline to be put in the pool of
reserved category, which could have been offered to the petitioner
no.1.
8. Feeling aggrieved of the aforesaid judgment/final order, the present
appeal has been preferred by the appellants on the ground that the
learned Writ Court has interpreted Rule 17 in a different way than
implemented by the appellants since inception of the J&K Reservation
Rules 2005 read with SRO 49 dated 30.01.2018 followed by SRO 165
dated 08.03.2019. It has been further pleaded in the memo of appeal
by the appellants that the candidate namely, Dr. Rasiq Mansoor,
having UT rank 5 belonging to JKPM/CDP, otherwise falling in open
merit category, had given only one choice while appearing for the
counselling for the said course, got selected for the said
discipline/course on the basis of merit-cum-choice, as the seat which
he opted for, was available only in his respective category, i.e.,
JKPM/CDP and was not available in open merit, as a result of which,
Rule17 could not be applied in his case as he has not leftover any
discipline/stream, which would have been shifted, after exhausting the
open merit quota and adding to the pool of the reserved category. The
appellants have specifically pleaded that the leftover discipline/stream
as per SRO 165 dated 08.03.2019, is created by the choices given by
the meritorious reserved category candidate, so preferences/choices
given by the meritorious reserved category candidates, has very
important role to play in deciding the allocation of the seat/stream to
the subsequent merit holder in the concerned category. Accordingly,
as per the appellants, Rule 17 was not applied as he has not leftover
any discipline/stream which would have been shifted to the reserved
category pool and, accordingly, as per the appellants, the impugned
judgment deserves to be quashed.
9.  Furthermore, it has been pleaded in the memo of appeal that the
respondent herein without bringing on record the selected candidates,
cannot obtain any order/judgment nor the relief in the nature of
certiorari can be claimed under Article 226 of the Constitution without
impleading them as party respondent.
10. It is the specific stand of the appellants in the memo of appeal that Dr.
Rasiq Mansoor, who participated in the counselling held on
03.10.2021, having UT rank 5 under JKPM Category, had given only
one choice in his preference form, i.e., Orthodontics & Dentofacial
Orthopaedics at GDC, Srinagar and at the time of his counselling, the
said choice was not available in the open merit category and the same
was available in the reserved category, therefore, the same was
allotted to him from the reserved category quota considering him as
JKPM candidate and as he had given only one choice in his
preferences form and has not leftover any seat which would have
eventually been shifted to the reserved category pool. Thus, as per the
stand of the appellants, one seat which was to be allotted to JKPM
category was allotted to Dr. Rasiq Mansoor having UT rank 5. So, the
JKPM category was exhausted at UT rank 5.
11. Besides that, it has been pleaded by the appellants that the respondent
no.1 herein participated in the physical round of counselling held on
03.10.2021, whereby, in his preference form, he had not given any
choice and furthermore, at the time of his counselling, no seat was
available under JKPM category as the same was already exhausted at
UT rank 5.
12. It has been further pleaded that the judgments on which the learned
Writ Court relied relates to the case, where the meritorious candidates
had approached the Court in time without any delay and there is a
fault only on part of the authorities and or there is apparent breach of
rules and regulations as well as related principles in the process of
grant of admission which would violate the right of equality, whereas
in the present case, the appellants have reserved two seats in the said
course in compliance to the Court judgment and not conducted the
second round of counselling and mop up round of the counselling for
allotment of the seats which had remained unfilled/leftover after
conducting the first round of counselling. As per the stand of the
appellants, one seat which has remained unfilled because of non-
availability of candidate in ST category and the second seat became
vacant because of the petitioner no.3, (resigned after allotment of the
seat in the first round of the counseling) had been kept reserved. It is
the specific stand of the appellants that because of pendency of the
case before the Writ Court, two seats got wasted as the last date of
allotting the seats was 10.11.2021, as given in the admission schedule
of academic year 2021-22 for MDS Courses 2021 by Dental Council
of India, therefore, the order/judgment is liable to be set aside.
13. Lastly, it has been pleaded by the appellants that, since, the writ
petitioner no.1 (respondent no.1) had prayed for quashment of
selection of the selected candidates, and none of the candidate has
been arrayed as a party respondent in the writ petition,as per the law
laid down by Hon’ble Supreme the Court, the appeal, as such,
deserves to be dismissal in the light of the fact that none the
candidates arrayed as party respondent by the writ petitioners.
14. The core issues which arise out of the instant appeal preferred by the
appellants is as under:-
(i)    Whether in the facts of the present case, Section 9 and
10 of the Reservation Act and Rules as amended till
date are required to be applied?
(ii)  If yes, then how Rule 15 and 17 of the Reservation
Rules is required to be interpreted and applied.
Secondly, whether the ground taken by the appellants
about Rule 17 being not applicable in the present case
(iii) Whether after coming to the conclusion by the learned
Writ Court about applicability of the Rules and Act and
its incorrect interpretation on part of the Board before
the Writ Court, the relief granted in favour of the
respondent is in tune with the settled legal position?
(iv)  Whether the directions issued by the learned Single
Judge, vide judgment impugned to the extent of
reserving one seat of MDS in the next session in the
discipline to which respondent no.1 (petitioner no.1)
was entitled to, but was not granted because of the fault
attributable to the appellants (BOPEE) is correct,in
absence of arraying the affected persons as party
15. Shri D. C. Raina, learned Advocate General assisted by Shri Hilal
Ahmad Wani, learned AAG, appearing on behalf of appellants has
argued that in case open merit candidate belonging to any reserved
category opts for only one discipline and does not leave any other
choice there, in that eventuality, Rule 17 of the reservation rules
cannot be applied in his case and he shall be considered first in open
merit and subsequently, alloted a discipline/stream/college of his
choice, if available.However, in case discipline/stream/college of his
choice is not available in open merit, he is required to be considered
for allotment of discipline stream/college in his respective category on
the basis of merit-cum-preference as per the rules.
16. Hehas argued that since Dr. Rasiq Mansoor ( who has not been
arrayed as party respondent before the Writ Court), participated in the
counselling held on 03.10.2021, having UT rank 5 under JKPM
category, had given only one choice in his preference form, i.e.,
Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopaedics, GDC Srinagar, and at the
time of his counselling, the said choice was not available in the open
merit category and the same was available in the reserved category,
therefore, the same was allotted to him from the reserved category
quota, considering him as JKPM. He further argued that since he had
given only one choice in his preference form and has not left any seat
vacant which would have eventually been shifted to the reserved
category pool. Therefore, in such a peculiar situation, the appellants
have not applied Rule 17 of J&K Reservation Rules 2005 read with
SRO 165 dated 08.03.2019. He further argued that as per the S.O 127
dated 20.04.2020, 2% reservation was to be given to the JKPM
category, so out 42 seats, 1 seat was to be allotted to the JKPM
category and same was allotted to Dr. Rasiq Mansoor having UT rank
5, so the JKPM category was exhausted at UT rank 5.
17. He has further argued that since the petitioner no.1 (respondent no.1
herein) had participated in the physical round of counselling held on
03.10.2021, whereby, in his preference form, he had not given any
choice and furthermore, at the time of his counselling, no seat was
available under JKPM category as the same was already exhausted at
UT rank 5.
18. He pointed out that in open merit category having 21 seats, stood
exhausted at UT rank 28,by the candidate namely, Samer Ahmad
Kambay, who was petitioner no.2 in writ petition bearing WP(C) No.
2020/2021, and reserved category having 19 seats got exhausted at
UT rank 78 namely, Asgar Ali, therefore, the only seat available under
JKPM category stood exhausted and no other reserved category seat
for a candidate under the aforesaid category could be allotted because
merit and choice are correlatedwith each other, as the merit of the
course is the relevant factor, but allocation of discipline is a
determinative factor.
19. With a view to substantiate his argument, learned Advocate General,
has heavily relied upon the judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in
case titled National Medical Commission v. Mothukuru Sriyah
Koumudi & Others, passed in Civil Appeal No. 3940 of 2020,
wherein it has been held that the directions cannot be issued for
increasing annual intake capacity and to create seats. He argued that
the annual intake capacity fixed by the MCI has to be strictly adhered
to as per the law laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court. With a
view to put forth his point, he relied upon para 11 of the aforesaid
judgment, wherein the principle has to be made applicable to the Post
Graduate Courses also. For facility of reference, para 9 and 11 of the
aforesaid judgment is reproduced as under:-
―9. The question that arises for our consideration is whether the High
Court was right in directing creation of a seat for this academic year
for granting admission to Respondent no.1. It has been repeatedly
held by this Court that directions cannot be issued for increasing
annual intake capacity and to create seats. The annual intake
capacity is fixed by the Medical Council of India (now National
Medical Commission) which has to be strictly adhered. Admissions
to Medical Colleges cannot be permitted to be made beyond the
sanctioned annual intake capacity of a medical college as has been
repeatedly held by this Court.
11, As the dispute in S. Krishna Sradha case (supra) pertained to
admission to the undergraduate MBBS Course, this Court held that
they have not dealt with the Post Graduate Medical Courses. Mr.
Parameshwar argued that there is no reason why the logic behind the
judgment in S. Krishna Sradha case (supra) should not be made
applicable to Post Graduate Courses. We find force in the said
argument of Mr. Parameshwar. This Court was only dealing with the
admission to the MBBS Course for which reason directions given in
the said judgment were restricted to the MBBS Course. Directions
issued in S. Krishna Sradha case (supra) can be made applicable to
admission to Post Graduate Courses as well‖.
20. Besides learned Advocate General has specifically relied upon the
operative portion of para 9 of another Supreme Court judgment in
case titled S. Krishna Sradha v. The State of Andra Pradesh and
Others, reported in AIR 2020 SC 47. With a view to justify that since
the petitioner no.1 has not impleaded any of the selected candidate in
the array of respondents and, as such, the writ petition could not have
been allowed and the writ petition, accordingly, was required to be
dismissed on this ground alone. The operative portion of para 9 of the
aforesaid judgment is reproduced as under:
―The Court may also pass an order cancelling the admission given to
a candidate who is at the bottom of the merit list of the category
who, if the admission would have been given to a more meritorious
candidate who has been denied admission illegally, would not have
got the admission, if the Court deems it fit and proper, however,
after giving an opportunity of hearing to a student whose admission
is sought to be cancelled‖.
21. He has also placed reliance upon judgment in case titled Tripurari
Sharan and Another v. Ranjit Kumar Yadav and Others, reported in
2018(2) SCC 656 and, judgment passed by Division Bench of this
Court in LPA No. 08/2021 in case titled Mehak Javid v. JKBOPEE
decided on 31.03.2021 and, accordingly, prayed for that the judgment
impugned passed by the learned Single judge be set aside.
22. Per contra, Shri Syed Faisal Qadiri, learned Senior Counsel for the
respondent no.1, along with ShriHuzaif Ashraf Khanpuri, & Shri
Mansab Wadoo, Advocates, appearing on behalf of respondent no.1,
has vehemently argued that the denial of MDS seat to the respondent
no. 1, by the appellants on the ground of non-applicability of the
reservation rules and the Act is incorrect. With a view to substantiate
his claim, he argued that the Meritorious Reserved Category
Candidate (MRC, Dr. Rasiq Mansoor) and the respondent no.1, both
had applied under CDP category, which as per the reservation rules
has 2% reservation in professional PG Course. He pleaded that the
Board upon allocating a seat to the MRC in open merit category was
under a legal obligation qua the respondentto allot the seat to his
client being next in the order of merit in CDP category. Since the
appellants have failed to act in conformity with the Reservation Rules,
the action of the appellants is not sustainable in the eyes of law with
particular reference to Rule 15 of the aforementioned Rules. He
further argued that Rule 17 of the Reservation Rules has to be applied
in the present case for allotment of discipline, more particularly, in the
light of explanation and proviso 2 to the aforesaid rules, which has not
been done by the Board and consequently, the action of the Board is
liable to be set aside. He further argued that admittedly, the UT rank
of the respondent no.1 and the MRC, Dr. Rasiq Mansoor, was 52 and
05, respectively. Once rank 5, i.e., MRC, Dr. Rasiq Mansoor, finds a
place in the open merit because of his higher merit, then Rank 52 was
required to be incorporated in the reserved category and one seat was
required to be given to CDP category as per the Rules in vogue, which
has not been done in the present case. He pleaded that this was
precisely the reason that the learned Single Judge, has allowed the
writ petition against the appellants.
23. He further argued that the Board has fallen in error in interpreting
Rule 15 and 17 of the Reservation Rules and he heavily relied upon
the judgments passed by Hon’ble the Supreme Court, which have
been reproduced by the learned Single Judge that, once MRC, had
opted for a preference out of the pool of disciplines reserved for
categories, leaves the discipline which he would ordinarily get in the
open merit because of his shifting being higher in the merit. The
learned Senior counsel appearing for the respondent no.1, has placed
reliance upon Rule 17 of the Reservation Rules, which makes it
abundantly clear that once, the MRC candidate chooses a discipline
from the pool of reserved category, he leaves the discipline being
offered to him as an open merit candidate because of his shifting from
reserved category candidate to open merit candidate. As per the
learned senior counsel for the respondent no.1, the explanation to Rule
17, prescribes the method for such a situation and, accordingly, he
argued that the respondent no.1, was required to be granted a seat and
a choice of his discipline in accordance with the rule read with
explanation and second proviso of Rule 17. With a view to clarify the
factual position, learned Senior counsel for respondent no.1, argued
that the select list was issued on 03.10.2021 and the respondent no.1
(writ petitioner no.1) objected to his non-inclusion immediately on
04.10.2021, without wasting any time and the writ petition came to be
preferred on 04.10.2021. He further pleaded that the learned Writ
Court vide interim order dated 05.10.2021, protected the writ
petitioners by passing an interim order in their favour by reserving the
seats, thus, no fault can be attributed to the respondent no.1, for not
approaching the Court well in time. The learned senior counsel for
respondent no.1 further argued that the judgment of the Writ Court is
comprehensive, well-reasoned and justified and the findings arrived
by the learned Single Judge are based on the law laid down by
Hon’ble the Supreme Court in identical cases for PG Courses.
24. With a view to substantiate his argument, the learned senior counsel
for the respondent no.1 has heavily relied upon the judgment passed
by Hon’ble the Supreme Court in case titled S. Krishna Sradha v.
The State of Andra Pradesh, reported in AIR 2020 SC 47, and also,
the judgment passed by the Hon’ble the Supreme Court in case titled
National Medical Commission v. MothkuruSriyahKoumudi and
Others, reported in 2020 SCC Online SC 992.
25. We have heard learned counsel for the parties at length and also
perused the material on record.
26. From a plain reading of Section 9 and 10 of the J&K Reservation Act,
2004, it is abundantly clear that these provisions have been enacted to
give effect to the law on the subject settled by Hon’ble the Supreme
Court and this Court in various authoritative pronouncements
rendered from time to time. The principle underlying the provision of
Section 10 is manifestly clear that the benefit of reservation must
reach to the deserving candidate in the category and is not eaten away
or affected by a candidate of reserved category, who on the strength of
his merit, has equal or better merit than the merit of the candidate last
admitted in the professional course in the general category.Section 10
in clear and unambiguous terms, provide that there shall be no bar for
admission of a member of reserved category against the seat other
than or in addition to one reserved for him under Section 9, if such
candidate is found qualified for admission on merit as compared with
the candidates of the open merit/general category. Admittedly, in the
present case, the Board has not acted in conformity with the mandate
and spirit of Section 9 and 10 of the aforesaid Act, as Dr. Rasiq
Mansoor, who was figuring at S. No. 5, was entitled to be considered
in the open merit, though, he had the option for taking the benefit of
his reserved category status for the purpose of making the choice of
the discipline/college.
For facility of reference Rule 9 and 10 of the Reservation Act is
reproduced as under:-
―9. Reservation in professional institutions. — (1) The
Government shall reserve seats in the Professional Institutions for
candidates belonging to:-
(a) reserved categories and such other classes and categories
as may be notified from time to time; and
Provided that the total percentage of reservation provided in
clause (a) shall in no case exceed 50%.
Provided further that the reservation in the Professional
Institutions in favour of the persons belonging to
economically weaker sections shall be in addition to the
existing reservation as provided in this sub-section and shall
be subject to a maximum of ten percent of the seats in each
category.
The Government shall prescribe the percentage for each
category in admission in the Professional Institutions:
Provided that different percentage may be prescribed for
Provided further that 50% of the seats in each category
including open category for admission to MBBS and BDS,
shall be selected from amongst female candidates belonging
Provided also that the seats in any reserved category, which
cannot be filled for want of candidates belonging to that
category, shall be filled from amongst the candidates
belonging to open merit category.
10.Reservation not to bar admission in open merit. —
Nothing contained in section 9 shall bar admission of
members of the reserved categories against seats other than,
or in addition to, those reserved for them under the said
section, if such members are found qualified for admission on
merit as compared with candidates not belonging to any
reserved category.
27. Accordingly, we are of the view that the next candidate in the order of
merit in the category of CDP/JKPM (respondent no.1 herein), was
entitled to be selected against one seat earmarked for the category of
CDP/JKPM. Admittedly, the appellant-Board, has not carried out the
mandate of Sections 9 and 10 of the aforesaid Act in its letter and
spirit as they have not selected any candidate in the category of
CDP/JKPM for which 1 out of the 42 notified seats, was reserved.
Thus, we answer the issue no. (i), in affirmative by holding
that Sections 9 and 10 of the Reservation Act and Reservation Rules
as amended till date was applicable to the case in hand.
28. From the perusal of the Rule 17, it is abundantly clear that the
reserved category candidate, if selected against open merit seat
(known as MRC), is entitled to be considered for allotment of
discipline/stream/college allocable to him in his respective category
on    the    basis     of   his    merit-cum-preference.        The     leftover
discipline/stream/college in the open merit category shall be allotted
to the reserved category candidate, who gets selected consequent upon
MRC getting selected in open merit. We have gone through the
explanation appended to Rule 17, which explicitly provides that the
term leftover discipline/stream/college means such number of
discipline/stream/college that would become available after allotment
of seat to the last open merit candidate as allocable under Rules.
It would be apt to reproduce Rule 15 and Rule 17 of the Reservation
Rules as it now stands and which are applicable to the instant
selection reads as under:-
―15. Distribution of seats:- For the post-graduate courses in
MD/MS/M.Tech. Engineering and Agricultural Sciences and
similar other postgraduate course, the seats shall be distributed
as follows with the condition that the selection of candidates
from the reserved categories for different streams shall be made
strictly on the basis of their inter-se merit, treating them as a
single class for purpose of allotment of streams:-
A reserved category candidates, if selected against the
open merit set may be considered for allotment of
discipline/stream/college allocable to him in his respective
category on the basis of his merit and preference. The left
over discipline/stream/college in the open merit category shall
be allotted to the reserved category candidates who get
selected consequent upon the reserved category candidate
getting selected in the open merit category.
Explanation: The left over discipline/stream/college shall
mean such number of disciplines/streams/colleges
becoming available after allotment of seat to the last OM
candidate as allocable under rules;
Provided that in respect of under graduate courses the
left over seats/colleges shall be added to such categories
where shortfall has taken place due to application of Rule 17
and allotment shall be made in terms of Rule 13 on the basis
merit cum preference from the respective categories.
Provided further that in respect of PG Course the
leftover discipline/stream/colleges shall be added to the pool
of reserved category candidates in terms of Rule-15 and
allotted on the basis merit cum preference.
Provided also thatRule-17 shall be applicable only
during the first round of counselling both in respect of UG
and PG courses, Unfilled seats due to non-joining, resignation
etc. during the first round of counselling shall be filled up
from amongst the eligible candidates from the respective
categories where a seat has become available i.e. seat left by
the SC candidate in the first round shall be allotted to the
candidates from the SC category during the second round of
counselling only etc. so that the quota allocable to different
categories is maintained.
The unfilled category seats, if any, shall be filled up
from OM candidates in accordance with Section 9 of the
Jammu and Kashmir Reservation Act, 2004.
Note:1: In case the last OM candidate belongs to any
reserved category, but Rule 17 cannot be applied in his case,
he shall be considered first in OM and allotted a
discipline/stream/college of his choice/preference, if
available. However, in case discipline/stream/college of his
choice/preference is not available in the OM, he may be
considered for allotment of 16 WPC No. 2020/2021
discipline/stream/college in his respective category on the
basis of merit cum preference in accordance with Rule 13 or
15 as may be applicable in his case.
Note 2: The prescribed Counselling Authority may, for
the reasons to be recorded, address any other unforeseen
situation arising during application of Rule 17 in such a
manner that it does not put any meritorious category
candidate to hardship viz-a-viz preference for allotment of
discipline/stream/college as the case may be‖.
From the bare perusal of Rule 15 coupled with 2nd proviso to
Rule 17, it is abundantly clear that in respect of PG Courses, the
leftover disciplines/streams/college, shall be added to the pool of
reserved category candidates in terms of Rule 15 and allotted on the
basis of merit-cum-preference.Note (1) of Rule 17, makes position
further clear by providing that in case the last open merit candidate
belongs to any reserved category, i.e., if the last candidate in the open
merit is MRC, in that eventuality, Rule 17 will have no application. In
such case, the said candidate shall be considered first in the open
merit category and subsequently, allotted the discipline/stream/college
of his choice/preference, if available. It is only in case
discipline/stream/college of his choice/preference is not available in
the open merit category, in such eventuality, he may be considered for
allotment of discipline/stream/college in his respective category on the
basis of merit/preference in accordance with Rule 15 of the Rules.
In the instant case, the MRC candidate, i.e., Dr. Rasiq Mansoor
had given only one choice insofar as the discipline of MDS is
concerned and, accordingly, he was allotted the aforesaid discipline as
per his merit/preference, which was Orthodontics and Dentofacial
Orthopaedics,by making his choice as a CDP/JKPM category
candidate. The movement of Dr. Rasiq Mansoor from open merit
category to CDP/JKPM category for the purpose of making the choice
of the discipline resulted in one discipline of MDS available in open
merit. The Board, as such, upon allotting a seat to MRC in open merit
was under a legal obligation to allot the seat to respondent no.1, being
next meritorious candidate in CDP category, which in the present case
has not happened and action of appellants, as such, is violative of Rule
15 of the Reservation Rules. The leftover discipline in the present case
would shift and has to be added to the pool of the reserved category
candidates as envisaged under Rule 15 and was required to be allotted
on the basis of inter se merit/preference amongst the reserved
category candidates. We are in agreementwith the learned Single
Judge that the Board has committed an illegality in not pushing the
petitioner no.1, upto the selected under the category of CDP/JKPM,
when,the only more meritorious candidate in the category than the
petitioner, i.e., Dr. Rasiq Mansoor,has succeeded in making a place in
the open merit on the strength of his merit. Thus, the Board has fallen
in error in interpreting Rule 15 and 17 to the disadvantage of the
petitioner No.1 (respondent no.1 herein) and, thus, we are of the view
that it is the discipline which the BOPEE ought tohave added to the
pool of reserved category in tune with Rule 15. Since Dr. Rasiq
Mansoor has taken the advantage of his category status and invoked
Rule 17 for the purpose of his choice of his discipline and was
admitted to MDS Course in the discipline of Orthodontics &
Dentofacial Orthopaedics, which discipline was available in the pool
of reserved category and by doing so, he consumed one discipline
from the pool of reserved category, but consequently,he made one
discipline meant for open merit category available to be filled up. We
are of the view that the said discipline that would be leftover
discipline, was required to be added to the pool of reserved category
and allotted on the basis of merit-cum-preference, which has not
happened in the present case.
Accordingly, we hold that the appellants have fallen in error
in interpreting the true spirit and mandate of Rule 17, which was
applicable to the case in hand. Thus, the ground taken by the
appellant-Board that Rule 17 was not applicable to the present case,
is rejected and we hold that the Rule 17 is applicable to the case in
hand, and the Board has fallen in error in understanding the true
import of Rule 17. Thus, the issue no. (ii), is answered, accordingly.
29. Since, there was no delay on part of the respondent no.1, in filing the
representation/writ petition, thus, we hold that the law laid down by
the Hon’ble Supreme Court in case titled S. Krishna Sradha v. The
State of Andhra Pradesh and Others and National Medical
Commission v. Mothukuru Sriyah Koumudi and Others, as has been
reproduced by the learned Single Judge, was fully applicable to the
case in hand. Since, the merit list was declared by the appellant-Board
on 03.10.2021 and representation was immediately filed by the
respondent no.1, on 04.10.2021, as per record followed by writ
petition, which was filed on 05.10.2021. Thus, the judgment passed
by Hon’ble the Supreme Court mentioned supra, was applicable to the
case in hand, wherein the Hon’ble the Supreme Court had held as
―13. In light of the discussion/observations made hereinabove, a
meritorious candidate/student who has been denied an admission in
MBBS Course illegally or irrationally by the authorities for no fault
of his/her and who has approached the Court in time and so as to see
that such a meritorious candidate may not have to suffer for no fault
of his/her, we answer the reference as under:
13.1. That in a case where candidate/student has approached the
court at the earliest and without any delay and that the question is
with respect to the admission in medical course all the efforts shall
be made by the concerned court to dispose of the proceedings by
giving priority and at the earliest.
13.2. Under exceptional circumstances, if the court finds that there is
no fault attributable to the candidate and the candidate has pursued
his/her legal right expeditiously without any delay and there is fault
only on the part of the authorities and/or there is apparent breach of
rules and regulations as well as related principles in the process of
grant of admission which would violate the right of equality and
equal treatment to the competing candidates and if the time schedule
prescribed – 30th September, is over, to do the complete justice, the
Court under exceptional circumstances and in rarest of rare cases
direct the admission in the same year by directing to increase the
seats, however, it should not be more than one or two seats and such
admissions can be ordered within reasonable time, i.e., within one
month from 30th September, i.e., cutoff date and under no
circumstances, the Court shall order any Admission in the same year
beyond 30th October. However, it is observed that such relief can be
granted only in exceptional circumstances and in the rarest of rare
cases. In case of such an eventuality, the Court may also pass an
order cancelling the admission given to a candidate who is at the
bottom of the merit list of the category who, if the admission would
have been given to a more meritorious candidate who has been
denied admission illegally, would not have got the admission, if the
Court deems it fit and proper, however, after giving an opportunity
of hearing to a student whose admission is sought to be cancelled.
13.3. In case the Court is of the opinion that no relief of admission
can be granted to such a candidate in the very academic year and
wherever it finds that the action of the authorities has been arbitrary
and in breach of the rules and regulations or the prospectus affecting
the rights of the students and that a candidate is found to be
meritorious and such candidate/student has approached the court at
the earliest and without any delay, the court can mould the relief and
direct the admission to be granted to such a candidate in the next
academic year by issuing appropriate directions by directing to
increase in the number of seats as may be considered appropriate in
the case and in case of such an eventuality and if it is found that the
management was at fault and wrongly denied the admission to the
meritorious candidate, in that case, the Court may direct to reduce
the number of seats in the management quota of that year, meaning
thereby the student/students who was/were denied admission
illegally to be accommodated in the next academic year out of the
seats allotted in the management quota.
13.4.Grant of the compensation could be an additional remedy but
not a substitute for restitutional remedies. Therefore, in an
appropriate case the Court may award the compensation to such a
meritorious candidate who for no fault of his/her has to lose one full
academic year and who could not be granted any relief of admission
in the same academic year.
13.5. It is clarified that the aforesaid directions pertain for
Admission in MBBS Course only and we have not dealt with Post
Rule 17,which is the core issue in the present case, has been
interpreted by this Court on more than one occasion. The essential
part of the Rue 17, which was interpreted by the Single Bench of this
Court in case titled Mehdi Ali and Others v. State and Others,
reported in AIR 2019 J&K 91, remains the same even after its
substitution vide SRO 165 of 2019 dated 08.03.2019. The law laid
down by the Court in aforesaid judgment is fully applicable to the
case in hand and, accordingly, we reject the contention of the Board
that since Dr. Rasiq Mansoor, had made only one choice, which was
available in the reserved category, therefore, Rule 17 had no
Since, the petitioner no.1 was left out not because of his Act or
omission, but due to the fault attributable, exclusively to the Board
which failed to act strictly in conformity with the Rule 17 of the
aforesaid Rules in its right perspective and deprived a meritorious
candidate of his right to seek admission in the PG Course in MDS.
We are in total agreement with the findings/observations
made by the learned Writ Court after careful consideration of the
matter and do not find any infirmity or illegality in the
judgment/finalorder.     Thus,     the   issueno.    (iii),is  answered,
accordingly.
30. The learned Single Judge, while parting with the judgment has
observed that since the petitioner no.1 has made out a strong case for
his admission toPG Course, i.e., MDS Course against the leftover
discipline in open merit category and with a view to undo the wrong,
the petitioner no.1 was given effect to his right of admission by
keeping one seat of MDS reserved in the next session in the discipline
to which the petitioner no.1 was entitled to in the instant admission,
but was not granted because of fault attributable exclusively to the
BOPEE, by directing the BOPEE to set aforesaid discipline apart and
not to make it part of selection or admission of MDS Course 2022,
besides holding him entitled to compensation of Rs. 5.00 lakhs. We do
not find any fault with the observations of learned Single Judge and,
thus, the ground of the appellants that the petitioner no.1 has failed to
array the affected persons as a party respondent does not hold good as
no prejudice has been caused to any contesting candidate for the
current session.
Thus, the argument of the learned Advocate General, does not
hold good that no directions can be issued for increasing the annual
intake capacity, which if be done, will be against the mandate of
Medical Council of India Guidelines as provided in para 11 of the law
laid down by Hon’ble the Supreme Court in case titled National
Medical Commission v .Mothukuru Sriyah Koumudi and Others,
with particular reference to para 9 of the aforesaid judgment. We are
of the view that the directions passed by the learned Single Judge to
reserve 1 seat of MDS in the next session in the discipline to which
the petitioner no.1 was entitled to, in no way increases the intake
capacity rather a direction has been issued to BOPEE to set the
aforesaid discipline apart and not to make it part of the selection or
admission of MDS Course 2022.
The 2ndcontention of learned Advocate General that the Court
cannot pass any order cancelling the admission given to a
candidate, who is at the bottom of the merit without arraying the
said person as a party respondent, is also not tenable in the eyes of
law as there is no such direction which has been issued by the
learned Single Judge, which will be violative of the law laid down by
Hon’ble The Supreme in case titled S. Krishna Sradha v, State of
Andhra Pradesh and Others, as projected by the learned Advocate
General.Thus, the issue no. (iv), is answered, accordingly.
31. The judgment relied upon by Shri D. C. Raina, learned Advocate
General, in case titled Mehak Javid v. JKBOPEE, passed by the
Division Bench of this Court in LPA No. 08/2021, decided on
31.03.2021, is not applicable to the present case.
32. Viewed in the context what has been discussed herein above, we are
in agreementwith the findings/observations made by the learned Writ
Court and on the careful consideration of the matter, we do not find
any infirmity or illegality in the judgment/final order dated
27.06.2022 and, accordingly, we uphold the same.
33.    In the above background, while affirming the judgment impugned
dated 27.06.2022, wedismiss the instant appeal filed by the appellants
along with connected CM(s), being without any merit.