These proceedings arise out of an incident which took place in the
city of Agartala on the night of 26th of April, 2021. Allegedly, when a
marriage function was going on in two marriage halls in the city area, the
District Magistrate, West Tripura, visited the said marriage halls and what
ensued was some heated discussions and acts of impropriety allegedly
committed by the District Magistrate. Parts of this incident were video
graphed and soon made its way to social media and went viral attracting
public attention across the country. PIL is filed by an advocate. His case is
that the District Magistrate had behaved improperly with the people
present and had exceeded his powers. He has made several prayers
including for issuance of writ against the District Magistrate for misuse
and abuse of his official authority, to take action against him and the
members of his team who had accompanied him at the said site on that
night. Prayer is also made for issuing directions to the official respondents
to take criminal action against the District Magistrate.
The Writ Petition is filed by the priest, who was called to perform
the marriage ceremony of the bride and the groom. He has prayed for a
direction to take punitive action against the District Magistrate and his
team members including taking departmental action against them.
It is a well-known fact that soon after the said incident came to light,
the State Government has instituted a two member Committee to inquire
into the incident and to make a report to the Government. While this
inquiry was going on, the Government has also passed an order dated 2nd
of May, 2021 by which the District Magistrate concerned is divested of the
charge of D.M. & Collector, West Tripura, the additional charges of CEO,
Agartala Smart City, Commissioner TUDA, CEO, Tripura Jal Board and
M.D., Agartala Smart City Ltd. till the inquiry is completed or till further
orders. A copy of this Notification dated 2nd May, 2021 issued by the
Government of Tripura is provided by the learned Advocate General and is
taken on record.
To make further inquiries, we would require following documents
and information from the petitioners and the State administration:
(i)   The complete footage of the video clips which are circulating
in the social media. Learned advocate, Ms. R. Guha for the
Public Interest petitioner has assured that she will provide a
CD of all these videos to the Court as well as to the concerned
parties along with an affidavit disclosing the source of these
clips.
(ii)  The learned Advocate General shall place on record the
Notification under which the inquiry against the D.M. has
been instituted.
(iii) The advocates of the petitioners as well as the learned
Advocate General shall place on record whatever proceedings
which may have been instituted either before the Police or
before the Government in relation to the said incident of the
night of 26th April, 2021.
(iv)  The petitioners shall disclose as to how many guests and
serving staff were present in the marriage hall when the
incident took place. They shall also disclose the precise time
at which the D.M. visited the marriage halls. Learned senior
advocate, Mr. Somik Deb for the petitioner of W.P. (C)
No.346 of 2021, who was a priest performing the religious
ceremonies was unable to give precise details of number of
people present. It would be duty of this petitioner to contact
the father of the bride whose marriage was taking place and
provide this information.
(v)    The learned Advocate General shall provide the exact stage of
the inquiry instituted against the D.M.
(vi)   The learned Advocate General shall also state whether any
lady members were arrested or detained at the police station
on the night of 26th April, 2021 and whether the raiding party
along with the District Magistrate contained any women
police officers.
Looking to the sensitivity of the issues involved, we had heard
the cases in camera where the advocates appearing for the parties and the
parties themselves were allowed to remain present. As a culmination of the
discussion that took place in camera, we are prima facie of the view that
the issues require for the consideration. However, we must make it clear
that in these petitions, there are several prayers, many of which we are not
inclined to entertain. For example, the request is made by both the
petitioners for action against not only the District Magistrate but his team,
who had visited the marriage halls. We are not inclined to consider any
action against any of the team members of the District Magistrate since
they were merely carrying out the orders issued to them by their superior.
Even if there is any lacuna in issuing such orders or exceeding of the
jurisdiction by the authority, this support staff cannot be made answerable
for their actions. At the time when the entire country is facing an extremely
difficult situation of managing corona virus spread, we would certainly not
send signals to the foot soldiers that carrying out the orders of their
superiors can expose them to inquiries.
The learned Advocate General during the discussions in the camera
had clarified that he was not defending any of the actions of the District
Magistrate, nevertheless, he was of the opinion that the incident as is
projected in the video clips available in the social media does not bring out
the correct facts and that it would not be correct to attach the blame for the
unfortunate incident on the District Magistrate. However, prima facie, he
did not dispute the language used by the District Magistrate during the
incident which in our prima facie opinion was inappropriate, that the
District Magistrate did tear away a copy of the permission granted by him
for conducting the marriage ceremony when it was shown to him by one of
the members of the family and that he had also used strong derogatory
words against the police officials, who according to him, were liable to
enforce the lockdown guidelines and curfew timings which according to
him, they had deliberately failed to do in the present case. At this ex parte
stage, however, we would refrain from making any definitive or conclusive
observations with respect to the misdeeds or demeanor of either the
District Magistrate or the family members and guests present at the
marriage hall.
Going by the press reports, we have noticed that the District
Magistrate has made public statements on more occasions than one about
the alleged incident. We would request him not to go public with respect to
the said incident till further orders.
Learned Advocate General requested that publication of any news in
relation to the present Court proceedings may be prevented. His
apprehension is that certain quarters may deliberately sensationalize the
issue. We are not inclined to issue any such general gag order. Freedom of
press is a valuable fundamental right and relates to the right of the people
of excess to information. Such right cannot be lightly curtailed. We,
however, assure learned Advocate General of two things. One, no amount
of sensationalization of the issue from any quarter would hamper our
judgment and secondly, if any instance of any publication which is either
contemptuous or is defamatory is brought to our notice, the same can
always be dealt with on case to case basis. In any case, we expect the
media to be responsible and publish the news as truthfully as the events
have taken place.
Issue notice to the respondents, returnable for 05.05.2021.
Learned counsel, Ms. Ayantika Chakraborty waived notice on behalf
of the official respondents in both the petitions.
‘Dasti’ service to private respondent permitted.
By way of interim measures following directions are issued:
(i)   We are of the strong prima facie view that in order to conduct
an impartial fact finding inquiry regarding the incident and the
role played by the D.M.; which is absolutely imperative; it
would be essential that he is shifted out of Agartala. Any such
inquiry would necessarily require recording of statements of
witnesses. It would be difficult for many witnesses to come
forward and to give truthful account of the incident if the
D.M. is retained at Agartala. We would strongly request the
learned Advocate General to take instructions from the
Government on this aspect of the matter and revert back to the
Court on the next date of hearing with necessary instructions.
(ii)  The District Magistrate shall not make any public statements
in any form including to media be it electronic, print or social
media in relation to the incident of the night of 26th April,
2021 and the subsequent inquiry which is pending against
(iii) Until further orders, the inquiry instituted against the District
Magistrate shall not proceed further.
(iv) The District Magistrate shall also place on record any order of
suspending the license of the marriage halls if he has passed
after 26th of April, 2021 incident.
(v)  The petitioners as well as the learned Advocate General shall
supply the information and documents as provided in the
earlier part of this order.