1.     To deal with the raging COVID-19 Pandemic, and to provide
protection to the masses, the Central Government and the State Governments
have rolled out the vaccination drive. In the first round, the frontline workers,
particularly of the medical community were covered, and other frontline
workers such as the Police Force have already been covered.
2.     From 01.03.2021, the Government has initiated the programme to
vaccinate persons above 60 years of age, and those having the specified co-
morbidities falling in the age group of 45-60 years. The co-morbidities listed
●   Heart failure with hospitalization in the last one year
●   Post cardiac transplant/Left Ventricular Assist Device
●   Significant left ventricular systolic dysfunction
●   Congenital heart disease with severe PAH or Idiopathic PAH
● Coronary Artery Disease with past CABG/PTCA/MI AND
● Angina and Hypertension/Diabetes on treatment
● CT/MRI documented stroke and Hypertension/Diabetes on treatment
● Pulmonary artery hypertension and Hypertension/Diabetes on
● Kidney/liver/Hematopoietic stem cell transplant: Recipient/on wait
● End stage kidney disease on haemodialysis/CAPD
● Current prolonged use of oral corticosteroids/ immunosuppressant
● Severe respiratory disease with hospitalisations in last two
● Diagnosis of any solid cancer on or after 1st July 2020 or currently
● Sickle Cell Disease/Bone marrow failure/ Aplastic
● Primary Immunodeficiency disease/ HIV Infection
● Persons with disabilities due to intellectual disabilities/ muscular
dystrophy/ acid attack with involvement of respiratory system/
persons with disabilities having high support needs/ multiple
3.     The Chairman, Bar Council of Delhi has sent a communication to
Hon’ble the Chief Justice on 01.03.2021 – requesting that appropriate
directions be issued to the concerned administrative/ medical authorities to
make available necessary infrastructure in Court premises, particularly in
medical dispensaries and other appropriate places conducive for vaccination,
for vaccination of the members of the Judiciary, the employees/ staff working
in the Courts, as well as the advocates who throng the Courts to attend to their
cases, by treating them as well, as frontline workers. The said communication
has been marked by the Hon’ble the Chief Justice to one of us (Vipin Sanghi,
4.     The need of the hour is to vaccinate the masses, in view of the raging
Pandemic, on a war footing so as to secure the life and health of all those who
step out of their homes to attend to their avocations and professions. Courts,
by their very nature, are places which have very high density congregations
of people on a daily basis. Hundreds and thousands of cases are listed in any
given Court complex every day. Apart from judges, the Court staff – which
is substantial, and Advocates – who have to attend to their respective cases,
and a large number of litigants visit Courts in which their cases are listed, on
a daily basis. Since, the cases listed on any given day are mostly different
from those listed on the previous day, or the next day, the litigants visiting
the Courts constitute a different group from day to day to a great extent. The
aforesaid peculiarity exposes the Judges, the Court staff, and the lawyers
functioning in the Court system to the risk of contracting the disease from not
only each other, but also from the large number of litigants who visit the
Courts every day to attend to their cases. In fact, the number of persons
visiting a Court complex – such as the Tiz Hazari Courts on any given day,
may well be in excess of the number of persons visiting and thronging the
hospital for treatment of patients.
5.     The Full Court of the Delhi High Court has already taken a decision to
re-open the full-fledged physical functioning of the Delhi High Court and all
Courts subordinate to it from Monday, 15.03.2021. Once the Courts re-open
fully, there is bound to be a surge in the number of litigants, Advocates, Court
staff and the Judges attending the Courts physically who, till now, have been
conducting their cases partially through the online mode, and partially
6.      There is a clear pattern emerging that the number of COVID-19
positive cases increases with greater intermingling and congregation of
people. Court premises of the Delhi High Court and some of the District
Courts, and all the Court rooms are air-conditioned. With increased footfall,
there is likelihood of the rate of infection amongst those who attend the Courts
spiking, once the full-fledged physical functioning of Courts in Delhi
7.      In the light of the aforesaid, prima facie, it appears to us that there is
weight in the claim made by the Bar Council of Delhi for declaring all persons
associated with the judicial functioning, which includes the Judges, the Court
Staff and the lawyers as frontline workers, so that they could receive
vaccination on priority, and without limitations of their age or physical
condition.      We may observe that the co-morbidities enlisted by the
Government to accommodate persons falling in the age group of 45 to 60
years, taken note of hereinabove, are serious conditions from which the
Judges, the Court staff and Advocates may, or may not, be suffering. Even
if, they are not found to be suffering from one of the co-morbidities, it does
not mean that the risk of their contracting the disease and suffering serious
health issues – including fatality, does not exist. To examine the aforesaid
aspects, we are inclined to register this communication of Mr. Ramesh Gupta,
Chairman, Bar Council of Delhi dated 01.03.2021 as a Public Interest
8.     It would be necessary to ascertain the availability of the two
vaccinations in use in India, namely COVISHIELD and COVAXIN
manufactured by Serum Institute of India and Bharat Biotech.
9.     We, therefore, direct issuance of notice to the Secretary, Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare, Government of India; the Principal Secretary,
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, GNCT of Delhi; the Serum Institute
of India and; Bharat Biotech returnable on 04.03.2021 before Hon’ble the
Chief Justice. Notice be issued to the Union of India and GNCT of Delhi
through their respective standing counsels.     Notice be issued to Serum
Institute of India and Bharat Biotech through email. Along with the notice,
the communication of Mr. Ramesh Gupta, Senior Advocate, Chairman, Bar
Council of Delhi dated 01.03.2021, and a copy of this order shall accompany.