UT of J&K through Principal Secretary and Ors              ...Respondent(s)
Through: Ms Asifa Padroo, AAG for official respondents
Mr S. H. Thakur, Advocate for complainants/respondents
The instant petitions raise issues which are analogues,
interconnected and akin to each other, as such, are being taken up for
disposal jointly here under.
The brief facts leading to the filling of the instant petition are as
 Respondents 4 and 5 herein (for short the complainants) are stated
to have filed a complaint before the Chief Judicial Magistrate,
Srinagar, against the petitioners herein for allegations of fraud,
cheating, embezzlement and misappropriation of funds of an
educational society namely “Tyndale Biscoe and Mallinson
Society Kashmir” (for short the Society) and Schools namely “The
Kashmir Valley School Budgam” and “Tyndale-Biscoe Mallinson
School Shajimarg Tangmarg” (for short the Schools) run by the
said Society besides, alleging conversion of assets of the Society
and the Schools into their personal assets and also for
misappropriating grants provided by the government worth crores
of rupees to the Society and the Schools in violation of rules of the
 The aforesaid complaint is stated to have been followed by another
complaint filed by the complainants against the petitioners before
the Court of Chief Judicial Magistrate, Srinagar, in the year 2019
as well having been forwarded by it to SSP Crime Branch for
report in terms of order dated 28.11.2019 alleging therein again the
same acts of omission and commission committed by the
petitioners herein.
During the pendency of the aforesaid complaints for
enquiry before the Crime Branch, the complainants are stated to
have also filed a representation/complaint against the petitioners
herein before respondent no. 2 seeking registration of an FIR and
constitution of a Special Investigation Team (SIT) thereof with
almost the same set of allegations as had been leveled in the
complaint filed by them earlier before the Chief Judicial
 It is being stated that on 14.10.2019 the Chief Judicial Magistrate,
Srinagar, after noticing that none appeared in the matter, directed
the police after perusal of the report that in case impugned alleged
offence by the accused persons are made out consequent legal
action under law be initiated and the complaint accordingly came
to be dismissed, whereafter the complainants are stated to have
filed another complaint supra before the Chief Judicial Magistrate,
Srinagar, wherein SSP Crime Branch came to be directed to submit
a report in terms of order dated 28.11.2019 supra.
 It is being next stated that respondent 3 submitted a report before
the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Srinagar, on 30.11.2019 in response
to order dated 28.11.2019 indicating therein that the enquiry is at
its final stage. The said complaint is stated to have been entertained
by respondent 2 in presence of the complaint pending enquiry
before the respondent 3 pursuant to the directions passed by the
 It is being further stated that the complainants instead of pursuing
the complaints filed before the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Srinagar
under enquiry before the Crime Branch inasmuch as in presence of
3rd complaint filed before respondent 2, yet filed another complaint
before the Director Industries and Commerce, Kashmir, being
Registrar of Societies under J&K Societies Registration Act, on
31.12.2019 against the petitioners herein on same set of
allegations.
The filing of the initial complaint as also the successive
complaints filed thereafter by the complainants against the
petitioners inasmuch as entertaining the same as also setting into
motion process thereof by the Court of Chief Judicial Magistrate,
Srinagar coupled with the enquiry/ies initiated by the Crime
Branch is being questioned in the instant petition by the petitioners
inter-alia on the ground that the complaints are false, frivolous,
highly motivated having been mechanically entertained and
forwarded for enquiry/investigation by the Chief Judicial
Magistrate, Srinagar, inasmuch without there being any substance
therein the same subjecting the petitioners to harassment,
victimization as also being abuse of process of law.
Reply to the petition has been filed by the respondents 2 and 3 as also
respondents 4 and 5.
 In the reply filed by respondents 2 and 3 it is being admitted
that the complaint came to be received on 14.12.2018 from the
Chief Judicial Magistrate, Srinagar whereafter an enquiry bearing
No. 214/2018 was initiated wherein most of the allegations were
not proved on the face of evidence both orally and documentary
mainly provided by school administration run by the petitioners.
 It is also being stated that during the pendency of the said
enquiry, the complainants submitted a representation/complaint
before the respondent 3 and simultaneously before respondent
No. 2 whereupon the respondent 2 directed respondent 3 to
initiate a preliminary verification resulting into initiation of
preliminary verification bearing No. 02/2020 which formal
verification with regard to the trustees of the school were found
to be in conflict with information received from the Registrar of
Societies J&K and the said complaint filed by complainants
against the petitioners disclosed offences of fraud, cheating,
misappropriation and conspiracy.
In the response filed by respondents 4 and 5 to the petition, the
complainants have reiterated the facts inasmuch as the allegations
leveled against the petitioners herein in the complaints filed by them
before the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Srinagar, as well as respondent
2, and based on the said response seek dismissal of the petition with
exemplary costs.
It is pertinent to note that the facts stated and noticed in the CRM(M)
No. 28/2020 supra have been reiterated and repeated in the instant
petition insofar as a complaints filed by           complainants (being
respondents 7 and 8 herein) against the petitioners before the Chief
Judicial Magistrate, Srinagar on 12.12.2018, Registrar Societies on
31.12.2019 are concerned and in addition thereto, a complaint is also
stated to have been filed before the and Director Industries and
Commerce, and the Divisional Commissioner, Kashmir who is stated
to have forwarded the same to Joint Director Education for holding of
an enquiry in terms of order dated 06.03.2020.
 It is being further stated that the respondents complainants filed a
similar complaint before the respondent 2 herein having been
forwarded to respondent 4 for investigation in terms of
communication        No.    Adm/K/PS/20-21/Misc./223-25        dated
29.05.2020 being impugned in the petition.
Reply to the petition has been filed by respondents 7 and 8 wherein
the respondents have again reiterated the same facts, circumstances
and allegations as have been leveled by them against the petitioners.
For the sake of brevity and in order to avoid repetition, the said reply
need not to be referred to herein.
The instant petitions are being maintained by the petitioners inter-alia
on the grounds that they have been subjected to multiple
enquiries/investigations for same set of allegations leveled by the
complainants in successive complaints and that the official
respondents despite being aware about the said complaints, enquiries
and investigations initiated thereupon and though having been
questioned by the petitioners before this court in WP(C) No. 803/2020
and WP(C) No. 901/2020 yet entertained the said complaints for
enquiry and investigation illegally, without any competence and in
breach and violation of fundamental rights of the petitioners for mala-
fide consideration aimed at to black-mail, victimize and harass the
petitioners, besides being an abuse of process of law.
Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
Submissions of counsel for the petitioners.
Mr. Sunil Sethi learned Sr. Counsel appearing for the petitioners while
making his submissions would contend that the complainant
(respondent 4 in CRM(M) No. 28/2020 supra) had been an employee
of the Tyndale Biscoe School since 2004 and resigned in the year
2018 whereafter the said complainant started harassing and
blackmailing the petitioners by filing false, frivolous and baseless
complaints against the petitioners, the Society and the Schools run by
the said Society.
Mr. Sethi would further contend that after filing the first
complaint before the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Srinagar, in the year
2018, the complainant also filed a complaint before the Divisional
Commissioner, Kashmir, which came to be forwarded by him to the
Joint Director Education Department for holding of an enquiry which
action came to be questioned by the petitioners in WP(C) No.
803/2020 before this Court.
Mr. Sethi would next contend that the complainants filed
another complaint on the similar set of allegations against the
petitioners before the Director Industries and Commerce Department
who while taking cognizance thereof sought information from the
Chairman Bishop of the Diocese of Amritsar on 07.01.2020 and in
addition thereto, another complaint came to be lodged by the
complainants before the Assistant Commissioner Nazool against the
petitioners against which complaint and action initiated thereupon as
well the petitioners filed WP(C) no. 901/2020 before this Court.
According to Mr. Sethi both WP(C) 803/2020 and WP(C)
901/2020 supra came to be allowed by this Court by a common
judgement dated 09.09.2021 and issued the process initiated by the
official respondents upon the said complaints filed by the
complainants against the petitioners.
Mr. Sethi would also submit that the allegations leveled against
the petitioners in the complaint filed before the official respondents
herein in the instant petitions are as well baseless and unfounded
aimed at to blackmail, harass and victimize the petitioners having
been filed successively one after another on same set of allegations
and without any competence and jurisdiction taken cognizance of by
the official respondents.
Mr. Sethi would further contend that petitioners admittedly
purchased various properties in their names out of the funds of the
Society however, the said properties were purchased in their own
names owing to the operation of the then Article 370 and 35-A of the
Constitution of India as the Society could not purchase the said
properties being not a State subject of the then State. Mr. Sethi would
submit that all the said properties are and belong to the Society and
the Schools in terms of Section 18 of the Jammu and Kashmir School
It is further contended by Mr Sethi that the allegations of
cheating, fraud and misappropriation leveled against the petitioners
besides being false, unfounded and baseless are otherwise not
attracted against the petitioners as the complainants do not claim to be
the persons either cheated or defrauded warranting application of
relevant provisions of the Penal Code.
Mr. Sethi would lastly contend that the complainants have been
continuously subjecting the petitioners to harassment, blackmailing
and persecution by filing false, baseless and unfounded successive
complaints on same set of allegations, without any lawful
justification, but for extraneous considerations coupled with oblique
Submissions of the counel for the complainants/respondents.
Mr. S. H. Thakur, appearing counsel for the respondents/complainants
while opposing and controverting the submissions made by Mr. Sethi
would contend that the complainants are the members of a Christian
Missionary Society and have as such a right to secure and protect the
interests of the Society and the schools being run and operated by it.
Mr. Thakur would further submit that the petitions have been
maintained by the petitioners to cover up the fraud, embezzlement and
misappropriation of the Society and the schools funds as such, are
liable to be dismissed.
In order to address to the issues raised in the instant petitions, it would
be advantageous and appropriate to refer to following provisions of
the Jammu and Kashmir School Education Act, 2002, being relevant
and germane herein, as the case setup by the complainants/
respondents relate to the allegations of fraud, embezzlement and
misappropriation of funds of the Society and the schools run and
operated by it.
Section 3- pertains to the application of the Act and applies to
all the Schools in the State.
Section 11- provides that no private school shall be established,
run or maintained without permission in writing of the
Government or competent authority.
Section 13- deals with the management of the private schools
and provides that no private school shall be managed and run
by any person other than an educational agency which agency
has to appoint a manager for looking after day-to-day running
and administration of the schools managed and run by such
education agency.
Section 18 of the Act provides that any property or assets
owned, hold or acquired by any person in or on behalf of any
private school shall for the purposes of this Act be deemed to be
property of the educational agency notwithstanding that such
property stands in the name of any individual.
Besides above, it would also be pertinent and appropriate to refer to
the sum and substance of the allegations leveled by the complainants
against the petitioners in the complaints filed by them before the Chief
Judicial Magistrate, Srinagar, and other official respondents herein.
The allegations admittedly are of fraud, cheating and misappropriation
of the funds of the Society and the Schools, besides to breach of trust.
Indisputably neither the Society nor the Schools are the complainants
alleging the said acts of omission and commission against the
petitioners in relation to their affairs, funds or properties. The
complainants thus, cannot by any sense of imagination said to be the
persons aggrieved of or persons having suffered on account of alleged
offences at the hands of the petitioners, be it the offence of fraud,
cheating or misappropriation of the funds of the Society or the
Schools, more so in presence of the stand of the petitioners that the
properties purchased by them in their own names in fact are the
properties belonging to the Society and the Schools, which stand of
the petitioners also lends support from the language used in Section
18 of the Act of 2002 supra.
Furthermore, in this regard, the stand taken by the official respondents
in their reply filed to CRM(M) 28/2020 cannot also be overlooked
which provide that the most of the allegations during the course of
enquiry held under enquiry no. 214/2018 were not proved on the face
of evidence both orally and documentary provided by the petitioners
notwithstanding the assertion in the said objections that information
with regard to the trustees of the school was found in conflict with the
information received from the Registrar of the Societies of J&K which
conflict of information, even if, taken to be true cannot per-se by any
sense of imagination said to be constituting any offence much less
those alleged by the complainants in the complaints as such alleged
conflict in the records of the Society may be a breach or violation of
the provisions of the Jammu and Kashmir Societies Registration Act
and under the said Act any such breach would not constitute any
offence covered under the Penal Code.
Perusal of the record manifestly tends to show that the complainants
have successively filed complaints against the petitioners on the same
set of allegations, be it before the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Srinagar,
Inspector General of Police, SSP Crime Branch, Divisional
Commissioner, Kashmir, Director Industries and Commerce Kashmir,
Registrar under Societies and Registration Act, Kashmir, amongst
which two complaints and actions initiated thereupon came to be
quashed by this Court on 09.09.2021 while deciding WP(C) 803/2020
Law is no more res-integra and is settled by the Apex Court in cases
titled as “Tarak Dash Mukharjee & Ors V. State of Uttar Pradesh
& Ors passed in Criminal Appeal No. 1400 of 2022 on 23.08.2022
and “Krishna Lal Chawla and Ors Vs. State of U.P and Anr.”
reported in 2021(5) SCC 435 and “T. T. Antony Vs. State of
Kerela” reported in 2001 (6) SCC 181 , that filing of the multiple
criminal proceedings by some person against the same accused for the
same alleged offences is prohibited and getting an accused entangled
in multiple criminal proceedings in same alleged offences would be an
abuse of process of law and as such, will not stand the scrutiny of the
Article 21 and 22 of the Constitution.
It has also been the consistent view of the Apex Court and this Court
and is a settled canon of law that power under Section 482 CrPC can
be exercised in order to prevent the abuse of process of law.
The instant cases are glaring example of such an abuse of process of
law taken recourse to by the complainants/respondents by filing
successive complaints against the petitioners not only setting criminal
law into motion but also involving administrative/executive
authorities   therein.  The     entire    exercise   undertaken by  the
complainants/respondents herein against the petitioners seemingly is
not only unfair but patently tainted with malafide motive aimed at to
abuse the process of law with a view to harass the petitioners and
same as such cannot be overlooked by this Court. In this Court’s quest
for doing justice while allowing the instant petitions and quashing the
impugned complaints including the proceedings initiated thereupon,
the complainants/respondents are thus, liable to be burdened with
costs to be payable to the petitioners. Accordingly, petitions are
allowed and consequently impugned complaints and proceedings
initiated thereupon are quashed and an amount of Rs. 50,000/- is
imposed as costs upon the complainants/respondents herein to be
payable to the petitioners within eight (8) weeks hereafter.
Disposed of.