1.     The following questions have been referred to this Bench by a
learned Single Judge of this Court:
“a) whether in cases specifically related to
manufactured drug with a miniscule percentage of a
narcotic substance, the weight of the neutral
substance ought to be ignored while determining the
nature of the quantity seized i.e. small, commercial or
b) whether Note 4 of the S.O. 1055 (E) dated 19th
October, 2001 published in the Gazette of India,
Extra., Pt.II, Sec3 (ii) dated 19th October 2001, as
amended on 18.11.2009, should be held inapplicable
to manufactured drug which contain a miniscule
percentage of a narcotic drug?
c) whether Note 4 of the S.O. 1055 (E) dated 19th
October, 2001 published in the Gazette of India,.
Extra., Pt.II, Sec3 (ii) dated 19th October 2001, as
amended on 18.11.2009, should be made applicable to
cough syrups containing miniscule percentage of
Codeine since it has medicinal value and is also easily
2.     The background for such reference is that during the course of
the hearing in the bail application, filed on behalf of the petitioner, in
a Complaint Case No. 62/2020, dated 31.01.2018, filed by customs
under Sections 21(C) and 23(C) of The Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances Act 1985 (hereinafter “NDPS Act”), one of
the points that arose for consideration was whether the recovery of
110 bottles of „Phensedyl New‟ weighing 100 gms each and having a
Codeine concentration of 0.17% per bottle would be considered as
„commercial quantity‟ under the NDPS Act.
3.     The attention of the learned Single Judge was drawn to a
judgment of another learned Single Judge of this Court in Iqbal Singh
vs. State (BAIL APPLN. 645/2020), wherein the learned Single Judge
vide order dated 31.07.2020 had held that cough syrup bottle (Onerex)
containing Codeine Phosphate would fall outside the scope of the
definition of „manufactured drug‟ under Section 2(xi) of the NDPS
Act. The aforesaid finding of the learned Single Judge was based on
various provisions of the NDPS Act as well as the Drugs and
Cosmetics Act, 1940. The facts of the bail application in Iqbal Singh
(supra) were similar to the facts in the present bail application.
4.     The learned counsel for the petitioner in the present bail
application relying on the judgment of this court in Iqbal Singh
(supra) had argued that in the present case too, the bottles which had
been recovered were prescribed drugs which are covered under the
Drugs & Cosmetics Act and fall under Schedule H of The Drug and
Cosmetics Rules, 1945. It was further argued that the said bottles were
manufactured by a licensed manufacturer, i.e. M/s Abbot Healthcare
5.     The learned Single Judge, while hearing the present bail
application noted that the case of the applicant was to the extent that
since each bottle contained only 0.17% Codeine concentration, the
same cannot be categorised as „commercial quantity‟. In other words,
it was urged on behalf of the petitioner that only the weight of
Codeine concentration in each of the bottles should be taken into
account, which in the present case would be 18.70 gms (0.17% x 110),
bringing the case in the category of „intermediate quantity‟ and
therefore, rigours of Section 37 of the NDPS Act would not be
applicable. The Hon‟ble Supreme Court in Hira Singh vs. Union of
India, (2020) 20 SCC 272 had considered the notification bearing no.
S.O. 2941(E) dated 18.11.2009, adding ‘Note 4’ to the notification
bearing no. S.O. 1055(E) dated 19.10.2001 and had held that
irrespective of the quantity of the narcotic drug or psychotropic
substance in the mixture, the quantity of the entire substance would be
considered for the purposes of ascertaining whether it is a commercial
quantity, intermediate quantity or small quantity.
6.     After taking into consideration the judgment of Hon‟ble
Supreme Court in Hira Singh‟s Case (supra), the learned Single Judge
in Iqbal Singh (supra) held as under:
“25. Plainly, the quantity of the mixture of a
manufactured drug and a neutral substance would
require to be considered for the purposes of
determining whether the quantity is a commercial
quantity or a small quantity for the purposes of the
NDPS Act. However, a drug which is manufactured
but falls outside the scope of the definition of a
„manufactured drug‟ under the NDPS Act on account
of the component of offending material being below
the prescribed threshold, cannot be construed as a
manufactured drug by dissecting its ingredients and
considering them in isolation.”
7.     In this backdrop, the learned Single Judge, in the present matter
vide order dated 25.06.2021 observed as under:
“16. A reading of the judgment in lqbal Singh (supra)
therefore shows that this Court has created a
distinction between illicit substances which are sold in
mixtures containing neutral substances or which may
have the effect of enhancing the effect of the offending
substance or facilitate its abuse and a non offending
substance or preparation with bifacial qualities which
may have the miniscule quantities of a substance
which are also used for medicinal purposes and are
available in medical shops across country.”
The learned Single Judge further observed:
“21. Be that as it may, para 8.4 and para 10(II) of the
judgment of the Supreme Court in Hira Singh v.
Union of India reported as (2020) SCC Online SC 382
does not make any distinction between manufactured
drugs with a miniscule percentage of narcotic
substance and other mixture of narcotic drugs or
psychotropic substance out of a neutral substance.
The judgment of Iqbal Singh (supra) is therefore
contrary to a plain reading of the judgment of the
Supreme Court. Since cases of this nature are
common there is a strong possibility that different
Single Judge Benches of this Court may take different
opinions while deciding as to whether the rigour of
Section 37 would be attracted or not in such cases. It
would therefore be in the interest of justice that an
authoritative and final pronouncement is made by a
larger Bench of this Court.”
It is in these circumstances that the questions referred to
hereinabove have been placed before us for decision.
8.      Written submissions have been filed on behalf of the petitioner
and as well as the respondent.
9.      It is submitted on behalf of the petitioner that the 110 bottles of
cough syrup „Phensedyl New‟ manufactured by M/s Abbot Healthcare
Pvt. Ltd., containing a miniscule quantity of Codeine i.e. 0.17% in
each of the bottles will not fall within the definition of the
„manufactured drug‟ under Section 2(xi) of the NDPS Act.
10.     The learned counsel for the petitioner relies upon notification
titled “Manufactured Narcotics Drug” (as contained in Government of
India Notification No. S.O. 826 (E) dated 14.11.1985 and S.O. 40(E)
dated 21.09.1993 and S.O. no. 1431 (E) dated 21.06.2011) issued in
exercise of powers conferred by Sub-Clause (b) of Clause (xi) of
Section 2 of the NDPS Act and draws attention of this Court to Entry
35, which pertains to the substance Methyl Morphine (commonly
known as „Codeine‟). The said entry reads as under:
“S.O. 826(E). – In exercise of the powers conferred by
sub-clause (b) of clause (xi) of section 2 of the Narcotic
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (61 of
1985), the Central Government hereby declares the
following narcotic substances and preparations to be
manufactured drugs, namely:-
35. Methyl morphine (commonly known as „Codeine‟) and
Ethyle morphine and their salts (including Dionine), all
dilutions and preparations except those which are
compounded with one or more other ingredients and
containing not more than 100 milligrams of the drug per
dosage unit, and with a concentration of not more than
2.5% in undivided preparations and which have been
established in Therapeutic practice.
11.    It was submitted on behalf of the petitioner that the present case
is covered under the exception provided for in the aforesaid Entry 35.
It was further submitted that the alleged recovery of 110 bottles of
cough syrup, measuring 100 ml each contained 0.17% of Codeine
Phosphate and therefore it was contended that since Codeine was not
more than 100 milligrams in each bottle, the same would not be a
„manufactured drug‟ under the NDPS Act. In other words, the cough
syrup containing Codeine is used for “therapeutic practice” and
therefore is not a narcotic drug under the NDPS Act.
12.     In view of the foregoing, submissions on behalf of the
petitioner was that, the reliance placed upon the judgment of the
Hon‟ble Supreme Court in Md. Sahabuddin & Anr. vs. State of Assam
(2012) 13 SCC 491 by the respondent was not applicable to the facts
and circumstances of the present case as the alleged recovery in Md.
Sahabuddin (supra) was extremely huge and the Codeine percentage
in the cough syrup recovered therein was also 5%, which exceeded the
permissible limit of 2.5%.
13.    The learned counsel for the petitioner also relied upon an order
dated 26.10.2005 issued by the Drug Controller General of India, inter
alia, directing as under:-
“As you are aware there are number of Cough
preparations like Corex of M/s Pfizer Ltd. Mumbai,
Phensedyl of M/s. Nicholas Piramal India Limited,
Mumbai, Codokuff of M/S. German Remedies,
Codeine Linctus of M/s Zydus Alidac etc. moving in
inter state commerce. These preparations contain
among other drugs Codeine Phosphate 10 mg as one
of the ingredients. By virtue of the fact that these
preparations contain Codeine and it salts they do not
fall under the provisions of NDPS Act and Rules of
1985 but they fall under Schedule H of the Drugs and
Cosmetics Rules and are governed by the said rules.”
14.    The learned counsel for the petitioner had primarily relied upon
judgment/order passed by learned Single Judge in Iqbal Singh (supra).
Reliance was further placed on a judgment passed by learned Single
Judge of this Court in W.P. (C) 212/2016, titled Pfizer Ltd. & Anr. vs.
Union of India & Anr. dated 01.12.2016, whereby a notification
issued by the Central Government dated 10.03.2016 which considered
cough syrup containing Codeine, as “likely to involve risk to human
beings” was quashed. Reliance was also placed on an order passed by
the Hon‟ble Supreme Court in Binod Kumar @ Binod Kumar Bhagat
vs. The State of Bihar, (2018) 14 SCC 199 dated 10.08.2017, wherein
“6. According to the prosecution the Corex cough syrup
has been recovered from the godown and the prosecution
alleges that it has been recovered from the appellant. It is
evident that the Delhi High Court by order dated
01.12.2016 quashed the notification issued under Section
26A of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 which has
sought to prohibit the manufacture, distribution and sale of
344 Fixed Dose of Combination. The FIR was registered
on 23.8.2016. Be that as it may, the appellant has been in
custody from 24.08.2016.”
7. Having regard to the facts and circumstances of the
case, we are of the view that it is just and proper to release
the appellant on bail. Therefore, we order the appellant to
be released on bail on execution of his personal bond in
sum of Rs. 25,000/-with two sureties in the like sum to the
satisfaction of the trial judge. We permit the trial judge to
impose such conditions as he feels necessary for ensuring
the appellant's attendance on the dates of posting in the
trial court.”
15.     It was also submitted by learned counsel for the petitioner that
the Hon‟ble Supreme Court in the case of Hira Singh (supra) was
considering a case of a declared narcotic drug and the issue of a
miniscule quantity of an alleged narcotic drug like Codeine, used
within permissible limits in medicinal products which are available to
be bought online and offline with prescriptions, was not under
consideration before the Hon‟ble Supreme Court.
16.    Learned Counsel for the petitioner, on the basis of the aforesaid
submissions, prayed for grant of bail to the petitioner in the present
matter.
17.     Learned SPP appearing on behalf of the respondent submits
that the interpretation with regard to the questions referred by the
learned Single Judge is completely covered by the judgment of the
Hon‟ble Supreme Court in Hira Singh & Anr. vs. Union of India
18.     Learned SPP for the customs further relies upon the judgment
of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court in Md. Sahabuddin (supra) wherein the
Hon‟ble Supreme Court has held that if Codeine Phosphate was being
transported illegally without proper documents, it cannot be presumed
that it was for therapeutic practice in spite of it being a Schedule H
drug. It was further submitted that Section 80 of NDPS Act, inter alia,
provides that the provisions in said Act shall be in addition to the
Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and the Rules framed thereunder. It is
the contention of the learned SPP that provisions of both legislations
are to be read harmoniously and in the event Codeine or its
preparations including salts which fall within the ambit of Schedule H
is possessed, stored, transported or purchased under suspicious
circumstances, the same would give rise to a reasonable suspicion that
the drug is not being used for therapeutic purposes, and provisions of
the NDPS Act can be invoked.
19.     Reliance is also placed by learned SPP on the order/judgment
dated 01.11.2017 rendered in Gavranjeet Singh @ Gavrana vs. State
by the Hon‟ble High Court of Rajasthan in Criminal Misc. Bail No.
3790/2017 wherein the Hon‟ble High Court followed the decision of
the Hon‟ble Supreme Court in Md. Sahabuddin‟s case (supra).
20.    Learned SPP submits that in the present case, the petitioner was
found carrying two packets, each containing 55 bottles of „Phensedyl
New‟ (containing Codeine as one of its ingredients) in his checked-in
luggage. The petitioner could not produce any document to justify the
possession of the aforesaid 110 bottles of „Phensedyl New‟ and
therefore, the present case is covered by the judgment of the Hon‟ble
Supreme Court in Mohd. Sahabuddin‟s case (supra) and furthermore,
the entire quantity contained in the aforesaid bottles will have to be
calculated for purpose of prosecuting the petitioner under the NDPS
Act. The said quantity, according to the learned SPP would be 11000
ml (100 ml x 110) which would be categorised as commercial, as per
entry no. 28 in the notification specifying small quantity and
commercial quantity of Codeine as 10g and 1kg respectively, and
therefore, the rigours of Section 37 of the NDPS Act would apply and
the petition for seeking bail should be dismissed.
21.    Before we proceed to answer the questions referred to this
bench, we feel that the decision of the learned Single Judge of this
court in Iqbal Singh (supra) needs to be considered. In Iqbal Singh
(supra), learned Single Judge was concerned with the bail application
filed by the petitioner therein, in a complaint case filed by the
Narcotic Control Bureau (NCB) under Section 8 and 21 of the NDPS
Act. The recovery in the said case was alleged to be 57 bottles of
„Onerex‟ cough syrup. The said cough syrup, as in the present case,
also contained Codeine Phosphate. The learned Single Judge after
examining the provisions of the NDPS Act as well as The Drugs and
Cosmetics Act, was of the prima facie view that the alleged recovery
from the petitioner was of a cough syrup (having codeine as one of its
ingredients) which is not a narcotic drug covered under the NDPS Act.
The learned Single Judge in Para 16 observed:
“16. The product recovered from the petitioner is a
cough syrup and not any narcotic drug. Mr Dhaka
also pointed out that the said product (cough syrup) is
sold openly in the market and is also available online.
The fact that the said product also includes miniscule
quantity (0.17%) of a prohibited or controlled
substances cannot, prima facie, change the nature of
the product. In terms of Entry 35 of the list of
manufactured drugs (as contained in Govt. of India
notifications SO 826(E) dated 14.11.1985., S.O. 40(E)
dated 29.01.1993 and S.O. 1431(E) dated
21.06.2011), the product recovered from the
petitioner does not fall within the ambit of a
manufactured drug as the content of Codeine
phosphate is less than 2.5%.”
22.    As far as the decision of Hon‟ble Supreme Court in Hira Singh
(supra), is concerned, it is observed that the learned Single Judge in
Iqbal Singh was of the prima facie view that the recovered substance
in the said case i.e. cough syrup (having codeine as one of its
ingredient) would fall outside the scope of definition of the
„manufactured drug‟ under the NDPS Act and the learned Single
Judge in Para 25 has held:
“25. Plainly, the quantity of the mixture of a
manufactured drug and a neutral substance would
require to be considered for the purposes of
determining whether the quantity is a commercial
quantity or a small quantity for the purposes of the
NDPS Act. However, a drug which is manufactured
but falls outside the scope of the definition of a
„manufactured drug‟ under the NDPS Act on account
of the component of offending material being below
the prescribed threshold, cannot be construed as a
manufactured drug by dissecting its ingredients and
considering them in isolation.”
23.     In view of the foregoing, learned Single Judge in Iqbal Singh
(supra) has held in Para 27 as under:
“27. At this stage, this Court is not required to
examine the matter in any further detail. Suffice it to
state that the petitioner has presented reasonable
grounds for being acquitted in the present case. There
is no allegation that the petitioner is involved in any
other case.”
24.     In view of the above, we are of the considered opinion that the
judgment in Iqbal Singh (supra) is not contrary to the judgment of the
Hon‟ble Supreme Court in Hira Singh (supra). It is relevant to point
out that the learned Single Judge in Iqbal Singh (supra) has merely
stated that the determination of the „commercial quantity‟ or otherwise
would only be relevant in a case where the prosecution establishes that
the recovered substance was either a narcotic drug or a psychotropic
substance. The learned Single Judge in Iqbal Singh (supra) case was
of the prima facie view that the cough syrup containing Codeine
would not fall within the definition of „manufactured drug‟ under the
NDPS Act in view of the various provisions and circulars referred to
in the judgment.
25.     The issue whether a cough syrup containing Codeine
manufactured by a licensed manufacturer would fall within the
definition of „manufactured drug‟ under the NDPS Act or not will be
relevant to decide question „(c)‟ referred to this bench.
26.    Section 2(xiv) defines „narcotic drug‟ as:
“means coca leaf, cannabis (hemp), opium, poppy
straw and includes all manufactured drugs”.
(emphasis supplied)
Section 2(x) defining the term „manufacture‟ reads as
“manufacture”, in relation to narcotic drugs or
psychotropic             substances,              includes—
(1) all processes other than production by which such
drugs       or    substances      may      be      obtained;
(2) refining of such drugs or substances;
(3) transformation of such drugs or substances; and
(4) making of preparation (otherwise than in a pharmacy
on prescription) with or containing such drugs or
(emphasis supplied)
Section 2(xi) defines “manufactured drug” as follows:
“(a) all coca derivatives, medicinal cannabis, opium
derivatives     and      poppy      straw       concentrate;
(b) any other narcotic substance or preparation which the
Central Government may, having regard to the available
information as to its nature or to a decision, if any, under
any International Convention, by notification in the
Official Gazette, declare to be a manufactured drug;
but does not include any narcotic substance or
preparation which the Central Government may, having
regard to the available information as to its nature or to a
decision, if any, under any International Convention, by
notification in the Official Gazette, declare not to be a
manufactured drug;”
The term „opium derivative‟ has been defined under
Section 2(xvi) as:
(c) phenanthrene alkaloids, namely, morphine, codeine,
thebaine and their salts;
27.    It is an admitted position that in the present case, the seized
substance i.e. 110 bottles of „Phensedyl New‟ is a „preparation‟ within
the meaning of Section 2(xx) of the NDPS Act. Such „preparation‟ to
be declared as „manufactured drug‟ would have to be notified by the
Central Government under Section 2(xi)(b) of the NDPS Act. All
„manufactured drugs‟ are included within the definition of the
„narcotic drug‟ under Section 2(xiv) of the NDPS Act. In other words,
a preparation to be included in the NDPS Act, would at the first
instance have to be declared a „manufactured drug‟.
28.    At this stage, it is also pertinent to take note of Entry 35 in
notification titled “Manufactured Narcotics Drug” (as contained in
Government of India Notification No. S.O. 826 (E) dated 14.11.1985
and S.O. 40(E) dated 21.09.1993 and S.O. no. 1431 (E) dated
21.06.2011) issued in exercise of powers conferred by Sub Clause (b)
of Clause (xi) of Section 2 of the NDPS Act which pertains to
substance Methyl Morphine (commonly known as „Codeine‟). The
said entry reads as under:-
“S.O. 826(E). – In exercise of the powers conferred
by sub-clause (b) of clause (xi) of section 2 of the
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act,
1985 (61 of 1985), the Central Government hereby
declares the following narcotic substances and
preparations to be manufactured drugs, namely:-
35. Methyl morphine (commonly known as „Codeine‟)
and Ethyle morphine and their salts (including
Dionine), all dilutions and preparations except those
which are compounded with one or more other
ingredients and containing not more than 100
milligrams of the drug per dosage unit, and with a
concentration of not more than 2.5% in undivided
preparations and which have been established in
Therapeutic practice.
29.     Thus, as per the aforesaid notification, if any „manufactured
drug‟ within the meaning of Section 2(xi)(b) of NDPS Act contains
not more than 100 mg of Methyl Morphine, commonly known as
Codeine, per dosage unit, and in that drug, Codeine is compounded
with one or more ingredients and if in the said drug the concentration
of Codeine is not more than 2.5% in undivided preparation, and the
drug has been established in therapeutic practice, it will not be a
„preparation‟ within the meaning of „manufactured drug‟ and,
therefore it will not to be a „narcotic drug‟.
30.    It is also admitted fact that to clarify this position, on
26.10.2005, the Drug Controller of India, has written a letter to the
State Drug Controller stating as follows:
“As you are aware there are number of Cough
preparations like Corex of M/s Pfizer Ltd. Mumbai,
Phensedyl of M/s. Nicholas Piramal India Limited,
Mumbai, Codokuff of M/S. German Remedies,
Codeine Linctus of M/s Zydus Alidac etc. moving in
inter state commerce. These preparations contain
among other drugs Codeine Phosphate 10 mg as one
of the ingredients. By virtue of the fact that these
preparations contain Codeine and it salts they do not
fall under the provisions of NDPS Act and Rules of
1985 but they fall under Schedule H of the Drugs and
Cosmetics Rules and are governed by the said rules.”
31.    In view of the above provisions of the NDPS Act, The Drugs
and Cosmetics Act, The Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 and the
aforesaid circular, the learned Single Judge in Iqbal Singh (supra)
came to a prima facie conclusion that „Onerex‟ cough syrup
containing 0.17% of Codeine was below the prescribed threshold and
could not be construed as a „manufactured drug‟ by dissecting its
ingredients and considering them in isolation.
32.    In Mohd. Sahabuddin (supra), the Hon‟ble Supreme Court was
dealing with the case of seizure of 347 cartons with each carton
containing 100 bottles of 100 ml of „Phensedyl‟ cough syrup and 102
cartons of 100 bottles of 100 ml bottles of „Recodex‟ cough syrup
which were found concealed, along with other household articles, in a
truck. Both the aforesaid cough syrups were pharmaceutical drugs
covered under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act and the Rules framed
thereunder. Taking note of the notifications dated 14.11.1985 and
29.01.1993 (issued under Section 2(xi)(b) of the NDPS Act), as
mentioned hereinabove, the Hon‟ble Supreme Court in the aforesaid
judgment held as under:
“10. It is not in dispute that each 100 ml bottle of
Phensedyl cough syrup contained 183.15 to 189.85
mg of codeine phosphate and the each 100 ml bottle of
Recodex cough syrup contained 182.73 mg of codeine
phosphate. When the appellants were not in a position
to explain as to whom the supply was meant either for
distribution or for any licensed dealer dealing with
pharmaceutical products and in the absence of any
other valid explanation for effecting the
transportation of such a huge quantity of the cough
syrup which contained the narcotic substance of
codeine phosphate beyond the prescribed limit, the
application for grant of bail cannot be considered
based on the above submissions made on behalf of the
appellants.
12. As pointed out by us earlier, since the appellants
had no documents in their possession to disclose as to
for what purpose such a huge quantity of Schedule H
drug containing narcotic substance was being
transported and that too stealthily, it cannot be simply
presumed that such transportation was for therapeutic
practice as mentioned in the Notifications dated 14-
11-1985 and 29-1-1993. Therefore, if the said
requirement meant for therapeutic practice is not
satisfied then in the event of the entire 100 ml content
of the cough syrup containing the prohibited quantity
of codeine phosphate is meant for human
consumption, the same would certainly fall within the
penal provisions of the NDPS Act calling for
appropriate punishment to be inflicted upon the
appellants. Therefore, the appellants' failure to
establish the specific conditions required to be
satisfied under the abovereferred to notifications, the
application of the exemption provided under the said
notifications in order to consider the appellants'
application for bail by the courts below does not
arise.
13. As far as the grievance raised on the ground that
the appellants were illegally detained beyond 24
hours by the police is concerned, the conclusion of the
High Court having been based on the satisfaction
reached by it, we do not find any scope to interfere
with the same.”
33.    Recently, the Hon‟ble Supreme Court in State of Punjab vs.
Rakesh Kumar (2019) 2 SCC 466, reversed a decision of the Hon‟ble
High Court of Punjab and Haryana, granting suspension of sentence to
the convicts under Section 389 Cr.P.C and held as under:
“10. In the present case, the respondent-accused were
found in bulk possession of manufactured drugs
without any valid authorisation. The counsel on behalf
of the appellant State has extensively stressed that the
actions of the respondent-accused amounts to clear
violation of Section 8 of the NDPS Act as it clearly
prohibits possession of narcotic substances except for
medicinal or scientific purposes. In furtherance of the
same, the counsel on behalf of the appellant State has
put emphasis on the judgment rendered by this Court
in Union of India v. Sanjeev V. Deshpande , wherein it
was held that : (SCC pp. 12-13, paras 25-26)
“25. In other words, DEALING IN narcotic
drugs and psychotropic substances is
permissible only when such DEALING is for
medical       purposes      or      scientific
purposes. Further, the mere fact that
the DEALING     IN narcotic    drugs      and
psychotropic substances is for a medical or
scientific purpose does not by itself lift the
embargo created under Section 8(c). Such a
dealing must be in the manner and extent
provided by the provisions of the Act, Rules
or Orders made thereunder. Sections 9 and
10 enable the Central and the State
makerules permitting and regulating variou
s aspects contemplated under Section 8(c),
26. The Act does not contemplate framing of
rules for prohibiting the various activities
of DEALING      IN narcotic     drugs      and
psychotropic substances. Such prohibition
is already contained in Section 8(c). It only
contemplates of the framing of rules for
permitting and regulating any activity of
DEALING IN narcotic drugs or psychotropic
substances.”
13. However, we are unable to agree on the
conclusion reached by the High Court for reasons
stated further. First, we note that Section 80 of the
NDPS Act, clearly lays down that application of the
Drugs and Cosmetics Act is not barred, and
provisions of the NDPS Act can be applicable in
addition to that of the provisions of the Drugs and
Cosmetics Act. The statute further clarifies that the
provisions of the NDPS Act are not in derogation of
the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940. This Court
in Union of India v. Sanjeev V. Deshpande , has held
that : (SCC p. 16, para 35)
“35. … essentially the Drugs and Cosmetics
Act, 1940 deals with various operations of
manufacture, sale, purchase, etc. of drugs
generally whereas Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 deals
with a more specific class of drugs and,
therefore, a special law on the subject.
Further, the provisions of the Act operate in
addition to the provisions of the 1940 Act.”
(emphasis supplied)”
34.    It is pertinent to note that the aforesaid decision is related to an
order passed by the Hon‟ble High Court of Punjab and Haryana,
granting suspension of sentence to convicts under the NDPS Act.
Some of the said cases in the table which is a part of the aforesaid
judgment reflect that some of the respondents therein were convicted
for possession of cough syrup containing Codeine Phosphate, while
others had been convicted for possession of other narcotic drugs or
psychotropic substances.
35.     A division bench of the Hon‟ble High Court of Allahabad in
case titled as Vibhor Rana vs. Union of India, 2021 SCC Online All
908, after analyzing the provisions of the NDPS Act, The Drugs and
Cosmetics Act, and the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, observed as
“24. The prohibition contained in Section 8 of the Act
is applicable to “Narcotic Drugs” and since
Phensedyl New Cough Linctus contains Codeine
compounded with one other ingredient, namely
Chlorpheniramine Maleate and since Phensedyl New
Cough Linctus contains merely 10 milligrams per
dosage unit of 5 ml, which is not more than 100
milligrams of the drug per dosage unit in undivided
preparations and the concentration of Codeine in
Phensedyl New Cough Linctus is merely 0.2%, which
obviously is not more than 2.5% and which has been
established in Therapeutic practice, it is not a
“Manufactured Drug” and, therefore, it is not a
“Narcotic Drug”, the prohibition contained in Section
8 of the Act does not apply to it.
25. Phensedyl New Cough Linctus contains Codeine
which is mentioned at Serial Number 20 in Schedule
H1 appended to the Drugs Rules, 1945 and a note
appended to Schedule H1 provides that “Preparations
containing the above drug substances and their sales
excluding those intended for topical or external use
(except opthalmic and ear or nose preparations)
containing above substances are also covered by this
is a drug covered by the Drugs and Cosmetics Act,
26. To clarify this position, on 26.10.2005 the Drug
Controller General of India had written letter to all
the State Drugs Controllers stating as follows:—
“As you are aware there are number of
Cough preparations like Corex of M/s
Pfizer Ltd. Mumbai, Phensedyl of M/s.
Codokuff of M/S. German Remedies,
Codeine Linctus of M/s Zydus Alidac etc.
moving in inter state commerce. These
preparations contain among other drugs
Codeine Phosphate 10 mg as one of the
ingredients. By virtue of the fact that these
preparations contain Codeine and it salts
they do not fall under the provisions of
NDPS Act and Rules of 1985 but they fall
under Schedule H of the Drugs and
Cosmetics Rules and are governed by the
said rules. Though stocking and sale of
these drugs do not attract the provisions of
NDPS Act and Rules 1985 however these
formulations are prescriptions drugs and
are to be dispensed on the prescriptions
drug and are to be dispensed on the
prescription of a registered Medical
Practitioner only. Further you may be
already aware that under notification
number S.O. 826(E) dated 14th Nov. 1985
under the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances Act and Rules 1985 certain
preparations are exempted as manufactured
drugs provided the preparations contain the
Narcotic drug to the extent permitted. In
respect of Codeine under entry no. 35 it is
stated that Codeine and Ethyl Morphine and
their salts including Dionine all dilutions
and preparations are considered to be
manufactured drugs except those which are
compounded with one or more other
ingredients and containing not more than
100 milligrams of the drug per dosage unit
and with a concentration of not more than
2.5 per cent in undivided preparations and
which have been established in therapeutic
practice.”
27. In March 2009 the Drugs Controller General
(India) had issued a letter to the Associated Chambers
of Commerce and Industry of India in response to a
request for clarification of drug substance Cough
Linctus containing codeine Phosphate stating that:—
“In this connection this Directorate had
already issued a circular letter vide our
letter number X-11029/27/05-D dated
26/10/2005 to all State Drugs Controllers
with a copy to various associations and a
copy Narcotic Control Bureau New Delhi
(copy enclosed). The above circular inter
alia stated that these preparations (Cough
Linctus containing Codeine Phosphate)
contains among other drugs Codeine
Phosphate 10 mg as one of the ingredients.
By virtue of the fact that these preparations
contain Codeine and its salts they do not
fall under the provisions of NDPS Act and
the Rules of 1985 but they fall under
Schedule H of the Drugs and Cosmetic
Rules and are governed by the said rules.
Though stocking and sale of these drugs do
not attract the provisions of NDPS Act and
Rules 1985, however these formulations are
prescriptions drugs and are to be dispensed
on the prescriptions of a registered Medical
Practioner only. Further you may be aware
that under notification number S.O.826(E)
dated 14th November, 1985 under the
Narcotic     Drugs     and     Psychotropic
Substances Act and Rules 1985 certain
preparations are exempted as manufactured
drugs provided the preparations contain the
Narcotic drug to the extent permitted. In
respect of Codeine under entry no. 35 it is
stated that Codeine and Ethyl Morphine and
their salts including Dionine all dilutions
and preparations are considered to be
manufactured drugs except those which are
compounded with one or more other
ingredients and containing not more than
100 miligrams of the drug per dosage unit
and with a concentration of not more than
2.5 per cent in undivided preparations and
which have been established in therapeutic
practice.”
36.    The Division Bench of High Court of Allahabad in Vibhor
Rana (supra), after examining the aforesaid judgment of the Hon‟ble
Supreme Court in the State of Punjab Vs. Rakesh Kumar (supra) has
“35. However, whether Phensedyl New Cough
Linctus, or any substance containing “Methyl
morphine (commonly known as “Codeine‟) and Ethyl
morphine and their salts (including Dionine), all
dilutions and preparations except those which are
compounded with one or more other ingredients and
containing not more than 100 milligrams of the drug
per dosage unit and with a concentration of not more
than 2.5% in undivided preparations and which have
been established in Therapeutic practice.” falls within
the exception to item No. 35 of the Notification dated
14-11-1985 issued by the Government of India
containing the list of narcotic drugs and whether it is
a “Manufactured drug‟ and is a “narcotic substance‟
was neither raised nor adjudicated in this case.
38. In both the aforesaid decisions in State of
Punjab v. Rakesh        Kumar and Hemant         Kumar
Saini v. Union of India (Supra), the question whether
or not the offending substances fell within the
definitions of “manufactures drugs” and “narcotic
substance” provided in Sections 2 (xi) and 2 (xiv) of
the NDPS Act, was not decided. However, in the
present case, the composition of the drug has been
pleaded specifically and the same has not been
disputed by the respondents. It is thus admitted that
Phensedyl New Cough Linctus contains Codeine
compounded with one other ingredient, namely
Chlorpheniramine Maleate and contains merely 10
milligrams per dosage unit of 5 ml, which is not more
than 100 milligrams of the drug per dosage unit in
undivided preparations and the concentration of
Codeine in Phensedyl New Cough Linctus is merely
0.2%, which obviously is not more than 2.5%. and the
precise question involved in the case is on the basis of
the aforesaid undisputed facts, whether Phensedyl
New Cough Linctus falls within the exception
mentioned in entry 35 of the Notification dated 14-11-
1985 or not and consequently, whether the provisions
of the NDPS Act would apply to it or not. Therefore,
both the aforesaid judgments are not relevant for
deciding the question involved in the present Writ
37.     It may be noted that in the judgment of Hon‟ble Supreme
Court in Md. Sahabuddin (supra) it had been observed that the twin
conditions in Entry 35, as aforesaid mentioned, would be fulfilled only
if the recovered substance was “being used for therapeutic practice”
and further observed in Para 11 of the said judgment;
“11…Therapeutic practice as per dictionary meaning
means “contributing to cure of disease”. In other
words, the assessment of codeine content on dosage
basis can only be made only when the cough syrup is
definitely kept or transported which is exclusively
meant for its usage for curing a disease and as an
action of remedial agent.”
The Division Bench in Vibhor Rana (supra) had an occasion to
deal with the expression used in the aforesaid Entry 35 viz.
“established in Therapeutic Practice” and held as under:
“41. The expression “established in therapeutic
practice” has not been interpreted in any previous
decision. It is a basic rule of interpretation that the
words used in the statute should be given there simple
and natural meaning and neither any word should be
added nor should any word be ignored while
interpreting any provision. When the Government has
used the expression “established in therapeutic
practice” these words cannot be altered so as to read
it as “used for therapeutic purposes”. The phrase
“established in therapeutic practice” apparently
means that the compound in question has been
established to be a drug in accordance with the
therapeutic practices followed for establishment of
new drugs. Therefore, the submission of Sri. Ashish
Pandey that the drug in question does not fulfil the
condition no. (2) of having been “established in
therapeutic practice”, is without any force.”
38.    The aforesaid case of Vibhor Rana (supra) was in nature of a
writ petition seeking quashing of the complaint case filed by the NCB,
pending before the court of Special Judge NDPS Act and in its final
conclusion the aforesaid division bench has held as under:
“44. In view of the foregoing discussion, we hold that
in view of the fact that as per the composition of
Phensedyl New Cough Linctus pleaded in the Writ
Petitions, the prescription dosage of Phensedyl Cough
Syrup is 5 ml and each dosage unit thereof contains
10 mg of Codeine Phosphate IP, besides
Cough Linctus contains merely 0.2 % Codeine, and
this has not been disputed and rather has been
admitted by the learned Counsel for the Respondent
NCB that there is no dispute that the drug in question
fulfils the first condition for falling within the
exception to Entry 35 of the Notification dated 14-11-
1985 issued by the Central Government containing
the list of Narcotic Drugs, i.e. being “compounded
with one or more other ingredients and containing not
more than 100 milligrams of the drug per dosage unit
and with a concentration of not more than 2.5% in
undivided preparations”, Phensedyl New Cough
Linctus is not a Narcotic Drug and any dealing in this
drug would not be subject to the provisions of the
NDPS Act. The search and seizure conducted by the
NCB Officials in Jaunpur on 17-01-2021 was without
any authority of law and so is the complaint filed on
15-07-2021 by the Intelligence Officer, NCB under
Sections 8, 21 (c), 22, 25, 29 and 60 (3) of the NDPS
Act in the Court of Special Judge, NDPS Act at
39.    The aforesaid judgments, however, have not considered the
scope of Section 9(1)(a)(va) of the NDPS Act which provides as
“9. Power of Central Government to permit, control
and regulate.-
(1) Subject to the provisions of Section 8, the Central
Government may, by rules—
(va) the manufacture, possession, transport, import
inter-State, export inter-State, sale, purchase,
consumption and use of essential narcotic drugs:
Provided that where, in respect of an essential
narcotic drug, the State Government has granted
licence or permit under the provisions of Section 10
prior to the commencement of the Narcotic Drugs and
such licence or permit shall continue to be valid till
the date of its expiry or for a period of twelve months
from such commencement, whichever is earlier.
40.    The aforesaid sub-clause (va) was introduced by the
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (Amendment) Act,
2014 (No. 16 2014), which came into effect on 01.05.2014. The
said amendment was introduced subsequent to the judgment of
Hon’ble Supreme Court in Mohd. Sahabuddin’s case (supra). A
bare reading of the said amended provision shows that the same
was introduced in the NDPS Act authorizing the government to
permit and regulate the manufacture, possession, transport,
import interstate, export interstate, sale, purchase, consumption
and use of the “essential narcotic drugs”. The term ‘essential
narcotic drugs’ has not been defined in the NDPS Act. However,
exercising powers under Section 9(1)(a)(va) of the NDPS Act, the
Central Government vide notification dated 05.05.2015 (w.e.f.
05.05.2015) added Chapter –VA to The Narcotic Drugs and
Rule 52A of the said Chapter provides as under:
“52A. Possession of essential narcotic drug.—(1) No
person shall possess any essential narcotic drug
otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of
these rules.
(2) Any person may possess an essential narcotic drug
in such quantity as has been at one time sold or
dispensed for his use in accordance with the
provisions of these rules.
(3) A registered medical practitioner may possess
essential narcotic drug, for use in his practice but not
for sale or distribution, not more than the quantity
mentioned in the Table below, namely—
Sl.               Name of the essential                Quantity
1.          Morphine and its salts and all        500
preparations containing more          Milligrammes
than 0.2 per cent of Morphine
known as „Codeine‟) and               Milligrammes
Ethyl morphine and their
(commonly known as Oxy-          Milligrammes
Dihydroxycodeinone),         its
propionylanilino-piperidine      transdermal
(the     international     non-  patches one
proprietary name of which is     each of 12.5
Fentanyl) and its salts and      microgram
preparations,        admixture,  per hour and
extracts or other substances     25 microgram
containing any of these drugs    per hour:
Provided that the Controller of Drugs or any other
officer authorised in this behalf by him may by special
order authorise, in Form 3-B, any such practitioner to
possess the aforesaid drugs in quantity larger than as
specified in the above Table:
Provided further that such authorisation may be
granted or renewed, for a period not exceeding three
years at a time.
Explanation.—The expression “for use in his practice”
covers only the actual direct administration of the
drugs to a patient under the care of the registered
medical practitioner in accordance with established
medical standards and practices.
41.     Since, during the course of the hearing, the aforesaid provision
was not brought to the notice of the court, the matter was listed for
clarification. Subsequently, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
petitioner placed reliance on the judgment rendered by the division
bench of Hon‟ble High Court of Allahabad in Vibhor Rana (supra).
He further submitted that Rule 66 of the NDPS Rules would be
applicable in the facts and circumstances of the present case, and not
Rule 52A. Rule 66 of the NDPS Rules provides as under:
“66. Possession, etc., of psychotropic substances.—
(1) No person shall possess any psychotropic
substance for any of the purposes covered under 1945
rules, unless he is lawfully authorized to possess such
substance for any of the said purposes under these
rules: Provided that possession of a psychotropic
substance specified in Schedule I shall be only for the
purposes mentioned in Chapter VII-A.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule
(1), any research institution, or a hospital or
dispensary maintained or supported by the
Government or local body or by charity or voluntary
subscription, which is not authorised to possess any
psychotropic substance under the 1945 Rules, or any
person who is not so authorised under the 1945 Rules,
may possess a reasonable quantity of such substance
as may be necessary for their genuine scientific
requirements or genuine medical requirements, or
both for such period as is deemed necessary by the
said research institution or, as the case may be, the
said hospital or dispensary or person: Provided that
where such psychotropic substance is in possession of
an individual for his personal medical use the quantity
thereof shall not exceed one hundred dosage units at a
Provided further that an individual may possess the
quantity of exceeding one hundred dosage units at a
time but not exceeding three hundred dosage units at
a time] for his personal long term medical use if
specifically prescribed by a Registered Medical
(3) The research institution, hospital and dispensary
referred to in sub-rule (2) shall maintain proper
accounts and records in relation to the purchase and
consumption of the psychotropic substance in their
possession.
A bare perusal of the aforesaid rule clearly shows that the
reliance placed on the same by learned counsel appearing on behalf
of the petitioner is misplaced. The aforesaid Rule 66 relates to
psychotropic substances and therefore, is not applicable to „codeine‟
which is admittedly a „narcotic drug‟ under the NDPS Act.
42.    As mentioned earlier, the term „essential narcotic drugs‟ has
not been defined under the NDPS Act but the table in Rule 52A, Sub-
Rule (3), at serial no. 2, under the title “Name of essential narcotic
drug” gives a description of Methyl Morphine (commonly known as
„Codeine‟), which is an exact verbatim copy of Entry no. 35 in
notification titled “Manufactured Narcotics Drug” (as contained in
Government of India Notification No. S.O. 826 (E) dated 14.11.1985
and S.O. 40(E) dated 21.09.1993 and S.O. no. 1431 (E) dated
21.06.2011). A combined reading of Rule 52A of The NDPS Rules
and Entry no. 35, in the aforementioned notification, would
demonstrate that the exception carved out in Entry no. 35, of the
aforesaid notifications, with respect to codeine, has been further
qualified by way of its inclusion under the category of „essential
narcotic drug‟ under Section 9(1)(a)(va) of the NDPS Act 1985. In
our considered opinion, Rule 52A further regulates the manner of
possession and other related activities enumerated therein, with
respect to substances/preparations covered under the aforesaid Entry
43.    Section 21 of the NDPS Act provides for prosecution for
contravention of any of the provision of the NDPS Act or any Rule
made thereunder. Needless to say that Rule 52A clearly prohibits
any person from possessing any ‘essential narcotic drug’
otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of the rules
made thereunder. The amended provision i.e. Section 9(1)(a)(va)
of the NDPS Act and the rules made thereunder clearly and
unequivocally declare that any substance covered under the
description given in the Table to Rule 52A(3) would be considered
as an ‘essential narcotic drug’, even if the said substance is
otherwise covered under The Drugs and Cosmetic Act including
cough syrup containing codeine phosphate.
44.    The aforesaid interpretation is supported by a judgment
rendered by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Union of India and Anr.
vs. Sanjeev V. Deshpande (2014) 13 SCC 1, wherein it was held as
“25. In other words, DEALING IN narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances is permissible only when
such DEALING is for medical purposes or scientific
purposes. Further, the mere fact that the DEALING
IN narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances is for
a medical or scientific purpose does not by itself lift
the embargo created under Section 8(c). Such a
dealing must be in the manner and extent provided
by the provisions of the Act, Rules or Orders made
thereunder. Sections 9 and 10 enable the Central
and the State Governments respectively to make
rules permitting and regulating various        aspects
(contemplated under Section 8(c), of DEALING
IN narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances.
26. The Act does not contemplate framing of rules
for prohibiting the various activities of DEALING
IN narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances. Such
prohibition is already contained in Section 8(c). It
only contemplates of the framing of Rules for
permitting and regulating any activity of DEALING
IN narcotic drugs or psychotropic substances.
(emphasis supplied)
45.    The aforesaid amended provisions of the NDPS Act and the
Rules made thereunder were not brought to the notice of the
learned Single Judge of this court in Iqbal Singh’s case (supra) as
well as to the notice of the division bench of the Hon’ble Allahabad
High Court in Vibhor Rana’s case (supra).
46.    In view of the foregoing analysis of various provision of the
NDPS Act, NDPS Rules, The Drugs and Cosmetics Act and the
Drugs and Cosmetics Rules and the judgments referred to, we
answer       the      reference     in   the     following     terms:
Question - “(c) whether Note 4 of the S.O. 1055 (E) dated
19th October, 2001 published in the Gazette of India,. Extra.,
Pt.II, Sec3 (ii) dated 19th October 2001, as amended on
18.11.2009, should be made applicable to cough syrups
containing miniscule percentage of Codeine since it has
medicinal        value     and    is   also    easily    available?”
Ans: If the contraband recovered in a particular case is
covered by Rule 52A of the NDPS Rules made under Section
9(1)(a)(va) of the NDPS Act, then violation of the said Rules would
be punishable under the NDPS Act. In that situation, Note 4 of the
S.O. 1055 (E) dated 19th October, 2001 would be applicable to
such substances including cough syrup.
47.     As far as the questions (a) and (b) referred to us by the
learned Single Judge are concerned, the same are squarely
covered by the judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Hira
Singh (supra) wherein the Hon’ble Supreme Court was disposing
of a reference as well as a challenge to the validity of notification
bearing no. S.O. 2941(E) dated 18.11.2009, adding ‘Note 4’ to the
notification bearing no. S.O. 1055(E) dated 19.10.2001. The
Hon’ble Supreme Court in Hira Singh (supra) has clearly held as
“12.2. In case of seizure of mixture of narcotic drugs
or psychotropic substances with one or more neutral
substance(s), the quantity of neutral substance(s) is
not to be excluded and to be taken into consideration
along with actual content by weight of the offending
drug, while determining the “small or commercial
quantity” of the narcotic drugs or psychotropic
substances.”
48.    In view of the aforesaid decision, the questions (a) and (b)
referred to us are answered as follows:
Question - “(a) whether in cases specifically related to
manufactured drug with a miniscule percentage of a narcotic
substance, the weight of the neutral substance ought to be ignored
while determining the nature of the quantity seized i.e. small,
commercial or in between?”
Ans: If the contraband seized falls within the provisions of
NDPS Act, the weight of the neutral substance would not be ignored
while determining the nature of the quantity seized, whether small
quantity, commercial quantity or in between.
Question - “(b) whether Note 4 of the S.O. 1055 (E) dated
19th October, 2001 published in the Gazette of India, Extra., Pt.II,
Sec3 (ii) dated 19th October 2001, as amended on 18.11.2009,
should be held inapplicable to manufactured drug which contain a
miniscule percentage of a narcotic drug?”
Ans: If the alleged contraband seized falls within the definition
of „manufactured drug‟ under Section 2(xi) of the NDPS Act, then the
entire notification including the aforesaid „Note 4‟ will be applicable.
49.     Having answered the questions referred to us, this matter may
be placed before the appropriate bench for considering the question of
grant of bail.