The petitioner has challenged the order passed by the
Respondent No. 2 dated 26.10.2021 by which his representation
to condone his absence for the period from 2003 to 2006 on the
grounds of serious illness and his reinstatement in service, was
rejected.
2.    The petitioner is a male, aged 42 years, who had passed his
higher secondary examination in 1994 from the Government
Higher Secondary School, Surkhi, with second division securing
59%. Thereafter, he completed his graduation in B.A. subject in
the year 2002 from Bhoj (open) University, Bhopal. Vide order
dated 10.01.1997 a resolution was passed by the Permanent
Education Committee of Janpad Panchayat, Sagar appointing
Guruji (Samvida Shala Shikshak Class-III) in various E.G.S.
under the Shiksha Guarantee Scheme. The Petitioner was
selected and on 11.01.1997, the Gram Panchayat, Surkhi,
issued an appointment order in the name of the petitioner
appointing him for a temporary period. On 26.01.1997, the
petitioner had taken charge on the post of Guruji in the E.G.S.
Centre,          Parditola          and        started         his      work         on     27.01.1997.
Thereafter, the petitioner says that he became a patient of heart
disease and was unable to discharge his duties as Guruji
(Samvida Shala Shikshak Class-III) in E.G.S. Centre, Parditola,
Gram Panchayat, Surkhi. Between 1998 to 2006, the petitioner
was taking treatment continuously from various doctors and
was away without leave for the duration on account of which,
his services were terminated by the respondent.
3. In his declaration at paragraph 2, the petitioner has mentioned
that this is the third petition before this Court. Earlier he had
filed W.P. No.7274/2013, which was dismissed as withdrawn by
his previous counsel without taking any such instructions from
the    petitioner.   Thereafter,   the   petitioner   filed   W.P.
No.9324/2013, in which this Court had passed the order dated
24.08.2021 by which the petitioner was directed to prefer a
detailed representation before the respondent No.2, which has
been dismissed by the order impugned in this case.
4. However, learned counsel for the State had pointed out that the
petitioner has missed mentioning one more writ petition being
W.P. No.17574/2012 by which this Court, vide order dated
29.10.2012, had directed the Collector, Sagar, to decide the
representation of the petitioner against his termination on
merits within a period of three months from the date of the
order.
5. The petitioner has filed several documents relating to his alleged
cardiac problem. Several certificates and prescriptions are
without the signatures of the doctors and many of the OPD
tickets and treatment slips are of the Government run medical
institutions.
6. While perusing the documents relating to his affliction this
Court realised that the Petitioner maybe a person of immense
interest to the medical community. At page 39, is an admission
slip issued in the name of the Petitioner by the         Samuhik
Swasthya Kendra (place not mentioned) dated 29/09/11,
wherein it is written “C/O Amenorrhea 9 month labour pain
start since today morning 5 A.M”. In other words, the
Petitioner, a male aged 33 years (as on 29/09/11) was wheeled
into the labour room with labour pains. Perhaps, yet another
case of immaculate conception with no available details of the
messiah born therefrom. The petitioner has unabashedly filed
fake documents with utter disdain and disregard for this Court.
The document at page 39 clearly reveals that the petitioner has
no qualms about making false statements and filing fabricated
documents before this Court. In all probability, the Petitioner
visited the Primary Health Centre and found the admission slip
in question, discarded by the doctor, without the patients name
and details, which was picked up by the Petitioner who entered
his name and date in space provided and used it as a slip issued
to him in order to show that he is undergoing treatment. He
apparently was unable to understand the diagnosis requiring
admission into the PHC which was written in English.
7. Under the circumstances, it is clear that the petitioner has no
case on equity and his petition is dismissed as he has
approached this Court with tainted hands.
8. However, this Court is also of the opinion that in such cases, the
petitioner or the respondent, as the case may be, ought not be
allowed to go scot-free while trying to deceive the Court by filing
false statements.
9.    Under the circumstances, the Registrar General is requested to
proceed in accordance with law and file a complaint case before
the appropriate Court having jurisdiction to try an offence
against the petitioner for offences under Sections 468, 471 and
such other provisions under the IPC or any other law in force
under which the petitioner may be prosecuted.
10.   With the aforesaid, this petition is dismissed.
Digitally signed by POONAM