1.     This petition under Section 397/401 Cr.P.C is directed against the
order dated 25.02.2020, passed by the learned District and Sessions Judge,
Patiala House Courts, New Delhi, in SC No.58/2020 arising out of FIR
No.189/2016, registered at Police Station South Campus for offences under
Section 392/34 IPC. The learned District and Sessions Judge by the order
impugned herein has held that the offence under Section 397 IPC is not
made out against the accused/respondent herein and the matter has been sent
to the learned Chief Metropolitan Magistrate for framing of charge under
2.     The factual matrix which has led to the filing of the instant petition is
a)    A complaint was received from one Navi S/o Sanjiv Bhadu R/o
S/466, Second Floor, Greater Kailash -I, New Delhi, stating that
on 11.04.2016 at about 9 PM, four of his friends, namely,
Siddhant, Suyesh, Shubham and Pranav came to meet him at his
house. It is stated that at about 1:00 AM he along with his
friends went to Janakpuri to drop Pranav to his work in a car
bearing No. DL 1N 8064. It is stated that that the complainant
was driving the car. It is stated that at about 1:40 AM the
complainant stopped the car at Ring Road, Dhaula Kuan, Delhi
before South Moti Bagh bus stand, to buy a cigarette. It is stated
that the complainant, Pranav and Suyesh got off the car. It is
stated that a grey coloured Swift Dzire car came from the
wrong side and parked their car behind the car of the
complainant. It is stated that the occupants of the car introduced
themselves as officials of Delhi Police and asked the
complainant and his friends as to what they were doing there
and told them to sit inside the car. It is stated that after the
complainant and his friends sat in the car, one person who was
about 5'7'' and had wheatish complexion, threatened the
complainant and his friends by brandishing a pistol and asked
them to give all their belongings. It is stated that the
complainant and his friends gave their belongings to those
persons. On the said complaint, FIR No.189/2016 dated
12.04.2016, was registered at Police Station South Campus for
offences under Sections 392/34 IPC.
b)   Accused (respondent herein) was arrested in FIR No.559/2016
registered at Police Station Malviya Nagar for offences under
Sections 411/482 IPC and Sections 25/54/59 Arms Act. It is
stated that during interrogation the accused gave a disclosure
statement of having committed the offence in FIR No.189/2016
along with other persons who were there with him. The
respondent herein refused to join the TIP.
c)   Charge-sheet has been filed stating that there is sufficient
material against the respondent herein to proceed ahead against
him for offences under Sections 397/34 IPC.
d)   On 25.02.2020, the learned District and Sessions Judge, Patiala
House Courts, passed the impugned judgment framing charges
against the respondent herein only for offences under Section
392 IPC. The learned District and Sessions Judge, Patiala
House Courts, held that since the pistol had only been
brandished, and it had not been used, and therefore, the offence
under Section 397 IPC is not made out against the accused.
Since, the offence under Section 392 IPC is triable by the
learned Metropolitan Magistrate, the file was directed to be sent
to the learned Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Patiala House
Courts to assign the case to its own Court or other Court in
accordance with law.
e)   It is this order which has been assailed in the instant petition.
4.    The question which arises for consideration in this case is whether
when an act of robbery is committed by showing a revolver/pistol then does
an offence under Section 397 is made out or not ?
5.     Ms. Meenakshi Chauhan, learned APP for the State, submits that
showing a revolver/pistol to commit robbery is sufficient to attract the
provisions of Section 397 IPC. The learned APP for the State relies on the
judgment of the Supreme Court in Phool Kumar v. Delhi Admn., (1975) 1
SCC 797, to contend that the judgment impugned herein is completely
contrary to the laws laid down by the Supreme Court.
6.     Per contra, Ms. Rakhi Dubey, learned counsel appearing for the
accused/respondent herein contends that there is no recovery of any material
which is alleged to have been robbed by the accused/respondent herein. She,
therefore, states that the offence under Section 397 IPC is not made out
against the respondent. It is further contended by the learned counsel for the
respondent that the weapon used in the alleged incident has also not been
recovered from the accused. It is further contended by the learned counsel
for the respondent that the accused/respondent was arrested in some other
case and he is being falsely implicated in the present case.
7.     Heard Ms. Meenakshi Chauhan, learned APP for the State, and Ms.
Rakhi Dubey, learned counsel appearing for the accused/respondent, and
perused the material on record.
"397. Robbery, or dacoity, with attempt to cause death
or grievous hurt.—If, at the time of committing robbery
or dacoity, the offender uses any deadly weapon, or
causes grievous hurt to any person, or attempts to
cause death or grievous hurt to any per-son, the
imprisonment with which such offender shall be
punished shall not be less than seven years."
9.     The Supreme Court in Phool Kumar (supra) has observed as under:
"7. If the deadly weapon is actually used by the
offender in the commission of the robbery such as in
causing grievous hurt, death or the like then it is
Nath v. Emperor [AIR 1932 Oudh 103] ;Nagar
Singh v. Emperor [AIR 1933 Lah 35] and Inder
Singh v. Emperor [AIR 1934 Lah 522] some overt act
such as brandishing the weapon against another
person in order to overawe him or displaying the
deadly weapon to frighten his victim have been held
to attract the provisions of Section 397 of the Penal
Code. J.C. Shah and Vyas, JJ. of the Bombay High
Court have said in the case of Govind Dipaji
More v. State [AIR 1956 Bom 353] that if the knife
“was used for the purpose of producing such an
impression upon the mind of a person that he
would be compelled to part with his property,
that would amount to „using‟ the weapon within
the meaning of Section 397.”
In that case also the evidence against the appellant
was that he carried a knife in his hand when he went to
the shop of the victim. In our opinion this is the correct
view of the law and the restricted meaning given to the
word “uses” in the case of Chand Singh [ILR (1970) 2
10.   A reading of the abovementioned judgment shows that the term 'use'
would include brandishing the weapon against another person in order to
overpower him or to frighten his victim. The Apex Court upheld the
judgment of the Bombay High Court in Govind Dipaji More v. State, AIR
1956 Bom 353, by observing that that if the knife was used for the purpose
of producing such an impression upon the mind of a person that he would be
compelled to part with his property, that would amount to ‘using’ the
weapon within the meaning of Section 397 IPC. The Supreme Court has
over-ruled the judgment of the Full Bench of the High Court of Punjab &
Haryana in State v. Chand Singh, ILR (1970) 2 Punj and Har 108, on this
11.    The fact that the weapon has not been recovered is no ground for not
framing charges under Section 397 IPC. The effect of non recovery of the
weapon would be seen only in trial and that cannot be a reason for not
framing charges under Section 397 IPC.
12.    Accordingly, the revision petition is allowed. Charges under Section
397 IPC ought to be framed against the accused. The learned District and
Sessions Judge, Patiala House Courts, New Delhi, is directed to assign the
case to its own Court or other Court in accordance with law.
13.    With these observations, the petition is disposed of along with the
pending application(s), if any.