1. The petitioner is before this Court seeking for the
following reliefs :
a)     The Petitioner prays that this Hon’ble Court may
pleased to issue a writ of Certiorari to quash the
impugned orders dated 31.10.2019 passed by the
Appellate Authority under the Payment of Gratuity Act,
1972 and the Deputy Chief Labour Commissioner
(central), Bangalore in Appeal No.36(129)/2018/B1 and
also the Corrigendum dated 13.11.2019 to the order
produced at ANNEXURE-F and G respectively.
b)     Grant such other relief or reliefs as this Hon’ble
Court deems fit in the circumstances of the case including
cost of this writ petition.
2. The petitioner is a nationalised Bank constituted
under the Banking Companies (Acquisition & Transfer
of Undertakings) Act, 1970.         One Mr. Srimantha D,
husband of the respondent joined the service of the
petitioner-Bank         on  13.3.1975    as   a    Peon    and
subsequently was promoted as a Clerk with effect
from 24.8.1987.          During his service, the petitioner
had availed Housing Loan which was being repaid by
him from time to time.
3. In the year 2005, alleging that there is gross
misconduct on the part of the husband of the
respondent, disciplinary proceedings were taken up
against him and a charge sheet was issued on
14.12.2005.      The Enquiry Officer submitted its
finding on 20.5.2006, holding the charge to be
proved and thereafter, punishment of compulsory
retirement    was  imposed    on   27.7.2006   by  the
disciplinary authority.
4. Appeal preferred by the husband of the respondent
was dismissed on 3.8.2007. An industrial dispute was
filed. In the meanwhile, the said husband expired.
On his expiry, his legal heirs, i.e. the wife and
children,   were  impleaded    in the   said industrial
dispute, which came to be withdrawn on 11.12.2018.
In the meanwhile, an application filed by the husband
in the year 2017 for release of the gratuity amount
came to be rejected.        Hence, the employee had
WP No. 11463 of 2020
approached the Controlling Authority for a direction
to make payment of the said amounts.
5. In the proceedings, it was contended by the Bank
that there are dues liable to be paid on account of
the housing loan and the dues which are due on
account of the Staff Welfare Fund. These dues have
to be adjusted from and out of the gratuity amount,
and as such, no amount is due.
6. The   Controlling  Authority,  after  considering  the
matter, came to the conclusion that adjustment of
gratuity amount towards loans of the employee was
permissible and as such rejected the application filed
by the employee vide its order dated 19.12.2017.
7. An appeal came to be filed by the respondent herein
before    the    Appellate    Authority   in    Appeal
No.36(129)/2018/B1, and the Appellate Authority by
way of its order dated 21.10.2019, set aside the
order of the Controlling Authority and directed the
WP No. 11463 of 2020
Bank to make payment of gratuity amount along with
interest at 10% p.a. from the date it became due till
the actual date of payment. It is challenging the said
order, the petitioner-Bank is before this Court.
8. Sri. Udaya Shankar Rai P, learned counsel for the
petitioner-Bank would submit that the decision of the
Appellate Authority is not proper inasmuch as by a
mandate executed by the workman, the Bank was
entitled to adjust the gratuity amounts towards the
loan amounts due, which was pending as on that
date.   On enquiry regarding the term/period of the
loan, he submitted that the loan has been closed on
account    of  the   compulsory   retirement    of the
workman.      He further submits that the Appellate
Authority could not have directed payment of interest
on the said amount since the application/claim was
made beyond the period of 90 days and the same not
being within the reasonable time, in which only the
principal amount could have been directed to be paid
WP No. 11463 of 2020
and not interest.     On these grounds, he prays to
allow the writ petition.
9.  Per contra, Smt.Geeta R Shinde, learned counsel
appearing for the respondent submits that the order
passed by the Appellate Authority is proper and
correct and therefore, there is no necessity to
interfere with the said order.
10. Heard learned counsels on both sides and perused
the papers.
11. The short question that would arise in the
present matter is whether the loan account of
an employee can be adjusted towards the
gratuity amounts?
12. There is a special treatment for payment of gratuity
both under the Payment of Gratuity Act and also
under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.    Gratuity
has been given a special protection and special
WP No. 11463 of 2020
treatment inasmuch as it is made absolutely clear
that the gratuity amounts can neither be attached
nor can any garnishee order be passed. Section 7 of
the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 is herewith
reproduced for easy reference :
7. Determination of the amount of gratuity.-
(1) A person who is eligible for payment of gratuity under
this Act or any person authorised, in writing, to act on his
behalf shall send a written application to the employer,
within such time and in such form, as may be
prescribed, for payment of such gratuity.
(2) As soon as gratuity becomes payable, the employer
shall, whether an application referred to in sub-section (1)
has been made or not, determine the amount of gratuity
and give notice in writing to the person to whom the
gratuity is payable and also to the controlling authority
specifying the amount gratuity so determined.
(3) The employer shall arrange to pay the amount of
gratuity within thirty days from the date it becomes
payable to the person to whom the gratuity is payable.
(3A) If the amount of gratuity payable under sub-section
(3) is not paid by the employer within the period specified
in sub-section (3), the employer shall pay, from the date
on which the gratuity becomes payable to the date on
which it is paid, simple interest at such rate, not
exceeding the rate notified by the Central Government
from time to time for repayment of long-term deposits, as
that Government may, by notification specify:
Provided that no such interest shall be payable if
the delay in the payment is due to the fault of the
employee and the employer has obtained permission in
writing from the controlling authority for the delayed
payment on this ground.
(4)(a) If there is any dispute as to the amount of gratuity
payable to an employee under this Act or as to the
admissibility of any claim of, or in relation to, an
employee for payment of gratuity, or as to the person
entitled to receive the gratuity, the employer shall deposit
with the controlling authority such amount as he admits
to be payable by him as gratuity.
(b) Where there is a dispute with regard to any matter or
matters specified in clause (a), the employer or employee
or any other person raising the dispute may make an
application to the controlling authority for deciding the
(c) The controlling authority shall, after due inquiry and
after giving the parties to the dispute a reasonable
opportunity      of   being     heard,     determine    the
matter or matters in dispute and if, as a result of such
inquiry any amount is found to be payable to the
employee, the controlling authority shall direct the
employer to pay such amount or, as the case may be,
such amount as reduced by the amount already deposited
by the employer.
(d)The controlling authority shall pay the amount
deposited, including the excess amount, if any, deposited
by the employer, to the person entitled thereto.
(e)As soon as may be after a deposit is made under
clause (a), the controlling authority shall pay the amount
of the deposit –
(i) to the applicant where he is the employee; or
(ii) where the applicant is not the employee, to the
nominee or, as the case may be, the guardian of
such nominee or heir of the employee if the
controlling authority is satisfied that there is no
dispute as to the right of the applicant to receive
the amount of gratuity.
(5) For the purpose of conducting an inquiry under sub-
section (4), the controlling authority shall have the same
powers as are vested in a court, while trying a suit, under
WP No. 11463 of 2020
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), in respect
of the following matters, namely :
(a) enforcing the attendance of any person or
examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of
witnesses.
(6) Any inquiry under this section shall be a judicial
proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228,
and for the purpose of section 196, of the
Indian Penal Code, 1860 (45 of 1860).
(7) Any person aggrieved by an order under sub-section
(4) may, within sixty days from the date of the receipt of
the order, prefer an appeal to the appropriate
Government or such other authority as may be specified
by the appropriate Government in this behalf:
Provided that the appropriate Government or the
appellate authority, as the case may be, may, if it is
satisfied that the appellant was prevented by
sufficient cause from preferring the appeal within the said
period of sixty days, extend the said period by a further
period of sixty days.
Provided further that no appeal by an employer shall be
admitted unless at the time of preferring the appeal, the
appellant either produces a certificate of the controlling
authority to the effect that the appellant has deposited
with him an amount equal to the amount of gratuity
required to be deposited under subsection (4), or deposits
with the appellate authority such amount.
(8) The appropriate       Government or the appellate
authority, as the case    may be, may, after giving the
parties to the appeal a   reasonable opportunity of being
heard, confirm, modify     or reverse the decision of the
controlling authority.
13. The protection to gratuity is granted in order to safe-
guard the financial security of a person at the time of
his retirement.   In the present case, the petitioner-
Bank has sought to adjust a sum of Rs.9,85,420.24
towards the housing loan and a sum of Rs.1,29,691/-
on account of Staff Welfare Fund liability. The Staff
Welfare Fund would come within the domain of the
service conditions.   However, home loan occupies a
completely different position inasmuch as the home
loan would be governed by the terms of the loan
agreement     which   is    a  commercial   transaction
between the bank and the debtor.          Whether the
debtor is an employee or not, it is the said terms of
the loan which would govern the said relationship.
14. In the present case, admittedly, there is no demand
made for repayment of Housing loan interest by the
Bank on the employee and/or after his expiry on his
legal heirs/legal representatives.     The Bank has
unilaterally on the basis of an alleged authorization,
WP No. 11463 of 2020
determined    the  amount        due   on   its own   and
recovered the same from gratuity amount payable by
it, there being no dispute about the requirement of
payment of gratuity amount.
15. Home loan is governed by the agreement of loan. It
is for the Bank to act in terms of the said agreement
and exercise all rights under the said agreement as
against the debtor.        The Bank could not have
adjusted the same from and out of gratuity amount,
which are protected under Section 7 of The Payment
of Gratuity Act, 1972.        It is this factor which has
been taken into consideration by the Appellate
Authority and the action of the Bank in adjusting the
said amount has been set aside.
16.  Mr. Udaya Shankar Rai, learned counsel for the
petitioner-Bank, submits that interest ought not to be
payable by relying upon Rule 10 of the Payment of
WP No. 11463 of 2020
Gratuity Rules 1972 which is reproduced here under
for easy reference.
10. Application to controlling             authority    for
direction.–(1) If an employer-
(i)     refuses to accept      a nomination or to
entertain an application sought to be filed under
(ii)    issues a notice under sub-rule (1) of rule 8
either specifying an amount of gratuity which is
considered by the applicant less than what is
payable or rejecting eligibility to payment of
(iii)   having received an application under rule 7
fails to issue any notice as required under rule 8
within the time specified therein,
the claimant employee, nominee or legal heir, as the case
may be, may, within ninety days of the occurrence of the
cause for the application, apply in Form ‘N’ to the
controlling authority for issuing a direction under sub-
section(4) of section 7 with as many extra copies as are
the opposite parties.
Provided that the controlling authority may accept any
application under this sub-rule, on sufficient cause being
shown by the applicant, after the expiry of the specified
(2)    Application under sub-rule (1) and other documents
relevant to such an application shall be presented in
person to the controlling authority or shall be sent by
registered post acknowledgement due.
WP No. 11463 of 2020
17.  The further contention is that interest could not be
awarded by the Payment of Gratuity (Central) Rules,
1972.    By relying upon the said Rules, he submits
that the employee could have made an application
within a period of 90 days.     In the present case,
application was made in the year 2017 after a period
of ten years from the order of punishment dated
27.06.2006 for compulsory retirement.
18. From the facts, it is seen that the retirement order
dated     27.07.2006     was  challenged  before  the
Appellate Authority and thereafter industrial dispute
was raised in CR No.72/2008 before the CGIT,
Labour Court in the event of the employee having
applied for payment of gratuity that would amount to
giving up the employment in the proceedings before
the CGIT/Labour Court since the employee could only
be paid after the person accepts his retirement. In
the present case, compulsory retirement order was
under challenge there is no scope for the employee
WP No. 11463 of 2020
to have made a claim for gratuity, it is only in the
year 2017 that upon he attaining the age of
superannuation,    that    application  for  release  of
gratuity amount has been filed and consequently, the
proceedings before the Labour Court were also
withdrawn.
19. Therefore, I am of the considered opinion that there
is no delay in filing the application for payment of
gratuity amounts. Be that as it may, even otherwise
in terms of the proviso to sub clause (iii) of sub Rule
(1) of Rule 10, the Authority is also authorised to
condone the delay if any. There is neither restriction
on the period which could be condoned nor there is
an embargo imposed under the said Rules which
would disentitle the applicant to receive any interest.
Hence, on this ground also the writ petition will have
to be rejected.
20. Hence, I pass the following order :
WP No. 11463 of 2020
i) Writ petition stands dismissed.
ii) The Bank is directed to comply with the
order of the Appellate Authority within three
weeks from the date of receipt of a copy of this
order.