Petitioner has approached this Court praying for grant of
anticipatory bail in case FIR No.64 dated 01.08.2021, under Sections 354, 354-
A, 354-D and 452 of IPC, registered at Police Station Cantt. Bathinda, District
As per the facts of the case, the present FIR was lodged by the
prosecutrix (name concealed). It was alleged that she is student of BA-2
studying at Punjabi University College Khuda. On 01.04.2021, when she
boarded the bus, the accused Akashdeep caught hold her arm and on raising
alarm by her, he fled away from the spot. On returning home, she disclosed the
same to her parents and on their protest, the accused tendered apology in the
presence of respectables of the village. Thereafter on 12.07.2021 at about 02:30
PM when she was alone at home, accused trespassed in her house and tried to
kiss her. The prosecutrix raised an alarm and on hearing the same, the accused
escaped from the spot. In order to save dignity of the family, she remained
silent. However, the accused did not mend his ways and hence, the FIR was
lodged to take the legal action against the accused. After recording the FIR, the
supplementary statement of the prosecutrix was recorded wherein she clarified
that the accused Akashdeep Singh is known by the name of Maninderpal Singh.
Apprehending his arrest, the petitioner approached the Court of learned
Additional Sessions Judge, Bathinda praying for grant of anticipatory bail. After
hearing the parties, learned Additional Sessions Judge declined the same vide
his order dated 18.06.2022. Aggrieved by the same, the petitioner approached
this Court praying for grant of anticipatory bail.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the petitioner
has been falsely implicated in this case. He submits that there is unexplained
delay in lodging the FIR. He further submits that the allegations are false and
frivolous and no offence under Sections 354, 452 IPC are made out. He has
submitted that the petitioner be granted anticipatory bail.
I have heard counsel for the petitioner and perused the record.
On perusal of the record, it is apparent that the prosecutrix has
given the details of stalking by the petitioner. He has alleged to have outraged
the modesty of the prosecutrix repeatedly. The prosecutrix is a young college
going girl who is repeatedly being stalked by the petitioner. The delay in lodging
the FIR cannot be taken into consideration at the stage of consideration of
anticipatory bail when the investigation is at threshold. Hon'ble the Supreme
Court has laid down in a number of judgments that while considering the
anticipatory bail, the Court should consider the factors like gravity of the
offence, antecedents of the accused, probability of the accused tampering with
the ongoing investigation and his possibility of fleeing from the justice. Besides
this, the Court is to strike the balance between the liberty of the individuals and
the overall interest of the society. The facts and circumstances of the present
case where the petitioner accused has been alleged to have been harassing the
prosecutrix repeatedly are to be taken seriously. The case needs a thorough and
fair investigation to unravel the truth in the allegations levelled.
Hon'ble the Supreme Court in State (rep by CBI) Vs. Anil Sharma,
(1997) 7 SCC 187 held as under:-
6. We find force in the submission of the CBI that custodial
interrogation is qualitatively more elicitation-oriented than
questioning a suspect who is well ensconced with a
favorable order under Section 438 of the Code. In a case
like this effective interrogation of a suspected person is of
tremendous      advantage    in   disinterring many    useful
informations and also materials which would have been
concealed. Success in such interrogation would elude if the
suspected person knows that he is well protected and
insulated by a pre-arrest bail order during the time he is
interrogated. Very often interrogation in such a condition
would reduce to a mere ritual. The argument that the
custodial interrogation is fraught with the danger of the
person being subjected to third-degree methods need not be
countenanced, for, such an argument can be advanced by all
accused in all criminal cases. The Court has to presume that
responsible police officers would conduct themselves in a
responsible manner and that those entrusted with the task of
disinterring offences would not conduct themselves as
offenders.
Keeping in view the overall facts and circumstances, this Court is
of the opinion that the petitioner deserves no leniency for the grant of
anticipatory bail in view of the statutory provisions and the law settled. Thus,
the petition being devoid of any merits is hereby dismissed. Nothing said herein
shall be treated as an expression of opinion on the merits of the case.
Whether speaking/reasoned            :      Yes/No