1.      The original informant filed present criminal revision application
under Section 401 of Cr.P.C. thereby challenging the judgment and
order of acquittal dated 23.3.2004 passed in Sessions Case No. 26
of 2002 by the learned Sessions Judge, Nanded.
2.      The learned Sessions Judge, Nanded in his judgment dated
23.3.2004 found that the prosecution has failed to prove charges
levelled against accused persons and accordingly said three accused
persons were acquitted of the offences punishable under Sections
498A, 304-B, 306 r.w. 34 of I.P.C.
3.      The petitioner, unfortunate father of deceased Vandana @
Seema, preferred present revision application basically on three
different aspects. (i) Firstly, it is claimed that learned Sessions Judge
ignored basic principles of law with regard to offences punishable
under Sections 498A and 304-B while appreciating evidence and
giving more importance to surmises and conjunctures as well as
fancy reasons for discarding the evidence of P.W.3, 4 and 5. (ii)
Secondly, the applicant claimed that learned Sessions Judge
completely lost sight of provisions of Section 113-A of Indian
Evidence Act. (iii) Thirdly, it has been claimed that the learned Judge
accepted defence version and more particularly alleged dying
declaration of deceased which in fact has not been proved in
evidence as recorded by exercising judicial norms and settled
proposition of law.
4.      Vide order dated 14.7.2006, Rule was issued. Accordingly,
respondents appeared in the matter. Record and proceedings were
called for. It has been informed that during pendency of present
revision     application,  respondent  No.3     Laxman        Digambarrao
Wattamwar (original accused No.2) expired. Therefore, as far as
respondent No.3 is concerned, the matter stands abated.
5.      Heard learned counsel for the petitioner, learned A.P.P. for
respondent No.1 and learned counsel for respondent Nos. 2 and 4.
6.      With the assistance of learned counsel appearing for the
respective parties, I have perused entire record as well as impugned
judgment and order and more specifically the reasons disclosed
therein while acquitting the accused persons. This application was
filed much prior to amendment effected to the provisions of Section
378 of Cr.P.C., as at the relevant time, there was no provision for the
informant to file appeal challenging the order of acquittal. It is an
admitted fact that inspite of acquittal passed by learned Sessions
Judge, the State did not file any appeal challenging such decision.
Accordingly, the present criminal revision application is now taken up
for final disposal.
7.      Learned counsel for the applicant strenuously urged that the
reasons given by the learned Sessions Judge in acquitting the
accused       persons      are  prima   facie  perverse,      against       settled
propositions of law and by ignoring law laid down by the Apex Court
in connection with appreciation of evidence of the dowry matters and
also with regard to accepting of dying declaration. She forcefully
submitted that reasons for discarding evidence of the parents of
deceased the learned Sessions Judge has considered the flimsy
grounds.       Such finding is purely perverse and by ignoring the
presumption under Section 113-A of Indian Evidence Act. She then
claimed that deceased sustained burn injuries of 97% in her
matrimonial house and that too in presence of accused persons. The
incident occurred within three years from the date of marriage and
therefore, learned Judge ought to have presumed that it is a case of
dowry death.            She then claimed that the dying declaration of
deceased produced by the defence evidence is not at all reliable,
authentic and raise suspicion.         Inspite of above aspects, learned
Sessions Judge accepted such dying declaration and thereby
committed patent illegality in acquitting accused persons.
In support of her submissions, learned counsel for the
petitioner placed reliance on the following decisions:-
i)      Paparambaka Rosamma and Ors. vs. State of Andhra
Pradesh, reported in AIR 199 SC 3455;
ii)     Atbir vs. Govt. of N.C.T. of Delhi, reported in AIR 2010 SC
iii)    Tapinder Singh vs. State of Punjab and Ors. reported in AIR
iv)     Ravindra Trimbak Patil vs. State of Maharashtra, reported in
v)      Harbans Singh and another vs. State of Punjab, reported in
8.      Learned A.P.P. appearing for State submitted that the findings
of learned Sessions Judge cannot be accepted and this is a fit case
for quashing of such judgment and remanding the matter back for
deciding afresh.
9.      Learned counsel appearing for respondent Nos. 2 and 4
forcefully submitted that the grounds in the present revision
application are devoid of merit and learned Sessions Judge
considered all aspects and appreciated the evidence of witnesses in
proper manner. He submitted that during defence evidence, the
burden on accused persons to prove their defence is on the
preponderance of probabilities and while appreciating such aspect,
the learned Sessions Judge found that such dying declaration is
trustworthy. He therefore, claimed that no interference is warranted
with the findings in the impugned judgment and order of acquittal.
10.     Before considering the above submissions, it is necessary to
look into the observations of learned Sessions Judge while deciding
the points framed at page No.4. Point No.1 is with regard to the
aspect of cruelty meted out to deceased by accused persons. Point
No.2 is whether death had occurred otherwise than in normal
circumstances and within 7 years of her marriage.            Point No.3 is
again referring to the cruelty at the hands of accused Nos. 1, 2, and
3. Point No.4 is whether accused with their common intention
abetted/instigated Vandana to commit suicide. All said points were
taken for discussion jointly. Learned Sessions Judge observed in
para 5 itself that accused admitted that Vandana died of burn injuries
on 14.6.2001 i.e. within a period of three years from her marriage.
Accused persons then admitted inquest panchnama (Exh.18), post
mortem report (Exh.20). Post mortem report shows that Vandana
sustained 97% burn injuries. The cause of death as per doctor is
due to shock due to burn injuries.
11.     Learned Sessions Judge then appreciated the evidence of
prosecution witness with regard to aspect of cruelty from para 7
onwards. He refused to accept the version of parents of deceased
on the ground that accused knew about the financial status of
parents of deceased, who were poor as compared to accused
persons and therefore, there was no question of asking dowry. Such
finding, with utmost sincerity has to be considered as flimsy and
imaginary.
12.     The aspect of dowry in our society is clearly a social menace.
Inspite of strict legislation and punishments imposed by the courts
from time to time, many cases are coming in the courts of law. A
greed is not dependent upon the status of persons.               Demand of
dowry even by reach persons against poor family members of the
wife is rampant. Thus, discarding evidence of parents on such flimsy
grounds is clearly against settled principles and propositions of law.
Learned Sessions Judge has completely lost sight of settled
propositions to be considered while deciding dowry case and thereby
arrived at erroneous conclusion.
13.     As far as so called drying declaration of deceased Vandana is
concerned, admittedly, it was not relied upon by the prosecution,
however, it was brought on record through defence witness. Such
dying declaration is at Exh.19 and the same was brought on record
through the defence witness, who was A.S.I. Kisan Bokare (Exh.29).
Learned Sessions Judge has fully relied upon such dying declaration
and considered the contents mentioned therein. In the said dying
declaration, Vandana disclosed to A.S.I. Kisan Bokare that she
committed suicide, as she was unable to bear the pains in stomach,
which she was suffering since long. She further stated in the said
dying declaration that no one was responsible for her death.
14.     Learned counsel appearing for the petitioner was fully justified
in her statement that patent illegality has been committed by learned
Sessions Judge while relying upon said dying declaration which was
not at all proved to be authenticate. She invited my attention to the
deposition of D.W.1 Kisan Bokare (A.S.I. police station Vaijabad).
The cross examination of D.W.1 clearly goes to show that he did not
inquire from doctor whether the patient was in a position to give
statement and whether she was in fit state of mind.
15.     It is settled propositions of law that before accepting dying
declaration the court must satisfy itself certain parameters which are
mandatory to be gone into by the person who has recorded it. First
of all, doctor has to certify that the patient is in fit state of mind,
conscious and able to record her statement. Such certificate of the
doctor must appear in writing, either on declaration itself or
separately attached to it. Admittedly, in the present matter, there is
no medical certificate obtained by D.W.1 to show the statement of
doctor that the patient was in sound state of mind and fit to give
statement. It is fact that deceased Vandana had suffered 97% burns
and D.W.1 stated that she was screaming. He did not tell what type
of medicines were administered to her after she was admitted. The
doctor, who was present in the hospital is not examined in defence to
prove that deceased Vandana was in a fit state of mind to give her
statement.
16.     In the case of Paparambaka Rosamma and Ors. vs. State of
Andhra Pradesh (supra)             the Hon’ble Apex Court considered
Section 32 of Indian Evidence Act and more particularly dying
declaration and thereafter observed that in case no evidence is led to
prove that person is in sound state of mind to make declaration and if
there is no medical certificate for certifying state of mind of persons
making declaration, such dying declaration is of no substance.
Learned counsel for the petitioner then pointed out to the
observations in para 16 of the above decision and submitted that
such dying declaration can be sole basis for conviction if it inspires
full confidence of the court. Similarly, if after careful scrutiny the
court is satisfied that it is true and free from any sufferings to induce
deceased to make a false statement and if it is coherent and
consistent, there shall be no legal impediment to make it base of
conviction even if there is no corroboration.
17.     It is settled propositions that dying declaration is not deposition
in court and it is neither made on oath nor in presence of the
accused. It is therefore, not tested by cross examination on behalf of
the accused. The dying declaration is admitted in evidence by way of
exception to the general rule against admissibility of hearsay
evidence, on the principle of necessity. The weak point of a dying
declaration merely serve to put the court on its guard while testing its
reliability, by imposing on it an obligation to closely scrutinize all the
relevant attendant circumstances. Each case must be determined on
its own fact keeping in view the circumstances in which dying
declaration was made. It is equally true that it cannot be laid down
as a general proposition that dying declaration is weaker kind of
evidence than other pieces of evidence. The dying declaration which
has been recorded by the competent Magistrate, in proper manner,
i.e. to say in the form of questions and answers and as far as
possible practical in words of maker of declaration stands on much
higher even than the dying declaration which depends upon oral
testimony which may suffer from all infirmities of human memory and
human character. In order to rely on dying declaration, the court has
to keep in view the circumstances like an opportunity to a dying
person for observations. Hence, in order to pass test of reliability the
dying declaration has to be subjected to a very close scrutiny
keeping in view with the fact that the statement has been made in
absence of accused, had no opportunity to test the veracity of such
statement by cross examination.
18.     In the present matter, though the prosecution did not rely upon
dying declaration, it was brought on record through the defence
witness. However, before accepting the said dying declaration as
reliable and trustworthy, it was the duty of learned Sessions Court to
scrutinize it closely. The observations of learned Sessions Court in
the impugned judgment while relying upon such dying declaration are
very cryptic and he failed to consider settled parameters before
accepting it. Admittedly, there is no certificate issued by the Medical
Officer to certify that deceased was in fit state of mind before making
such declaration. There is only endorsement “She was conscious
throughout”.        Such statement by medical Officer is not sufficient
enough to prove actual state of mind of patient and whether she was
in sound state of mind. Remaining conscious and in fit state of mind
are two different aspects.
19.     It is no doubt true that the burden on the defence is not as
heavy as that of prosecution. However, before accepting such dying
declaration in favour of accused persons, it was the duty of learned
Sessions Court to first of all satisfy himself that such declaration was
obtained by following all parameters.
20.     The matter in hand clearly goes to show that such dying
declaration was not recorded by observing all parameters and
therefore even placing reliance on it on preponderance of
probabilities in favour of the accused persons is not at all justified.
21.     Admittedly, deceased sustained 97% burns in her matrimonial
house when all accused persons were present in the house. Such
burn injuries were sustained within a period of three years from her
marriage.       Prior to the said incident, there are allegations by the
parents that she was subjected to ill-treatment and demand of dowry.
Therefore, rejecting such contention of assumptions and conjectures
as well as on flimsy ground, is not at all justified.
22.     This is a fit case for exercising jurisdiction under Section 401 of
Cr.P.C. as it is found that learned Sessions Judge completely
ignored settled propositions of law with regard to dowry death,
appreciation of evidence in connection with demand wherein
normally there is no independent witness and thirdly, with regard to
dying declaration which appears to be not genuine. Thus, acquitting
all accused persons on these grounds is a miscarriage of justice.
Deceased and her parents suffered at the behest of said judgment
and therefore, interference is necessary.
23.     Having said so, the impugned judgment of acquittal of persons
by the trial court for the offences punishable under sections 498A,
304-B, 306 r.w. 34 of I.P.C. in Sessions Case No. 26 of 2002 decided
on 23.3.2004 by the learned Sessions Judge, Nanded is required to
be quashed and set aside. The matter is therefore, required to be
remanded to the learned Sessions Judge, Nanded to decide the said
Sessions Case afresh after hearing the parties by giving them
opportunity to argue the matter. Hence, the following order:-
I.      Criminal revision application stands allowed.
II.     The impugned judgment and order dated 23.3.2004 in
Sessions Case No. 26 of 2002 is hereby quashed and set
aside.
III.    The Sessions Case No. 26 of 2002 is therefore remanded to
the learned Sessions Judge, Nanded. The learned Sessions
Judge after hearing the parties afresh shall decide it as
expeditiously as possible, however, within a period of six (06)
months from the date of receipt of writ from this Court.
IV.     Original accused Nos. 1 and 3 shall appear before the
Sessions Court Nanded on 22.8.2022.
V.      Criminal Revision application stands disposed of.
VI.     Rule made absolute in the above terms.
VII.    Record and proceeding be returned to the Sessions Court
forthwith.