1.     Petitioner preferred this revisional application under section 482 of the
code of Criminal Procedure being aggrieved and dissatisfied with order dated
16.11.2019 passed by the Learned Judicial Magistrate 2nd Court at Alipore in
Case No. C/ 4108 of 2011 under section 420/ 120 B of the Indian Penal Code,
filed against Opposite Party no. 2 and others, whereby Learned Magistrate has
discharged the accused persons under section 245 (2) of Cr. P.C. due to
absence of the complainant on the date fixed for evidence.
2.     Learned Advocate for the petitioner submitted that the petitioner filed a
complaint case before the Learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Alipore which was
registered as Case No. C/ 4108 of 2011 and transferred to the 2nd Court of
Learned Judicial Magistrate at Alipore for disposal. The petitioner wanted to
produce some documents as evidence which were seized from him by police in
connection with Tollygunge P.S Case No. 52 of 2011 but were not returned. In
this connection Writ petition no. 31667 (w) of 2013 was filed by the petitioner
and by order dated 26.06.2018 this court permitted the petitioner to produce
certified copies of those documents in the evidence. Subsequently, the
petitioner filed a Criminal Revision No. 3 of 2019 before this Court for quick
disposal of the complaint case. By order dated 05.03.2019 this court directed
Learned Magistrate to dispose of the pending case as early as possible.
3.     Further case of the petitioner/complainant is that the complaint case
was fixed on 15.06.2019 for evidence, which was three months after the early
date. Learned Advocate for the petitioner filed an application before the
Learned Magistrate for preponing the date for hearing but the application was
4.     According to the petitioner after examining the complainant as PW-1, Mr.
Saroj Praharaj S.I. of police was examined as PW-2 in the case and he
produced some documents including 21 bills, 18 challans, 4 cheques and 4
cheque return memos along with letter dated 21.08.2000 and 06.09.2000.
Learned Magistrate collectively marked those documents as “P/4” but did not
admit them in evidence by putting exhibit marks. Since PW-2 did not produce
some documents on that date, he sought for time as a result the case was
adjourn to 20.07.2019.
5.    According to the petitioner on 20.07.2019 the case could not be taken up
for hearing as learned Magistrate was on leave and the Magistrate-in-Charge
refused to take evidence. It is alleged that as the petitioner/ complainant
thereafter filed writ petition no. 15422 (w) of 2019. On 25.09.2019 though the
Advocate for the complainant and the witness, PW-2 were present in court,
learned Magistrate refused to take evidence in the absence of the accused
person. Learned Advocate for the petitioner submitted that on 15.06.2019
learned Magistrate in absence of the accused persons had recorded evidence
but on 25.09.2019 he refused to take evidence despite the presence of the
witness in court.
6.    It is further contended that on 15.10.2019 the complainant’s advocate
was present in court but due to the absence of the complainant learned
Magistrate issued an order directing the complainant to show-cause and
recorded that no step was taken by the complainant till 12:25 p.m. The main
contention of the petitioner/complainant is that on 16.11.2019, PW-2, Saroj
Praharaj S.I. of Police Tollygunge P.S. who was examine in part could not
appear in court due to his illness and step was taken for fixing another date for
his evidence but learned Magistrate rejected the cause shown by the
complainant for his absence, on the ground that it was without any verification
or signature of the litigant and in the same order discharged the accused under
section 245(2) of the Cr. P.C.
7.     Learned Advocate for the petitioner argued that the complainant was
already examined in full and his attendance was not necessary on the date of
examination of PW-2 who was also partly examined. It is urged that there is no
provision in the Code of Criminal Procedure requiring verification of an
application showing cause and even if the same is deemed necessary, a defect
in the verification of an application cannot result in discharge of the accused
person. Learned Advocate contended that the impugned order passed by
learned Magistrate suffers from illegality, impropriety and is liable to be set
aside invoking the inherent jurisdiction of this court under section 482 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, else which there will be abuse of the process of
8.     In support of his argument learned Advocate for the petitioner relied
upon a decision of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Associated Cement Co. Ltd
V. Keshvanand (1998) 1 SCC 687, wherein it has been observed, “When the
court notices that the complainant is absent on a particular day the court must
consider whether the attendance of the complainant is essential on that day
for the progress of the case and also whether the situation does not justify the
case being adjourned to another date due to any other reason. If the situation
does not justify the case being adjourn the court is free to dismiss the
complaint and acquit the accused. But if the presence of the complainant on
that day was quite unnecessary then resorting to the step of axing down the
complaint may not be a proper exercise of the power envisaged in the section.
The discretion must therefore be exercised judicially and fairly without
impairing the cause of administration of criminal justice.
18.    “When considering the situation of this case as on 24.08.1996, from the
facts narrated above, we have no manner of doubt that the Magistrate should
not have resorted to the axing process, particularly since the complainant was
already examined as a witness in the case besides examining yet another
witness for the prosecution.”
9.      In another decision cited on behalf of the petitioner, in the case of Ajay
Singh and another V. State of Chhattisgarh and another, (2017) 3
Supreme Court Cases 330, learned Advocate for the petitioner referring to the
provision of section 227 of the Cr. P.C, applicable to sessions triable cases,
argued that learned Magistrate has to exercise his judicial mind to the facts of
the case in order to determine whether a case for trail has been made out by
the prosecution and at the time of assessing such fact, it is not necessary for
the court to enter into the pros and cons of the matter or into a weighing and
balancing of evidence and probabilities which is really the function of the court,
after trial starts.
10.    Learned Advocate for Opposite Party no. 2 assailing the contentions
argued that there is no merit in the revisional application filed by the
petitioner. It is submitted that the complaint was lodged by the petitioner in
the year 2001 and he could not complete the evidence within four years.
Referring to West Bengal State amendment relating to section 245 (3) of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, it is contended on behalf of the Opposite Party no.
2 that if the evidence referred to in section 244 are not produced in support of
the prosecution within four years from the      appearance of the accused, the
Magistrate shall discharge the accused unless the prosecution satisfied the
Magistrate that upon the evidence already produced and for special reasons
there is ground for presuming that it was not be in the interest just to
discharge the accused. It is urged by learned Advocate for Opposite Party No 2
that the Petitioner/ Complainant has resorted to dilatory tactics for which he
has not been able to adduce any material evidence till date for which the
accused person has been discharged. It is submitted that the present petition
is also liable to be dismissed.
11.    I have considered the arguments advanced by learned Advocate for both
parties in the backdrop of the facts and circumstances of this case and the
relevant provisions of law. It appears from the certified copy of the impugned
order passed in case no. C/ 4108 of 2011 that the allegations against the
accused/Opposite Party no. 2 is under section 420/ 120 B of the I.P.C. The
alleged offence is a cognizable one but compoundable in nature. Section 249 of
the code of Criminal Procedure has laid down, “When the proceedings have
been instituted upon complaint, and on any day fixed for the hearing of the case,
the complainant is absent, and the offence may be lawfully compounded or is not
a cognizable offence, the Magistrate may, in his discretion, notwithstanding
anything hereinbefore contained, at any time before the charge has been framed,
discharge the accused.” Accordingly in a warrant proceeding case arising out of
a compliant, absence of a complainant may result in discharge of the accused
person before a charge has been framed, if the offence is lawfully
compoundable and it is not a cognizable offence. Therefore, it is clear that an
accused may be discharged if the offence is not a cognizable one but in the
instant case the offence being a cognizable one, the provisions of section 249 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure would not be attracted.
12.    The impugned order has been passed by the learned Magistrate resorting
to the fact that the application filed on behalf of the complainant showing
cause, did not bear any verification or signature of the complainant. It is true
that an application which contain some assertion should be verified by the
person making the statements for holding such person responsible regarding
its genuineness. However, there is no provision which makes such verification
essential. In the instant case it is undisputed that the complainant has already
been examined and PW-2 S.I. Saroj Praharaj having been examined in part,
appeared on another date for his evidence but he was not examined by the
learned Magistrate on the ground that the accused person was absent. On the
subsequent date the witness was not present and sought for time for his
evidence but learned Magistrate had directed the complainant to show-cause
for not appearing in person. Though order dated 15.10.2019 has not been
produced by the petitioner, it appears from order dated 16.11.2019 that on
15.10.2019 the complainant was absent without steps and nobody represented
him despite repeated calls and only at 12:25 p.m. the complainant was directed
to show-cause. Non-production of order dated 15.10.2019 on the part of the
petitioner does not extend any assistance to this court to observe whether the
petitioner had at all been represented on that date or not and whether learned
Magistrate was justified in issuing an order directing him to show-cause. This
conduct of the petitioner of playing truant and blaming the court is indeed
13.    The crux of the issue before this court is whether learned Magistrate was
justified in discharging the accused person under section 245(2) of the Cr. P.C
for the failure on the part of the complainant to show-cause with verification
and signature on the application. In my considered view it would be a legal
necessity on the part of learned Magistrate under section 245 (2) of the Cr. P.C
to consider and record reasons that no case against the accused has been
made out which, if unrebutted would warrant his conviction. In absence of
such evidence the accused may be discharged. I do not find any such finding or
observation made by the learned Magistrate in the impugned order. It appears
that learned Magistrate has been swayed by the sole reason that he did not
find the cause shown by the complainant to be in proper form. In this context
it needs to be mentioned that an accused person could be discharged under
section 245 (2) of Cr. P.C if the Magistrate for reasons recorded found that the
charge was groundless. Learned Magistrate has discharged the accused under
section 245(2) of Cr. P.C. without considering the evidence of PW-1 and PW-2
before charge and before arriving at any finding that the charge levelled against
the accused was groundless, and not tenable.
14.      Learned Advocate for the Opposite Party no. 2 has drawn my attention
to the West Bengal state amendment incorporating section 245(3) of Cr. P.C,
whereby an accused could be discharge if prosecution evidence was not
completed within four years. In the instant case no such reason has been
assigned nor had there been any direction to the complainant to adduce
evidence within any specified period. To the contrary, it has been noticed that
even after a direction passed by this court to dispose of the case at the earliest,
proceeding in that regard was conspicuously absent.
15.   Learned Advocate for the petitioner, relied on the ratio of the decision
reported in (1998) 1 SCC page 687 at paragraph 17 and 18, wherein Hon’ble
Supreme Court while dealing with the scope of section 247 of Cr. P.C (of old
Code corresponding to SCC 256 of the new code) observed that if the presence
of the complainant on that date was quite unnecessary then resorting to the
step of axing down the complaint may not be a proper exercise of the power
envisaged in the section. On careful reading of the above decision it appears
that the same relates to summons cases and would not apply to the present
case. Here we are not concerned with the provisions of section 249 of Cr. P.C,
which could have resulted in discharge of the accused due to absence of the
complainant if the offence was a non cognizable and compoundable one. The
provision under section 245 of the Criminal Procedure Code however does not
foresee a situation where the absence of the complainant can be a ground for
discharging of the accused without considering the evidence already adduced
by the complainant witnesses before charge. The other decision reported in
(2017) 3 SCC page 330, which discussed the scope of section 227 of the Cr.
P.C related sessions trial also does not apply to warrant proceeding cases
instituted otherwise than on police report.
16.    In the light of my above discussion I hold that the impugned order dated
16.11.2019 passed by learned Judicial Magistrate 2nd Court at Alipore in case
no. C/4108 of 2011 suffers from illegality and impropriety and the same is
liable to be set aside.
17.     The revisional application under section 482 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure is allowed on contest against Opposite Party no. 2. Complaint Case
No C-4108 of 2011 is resorted to its original number and file. Learned Judicial
Magistrate is directed to give opportunity to the petitioner/ complainant to
adduce evidence within a reasonable period from the date of communication of
the order, preferably within six months. In view of my above finding I.A No.
CRAN/1/2020(old I.A. CRAN/1203/2020 also stands disposed of.
18.     Criminal Section is directed to send a copy of the judgment to learned
Judicial Magistrate, 2nd court at Alipore for information and necessary action.
19.      Urgent Photostat certified copy of this judgment, be supplied to the
parties if applied for maintaining all formalities.