The State West Bengal and others
… for the petitioner
Mr. Swapan Kumar Datta, ld. AGP,
The grievance raised in this petition is that in respect
of certain defalcations by Contai Prabhat Kumar College,
the petitioner had made a complaint to the police, but on
that complaint no action has been taken.         The prayer
made    in   the   petition   is   to issue   a  mandamus
commanding the respondent authorities to register an
FIR and to initiate proper investigation on the basis of the
complaint.    Further prayer has been made to issue a
direction to the Superintendent of Police to initiate an
enquiry against the concerned Inspector-in-Charge as to
why proceedings be not initiated against him for not
taking action after receiving the complaint.
The grievance is in respect of non-registration of FIR
on the basis of the complaint made by the petitioner
therefore it is a grievance of personal nature, which
cannot be agitated in a PIL. That apart, the writ under
Article 226 of the Constitution is not a proper remedy
seeking direction to register an FIR or to carry out the
investigation.
If the petitioner has any grievance in respect of non-
registration of the FIR or improper investigation, then the
proper remedy available to him is to take recourse to the
provision of Cr.P.C. The Hon’ble Supreme Court in the
matter of Sakiri Vasu vs. State of Uttar Pradesh and others
reported in (2008) 2 SCC 409 has held as under:
“25. We have elaborated on the above matter
because we often find that when someone has a
grievance that his FIR has not been registered at
the police station and/or a proper investigation is
not being done by the police, he rushes to the High
Court to file a writ petition or a petition under
Section 482 Cr.P.C. We are of the opinion that the
High Court should not encourage this practice and
should ordinarily refuse to interfere in such matters
and relegate the petitioner to his alternating
remedy, first under Section 154(3) and Section 36
Cr.P.C. before the police officers concerned, and if
that is of no avail, by approaching the Magistrate
concerned under Section 156(3).
26. If a person has a grievance that his FIR has
not been registered by the police station his first
remedy is to approach the Superintendent of Police
under Section 154(3) Cr.P.C. or other police officer
referred to in Section 36 Cr.P.C.          If despite
approaching the Superintendent of Police or the
officer referred to in Section 36 his grievance still
persists, then he can approach a Magistrate under
Section 156(3) Cr.P.C. instead of rushing to the
High Court by way of a writ petition or a petition
under Section 482 Cr.P.C.       Moreover, he has a
further remedy of filing a criminal complaint under
Section 200 Cr.P.C. Why then should writ petitions
WPA (P) 57 of 2022
or Section 482 petitions be entertained when there
are so many alternative remedies?”
In view of the above, we are of the opinion that the
present writ petition cannot be entertained which is
accordingly dismissed.
However, the petitioner will be at liberty to avail such
other appropriate remedies as are available in law.
Urgent photostat certified copy of this order, if
applied   for, be  supplied    to  the   parties   on   usual