We have heard learned counsel for parties.
Learned   senior  counsel           for the  appellants   has
drawn our attention to the regulations and the G.Os. in
question more specifically in the sequence as set out in
the rejoinder.
In this behalf it is stated that as per regulation
89(a) of Tamil Nadu Electricity Board (TNEB) Service
Regulations reservation of appointments both by direct
recruitment and by promotion are being followed.
In order to facilitate recruitment of personnel
from the open market, G.O.(Ms.) No.44 dated 11.3.2015
was    issued   inviting    applications         for   the   post  of
Assistant Engineer/ Electrical/ Mechanical & Civil to be
filled up by a selection process comprising of a written
interview. The written examination
was completed on 31.1.2016 for the post of 375 Assistant
Engineers and the competitive written examination marks
were published on 30.7.2016. The appellant(s) published
the cut-off marks of appearing for viva voce interview
for  the   post  of  375   Assistant          Engineers  by  direct
recruitment on the website on 27.1.2017.
As far as the respondent is concerned, she had
applied through an online process and while making such
an application had not mentioned that she was eligible
for concession to come under any priority quota except
for the benefit of reservation as she belonged to the SC
community. Thus, as per the disclosure of information by
the  respondent   she   is      eligible       for  General  Quota,
SC(General) and SC(Women) quota              only. She appeared in
the written examination on 31.1.2016             and secured 28.333
marks. The respondent, having scored more than the cut-
off marks, was called for the interview and the final
score post interview was 29.283.
The  claim  of  the      respondent       was  predicated  on
G.O.Ms. No.188 dated 28.12.1976 providing for an order
of priority list. However, stand of the respondent is
that despite the respondent being an outstanding scout,
that is not a priority for appointment to the post of
direct   recruitment   through           employment   exchange.  It
appears that candidates at different serial numbers had
applied under priority quota of inter-caste marriage and
dependents of ex-servicemen and the candidates who have
scored higher marks than the cut-off marks prescribed
for priority quota and had reached the zone of selection
under the priority quota based on merit of the marks and
as per roster prescribed by Government of Tamil Nadu was
given the benefit. We may note, notification does not
prescribe an outstanding scout as a priority.
The    dispute   has     arisen        as  according  to  the
appellant, the G.O.Ms. No.549 of the TNEB Select Service
Regulations do not provide priority for an outstanding
scout which has however weighed with the courts below in
granting benefit to the respondent.
In   our  view   the    most        material  aspect is  that
G.O.Ms. No.549 provided for “preference only ” and not
priority. The relevant provision reads as under:-
“Rule 55 of Tamil Nadu State and Subordinate Service
55. Employment concession following for outstanding
Notwithstanding anything contained in these
rules or in the Special Rules for the various State
and Subordinate Service, other things being equal,
preference shall be given to the Outstanding scouts
for appointment to any post by direct recruitment.
Explanation:- For the purpose of this rule,
“outstanding scout” means a person who has received
the award from the President of India.”
The   principle     of     preferential         candidates     would
apply   when   there   is   a      tie      between    the   preferential
candidate and a general candidate and the person who is
to be treated as a preferential can be given a mark over
a   general    candidate.        This         is   the    most   material
distinction. In view thereof, the respondent could not
have been treated as a “preferential candidate” much
less a “priority candidate”.
The respondent apparently was also conscious of
this   fact   as   she   has       not       claimed    eligibility    for
concession under any priority quota and having scored
29.283 marks in total, the last selected person was well
above   her  marks    both     under         SC(General)     category   or
SC(women) Category, the latter being 34.142 and was thus
denied selection.
In  our   view   the    courts          below   appeared   to   have
missed the distinction between priority and preference
moreso as respondent had not claimed any priority other
than what she had set out. The question of preference,
even if it had to work in favour of the respondent,
would arise if she was identically situated as the other
candidates in terms of the marks and would then get the
preference,     we   find     it          apposite   to    reproduce   the
observations of this Court in Secy., A.P. Public Service
Commission v. Y.V.V.R. Srinivasulu, (2003) 5 SCC 341:
“10. … The word “preference” in our view is capable
of different shades of meaning taking colour from
the context, purpose and object of its use under the
scheme of things envisaged. Hence, it is to be
construed not in an isolated or detached manner,
ascribing a meaning of universal import, for all
contingencies capable of an invariable application.
The procedure for selection in the case involves a
qualifying test, a written examination and an oral
test or interview and the final list of selection
has to be on the basis of the marks obtained in
them. The suitability and all-round merit, if had to
be adjudged in that manner only, what justification
could there be for overriding all these merely
because, a particular candidate is in possession of
an additional qualification on the basis of which, a
preference has also been envisaged. The Rules do not
provide   for    separate          classification   of   those
candidates or apply different norms of selection for
them. The “preference” envisaged in the Rules, in
our   view,   under    the            scheme   of things   and
contextually also cannot mean, an absolute en bloc
preference akin to reservation or separate and
distinct method of selection for them alone. A mere
rule of preference meant to give weightage to the
additional qualification cannot be enforced as a
rule of reservation or rule of complete precedence.
Such a construction would not only undermine the
scheme of selection envisaged through the Public
Service Commission on the basis of merit performance
but also would work great hardship and injustice to
those who possess the required minimum educational
qualification with which they are entitled to
compete     with     those             possessing   additional
qualification too, and demonstrate their superiority
meritwise and their suitability for the post. It is
not to be viewed as a preferential right conferred
even for taking up their claims for consideration.
On the other hand, the preference envisaged has to
be given only when the claims of all candidates who
are eligible are taken for consideration and when
any one or more of them are found equally
positioned, by using the additional qualification as
a tilting factor, in their favour vis-à-vis others
in the matter of actual selection.
11.Whenever, a selection is to be made on the basis
of merit performance involving competition, and
possession of any additional qualification or factor
is also envisaged to accord preference, it cannot be
for the purpose of putting them as a whole lot ahead
of others, dehors their intrinsic worth or proven
inter se merit and suitability, duly assessed by the
competent authority. Preference, in the context of
all such competitive scheme of selection would only
mean that other things being qualitatively and
quantitatively equal, those with the additional
qualification have to be preferred. There is no
question    of   eliminating            all   others   preventing
thereby    even     an      effective          and    comparative
consideration on merits, by according en bloc
precedence in favour of those in possession of
additional     qualification             irrespective    of    the
respective merits and demerits of all candidates to
be considered.”
The   direction     by     the        learned    Single   Judge   as
affirmed   by   the    Division           Bench   actually    amounts   to
bringing the respondent in a “priority category”.                    Thus,
the findings of the learned Single Judge and Division
Bench can’t really be sustained.
We having observed aforesaid, must note that the
two courts below having held in a particular manner, we
have   put   to    the   learned            senior    counsel    for   the
appellant(s) to obtain instructions whether there were
vacancies where the respondent could be accommodated so
as to at least put this lis to an end. The concern
expressed    by    the   learned            senior   counsel     for   the
appellant(s) was that it would amount to accepting the
legal position as set out in the impugned order but
otherwise the respondent can be adjusted. It is in view
thereof we have proceeded to set out the legal position
so that there is no repeat of the nature of the problem
faced in terms of the impugned orders. But at the                     same
time we are inclined to accommodate the respondent                 more
in the nature of exercise of the power conferred on us
under Article 142 of the Constitution of India. What
persuades us to exercise this power is the fact that the
respondent is an outstanding scout who is recipient of a
Presidential Award for her contribution as a scout. In
view   of   the   passage     of          time  and    the   hopes  and
aspirations arising from the impugned orders, albeit on
a  wrong   legal   principle,          in    view  of   what  has  been
volunteered    by   the  learned            senior   counsel   for  the
appellant the respondent would be accommodated in the
post of Assistant Engineer (Electrical) but will be at
the bottom of the seniority list and will get benefits
only from the date of her appointment order which may be
issued to her in a period of one month from today.
Civil appeal is allowed in the aforesaid terms.
Leaving parties to bear their own costs.
Date : 27-10-2021 These matters were called on for hearing today.
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
Civil appeal is allowed in terms of the signed order.
Pending applications stand disposed of.
(Signed order is placed on the file)