The present appeal under Section 19 of the
Family Courts Act, is preferred by the appellant-husband
to assail the order dated 25.08.2022, passed by the
Family Court, Kotdwar, Pauri Garhwal, in Misc. Criminal
Suit No. 02 of 2022, whereby the Family Court allowed
the application filed by the respondent-wife under
Section 5 of the Limitation Act as well as a second
application under Order 9 Rule 13 of the CPC, setting
aside the ex-parte divorce decree obtained by the
appellant-husband      against    the   respondent     dated
2)         The parties were married on 19.10.1996.
They were living as husband and wife under the same
roof in Village Maanpur, Patti Sukhrow, Tehsil Kotdwar,
District Pauri Garhwal.       While so living together as
husband and wife, the appellant filed the divorce petition
under Section 13(1)(ia) of the Hindu Marriage Act on the
ground    of   cruelty    against   the   respondent    vide
Matrimonial Case No. 05 of 2013, in the Court of the
Family Judge, Kotdwar, Pauri Garhwal.         The memo of
parties / cause title of the said divorce petition disclosed
the address of both the parties as aforesaid, namely,
Pauri Garhwal.     The parties were blessed with three
sons, namely, Deepak, Kulbhushan and Paras, who were
16 years, 14 years and 10 years old, when the divorce
petition was preferred in the year 2013. In the divorce
proceedings, the respondent-wife was treated as served
with the summons on the basis of the Process Server’s
report which showed acknowledgement of the summons
by her, in her own hand.       Since she did not appear to
contest the divorce proceedings, she was proceeded ex-
parte on 12.08.2013. The ex-parte divorce decree came
to be passed by the Family Court on 30.10.2021.
3)         During the course of the pendency of the
divorce proceedings, the appellant did not inform the
Court   of  any    alleged  change  of  address  of  the
respondent to claim that she had moved out of her
matrimonial home.        Thus, as per the record, she
continued to reside with the appellant even during the
pendency of the divorce proceedings under the same
4)         Pertinently, even in the present appeal, the
address of both the parties is shown to be the same,
which shows that the respondent continues to reside in
her matrimonial home even now.
5)         After the appellant had obtained the ex-parte
decree of divorce on 30.10.2021, the respondent-wife
moved the aforesaid two applications on 23.05.2022 -
one under Section 5 of the Limitation Act to seek
condonation of delay in moving the second application
under Order 9 Rule 13 CPC, and the other, to seek the
setting aside of the ex-parte decree of divorce.    The
respondent claimed that the conduct of the appellant in
relation to other woman gave rise to a controversy
between the parties and, at that stage, the appellant
disclosed to the respondent that he had already obtained
a decree of divorce against her.                       It is only thereafter,
that she moved the aforesaid two applications on
23.05.2022. In the application, the respondent stated in
paragraph 8, as follows:
“fd i=koyh ij tks leu dh izfr izkfFkZuh@izfrokfnuh dks izkIr gksuk n’kkZ;k gS
og izkfFkZuh@izfrokfnuh }kjk izkIr ugh gS cfYd foi{kh@oknh us gh izkfFkZuh@izfrokfnuh
ds gLrk{kj cukdj izkIr dh gS D;ksfd foi{kh@oknh o izkfFkZuh@izfrokfnuh ,d gh ?kj esa
jgrs gSa rFkk i=koyh ij tks iks0vks0 dh jlhn layXu gS og Hkh foi{kh@oknh }kjk gh
izkIr fd;k x;k gksxk bl rjg foi{kh@oknh us izkfFkZuh@izfrokfnuh dks vU/kdkj esa
j[kdj ekuuh; U;k;ky; dks xqejkg dj ,d i{kh; rykd dh fMdzh izkIr dh gS tks
[kkfjt gksus ;ksX; gSA”
6)              The application was contested by the appellant
by filing his reply / objection, wherein he stated in
paragraph 5, as follows:
“;g fd ekuuh; U;k;ky; }kjk izkFkZuh dks ctfj;s foi{kh@oknh uksfVl@leu
iSjoh dh x;h Fkh tksfd dkxt la[;k 9d gS ftl ij izkFkZuh yTth nsoh ds gLrk{kj cus
gSa rFkk yTth nsoh ij rkehyk Ik;kZIr gS rFkk ekuuh; U;k;ky; ds rkehyh okgd dh
vk[;k ifjyf{kr gSA bl izdkj izkFkZuh dks ekuuh; U;k;ky; ds rkehyh okgd }kjk
fnaukd 11.05.2013 dks okn dh iw.kZ tkudkjh izkIr gks x;h Fkh izkFkZuh dks okn esa
mifLFkr gksdj viuk mRrj@tokc nsus dk Ik;kZIr le; Fkk fdUrq izkFkZuh us tkucqtdj
ckotwn tkudkjh ekuuh; U;k;ky; esa mifLFkr ugh gqbZ vkSj uk gh oknh ds okn dk dksbZ
[k.Mu fd;k ftl dkj.k ekuuh; U;k;ky; }kjk fnaukd 12.08.2013 dkas ewy okn esa ,d
i{kh; lquokbZ ds vkns’k ikfjr fd;s x;sA”
7)         In the impugned order, in paragraph 7, the
Family Court observed as follows:
“Learned counsel for the applicant argued that the
applicant had not received the summons sent by
registered post and the summons paper number 9A
which the opposition is asking to be served on the
petitioner, was also got signed by the applicant saying
that in any case he has to testify and kept the paper
with him and the applicant never got to know about the
pending divorce case against her.       In the light of the
above discussion in this application, it has been found
that the opposition is also residing with the applicant,
therefore, in view of the relationship and mutual trust
between the husband and wife, the opposition cannot
ask any of his/her wife/appellant. The fact of getting
the paper signed also cannot be denied. Therefore, the
petitioner not having the information of suit 05/2013 in
advance also appears to be justified by the statement
made by the applicant. In addition to the applicant, if
the summons has been sent by post, it is also shown
from the postal receipt paper number 12A, to be sent
to  the   joint residence   of  the    applicant  and   the
opposition, in such a situation, in view of the conduct of
the opposition, there is a strong possibility that the said
post was sent by the opposition himself and has been
received by him, and the applicant does not have any
information regarding the said registered post, because
no copy of the acceptance of the said registered post
has been received on record, which should show that
the said registered post has been received by the
applicant.”
8)              We may observe that the aforesaid quotation
is from a translation of the impugned order produced by
the appellant, and is not the original text from the
impugned order itself.
9)              Paragraph 7 from the impugned order, which
is in Hindi language, reads as follows:
“izkfFkZuh ds fo}ku vf/koDrk us rdZ fn;k fd izkfFkZuh dks iathd`r Mkd ls
izsf"kr leu izkIr ugh gqvk vkSj tks leu dkxTk l[;k d9 foi{kh] izkfFkZuh ij
rkehy gksuk dg jgk gS ml ij Hkh foi{kh us izkfFkZuh ls ;g dgdj gLrk{kj djok;s
dh fdlh ekeys esa xokgh nsuh gS vkSj ml dkxt dks vius ikl j[k fy;k vkSj
izkfFkZuh dks mlds fo#) yfEcr rykd ds eqdnesa dh dHkh tkudkjh ugha gks ik;hA
bl izkFZkuk i= esa mij dh x;h ifjppkZ ds izdk’k esa ;g rF; ik;k tk pqdk gS fd
foi{kh Hkh izkfFkZuh ds lkFk fuokl dj jgk gS] vr% ,sls esa ifr&ifRu ds fj’rs ,oa
vkilh fo’okl dks ns[krs gq, foi{kh }kjk viuh ifRu@ izkfFkZuh ls fdlh dkxt ij
gLrk{kj djkus ds rF; ls Hkh bUdkj ugh fd;k tk ldrk gSSA vr% izkfFkZuh dks
oSokfgd okn la[;k 05@2013 dh tkudkjh iwoZ esa ugh gksuk Hkh izkfFkZuh }kjk izdV
fd;s x;s dFku ls U;k;ksfpr izrhr gksrk gSSA blds vfrfjDr izkfFkZuh dks tks leu
Mkd }kjk izsf”kr fd;k x;k gS og Hkh izkfFkZuh o foi{kh ds l;qDr fuokl djus okys
irs ij izsf”kr djuk Mkd jlhn dkxt la[;k 12d ls nf’kZr gS] ,sls es foi{kh ds
vkpj.k dks ns[krs gq, bl rF; dh izcy laHkkouk gS fd mDr Mkd foi{kh }kjk
Lao; izkIr dj yh x;h gks vkSj izkfFkZuh dks mDr iathd`r Mkd ds lac/k esa dksbaZ
tkudkjh u gks] D;ksafd mDr iathd`r Mkd dh dksbZ izkfIr Lohd`fr dh izfr vfHkys[k
ij izkIr ugh gS] ftlls izdV gks fd mDr iathd`r Mkd izkfFkZuh }kjk izkIr dh x;h
10)             The submission of learned counsel for the
appellant is that the Family Court has, while passing the
impugned order under Order 9 Rule 13 CPC, gone
beyond the pleadings of the parties. It was the case of
the   respondent-wife   that  she   had  not  signed    the
summons, and that her signatures on the summons had
been forged by the appellant. However, in paragraph 7
of the impugned order, the Family Court has proceeded
on the basis that the signature of the respondent-wife
had been obtained by the appellant by misrepresenting
to her that her signatures are required in relation to
some     case   without   disclosing   anything    further.
Therefore, it is argued, that the impugned order suffers
from a patent illegality and deserves to be recalled. He
further submits that since the respondent had been
proceeded ex-parte way back on 12.08.2013, after due
notice of summons upon her, her applications under
Section 5 of the Limitation Act and under Order 9 Rule
13 CPC should have been dismissed.
11)        We   have   heard   learned  counsel   for   the
appellant and perused the record.
12)        We may observe that when the appeal was
taken up by us for hearing on 23.09.2022, after hearing
counsel for the appellant, we had expressed the, prima
facie, view that the appellant appears to have played
fraud upon the respondent, and we also informed
learned counsel that we would be inclined to dismiss the
appeal - in case, we do not agree with the submissions
advanced by the counsel for the appellant, with exemplary
costs in the light of the appellant’s conduct.     Counsel for
the   appellant    had   taken   an   adjournment     to  take
instructions, and the matter was posted for today. Today,
the appellant is also present in Court, and in our presence,
counsel for the appellant has again taken instructions, and
the appellant insists that the present appeal be decided on
merits.    Accordingly, we proceed to decide the present
13)         It is not in dispute that the parties, who were
married way back on 19.10.1996, continued to live as
husband and wife even when the divorce petition was
preferred by the appellant on 04.01.2013. The appellant,
while filing the petition and providing his own address and
the address of his wife, i.e., the respondent, did not claim
that they are residing separately, in different portions of
their house. The address of both the parties was the same
as taken note of hereinabove.       Thus, it is clear that the
divorce petition was preferred by the appellant while living
with the respondent as her husband.             The conjugal
relationship between the parties, therefore, continued to
be maintained as before, even after filing of the petition.
It would, therefore, naturally follow that there would have
been condonation of the alleged matrimonial misconduct of
the respondent, as the parties continued to reside under
the same roof as husband and wife, even after the filing of
the divorce petition.   Not only this, even after obtaining
the ex-parte divorce on 30.10.2021, the parties continued
to live under the same roof as husband and wife, at least
till the respondent learnt of the ex-parte decree against
her dated 30.10.2021.
14)         The three sons of the parties, who were 16
years, 14 years and 10 years in the year 2013, when the
divorce petition was preferred, would have all attained
majority when the application of the respondent-wife to
seek the setting aside of the ex-parte decree was moved.
The Family Court observes in the impugned order, that
none of them were produced before the Court by the
appellant to establish that the parties were not residing as
husband and wife after the filing of the divorce petition.
Pertinently, the case of the respondent, in her application
was that she was residing with the appellant and her
children in the same house as a single family.     This fact
was not even denied by the appellant in his reply to the
respondent’s application under Order 9 Rule 13 CPC.
15)         So far as the submission of learned counsel for
the    appellant  premised   on  the   averment   made    in
paragraph 8 of her application under Order 9 Rule 13 CPC
is concerned, we do not find any merit in the same. This is
for the reason that, in the normal course, while living as
husband and wife, there is complete and implicit faith that
the two spouses repose in each other, and are expected to
repose in each other. Therefore, if the husband were to -
casually, ask his wife to sign a particular document, she
would unhesitatingly sign the same without even enquiring
as to what is the document on which her signatures are
being obtained. She would not even care to remember the
fact that she has actually signed a document on the
instructions of her husband. It is in this context that the
averment made in paragraph 8 of her application has to be
viewed.   When she made the averment, she was certain
that she had not signed any summons in a divorce case
initiated against her by the husband.         The appellant,
however, seems to think that he can get away with the
aforesaid fraudulent conduct by clutching on to her
averment made in paragraph 8 of her application, and by
insisting that the summons in the divorce proceedings
were actually signed by her. Even if she did actually sign
the summons, the same is neither here nor there, as he
continued to cohabit with his wife, i.e., the respondent by
treating his wife all through - before filing the divorce
petition; after filing the divorce petition, and; even after
obtaining the ex-parte divorce decree.
16)         It appears that the Family Court has taken note
of the aforesaid circumstances while passing the impugned
order, and the observation made in paragraph 7 of the
impugned order, stand from a correct understanding of the
factual situation, considering the fact that the parties were
residing as husband and wife, and also keeping in view the
social context in which Indian family exist - where the
spouses, particularly the wives, exhibit implicit faith and
trust in their husbands.
17)         The appellant, by his aforesaid conduct, has
gravely undermined the institution of marriage which is
sacrosanct amongst the Hindus - the religion to which the
parties belong. If he had to obtain divorce, he should have
fairly and squarely separated from his wife before filing the
divorce petition, and he should not have been living with
her.    However, he continued to live with her as her
husband even after filing of the divorce petition, and
obtained the ex-parte divorce.     The only conclusion that
we can draw is that the appellant misled his wife into, and
contrived to obtain her signatures on the summons and
get the Process Server’s report to show that she had been
served in the divorce proceedings, while she continued to
live with the appellant as his wife in complete ignorance of
the said developments. If there was any truth in the case
of the appellant, he would have produced his children to
support his plea that he was not residing with the
respondent as her husband throughout the proceedings,
and even after obtaining the ex-parte divorce decree.
18)         We, therefore, dismiss this appeal with costs
quantified at Rs.1,00,000/- (Rupees one lac only). Out of
the   said  costs,  Rs.   50,000/-  shall  be  paid  to  the
respondent-wife, and the remaining Rs.50,000/- shall be
deposited with the State Legal Services Authority within
four weeks.    In case, the appellant does not deposit the
said costs, his divorce petition, which has been restored,
would be liable to be dismissed for non-prosecution.
Stay Application (IA No. 01 of 2022) also stands
disposed of.