Union of India through Secretary & Ors.    ...Respondents
Union of India through Secretary
Union of India through Secretary & Ors.    ...Respondents
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
The State of Maharashtra,
through its Secretary                      ...Respondent
Union of India through Secretary & Ors.    ...Respondents
Union of India & Ors.                      ...Respondents
Union of India through Secretary & Ors.    ...Respondents
Union of India through Secretary & Ors.    ...Respondent
The State of Maharashtra & Anr.            ...Respondents
The State of Maharashtra & Anr.            ...Respondents
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
The State of Maharashtra,
through its Secretary & Anr.                 ...Respondents
The State of Maharashtra, through
its Secretary, Ministry of Energy & Anr.     ...Respondents
The State of Maharashtra, through
its Secretary, Ministry of Energy            ...Respondent
The State of Maharashtra, through
The State of Maharashtra & Anr.              ...Respondents
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
The State of Maharashtra & Anr.           ...Respondents
The State of Maharashtra & Anr.           ...Respondents
The State of Maharashtra & Anr.           ...Respondents
The State of Maharashtra & Anr.           ...Respondents
The State of Maharashtra & Anr.           ...Respondents
Santosh s/o. Vasantrao Padamwar           ...Applicant
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
The State of Maharashtra & Anr.           ...Respondents
The State of Maharashtra & Anr.           ...Respondents
The State of Maharashtra & Anr.           ...Respondents
The State of Maharashtra & Anr.           ...Respondents
The State of Maharashtra & Anr.           ...Respondents
The State of Maharashtra & Anr.           ...Respondents
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
The State of Maharashtra & Anr.             ...Respondents
The State of Maharashtra & Ors.             ...Respondents
The State of Maharashtra                    ...Respondent
The State of Maharashtra & Anr.             ...Respondents
Union of India, through its Secretary       ...Respondent
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
Mr. Rajendra Deshmukh, senior advocate a/w Mr. Sayyed
Tauseef for petitioner in WP/2663/2021, WP(ST)/7549/2021,
WP(ST)/7891/ 2021 a/w WP(ST)/7575/2021.
Mr. Amol Chalak a/w Mr. Vinod Sangvikar for petitioner in WP/
Mr. Amol Chalak i/b Mr. Vinod Sangvikar & Mr. Yogesh Morbale
for petitioner in WP(ST)/59/2021, WP(ST)/97757/2020, WP
Mr. Afroz A. Siddiquie for petitioner in WP/1054/2021.
Mr. Vishal Kadam for Petitioner in WP/3690/2020,
3702/2020 and Applicant in IA/1413/2021 in WP/2663/2021.
Senior Advocate Mr. V.A. Thorat Special Counsel a/w Senior
Advocate Mr. Mihir Desai, Special Counsel a/w Mr. P.P. Kakade
Government Pleader a/w Ms. R.A. Salunkhe, AGP for State.
Mr. Anil Sakhare, Senior Advocate a/w Mr. Kiran Gandhi i/b
Little and Co. for Resp No.5 in WP/2663/2021 &
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
Mr. Kiran Gandhi i/b Little and Co. for Resp No.1 in
WP/1054/2021 and for Resp No.2 in               WP(ST)/59/2021,
2020, for Respondent No.5 in WP/2663/2021, For Respondent
Nos. 5 & 6 in WP(ST)/7549/2021.
Mr. Neel Helekar a/w Mr. P. Khosla for Respondent No.1/UOI in
Mr. Omkar Kulkarni       for   Applicant   in  IA/2162/2021         in
Mr. Atul Hawale for Applicant in IA/1411/2021.
Mr.    Dashrath   Dube      a/w     Mr.   Rupesh      Dubey        for
Respondent/Union of India in WP/7549/2021.
1.    Before we state the facts in detail, a birds eye view of
the controversy is set out for convenience, considering that a
large number of petitions need to be dealt with involving
common issues. We are dealing with two groups pitted against
each other espousing their respective cause. These writ
petitions are clubbed together as common questions are
involved. One group pertains to the writ petitions filed by the
candidates selected to the posts reserved for Economically
Weaker Sections (hereafter ‘EWS’ for short) category, and the
other group of writ petitions is filed by the candidates
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
selected/aspiring to the posts reserved for Socially and
Educationally Backward Class (hereafter “SEBC” for short) in
respect    of  the   recruitment    process     initiated   by     the
(hereafter ‘MSEDCL’ for short) pursuant to the advertisement
bearing No.MSEDCL-04/2019 (hereafter ‘the advertisement’
for short), Advertisement No. 05/2019, and Advertisement
No. 06/2019 for filling up the vacancies of ‘Electricity
Assistant’, ‘Upkendra Sahayyak’, and ‘Diploma Engineer –
Trainee (Distribution)’ respectively.
(a)   It is the case of the EWS candidates that they are a
separate and distinct category for the purposes of the present
recruitment and recognised as such. The advertisement
provide for a separate and distinct reservation for the SEBC. A
specified   number    of  vacancies     were   reserved     for    the
candidates of the SEBC category. This reservation in favour of
the SEBC candidates was in accordance with the provisions of
the Maharashtra State Reservation (of seats for admission in
educational institutions in the State and for appointments in
the public services and posts under the State) for Socially and
‘the MSEBC Act’ for short). The constitutional validity of the
MSEBC Act was challenged in this Court. The challenge failed.
The decision of this Court upholding the constitutional validity
of the MSEBC Act was challenged in the Supreme Court.
Pending the challenge, the advertisement came to be issued
by the MSEDCL for recruitment to the various posts stipulated
thereunder. Though a specified number of vacancies were
carved out for SEBC reservation, the advertisement provided
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
a condition that the recruitment is subject to the outcome of
the decision of the Supreme Court. MSEDCL proceeded with
the recruitment process. A combined merit list of selected
candidates was published on January 17, 2020 by MSEDCL.
Thereafter, the Supreme Court passed interim directions in
the aforementioned matter. The Supreme Court passed an
order that appointments to public services and posts under
the Government shall be made without implementing the
reservation   as   provided   under   the   MSEBC      Act.   As     a
consequence, after the interim directions of the Supreme
Court, the MSEDCL could not have proceeded to fill up the
vacant posts reserved for SEBC candidates. The candidates
selected against the SEBC reservation were left in a lurch. The
State Government then took a decision that those candidates
from SEBC category, who otherwise fulfill the eligibility
prescribed for open or EWS category, may be considered
against the vacancies meant for open or EWS category. The
MSEDCL took a decision to comply with the directives of the
State Government. EWS category candidates take exception
to this decision. The petitioners belonging to EWS category
contend that the action of the State Government in allowing
SEBC category candidates who otherwise fulfill the eligibility
to participate in the selection process meant for EWS category
is completely arbitrary and unconstitutional. In any case, it is
the contention of the petitioners belonging to EWS category,
that, introducing a reservation for SEBC category at such an
advanced stage of the recruitment process is impermissible.
(b)   The second group of writ petitions is filed by the
candidates belonging to SEBC category contending that the
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
directives of the State Government to the MSEDCL, permitting
them to participate in the selection process in the vacancies
reserved for EWS category, is an informed decision which
should be taken to its logical conclusion.
(I)   We refer to the facts in Writ Petition No.2663 of 2021
which was filed on February 24, 2021 which espouses the
cause of EWS category. The jurisdiction of this Court under
Article 226 of the Constitution of India is invoked. The
following are the substantive reliefs prayed in Writ Petition No.
“B. By issuing Writ of Certiorari or any other Writ, order or
direction in the like nature, to quash and set aside the letter
dt. 10/02/2021 at Exhibit-O issued by Industries, Energy
and Labour Department, Govt. of Maharashtra as being
unconstitutional, illegal, arbitrary, self-contradictory, violative
of Government Resolution dt. 23/12/2020 and moreover
being issued without any authority of law.
C.    By issuing Writ of Certiorari or any other Writ, order or
direction in the like nature, to quash and set aside the public
notice dt. 11/02/2021 issued by Maharashtra State Electricity
Distribution Company Limited at Exhibit-P as being
unconstitutional, illegal, arbitrary, self-contradictory, violative
of Government Resolution dt. 23/12/2020.
D.    By issuing Writ of Certiorari or any other Writ, order or
direction in the like nature, to direct the respondent no.03
and 05 to grant appointment orders to the petitioners as
‘Diploma Engineer – Trainee (Distribution)’ by considering
their date of seniority same as of their counterparts who are
appointed from the Open, O.B.C., S.C. and S.T. category in
pursuance of the Advertisement at Exhibit-E.
D-1. By issuing Writ of Certiorari or any other Writ, order or
direction in the like nature, to quash and set aside the
Government Resolution dt. 31/05/2021 issued by General
Administration Department, Government of Maharashtra at
Exhibit-S as being unconstitutional, illegal and arbitrary.
D-2. By issuing Writ of Certiorari or any other Writ, order or
direction in the like nature, to quash and set aside the
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
notification   dt.  08/06/2021   issued    by    respondent
M.S.E.D.C.L. at Exhibit-T as being unconstitutional, illegal
and arbitrary.
(II) On behalf of the candidates belonging to SEBC category
we refer to the facts set out in Writ Petition No. 3704 of 2020
(upon transfer from the Aurangabad Bench of this Court Writ
Petition No.8184 of 2020 is renumbered as such). The
following are the substantive reliefs prayed in this writ
A.     To direct the respondent No.2 – MSEDCL to issue
appointment orders for the post of Diploma Engineer
Trainee (Distribution) pursuant to the advertisement
No.06/2019 and selection by issuing a writ of
mandamus, orders, directions or any other appropriate
writ as the case may be;
B.     To direct the respondent No.2-MSEDCL to extend
the benefits of EWS category to the petitioners and to
give the appointment orders to the petitioners for the
post of Diploma Engineer Trainee (Distribution), by
issuing a writ of mandamus, orders, directions or any
other appropriate writ as the case may be;
C.      To direct the respondent No.2-MSEDCL, not to
issue appointment orders in respect of the candidates
belonging to EWS category who possess less marks than
the petitioners herein;
2.    The cause of EWS category candidates is espoused by
Shri   Deshmukh,      senior  advocate   alongwith     the    other
advocates appearing in the connected petitions.
3.    Espousing the cause of the candidates belonging to
SEBC category and in support of the impugned G.Rs., we have
heard Mr. V. A. Thorat, special counsel along with senior
advocate Mr. Mihir Desai appearing on behalf of the State.
Mr. A. Y. Sakhare, learned senior advocate appeared on behalf
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
of the MSEDCL supporting the stand of the State Government
advancing the cause of SEBC candidates. We have also heard
learned advocates representing SEBC candidates in the
concerned writ petitions.
4.    The MSEBC Act was brought into force on November 30,
2018. The State Government took a decision to extend the
benefit of reservation in services to the SEBC. Likewise the
State Government has extended the benefit of reservation in
education and service to the EWS category within the State of
Maharashtra vide Government Resolution (hereafter ‘G.R.’ for
short) dated February 12, 2019 issued by the General
Administration Department, Government of Maharashtra. The
respondent no.5 – MSEDCL issued an advertisement dated
June    2,  2019     bearing    No.MSEDCL-06/       2019      inviting
applications for various posts including that of ‘Diploma
Engineer – Trainee (Distribution) (hereafter ‘the said post’ for
short) to be filled at various offices of the MSEDCL. MSEDCL is
a State owned company/entity. There is no dispute that the
MSEDCL is a ‘State’ within the meaning of Article 12 of the
Constitution of India and is amenable to the writ jurisdiction
of this Court. The educational qualification prescribed for the
said post was ‘Diploma in Electrical Engineering’. Out of the
total 408 vacancies advertised for the said post, 40 posts
were reserved for EWS category candidates and 53 posts
were reserved for SEBC category candidates. A corrigendum
to the advertisement due to certain changes in the vacancies/
backlog position for the said post came to be issued.
Consequently, for the said post, the vacancy position was
reduced to 29 for EWS category and 43 for SEBC category.
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
5.    A reference to some of the conditions of advertisement
pertaining to SEBC and EWS categories is relevant. Clause
5.12 provides that for claiming the benefit of reservation
under SEBC, the candidates have to produce the Caste
Certificate issued by the appropriate authority and Caste
Validity Certificate issued by Caste Scrutiny Committee. Also
the concept of Non-creamy Layer Certificate is applicable to
SEBC along with all Backward Class (other than SC/ST)
categories. Clause 5.12 provides thus: -
“It will be sole responsibility of the candidate to produce
the appropriate documents to claim the benefit of
reservation under SEBC.”
“5.13       As per the guidelines vide GR dated
07/12/2018, the Caste Certificate issued to the
candidate under Educationally and Socially Backward
Category           (ESBC)           as         per            the
G.R.No.CBC-10/2013/P.K.35/BCR dated 15/07/2014
earlier will be valid for availing reservation under SEBC
under this recruitment.”
The caste certificate issued to the candidate under
Educationally and Socially Backward Category as per
earlier G.R. dated July 15, 2014 is made valid for
availing reservation under SEBC under this recruitment.
6.    Clause 5.14 provides thus: -
“5.14     For claiming the benefit of reservation under EWS
the candidates have to produce the Certificate within 6
months from the date of submission of application. The
candidates shall produce certificate issued by the appropriate
authority as prescribed under Annexure -’A’ enclosed to
Maharashtra Government Resolution dated 12/02/2019.”
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
7.    Clause 5.16 stipulates that the candidate applying under
SEBC should be a domicile of Maharashtra State as per G.R.
dated 05/12/2018. Clause 5.21 stipulates that the reserved
category candidates who avails concession in age will not be
considered against the open/general category posts. The
applicants were requested to observe the vacancies before
submission of online application. Further, clause 5.23 of the
advertisement mentions that recruitment process of the SEBC
category candidates is subject to the order from the Hon’ble
Supreme Court of India in the SLP (C) No. 015701/2019 and
any instructions by the GoM accordingly are received. The
tentative time schedule is provided under clause 7 which is as
7.1   Opening of submission of online applications : 07/08/2019
7.2   Last date of submission of online application : 20/08/2019
7.3   Candidates to download call letter for online : 10 days prior
test                                             to online test
7.4   Online Examination at Test Centre             : During August 2019
Thus, the last date of submission of online application was
8.    The procedure to apply is stated in clause 9. Clause 9.1
provides that “candidate applying for the posts advertised
should ensure that they fulfill all eligibility criteria. Their
admission to all the stages of the recruitment process will be
purely     provisional  subject     to    satisfying    the    prescribed
eligibility criteria mentioned in this advertisement.”                The
general conditions are prescribed by clause 12. Clause 12(a)
stipulates    that   “mere     submission/acceptance           of   online
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
application and/or appearing for the exams do not ensure
eligibility as   well  as   does   not   confer   any    right    for
appointment”. Clause (d) provides that “once the application
is submitted, no information can be corrected. Candidates
should be careful in filling the online application and should
cross-check and are responsible for correctness of information
in continuation”. Clause (r) stipulates that “any request for
change of address or any other information provided in online
application will not be entertained”. Further, by virtue of
clause (v), the MSEDCL has reserved the right to cancel the
advertisement fully or partly on any grounds and such
decision was not to be notified or intimated to the candidates.
9.     The candidates appeared for online examination on
November 13, 2019. The combined list of selected candidates
was published on January 17, 2020. The names of the
candidates selected from various categories including EWS
and SEBC category was declared. The candidates received a
communication through e-mail dated January 25, 2021
whereby they were informed by the MSEDCL that they are
selected and further instructed to report for document
verification process. As a result of the interim order passed by
the Supreme Court, the MSEDCL did not proceed to issue
appointment orders to the candidates selected from SEBC
category. Even those from EWS category were not appointed.
10. The candidates from the SEBC category approached the
Bench of this Court at Aurangabad by way of Writ Petition No.
8184 of 2020 (now Writ Petition No.3704 of 2020 upon
transfer to this Court). It was contended that SEBC candidates
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
also possessed EWS certificate issued by the competent
authority. They relied upon the Cabinet decision dated
September 22, 2020 to contend that in view of the stay
granted by the Supreme Court to SEBC reservation, the SEBC
candidates can avail the benefit of EWS also. This Court on
December 11, 2020 passed an interim order thereby directing
that “in case, the petitioners possess the EWS certificate, then
till the next date the candidates possessing the less marks
than the petitioners, shall not be given appointment orders
from EWS category. The present order would not preclude the
respondents for giving appointment orders to the candidates
from EWS possessing more marks than the petitioners”.
11. The State of Maharashtra issued a G.R. dated December
23, 2020 whereby it permitted the candidates belonging to
SEBC category to obtain EWS certificates for the purpose of
securing admissions into educational institutions and for direct
recruitment to civil posts for the year 2020-2021.
12. The State of Maharashtra then issued a G.R. dated
January 13, 2021 providing that in the light of the interim
order passed by the Supreme Court, the posts reserved for
SEBC category for the purpose of recruitment to various posts
including police constable, police driver amongst others were
decided to be converted to Open Category posts. The
Government also allowed the SEBC candidates to obtain EWS
category certificate from the competent authority and apply
for the said posts providing an option either from the open
category or from EWS category.
13. The State Government through the Industries, Energy
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
and Labour Department issued a letter dated February 10,
2021     addressed     to   the     Managing   Director,    MSEDCL,
instructing him to comply with the guidelines laid down
therein. The relevant portion of the said guidelines read thus:-
“a. To allow the S.E.B.C. candidates who had participated
in the recruitment process in pursuance of the Advertisement
No.05/2019 (Upkendra Sahayyak) and Advertisement
No.06/2019 (Diploma/Graduate Engineer Trainee) advertised
by the M.S.E.D.C.L. in the year 2019 to obtain E.W.S.
certificates for the purpose of their recruitment from the
E.W.S. category for the aforesaid posts.
b.     To take abundant care and caution that no action in
contravention and derogation of the Government Resolution
dt. 23/12/2020 issued by General Administration Department
be taken.”
Further, vide the aforementioned letter dated February 10,
2021, the Industries, Energy and Labour Department gave
retrospective effect to the G.R. dated December 23, 2020 by
allowing even the candidates who had participated in the
recruitment process held in the year 2019 to obtain EWS
category certificate and avail its benefits by changing their
caste/reservation category from SEBC category to EWS
category for the purpose of recruitment to the said posts. In
pursuance of the letter dated February 10, 2021, the Chief
General Manager, MSEDCL, issued a public notice dated
February 11, 2021 that MSEDCL had activated the URL-line for
the purpose of allowing SEBC category candidates to change
their category either to “EWS category” or “Open category”
with reference to their recruitment to various posts advertised
by MSEDCL in the year 2019. The last date provided by
MSEDCL for changing reservation category was March 20,
2021. This led to the filing of these writ petitions by the
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
respective category of candidates.
(emphasis supplied by us)
14. The reservation to EWS category in the State of
Maharashtra was introduced by G.R. dated February 12, 2019.
Advertisement No.06/2019 was published by the MSEDCL on
August 7, 2019. On July 28, 2020, the State of Maharashtra
issued a circular reiterating that SEBC category candidates
cannot avail the benefit of EWS category. The reservation for
the EWSs of citizens is a constitutional reservation. On the
date of issuance of the advertisement No.06/2019, the MSEBC
Act was in force. The SEBC candidates applied in view of the
statutory reservation carved out in their favour by the State in
view of the enforcement of the MSEBC Act. Thus, the
MSEDCL, at the time of the issuance of the advertisement had
reserved certain percentage of posts for EWS category which
is a constitutional reservation and certain percentage of posts
for the SEBC category which was a statutory reservation.
Once   the   recruitment   process   has   already   commenced
pursuant to the issuance of an advertisement, the selection
procedure cannot be changed midway to the detriment of the
EWS category. SEBC category candidates were aware of the
challenge to the MSEBC Act pending before the Supreme
Court. Even the advertisement provided a condition that the
recruitment process of the SEBC category candidates is
subject to outcome of the order of the Supreme Court. SEBC
candidates were put on guard even at the stage of issuance of
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
the   advertisement.   The   SEBC    category    candidates      still
preferred to apply against the posts reserved for SEBC
candidates. There are adequate indications and clauses
present in the advertisement which prohibit making any
change in the application or changing the category of
reservation at all, once the application form has been
submitted. SEBC candidates took a chance by participating in
the selection process. Midway during the selection process it
is impermissible for the State to allow such a migration of the
SEBC candidates, from SEBC category to EWS category. A
distinct and separate constitutional reservation has been
carved out in favour of EWS category. Allowing the State to
permit such migration by issuance of G.R. upon the Supreme
Court having struck down the reservation in favour of the
SEBC candidates works completely to the detriment and is
against the vested rights accrued in favour of the EWS
candidates. SEBC candidates applied against SEBC category
which came into existence by virtue of MSEBC Act. EWS
category is a separate and distinct reservation which can be
well gathered from the language of clause (6) (a) of Article 15
which provides that “nothing in this article shall prevent the
State from making any special provision for the advancement
of any economically weaker sections of citizens other than the
classes mentioned in clauses (4) and (5)”. SEBC candidates
for the purpose of the present advertisement have to be
regarded as a separate class and the plain language of clause
(6) of Article 15 prohibits the State from including such a
class under the category of EWS. The State had recognized
SEBC as a separate class. Having done so, there is no
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
question then of allowing a section of that class to participate
in the category meant for EWS which is in the teeth of clause
(6) of Article 15 of the Constitution of India.
15. Learned senior advocate and advocates appearing on
behalf of the EWS category candidates relied upon the
following decisions in support of their respective contentions:-
i)      P. D. Aggarwal and others vs. State of U.P.
ii)     P. Mahendran and others         vs.   State     of
Karnataka and others2;
iii)    N. T. Devin Katti and others vs. Karnataka
Public Service Commission and others3;
iv)     K. Narayanan and others         vs.   State     of
Karnataka and others4;
v)      Union of India and others vs. Tushar Ranjan
Mohanty and others5;
vi)     Gurdeep Singh vs. State of J & K and others6;
vii) Ashok Kumar Sharma and others vs. Chander
Shekhar and another7;
viii) Sonia vs. Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd. and
ix)     Madan Mohan Sharma and another vs. State
of      Rajasthan and others9;
x)      Tamil Nadu Computer Science BEd Graduate
Teachers Welfare Society (1) vs. Higher
Association and others ;
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
xi)     State of Bihar and others vs. Mithilesh
xii) P. V. Indiresan (2) vs. Union of India and
xiii) Parmender Kumar and others vs. State of
Haryana and others13;
xiv) Kishor Kumar and others vs. Pradeep Shukla
xv) Natural Resources Allocation, in Re, Special
Reference No.1 of 201215;
xvi) M. Surender Reddy vs. State of Andhra
Pradesh and others16;
xvii) Prakash Chand Meena and others vs. State of
Rajasthan and others17;
xviii)Gaurav Pradhan and others vs. State of
Rajasthan and others18;
xix) Zonal Manager, Bank of India, Zonal Office,
Kochi            and others vs. Aarya K. Babu and
xx) Assam Public Service Commission and others
vs. Pranjal Kumar Sarma and others20.
(a)     There        is    nothing       arbitrary       or  discriminatory      about
extending benefit of EWS reservation to eligible candidates of
SEBC class. The vacancies were reserved for SEBC candidates
in    terms        of     the     provisions         of   the   MSEBC      Act.    The
15 Spl. Ref. No. 1/2012, decided on September 27, 2012.
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
constitutional validity of the MSEBC Act was upheld by this
Court. All the candidates were informed that recruitment is
subject to the outcome of the decision of the Supreme Court.
Pursuant to the interim directions of the Supreme Court that
no appointments from the SEBC category is to be made, the
State Government had issued the circular safeguarding the
interest of such SEBC candidates who otherwise fulfill the
eligibility of EWS category. The SEBC candidates who had
participated in the recruitment process and were selected had
a legitimate expectation to be considered for appointment.
The State Government as well as the MSEDCL had to be
sympathetic to the cause of such SEBC candidates who were
directly affected by the interim directions passed by the
Supreme Court. SEBC candidates were in any case entitled to
reservation; it is not as if the benefits of reservation are
extended to SEBC category in the midst of the recruitment
process. The State Government has only permitted SEBC
candidates who otherwise fulfill the eligibility of EWS category
to either opt against the open category or EWS category. This
does not amount to applying the reservation policy midway
down the recruitment process as in any case SEBC candidates
were covered by the reservation provided by the MSEBC Act.
The    advertisement   provided   a   condition    that    the
selection is subject to the outcome of the matter before the
Supreme Court. EWS category candidates, therefore, cannot
claim a vested right to be appointed against the existing
vacancies. Merely because the select list of EWS category was
also published, the successful candidates do not acquire any
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
indefeasible right to be appointed against the existing
vacancies. The candidates who had applied under SEBC
category and are otherwise eligible to be considered in EWS
and/or open category, as the case may be, would be unfairly
deprived of the opportunity to be considered under the
aforesaid categories, if they are completely left out,         which
would be discriminatory and unconstitutional.
There is nothing arbitrary or unfair if such candidates are
given an option to either opt for EWS or open category as per
their eligibility and thereafter, the appointment orders are
issued strictly based on merit.
Clauses 6 and 7 of the advertisement provide that the
number of vacancies and reserved seats are provisional and
subject to change. Mere publication of select list cannot be
construed as a conclusion of the recruitment process as the
appointment orders were yet to be issued.
The contention as to the illegal manner in which the G.R.
is  issued    or  made   applicable   retrospective    is    entirely
misconceived. The vacancies advertised for SEBC category are
required to be adjusted in other categories in view of the
orders passed by the Supreme Court and therefore, even the
candidates who had applied for the aforesaid vacancies and
were included in the select list under SEBC category would
necessarily have to be adjusted under the appropriate
category as per their eligibility and merit. If the candidates
had applied under SEBC category, prior to the order of the
Supreme Court, and are otherwise eligible to be considered
under EWS category or open category, such candidates would
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
be unfairly kept out of the recruitment process for no fault on
their part and therefore, the State Government had issued
G.Rs. dated December 23, 2020, January 13, 2021, May 31,
2021 and July 5, 2021.
Vide public notice dated February 11, 2021 and June 8,
2021, the MSEDCL accepted the directives of the State
Government. The Government of Maharashtra applied the
EWS reservation in the State vide G.R. dated February 12,
2019 which contemplated that benefit of EWS reservation
would not ensue to such persons that were covered by other
statutory reservations including but not limited to the Maratha
community that were granted reservation under the MSEBC
Act which was in vogue at the time and was being
implemented. Once the reservation to the Maratha community
under the MSEBC Act was held to be unconstitutional, the
unavoidable consequence would be that candidates belonging
to the said community would be entitled to avail the benefit of
open category or EWS category as per their eligibility.
(a)     Learned senior advocate relied upon the following
decisions of the Supreme Court in support of the submission
that the candidate included in merit list has no indefeasible
right even if a the vacancy is existing.
(i)     Shankarsan Dash vs. Union of India21;
(ii) Vijoy Kumar Pandey vs. Arvind Kumar Rai and
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
(iii) Union of India and others vs. Kali Dass Batish
and another23; and
(iv) Prafulla Kumar Swain vs. Prakash Chandra
Misra and others24.
[I].     The following decisions are relied upon in support of the
contention that no candidate can claim vested right to
(a)      The      decision        of  this  Court   in  Shri   Vishwanath
Digambar Wadje vs. The State of Maharashtra through
Additional Chief Secretary, GAD and others.25
(b)      The decision of the Supreme Court dated May 5, 2021 in
Dr. Jaishri Laxmanrao Patil vs. The Chief Minister &
ors.26 which struck down Sections 2(j), 4(1)(a) and 4(1)(b) of
[II] Reliance is also placed on the order dated May 4, 2021
passed by the Aurangabad Bench of this Court in the case of
Ramkisan              Vitthal        Doiphode     vs.    The     State        of
Maharashtra and another27.
19. We have heard learned counsel for the parties at length.
20. Before we proceed to deal with the issues involved in
these writ petitions, it would be material to set out a brief
history pertaining to the challenge earlier made to the MSEBC
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
Act. The Maratha community, in the State of Maharashtra,
repeatedly sought reservations through diverse nature of
demands made in public meetings, by marches etc., of
members of the community. It also led to representatives and
organizations of the community taking the demands to the
streets, resulting in the State of Maharashtra promulgating an
Ordinance for the first time in the year 2014, which granted
reservation to the community in public employment and in the
field of education. Later, the Ordinance was given the shape of
an Act (Maharashtra Act No. I of 2015), which was challenged
before this Court by a writ petition in the case of Sanjeet
Shukla vs. State of Maharashtra28. This Court, after
considering the rival submissions, including the arguments of
the State, stayed the operation of the enactment. The State
Government then set up a Backward Class Commission to
ascertain the social and educational status of the community.
Initially, the commission was headed by Justice S. B. Mhase.
His demise led to the appointment of Justice M. G. Gaikwad
(Retired) as Chairperson of the Commission; it comprised of
10 other members. The                   Committee headed        by Justice
Gaikwad was thus reconstituted on November 3, 2017. By its
report dated November 13, 2018 (the Gaikwad Commission
Report), the Commission, on the basis of the surveys and
studies it commissioned, and the analysis of the data collected
during its proceedings, recommended that the Maratha class
of citizens be declared as SEBC. This soon led to the
enactment           of     the     MSEBC    Act,  giving   effect    to    the
recommendations of the Gaikwad Commission, resulting in
28 Writ Petition No. 3151 of 2014.
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
reservation to the extent of 16% in favour of that community;
consequently, the aggregate reservations exceeded 50%.
21. After the MSEBC Act was brought into force on
November 30, 2018, close on its heels a spate of writ
petitions       was      filed   before  this   Court,   challenging      the
identification of Marathas as SEBCs, the conclusions of the
Commission, which culminated in its adoption by the State of
Maharashtra and enactment of the MSEBC Act, the quantum
of reservations, and the provisions of the Act itself, on diverse
grounds.        By      the    judgment    rendered     in   Dr.     Jaishri
Laxmanrao Patil vs. The Chief Minister and ors. 29, this
High Court turned down the challenge and upheld the
identification of Marathas as SEBCs, and further upheld the
reasons presented before it, that extraordinary circumstances
existed, warranting the breach of the 50% mark, which was
held to be the outer limit in the Nine-Judges Bench decision of
the Supreme Court in Indra Sawhney vs. Union of India30.
22. The Special Leave Petitions, filed against the impugned
judgment before the Supreme Court, were heard, and
eventually, leave granted on September 9, 2020. (Dr. Jaishri
Laxmanrao Patil vs. State of Maharashtra, through
Chief Minister, and another31). Interim orders came to be
passed. Some writ petitions too were filed, challenging
provisions of the MSEBC Act. The validity of the Constitution
(102nd) Amendment Act (hereafter ‘102 nd Amendment” for
short) too was the subject matter of challenge, on the ground
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
that it violates the basic structure, or essential features of the
23. The Supreme Court heard the challenge finally. The
Supreme Court ultimately held that Maratha community are
not entitled to reservation as SEBC, as it is not the case of
extraordinary     situation  or  exceptional   circumstances        to
provide reservation to Marathas by exceeding 50% upper limit
or ceiling on reservation as laid down in Indra Sawhney’s
case, hence, Section 4(1) (a) and (b) of MSEBC Act as
amended by 2002 amendment and Section 2 (j) thereof, were
declared invalid and therefore set aside. Section 4(1) (b) of
the MSEBC Act as amended by 2019 Act, granting reservation
of 13% to the Maratha community of the total appointments
in direct recruitment in public services and posts under the
State, is held to be ultra vires to the Constitution and struck
24. Another aspect that needs to be noted before we
proceed to deal with the present case is the insertion of
Clause (6) in Article 15 of the Constitution of India by the
103rd Amendment Act, 2019, Section 2 (with effect from
January 14, 2019). Clause 6 of Article 15 provides that
nothing in this article or sub-clause (g) of clause (1) of article
19 or clause (2) of article 29 shall prevent the State from
making, - (a) any special provision for the advancement of
any economically weaker sections of citizens other than the
classes mentioned in clauses (4) and (5); and (b) any special
provision for the advancement of any economically weaker
sections of citizens other than the classes mentioned in
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
clauses (4) and (5) in so far as such special provisions relate
to their admission to educational institutions including private
educational institutions, whether aided or unaided by the
State, other than the minority educational institutions referred
to in clause (1) of Article 30, which in the case of reservation
would be in addition to the existing reservations and subject
to a maximum of ten percent of the total seats in each
category. The explanation to Article 15 contemplates that for
the purposes of Article 15 and Article 16, “economically
weaker sections” shall be such as may be notified by the State
from time to time on the basis of family income and other
indicators of economic disadvantage. So far as sub-clause (b)
of clause (6) of Article 15 is concerned, it pertains to
provisions relating to educational institutions and therefore
not relevant for the purposes of the present case.
25. Article     15   of   the   Constitution    of   India    forbids
discrimination on the grounds only of religion, race, caste,
sex, or place of birth. Clause (1) of Article 15 provides that
the State shall not discriminate against any citizen on grounds
only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them.
Clause (2) of Article 15 provides that no citizen shall, on
grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any
of them, be subject to any disability, liability, restriction or
condition with regard to - (a) access to shops, public
restaurants, hotels and places of public entertainment; or (b)
the use of wells, tanks, bathing ghats, roads and places of
public resort maintained wholly or partly out of State funds or
dedicated to the use of the general public. Clause (3) of
Article 15 provides that nothing in this article shall prevent
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
the State from making any special provision for women and
children. Clause (4) of Article 15 which is relevant from the
standpoint of the issues involved in the present writ petitions,
prescribes that nothing in this article or in clause (2) of Article
29 shall prevent the State from making any special provision
for the advancement of any socially and educationally
backward classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes and
26. Article 16 of the Constitution of India is a provision
mandating equality of opportunity in matters of public
employment. Clause (4) of Article 16 provides that nothing in
this article shall prevent the State from making any provision
for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any
backward class of citizens which, in the opinion of the State,
is not adequately represented in the services under the State.
27. The MSEBC Act, which made provisions for reservation
for  Maratha     community,    was   brought    into   force    from
November 30, 2018. The constitutional validity of the MSEBC
Act was challenged in this Court. By the Constitutional (103 rd
Amendment) Act, 2019, Articles 15 and 16 came to be
amended empowering the State from making any special
provision for advancement of any EWSs of citizens. In terms
of this Constitutional mandate, the Central Government on
January 17, 2019 issued a Memorandum thereby providing
10% reservation for ‘EWS’. In the wake of such Central
Government Memorandum, the State Government by G.R.
dated February 12, 2019 made EWS reservation applicable to
the State of Maharashtra.
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
28. The State Government while issuing G.R. dated February
12, 2019 making EWS applicable to the State of Maharashtra
provided that those candidates who are not covered under
other reservation can take benefit of EWS reservation; and
that EWS reservation will be in addition to the other
reservations. The reservation meant for EWS category of
citizens is a constitutional reservation.
29. MSEDCL published Advertisement on August 1, 2019. On
the date of issuance of the advertisement, the challenge
before    the  Supreme     Court    was   pending.   In    the    said
advertisement, the number of vacancies and reservations for
various categories including SEBC and EWS was indicated.
The    constitutional    and    statutory    scheme      prescribing
reservation for EWS and SEBC, recognizes SEBC as a separate
class completely different and distinct from EWS category. The
SEBC candidates were required to produce caste certificate
issued by the Caste Scrutiny Committee. The caste certificate
to the SEBC class of candidates was to be issued as per the
guidelines prescribed by G.R. dated December 7, 2018
whereas for claiming the benefit under EWS, the candidates
had to produce the certificate in terms of the G.R. dated
30. It is not as if the SEBC category candidates were not put
to notice about the matter pending before the Supreme Court.
Clause 5.23 of the advertisement makes the recruitment
process of the SEBC category candidates as subject to
outcome of the order from the Supreme Court. SEBC
candidates, despite having knowledge of the matter pending
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
before the Supreme Court, still chose to apply under SEBC
category. The select list was published by the MSEDCL on
January 17, 2000. In terms of the advertisement, the SEBC
candidates were categorized differently from EWS category for
due consideration as against the vacancies prescribed for their
respective categories. The State of Maharashtra received
certain complaints that persons belonging to other reserved
categories were seeking to take benefit of EWS reservation.
The State Government, therefore, issued a G.R. dated July
28, 2000 clarifying that SEBC category candidates would not
be entitled to the benefit of the EWS reservation as they are
covered by the MSEBC Act.
31. It is therefore apparent that till September 9, 2020 viz.
the date when the interim order came to be passed by the
Supreme Court directing that the appointments are to be
made without implementing the MSEBC Act, the State
Government had taken the position that SEBC cannot avail
the benefit meant for EWS reservation. After passing of the
interim order dated September 9, 2020 by the Supreme
Court, the State Government decided to extend the benefit of
EWS reservation to the candidates who had applied under
SEBC category vide the Cabinet decision dated September 22,
2020.   Some    of  the   SEBC    candidates    approached       the
Aurangabad Bench of this Court contending that SEBC
candidates are entitled to the benefit of EWS reservation. The
petitioners before the Aurangabad Bench of this High Court
(now transferred to this Court and heard along with the
present group of writ petitions), contended that they were
persons from SEBC category who were also eligible for EWS
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
reservation in view of the Cabinet decision dated September
22, 2020. MSEDCL did not make any appointments from EWS
category in view of the orders passed by the Aurangabad
Bench of this Court. On December 23, 2020, the State
Government issued a G.R. providing that the candidates from
SEBC category would be eligible to take benefit of EWS
reservation. They were given an option to opt for open or
EWS category. MSEDCL issued a public notice on February 11,
2021 that G.R. dated December 23, 2020 would be applicable
to candidates that had applied for recruitment under SEBC
category and opt for open or EWS reservation. The MSEDCL
issued a public notice on June 8, 2021 calling upon SEBC
candidates to avail option either of open or EWS as per
eligibility. It is pertinent to note that till the time the Supreme
Court passed the interim order dated September 9, 2020
issuing      directions    for   making      appointment       without
implementing the MSEBC Act, the MSEDCL was proceeding
ahead with the recruitment on a clear understanding that
EWS is a separate and distinct category from SEBC class of
citizens. The MSEDCL had taken a firm position which is in
consonance with the constitutional scheme and accordingly
issued     the    advertisement    providing     for  the  vacancies
earmarked for EWS and other reserved categories including
SEBC. The advertisement provided a separate procedure
under G.Rs. issued by the State Government for obtaining the
certificate meant for EWS category and the one meant for
SEBC category. The State Government by issuance of a
Circular dated July 28, 2020 in no uncertain terms clarified
that SEBC category candidates cannot avail the benefits of the
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
reservation meant for EWS category. Upon issuance of the
advertisement this was the representation made to the
candidates of the EWS category which the Constitution
recognizes as a separate section of citizens.
32. The candidates of SEBC category participated in the
selection process with full knowledge of the matter pending
before the Supreme Court. Those eligible for claiming the
benefit for reservation under EWS category, after following the
procedure and upon obtaining the requisite certificate applied,
which applications were accepted. The select list was duly
prepared.        The candidates   belonging    to   SEBC     category
preferred to claim the benefit meant for SEBC category, this
Court having upheld the constitutional validity of the MSEBC
Act. Having applied, they made a choice. MSEDCL proceeded
with the recruitment on a clear understanding that the same
is carried on subject to outcome of the matter before the
Supreme Court. The advertisement specified that once the
application is submitted, no information can be corrected and
further, that any request for change of address or any other
information provided in the online application will not be
entertained. The recruitment process reached till the stage of
publication of the select list. It is pointed out that in respect of
the categories where there was no dispute, the appointments
are already made.
33. The Supreme Court in the case of Maharashtra State
Road       Transport    Corporation     vs.   Rajendra      Bhimrao
Mandve32 has said that “the rules of the game cannot be
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
changed once it has begun” . Learned senior advocates
appearing on behalf of the State Government and MSEDCL
though     are   justified in contending     that  the    successful
candidates cannot acquire any indefeasible right to be
appointed against the existing vacancies, however, this is not
the case where EWS category candidates are claiming to have
acquired an indefeasible right to appointment. The simple
case of the candidates of EWS category is that midway
through the recruitment process, SEBC candidates claim
eligibility to be considered for selection in vacancies meant for
EWS category, and that too, at an advanced stage of the
recruitment process, which is impermissible. The decisions
relied by learned senior advocate in the case of Shankarsan
Dash (supra) and Vijoy Kumar Pandey (supra) have no
application in the present facts. Shri Thorat, learned senior
advocate appearing for the State in support of the cause of
SEBC candidates submitted that SEBC candidates should not
suffer for any fault on their part. We cannot help but express
sympathies for the SEBC candidates, for we cannot decide the
writ petitions only on sympathetic consideration to the
detriment of EWS category candidates. The candidates of
SEBC category took a chance despite the matter pending
before the Supreme Court and the caution sounded by the
MSEDCL in the advertisement. For the purpose of the present
advertisement EWS was recognized as a separate category
and the recruitment process went ahead accordingly.
34. It is only after the interim order was passed by the
Supreme Court on September 9, 2020 that the benefit of the
EWS reservation was sought to be given to those eligible
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
weaker sections from the Maratha community, by executing
the benefit of EWS reservation after the recruitment process
was initiated. In view of the decision of the Supreme Court in
Mohan Kumar Lal vs. Vinoba Bhave University and
others33, such a course adopted by the State Government is
impermissible. Their Lordships while holding the reservation
policy inapplicable to the case before the Supreme Court held
“1.    Leave granted.
2.     The short question that arises for consideration in this
appeal is whether the Service Commission could ignore the
decision to make reservation policy applicable in respect of
an appointment to the post, which was advertised on 10-1-
1990, and the last date for submission of the application was
30-1-1990. The High Court in the impugned judgment is of
the view that since appointments had not factually been
made, the reservation policy would apply. As it transpires,
the provisions of Section 57, which governs the field, did not
contain any clause for reservation and sub-section (5) of the
said Section 57 providing for reservation was introduced only
on 22-8-1993. In this view of the matter in respect of the
post advertised for which the process of recruitment had
been initiated, the reservation policy could not have been
made applicable. The impugned judgment of the High Court
was, therefore, erroneous, and cannot be sustained. We,
therefore, set aside the impugned judgment of the High
Court and hold that the reservation policy, pursuant to the
amended provision of sub-section (5) of Section 57 of the
Act, will not apply to the present case.
3.     The appeal is allowed.”
35. In the present case, the process of recruitment had been
initiated and reached till the stage of publication of select
lists, and hence, even otherwise, the State Government could
not have issued a G.R./Circular retrospectively applying EWS
reservation to those eligible under SEBC category.
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
36. We are surprised at the stand taken by the State
Government as well as the MSEDCL while deliberating on the
condition in advertisement stipulating that all appointments
made are subject to the orders passed by the Supreme Court,
which forms the basis of their submission that EWS category
candidates cannot claim a vested right to appointment. It has
to be borne in mind that the challenge pending before the
Supreme Court was against the decision of this Court
upholding the constitutional validity of the MSEBC Act. The
caution that all appointments under the advertisement are
subject to the order passed by the Supreme Court was for the
candidates from SEBC category. The reservation to EWS
category was not in issue. The State Government as well as
the MSEDCL, therefore, are not justified in contending that
EWS category candidates have no vested right in view of such
clause in the advertisement. On the contrary, after the interim
order was made by the Supreme Court, the State Government
could have taken a stand that SEBC category candidates apart
from having no vested right to be considered for appointment
are now precluded from participating in the recruitment
process. They made a choice despite being fully aware of the
challenge pending before the Supreme Court. In view of the
interim directions of the Supreme Court, it is more the
question of what is the vested right of SEBC category
candidates than that of EWS category candidates.
37. It is not as if the candidates could not have opted for the
open category or for EWS category if eligible at the stage of
making of the application. Such candidates, however, obtained
necessary certificates and caste validity certificate and laid a
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
claim to the reservation meant for SEBC category candidates.
The embargo at the time when the application was made
assumes relevance. The procedure for obtaining the certificate
as belonging to EWS category prescribed was different from
the one prescribed for SEBC. In our opinion, by issuing the
impugned circulars extending the benefit of EWS reservation
to the candidates who had initially participated as the SEBC
candidate, after the select list was published, is arbitrary and
unconstitutional. The Supreme Court while issuing interim
directions in the SEBC case observed that the appointments to
public services and posts under the Government shall be
made without implementing the reservation as provided under
MSEBC Act. In the present recruitment initiated pursuant to
the advertisement issued by the MSEDCL, the concerned
candidates had applied against SEBC category knowing fully
well the consequences that may ensue in the pending
challenge before the Supreme Court.
38. Let us consider whether the view we take finds support
from the decisions relied by the learned advocate for the
State. By an executive fiat the State has allowed the SEBC
candidates to participate in the EWS category retrospectively.
We test this action on the basis of the law laid down by the
Supreme Court. In Shankarsan Dash (supra) and                 Vijoy
Kumar Pandey (supra), the Supreme Court has held that
though the candidate included in merit list has no indefeasible
right to appointment but the State while filling up the
vacancies has to act bonafide and not arbitrarily.
39. In N. T. Devin Katti and others (supra) in paragraphs
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
11 and 13, it is observed thus: -
“11. There is yet another aspect of the question. Where
advertisement is issued inviting applications for direct
recruitment to a category of posts, and the
advertisement expressly states that selection shall be
made in accordance with the existing rules or
government orders, and if it further indicates the extent
of reservations in favour of various categories, the
selection of candidates in such a case must be made in
accordance with the then existing Rules and government
orders. Candidates who apply and undergo written or
viva voice test acquire vested right for being considered
for selection in accordance with the terms and conditions
contained      in   the      advertisement,      unless       the
advertisement itself indicates a contrary intention.
Generally, a candidate has right to be considered in
accordance with the terms and conditions set out in the
advertisement as his right crystallises on the date of
publication of advertisement, however he has no
absolute right in the matter. If the recruitment Rules are
amended retrospectively during the pendency of
selection, in that event selection must be held in
accordance with the amended Rules. Whether the Rules
have retrospective efect or not, primarily depends upon
the language of the Rules and its construction to
ascertain the legislative intent. The legislative intent is
ascertained either by express provision or by necessary
implication; if the amended Rules are not retrospectively
in nature the selection must be regulated in accordance
with the rules and orders which were in force on the date
of advertisement. Determination of this question largely
depends on the facts of each case having regard to the
terms and conditions set out in the advertisement and
the relevant rules and orders. Lest there be any
confusion, we would like to make it clear that a
candidate on making application for a post pursuant to
an advertisement does not acquire any vested right of
selection, but if he is eligible and is otherwise qualifed in
accordance with the relevant rules and the terms
contained in the advertisement, he does acquire a
vested right of being considered for selection in
accordance with the rules as they existed on the date of
advertisement. He cannot be deprived of that limited
right on the amendment of rules during the pendency of
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
selection unless the amended rules are retrospective in
nature.”
40. Their Lordships in Tushar Ranjan Mohanty (supra), in
paragraph 14 observed thus: -
“14. The legislatures and the competent authority under
Article 309 of the Constitution of India have the power to
make laws with retrospective efect. This power,
however, cannot be used to justify the arbitrary, illegal
or unconstitutional acts of the Executive. When a person
is deprived of an accrued right vested in him under a
statute or under the Constitution and he successfully
challenges the same in the court of law, the legislature
cannot render the said right and the relief obtained
nugatory by enacting retrospective legislation.”
41. The Supreme Court in Gurdeep Singh (supra) in a
different factual context in paragraph 12 observed thus:-
“12. What remains to be considered is whether the
selection of Respondent 6 should be quashed. We are
afraid, unduly lenient view of the courts on the basis of
human consideration in regard to such excesses on the
part of the authorities, has served to create an
impression that even where an advantage is secured by
stratagem and trickery, it could be rationalised in courts
of law. Courts do and should take human and
sympathetic view of matters. That is the very essence of
justice. But considerations of judicial policy also dictate
that a tendency of this kind where advantage gained by
illegal means is permitted to be retained will jeopardise
the purity of selection process itself; engender cynical
disrespect towards the judicial process and in the last
analyses embolden errant authorities and candidates
into a sense of complacency and impunity that gains
achieved by such wrongs could be retained by an appeal
to the sympathy of the court. Such instances reduce the
jurisdiction and discretion of courts into private
benevolence. This tendency should be stopped. The
selection of Respondent 6 in the sports category was, on
the material placed before us, thoroughly unjustified. He
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
was not eligible in the sports category. He would not be
entitled on the basis of his marks, to a seat in general
merit category. Attribution of eligibility long after the
selection process was over, in our opinion, is misuse of
power. While we have sympathy for the predicament of
Respondent 6, it should not lose sight of the fact that
the situation is the result of his own making. We think in
order to uphold the purity of academic processes, we
should quash the selection and admission of Respondent
6. We do so, though, however, reluctantly.”
42. In the case of Madan Mohan Sharma and another
(supra), in paragraph 11, the Supreme Court observed thus:-
“11. We have heard learned counsel for the parties and
perused the records. Mr. M. R. Calla, learned senior
counsel appearing for the appellants has strenuously
urged that during the pendency of the selection process,
the eligibility criteria was changed and the date for
submission of the application in pursuance to the
advertisement was extended and Rule 266 of the Rules
of 1996 came into being on 30.12.1996 whereby it was
provided that Higher Secondary Examination shall be the
criteria for preparing the merit list. As such, as per the
service rules, the selection should have been made on
the basis of Higher Secondary Examination marks and
not on the basis of Secondary Examination marks. We
regret this cannot be accepted. Once the advertisement
had been issued on the basis of the circular obtaining at
that particular time, the effect would be that the
selection process should continue on the basis of the
criteria which were laid down and it cannot be on the
basis of the criteria which has been made subsequently.”
43. Their Lordships in Mithilesh Kumar (supra) had an
occasion to consider the decisions in Shankarsan Dash
(supra), N. T. Devin Katti and others (supra) and other
decisions. The law with regard to the applicability of the Rules
which are amended/altered during the selection process is
clearly explained. Paragraphs 20, 22 and 23 being relevant
are reproduced, reading thus: -
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
“20. The decisions which have been cited on
behalf of the Respondent have clearly explained
the law with regard to the applicability of the
Rules which are amended and/or altered during
the selection process. They all say in one voice
that the norms or Rules as existing on the date
when the process of selection begins will control
such selection and any alteration to such norms
would not affect the continuing process, unless
specifically the same were given retrospective
effect.
22. There is no reason for us to have any
disagreement with the decision of this Court in
All India Railway Recruitment Board case
[(2010) 6 SCC 614] regarding the right to
appointment even of selected candidates, but
this is not a case of the Respondent having
acquired any indefeasible right which has to be
cancelled on account of certain exigencies. On
the other hand, this is a case where although
selected for the purpose of appointment by the
BPSC, Patna, the case of the respondent was not
even considered as there was a change in policy
regarding recruitment in the meantime.
23. While a person may not acquire an
indefeasible right to appointment merely on the
basis of selection, in the instant case the fact
situation is different since the claim of the
respondent to be appointed had been negated
by a change in policy after the selection process
had begun.”
44. In    Prakash Chand Meena and others (supra) in
paragraphs 8 and 9, Their Lordships observed thus: -
“8. Having heard the parties, we have also perused the
written submissions filed on behalf of some of them and
have perused the judgment of the learned Single Judge
and the impugned judgment of the Division Bench. In
our considered view, the issue noticed at the outset
must be decided on the basis of settled law noticed by
the learned Single Bench that recruitment process must
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
be completed as per terms and conditions in the
advertisement and as per Rules existing when the
recruitment process began. In the present case, the
Division Bench has gone to great lengths in examining
the issue whether BPEd and DPEd qualifications are
equivalent or superior to CPEd qualification but such
exercise cannot help the cause of the respondents who
had the option either to cancel the recruitment process if
there existed good reasons for the same or to complete
it as per terms of advertisement and as per Rules. They
chose to continue with the recruitment process and
hence they cannot be permitted to depart from the
qualification laid down in the advertisement as well as in
the Rules which were suitably amended only later in
2011. In such a situation, factual justifications cannot
change the legal position that the respondents acted
against law and against the terms of advertisement in
treating such applicants successful for appointment to
the post of PTI Gr. III who held other qualifications but
not the qualification of CPEd. Such candidates had not
even submitted separate OMR application form for
appointment to the post of PTI Gr. III which was
essential as per the terms of advertisement.
9.    The candidates who were aware of the
advertisement and did not have the qualification of CPEd
also had two options either to apply only for PTI Gr. II if
they had the necessary qualification for that post or to
challenge the advertisement that it omitted to mention
equivalent or higher qualification along with qualification
of CPEd for the post of PTI Gr. III. Having not challenged
the advertisement and having applied for the other post,
they could not have subsequently claimed or be granted
eligibility on the basis of equivalence clarified or declared
subsequently by the State Government. In the matter of
eligibility qualification, the equivalent qualification must
be recognised as such in the recruitment rules or
government order existing on or before the initiation of
recruitment process. In the present case, this process
who initiated through advertisement inviting application
which did not indicate that equivalent or higher
qualification holders were eligible to apply nor were the
equivalent qualifications reflected in the recruitment
rules or government orders of the relevant time.”
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
45. In Nalgonda Srinivas Rao and others vs. Dr. B.
Kishore & anr.34 the Supreme Court had an occasion to
consider the law laid down in M. Surender Reddy (supra).
Paragraph 28 of the decision in M. Surender Reddy (supra)
was referred which reads thus: -
“28. In any case, the State Government cannot pass any
order amending a procedural law regarding reservation
in the matter of selection to posts, with retrospective
effect, once the procedure of selection starts.”
Their Lordships then observed that,
“Paragraph 28 sets out the principle that the State
Government could not pass any order amending the
procedural law regarding reservation in the selection to
posts, once the procedure of selection had started. This
is a clear indication that the process which was started
or initiated prior in point of time would not be governed
by the principles of reservation stipulated in 2002 GO.
The observation in paragraph 29 clearly holds the
applicability of 2002 GO to be prospective and the same
thought is again made clear in paragraph 31 according
to which even the rest of the posts or the posts that
were lying vacant from the selection process already
initiated before 2002 GO came into force, were required
to be filled up in consonance with what was prevailing in
the year 1999 when the advertisement was issued.
These paragraphs, in our view, are quite clear that
everything that was initiated pursuant to the
advertisement issued before or prior to 2002 GO, must
be taken to the logical conclusion, in consonance with
the then prevailing rules or regime when the
advertisement was issued. This logic would apply even
with respect to filling up of vacant or remaining posts
from that selection. In other words, the principles
emanating from said 2002 GO are not to be applied to
such selection.”
46. In K. Manjusree vs. State of A. P. and others 35,Their
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
Lordships in paragraph 28 observed thus: -
Corporation vs. Rajendra Bhimrao Mandve (supra),
this Court observed that “the rules of the game,
meaning thereby, that the criteria for selection cannot be
altered by the authorities concerned in the middle or
after the process of selection has commenced.” In this
case the position is much more serious. Here, not only
the rules of the game were changed, but they were
changed after the game has been played and the results
of the game were being awaited. That is unacceptable
and impermissible.”
47. In Bishnu Biswas and ors. vs. Union of India (UOI)
and Ors.36 the Supreme Court in paragraph 20 observed as
“20. In the instant case, the rules of the game had been
changed after conducting the written test and admittedly
not at the stage of initiation of the selection process. The
marks allocated for the oral interview had been the
same as for written test i.e. 50% for each. The manner
in which marks have been awarded in the interview to
the candidates indicated lack of transparency. The
candidate who secured 47 marks out of 50 in the written
test had been given only 20 marks in the interview while
large number of candidates got equal marks in the
interview as in the written examination. Candidate who
secured 34 marks in the written examination was given
45 marks in the interview. Similarly, another candidate
who secured 36 marks in the written examination was
awarded 45 marks in the interview. The fact that today
the so called selected candidates are not in employment,
is also a relevant factor to decide the case finally. If the
whole selection is scrapped most of the candidates
would be ineligible at least in respect of age as the
advertisement was issued more than six years ago.”
48. Applying         the  aforestated     well   settled     principles
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
enunciated by the Supreme Court to the facts of the present
case, we have no hesitation in holding that the benefit
extended to SEBC candidates while granting such candidates
an opportunity to be considered in the EWS category at such
an advanced stage of the recruitment process is arbitrary and
impermissible. The advertisement had clearly spelt out the
vacancy position for the various categories. As on the date
when the advertisement was published, the challenge to the
decision of this Court upholding the constitutional validity of
the MSEBC Act was pending in the Supreme Court. The State
Government by issuance of the impugned G.R., which is in the
nature       of   an   executive   instruction   sought     to   give     a
retrospective        operation   to    the   selection   process      qua
reservations for the EWS. This is impermissible. It is not as if
in the exercise of the rule making power of the State that
retrospective effect is given to its decision. In our opinion, by
issuance of such executive instructions, it is not open for the
State Government to stultify the vested right created in favour
of    EWS       category  candidates     for   considering    them      for
appointment to the said posts which were reserved for them.
The decision in case of I.C.A.R. vs. Satish Kumar and
another37 affirmed the view taken by the Supreme Court in
Tushar Ranjan Mohanty and others (supra) supports the
view we take. All concerned (SEBC candidates) were informed
that the selection process would be subject to the outcome of
the orders passed by the Supreme Court. The aspirants with
full knowledge of the matter pending before the Supreme
Court chose to take the benefit of the reservation provided by
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
the MSEBC Act. The selection process reached the stage of
publication of the select list of the candidates selected from
the respective reserved categories. The Supreme Court on
September 9, 2020 by its interim order directed that
appointments     to  public   services   and    posts   under     the
Government     shall   be   made    without    implementing       the
reservation as provided under the MSEBC Act. The State
Government at this stage issued the impugned G.R. thereby
permitting   the    candidates    belonging     to   the    Maratha
community to avail the benefit of open category or EWS
category as per their eligibility. In our opinion, the State
Government and the MSEDCL was not at all justified in
permitting SEBC candidates to avail the benefit of EWS
category. The EWS category candidates who are duly selected
had accrued a vested right to be considered for appointment.
The State Government could not have issued a G.R. to the
detriment of the EWS category candidates. The Supreme
Court has in no uncertain terms held that the rules of the
game, meaning thereby, that the criteria for selection cannot
be altered by the authorities concerned midway or after the
process of selection has commenced. It was not open for the
State   or  the   MSEDCL     to  issue    such   circulars    having
retrospective operation in the midst of the selection process
and that too, by an executive fiat. While we have sympathy
for the SEBC candidates, but we cannot lose sight of the fact
that the situation is the result of their own making. The SEBC
candidates were aware about the matter pending before the
Supreme     Court   despite  which    they   took   a   chance      to
participate in the recruitment process claiming         reservation
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
meant for SEBCs.
49. It is pertinent to refer to a decision of the Supreme
Court in       Neil Aurelio Nunes (OBC RESERVATION) and
Ors vs. Union of India and Ors.38, which came to our notice
after these writ petitions were reserved for judgment. Their
Lordships held that it is well settled now, that affirmative
action/reservation is not an exception to the principle of
equality. Thus, special provisions (like reservations) under
Article 15 (4) and 16(4) are not an exception to the principle
of equality under Articles 14, 15(1) and 16(1) but the
restatement of the right to equality. The Supreme Court was
dealing with a question of reservation within All India Quota
(AIQ) for OBCs (non-creamy layer) by notification dated July
29, 2021 in undergraduate and post-graduate seats in medical
courses in State run institutions. Their Lordships explained in
detail the role of special provisions providing for such
reservations, stating thereby, that the object is to ensure a
level playing field to unequals. In view of the notification
dated July 29, 2021, as a result of the reservation for OBCs,
there was a change in the seat matrix after registration. Their
Lordships held that there was only a change in seat matrix
after registration, the principle of changing the rules of the
game will not apply as there was no change in the selection
criteria or the procedure for selection after the selection
process has commenced. In our humble opinion, the decision
in Neil Aurelio Nunes (supra) will not apply in the factual
matrix of the present case. The reason why Their Lordships
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
held that it cannot be argued that rules of the game were set
when the registration for examination closed is spelt out in
paragraph 85.8 which reads thus: -
“85.8      Clause 11 of the Information Bulletin specifies
that the reservation applicable to NEET-PG would be
notified by the counselling authority before the
beginning of the counselling process. Therefore, the
candidates while applying for NEET-PG are not provided
any information on the distribution of seat matrix. Such
information is provided by the counselling authority only
before the counselling session is to begin. It thus cannot
be argued that the rules of the game were set when the
registration for the examination closed.”
The present is not a case where EWS reservation was
introduced after selection process commenced. On the date of
the advertisement, the candidates were aware of the number
of seats reserved for EWS and SEBC category. The procedure
for obtaining the certificates and the manner in which the
applications were to be made to the specified number of seats
reserved for EWS and SEBC was already prescribed. SEBC
candidates took a chance and applied against the seats
reserved for SEBC. It is not as if on the date of the
advertisement/on the date of the application, the eligible
candidates of SEBC category could not have availed of the
reservation provided for EWS category. The rules set out on
the date of the advertisement were clear that eligible
candidates had to either apply against the EWS vacancies or
the SEBC vacancies. SEBC candidates took a chance and
made a choice of filing application for appointment in the
vacancies reserved for the SEBC. Thereupon the selection list
is published, whereupon the EWS candidates as well as SEBC
candidates    were   awaiting  further  consideration     of   their
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
appointments. It is at this stage that the interim order of the
Supreme Court scuttled the chances of the SEBC candidates
for appointment against such category. As indicated earlier,
the SEBC candidates applied with full knowledge that their
applications are made subject to the orders passed by the
Supreme Court. EWS category candidates definitely had a
accrued right to be considered for appointment. In such
circumstances, the decision of the State to permit such
migration midway through the selection process is arbitrary
and unfair. It is, therefore, we formed an opinion, that the
decision of the Supreme Court in Neil Aurelio Nunes (supra)
is distinguishable and will not have an application in the
present facts.
50. Resultantly, the writ petitions [Writ Petition (St.) No.
7549 of 2021, Writ Petition No. 4059 of 2021, Writ Petition
(St.) No. 13088 of 2021, Writ Petition (St.) No. 4060 of 2021,
Writ Petition (St.) No. 7891 of 2021, Writ Petition (St.) No.
7575 of 2021, Writ Petition No. 1054 of 2021 and Writ Petition
No. 8099 of 2021] filed by EWS category candidates succeed
in the following terms:
(a)   We hold and declare that the G.Rs. impugned in
such writ petitions are not applicable to the recruitment
process initiated for the purpose of appointment of EWS
category in furtherance of the Advertisement Nos.04/
2019, 05/2019 and 6/2019 which are the subject
matters of the respective writ petitions and the G.Rs. will
not affect the selection process initiated pursuant to the
publishing of such advertisements.
903-cwp2663-2021 & ors (fial).doc
(b)   It is declared that the action on the part of the
respondents in applying the G.Rs. impugned in the writ
petitions retrospectively to the selection process which is
the subject matter of the writ petitions is illegal and bad
in  law.   Consequently,    the   impugned     directions      of
MSEDCL are held illegal and bad in law.
(c)   MSEDCL to proceed with the selection process in
consonance     with   the   Rules    prevailing    when      the
advertisement/s were issued.
51. The writ petitions [Writ Petition No. 3688 of 2020, Writ
Petition No. 3695 of 2020, Writ Petition No. 3704 of 2020,
Writ Petition No. 3694 of 2020, Writ Petition No. 3693 of
2020, Writ Petition (St.) No. 59 of 2021, Writ Petition (St.)
No. 97757 of 2020, Writ Petition (St.) No. 98066 of 2020, Writ
Petition (St.) No. 98309 of 2020, Writ Petition No. 3690 of
2020, Writ Petition No. 3691 of 2020, Writ Petition No. 3692
of 2020, Writ Petition No. 3696 of 2020, Writ Petition No.
3697 of 2020, Writ Petition No. 3699 of 2020, Writ Petition
No.3700 of 2020, Writ Petition No. 3701 of 2020 and Writ
Petition No. 3702 of 2020] filed by the candidates selected
from SEBC stand dismissed.
52. Nothing      survives  for   consideration    in   the    interim
applications. They are disposed of.
53. No costs.