1.             Vide this judgment, I shall dispose of the present appeal
filed under Section 29 of the Protection of Women from Domestic
Violence Act, 2005 (in short 'PWDV Act') by the appellant against
the impugned order dated 18.01.2020, whereby the Ld. Trial Court
disposed of the application under Section 23 PWDV Act.
2.             I have gone through the file as well as Ld. Trial Court
record and have heard the arguments of both the counsel for the
parties. I have also gone through the judgment relied upon by the
appellant titled as ‘Sh. Bharat Hegde Vs. Saroj Hegde’, CM (M)
No. 40/2005 dated 24.04.2007, passed by Hon’ble High Court
3.             The perusal of order passed by Ld. Trial Court shows
that Ld. Trial Court awarded interim maintenance of Rs.15,000/­
per month in favour of respondent no. 1 / complainant and her
minor daughter from the date of filing of application/petition i.e
08.03.2019 till the final disposal of petition. It was also ordered
that payment of maintenance has to be made on or before 10 th day
of each English calender month.
Criminal Appeal No. 87­2020 Deepak Kumar @ Tinku Vs. Kavita & Anr Page No. 2 of 8
4.             The Ld. counsel for appellant has raised various
grounds in the present appeal for assailing the impugned order. It
is argued by the counsel for appellant that impugned order is
against the surmises and conjectures. It is further argued that the
Ld. Trial court has failed to appreciate the law and various case
judgment passed by various Hon’ble Courts as well as the Hon’ble
Apex Court in a number of cases. It is further argued that the Ld.
Trial court has passed the impugned order for maintenance by pure
guesswork. It is further argued that the Ld. Trial court has passed
the impugned order without appreciating the fact that the
complaint filed under Section 12 of PWDV Act 2005 is full of
inconsistent/vague statements. It is further argued by Ld. counsel
for the appellant that appellant is only earning a salary of Rs.
12,000/­ per month and Ld. Trial Court has wrongly passed the
order of maintenance. It is further argued by Ld. counsel for the
appellant that respondent no. 1 had not filed any documentary
proof before Ld. Trial Court with regard to the income of the
5.             On the other hand, the counsel for respondents have
argued that the Ld. Trial Court has already assessed the monthly
income and passed the order of interim maintenance as per
material available on record. It is further argued by Ld. counsel for
respondents that appellant is living a lavish and luxury life. It is
further argued by Ld. counsel for the respondents that respondent
Criminal Appeal No. 87­2020 Deepak Kumar @ Tinku Vs. Kavita & Anr Page No. 3 of 8
no. 1 is required to take care minor child who is in her custody. It
is argued that amount granted by Ld. Trial Court towards the
maintenance is on lower side and same is required to be enhanced.
6.             It is to be kept in mind that after marriage, husband is
bound to maintain his legally wedded wife and minor child as per
law.    There is no reason, not to pay maintenance to her legally
wedded wife and minor child. So, the arguments of the appellant
seems to be irrelevant at this stage. The material available on
record have already been considered by Ld. Trial Court.
7.             It is well settled law of the land that the husband cannot
take subterfuges to deprive her wife of the benefit of living with
dignity. Regard being had to the solemn pledge at the time of
marriage and also in consonance with the statutory law that
governs the field, it is the obligation of the husband to see that the
wife and children does not become a destitute, a beggar. A situation
is not to be maladroitly created where under she is compelled to
resign to her fate and think of life "dust unto dust". It is totally
impermissible. In fact, it is the sacrosanct duty to render the
financial support even if the husband is required to earn money
with physical labour, if he is able­bodied. There is no escape route
unless there is an order from the court that the wife is not entitled
to get maintenance from the husband on any legally permissible
Criminal Appeal No. 87­2020  Deepak Kumar @ Tinku Vs. Kavita & Anr Page No. 4 of 8
8.             The Ld. Trial Court has rightly assessed the monthly
income of appellant. It is not disputed that both appellant and
respondent got married on 19.01.2014. So, the marriage between
the parties is not disputed. The parentage of child born out of said
wedlock is also not disputed. The minor child is entitled to some
reasonable maintenance amount for leading decent dignified life.
The welfare of minor child is paramount purpose for both parents
and the minor child cannot be thrown at the mercy of others by the
9.             In the present case, the wife has been awarded interim
maintenance of Rs.15,000/­ per month for maintaining herself and
her minor child who is in her custody.                In the present state of
affairs, Rs.15,000/­ is not such a great amount which can be
reduced. The husband is duly bound to support his wife as well as
child and is required to use all his potential for his earning. The
husband cannot be allowed to say that he is not in a position to
earn more or that most of the amount is required for his own
purposes. The couple was blessed with a daughter which is also the
liability of the husband and he should take care of minor child. The
argument addressed by husband seems to be just as a mere escape
from his liability to pay to the minor child and he should shoulder
the responsibility of his child.
10.            In the latest judgment passed by Hon'ble High Court of
Delhi, titled as 'Kanupriya Sharma vs. State & Anr' Crl. Rev.
Criminal Appeal No. 87­2020 Deepak Kumar @ Tinku Vs. Kavita & Anr Page No. 5 of 8
Pet. 849/2018 & Crl. M.A. 33234/2018 dated 31.05.2019,
21. An application under Section 23 (1) of the D.V.
Act is an application for fixing interim maintenance.
stage, requiring evidence cannot be gone into.
30. The grant of maintenance under the DV Act has
not been made dependent upon the expression
“unable to maintain herself”. Further, the
expression “unable to maintain herself” does not
mean capable of earning.
11.            The Apex Court in Noor Khatoon Vs. Mohd. Quasim;
1997 Crl. L. J. 3972 has made the observation that “a father
having sufficient means has the obligation to maintain his
minor children who are unable to maintain themselves till
they attain majority and in case of females, till they get
12.            Since the minor child is to be maintained by the
appellant/husband           and   even    the    paternity      is not   disputed,
therefore, in the absence of denial of existence of the marriage and
denial of paternity of minor child, the appellant cannot shy away
from his statutory obligation of maintaining his minor child.
Criminal Appeal No. 87­2020  Deepak Kumar @ Tinku Vs. Kavita & Anr    Page No. 6 of 8
13.            The statutory obligation to maintain child is paramount
wish of the father and he cannot be permitted to limit this claim of
the child on flimsy and baseless grounds. In this regard, help can be
taken from the judgment of the Hon'ble Punjab and Haryana High
Court in the case titled as Dr. R. K. Sood Vs. Usha Rani Sood;
1996 (3) 114 PLR 486 and the relevant paragraph is reproduced as
statutory obligation to maintain his infant
regulated directly in relation to the money,
status that the father enjoys. The right of
maintenance of a child from his father cannot
determined on the basis of the benefit, status
and money that the child would have enjoyed
as if he was living with the family, including
his mother and father. Irrespective of the
differences and grievances which each spouse
may have against the other, the endeavour of
the Court has to be to provide the best to the
child in the facts and circumstances of each
child in mind for all such determinations.
Liability to maintain one's children is clear
statutory obligation is paramount to the wish
Criminal Appeal No. 87­2020 Deepak Kumar @ Tinku Vs. Kavita & Anr Page No. 7 of 8
baseless grounds.”
14.            Hence, in view of the submission made above, this Court
is of the considered view that amount of interim maintenance
cannot be reduced. As far as judgments relied upon by the appellant
is concerned, it is to be kept in mind that each case has its own
facts and circumstances.
15.            Accordingly, in view of the above discussion, the present
appeal stands dismissed being without any merits. There is no
illegality and infirmity in the impugned order. Copy of this judgment
be sent to Ld. Trial Court alongwith Trial Court record. Appeal file
be consigned to record room.
16.            It is made clear that the Ld. Trial Court would be at
liberty to assess final maintenance, after parties have led their
evidence, without being influenced by the present order.
Pronounced in the Open Court                                     (Deepak Wason)
Criminal Appeal No. 87­2020 Deepak Kumar @ Tinku Vs. Kavita & Anr     Page No. 8 of 8