For the Petitioner                :Mr. Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharya, Sr. Adv.
For the State                     : Mr. S.N. Mookherjee, Ld. Advocate
For the CBI                       :Mr. Billwadal Bhattacharyya, A.S.G.I.,
Hearing Concluded on             : 15.06.2022
1. The subject matter of the writ petition is the unfortunate death of one
Anis Khan on the night of February 19, 2022. The writ petitioner is
the father of the deceased Anis Khan.         He has prayed that the
investigation into the death of his son should be transferred from the
State Investigation Agency to an independent third party outside the
control of the State Government.
2. The factual background is that the deceased Anis Khan was a student
of Journalism and Mass Communication at Kalyani University.          He
was also an alumnus of Aliah University.       He was a public-spirited
person involved in various social causes, and participated in rallies
and protest movements against the activities of the State Government.
He was involved in the protests against the Hijab Ban and National
Register of Citizens-Citizenship Amendment Act (NRC-CAA) issues.
He was also involved in organizing blood donation camps that were
shut down by the members of the ruling party.
3. It also appears from a complaint annexed with the writ petition, that
in August 2017 the victim was tied up, insulted, mocked, and
assaulted by the local Pradhan and his associates.    The Pradhan was
a member of the ruling political party who was allegedly enraged by
the petitioner objecting and frustrating the attempts of the latter to
extort hefty sums of donations from students seeking admission to a
certain school named Ananda Niketan Vidyamandir. The said incident
has been recorded in FIR being Bagnan P.S. Case No. 433 of 2017
dated 3rd August 2017.
4. FIRs are also lying registered against the deceased in the Amta and
Bagnan police Stations. Five cases have been registered in which the
deceased was either an accused or somehow involved in other ways.
 Amta PS Case No. 213/14 dt. 17.07.2014,                u/s
 Amta P.S. Case No. 230 of 2014 dated 17.07.2014 under
Sections 143/427/447/324/325/354/379 and 34 of the
IPC, which has resulted in the charge sheet.
 P.S. Case No.429 of 2017 dated 2nd August 2017 under
Section 354 of the IPC read with Section 12 of the POCSO
 Amta PS Case no. 200/21                dt.  27.07.21   u/s
5. It further appears that on 21st May 2021, the petitioner was
threatened by the booth president of the ruling party, Malek Khan,
and his associates for organizing a blood donation camp.        A mob
organized by the said local ruling party is stated to have been sent to
the petitioner’s house, to abuse and threaten the petitioner’s family
members. The victim’s uncle was assaulted on the 22nd of May, 2022.
It is submitted that despite submitting a written complaint detailing
these incidents, Amta Police Station did not register any FIR.
6. The State submits that investigation into the FIRs registered with
Amta P.S. being Case No. 213 of 2014 was continuing, and several
attempts were made to serve notice under Section 41A of the Cr.P.C,
but the deceased could not be served as he was allegedly absconding.
The victim was also evading summons in respect of Bagnan P.S. case
No. 422 dated 19.02.2022.
7. Sometime in February 2022, the Social Media Monitoring Cell of the
Howrah Rural District discovered 38 sensitive posts on the social
Media website “Facebook”, based on which the police launched
enquiries. 25 of such posts came to be deleted on the intervention of
the police. Proceedings under Section 107 of the Cr.P.C. were drawn
up in three such cases.
8. Apprehending communal tension and a law and order situation, two
cases have been registered being Bagnan Case No. 57 of 2022, dated
11th February 2022 under Sections 153, 153A, and 295A IPC, and
Penro P.S. Case No. 15 of 2022 dated 13th February 2022 under
Sections 153, 153A and 295A of the IPC.         The aforesaid cases are
related to the “Hijab” issue, which originated in Karnataka.
9. It is in connection with these cases that the said Social Media
Monitoring Cell of Howrah Rural District found a post on Hijab issue
on the Facebook profile of a person named Anis Khan at about 8.00
pm on 18th February 2022.          Given the law and order situation
apprehended in respect of the Bagnan P.S. and Penro P.S. cases dated
11th February 2022 and 13th February 2022 respectively, the said
information was provided along with the phone number and profile to
the Additional Superintendent of Police, Howrah Rural District, on a
WhatsApp group. The Additional Superintendent of Police is stated to
have then passed on the mobile number of one Sabir Khan (brother of
the deceased), found associated with the Facebook profile, and the
details were forwarded to the O.C., Amta Police Station, and the I.C.,
Bagnan Police Station.    The Additional Superintendent of Police is
stated to have directed the person responsible for the Facebook
account to be picked up.
10. Nine persons including Jiyaur Rahman (civic volunteer), Debabrata
Hembrem, Home Guard Kashinath Bera, Sujay Kanrar and others
participated in a raid on 18th February 2022 in furtherance of the
aforementioned ASP’s order. The matter and proposed raid were not
entered into the GD of the police. The said persons reached the house
of the writ petitioner where deceased Anis Khan was stated to have
reached.
11. At about 12.00 midnight, three of the aforesaid persons took positions
on the rooftop of the surrounding houses, and one was at the back
side of the house. Four persons went to the front door of the house.
12. One person started talking to the writ petitioner, Salem Khan,
enquiring of the whereabouts of the deceased Anis Khan. Two persons
went upstairs and searched for the deceased. The writ petitioner
insisted that Anis Khan was not at home. One of the members of the
raiding party, Kartick Pramanik, is stated to have received information
over the phone from one Sujay Kanrar, Civic Volunteer, that
somebody was on the rooftop. Thereafter a loud thud was heard. The
victim was found lying full of blood in front of the house, appearing to
have fallen from the roof. The writ petitioner-father started shouting
and his family members came out. The entire raid party fled from the
scene.
13. The writ petitioner-father is stated to have called the Amta police twice
at about 3.00 am, but the police did not reach the house of the
deceased until about 9.00 in the morning. The writ petitioner along
with his nephews and elder son took the victim immediately to
Uluberia hospital, where he was declared having been brought dead.
The petitioner brought back the body to the house. The body was
handed over to the police after initial objection, and only after the
arrival of the media. The body of the victim was taken by the police for
inquest and post mortem. The post-mortem was conducted without
intimation to the family members.
14. A formal written complaint was submitted by the petitioner on 19th
February 2022 to O.C. Amta PS, putting his thumb impression, that
was registered as Amta PS Case No. 48 of 2022, under Sections
302/201 and 34 of the IPC. The complaint is stated to have been
drafted by a member of the village. The writ petitioner is illiterate and
thus put his Left Thumb Impression on the complaint.
15. The incident was mentioned before this Court on 21st February 2021,
by Senior Counsel appearing for the petitioner, asking for suo moto
cognizance, which was taken. A formal writ petition was filed by the
petitioner the next day.
16. The State submitted on the next day that a Special Investigation Team
has been constituted comprising three senior IPS officers belonging to
the CID, West Bengal, and the 3rd being the Joint Commissioner of
17. This Court had permitted this SIT to proceed with the investigation
and the 2nd post-mortem, after the body was exhumed, where another
direction was passed. SIT submitted a preliminary report on 11th
March 2022, indicating the progress of the investigation. A further
detailed report was filed by the SIT on 19th April 2022. Counsel for
the petitioner filed an objection to the said report.
18. The investigation was subsequently completed and a detailed report
has been received from the SIT by this Court. This court has carefully
considered and scrutinised the Case Diary, the Statements of all
witnesses, statements under Section 161 and 164 Cr.PC, the FSL
Reports, the Post-Mortem report, and all the written complaints filed
by both the deceased as well as the writ petitioner, alongside the
English translations of these complaints furnished by the Ld.
Advocate for the petitioner.
19. Mr. Bikash Ranjan Bhattachariya, Senior Counsel for the writ
petitioner, has assailed the investigation report, inter alia, on the
ground that the conspiracy to eliminate the victim, which is the
principal reason behind the police raid, has not been addressed by the
SIT. It is also argued by reference to the complaints of the years 2017
and 2021, that the present political dispensation of this State had
targeted the deceased on repeated occasions, and had all the motives
to eliminate him. It is also submitted that the social media posts and
the purported likely law and order situation because of the
participation of the deceased in the hijab and the anti-CAA protests,
was a mere ruse to unleash an old vendetta of certain influential
persons, and a front to eliminate him.
20. On the investigation by the SIT, it is stated that the polygraph test has
been perfunctory and only three questions were put to each of the
accused police personnel. The manner in which the raid was
conducted i.e. by placing one policeman each on the rooftop of three
surrounding buildings, the altercation between the three accused
home guards and the family members of the deceased, is extremely
unusual and part of the conspiracy to murder.
21. Under the garb of a raid, the accused were executing a pre-planned
murder at the instance of a large number of hidden players and
political leaders. It is also argued that the murder is further confirmed
by reason of the fact that the deceased after falling from the rooftop,
was left to die by the accused rather than being taken for immediate
medical attention.
22. Ld. Advocate General, Mr. Soumendra Nath Mookherjee appearing for
the State, submits that the complainant-petitioner did not mention or
suggest any conspiracy in his complaint. Hence, the conspiracy angle
was not even an issue before the SIT. The writ petition does not refer
to any conspiracy in any detail except to annex old complaints
regarding past altercation and incidents with a certain third person.
23. On the investigation by the SIT, it is submitted firstly that the
exhumation of the body and the 2nd port-mortem was conducted in
accordance with law, after the body was exhumed under orders of this
Court. The 2nd autopsy surgeon opined that the death was the effect of
head injury, antemortem in nature. The SIT followed the investigation
process strictly by the book. A sketch map was prepared. The scene
and place of occurrence were re-enacted with the help of dummies by
the forensic experts. The seized articles of clothing, sim cards, and
mobile phones of the deceased as well as of all the accused and
suspects were duly analyzed. Two persons were arrested who were
part of the police team which conducted the raid. Exhumation and TI
Parade was conducted in the presence of the District Judge, North 24
Parganas. The FSL and CFSL reports clearly indicated that the death
was due to an accidental fall, and that the deceased was pushed from
the 2nd floor. The polygraph test was conducted by the independent
agency under the control of the CBI. Apart from the sound of the body
falling from the 2nd floor, there were no other sounds of any scuffles,
shouting or screaming by the deceased or any other persons, that
have emerged from all the oral, documentary, and expert evidence.
24. The writ petitioner-father did not make any statement under Sections
161 and 164 of the Cr.P.C. of any conspiracy behind the death or
murder of his son Anis Khan. The SIT therefore, did not feel the need
to investigate any conspiracy angle. Reference is also made to the
evidence on record that there was absolutely no scuffle whatsoever,
indicating any injury other than the mechanical injury due to impact
of the body on a blunt hard surface.
25. Therefore, according to the Ld. Advocate General, the conclusion of
the SIT that the deceased Anis Khan died after falling from the 2nd
floor, is the most plausible conclusion. This Court does not wish to
detail any other of the arguments and counter-arguments made by the
petitioner and the State, since it would prejudice the prosecution
and/or the defense in course of the trial.
26. This Court notes that the investigation was conducted strictly as per
the Standard Operating Procedure for investigation and best practices.
All evidence that has come on record, as well as FSL Reports and
statements under Sections 161 and 164 of the Cr.P.C. and
interrogations appear to have been considered. The State has also
produced complete and full details of the steps taken by the forensic
polygraph specialist, who functions under the administrative control
of the Central Bureau of Investigation. All questions considering all
angles, prescribed parameters of testing of the physical evidence, FSL
reports medical reports, appear to have been addressed. The evidence,
according to the SIT, points to acts and omissions of a set of persons
including police personnel. Lapses on the part of the raiding party and
the raid itself have been found faulty by the SIT.     The prima facie
findings against such persons are plausible, and the same is subject
to the trial and findings of the Sessions Court.
27. The only question that remains is whether the SIT committed any
error in not investigating the conspiracy angle as canvassed by the
counsel for the petition, at the Bar. The conspiracy was that the
deceased Anis Khan was an eyesore, and thorn on the side to some
members of the political establishment. Admittedly, there are four
FIRs registered with the Amta and Bangnan Police Station in which
the deceased Anis Khan was either an accused or substantially
involved. The incidents of intimidation of the deceased by the local
booth president of the ruling party occurred in early 2021. The
incident at Ananda Niketan Vidyamandir occurred in 2017, while the
dates when the incidents at Aliah University occurred have not been
specifically mentioned by the petitioner. The reference to protests
against land grabbing of Aliah University are equally vague. There is a
long time-gap between the incidents in question and the death of the
victim. The causal connection between the said incidents and the
death of the victim appears to be rather remote. This is to be coupled
with the fact that the writ petitioner-father in his written complaint or
even in the statements under Sections 161 and 164 Cr.P.C. did not
suggest or indicate any conspiracy behind the death of his son. No
reference was made to any political vendetta for the death of his son.
This Court does not, therefore, find fault with the SIT in not having
considered the conspiracy angle worthy of any investigation.
28. What, however, remains to be considered is the immediate trigger that
had prompted the raid in question which resulted in the unfortunate
death of Anis Khan. The SIT report reveals that the Social Media
Monitoring Cell of the Howrah Police District after identifying certain
inflammatory posts on social media (Facebook) of some persons has
prompted an enquiry about the same. The situation at the relevant
point of time in South Bengal was indeed volatile and concerning, in
view of the agitations in relation to the Hijab issue that originated in
the State of Karnataka.
29. About 25 persons who were responsible for such posts, were traced
out, contacted, and had removed the said offensive and sensitive
posts. Proceedings under Section 107 of the Cr.PC were drawn up
against a few other persons. The Howrah Police, therefore, zeroed
down on a few remaining posts and their Facebook account holders.
Given the public-spirited background of the deceased and his
Facebook posts, it is quite plausible that the Howrah Police might
have been on a lookout to identify and access the deceased.
30. The explanation offered by the SIT that the above FIR of 2014 was not
the actual reason but only an additional ground to apprehend the
deceased for suspicious conduct at a time when communal tensions
were running high, however, cannot be ignored. The reasons advanced
by the SIT in this regard are plausible.
31. The SIT had analysed the statements of all the persons interrogated,
including those under Sections 161 and 164 Cr. P.C.; the result of the
polygraph test, the forensic evidence; analysed the call records of all
the persons involved, the phone data of all persons, reconstructed the
scene of the crime, the 1st, and 2nd post-mortem report, the evidence of
the medical personnel, the sketch map of the scene of crime and re-
enactment thereof, the result of the polygraph test, and have, prima
facie, arrived at a conclusion of evidence against offenses under the
relevant Sections of the IPC against the following persons:
i. 120 (b) r/w 342/452 IPC:
1.  SI Debabrata Chakroborty, the then O/C of Amta PS
1. SI Debabrata Chakroborty, the then O/C of Amta PS
iii. 452 IPC (substantive offence):
32. This Court has consciously not referred to the complete details of the
investigation report as it may prejudice the parties in the trial.
33. The investigation conducted by the SIT is in order, as of now. Charge-
sheet shall be filed immediately.       The SIT always has powers to
conduct further investigation, inter alia, upon discovery of new
evidence and file supplementary charge sheets, if necessary. The Trial
Court has powers under Sections 311 and 319 of the Cr. P.C., which
are wide enough to include any other matter in course of trial and find
any other person than those to be named in the charge sheet to be
filed.
34. A court is required to exercise great care and caution before ordering
transfer of investigation to a third party. Reference in this regard is
made to paragraphs 70 and 71 of the decision of the Supreme Court
in State of W.B. v. Committee for Protection of Democratic Rights
reported in (2010) 3 SCC 571, wherein it was noted as follows:
“70. Before parting with the case, we deem it necessary to emphasise
that despite wide powers conferred by Articles 32 and 226 of the
Constitution, while passing any order, the Courts must bear in mind
certain self-imposed limitations on the exercise of these constitutional
powers. The very plenitude of the power under the said articles requires
great caution in its exercise. Insofar as the question of issuing a direction
to CBI to conduct investigation in a case is concerned, although no
inflexible guidelines can be laid down to decide whether or not such
power should be exercised but time and again it has been reiterated that
such an order is not to be passed as a matter of routine or merely
because a party has levelled some allegations against the local police.
This extraordinary power must be exercised sparingly, cautiously and in
exceptional situations where it becomes necessary to provide credibility
and instil confidence in investigations or where the incident may have
national and international ramifications or where such an order may be
necessary for doing complete justice and enforcing the fundamental
rights. Otherwise CBI would be flooded with a large number of cases and
with limited resources, may find it difficult to properly investigate even
serious cases and in the process lose its credibility and purpose with
unsatisfactory investigations.
71. In Minor Irrigation & Rural Engg. Services, U.P. v. Sahngoo Ram
Arya [(2002) 5 SCC 521 : 2002 SCC (L&S) 775] this Court had said that
an order directing an enquiry by CBI should be passed only when the
High Court, after considering the material on record, comes to a
conclusion that such material does disclose a prima facie case calling for
an investigation by CBI or any other similar agency. We respectfully
concur with these observations.”
35. In the instant case, the SIT itself has implicated some police officials
in its investigation report, finding fault with the manner and conduct
of raid. The petitioner’s apprehension that the accused police officers
would be shielded by the police, is therefore devoid of merit. In the
facts of the case, merely because some police officers are involved
there is no need for apprehending of impropriety in the investigation
or the trial as the SIT is comprised of very highly ranked police
personnel. Any other omission or mistake in future can be addressed
under the provisions of the Cr.PC.
36. When the trial commences, the Sessions judge shall proceed to deal
with the same independently, completely uninfluenced by the
observations made hereinabove. This Court’s observations and
findings as above are only for the purpose of addressing the prayers
made by the petitioner in this writ petition, and not for any other
purpose.
37. For the reasons stated hereinabove, this Court is of the view that
there is no need for transfer of investigation to any third agency. The
prayer for transfer of investigation to the CBI is refused.
38. It is expected that the charge-sheet is put up for committal and the
trial is commenced and concluded expeditiously, but not later than six
months from the date of committal.
40. There shall however be no order as to costs.
41. All parties shall act on the server copy of this judgment duly downloaded
from the official website of this Court.