Dated this the 12th day of October, 2022
Lalan P.R married Aysha. They are the petitioners in
this writ petition. The 1st petitioner Lalan is a Hindu by
birth. The mother of the 2nd petitioner Ayisha is a Muslim.
According to the petitioners, they are followers of the
Hindu religion. The petitioners married following Hindu
religious rites and customs. The 2 nd respondent the local
Registrar (common) refused to register the marriage
solemnized between the petitioners, as per the Kerala
Registration      of    Marriages           (Common)          Rules, 2008
(hereinafter mentioned as "Rules 2008") with a reasoning
that the registration of marriage is possible only if it is
solemnized as per the marriage laws in force. It was also
stated that since the petitioners' marriage was not
conducted as per any personal laws of the parties or based
on any statutory provisions, petitioners can register their
marriage only as per the Special Marriage Act 1954. The
grievance of the petitioners is that the 2nd respondent
rejected the request for registering their marriage as per
the Rules 2008 because the 1st petitioner is a Hindu and
the mother of the 2nd petitioner is a Muslim. The second
respondent also stated that, there is no evidence to show
that the marriage was solemnized in accordance to any
religious rites and customs. I am surprised to see such a
stand from the respondents. Even now, the authorities are
reluctant to register marriages because of religious
differences between the parties to a marriage. Then what
is the purpose of saying that we are the followers of
legends    like  Sree  Narayana    Guru    and  Ayyankali?
Hypertechnical reasons for not registering marriages as
per the Rules 2008 are to be deprecated. Therefore, a
detailed consideration with respect the intention for
framing the Rules 2008 is necessary to resolve the issue in
this case.
2.   The short facts, of the case, are as follows:
According    to   the  petitioners,  their  marriage    was
solemnized on 02.12.2001 at Lions Club Hall Kadavanthra,
as per religious rites and customs, in the presence of
friends and relatives of both the parties. Ext.P1 is the
wedding invitation card. The petitioners are now living
with their two children. The first petitioner is a Hindu by
birth, and he belongs to the Dheevara community. The
second petitioner’s father hails from Dheevara community
and her mother is from the Muslim community. The 2 nd
petitioner professes Hindu religion and follows the culture
of Hindu community. Hence, it is stated in the writ
petition that, the marriage was solemnized as per Hindu
religious customs and rituals as agreed by both the
families. Consequently, the petitioners decided to register
their marriage under the Rules 2008 and submitted an
application before the 2nd respondent in Form No.1 on
02.12.2008 after remitting the prescribed fee. Ext.P2 is
the application form. It is also submitted that they also
furnished Form No.III with details of 2 witnesses to prove
the solemnization of marriage as mandated under Rule
9(3) of the Rules 2008. Since, the 2 nd petitioner's religion
is shown in her SSLC Book as Muslim, the 2 nd respondent
declined    to   register  their   marriage     and   sought
clarification from the 1st respondent, the Chief Registrar
General of Marriages(common). The 1st respondent, as per
Ext. P4 informed that only marriages solemnized under
any of the existing marriage laws could be registered
under the Rules, 2008 and the petitioner's marriage was
not solemnized and could be registered only under the
Special Marriage Act 1954. Hence, this writ petition is
filed challenging Ext.P4 order of the 1 st respondent and to
issue appropriate directions to the 2nd respondent to
register the marriage of the petitioners under the Rules,
3.   Heard counsel for the petitioners and the
Government pleader. The counsel for the petitioners
reiterated his contentions in the writ petition. The
government     pleader  submitted   that,  for  registering
marriages, marriages should be either solemnized before a
marriage officer appointed under any statutory provisions
or solemnized as per religious rites. The Government
pleader relied on the judgment of this Court in Sabu
K.Eliyas V. State of Kerala and others(2014(1) KLT
4.   The Rules 2008 was framed by the Government
of Kerala based on the directions of the Apex Court in
Seema v. Ashwani Kumar (2006 (1) KLT 791). The
registration of marriages as per the Rules 2008 is mainly
intended for the purpose of protecting the rights of women
and children. The reason why the Apex Court directed the
State    Governments   to  frame   the   Rules   is  clearly
mentioned in Seema's Case (supra). It will be beneficial to
extract the relevant portions of Seema's case(supra)
15. As is evident from narration of facts,
though most of the States have framed rules
regarding      registration      of     marriages,
registration of marriage is not compulsory in
several States.    If the record of marriage is
kept, to a large extent, the dispute concerning
solemnisation    of   marriages     between   two
persons is avoided. As rightly contended by the
National   Commission,     in   most   cases  non
registration of marriages affects the women to a
great measure. If the marriage is registered it
also provides evidence of the marriage having
taken place and would provide a rebuttable
presumption of the marriage having taken
place. Though, the registration itself cannot be
a proof of valid marriage per se, and would not
be the determinative factor regarding validity of
a marriage, yet it has a great evdientiary value
in the matters of custody of children, right of
children born from the wedlock of the two
persons whose marriage is registered and the
age of parties to the marriage. That being so, it
would be in the interest of the society if
marriages are made compulsorily registrable.
The legislative intent in enacting S.8 of the
Hindu Act is apparent from the use of the
expression “for the purpose of facilitating the
proof of Hindu marriages”.
5.   Based on the above directions, the Government
of Kerala framed the Rules 2008. As per Rule 6 of the
Rules 2008, all marriages solemnized in the state after the
commencement of these Rules shall compulsorily be
registered irrespective of religion of the parties. It will be
better to extract Rule 6 of the Rules 2008 along with its
Registrable.- All marriages solemnized in the
State after the commencement of these Rules shall
compulsorily be registered irrespective of religion
Provided    that    the    marriages,    the
registration of which is compulsorily under any
other statutory provisions, need not be registered
under these Rules and such marriages shall be
registered     under    the     respective     statutory
Provided     further    that    marriages,     the
registration of which is optional as per any other
statutory provisions shall be registered under
these    Rules    unless   registered      under    such
statutory provisions:
Provided    also   that    the    registration  of
marriages     solemnized    prior    to   the   date  of
commencement of these Rules shall be optional.
Provided also that any relation made by any
agreement or by any other mode in the name of
marriage, other than the marriages solemnized as
per any law in force in India or as per religious
rites, shall not be registered under these Rules. “
6.    The first proviso to Rules 6 states that the
registration of marriages which is compulsory under any
other statutory provisions, need not be registered in these
Rules and such marriages shall be registered under the
respective statutory provisions. The 2nd proviso states that
the registration of the marriages, which is optional as per
any other statutory provisions shall be registered under
these   Rules   unless  registered   under    such   statutory
provisions. The 3rd proviso states that registration of
marriage solemnized prior to the date of commencement
of these Rules shall be optional. The 4 th proviso states that
any relation made by any agreement or by any other mode
in the name of marriage, other than the marriages
solemnized as per any law in force in India or as per
religious rites shall not be registered under these rules.
Therefore, a reading of Rule 6 will show that all marriages
solemnized in the state after the commencement of the
Rules 2008 is to be registered compulsorily irrespective of
the religion of the parties. Therefore, for registration of
the   marriage   under   Rule   6,  "solemnization     of  the
marriage" is necessary. But in Rule 6, it is clearly stated
that the registration is irrespective of the religion of the
parties. Now the question to be answered is what is meant
by “solemnization of marriage"? This proposition is not at
all res integra in the light of the Apex Court judgment in
Bhaurao Shankar Lokhande and Another v. State of
Maharashtra and Another (AIR 1965 SC 1564). Para 5
of the above judgment is relevant and the same is
extracted hereunder.
5. The word 'solemnize' means, in connection
with a marriage, to celebrate the marriage with
proper ceremonies and in due form, according to
the   Shorter    Oxford    Dictionary.  It  follows,
therefore, that unless the marriage is 'celebrated
or performed with proper ceremonies and due
form it cannot be said to be 'solemnized'. It is,
therefore, essential, for the purpose of S.17 of the
Act,   that   the   marriage     to  which   S.494,
I.P.C.applies on account of the provisions of the
Act, should have been celebrated with proper
ceremonies and in due form. Merely going through
certain ceremonies with the intention that the
parties be taken to be married, will not make the
ceremonies prescribed by law or approved by any
established custom.”
Thus the word “solemnize” in connection with
the marriage means to celebrate the marriage with proper
ceremonies and in due form. In Rajeeve v. Sarasamma
and Others (2021 (4) KHC 87), a Division Bench of this
Court observed that a Hindu marriage has both religious
as well as secular aspects. This Court further observed
that the Hindu marriage is to be treated both as a
sacrament and as a contract. It will be beneficial to extract
relevant portions of the Rajeeve's Case(supra).
15. The parties are Hindus. Marriage,
according to the pristine Hindu Law is sanskar-a
sacrament;    one   of   the   sixteen   important
sacraments essential to be taken during one's
lifetime. The traditional concept of marriage is
now grossly changed and Hindu marriage today
has assumed more or less the nature of contract
for the mutual benefit of the parties concerned,
duly aided by different legal provisions and
reformers.   The   Hindu    Marriage    Act, 1955
reformed radically the Hindu law of marriage. The
Act overrode all the rules of law of marriage
whether by virtue of any text or rule of Hindu law
or any custom or usage having the force of law in
respect of all the matters dealt with in it. The Act
does    not   use    the   expression  'sacramental
marriage'    but   speaks   of  a  Hindu    marriage
solemnized in accordance with customary rites
and ceremonies of either party. S.7 makes it clear
that a Hindu marriage has both religious as well
as secular aspects. Therefore, it is to be treated
both as a sacrament and as a contract. It is a
sacrament because there is emphasis on the
performance      of    the   customary    rites  and
ceremonies including Saptapadi wherever it is
treated    as  an    essential  ceremony     for the
completion of the marriage. It is contract because
this section deals with the capacity of the spouses
to enter into an alliance for a marriage.
16. To prove a valid marriage under the
Hindu     law,    the    evidence   regarding    the
performance of marriage as required under S.7 of
the Hindu Marriage Act must be brought on
record. S.7 speaks of solemnization of marriage
with customary rites and ceremonies. The word
'solemnized' means, to celebrate the marriage
with proper ceremonies with the intention that the
parties should be considered to be married. The
Apex Court in Gopal Lal v. State of Rajasthan
MLJ (Cri) 480 : 1979 (16) ACC 115) while defining
the   word    'solemnize'   in   connection with   a
marriage under the Hindu Marriage Act, held
inter   alia,  that   word    'solemnize' means   in
connection with a       marriage, 'to celebrate the
marriage with proper ceremonies and in due
form'. In Bhaurao v. State of Maharashtra (1965
1965 (2) CriLJ 544), it was held that unless the
marriage is 'celebrated or performed with due
ceremonies and due form' it cannot be said to be
"solemnized". It follows, therefore, that unless the
marriage is celebrated or performed with proper
ceremonies and due form, it cannot be said to be
'solemnized'. Where the factum of marriage is
disputed, essential ceremonies constituting the
marriage must       be pleaded and proved to show
that the marriage was valid.
18. As per S.50 of the Indian Evidence Act, when
the Court has to form an opinion as to the
relationship of one person to another, the opinion
expressed by conduct as to the existence of such
relationship of any person who has special means
of knowledge on the subject of that relationship is
a   relevant    fact.  The   person   whose  opinion
expressed by conduct is relevant must be a person
who, as a member of the family or otherwise, has
special means of knowledge on the particular
subject of relationship. What the Section says is
that such conduct or outward behavior as evidence
of the opinion held is relevant and may, therefore,
be proved. The two illustrations appended to the
Section clearly bring out the true scope and effect
of the Section. The evidence of PWs 2 to 4 would
clearly show that they had special means of
knowing the disputed relationship between the
first respondent and late Reghunathan. They have
attended the marriage ceremony and they have
witnessed     the   first  respondent    and   late
Reghunathan cohabating together as husband and
wife. Undoubtedly, they showed their opinion as
expressed by their conduct and thus admissible
under    S.50.  The    Supreme   Court  in  Reema
Aggarwal v. Anupam (2004 KHC 668: 2004 (2)
CriLJ 892) has held that when the factum of
celebration of marriage is established, it will be
presumed that absence to the contrary that all the
rite and ceremonies to constitute a valid marriage
have been gone through."
7.    From the above decisions, it is clear that the
“solemnization of marriage" means to celebrate the
marriage with proper ceremonies with the intention that
the parties should be considered to be married. In
Rajeeve's case(supra), this Court considered Section 50
of the Indian Evidence Act 1872 also.     In the light of the
above discussions, it is clear that the marriages which are
solemnized alone can be registered as per the Rules, 2008.
The solemnization of marriage means celebrating the
marriage with proper ceremonies.
8. When a circular was issued by the Government to
the effect that marriages solemnized between persons
belonging to two different religions can not be registered
under the Rules 2008,       this Court in Deepu Dev and
another v. State of Kerala and another 2012 (2) KHC
497, observed that the circular to that effect is repugnant
and contrary to the provisions contained in the Rules,
2008. Relevant portions of the judgment in Deepu Dev's
Case (supra) is extracted herein.
“9. Learned counsel for the petitioner had
drawn my attention to Section (4) of the Christian
Marriage Act, 1872, and contended that the
marriage    between      the    petitioners,  which   is
solemnized through         religious   rites prescribed
under Christianity, is valid. But I am of the view
that for the purpose of deciding the issue involved,
I need not adjudicate the validity of the marriage. I
take note of the fact that it is in view of the
directives of the Honourable Supreme Court that
the State Government has framed the Common
Rules, making all the marriages compulsorily
registrable, irrespective of the religion of the
parties, (emphasis supplied). That being so, the
State Government by virtue of Ext.P7 circular
which is an executive order, cannot impose any
restriction on the scope and applicability of the
Rules. Even the proviso to R.6 of the Common
Rules only provides that a marriage which is
compulsorily registrable under any other law need
not be registered again under the Common Rules.
It only provides an exemption from the obligation
provided under R.6 for mandatory registration of
all marriages solemnized in the State. But it
cannot be interpreted in any manner preventing
registration of a marriage solemnized within the
State, even if it is liable to be registered under any
other law, especially in view of wordings of R.6
that all marriages irrespective of religion, of the
parties should be registered, if it is solemnized
within the State.
10. Therefore, I am of the view that the
instructions   issued   through    Ext.P7,   that  the
marriages solemnized between persons belonging
to different religions are not registrable under the
Common Rules is repugnant and contrary to the
provisions contained in the Common Rules. The
State Government has no power to issue any such
executive order contrary to the provisions of a
legislation. Hence, Ext. P7 is liable to be quashed."
9. In Sabus’s case (supra), which was the decision
relied by Government Pleader, it is only stated that, for
the purpose of registration under the Rules, 2008, the
marriages should either be solemnized before a marriage
officer or as per religious rites. Therefore, from the above
discussions, it is clear that marriages which is solemnized
in the State of Kerala after the commencement of the
Rules, 2008 shall be compulsorily registered irrespective
of the religion of the parties. Rule 7 deals with the
jurisdiction.   As   per   this  Rule,    marriages     shall be
registered within the local area of the local registrar of
Marriages(common), of whose jurisdiction the marriage is
solemnized. The local registrar of Marriages (Common)
will be the registrar of births and deaths appointed under
the Registration of Birth and Deaths Act, 1969. The Rule 8
of the Rules 2008 deals with the maintenance of the
register of marriages(Common). As per Rule 8 Local
Registrar shall maintain a Register of Marriages (Common) in
Form-III appended to the Rules. Rule 9 deals with procedure and
time limit of registration. It will be better to extract Rule 9 of the
“9. Procedure and time limit for registration.- (1)
The parties to a marriage shall prepare a memorandum
in duplicate in Form No. I appended to these Rules along
with three separate sets of photos and shall submit the
same to the Local Registrar within a period of forty-five
days from the date of solemnization of their marriage.
(2) The memorandum for registration of marriages
solemnized before the commencement of these Rules
may be submitted on or before 31st December 2013.
(3) The memorandum shall be signed by both the parties
to the marriage and two other persons who witnessed the
marriage. In the case of a marriage solemnized before a
Marriage Officer appointed under any statutory
provisions, the entries made in the Register of Marriages
or any other register maintained for this purpose and
certified by the Marriage Officer and in the case of a
marriage solemnized as per religious rites, a copy of the
certificate of marriage issued by the religious authority
concerned or a declaration from a Gazetted Officer /
Member of Parliament / Member of Legislative
Assembly / Member of Local Self Government Institution
in Form No. II appended to these rules may be a
document in proof of the marriage. A registration fee of
rupees one hundred shall be payable along with the
submission of the memorandum for registration.
Provided that in the case of persons below
the poverty line and those who belong to
the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes,
the fee for Registration of Marriages shall
Provided further that in the event of the
death of either the husband or the wife and
if a memorandum, with the signature of
two witnesses to the marriage together
with sufficient documents to prove that the
marriage had been solemnized, is filed by
the person alive before the Local Registrar,
he shall register the marriage.
(4) Marriages solemnized after the commencement of
these Rules, in respect of which no memorandum is filed
within the period of forty-five days and a period of one
year has not expired from the date of such solemnization,
may be registered subject to sub-rule (3) by the Local
Registrar after imposing a fine of rupees one hundred. In
such cases the memorandum shall be filed together with
a declaration from a Gazetted Officer/Member of
Parliament/Member of Legislative Assembly/Member of a
Local Self Government Institutions in Form No. II
appended to these Rules or with any other document to
prove the solemnization of the marriage to the
satisfaction of the Local Registrar.
10. As per Rule 9(1) the parties to a marriage shall
prepare a memorandum in duplicate in Form No. I, along
with three sets of photos and shall submit the same to the
Local Registrar within a period of forty-five days from the
date of solemnization of their marriage. It is stated in Rule
9(2) that the memorandum for registration of marriages
solemnized before the commencement of these Rules may
be submitted on or before 31st December 2013. Rule 9(3)
deals with the submission of Form -1. It only says that the
memorandum shall be signed by both the parties to the
marriage and two other persons, who witnessed the
marriage. In the case of the two eventualities mentioned
in Rule 9(3), the following documents may be proof of the
(i) In the case of a marriage solemnized before
a Marriage         Officer appointed under any statutory
provisions, the         entries made in the Register of
Marriages or any other register maintained for this
purpose and certified by the Marriage Officer and
(ii) In the case of a marriage solemnized as per
religious rites, a copy of the certificate of marriage
issued by the religious authority concerned or a
declaration from a Gazetted Officer / Member of
Parliament / Member of Legislative Assembly /
Member of Local Self Government Institution in Form
No. II appended to these rules.
11. It is also stated in Rule 9(3) that a registration fee
is  also   payable      along  with    the submission   of  the
memorandum for registration. Therefore, Rule 9(3) deals
with the submission of Form No I. Form No.I only states
about the signature of the parties to the marriage and two
other persons who witnessed the marriage. It will be
1. Date of Marriage :
2. Place of Marriage : Local area                                      Village                 Taluk District
(specify hall, mandapam etc.)
Photo of the            Photo of the
3. Details of Parties to the Marriage (As on the date of marriage)
(in capital letters)
[sufficient proof such as S.S.L.C Book, Driving Licence,
Passport, School Admission Register or other records
issued by the Government showing date of birth shall be
(i) Name of father or guardian and the relationship
(l) Signature with date (If he is a consenting party)
(m) Name of mother
(p) Signature with date (If she is a consenting party)
4. Witness of solemnization of marriage
(c) Signature with date:
5. Details of records of marriage required under rule 9/rule 10, if any:
Declaration of the Parties
We........................................................do hereby declare that the details shown
above are true to the best of our knowledge and belief.
Signature of the Parties:
Received by Post/in Person on...........................................................
Registered in the Register of Marriages (Common) on .....................
12. A perusal of Form No.I will show the details
necessary in it. They are the date of marriage, place of
marriage, details of parties to the marriage (as on date of
marriage), two witnesses of solemnization of marriage
and details of records of marriage required under Rule
9/Rule 10 if any. A perusal of Form No.I would show that
there is no column in it which requires about the religion
of the parties. If the marriage is solemnized, it can be
registered as per the Rules, 2008. In the two eventualities
mentioned in Rule 9(3), the documents mentioned in
those situations alone are necessary. In case of marriage
solemnized before the Marriage Officer, a certificate from
the Marriage Officer is necessary. In case of a marriage
solemnized as per religious rites, a copy of the certificate
of marriage issued by the religious authority concerned
or a declaration from a gazetted officer/Member of
Parliament/Member of Legislative Assembly/Member of
Local Self Government Institutions in Form.II appended
to the rules is a document in proof of the marriage.
Therefore, in a marriage which is solemnized as per
religious rites, a copy of the certificate issued by any of
the above authorities mentioned above is sufficient along
with Form No-I. Form No.II deals about the declaration of
MP/MLA/Gazetted Officer or Member of LSGI.
13. A reading of the Apex Court Judgment in
Seema’s case (supra) which lead to the framing of the
Rules, 2008, makes it clear that the registration of the
marriage as per the Rules itself cannot be a proof of valid
marriage and would not be the determinative factor
regarding the validity of a marriage. But the Apex Court
observed that it has a great evidentiary value in the
matters of custody of children, rights of children born
from the wedlock of two persons, whose marriage is
registered and the age of parties to the marriage.
Therefore, simply because the marriage is registered as
per the Rules, 2008, it is not a proof of a valid marriage,
and it is only for the purpose of protecting the interest of
the children born out of that marriage and to prove the
age of the parties to the marriage. Therefore, simply
because the father or mother of one of the parties to a
marriage belongs to a different religion, it is not a reason
to reject an application submitted for registration of the
marriage as per the Rules, 2008.
14. In this case, the registration of marriage is
refused by the respondents mainly for the reason that the
mother of the 2nd petitioner is from the Muslim community
which is different from that of the 1 st petitioner. It is
clearly stated in the writ petition that the petitioner's
marriage was solemnized as per Hindu religious rites and
customs in the presence of friends and relatives of both
the parties. It is also stated that the 2nd petitioner is
professes Hindu religion and follows the culture of Hindu
community. Hence the marriage was solemnized as per
Hindu religious custom and rituals as agreed by both the
families. In such a situation, I fail to understand why the
respondents refused to register the marriage as per the
Rules, 2008. There is no rule which prohibits the
registration of the marriage between Lalan P.R. and
Aysha, simply because the mother of Ayisha belongs to
Muslim community. The only condition for the registration
of the marriage as per Rule 6 of the Rules, 2008 is that the
marriage is to be solemnized. Religion of the parties is not
a consideration for registering marriages. If there is a
declaration     from     gazetted     officer/member      of
parliament/member of legislative assembly/ member of
local self government institution in Form No.II, the
registration cannot be rejected simply because the mother
of one of the party is a Muslim and the other party is
Hindu. Respondents are unnecessarily creating confusion
while registering the marriages, which are solemnized,
according to parties. The counsel for the petitioners
submitted that the petitioners are ready to produce a
declaration from the authorities mentioned in Rule 9(3) to
prove the solemnization of the marriage. If that is the
case, nothing prevents the respondents from registering
the marriage.
15. The respondents, while registering the marriage
as per the Rules 2008, should remember that our Country
is a secular Country giving liberty to all citizens to adopt
their own religion and to follow their own rites, customs,
and ceremonies. Kerala is a State, where the Great
reformers like "Sree Narayana Guru and Ayyankali" lived
and they propagated the principle of secularism. It is
unfortunate that nowadays there is an attempt to hijack
the names of these legends by certain caste group as if
they are their caste leaders. That should not be permitted.
They are the reformers of our country. They are the
leaders of all citizens of this country irrespective of the
religion and caste. Social reformers of different religions
should not be caged in their religion or caste at the
instance of certain groups. If it happens, we will be
insulting those legends. It will be beneficial to quote the
famous words of ‘Sree Narayana Guru’, which says that
this is a place where people reside in brotherhood without
any difference based on their caste and religion. The
16. The Local Registrar of Marriages (Common)
appointed as per the Rules, 2008 should remember the
above lines of Sree Narayana Guru while dealing with the
applications for registration of marriages. Hypertechnical
defects   shall  not  be   raised   while  entertaining  the
applications for registration of marriage. The intention of
registration of marriage is clearly stated by the Apex
Court in Seema's case (supra). The registration of
marriage as per the Rules, 2008 will not prove a valid
marriage, and it is only to protect the rights of the women
and the children born in that marriage. Therefore,
hypertechnical defects shall not be raised by the Marriage
Officers. The Registry will forward a copy of this judgment
to the Secretary, Local Self Government Department, who
shall issue a circular mentioning the dictum laid down in
this judgment.
17.In this writ petition, the counsel for the
petitioners submitted that the petitioners are ready to
furnish a declaration in Form No-II from the persons
narrated in Rule 9(3) of the Rules, 2008. If that is the case,
the 2nd respondent shall register the marriage as per the
Therefore, this writ petition is allowed in the
following manner:
2. The 2nd respondent is directed to register the
marriage of the petitioners if the petitioners submit
Form No.I along with the declaration in Form No.II to
prove the solemnization of marriage and in such
event, the respondents shall issue the necessary
certificate in accordance to law, as expeditiously as
possible, at any rate, within two weeks from the date
of receipt of the application.
3. The Registry will forward a copy of this judgment
to the Secretary, Local Self Government Department,
State of Kerala,    who shall issue a general circular
mentioning the dictum laid down in this judgment.