The petitioner is the father of the deceased victim. The
victim was married to one Kushal Agarwal on February 9,
2020. Records reveal that there were instances when the
deceased had met her parents time and again soon after the
marriage and intimated them about the alleged physical and
mental torture inflicted by her husband and the alleged
debauchery the husband had indulged in.
It appears that the parents did not pay much attention to
such complaints and ultimately on February 16, 2021 the
petitioner received a call from the mother-in-law of the
deceased, informing him that his daughter had fallen from the
terrace of her matrimonial home and was taken to Woodlands
The victim succumbed her injuries on the same day. A
whatsapp message was received by the petitioner. It was sent
by his deceased daughter, which reads as follows:-
“It’s better that I die than live in this family or with
what will be done to me if I leave this family…so
please don’t miss me and byebye.”
The petitioner lodged a complaint on February 17, 2021
before the Alipore Police Station and Alipore Police Station
Case No.15 of 2021 dated February 17, 2021 under Sections
306/498A/34 of the Indian Penal Code was initiated. A post
mortem was conducted. On February 25, 2021, the petitioner
submitted another complaint narrating the details of the
behaviour of the in-laws of the deceased. Investigation was
transferred to the Detective Department of the Women’s
Grievance Cell, Lalbazar. After the post mortem, a prayer was
made by the investigating officer for adding Section 304B
along with Section 406 of the Indian Penal Code before the
learned Chief Judicial Magistrate at Alipore, which was
allowed. On the basis of the order passed by the learned
Magistrate, seized articles and the mobile phones were sent to
the Central Forensic Science Laboratory at Bhopal, for data
extraction and expert opinion.
The records reveal that the husband of the victim filed
an application for anticipatory bail before this Court, and
thereafter withdrew the same. A non-bailable warrant was
issued by the criminal court on the prayer of the investigating
officer. The warrant was not executed.
Thereafter the husband, once again, moved this Court.
An interim protection was granted to the husband till the
disposal of the application for anticipatory bail. The warrant of
arrest was recalled. The application for anticipatory bail was
rejected by this Court, by an order dated February 23, 2022.
The husband is at large.
The allegation is that the investigating agency has failed
and neglected to proceed with the investigation with the
judiciousness, seriousness, expedition and sensitivity which
this case deserved. It is alleged that the investigating agency
did not make any endeavour for restoration of the warrant of
arrest after the rejection of the application for anticipatory bail.
That no report has yet been obtained from the Central Forensic
Science Laboratory at Bhopal. Hence, interference of this court
has been called for as the father has lost hope on the system
and the feels that the truth relating to the death of his bright,
young and beautiful daughter would never be unravelled. The
petitioner feels that the Sub-Inspector who is the investigating
officer, is under tremendous pressure.
Mrs. Mookherji, learned Senior Government Advocate,
appearing on behalf of the police authorities, files a report
prepared by the Officer-in-Charge, Women’s Grievances Cell,
Detective     Department,    Kolkata   and   submits   that  the
investigation has been conducted to the best of the ability of
the respondent No.6. The learned Magistrate also rejected the
prayer for day to day monitoring of the investigation.
According to the learned Magistrate, the investigation was
going on in an unbiased manner and there was no need for
day to day interference by the Court. The police report is taken
on record.
Having considered the graveness of the allegations, the
social position of the parties and the unfortunate events which
led to the death of the young lady and especially in view of the
delay which has occurred in the interregnum period, this
Court is of the view that the investigation ought to have been
conducted in a more speedy and systematic manner. It has
been rather slow and directionless. The offences relate to
dowry death and crime against women. It has a huge social
impact. Although, this court does not find anything irregular
with the approach of the respondent No.6 in dealing with the
investigation other than her lack of experience and lack of
adequate support and machinery. Thus, in view of the gravity
of the offences, and the delay in obtaining the report from the
CFSL, the Court opines that a Special Investigating Team
consisting of senior and experienced police officers should be
constituted. The respondent No. 6 may continue to be a part of
the investigation.
The Court      directs   Smt.  Damayanti Sen,      Special
Commissioner of Police (II), Kolkata Police, to constitute her
own team of competent officers to take over the investigation.
At least a team of five officers must be constituted. The
respondent No.6 shall be involved in the investigation as a
part of the team. Smt. Sen shall lead the team, supervise and
monitor the investigation.
It is expected that the team shall be constituted within a
week from the date of communication of this order and
immediate steps shall be taken to proceed with the
investigation, with the independence and the effectiveness that
is required. One and a half years have already passed, without
much development.
Let this matter appear on August 12, 2022 at the 10:30
a.m. when further report shall be filed by the Special
Investigating Team indicating the development and the
progress of the case.
The Court reposes full faith in the investigating agency
and expects positive results by the next date.
The parties are directed to communicate this order to
the police authorities through proper channel.
All parties are to act on the basis of the server copy of
this order.