Address by Honourable the Chief Justice of India to inaugurate
the International Virtual Mediation Summer School, 2021
organised by Nivaaran-Mediators of Supreme Court of India on
2.  At the outset, let me congratulate the Supreme Court trained
mediators- “NIVAARAN”, for organizing this important Summer
School on Mediation for Young Lawyers and Law Students.
3.  I am delighted to be releasing the inaugural edition of the newsletter
and inaugurating the present event for more than one reason. The
first reason is that I believe that education is one of the most
important tools to not only empower people, but to effect change in
society. To this extent, organizing an event such as the present one
where eminent mediators, lawyers, judges and jurists have the
opportunity to speak their thoughts on various topics and impart
information and knowledge to foster new understanding among
students and practitioners is invaluable.
4.  This brings me to the other reason I am pleased to be inaugurating
this event. I believe that mediation is one of the most important
conflict resolution mechanisms currently which will only continue to
grow in relevance in the coming future.
5. I recently had the opportunity of voicing my views on mediation, its
growth in India and the role it can play in our country during the
India-Singapore Mediation Summit. Mediation was a practise that
was commonly followed in India prior to the arrival of the British,
and their Court system. Not only did the British establish the
framework for the modern Indian judicial system, but they were also
instrumental in the creation of the myth that dispute resolution, and
justice, requires black coats and gowns and elaborate arguments. It
is time to dispel such myths and notions. The reality is most of the
litigants in India suffer from many social and economic constraints.
What they need is a quick, inexpensive and convenient method of
dispute resolution.
6. Mediation is one such mechanism available to parties to a dispute
which has the abovementioned characteristics. Apart from the fact
that it is cost effective, time saving and convenient to parties, there
is another facet of mediation that marks it out as perhaps a better
alternative for parties. Traditional litigation often leaves one of the
parties to the proceedings dissatisfied with the result, which is why
parties sometimes appeal decisions all the way to the Supreme
Court. This often compounds the problem of judicial delays. This is
an outcome of the “winner-takes-all” attitude that has come to affect
the system.
7.  Mediation solves this problem. It signifies a shift from an adversarial
attitude or position and creates an atmosphere that focusses on
better outcomes for all parties. It enables parties to contemplate a
continued relationship after the end of the resolution process.
8.  An important facet of mediation that is often not emphasised enough
is its possible contribution to improving access to justice in the
country. Pursuing traditional litigation strategies can often be
difficult  for  parties  without    ample    resources    or  time   or
sophistication. Mediation, as a tool of grievance redressal which is
cheaper, faster and simpler, can ensure just and fair outcomes.
9.  The Supreme Court has played an active effort to improve mediation
in India and has played a crucial role in bringing mediation into the
mainstream. Various judicial pronouncements by the Supreme
Court of India have, among other things, resulted in the creation and
spread of Court annexed mediation in the country.
10. Apart from this, the Supreme Court Mediation and Conciliation
Project Committee, which was set up in 2005, has been integral
when it comes to the training of Mediators in India. The first batch
of mediators was trained nearly a decade ago and a fresh batch was
trained in May 2019. I am glad to state that, over the past two years,
the Supreme Court trained mediators have been extremely active,
despite the ongoing pandemic. and have organized various events,
lecture series and discussions. The present Summer School
programme is one such programme which can help mediation
become an important tool for “NIVAARAN” in the country.
11. This brings me to the importance of training mediators. I had flagged
some     issues   during  the   India-Singapore    Mediation   Summit
regarding the difficulties that mediators face during conflict
resolution. The first issue related to the role of a Mediator- which is
now shifting to a more active, engaged role as opposed to the
facilitative role which was earlier envisaged, and how a Mediator
must act in such situations. The second, relates to what a Mediator
must do, or how “neutral” a Mediator must be, in the face of a
patently unjust settlement reached between parties in unequal
bargaining positions.
12. Such issues require a Mediator to be well trained and equipped to
understand and be prepared to react to any situation that arises
before him. This can only happen if there is a well-designed training
programme for Mediators in place with a focus on situation
recognition and the appropriate response. The Supreme Court
Mediation and Project Committee has already created a model
Training Programme wherein 40 hours of training and participation
and successful completion of a certain number of mediations is
mandated for accreditation as a qualified mediator.
13. However, it is necessary for the training programme to be constantly
updated and modified, to keep up with the best practices in the rest
of the world. We should also be innovative and think of how new
technologies and ideas can help in improving the training. As I have
earlier suggested, the development of a training tool for Mediators
like the simulators used in training commercial pilots might be a
useful innovation to put in place. It is also important that such
training take place periodically and continuously to keep Mediators
updated on the best practices to be followed.
14. It must also be remembered, being a successful lawyer does not
guarantee similar success in mediation. These two distinct roles
require distinct characteristics. A mediator needs to be perceptive to
the emotions of both the parties, as well as the underlying issues.
Even, with the most stubborn parties, the mediator must guide
parties with great optimism and patience to find a workable
settlement.
15. The role of law schools and law school curriculum should also not
be underplayed. While the Bar Council of India mandates a course
on Alternate Dispute Resolution, more focus should be placed by law
schools in the country on clinical education, with a focus on
16. The future belongs to mediation. Law students and young lawyers
need to learn the requisite skills and be at the forefront of creating
the space for the establishment of Mediation, and Mediators, as a
separate profession. The Court system needs full time, qualified
mediators with necessary skills to convince parties to arrive at an
amicable settlement.
17. Going through the newsletter, I am incredibly pleased to see that
since 2020, despite the pandemic, the mediators of the Supreme
Court have successfully conducted multiple events with renowned
speakers from across the world. All these events, along with today’s
programme, are an important step towards the skill development of
students and young lawyers. I am sure that the next week of lectures
by all the eminent invitees will be an eye-opener and will make you
appreciate, include, and improve mediation strategies while
counselling present or future clients when they approach you with
their disputes.
18. Finally, I would again like to congratulate the organizers and wish
them all the best for the success of this event. Let me also formally
extend my support for future events that they wish to organize.
19. Let me conclude with the words of the Mahatma Gandhi-
“I realised that the true function of a lawyer
was to unite parties riven asunder…..[T]wenty
years of my practise as a lawyer was occupied
in bringing out private comprises of hundreds
of cases. I lost nothing thereby- not even money;
certainly not my soul.”