This Criminal Appeal is filed by the appellant-A1 aggrieved by the
judgment of conviction and sentence imposed against him in S.C.No.479 of
2012 dated 05.08.2013 by the Special Judge for trial of Offences under SC and
ST (POA) Act cum VI Additional Metropolitan Sessions Judge, Secunderabad.
2.    The case of the prosecution in brief was that on 06.07.2011 at about
10:00PM, the Accused No.1 poured kerosene on his wife by name
Smt.Shyamala and lit fire due to which she sustained 40% burn injuries and
died on 12.08.2011 while undergoing treatment.         On receipt of telephonic
message from Gandhi Hospital, Secunderabad on 07.07.2011 at about 00:15hrs,
the Head Constable of PS Begumpet proceeded to Gandhi Hospital, Female
Burns Ward and recorded the statement of the victim. Basing on the said
statement, another Head Constable (3006) of Begumpet PS registered a case
vide Crime No.210 of 2011 under the head ‘Woman Burnt’ and handed over the
case file to the SI of Police, PS Begumpet for investigation. The SI also
recorded the statement of the victim at Gandhi Hospital, thereafter proceeded to
the scene of offence i.e., to the house of the victim and conducted observation-
cum-seizure panchanama in the presence of the witnesses and seized a kerosene
stove from the said house. He also drafted a rough sketch of the scene of
offence and got the scene of offence photographed with the help of a
photographer.      On requisition by the SI of Police, on 08.07.2011, the
XII ACMM, Nampally recorded the dying declaration of the victim at female
Burns Ward, Gandhi Hospital.         Subsequently on telephonic message from
Gandhi Hospital that the victim intended to give a second dying declaration, the
SI of Police of PS Begumpet gave a requisition to XI ACMM, Secunderabad
who recorded the same on 18.07.2011.               While undergoing treatment,
Smt.Shyamala succumbed to burn injuries on 12.08.2011 at 09:35PM at Gandhi
Hospital, Secunderabad. On requisition by the SI of Police, the Deputy
Tahsildar Smt.S.Geetha conducted inquest over the body of the deceased in the
presence of the witnesses. She also examined the parents of the deceased, who
stated that their son-in-law harassed their daughter for want of more dowry and
after three (03) days of the incident they were also informed by their daughter
(deceased) that their son-in-law Rajkumar poured kerosene in drunken condition
on their daughter and lit fire by closing the doors from inside. After inquest, the
body of the deceased was subjected to autopsy by the Professor, Department of
Forensic Medicine, Gandhi Medical College, Secunderabad. The doctor, who
conducted autopsy, opined that the cause of death of the deceased was "Shock
due to burns".
3.     Basing on the statements of witnesses recorded by the Deputy Tahsildar,
as the death of the deceased occurred within seven (07) years of her marriage,
the SI of Police altered the Section of Law from ‘woman burns’ to
Section 304-B IPC and handed over the case file to the Assistant Commissioner
of Police, Begumpet Division, Secunderabad for further investigation. The
Assistant Commissioner of Police visited the scene of offence, recorded the
statements of the neighbours, parents and another relative of the deceased. He
affected the arrest of A1 on 29.11.2011 and produced before the court. On his
transfer, the subsequent Assistant Commissioner of Police who took charge,
basing on the second dying declaration affected the arrest of A2 to A5 on
23.05.2012 and produced them before the court. After completing the
investigation, he filed charge sheet against A1 for the offences punishable under
Sections 498-A and 304-B IPC, against A2 and A3 for the offence under
Section 498-A IPC and against A4 and A5 for the offence under Section 498-A
read with Section 109 IPC.
4.     The case was taken cognizance by the XI ACMM, Secunderabad and
committed it to the court of sessions, which was made over to the VI Additional
5.     On appearance of the accused, the VI Additional Metropolitan Sessions
Judge framed charges against the Accused-A1 for the offences under
Sections 304-B and 498-A IPC, against A2 and A3 for the offence under
Section 498-A IPC and against A4 and A5 for the offence under Section 498-A
read with Section 109 IPC.
6.    During the course of trial, the prosecution got examined PWs 1 to 15 and
got marked Exs.P1 to P12. The stove seized from the scene of offence was
marked as MO1. No defence evidence was adduced by the accused. On
considering the oral and documentary evidence on record and on hearing both
the Special Public Prosecutor and the learned defence counsel, the Sessions
Court acquitted A1 for the offence under Section 304-B IPC, acquitted A2 and
A3 for the offence under Section 498-A IPC and acquitted A4 and A5 for the
offence under Section 498-A IPC read with Section 109 IPC.        The trial court
found A1 guilty for the charge under Section 498-A IPC and convicted and
sentenced him to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of one year and
fine of Rs.1000/- and in default of payment of fine, to suffer simple
imprisonment for a period of three (03) months for the said offence.
7.    Aggrieved by the said judgment of conviction and sentence imposed
against Accused No.1 for the offence under Section 498-A IPC, the
Accused No.1 preferred this appeal contending that the trial court failed to
appreciate the conflicting versions given by the deceased in Exs.P2, P4, P7 and
P11 and came to a conclusion that the deceased stated about the harassment of
A1. In both Exs.P4 and P11 also, the deceased stated that due to unbearable
words, she poured kerosene on herself and set ablaze. The deceased had not
stated in Exs.P2 and P7 what she had stated in Exs.P4 and P11. The trial court
failed to see that the evidence of PWs 1 to 3 and the statements of the deceased
deposed in Exs.P2, P4, P7 and P11 would not attract the ingredients of Section
498-A IPC and prayed to set aside the judgment of conviction and sentence
imposed against him by the trial court.
8.     Heard the learned counsel for the appellant and the learned Assistant
9.     The learned counsel for the appellant submitted that there were four (04)
dying declarations given by the deceased in this case, each one was an
improvement over the other, when contradictory dying declarations were given
by the deceased, the benefit of doubt should be given to the accused. He further
contended that there was delay in recording the statements of PWs 1 to 3, as
such no reliance could be placed upon them, all the witnesses were interested
and prayed to allow the appeal by setting aside the judgment of conviction and
sentence recorded against the appellant-Accused No.1.
10.    The learned Assistant Public Prosecutor on the other hand contended that
the trial court acquitted A1 for the major offence under Section 304-B IPC and
convicted only for the minor offence under Section 498-A IPC and that too, had
taken a lenient view and had imposed a sentence of imprisonment of one year
only, there was no reason to interfere with the said judgment and prayed to
dismiss the appeal.
11.    Now the point for consideration is: Whether the judgment of the trial
court in convicting the Accused No.1 for the offence under Section 498-A IPC
and sentencing him as above is in accordance with law or requires any
interference by this court.
12.    On a perusal of the evidence of the witnesses, PW1, the father of the
deceased stated that on 26.05.2010, he performed the marriage of his deceased
daughter with A1. At the time of marriage, on the demand of the Accused, he
gave Rs.55,000/- of cash, gold and household articles, they lived happily for a
period of six months. Thereafter A1 demanded additional dowry. On that issue,
on two (02) occasions, a panchayat was held. On 06.07.2011 he received
telephone from A2, the father of A1, that his daughter was admitted in Gandhi
Hospital. He saw his daughter with burn injuries in hospital. She was not in a
position to give statement. After three (03) days, his daughter told him that A1
had stolen Rs.500 kept in the almurah, went out, came in drunken condition and
assaulted her. She further stated that A1 lit fire by pouring kerosene on her
body and A2 to A5 supported A1. He stated that A1 harassed his daughter
physically and mentally, on 12.08.2011, his daughter died due to burn injuries.
In his cross-examination, he stated that his daughter sustained burn injuries on
face, nose, mouth, lips and on head and for three (03) days from the date of
admission into hospital, she was in unconscious state of mind. He denied that
they tutored the deceased to give statement improving her earlier statements.
He also stated that A1 and the deceased used to reside separately from A3 to A5
in one room.
13.    The mother of the deceased examined as PW2 also stated that on
26.05.2010, they got married the deceased with A1, on the demand of accused
at the time of marriage they gave Rs.55,000/- of cash, six and half tulas of gold
and Rs.25,000/- for utensils, she lived happily for a period of six (06) months.
Thereafter, A1 demanded additional dowry and the same was informed by their
daughter to them. Panchayat was held on two (02) occasions. After Panchayat,
A1 and the deceased lived separately in the same locality.         Her daughter
informed her that A1 poured kerosene and lit fire on her due to which she
sustained injuries. After one month, due to injuries her daughter died. In her
cross-examination, she stated that one (01) month after her daughter was
admitted in the hospital, Police recorded her statement.
14.    PW3, who was related to the deceased as a grand father stated that he was
present at the time of marriage between the deceased and A1. On the demand
of the accused at the time of marriage, PWs 1 and 2 gave Rs.55,000/- of cash,
six and half tulas of gold and household utensils. He received information from
PW1 that his daughter received burn injuries and was shifted to hospital. Two
(02) days later on his enquiry, the deceased Smt. Shyamala told him that A1 lit
fire by pouring kerosene.
15.    The evidence of PWs 1 to 3 is not specific as to what was the additional
dowry amount demanded nor any details of it as to when the demand was made,
when and where the panchayats were held, who held the panchayats, etc. Their
evidence is vague with regard to the demand of additional dowry by A1.
16.    As per the prosecution case, immediately on receiving the telephonic
message from Gandhi Hospital, the Head Constable (7045) by name Giddaiah
of Begumpet PS, Secunderabad went to Gandhi Hospital, female Burns Ward
and recorded the statement of the victim on 07.07.2011 at 00:15hrs. The said
statement was marked as Ex.P4. In the said statement, the victim stated that she
was married with A1 about one year one month ago, on 06.07.2011 at about
10:00PM A1 came home in drunken condition and when she questioned him for
not bringing the provisions, he tried to beat her and abused her. Unable to
tolerate his abusive words, she poured kerosene available in the stove over her
body and set fire to herself.
17.    Subsequently, as per the prosecution case, the SI of Police visited the
Gandhi Hospital on 07.07.2011 and he also recorded the statement of the victim.
In the said statement, it was recorded that the marriage of the victim was
performed with A1 one year ago, A1 was addicted to alcohol and used to come
home in drunken condition daily. On 06.07.2011 A1 came home in drunken
condition and forced the victim to bring household articles from her parents’
house and tried to beat her and used vulgar language against her. Unable to
bear the abusive words by her husband, the victim poured kerosene available in
the stove and set herself ablaze.       On her hue and cry, A1 came there
extinguished the flames and shifted her to Gandhi Hospital for treatment. The
said statement was marked as Ex.P11. There was no signature of victim on
Ex.P11, but the signature of the victim was obtained on Ex.P4. As per the
evidence of PWs 1 to 3, the victim was not in a position to speak and she was in
unconscious condition for 2 to 3 days. But, the Head Constable, as well as the
SI recorded her statement immediately after the incident on 06.07.2011 at
01:20AM as well as on 07.07.2011 and the Head Constable also obtained her
signature on the statement.
18.    On the requisition given by the SI of Police, the XII ACMM recorded the
dying declaration of the deceased on 08.07.2011 at 12:55PM. In the said dying
declaration, the victim stated that A1 poured kerosene on her and set fire to her,
when she raised hue and cry, the neighbours opened the door, bet A1 and
brought her to the hospital, her husband was harassing her daily as she was not
begetting children and was threatening that he would perform second marriage,
he had taken all her gold ornaments including her mangalasutram chain and
mortgaged all the articles and when she asked him about them, he used to beat
her. To perform second marriage, he burnt her. The evidence of PW5, the
XII ACMM, who recorded the dying declaration on 08.07.2011 marked as
Ex.P2 would disclose that she had taken all the necessary precautions in
recording the dying declaration, obtained the certificates of the duty doctor
about the condition of the declarant before recording the dying declaration as
well as after recording the dying declaration that she was in a fit state of mind to
give her statement and after putting some preliminary questions and
ascertaining the mental condition of the declarant and on satisfying herself,
recorded the statement. The witness also stated that as the victim was unable to
put her signature due to pain on her hand due to burn injuries, she obtained the
left thumb impression of the declarant. She also stated that except she and the
duty doctor, no others were present at the time of recording the statement.
19.    Another dying declaration was recorded by the XI ACMM, Secunderabad
on 18.07.2011 at 00:45hrs. The said witness was examined as PW11 and he
stated that on the requisition given by the SI of Police, PS, Begumpet, he
proceeded to the Gandhi Hospital, Secunderabad and recorded the dying
declaration of the deceased. His evidence would also disclose that he had also
taken all precautions in recording the dying declaration. In the said declaration,
the victim stated that her husband came in drunken condition and poured
kerosene on her, he was unnecessarily abusing her since she had not given birth
to children, the doors were broke open by the outsiders and her mother-in-law
poured water and bet her with kettle (binde) on her loin, her father-in-law also
used to abuse her in drunken condition daily, her parents gave 6 tulas of gold
which was taken away by her husband by beating her and gave the same to her
in-laws, who pledged the said gold and even though she was asking they were
not getting it released, the elder sister of her mother-in-law and the husband of
the elder sister of her mother-in-law also instigate her parents-in-law to abuse
her. The old woman who was staying by the side of their house also used to
create quarrels between her and her husband. The said statement was marked as
Ex.P7.    PW11 stated that he had taken the right thumb impression of the
declarant on each page of the statement. He also obtained the endorsement of
the duty doctor with regard to the fitness of the declarant prior to and after
recording the statement. He also stated that except the witness, duty doctor and
the victim no one were present at the time of recording the statement. The
mother of the declarant by name Smt. Leela Mallamma was present at the bed
of declarant but he sent her away and recorded the statement in her absence.
20.    Thus, though the trial court recorded that PWs.5 and 11 followed the
requisite procedure and had taken all the precautions while recording the
statements, as there were improvements in the dying declarations considered
that the said dying declarations were given by the declarant on tutoring and the
allegations made against A2 to A5 were later development. The trial court also
observed that as the deceased had not stated in her earlier statements recorded
by the Head Constable and the SI about A1 pouring kerosene on her and set her
ablaze but stated that she herself poured kerosene and set her ablaze, considered
that the later version of her stated before the Magistrates PWs 5 and 11 was also
an afterthought and the said version did not repose any confidence.
21.      The trial court relied upon the judgment of the Hon’ble Apex Court in
Smt. Kamala v. State of Punjab1 wherein it was held that:
"if there were more than one dying declaration they should be consistent
particularly in material particulars".
22.      The trial court also relied upon the judgment of the AP High Court in
Chinnapattu Naga V. State of Andhra Pradesh2 where in it was held that:
"the oral dying declaration appeared to be the first in time and there was a
chance for the interested witnesses to tutor the deceased. Therefore, the
subsequent dying declarations involving the accused in the crime appeared
to be an afterthought”.
23.      The trial court also recorded the decision of the Division Bench of the AP
High Court in Public Prosecutor Hyderabad v. Jangili Nirmala and another3,
“when there are conflicting views in between two dying declarations,
acquittal was justified”.
24.      It also recorded the decision relied by the accused of AP High Court in
Chakiri Saidulu and others v. State of Andhra Pradesh4, wherein it was held
"The second dying declaration was definitely an improvement over the
earlier dying declaration and in the absence of any other evidence on
record corroborating the version contained in the second dying declaration,
it cannot be accepted".
25.      The trial court also relied upon the judgment cited by the learned counsel
for the accused, of AP High Court in Kadapa Subba Ranga Swamy @ Subba
v. State of Andhra Pradesh5 wherein it was held that:
"It was settled principle of law that if a dying declaration was true and
voluntary, it can be relied upon. But when a doubt or suspicion arises
regarding the statement of the deceased viz., dying declaration, it was not
safe to rely on such dying declaration to base the conviction of the accused".
26.      The trial court observed that in view of the vital discrepancies in the
dying declarations, the same could not be accepted. In the first two dying
declarations i.e., Exs.P4 and P11, the declarant had taken a stand that she
poured kerosene on herself and lit fire, she also stated in Ex.P11 that it was her
husband A1, who put off the fire and admitted her in the hospital, but in the
later dying declarations Exs.P2 and P7, the deceased developed the version as if
A1 poured kerosene and lit fire to her and A2 to A5 used to harass her.
Considering the time gap in recording the subsequent dying declarations, the
trial court opined that there was development about the involvement of A2 to
27.    But however considering that the presence of A1 was mentioned in the
earlier statements made by the declarant and though there were developments in
the subsequent statements, the deceased was specific in both Exs.P4 and P11
that A1 tried to beat her and used most vulgar language against her and the
conduct of A1 in abusing the deceased would attract the provisions of Section
498-A IPC which would amount to cruelty defined in the Section driving the
deceased to commit suicide, the trial court found A1 guilty for the offence under
28.    This Court does not find any illegality in the observation of the trial court
in coming to the conclusion of the guilt of A1 for the offence under Section
498-A IPC. The trial court had also taken into consideration the contention of
the defence counsel with regard to the delay in recording the 161 Cr.P.C.
statements of PWs 1 to 3 and observed that the evidence of PWs 1 to 3 was not
considered with regard to the harassment by A1 to A5 for dowry as such the
delay in recording their statements would not cause any prejudice to A1 since
his case was appreciated considering Exs.P4 and P11 and other circumstances.
29.    The contention of the learned counsel for the appellant was that Exs.P4
and P11 were also not consistent with each other and the said statements would
not attract the ingredients of Section 498-A IPC. Though there were some
contradictions in both these statements, wherein in Ex.P4 it was stated by the
deceased that when she questioned A1 about not getting the provisions he came
on to beat her and abused her in filthy language, whereas in Ex.P11 she stated
about A1 forced her to bring household articles from her parents' house and
tried to beat her and used most vulgar language against her and there was also
an improvement in the statement recorded under Ex.P11 about A1 trying to
extinguish the flames and that it was he, who shifted her to Gandhi Hospital for
treatment.    Both these statements are consistent with regard to the quarrel
ensued between the deceased and A1 and that he came in drunken condition,
abused her and came upon to beat her. Unable to bear the same, she poured
kerosene oil from the stove on her body and set herself ablaze, which is
sufficient to attract the ingredients of Section 498-A IPC. Even after removing
the exaggerations, the statement of the deceased in Exs.P4 and P11 is consistent
with regard to the harassment and cruelty met by her in the hands of A1 which
drove her to commit suicide. As such, this Court does not find any illegality or
impropriety in the judgment of the trial court in coming to the conclusion about
the guilt of the Accused No.1 for the offence under Section 498-A IPC. The
sentence imposed by the trial court is also very meager.         The trial court
sentenced A1 to rigorous imprisonment for a period of one year only and
imposed fine of Rs.1,000/-. This Court does not find any necessity to interfere
with the sentence inflicted against A1 for the offence under Section 498-A IPC.
30.    Hence, the Criminal Appeal is dismissed confirming the conviction and
sentence inflicted against the Appellant-A1 vide judgment dated 05.08.2013
passed in S.C.No.479 of 2012 by the Special Judge for trial of Offences under
SC and ST (POA) Act cum VI Additional Metropolitan Sessions Judge,
Secunderabad for the offence under Section 498-A IPC. The bail granted to the
Appellant-A1 shall stand cancelled. The appellant-A1 is directed to surrender
before the court below within fifteen (15) days from the date of this order and in
case he failed to do so, the court below is directed to take steps in accordance
with law to take him into custody.
Miscellaneous applications pending, if any, shall stand closed.