offences under Sections 7, 12, 13(1)(d) and 13(2) of the Prevention of
3       Mr.Vyom Shah, learned counsel for the petitioner, would submit
that against the order of conviction, the petitioner has filed Criminal
Appeal No. 1087 of 2019, wherein, the execution of the sentence has
been suspended. The other ground raised by Mr.Shah, learned counsel, is
that the services of the petitioner could not have been terminated despite
such conviction without a show cause notice.
4       Mr.Kurven Desai, learned Assistant Government Pleader for the
State, would submit that it is a settled proposition of law that once the
petitioner has been convicted, termination has to follow without the
procedure of show cause notice.
5       Considering the decisions of this Court, specially the one relied by
Mr.Shah, learned counsel in Special Civil Application No.9743 of 2020
dated 07.10.2020, which took into consideration the decision of the Full
Bench in the case of V.D.Vaghela vs. G.C.Raiger, Deputy IGP, reported
in 1993 (2) GLH 1005, it is borne out that termination of service without
issuance of a notice prior to the order and without considering the reply
of the petitioner was bad.
6       The decision rendered by this Court in Special Civil Application
“7. It would be relevant to extract the entire relevant discussion
from judgment in Budhsinh Jaisinh Patel (supra) to become part of
the reasoning of this order applicable to the present petitioner.
"4. Assailing the impugned order, primarily and principally on the
ground of non-observance of principles of natural justice that
prior notice was not given before passing the order of the
dismissal, learned advocate for the petitioner Mr.Gautam Joshi
pressed into service decision of the Division Bench of this Court in
Ahmadkhan Inayatkhan v. District Superintendent of Police,
Banaskantha [1989 (2) GLR 1301]. Therein a government servant
who was convicted by the criminal court and whose appeal against
the conviction was pending in the High Court, came to be
dismissed on the basis of the conviction. The dismissal did not
precede with the issuance of notice. The Court held that failure to
give notice vitiated the dismissal.
4.1.On the other hand, learned Assistant Government Pleader
Mr.K.M. Antani harped on the decision of this Court in H.N. Rao
v. State of Gujarat [2000(3) GLH 358]. On the basis of this
decision, it was submitted that the Court in terms held that notice
was not necessary before passing order of dismissal upon the event
of conviction. It was submitted that the decisions which were relied
on by this Court in Ahmadkhan Inayatkhan (supra) were
considered and contrary view was taken in H.N. Rao (supra)
which is required to be followed.
4.2 The decision of the Supreme Court in Union of India v. V.K.
Bhaskar [(1997) 11 SCC 383] was relied on, in which it was held
that dismissal from service on the ground of conduct which led to
conviction on a criminal charge could be passed, for which
pendency of an appeal against conviction was no bar. Learned
Assistant Government Pleader proceeded to refer to the decision of
the Full Bench of this Court in V.D. Vaghela v. G.C. Raiger,
Deputy IPG [1993 (2) GLH 1005] in which the meaning and
import of the word 'conviction' was highlighted in the context of
clause (a) of Second Proviso to Article 311(2) of the Constitution,
to lay down that the conviction is arrived at when recorded by the
competent criminal court in the first instance.
5 The proposition of law in Ahmadkhan Inayatkhan (supra) relied
on behalf of the petitioner and what is held in H.N. Rao (supra)
stand in opposite.
5.1 However, the law has developed and travelled farther, which is
to be learnt and gathered from decision of the Apex Court in
Union of India v. Sunil Kumar Sarkar [(2001) 3 SCC 414]. It
would be worthwhile to advert to analyse. In Kiritkumar D. Vyas v.
State of Gujarat [1982 (2) GLR 79] this Court held, "mere
conviction, therefore cannot be utilised for passing an order of
dismissal blindfoldedly without hearing the delinquent on the
question of sentence. Needless to add that this would be so even in
case where the disciplinary authority exercises powers under Rule
14 of the Gujarat Civil Services (Discipline and Appeal) Rules.".
Kiritkumar D. Vyas (supra) was a Division Bench judgment.
Relying on the same in a similar set of facts, learned Single Judge
of this Court in Shankabhai Naginbhai Patel being Special Civil
Application No.2349 of 1998 set aside the order removing the
petitioner of that petition keeping it open for the respondent to
pass fresh order after giving opportunity.
5.1.1 The Division Bench in Ahmadkhan Inayatkhan (supra) relied
on the decision in Kiritkumar D. Vyas (supra) as well as another
decision also of this Court in Laxman Waghgimal v. K.N. Sharma,
D.S.P., Kutch [1985 GLH (UJ-28) 20]. On the basis of the said
decisions, in Ahmadkhan Inayatkhan (supra) it was ruled in
"In this decision, this Court held that even though this rule
does not contemplate giving of the notice, it must be read
into this rule that notice should be given to satisfy the
5.1.2 Since in H.N. Rao (supra), a view was taken that show- cause
notice was not necessary, in paragraphs 6 adn 7 of the judgment,
the Court referred to the decisions taking contrary view including
Shankabhai Naginbhai Ptael (supra) and Kiritkumar D. Vyas
(supra) to hold that they did not take the correct view.
5.2 Now proceeding to look at The Supreme Court decision in
Sunil Kumar Sarkar (supra), it dealt with the case of a delinquent
undergoing sentence of imprisonment. The respondent was found
guilty and sentenced under the General Court Martial to rigorous
imprisonment for six years under the Army Act. The High Court
found fault with the order of dismissal passed by the disciplinary
authority on the ground that the same was solely based on
conviction suffered by the respondent in the Court Martial
proceedings. It was held by the High Court that the disciplinary
authority had a predetermined mind when it passed the order of
dismissal.
5.2.1 In the context of the aforesaid facts the Supreme Court held,
"This is a summary procedure provided to take disciplinary action
against a government servant who is already convicted in a
criminal proceeding. The very foundation of imposing punishment
under Rule 19 is that there should be a prior conviction on a
criminal charge. Therefore, the question of having a
predetermined mind does not arise in such cases. All that a
disciplinary authority is expected to do under Rule 19 is to be
satisfied that the officer concerned has been convicted of a
criminal charge and has been given a show-cause notice and reply
to such show- cause notice, if any, should be properly considered
before making any order under this Rule. Of course, it will have to
bear in mind the gravity of the conviction suffered by the
government servant in the criminal proceedings before passing any
order under Rule 19 to maintain the proportionality of punishment.
In the instant case, the disciplinary authority has followed the
procedure laid down in Rule 19, hence, it cannot be said that the
disciplinary authority had any predetermined mind when it passed
the order of dismissal." (Para 8) It is thus considered an essential
requirement that before disciplinary authority passed the order of
dismissal against the respondent who was convicted of criminal
charge to give show- cause notice and to consider the reply given
to the show-cause notice. The Supreme Court held that at that
stage the question of having predetermined mind did not arise in
such cases. In other words, the Court considered the procedure of
giving notice and consider defence of the convict at that stage to be
the meaningful exercise. Dispensation of notice before taking
action of dismissal against the convicted person which is based on
the theory of empty formality was found not tenable in law. The
authority could not have judged at the stage of taking the action of
dismissal that the person to be dismissed was not prejudiced since
there was already a conviction recorded against him. The stage to
apply the test of prejudice would arrive at a subsequent point of
time. The requirement of giving notice and appreciating the reply
of the person concerned was not viewed as an empty formality but
a condition precedent before passing the order of dismissal under
the Rule. The observance of natural justice to this extent was
treated as pre-requisite in law.
6 In view of the aforesaid decision in Sunil Kumar Sarkar (supra)
and the ratio thereof, the decisions of this Court in H.N. Rao
(supra) and those judgments taking the view that prior notice is not
necessary, no more stand to be the good law. The ratio in Sunil
Kumar Sarka (supra) would prevail and the proposition of law laid
down by this Court in Kiritkumar D. Vyas (supra), Shankabhai
Naginbhai Patel (supra) as well as in Ahmadkhan Inayatkhan
(supra) stand revived to be the law holding the field to be applied.
6.1 In the aforesaid view, the impugned action taken against the
petitioner to terminate his service without issuance of notice prior
to the order and without considering his reply is illegal. Therefore,
order dated 24th February, 2017 passed by respondent No.3-
District Superintendent of Police, Dahod as well as further orders
dated 25th May, 2017 passed by the Director General of Police,
Panchmahals, Godhra Range, Godhra dismissing the appeal and
the order of the revisional authority-respondent No.1 Director
General and Inspector General of Police further dismissing the
Revision Application, cannot sustain and they are herewith set
8. In view of above discussion and reasons, the impugned orders of
termination of the service of the petitioner are quashed ad set
aside and the petitioner shall be entitled to be reinstated in service
on his original post with all consequential benefits and back
wages. The reinstatement to the petitioner shall be granted within
15 days from the date of receipt of this order and the petitioner
shall be paid consequential benefits including the back wages
arising to be paid by virtue of this order, within four weeks from
the date of his reinstatement.”
7       In view of the discussion above, the petition is allowed. The order
of termination dated 04.06.2019 is quashed and set aside and the
petitioner shall be reinstated in service on his original post with all
consequential benefits and backwages. Reinstatement shall be granted
within a period of four weeks from the date of receipt of copy of this
order and the consequential benefits to be paid within two weeks
It is clarified that the respondent authorities are not precluded from
passing appropriate order afresh in accordance with law after giving
opportunity of hearing to the petitioner and considering the reply which
may be filed. Rule is made absolute accordingly with no orders as to