The appellant who is the maternal uncle of the
prosecutrix   belongs   to  Valayar   community,   which  is  a
most backward community in the State of Tamilnadu.           He
works   as  a  woodcutter    on  daily   wages  in   a  private
factory. FIR was registered against him for committing
rape under Sections 5(j)(ii)read with Section 6, 5(I)
read with Section 6 and 5(n) read with Section 6 of
Protection of Child from Sexual Offences (POCSO) Act,
2012.    He was convicted after trial for committing the
said    offences    and   sentenced    to   undergo    rigorous
Digitally signed by
Reason:                  imprisonment for a period of 10 years       by  the   Sessions
Judge, Fast Track Mahila Court, Tiruppur on 31.10.2018.
The High Court, by an order dated 13.02.2019, upheld the
conviction    and   sentence.     Aggrieved    thereby,    the
appellant has filed this appeal.
Mr.  M.P.Parthiban,    learned   counsel  appearing
for the appellant, submitted that allegation against him
was that he had physical relations with the prosecutrix
on the promise of marrying her.         He stated that, in
fact,  he  married   the  prosecutrix    and  they   have  two
The appellant submitted that this Court should
exercise its power under Article 142 of the Constitution
and ought to do complete justice and it could not be in
the interest of justice to disturb the family life of
the appellant and the prosecutrix.
After hearing the matter for some time on 08 th
March, 2022, we directed the District Judge to record
the  statement   of  the   prosecutrix    about  her   present
status.    The   statement   of  the  prosecutrix    has  been
placed on record in which she has categorically stated
that she has two children and they are being taken care
of by the appellant and she is leading a happy married
Dr.   Joseph   Aristotle   S.,   learned   counsel
appearing for the State, opposed the grant of any relief
to the appellant on the ground that the prosecutrix was
aged 14 years on the date of the offence and gave birth
to the first child when she was 15 years and second
child was born when she was 17 years. He argued that the
marriage between the appellant and the prosecutrix is
not legal.   He expressed his apprehension that the said
marriage  might    be   only  for    the  purpose   of  escaping
punishment and there is no guarantee that the appellant
will take care of the prosecutrix and the children after
this Court grants relief to him.
In   the   peculiar   facts    and   circumstances  of
this  case,   we   are   of  the    considered   view  that  the
conviction and sentence of the appellant who is maternal
uncle of the prosecutrix deserves to be set aside in
view of the subsequent events that have been brought to
the notice of this Court.          This Court cannot shut its
eyes to the ground reality and disturb the happy family
life of the appellant and the prosecutrix. We have been
informed about the custom in Tamilnadu of the marriage
of a girl with the maternal uncle.
For   the    aforesaid     mentioned   reasons,    the
conviction and sentence of the appellant is set aside in
the peculiar facts of the case and shall not be treated
as a precedent. The appeal is accordingly, disposed of.
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
In case, the appellant does not take proper
care of the prosecutrix, she or the State on behalf of
the prosecutrix can move this Court for modification of
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Crl.)     No(s).9698/2019
(Arising out of impugned final judgment and order dated 13-02-2019
in CRLA No. 12/2019 passed by the High Court Of Judicature At
(With applns for exemption from filing O.T., permission to file
additional documents/facts/annexures)
Date : 09-05-2022 These matters were called on for hearing today.
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
Leave granted.
The appeal is disposed of in terms of the signed
order. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed
(Signed order is placed on the file)