1)     By this common judgment, we propose to decide two
Letters     Patent      Appeals      filed   against       two   separate
judgments dated 18th October, 2022, passed by learned
Writ     Court       in    WP(C)      No.2269/2022           and     WP(C)
No.2270/2022. In both these cases common question of
law which arose for consideration is whether for the
purpose of taking possession of the property attached
under Section 5 or frozen under sub-section 1-A of Section
17 of the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002
(hereinafter referred to as PMLA), the Director or any other
officer authorized by him has to wait for the expiry of the
period of limitation for filing appeal against the attachment
order that has been confirmed in terms of sub-section (3)
of Section 8 of the PMLA for taking its possession in terms
of Section 8(4) of the PMLA.
2)     The learned Writ Court has vide the impugned
judgments answered the aforesaid question in negative by
holding that the Director or the authorized officer is not
bound to wait till the expiry of the period of limitation for
filing appeal for the purpose of taking action in terms of
Section 8(4) of the PMLA.
3)     Before adverting to the rival contentions advanced by
learned counsel for the parties, it would be apt to give a
brief background of the facts leading to the filing of the
instant appeal.
4)     It    appears        that the  respondents     initiated
investigation under the provisions of the PMLA against
Shri Rahul Grover and others on the basis of two FIRs
bearing       Nos.RCCHG0512018S006         and    007    dated
16.10.2018, registered by the Special Crime Branch,
Central Bureau of Investigation, Chandigarh. These FIRs
pertain to offences under Section 3 and 4 of the Arms Act
read with Section 5(2) of the Jammu and Kashmir
Prevention of Corruption Act and Section 120-B of RPC.
During the investigation, it came to the fore that the
appellants herein were found to have indulged in issuance
and renewal of arms licences in contravention of the
provisions of the Arms Act in lieu of payment of monetary
considerations to the Government         employees. After
analyzing the bank accounts of both the appellants, it was
found that they had purchased immovable property in the
form of 05 marls of land each at Village Chinoor, Jammu.
The source of payments used for purchasing the land and
raising construction over the land, according to the
respondents, is the illegal funds which they had received
in lieu of issuance of arms licences.
5)     A provisional attachment order of the aforesaid two
properties was issued by the competent authority i.e.,
Deputy Director Enforcement Directorate, Jammu on 31st
March, 2022. The said attachment order was confirmed by
the competent authority in terms of its order dated 16th
September, 2022. After passing of the aforesaid order of
confirmation of provisional attachment in terms of Section
8(3) of the PMLA by the Adjudicating Authority, notice
dated 23.09.2022 was issued by the Assistant Director,
Directorate of Enforcement, Jammu, in exercise of its
powers under Section 8(4) of the PMLA, whereby the
appellants were directed to vacate the attached properties
within ten days of receipt of the notice. Two separate
notices were issued to the appellants and the same
became subject matter of challenge before the Writ Court
by way of two separate writ petitions, particulars whereof
have been given hereinbefore. As already noted, the
learned Writ Court dismissed both the writ petitions and
repelled the challenge thrown to the impugned notices.
The judgments passed by the Writ Court in the aforesaid
two writ petitions are under challenge before us.
6)     We have heard learned counsel for the parties and
perused the impugned judgment passed by the Writ Court,
the grounds of appeal and the record of the case.
7)     As already noted, the only question which is under
consideration before us is whether it was open to the
authorized officer to issue the impugned notices of eviction
against the appellants without waiting for the expiry of
period of limitation for filing appeal against the order of
attachment passed in terms of Section 8(3) of PMLA.
8)     The learned counsel for the appellants has argued
that if the appellants are evicted from the attached
properties even before the consideration of their appeal by
the appellate authority, the statutory right of appeal given
to them in terms of Section 26 of the PMLA would become
redundant. It has been further argued that the Supreme
Court has, in the case of Vijay Mandal Choudhary & Ors.
Vs, Union of India & Ors.
testing     the vires of sub-section (4) of Section 8 of the
PMLA, clearly laid down that taking possession of the
property before a formal order of confiscation is passed,
merely on the basis of confirmation of provisional
attachment order, should be an exception and not a rule.
It is urged that there were no exceptional circumstances
prevailing in the instant case, as such, taking of action in
terms of Section 8(4) of the PMLA by the respondents
cannot be countenanced in law.
9)     There is no dispute to the legal position that the
Supreme Court in Vijay Mandal Choudhary’s               case
(supra) has upheld the vires of the provisions contain in
Section 8(4) of the PMLA. The said provision authorizes the
Director or any other officer to take possession of the
property regarding which provisional order of attachment
has been confirmed. As per the Rule 5(2) of the Prevention
of Money Laundering (Taking Possession of Attached or
Frozen       Properties     Confirmed  by   the   Adjudicating
Authority),Rules, 2013 (hereinafter referred to as the Rules
of 2013), once the attachment of immovable property has
been confirmed by the Adjudicating Authority and it is
found to be in possession of the owner, the authorized
officer has to issue a notice of eviction of ten days so as to
prevent the person from enjoying such property and if
such person does not vacate the property within the
stipulated time, he has to be evicted by taking possession
thereof. Section 26 of the PMLA gives a right of appeal to
the aggrieved person against an order made by the
Adjudicating Authority and the said appeal has to be filed
within a period of 45 days from the date a copy of the order
is received by the aggrieved person.
10)    A conjoint reading of all these three provisions brings
to the fore that while an aggrieved person has a right of
appeal against the order of attachment passed by the
Adjudicating Authority which the aggrieved person has to
avail within 45 days of receipt of order of attachment, the
authorized officer or the Director has the jurisdiction to
forthwith take possession of the property attached. The
expression “forthwith” is of great significance, inasmuch
as it gives power to the Director or authorized officer to
immediately proceed against the person whose property
has been attached by virtue of order of Adjudicating
Authority. The jurisdiction to proceed under Section 8(4)
of the PMLA would come into play immediately upon
passing of the order of attachment by the Adjudicating
Authority. There is no scope to interpret the provisions
contained in Section 8(4) and Section 26 of the PMLA and
Rule 5(2) of the Rules of 2013 to hold that for taking action
under Section 8(4) of the PMLA, the authorized officer has
to await the expiry of period of limitation i.e., 45 days.
11)    The order of confirmation of attachment passed by
the Adjudicating Authority is just like a decree of a civil
court which becomes executable the moment it is drawn.
Just like execution of a decree of civil court is not to await
the period of limitation for filing an appeal before the
appellate court, similarly, an order passed under Section
8(3) of the PMLA is to be acted upon immediately and it
cannot await the expiry of period of limitation for filing
appeal against the said order. Thus, the respondents were
well within their powers to issue the impugned notice,
which is in tune with the legal position as discernible from
the provisions contained in Sections 8 and 26 of the PMLA
read with Rule 5(2) of the Rules of 2013.
12)    Next it has been contended by learned counsel for the
appellants that as per the ratio laid down by the Supreme
Court in Vijay Mandal Choudhary’s case, resort to action
under Section 8(4) of the PMLA should be only by way of
an exception and not as a rule. There can be no dispute to
the legal position in this regard, as has been clearly spelled
out by the Supreme Court in the aforesaid case but the
question whether a particular case is of exceptional nature
or not, can be determined only by the appellate authority
at the time of considering the merits of the appeal and not
by this Court in exercise of its writ jurisdiction. If at all the
appellants apprehend an immediate action against them
by the respondents, which apprehension is certainly borne
out from the record, it is open to them to immediately
approach the appellate authority and persuade the said
authority to stay the impugned order of attachment. They
cannot bypass the remedy of appeal by invoking the writ
jurisdiction of this Court simply by laying challenge to the
proceedings which are essentially offshoot of the order
passed by the Adjudicating Authority, which is appealable
under Section 26 of the PMLA.
13)    For the foregoing reasons, we do not find any ground
to interfere in the impugned judgments passed by the
learned Writ Court. The same are well-reasoned and lucid
and deserve to be upheld. The appeals lack merit and are,
accordingly, dismissed
Whether the order is speaking:      Yes/No
Whether the order is reportable:    Yes/No