Petitioner –Bank is grieving before the Writ Court
against non-consideration of its representation dated
25.07.2022 a copy whereof avails at Annexure-G wherein
it has requested the 2nd Respondent – SLAO to deposit the
compensation     amount   to   the  loan   account   of  3rd
Respondent – borrower, toward repayment that was
secured by the mortgage of the property in acquisition.
Learned counsel for the Petitioner vehemently argues that
mortgage is one of the five traditional modes of transfer
recognized by the provisions of the Transfer of Property
Act, 1882 and therefore, his client has a vested interest in
the subject property, which entitles it to the payment of
compensation for its appropriation to loan account of the
borrower.      She  expresses    anguish  against  the   2nd
WP No. 18206 of 2022
Respondent in not considering her client’s Representation
in terms of Sections 64 & 73            of the Right to Fair
Compensation and        Transparency in Land      Acquisition,
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013.
2.    After service of notice, the Respondent Nos. 1 &
2 are represented by the learned AGA and the 3rd
Respondent – borrower who happens to be the mortgager,
has chosen to remain unrepresented despite service of
notice; however, that will not deter the Court from
adjudging the cause brought before it, in accordance with
law.     Learned AGA contends that the Petitioner can
approach the Civil Court for the redressal of its grievance
since disputable fact matrix emanates from the case
papers, writ remedy not being much suitable. Having so
contended, he now fairly agrees to instruct his clients to
look into the grievance of the Petitioner in accordance with
law, should a reasonable timeline be prescribed and legal
norms be stated.
3.    Having heard the learned counsel for the parties
and having perused the Petition papers, this Court is
inclined to grant indulgence in the matter as under and for
the following reasons:
a) Petitioner apparently is a scheduled Bank and the
3rd Respondent happens to be its borrower.           He has
availed certain sum of money as loan having mortgaged
the   subject   land  vide   registered   instrument  dated
28.09.2017 for securing the repayment of said loan. The
mortgaged land having been acquired, the Petitioner –
Bank had made a representation requesting the SLAO to
remit the compensation amount to the loan account of the
3rd Respondent, which has        since been declared NPA.
Except   some    exchange   of   notices,  nothing concrete
appears to have been done in the matter from the side of
b)    It is pertinent to mention that where the
mortgaged property has been acquired, the amended
provisions of Section 73 of the Transfer of Property Act
WP No. 18206 of 2022
1882 Act becomes invokable. Subsections (2) & (3) of this
Section read as under:
“(2) Where the mortgaged property or any
part thereof or any interest is acquired under the
Land acquisition Act, 1894, or any other
enactment or the time being in force governing
the compulsory acquisition of immovable
property, the mortgagee shall be entitled to
claim payment of mortgage money, in whole or
in part, out of the amount due to mortgagor as
compensation.
(3)   Such claim shall prevail against all
other claims except those of prior encumbrances
and may be enforced notwithstanding that the
principal money on the mortgage has not
become due.”
This section is an instance of incorporation application of
the   “doctrine   of substituted   security”,  viz that   the
mortgagee is, for the purpose of his security, entitled in
lieu of only to the mortgaged property, to anything that is
substituted for it. If, by a process of law or by a
compelling situation sanctioned by law, the security given
to a creditor for the repayment of debt is changed into
something other than the property, the mortgagee gets
rights over the substituted security namely, the changed
one i.e., the compensation or the like.
WP No. 18206 of 2022
c) The doctrine of substituted security as an applied
idea to protect the interest of secured creditors was
treated    by   the   Privy  Council  nine  decades   ago   in
MOHAMMAD AFZAL vs ABDUL RAHMAN, AIR 1932 PC 235,
with the following observations:
“Their Lordships are of opinion that where one of
two or more co-sharers mortgages their
undivided shares in some of the properties held
jointly by them, the mortgagee takes the
security subject to the right of the other co-
sharers to enforce a partition and thereby, to
convert what was an undivided share of the
whole into a defined portion held in severalty. If
the mortgage therefore, is followed by a
partition, and the mortgaged properties are
allotted to the other co-sharers, they take those
properties, in the absence of fraud, free from the
mortgage, and the mortgagee can proceed only
against the properties allotted to the mortgagor
in substitution of his undivided share...”
d) Learned counsel for the Petitioner is more than
justified in heavily banking upon the provisions of Section
64 of the 2013 Act to contend that her client being the
person interested has sent a Representation in terms of
which the SLAO ought to have referred the dispute to the
jurisdictional court, for adjudication since the mortgage is
WP No. 18206 of 2022
shifted to the compensation in lieu of the mortgaged
property.    Even Section 76 of the 2013 Act from which
support can be drawn by the Petitioner reads as under:
“76. Dispute as to apportionment: When the
amount of compensation has been settled, if any
dispute arises as to the apportionment of the
same or any part thereof, or as to the persons to
whom the same or any part thereof is payable,
the Collector may refer such disputes to the
It hardly needs to be stated that this provision is
substantially texted on par with Section 30 of the erstwhile
e) The State Government being the appropriate
Government vide Notification dated 10.01.2017 issued
under Section 51 of the Act has designated the I Additional
District Judge of every District as & to be the “Authority”
inter alia for the adjudication of disputes of the kind. That
being the position, the SLAO ought to have referred the
matter to the said Judge for adjudication, especially when
Section 63 of the Act excludes the jurisdiction of ordinary
Civil Courts.      This having not been done, there is
WP No. 18206 of 2022
justiciable   right  availing  to  the  Petitioner  to   seek
appropriate writ for its enforcement. In matters like this,
driving the mortgagee to the ordinary Civil Court would
only amount to the Writ Court shirking its responsibility to
do justice in plain cases of the kind.
In   the   above  circumstances,   this  Writ   Petition
succeeds;    a   Writ  of   Mandamus   issues    to  the   2nd
Respondent – SLAO to refer the claim of Petitioner – Bank
forthwith to the Court of I Additional District Judge,
Chitradurga, with all necessary papers, with intimation to
On such reference being made, the Court after notice
to all the stakeholders, shall adjudge the claim of
Petitioner-Bank, within an outer limit of one year .        All
contentions of the parties are kept open.
Till the Reference is decided, the compensation
amount shall be kept in the interest earning scheme of
WP No. 18206 of 2022
some Nationalized Bank as a short time deposit of one
year and that, the compensation shall follow its outcome.
Now, no costs.