The Allahabad High Court on Friday observed that it is the bounded duty of the Peshkars/ Court Readers to write the Court order in a legible manner, failing which, it may be treated as misconduct. This assertion came from the Bench of Justice Rajesh Singh Chauhan while perusing some of the orders in a criminal case and noting that they were written in too bad handwriting to be...
The Allahabad High Court on Friday observed that it is the bounded duty of the Peshkars/ Court Readers to write the Court order in a legible manner, failing which, it may be treated as misconduct. 
This assertion came from the Bench of Justice Rajesh Singh Chauhan while perusing some of the orders in a criminal case and noting that they were written in too bad handwriting to be read properly.
In view of this, the District Judges across the State of Uttar Pradesh were directed by the High Court to issue standing directions to the Peshkars/Readers, who write the order-sheet, to the effect that the order should be written in a manner that can be read properly.
Essentially, the Court was dealing with a plea filed by Savita Yadav seeking expeditious trial of the case registered upon her complaint against her Sections 498-A, 323, 504 & 506 I.P.C. and Section 3/4 of Dowry Prohibition Act. As the Court persued the order sheets, the Court noted that the orders were legible.
"Since the typed copy of the order/ orders of the learned courts below is filed before the High Court or Supreme Court, therefore, that order must be legible so that it could be correctly typed and brought before the Superior Courts" the Court further observed.
Significantly, the Court sternly observed that if the order is written in the order-sheet in a manner which is unable to read, the erring official should be issued an explanation, and thereafter he may be punished departmentally, as per law.
Accordingly, the Senior Registrar of the Court was directed to circulate the order of the High Court to all the District Judges of State of U.P. for its strict compliance.
The Court ultimately allowed the instant plea and directed the CJM, Barabanki to conclude the trial of the case within 9 months.
Case title - Savita Yadav v. State Of U.P. Thru. Secy. Home. Lko & Others

Read Order

