Counsel for Applicant :- Jai Ram Singh Yadav
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Heard Sri Jai Ram Singh, learned counsel for the petitioner and
the learned Additional Government Advocate for the State.
In view of the proposed order, the notices to opposite party
Nos.2 to 8 are hereby dispensed with.
By means of this petition filed under Section 483 Cr.P.C., the
petitioner has prayed for the following relief:-
"Wherefore, it is most respectfully prayed that this Hon'ble
Court may graciously be pleased to direct the learned Chief
Judicial Magistrate, Barabanki to expeditiously decide the
Case No.3717 of 2019 (State vs. Shyamu Kumar & others)
relating to Crime No.402 of 2018, under Sections 498-A, 323,
504 & 506 I.P.C. and Section 3/4 of Dowry Prohibition Act,
preferably within a period of six months, in the interest of
Learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that the
petitioner being a complainant of the case crime in question
has been suffering a lot. Under the compelling circumstances,
she had filed an FIR in the year 2018. Since then, despite her
all co-operation for the trial proceedings the trial is not running
properly. Since the private-respondents were avoiding the trial
proceedings, therefore, the warrants were issued against them
and they surrendered before the trial court on 30.04.2019.
Presently, the date is fixed before the learned trial court for
prosecution witnesses. Therefore, he has requested that
considering the plight of the petitioner, who is a lady, the
direction for early disposal of the trial of the aforesaid criminal
case be issued to the learned court below.
I have seen the certified copy of the order-sheet, which has been
enclosed with the petition, and find that some of the orders have
been written in too bad hand writing to read properly. As a
matter of fact, some orders, more particularly the order dated
15.01.2021, cannot be read.
Therefore, the District Judge concerned is directed to issue
standing directions to the Peshkars/Readers, who write the
order-sheet, to the effect that the order should be written in a
manner those can be read properly. Since the typed copy of the
order/ orders of the learned courts below is filed before the
High Court or Supreme Court, therefore, that order must be
legible so that it could be correctly typed and brought before the
Superior Courts. There must be the bounded duty of the
Peshkars/ Readers to write down the order in a legible manner,
failing which, it may be treated as misconduct. Therefore, if the
order is written in the order-sheet in a manner which is unable
to read, the erring official should be issued explanation and
thereafter he may be punished departmentally, as per law. Such
directions are issued not only for the District Judge, Barabanki
but for all the District Judges of the State of U.P. to issue such
directions in terms of the aforesaid order.
The Senior Registrar of this Court shall circulate this order to
all the District Judges of State of U.P. including the District-
Judge, Barabanki for its strict compliance.
So far as the prayer of the present case is concerned, I hereby
dispose of this petition finally at the admission stage directing
the learned trial court i.e. the Chief Judicial Magistrate,
Barabanki to expedite the proceedings and conclude the trial of
Case No.3717 of 2019 (State vs. Shyamu Kumar & others)
relating to Case Crime No.402 of 2018, under Sections 498-A,
323, 504 & 506 I.P.C. and Section 3/4 of Dowry Prohibition Act
with expedition preferably within a period of nine months from
the date of receipt of a certified/ computerized copy of this