The  petitioners,     who   are   the   accused   in
Crime No. 734 of 2017 of Kodungallur Police Station,
Thrissur        District     registered    for   the    offences
punishable under Sections 366A, 376 and 34 of Indian
Penal       Code  and   Section    4   read   with   Section   3,
Section 6 read with Section 5 and Section 17 read
with Section 16 of the Protection of Children from
Sexual        Offences    Act,    2002,     have    filed    this
application        under    Section    482   of  the    Code   of
Criminal Procedure          to quash    the FIR,      the  final
report submitted by the Investigating Officer and
its further proceedings now pending as S.C. No. 836
of     2020    before   the   1st    Additional    District   and
2. Briefly stated the facts as emerge from
the records are that on 23.03.2017 at 12.30 p.m. the
petitioners/accused have procured the victim, who is
aged only 17 years, from her lawful custody and took
her forcibly to the rental house of the 2 nd accused
and the 1st accused committed rape on her.        The 2nd
accused, who is a child in conflict with law also
abetted the 1st accused to commit rape on her after
procuring her with the 1st accused      and thereby they
have committed the aforesaid offences.
3.  The learned counsel has contended that
they have not committed any offence as alleged by
the prosecution and now the entire matter has been
settled between the parties and the victim does not
intend      to  proceed  with   the   case  against  the
petitioners.      An  affidavit has also   been sworn to
by her, stating that      the 1st petitioner has married
her under the Special Marriage Act on 08.12.2020 and
now they are living together as husband and wife.
Hence,       this  petition     to  quash   Annexure   A1  FIR,
Annexure A2 final report and all further proceedings
initiated in S.C. No.836 of 2017 now pending before
the      1st  Additional     District   and   Sessions   Court,
4.    Heard    the    learned   counsel   for  the
petitioners       and    the    learned   Public    Prosecutor.
Perused the records.
5.     The    offences    alleged    against   the
petitioners are under Sections            366A, 376 and 34 of
Indian Penal Code (for short IPC).              Apart from the
provisions of the IPC, they have been charged for
the offences under Sections 4 read with 3, 6 read
with 5 and 17 read with 16 of the Protection Of
Children from Sexual Offences            Act (for short POCSO
Act).         Now   this    application    is   filed   by  the
petitioner        with  a    plea    to   quash   the   entire
proceedings       initiated    against   them  exercising  the
inherent powers of this Court as the dispute has
been      settled   amicably    and  the   1st petitioner  had
married       the  victim   under    the   provisions  of  the
Special Marriage Act and they are living together.
Annexure A3 is produced as the copy of the            marriage
certificate dated 08.12.2020. As referred above            the
2nd respondent, the victim, in the affidavit stated
that she has no complaints against the petitioners
and now       she has   no intention      to proceed   against
them.       So, the question      posed for consideration is
whether the FIR registered for an offence of rape
alleged to have been committed by the 1 st petitioner
after procuring a minor girl from her lawful custody
with the 2nd petitioner, could be quashed and whether
the       consequent    criminal      proceedings    initiated
thereto, also could be be quashed in view of the
compromise arrived at between the parties exercising
power under Section 482 of Cr.P.C. The Apex Court in
a    catena   of   decisions    laid   down   the  principles,
which govern the exercise of the jurisdiction of the
Court and held        that    the inherent power      given to
the High Court under Section 482 Cr.P.C. is with the
purpose to prevent abuse of process of the court and
with the object of advancement of justice and that
the      powers under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C. is an
exception and       not the    rule which     should be    used
sparingly      with   great   caution    and   circumspection.
Here, the      main offence      alleged is     rape that   too
alleged to have been committed on a minor girl. It
is      incontrovertible     that    the    charges   levelled
against the petitioners are of serious nature. Of-
course      the 1st petitioner       claims to have married
her. Whether on that ground the criminal proceedings
are     liable   to  be  quashed    to  secure    the  ends  of
justice and to prevent the abuse of process of the
court etc, have to be analysed on the basis of the
guiding      principles      laid   down   by   the   Honourable
6.   The Apex Court in Gian Singh v. State of
Punjab ((2012) 10 SCC 303) had                 delineated     the
guidelines for and limitations on exercise of power
to      quash   criminal      proceedings    involving       non-
compoundable offences in view of compromise arrived
at between the parties.           It was held as under:
“61. The position that emerges from the above
discussion can be summarised thus: the power of the
High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or
complaint in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is
distinct  and   different   from the  power  given  to  a
criminal   court  for   compounding  the  offences under
Section 320 of the Code. Inherent power is of wide
plenitude with no statutory limitation but it has to
be exercised in accord with the guideline engrafted in
such power viz: (i) to secure the ends of justice, or
(ii) to prevent abuse of the process of any court. In
what cases power to quash the criminal proceeding or
complaint or FIR may be exercised where the offender
and the victim have settled their dispute would depend
on   the facts and circumstances of each case and no
category can be prescribed. However, before exercise
of such power, the High Court must have due regard to
the  nature  and  gravity   of  the  crime.  Heinous   and
serious offences of mental depravity or offences like
murder, rape, dacoity etc. cannot be fittingly quashed
even  though  the  victim  or  victim's  family   and  the
offender have settled the dispute. Such offences are
not private in nature and have a serious impact on
society. Similarly, any compromise between the victim
and the offender in relation to the offences under
special statutes like the Prevention of Corruption Act
or the offences committed by public servants while
working in that capacity, etc.; cannot provide for any
basis for quashing criminal proceedings involving such
offences. But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly
and predominatingly civil flavour stand on a different
footing for the purposes of quashing, particularly the
offences    arising     from   commercial,     financial,
mercantile,    civil,    partnership    or    such    like
transactions of the offences arising out of matrimony
relating to dowry, etc. or the family disputes where
the wrong is basically private or personal in nature
and the parties have resolved their entire dispute. In
this category of cases, the High Court may quash the
criminal proceedings if in its view, because of the
compromise between the offender and the victim, the
possibility   of   conviction   is  remote   and  bleak   and
continuation   of    the   criminal   case  would   put   the
accused to great oppression and prejudice and extreme
injustice would be caused to him by not quashing the
criminal case despite full and complete settlement and
compromise with the victim. In other words, the High
Court  must  consider    whether   it  would  be  unfair   or
contrary to the interest of justice to continue with
the   criminal    proceeding    or   continuation    of   the
criminal   proceeding    would   tantamount   to   abuse   of
process   of  law    despite   settlement   and   compromise
between the victim and the wrongdoer and whether to
secure the ends of justice, it is appropriate that the
criminal case is put to a end and if the answer to the
above  question(s)    is   in  the  affirmative,   the   High
Court shall be well within its jurisdiction to quash
the criminal proceeding.”
7.   In Narinder Singh and others v. State of
Punjab and another ((2014) 6 SCC 466) the Apex Court
reiterated       the    same    principles     in   the   following
"29.1.   Power conferred under Section 482 of the Code
is to be distinguished from the power which lies in the
Court to compound the offences under Section 320 of the
Code.      No doubt, under Section 482 of the Code, the High
Court has inherent power to quash the criminal proceedings
even in those cases which are not compoundable, where the
parties      have    settled    the    matter   between   themselves.
However, this power is to be exercised sparingly and with
caution.
29.2.     When the parties have reached the settlement
and     on  that    basis  petition     for  quashing   the  criminal
proceedings is filed, the guiding factor in such cases
(ii)     to prevent abuse of the process of any
court.
While exercising the power the High Court is to form an
opinion on either of the aforesaid two objectives.
29.3.    Such   a  power    is  not  be   exercised  in  those
prosecutions which involve heinous and serious offences of
mental depravity or offences like murder, rape, dacoity,
etc. Such offences are not private in nature and have a
serious impact on society. Similarly, for offences alleged
to     have    been    committed     under   special   statute   like
the Prevention of Corruption Act or the offences committed
by Public Servants while working in that capacity are not
to be quashed merely on the basis of compromise between the
victim and the offender”.
8.     In       Parbatbhai     Aahir    v.   State   of
Gujarat ((2017) 9 SCC               641), the Apex Court has
elaborately         considered     the    scope   and     ambit   of
Section       482   of   Cr.P.C.    again   and   summarized     the
"16.1.    Section 482 preserves the inherent powers of
the High Court to prevent an abuse of the process of any
court or to secure the ends of justice. The provision does
not confer new powers. It only recognises and preserves
powers which inhere in the High Court;
16.2. The invocation of the jurisdiction of the High
Court to quash a First Information Report or a criminal
proceeding      on   the  ground  that   a  settlement    has  been
arrived at between the offender and the victim is not the
same as the invocation of jurisdiction for the purpose of
compounding an offence. While compounding an offence, the
power      of   the   court  is   governed    by  the    provisions
of Section 320 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
The power to quash under Section 482 is attracted even if
the offence is non-compoundable.
16.3.    In   forming  an   opinion   whether   a   criminal
proceeding or complaint should be quashed in exercise of
its jurisdiction under Section 482, the High Court must
evaluate whether the ends of justice would justify the
exercise of the inherent power;
16.4.    While the inherent power of the High Court has
a wide ambit and plenitude it has to be exercised; (i) to
secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent an abuse of
16.5.    The decision as to whether a complaint or First
Information Report should be quashed on the ground that the
offender      and  victim  have   settled   the  dispute,  revolves
ultimately on the facts and circumstances of each case and
no exhaustive elaboration of principles can be formulated;
16.6.    In  the  exercise    of  the  power   under Section
482 and while dealing with a plea that the dispute has been
settled, the High Court must have due regard to the nature
and gravity of the offence. Heinous and serious offences
involving mental depravity or offences such as murder, rape
and    dacoity    cannot  appropriately    be  quashed  though  the
victim      or  the  family   of   the  victim   have  settled  the
dispute. Such offences are, truly speaking, not private in
nature but have a serious impact upon society. The decision
to continue with the trial in such cases is founded on the
overriding element of public interest in punishing persons
16.7.     As distinguished from serious offences, there
may     be   criminal   cases   which   have  an   overwhelming  or
predominant element of a civil dispute. They stand on a
distinct footing in so far as the exercise of the inherent
16.8. Criminal cases involving offences which arise
from     commercial,  financial,  mercantile,  partnership  or
similar transactions with an essentially civil flavour may
in appropriate situations fall for quashing where parties
16.9. In such a case, the High Court may quash the
criminal proceeding if in view of the compromise between
the disputants, the possibility of a conviction is remote
and the continuation of a criminal proceeding would cause
oppression and prejudice; and
16.10. There is yet an exception to the principle set
out     in  propositions  16.8.  and   16.9.  above.  Economic
offences involving the financial and economic well-being
of the state have implications which lie beyond the domain
of a mere dispute between private disputants. The High
Court would be justified in declining to quash where the
offender is involved in an activity akin to a financial or
economic fraud or misdemeanour. The consequences of the
act complained of upon the financial or economic system
9.   Rape is a very serious offence and          it
is doubtless that it is not an offence of private in
nature but is also an offence            towards society. It
is worse than murder as          humiliating and horrifying
experience are caused to the victim and so               it is
considered       as the    most heinous, brutal and cruel
crime against a woman.           When it is towards a child
the gravity is       all the more severe and excruciating
as it may even low self-esteem, self confidence and
dignity of the child and that the psychic effect and
impact would cause a devastating effect on the minor
and      result   in   far-reaching     consequences.      The
Special Act(POCSO Act) itself was enacted to protect
children from sexual assault and harassment. Here,
the      learned   counsel     has   no  argument   that   the
essential      ingredients    to   attract    offences   under
Sections 376 and 366A or under any of the provisions
of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences
Act are not available and that the allegations set
out     in  the   case  do   not    constitute  the  offences
alleged.       In short, the petitioners have no case
that, the case has been maliciously instituted and
they are falsely implicated with an ulterior motive
and as such no offence is made out.        But only on the
basis of the alleged settlement between the parties,
the petitioners have sought for an order to quash
the FIR as well as the final report            and further
proceedings initiated in the case, in exercise of
the jurisdiction under Section 482 Cr.P.C.         Rape is
not      only   a  very  serious    and  inhumane  offence
committed        towards the victim alone, but also it
cause very serious impact upon her relatives and the
society as a whole.       When the magnitude of the crime
is so grave and heinous as such to shock the sense
of justice, settlement between the parties and a
marriage subsequently between them are not matters
for       consideration to quash the proceedings in a
criminal case. At the risk of repetition, I would
say that as the victim is a minor and the provisions
of the special Act enacted to protect and save minor
children      from  sexual   offences  and harassment  are
also involved, the argument that, now the victim has
attained the age of majority and is living happily
with       1st petitioner   are   not   valid   grounds  or
justifiable       reasons     or  decisive    factors   for
consideration       to quash the criminal proceedings as
sought for. Therefore, the compromise and settlement
entered between the parties are not accepted to hold
that the allegations do not make out a case         against
the petitioners.       Hence, it is made clear that the
petitioners      have  to   stand  the   test  of  judicial
scrutiny and thus face trial before the trial court.