for the respondent-State.
This petition has been filed under Section 439 Cr.P.C. for grant
of regular bail to the petitioner in case FIR No. 582 dated 30th of November,
2019 registered for the offences punishable under Sections 15(c) and 27(a)
of the NDPS Act, 1985 at Police Station City Tohana, District Fatehabad.
2.           As per the allegations levelled in FIR on 30th of November,
2019, the petitioner was apprehended in conscious possession of 500
kilograms of poppy husk without any licence. Reply by way of affidavit of
Deputy Superintendent of Police, Tohana, District Fatehabad has been filed
on behalf of the State, which is taken on record and the said fact that the
petitioner being behind the bars since 30th of November, 2019 is not in
dispute. As per prosecution, Challan was presented on 30th of May, 2020
and the charges were framed on 28th of April, 2021. Since then the trial has
not proceeded qua the petitioner.        Ld. Counsel for the petitioner thus
submits that the Challan having been presented and there being no other
case under the provisions of NDPS Act against the petitioner. There are 18
cited witnesses and none of them has been examined as yet. He thus
submits that the petitioner has undergone custody of approximately 3 years
and has a right to speedy trial guaranteed under Article 21 of the
Constitution of India. He submits that the false case has been foisted upon
the petitioner who has no criminal antecedents. Counsel asserts that right
of an accused to have speedy trial stands recognized under the provisions of
the NDPS Act as well and, thus, Section 37 of the NDPS Act in such
situation has to be read as subservient to the Fundamental Right of the
petitioner guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
3.            He further relies upon order passed by this Court in CRM-M
No.18805 of 2022 titled as Satnam Singh vs. State of Punjab, decided on
2nd of September, 2022, whereby the petitioner, who was in custody for
more than 2 years, 2 months and 29 days was held entitled to bail.       He
refers to various orders passed by the Supreme Court in Shariful Islam @
Sarif vs. The State of West Bengal passed in Special Leave to Appeal
(Crl.) No.4173 of 2022 decided on 4th of August, 2022, Gopal Krishna
Patra @ Gopalrusma Vs. Union of India passed in Criminal Appeal
No.1169 of 2022 decided on 5th of August, 2022, Chitta Biswas @ Subhas
vs. The State of West Bengal passed in Criminal Appeal No(s).245/2020
decided on 7th of February, 2020 and Mohammad Salman Hanif vs. The
State of Gujrat, Special Leave to Appeal (Crl.)              No(s).5530/2022
decided on 22nd of August, 2022 wherein undertrials have been granted
relief of regular bail on the basis of custody dehors Section 37 of the NDPS
Act. He also relies upon judgment of the Supreme Court in Sujit Tiwari
vs. State of Gujarat and another, reported as (2020) 13 SCC 447
wherein Apex Court found that a person in custody for more than 2 years
was entitled to bail.
4.            Mr. Jain appearing for the State does not dispute the factual
assertions made by counsel for the petitioner based on record however he
submits that the trial could not proceed for the reason some of the co-
accused (Dharambir) could not be arrested till date and further
supplementary Challan was required to be filed qua co-accused Tony alias
Richpal and the same was filed only on 20th of July, 2022.
5.            I have heard Ld. Counsel for the parties and have gone through
the records of the case.
6.            The petitioner has already suffered prolonged incarceration of
about 3 years. There is no other case under the provisions of NDPS Act
registered against the petitioner. There are 18 cited witnesses and, thus trial
is expected to take a long time and is not going to conclude in near future.
7.            In the case of Shariful Islam @ Sarif' case (supra), Apex
Court found that an under-trial having suffered incarceration over 1 year
and 6 months is entitled for grant of regular bail holding that :-
“2.    Taking into consideration the fact that the petitioner is
reported to be in custody since 27-1-2021 and has suffered
incarceration for over 1 year 6 months and there being no
likelihood of completion of trial in the near future, which fact
cannot be controverted by the learned counsel appearing for
the State, we are inclined to grant him bail.
3.     The petitioner is, therefore, directed to be released on
bail, subject to such terms and conditions which the
concerned Trial Court may deem fit and find appropriate to
impose upon him.”
8.          Similarly, the Supreme Court in Gopal Krishna Patra @
Gopalrusma's case (supra) ordered as under :-
“The appellant is in custody since 18.06.2020 in
connection with crime registered as N.C.B. Crime No.
02/2020 in respect of offences punishable under Sections 8,
20, 27-AA, 28 read with 29 of the Narcotic Drugs and
The application seeking relief of bail having been
rejected, the instant appeal has been filed.
We have heard Mr. Ashok Kumar Panda, learned
Senior Advocate in support of the appeal and Mr. Sanjay Jain,
learned. Additional Solicitor General for the respondent.
Considering the facts and circumstances on record and
the length of custody undergone by the appellant, in our view
the case for bail is made out.”
9.          The Supreme Court in Chitta Biswas @ Subhas's case
“The instant matter arises out of application preferred
by the appellant under Section 439 Cr.P.C. seeking bail in
connection with Criminal Case No.146 of 2018 registered
with Taherpur Police Station for offence punishable under
Section 21-C of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
According to the prosecution, the appellant was found
to be in possession of narcotic substance i.e. 46 bottles of
phensydryl cough syrup containing codeine mixture above
commercial quantity.
The appellant was arrested on 21.07.2018 and
continues to be in custody. It appears that out of 10 witnesses
cited to be examined in support of the case of prosecution four
witnesses have already been examined in the trial.
Without expressing any opinion on the merits or
demerits of the rival submissions and considering the facts
and circumstances on record, in our view, case for bail is
made out.”
10.         The Supreme Court in another case titled as Mohammad
Salman Hanif's case (supra) ordered as under :-
“The petitioner seeks enlargement on regular bail in
the case FIR being C.R.No.NDPS/11192015200884/2020
registered at Changodar Police Station, District Ahmedabad
(Rural) for the offences punishable under Sections 8(c), 21(c)
and 29 of the NDPS Act.
As per the allegations, 358 bottles of cough syrup
containing codein of 'commercial quantity' was recovered
We have heard learned counsels for the parties and are
of the considered opinion that the questions like whether the
contraband recovered from the petitioner is of 'commercial
quantity' or whether codein phosphate is a manufactured drug
or a narcotic substance, need not be go into at this stage.
We are inclined to release the petitioner on bail only on
the ground that he has spent about two years in custody and
conclusion of trial will take some time.
Consequently, without expressing any views on the
merits of the case and taking into consideration the custody
period of the petitioner, this special leave petition is accepted
and the petitioner is ordered to be released on bail subject to
his furnishing the bail bonds to the satisfaction of the Special
Judge/ concerned Trial Court.”
11.           Division Bench of this Court in Bhupender Singh vs.
Narcotic Control Bureau, (2022) 2 RCR (Criminal) 706 after considering
issue with respect to achieving balance between right to speedy trial
guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution of India and the rigors
enumerated under Section 37 of the Act held that convict/accused is not
precluded from claiming bail invoking parameters of Article 21 of the
Constitution of India dehors the stringent provisions of Section 37 of the
12.           Right to speedy trial is one of the objectives of NDPS Act and
is rather one of the checks and balances provided under the Act. Section 36
NDPS Act recognizes the need for speedy trial. The provision contained in
Section 36 providing for constitution of Special Courts is a means to
achieve the end objective of speedy trial. Section 36 well recognizes the
need for speedy trial. It is only with an objective to synthesize the right to
speedy trial and rigors of Section 37 that the Supreme Court in the afore-
referred cases granted concession of regular bail to the under-trials solely
on the basis of long incarceration that they have suffered owing to delay in
13.           Keeping in view the aforesaid facts and circumstances of the
present case, the instant petition deserves to be allowed. The petitioner is
ordered to be released on bail on his furnishing bail/surety bonds to the
satisfaction of the Ld. Trial Court/Duty Magistrate, concerned. However, in
addition to conditions that may be imposed by the Trial Court/Duty
Magistrate concerned, the petitioner shall remain bound by the following
(i)   The petitioner shall not mis-use the liberty granted.
(ii)   The petitioner shall not tamper with any evidence
oral or documentary during the trial.
(iii)   The petitioner shall not absent himself on any date
before the trial.
(iv)   The petitioner shall not commit any offence similar
to the one alleged in the present case.
(v)   The petitioner shall deposit his passport, if any with
the trial Court.
(vi)   The petitioner shall give his cellphone number to the
police authorities and shall not change his cell-phone
number without permission of the trial Court.
(vii) The petitioner shall not in any manner try to delay
the trial.
14.         In case of breach of any of the aforesaid conditions and those
which may be imposed by the Trial Court, the prosecution shall be at liberty
to move cancellation of bail of the petitioner.
15.         Ordered accordingly.