for the petitioners.
for respondents No.4 and 5.
Life is full with extraordinary challenges and unrivalled
opportunities, but such chances must not be used against those,
who parented you. With the birth of the children, the parents feel
the paramount bliss of the Supreme Power and thank Him.
However, when the very children, who the parents have reared
with untold sorrows and miseries, throw them at the mercy of their
destiny and use their muscle power to torture and harass them,
the parents’ world gets totally shattered. They become helpless
from all sides and thus, begins the unfortunate tale of their
moving from one Forum to another for redressal of their
In the holy script of Sri Guru Granth Sahib, Sri Guru
Ram Dass has written 'KAAHAY POOT JHAGRAT HA-O SANG
PAPP//” (O son, why do you argue with your father? It is a sin to
argue with the one who fathered you and raised you).
The above words of prudence guide us that we have to
treat our parents as God. The instant case is a classic example of the
aforesaid narration, wherein the petitioners are seeking the equities
entirely forgetting that it is because of their conduct that their old and
aged parents had to seek the petitioners' eviction so as to buy back their
peace and freedom.
The present criminal writ petition has been filed under
Article 226/227 of the Constitution for issuance of a writ in the
nature of mandamus directing respondents No.1 to 3 to protect the
life and liberty of the petitioners at the hands of respondents No.4
and 5 and mandate them not to interfere in the property of the
petitioners.      A prayer has also made to dismiss the application
filed by respondent No.4 under the Maintenance and Welfare of
Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007 (hereinafter referred to as
'the 2007 Act'), wherein the petitioners have been ordered to be
ejected from the house in question.
The facts, in brief, of the case are that respondent No.4
filed an application under the provisions of the 2007 Act against
the petitioners i.e. his son-petitioner No.1 and daughter-in-
law/petitioner No.2, with the averments that he purchased the
plot, vide registered sale deed No.4293 dated 25.03.1997, and had
raised the construction over it.           The petitioners herein were not
treating respondents No.4 and 5 properly and depriving them even
of the basic necessities. The petitioners wanted to grab the
property of respondents No.4 and 5 and owing to their behaviour,
respondents No.4 and 5 had disowned petitioner No.1 from their
movable and immovable property.               Respondents No.4 and 5
requested the petitioners to vacate the house in question, but to
no avail.     On their application, Sub Divisional Magistrate,
Thanesar, reported that respondent No.4 is owner of the house
and behaviour of the petitioners towards him and his wife is not
good and the petitioners are even not fulfilling the daily needs of
respondents No.4 and 5.
The Sub Divisional Magistrate in his report had
recommended ejectment of the petitioners and sent the same to
the office of the District Magistrate and vide             order dated
17.07.2019,     District   Magistrate,     Kurukshetra,   had   ordered
ejectment of the petitioners from the house in question.
Learned counsel for the petitioners would contend that
the house in question is a joint Hindu family property. Petitioner
No.1 also contributed in the construction of ground floor of the
house in the year 1989-90. He also started a business wherein
respondent No.4 was shown as the proprietor. The renovation of
ground floor was completed in the year 1994-95 and the first floor
of the house in question was constructed out of the funds of the
joint Hindu family property.         The learned counsel would further
submit that in fact, respondents No.4 and 5 had ill-treated
petitioner No.2 and accordingly, FIR No.570 dated 04.09.1998,
Police Station City Thanesar, under Sections 498-A, 406, 323, 506
and 34 IPC had been registered against respondents No.4 and 5.
The learned counsel would further submit that the District
Magistrate had no power under Section 23 of the 2007 Act to
direct a son to vacate the house of his parents because none of the
circumstances       contemplated         in the statutory  provisions,   is
attracted in a father-son-relationship. The learned counsel would
implore the Court to exercise its extraordinary writ jurisdiction and
strike down the order dated 17.07.2019 as the one amounting to a
gross illegality.     Learned counsel would further contend that
petitioner No.2 also moved an application before Women Cell,
Karnal, against respondents No.4 and 5, but with the intervention
of the respectables, the matter was resolved.
On the other hand, learned State counsel and learned
counsel   for    respondents      No.4      and  5,  while opposing    the
submissions of the learned counsel for the petitioners, would
contend that the house in question is a self-acquired property of
respondents No.4 and 5. The order dated 17.07.2019 (Annexure
P-3) has been passed in accordance with law and no illegality has
been committed by the authority concerned. The petitioners had
been permitted to reside therein out of love and affection of
respondents No.4 and 5. However, petitioner No.1, rather than
performing his obligations as a son of his parents had been
misbehaving and harassing them whereupon, respondent No.4
was compelled to move the application for getting the house in
question vacated.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties.
It is the case of respondent N.4 that the house in
question is his self acquired property, and rather it is not a joint
Hindu family property.        The Sub Divisional Magistrate sent the
report that as per the sale deed No.4293 dated 25.03.1997,
respondent No.4 is the owner of the house in question. On the
basis of the report sent by the Sub Divisional Magistrate, the
District Magistrate, Kurukshetra, had ordered ejectment of the
petitioners from the house in question. The petitioners have not
filed any document to show that respondent No.4 has gifted the
house in question to the petitioners. For the sake of arguments,
assuming that the respondent No.4 had gifted the house to the
petitioners, even then the transfer of property is to be held void in
certain circumstances.
It would be apposite to first refer to Section 23 and then
Section 22 of the 2007 Act and Rule 24 of the Rules, which are
23.    Transfer    of     property   to   be  void    in    certain
circumstances.-- (1) Where any senior citizen who, after the
commencement of this Act, has transferred by way of gift or
otherwise, his property, subject to the condition that the
transferee shall provide the basic amenities and basic physical
needs to the transferor and such transferee refuses or fails to
provide such amenities and physical needs, the said transfer of
property shall be deemed to have been made by fraud or
coercion or under undue influence and shall at the option of
the transferor be declared void by the Tribunal.
(2)    Where any senior citizen has a right to receive
maintenance out of an estate and such estate or part thereof is
transferred, the right to receive maintenance may be enforced
against the transferee if the transferee has notice of the right,
or if the transfer is gratuitous; but not against the transferee
for consideration and without notice of right.
(3)    If, any senior citizen is incapable of enforcing the rights
under sub-sections (1)       and (2), action may be taken on his
behalf by any of the organization referred to in Explanation to
sub-section (1) of section 5.”
“22. Authorities who may be specified for implementing
the provisions of this Act.- (1) The State Government may,
confer such powers and impose such duties on a District
Magistrate as may be necessary, to ensure that the provisions
of this Act are properly carried out and the District Magistrate
may specify the officer, subordinate to him, who shall exercise
all or any of the powers, and perform all or any of the duties,
so conferred or imposed and the local limits within which such
powers or duties shall be carried out by the officer as may be
prescribed.
(2) The State Government shall prescribe a comprehensive
action plan for providing protection of life and property of
senior citizens.”
24. Action plan for the protection of life and property of
senior citizens. [Section 22]. -- An action plan under section
22(2) shall be notified by the State Government within a period
of six months from the date of publication of these rules in the
Official Gazette and may be revised from time to time.”
Undoubtedly, Section 23 of the 2007 Act deals with the
validity of transfer of property in certain circumstances. It provides
that if a senior citizen who, after the commencement of the 2007
Act, has transferred by way of gift or otherwise, his property, with
the condition that the transferee would provide basic amenities
and basic physical needs to the transferor, who thereafter refuses
or fails to provide such amenities and physical needs, then the
transfer of the property made by the senior citizen shall be deemed
to have been made by fraud or coercion or under undue influence
and shall at the option of the transferor, be declared void by the
Tribunal. It further provides that if a senior citizen has a right to
receive maintenance out of an estate and such estate or part
thereof is transferred, then the senior citizen would have a right to
receive maintenance from the transferee if the transferee has
notice of the right or if the transfer is gratuitous but he would
not be entitled to receive maintenance from the transferee to
whom he has transferred the property for consideration and
without notice of his right of maintenance as provided under
Section 23(2) of the Act. It further provides that if a senior citizen
is incapable of enforcing the right under Sections 23 (1) and (2) of
the Act, then he can be helped by any of the organizations which
are referred to in Explanation to Section 5(1) of the 2007 Act.
Insofar as Section 22 of the 2007 Act is concerned, it
provides for the powers and duties imposed upon the District
Magistrate/State Government for implementation of the provisions
of the Act and also a comprehensive action plan for providing
protection to the life and property of the senior citizens.
Rule 24 of the Rules further provides that the action
plan under Section 22(2) of the 2007 Act has to be notified by the
Government.      Needless to mention that in pursuance of Section
22(2) of the Act and Rule 24 of the Rules, the Government of
Haryana has issued a notification No.530SW-(4)-2015 dated
26.05.2015, laying down the action plan for the protection of life
and property of senior citizens. The relevant portion of the
aforesaid notification in regard to the procedure for eviction from
the property/residential building belonging to/occupied by senior
“(1) Procedure for eviction from the property/residential
building       belonging        to/occupied         by       Senior
i. Complaints received (as per provisions of the Maintenance of
Parents and Senior Citizen Act, 2007) regarding life and
property of Senior Citizens by different Department,
NGOs/Social Workers, Helpline for Senior Citizens and District
Magistrate himself, shall be forwarded to the District
Magistrate of the concerned district for further action.
ii. The District Magistrate, shall immediately forward such
complaints/application to the concerned Sub Divisional
Magistrates for verification of the title of the property and facts
of the cases through Revenue Department/concerned
Tehsildars/spot verification within 15 days from the date of
receipt of such complaints/application.
iii.     The Sub Divisional Magistrates shall immediately
submit his/her report to the concerned District Magistrate for
final orders within 21 days from the date of receipt of the
complaint/application.
iv.      If the District Magistrate is of opinion that any son or
daughter or legal heir of a senior citizen/parents are in
unauthorized occupation of any property as defined in the
Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act,
2007, and that they should be evicted, the District Magistrate
shall issue in the manner hereinafter provided a notice in
writing calling upon all persons concerned to show cause as to
why an order of eviction should not be issued against
them/him/her.
v.       The result Shalla. specify the grounds on which the
order of eviction is proposed to be made; and b. require all
persons concerned, that is to say, all persons who are, or may
be, in occupation of, or claim interest in, the
property/premises, to show cause, if any against the proposed
order on or before such date as is specified in the notice, being
a date not earlier than ten days from the date of issued thereof.
c.       The District Magistrate shall cause the notice to be
served by having it affixed on the outer door or at some other
conspicuous part of the public premises and in such other
manner as may be prescribed, whereupon the notice shall be
deemed to have been duly given to all person concerned.
(2) Eviction Order from property/residential building of
i. If, after considering the cause, if any, shown by any person
in pursuance to the notice and any evidence he/she may
produce in support of the same and after giving him/her a
reasonable opportunity of being heard, the District Magistrate
is satisfied that the property/premises are in unauthorized
occupation, the District Magistrate or other officer duly
authorized may make an order of eviction, for reasons to be
recorded therein, directing that the property/residential
building shall be vacated, on such date as may be specified in
the order, by all persons who may be in occupation of any part
thereof, and cause a copy of the order to be affixed on the
outer door or some other conspicuous part of the public
ii. The District Magistrate may also associate NGOs/Voluntary
organizations/social workers working for the welfare of senior
citizens for the enforcement of eviction order.
i. If any person refuses or fails to comply with the order of
eviction within thirty days from the date of its issue, the
District Magistrate or any other officer duly authorized by the
District Magistrate in this behalf may evict that person from
the premises in question and take possession.
ii. The District Magistrate, of the concerned district shall have
powers to enforce the eviction orders through the Police
iii. The District Magistrate, of the concerned district shall
further arrange to hand over the property/premises in
question to the concerned Senior Citizens/parents.
iv. The District Magistrate, of the concerned district shall
forward a monthly report of such cases to the Director
Haryana, Chandigarh by 7th of the following month for review
of such cases in the State Council for Senior Citizens
constituted under the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and
Senior Citizens Act, 2007 and Rules of 2009 framed under the
said Act under the Chairmanship of the Hon'ble Minister of
It is provided in the action plan as to how the property
of a senior citizen, which includes a residential building, can be got
vacated from his son, daughter or legal heir(s) while in an
unauthorized occupation and how the said order is to be enforced.
A perusal of the above provisions would make it explicit
that there is a provision for eviction in the 2007 Act. Besides, the
instant is not a case wherein any transfer or gift has been executed by
respondent Nos.4 and 5 in favour of the petitioners. Thus, the
petitioners cannot maintain their claim on the alleged ground that
petitioner No.1 had contributed towards the renovation of the house.
It may be noticed that even in the cases, where a gift deed
was executed by the parents in favour of the children, it was held that
irrespective of any condition regarding providing to the transferor the
basic amenities, the transferee would be bound to maintain the
transferor. Reference in this regard may be made to the Division Bench
judgment of this Court in CWP-5086-2016, titled as ' Smt. Raksha Devi
Vs. Deputy Commissioner-cum-District Magistrate, Hoshiarpur and
others, decided on 03.05.2018.
Thus, in view of the above discussion, I do not find any
merit in the present petition and hence, the same is hereby