For Petitioner(s)        :    Mr. Jitendra Ojha through VC.
Though this Court had directed the learned Public Prosecutor
by order dated 17.06.2021 to get the notices of the respondent
No.2 complainant served through the SHO concerned. But till
date, compliance has not been made.
Learned Public Prosecutor has raised a preliminary objection
that the revision cannot be decided in absence of notice to the
complainant respondent No.2 Mani Lal.
I have considered the said submission in light of the relevant
legal provisions. It may be stated here that Sections 12, 101 and
102 of the Juvenile Justice Act are the provisions dealing with the
prayer for bail made on behalf of the CICL at different stages.
These  provisions   are    quoted        hereinbelow         for  the   sake   of
12. Bail to person who is apparently a child
alleged to be in conflict with law.- (1) When any
person, who is apparently a child and is alleged to have
committed     a    bailable       or     non-bailable     offence,   is
apprehended or detained by the police or appears or
brought     before       a      Board,         such    person    shall,
notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) or in any other
law for the time being in force, be released on bail with
or without surety or placed under the supervision of a
probation officer or under the care of any fit person:
Provided that such person shall not be so released if
there appears reasonable grounds for believing that the
release is likely to bring that person into association
with any known criminal or expose the said person to
moral, physical or psychological danger or the person's
release would defeat the ends of justice, and the Board
shall record the reasons for denying the bail and
circumstances that led to such a decision.
(2) When such person having been apprehended is not
released on bail under subsection (1) by the officer-in-
charge of the police station, such officer shall cause the
person to be kept only in an observation home in such
manner as may be prescribed until the person can be
brought before a Board.
(3) When such person is not released on bail under
sub-section (1) by the Board, it shall make an order
sending him to an observation home or a place of
safety, as the case may be, for such period during the
pendency of the inquiry regarding the person, as may
be specified in the order.
(4) When a child in conflict with law is unable to fulfil
the conditions of bail order within seven days of the
bail order, such child shall be produced before the
Board for modification of the conditions of bail.
101. Appeals.-(1) Subject to the provisions of this
Act, any person aggrieved by an order made by the
Committee or the Board under this Act may, within
thirty days from the date of such order, prefer an
appeal to the Children's Court, except for decisions by
the Committee related to Foster Care and Sponsorship
After Care for which the appeal shall lie with the
Provided that the Court of Sessions, or the District
Magistrate, as the case may be, may entertain the
appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty days,
if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by
sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time and such
appeal shall be decided within a period of thirty days.
(2) An appeal shall lie against an order of the Board
passed after making the preliminary assessment into a
heinous offence under section 15 of the Act, before the
Court of Sessions and the Court may, while deciding
the    appeal,    take       the      assistance    of    experienced
psychologists and medical specialists other than those
whose assistance has been obtained by the Board in
passing the order under the said section.
(a) any order of acquittal made by the Board in respect
of a child alleged to have committed an offence other
than the heinous offence by a child who has completed
(b) any order made by a Committee in respect of
finding that a person is not a child in need of care and
protection.
(4) No second appeal shall lie from any order of the
Court of Session, passed in appeal under this section.
(5) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Children's
Court may file an appeal before the High Court in
accordance with the procedure specified in the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).
102. Revision.-The High Court may, at any time,
either on its own motion or on an application received
in this behalf, call for the record of any proceeding in
which any Committee or Board or Children's Court, or
Court has passed an order, for the purpose of satisfying
itself as to the legality or propriety of any such order
and may pass such order in relation thereto as it thinks
Provided that the High Court shall not pass an
order under this section prejudicial to any person
without giving him a reasonable opportunity of being
heard.”
As is apparent, an application for bail on behalf of a CICL is
firstly required to be filed before the Juvenile Justice Board under
Section 12 of the Act, which does not stipulate any opportunity of
hearing     to    the  complainant/victim               for    deciding  such    bail
application.      In case of rejection of the bail application by the
Board, the CICL can approach the Children court/Sessions court
concerned by filing an appeal under Section 101 of the Juvenile
Justice Act.      The entire scheme of Section 101 of the Juvenile
Justice Act makes it clear that there is no requirement in this
provision as well to hear the complainant/victim while deciding an
appeal preferred against an order rejecting bail of a CICL passed
by the Juvenile Justice Board. In case, the prayer for bail of the
CICL has been turned down under Section 12 of the Juvenile
Justice Act and the appeal preferred thereagainst under Section
101 of the Juvenile Justice Act has also been rejected, these
orders can be challenged by filing a revision in the High Court by
invoking powers conferred under Section 102 of the Juvenile
Justice Act.    The proviso to Section 102 stipulates that the High
Court shall not pass an order under this section, prejudicial to any
person without giving him a reasonable opportunity of being
heard.       This   court     is     made         to     understand     that    the
complainants/victims are being impleaded as party respondents in
the revisions under Section 102 of the Juvenile Justice Act by
virtue of this proviso. However, after analyzing the entire scheme
of the Juvenile Justice Act, I am of the firm view that the concept
of hearing the complainant in an application for bail of a CICL
under the Juvenile Justice Act be it before the Board, the appellate
court or the revisional court is totally foreign to the fundamental
principles underlying the welfare legislation.               The legislative intent
does not give any such indication, which may require notifying the
complainant before proceeding to consider the prayer for bail of a
CICL at any of these three stages. Suffice it to say that even if
the plain language of proviso to Section 102 of the Juvenile Justice
Act is literally considered, it indicates that an order prejudicial to
any person may not be passed by the High Court without giving
him a reasonable opportunity of being heard. Manifestly, an order
of bail to an accused, moreso a CICL, can never be considered as
causing      prejudice    to      any        person,          may it   be    the
complainant/victim.      Bail to an accused furthers the concept of
liberty to a person arrested/confined by sanction of law and is
virtually an extension of the principle of fundamental right of
liberty guaranteed by Article 21 of the Constitution of India. If at
all, the legislature had intended to give a right of hearing to the
complainant in proceedings of bail, under the Juvenile Justice Act
specific insertions to this effect could have been made in Sections
12, 101 and 102 of the Juvenile Justice Act as are available in the
Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe (Prevention of Atrocities) Act,
another special legislation.        It has been specifically mandated in
the Section 15-A of the SC/ST Act that a victim or his dependent
shall have the right to reasonable, accurate, and timely notice of
any Court proceeding including any bail proceeding.
Thus, it is clear that there is no legislative mandate under
the Juvenile Justice Act that the victim should be notified before
hearing the bail application of a child in conflict with law, be it
before the Juvenile Justice Board, Appellate Court or before the
High Court exercising the revisional powers under Section 102 of
It seems that without any basis, a practice has been adopted
of impleading the complainant as a party in a revision for bail of a
juvenile under Section 102 of the Juvenile Justice act. Numerous
instances have come before the court, wherein, in cases involving
multiple accused, of which few are adults and one is juvenile, the
bail applications of the adult offenders are decided much earlier,
whereas the juvenile continue to languish in the Observation
Home, awaiting service of notice on the complainant.                        This
anomalous situation is absolutely unwarranted and has to be
resolved by taking a pragmatic, legal and logical view of the
Thus, the preliminary objection raised by the learned Public
Prosecutor that the complainant has to be notified before deciding
this revision is turned down.
I have heard and considered the submissions advanced by
learned counsel representing the petitioner and the learned Public
Prosecutor and have gone through the impugned orders.
The petitioner child ‘X’ son of Laxman in conflict with law
(identity of the child has been protected in view of the direction
given by Hon’ble the Supreme Court in the case of Shilpa Mittal
vs. State of NCT of Delhi & Ors. reported in AIR 2020 SC
405) has been confined in connection with FIR No.143/2021
registered at Police Station Dovda, District Dungarpur for the
offences under Sections 341 and 395 of the IPC and is lodged at
the Child Observation Home, Dungarpur. The bail application
preferred on his behalf by his natural guardian (father) Laxman
under Section 12 of the Juvenile Justice Act stands rejected by the
Principal Magistrate, Juvenile Justice Board, Dungarpur by order
dated 03.06.2021. The appeal preferred against the said order
under Section 101 of the Juvenile Justice Act also stands rejected
by the learned Special Judge, Children Court (Sessions Judge and
Children Human Protection Act), Dungarpur by order dated
08.06.2021. These two orders are assailed by the petitioner
through his natural guardian in this revision preferred under
Section 397 of the Cr.P.C. read with Section 102 of the Juvenile
The petitioner is a young boy of less than 16 years as per the
order rejecting bail. He is confined in the observation home in
connection with the above mentioned offence and the matter is
pending investigation. The Principal Magistrate, Juvenile Justice
Board has rejected the bail of the petitioner expressing that in
case, the petitioner is released on bail, there is every likelihood of
his coming into contact with known offenders and such a course of
action may also cause risk to his own mental, physical and
psychological state. In the opinion of this Court, there is no
foundation for such apprehension. The apprehension expressed
regarding the likelihood of the petitioner coming into contact with
other offenders can be taken off by requiring his natural guardian
to furnish a suitable undertaking.
In view of the facts noted above, I am of the opinion that
petitioner child is entitled to be enlarged on bail.
Consequently, the instant revision is allowed. The impugned
order dated 08.06.2021 passed by the learned Special Judge,
Children Court (Sessions Judge and Children Human Protection
Act), Dungarpur and the order dated 03.06.2021 passed by
are set aside. It is ordered that the accused-petitioner 'X' S/o
Laxman arrested in connection with FIR No.143/2021 registered
at Police Station Dovda, District Dungarpur shall be released on
bail; provided his natural guardian (father) Ramesh furnishes
a personal bond of Rs.50,000/- and two surety bonds of
Rs.25,000/- each to the satisfaction of the learned court below
with the stipulation to appear before the Board on all dates of
hearing and as and when called upon to do so. He shall also
furnish an undertaking in the Juvenile Justice Board that he
shall ensure that the petitioner is kept in a protective
atmosphere       and     does       not      come          into contact    with
known/unknown offenders during the pendency of the
inquiry.