Counsel for Petitioner :- Agendra Sinha,S.D. Singh
Counsel for Respondent :- Rishabh Kapoor,Raj Kumar Singh,Sudhir
1. According to Hindu Mythology, Bhagiratha, a legendary king of the
Ikshvaku dynasty, brought the River Ganga to Earth from heavens because
only she could bestow nirvana to Bhagiratha’s ancestors who were cursed
by Sage Kapila. After years of great penance, River Ganga descended on
Earth and Lord Shiva agreed to channelize her flow. Therefore, River
Ganga flowed from Lord Shiva’s hair. The place where the sacred river
originated is known as Gangotri in present times, and since the river
originated from Lord Shiva’s Jata (hair) it is also called Jatashankari.
2. River Ganga is called by several names, including Jahnavi, Shubhra,
Sapteshwari, Nikita, Bhagirathi, Alaknanda, and Vishnupadi.
3. It is believed that it flows from all the three worlds - Heaven/Swarga,
Earth/Prithvi, and Hell/Patala. In Hinduism, the holy River Ganga is
personified and personalized as Goddess Ganga. People believe that
bathing in the pious Ganga can help wash all sins. It is also believed that a
mere touch of the river can help attain moksha (salvation) and so the ashes
of the dead persons are immersed in the sacred river so that the dead attains
moksha (gange tav darshanarth mukti). There is no match to the everlasting
divinity of holy river Ganga.
4. It is lifeline of India because it provides water to 40% of India’s
population. It is a source of irrigation for a wide variety of crops. Its basin
has fertile soil that largely influences the agricultural economies of India
and its neighboring country of Bangladesh. It also supports fishing
industries, making it an agricultural and professional necessity for the
livelihood of Indians.
5. Varanasi, Haridwar, Gangotri, Prayagraj, and Rishikesh are the prime
religious destinations that have great religious significance for Hindus
located at the Banks of river Ganga. Kumbh Mela is organized in Prayagraj
and Haridwar. Ganga Arti takes place in twilight everyday at Rishikesh,
Haridwar and Varanasi.
6. Adventure tourism is also organized in Rishikesh, such as river rafting,
kayaking, and body surfing etc. The bathing ghats of Ganga are popular
tourist attraction. Travellers often visit these ghats to bathe and witness the
funeral rites and Ganga Arti.
7. Several yoga retreats have been established on the banks of River Ganga
because of its calm and peaceful atmosphere. River Ganga is worshiped as
Ganga Maa or Mother Ganges.
8. It is the longest river in India and it flows around 2525 kms from the
Himalayan Mountains to Bay of Bengal. It has the second greatest water
discharge in the world, and its basin is the most heavily populated in the
world with over 400 million people living in it. The course of river begins
in Himalayan Mountains where the Bhagirathi River flows out of the
Gangotri glacier in Uttarakhand. The glacier is located at an elevation of
12,769 feet. In long stream, the Bhagirathi and Alaknanda rivers join. As
the river Ganga flows out of the Himalayas, it creates a narrow, rugged
canyon. From Rishikesh, it begins to flow onto the Indo-Gangetic Plain. As
river Ganga then flows farther downstream, it changes its direction several
times and is joined by many other tributary rivers such as Yamuna,
Ramganga, Tamsa, and Gandaki Rivers. River Ganga flows out of India
and into Bangladesh, its main branch is known as Padma River. Before
entering the Bay of Bengal, the river creates the world's largest delta,
Ganges Delta. This region is a highly fertile sediment-laden area that covers
23,000 square miles. Its overall length of drainage size is based on what
tributary rivers are included. Its drainage basin is estimated to be about
4,16,990 square miles.
9. River Ganga basin has been inhabited by humans since ancient times.
The first region Harappan civilization, who moved into the Ganges River
basin from the Indus River basin around the 2nd millennium B.C.E. Later,
the Gangetic plain became the center of the Maurya Empire and then the
Mughal Empire. Megasthenes in his work Indica has discussed the
importance and significance of river Ganga.
10. Despite being the lifeline of the nation, having been worshiped,
providing sustenance to large population, over the time river has become
highly polluted. According to the studies, it is one of the most polluted river
in the world. Pollution of River Ganga is caused by both human and
industrial waste due to rapid industrialization as well as religious events.
Waste and raw sewage of population living in the river Ganga basin (400
Millions) is dumped into the river. Many people bath and use the river to
clean their laundry. Studies have described bacteria level near Varanasi at
least 3000 times higher than what has been prescribed as safe by the World
11. Industrial practices, population growth and harmful religious activities
are plausibly responsible for high level pollution of the river. Tanneries,
Chemical plants, Textile mills, distilleries, slaughter houses etc., along with
river dumping their untreated and intoxicated water into the river are
responsible for very high pollution and for poor health of river Ganga. Its
water contains high level of intoxicated substances like Chromium
Sulphate, Arsenic, Cadmium, Mercury and Sulphuric Acid. Even religious
practices such as offering foods and other items to rive Ganga which are
regularly thrown into the river as well as religious events also add to the
pollution level of the river.
12. In the late 1980s, Rajiv Gandhi, India's the then Prime Minister began
the Ganga Action Plan (GAP) to clean up the river Ganga. The plan shut
down many highly polluting industrial plants along the river and funds were
allotted for the construction of wastewater treatment plants However,
efforts have fallen short as the plants are not large enough to handle the
waste coming from such a large population. Many of the polluting
industrial plants are also continuing to dump their hazardous waste into the
13. The future of this nation to large extent will be depending on health and
well being of this river. It is, therefore, imperative that every effort should
be made to revive the river and make it pollution free. Prime Minister,
Narendra Modi after getting elected from Varanasi Parliamentary seat in
14. In 2014, the Government has come out with a Flagship Programme
'Namami Gange', an Integrated Conservation Mission, to accomplish twin
objectives of effective abatement of pollution, conservation and
rejuvenation of National River ‘Ganga’. It is being operated under the
Department of Water Resources, River Development and Ganga
Rejuvenation, Ministry of Jal Shakti. The programme is being implemented
by the National Mission for Clean Ganga (NMCG), and its state counterpart
organizations i.e., State Program Management Groups (SPMGs). NMCG is
the implementation wing of National Ganga Council set up in 2016; which
replaced the National Ganga River Basin Authority (NRGBA). Budget
outlay is Rs.20,000-crore, centrally-funded, non-lapsable corpus and
consists of nearly 288 projects. The main pillars of the programmes are:
15. The government’s Namami Gange Programme has revitalized India’s
efforts in rejuvenating river Ganga. Critical sewage infrastructure in 20
pollution hotspots along with the river and cleaning of its tributaries is
underway. River Gomti is one of the tributaries of river Ganga. River
Gomti is very highly polluted.
16. Several strategies are being evolved and implemented under the
Mission to see that the river is rejuvenated and becomes pollution free.
National Mission for Clean Ganga (NMCG) is the implementing agency of
Namami Ganges Programme. NMCG is treated as an authority with
statutory powers under Environment Protection Act, 1986. It has been given
bureaucratic autonomy and regulatory powers to execute the mission in
coordination with respective State Governments. In five years, Rs.20,000
crore have been sanctioned which is five times the amount committed in the
past 35 years. There is 100 per cent central funding of key projects. The
17. The focus is on rejuvenating the entire main strem of river Ganga rather
than a few cities on its banks. There is emphasis on regenerating and
conserving the aquatic and riparian biodiversity of the river basin. Seven
IITs had prepared a detailed basin management plan and plenty of
fieldwork, including estimating the amount of sewage generated by major
urban and rural centres alongwith its banks. So far the NMCG has
sanctioned a total of 333 projects at a cost of Rs 29,578 crore, of which 142
projects have been completed.
18. The NMCG is an authority constituted in accordance with the
provisions of Section 3 of the Environmental (Protection) Act, 1986 vide
notification No.S.O.3187(E) dated 07.10.2016 inter alia to take measures
for prevention, control and abatement of environmental pollution in river
Ganga and to ensure continuous adequate flow of water so as to rejuvenate
river Ganga. It is a nodal agency for implementation of the provisions of the
above notification and for effective abatement of pollution and
rejuvenation, protection and management of river Ganga and its tributries.
19. NMCG is under the administrative control of Ministry of Jal Shakti,
Government of India. It is a Central Government Authority constituted for
the purpose of executing projects such as cleaning of river Ganga
undertaken on mission mode by the Central Government in view of the
concerns on the subject of pollution in river Ganga and its tributaries
including those expressed by the Supreme Court (M.C. Mehta vs Union of
India, 1987(4) SCC 463, (1988) 1 SCC 471, (2015) 2 SCC 764) and in
orders passed by the National Green Tribunal.
20. In order to expedite implementation of the project in all earnestness and
in transparent manner, keeping with spirit of the orders passed by the
Supreme Court and taking into consideration the public interest involved
and the obligation of the Government to provide a clean and healthy
environment, the State missions have been set up in various States and
executing agencies have been identified for execution of the projects.
NMCG has provided substantial funding for these projects up to an extent
of 100 per cent central funding and has also imposed conditions amongst
others to keep overall control over the nodal missions in the State. The
sewerage works in the State of Uttar Pradesh are being executed through
U.P. Jal Nigam, a State owned corporation. The executing agency is
required to take such steps for award of contracts and its implementation
thereof, as may be deemed necessary including issuance of tenders subject
to certain conditions specified by NMCG.
21. It is stated that overall control on such processes including for award
and implementation thereafter rests with NMCG.
22. River Gomti is one of the tributaries of river Ganga. River Gomti is
highly polluted in Lucknow city and it smells and looklike a big sewer
drainage in City Lucknow. Untreated sewerage and waste flows directly
into river Gomti in Lucknow. To make river Gomti clean so that its flow
into river Ganga is pollution free, a tender for project of construction of
sewerage network of STP (Lucknow) was sanctioned by NMCG in favour
Government of U.P. This Society is within the State Mission for clean
Ganga, which is an executing arm of the State Ganga Committee,
constituted vide notification dated 07.10.2016. State mission for clean
Ganga is an implementing agency for the project based on their proposal
submitted to NMCG and sanctioned by executing committee of NMCG
subject to several terms and conditions. The project is to be executed
through U.P. Jal Nigam (respondent No.1), an agency of State Government.
23. NMCG generally funds the following category of projects:-
(i) projects funded through externally aided agencies including World
(ii) projects funded under National Ganga Plan (NGP)
24. The project in question at Lucknow was sanctioned in March, 2019
under NGP under Namami Gange Programme with 100 per cent central
25. Tenders for the above works were accordingly invited for the execution
of the project work. Tenders were invited on 30.01.2020 vide notification
No.358/M-13/16. NMCG has sanctioned estimated cost of Rs.213.91
Crores on 06.05.2020 with 100 per cent NMCG funding for the pollution,
abatement works for river Gomti at Lucknow with STP.
26. It is also one of the conditions that procurement of goods and services
shall be made strictly as per National Ganga River Basin Authority
(NGRBA) Programme Framework and various guild-lines of NMCG.
Union Cabinet while approving Namami Gange Programme decided that
the programme will be executed in accordance with NGBRA Programme
27. For the said sanctioned work, U.P. Jal Nigam invited bids from
qualified, capable and experienced bidders for Survey, Investigation,
Design, Supply, Construction, Installation, Testing & Commissioning for
pollution abatement works of river Gomti at Daulatganj, Lucknow
including all appurtenant structures and allied works including 15 years of
operation and management as per the scope of the bid document vide
Tender Notice No.358M-B/16 dated 30.01.22020. The work is to be
executed within 18 months. One of the qualifications of the bidder for
sound financial capabilities, is that the bidder must possess a financial net
worth minimum equivalent to INR 1784.89 lakhs in each of the last three
financial years ending on 31.03.2020 and bidder should demonstrate the
banker's certificate that it has available cash credit facility minimum
equivalent to INR 1189.93 lakhs as on the date of submission of the bids.
Tenders were invited on two bids system i.e. (i) Technical cum Financial
Capacity and pre-qualification evaluation bid; and (ii) Financial bid.
28. Subsequently, NMCG sanctioned revised Administrative Approval and
Expenditure Sanction (AA&ES) for the pollution abatement works of river
Gomti at Lucknow.
29. NGRBA framework procurement manual (chapter number-4 clause
4.2), which has been placed with the counter affidavit filed by Union of
India provides that all contracts of value more than US $1 million
equivalent (Rs.7.4 Crores) are subject to prior review by the funding agency
i.e. NMCG in the instant case. Accordingly, the procurement for this project
is also under prior review and approval by NMCG.
30. Eight bidders namely, (i) Geo Miller and Co. Pvt. Ltd.,; (ii) HNB
M/s. K.B. Srivastava; and (viii) R.K. Engineers Sales Ltd., submitted their
bids in response to the aforesaid tender notice. However, by corrigendum
notice dated 29.07.2020, General Manager, U.P. Jal Nigam, the Executing
Agency without taking approval from the NMCG, the funding agency,
cancelled the tender without assigning any reason. This action of the
Executive Agency would cause unwarranted delay in implementation and
execution of the project within the time frame provided by the National
Green Tribunal and the Supreme Court and would severely affect the clean
Ganga Mission much against public and national interest as such.
31. Bidders upon learning about the cancellation of the tendering process,
represented before the NMCG which in turn vide letter dated 31.07.2020
issued instructions to U.P. Jal Nigam not to give effect to the cancellation
order. The NMCG noted that delay in matters of tendering and indecisions
or improper decisions by the Executive Agencies/State missions adversely
affect the programmes of these high priority projects.
32. It is further said that timelines are fixed by the National Green Tribunal
and the Supreme Court and State must do everything possible earlier to
these timeline and expedite action at every stage. The Project Director of
U.P. Jal Nigam was directed to submit the technical evaluation reports of
the bidders. The Executing Agency was directed to proceed further only
after getting instructions/clearance from the NMCG.
33. It is important to note that the Technical Evaluation Committee headed
by the Chief Engineer of U.P. Jal Nigam had found three bidders to be
technically qualified excluding the petitioner and four others, namely;
34. Minutes of the meeting of the Technical Evaluation Committee dated
20.07.2020 have been placed on record as Annexure CA-6 of the counter
affidavit filed on behalf of the U.P. Jal Nigam. However, Tender
Sanctioning Committee headed by the Managing Director of U.P. Jal
Nigam in its meeting dated 27.07.2020, found that only one bidder i.e.
Ashoka Buildcon Pvt. Ltd., was qualified and in that view of the matter a
Corrigendum dated 29.07.2020 was issued canceling the tender process.
35. The NMCG reviewed the recommendation of the technical evaluation
committee and evaluated the technical bids of all eight bidders including
the petitioner’s bid herein and found two more bidders namely (i) M/s R.K.
Engineers Sales Ltd; (ii) M/s KB Srivastava; besides Ashoka Buildcon Pvt
Ltd., to be technically qualified and their bids responsive as was found by
the Technical Evaluation Committee head by the Chief Engineer.
36. The petitioner’s bid was again not found responsive at the level of hte
NMCG as it was not technically qualified. In view of the aforesaid, the
NMCG having overall control and supervision of the project and being 100
% funding agency, vide letter dated 25.08.2020 directed the U.P. Jal Nigam
to open the financial bids of three bidders, who were found technically
qualified by the Technical Evaluation Committee and, later on by the
NMCG itself.
37. In pursuance of the aforesaid direction issued by the NMCG, U.P.Jal
Nigam issued notice dated 03.09.2020 for opening of the financial bids. In
the financial bids, respondent no.4 was found to be eligible and, therefore,
Letter of Award dated 17.09.2020 has been issued in its favour.
38. The present writ petition has been filed by the petitioner, whose bid
was not found responsive as having not met the technical qualification
criteria, first by the Technical Evaluation Committee headed by the Chief
Manager, secondly by Tender Sanction Committee headed by the Managing
Director of U.P. Jal Nigam and, thirdly by the NMCG praying for inter alia
"(a) Issue a writ of certiorari or any other writ/order/direction of
similar nature seeking the quashing of letter/decision dated
2.09.2020 issued by the Chief Engineer, U.P. Jal Nigam Respondent
(b) Issue a writ of certiorari or any other writ/order/direction of
similar    nature   whereby    quashing   the   order/message  dated
03.09.2020 (Annexure No.13) issued by the respondent No.1 and 2
for allegedly revoking the cancellation order dated 29.7.2020 and
notifying the Petitioner as it was declared "Not qualified";
(d) Issue a writ of certiorari or any other writ /order/direction of
similar nature whereby quashing the document dated 7.9.2020 (P-
16) uploaded on the website of the Respondent No.1 whereby three
Bidders have been declared as qualified and the Petitioner so there
(h) Issue a writ of mandamus or any other writ, order or direction of
the similar nature whereby commanding the Respondent Nos.1 and 2
to open the price bid of the petitioner herein with respect to e-tender
notice no.358/M-13/16, dated 30.1.2020 and award the contract to
the Petitioner if the price Bid of the Petitioner is lowest one, as per
39. Heard Mr. S.D. Singh, learned counsel, assisted by Mr. Agendra Sinha,
Advocate appearing for the petitioner, Mr. Raghvendra Kumar Singh,
learned Advocate General, assisted by Mr. Rishabh Kapoor, Advocate
appearing for respondent nos. 1 and 2-U.P.Jal Nigam, Mr. J.N. Mathur,
learned Senior Advocate, assisted by Mr. Amrit Khare and Mr. Ruchir,
Advocates, appearing for respondent no. 3-Union of India, Mr. S.B. Pandey,
learned Assistant Solicitor General, assisted by Mr. Raj Kumar Singh,
Advocate also made submissions on behalf of respondent no. 3-Union of
India and, Mr. Sudhir Kumar Pandey, appearing for respondent no. 4-M/s
40. Mr. S.D. Singh, learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that
once the decision was taken by the competent authority to cancel the tender,
which was in fact cancelled vide corrigendum dated 29.07.2020, the same
could not have been revived by NMCG and fresh bids ought to have been
invited for implementing the project/scope of the tendering process. He has
further submitted that there was no authority vested in the NMCG to
interfere with the tendering process or the decision taken by the owner i.e.
U.P. Jal Nigam, which is defined under the tender document itself and,
therefore, the decision of the NMCG to re-evaluate the technical bids of the
tenderers was without jurisdiction. He has also submitted that the decision
of the NMCG to declare two more bidders i.e. (i) M/s R.K. Engineers Sales
Ltd; (ii) M/s KB Srivastava; to be qualified is null and void as being
without jurisdiction and powers of the NMCG. It is submitted that direction
of the NMCG to the U.P. Jal Nigam, the owner to open the financial bids of
only three bidders was again without jurisdiction and thus, Letter of Intent
issued in favour of respondent No.4 dated 17.09.2020 is illegal, arbitrary
and unjustified and is liable to the set aside.
41. Mr. S.D. Singh, learned counsel for the petitioner has placed reliance
on Clause 6.2 of the Bid Document, under which rights of respondent No.1
being owner of the project in question has been defined, which reads as
"6.2 Owner's Right to Accept or Reject and Waive Irregularities:-
4. annul the bidding process and commence a new process; and
5. Waive irregularities, minor informalities, or minor non-
conformities which do not constitute material deviations in the
submitted bids from the bidding documents, at any time prior to the
award of the contract without incurring any liability to the affected
Bidder or Bidders and without any obligation to inform the affected
bidder or bidders of the grounds for the Owner's actions.
b. Nothing in ITB section 6.2(a) is intended to permit the owner to
refuse to provide reasons for rejection to an unsuccessful bidder."
42.   Mr. S.D. Singh, learned counsel for the petitioner has, therefore,
submitted that after the tendering process was cancelled vide corrigendum
dated 29.07.2020, the only course of action available to the owner was to
commence fresh tendering process. There is nothing in the tendering
document under which respondent No.1 i.e. U.P. Jal Nigam is vested with
the power to revoke the decision of canceling the tendering process and,
therefore, decision to proceed with canceled tender, is totally illegal and
contrary to the terms and conditions of the tender document itself. The said
decision is without any right or authority and, therefore, void ab initio.
43. With the cancellation of the tender, all the processes came to an end.
Respondent No. 1 does not have any other option but to return the bids to
all the bidders and invite fresh bids. Bids submitted in response to the
tender which stood cancelled, could not be considered at all and all the bids
technically become redundant and infructuous.
44. However, it has been stated in para 25 of the writ petition that for any
reasons, if this court finds and arrives at a conclusion that the bids could
have been opened and reconsidered even after corrigendum notice dated
29.07.2020, petitioner’s right needs to be protected and, the declaration of
the petitioner as not being qualified is required to be quashed.
45. It has been further submitted that the respondent authorities are
obligated and duty bound to follow U.P. Procurement Manual and Manual
for Procurement of Works, 2019 of the Government of India, Ministry of
Finance, Department of Expenditure which contains basic principles and
guidelines for any tendering process. Learned counsel has placed reliance
on Clause 14.34 of the U.P. Procurement Manual to submit that procuring
entity would not be entitled to open any bids or proposals after taking a
decision to cancel the procurement and, is required to return such unopened
bids or proposals. A procurement process, once canceled, cannot be
reopened and the only option is to start a new procurement process, if so
required. He has also placed reliance on Clause 5.6.8 of the manual for
procurement of work, 2019 of Government of India issued by Ministry of
Finance, Department of Expenditure.
46. In view of the aforesaid submissions, he has submitted that the decision
to open the financial bids of three bidders and on that basis impugned
L.O.I. dated 17.09.2020 issued in favour of respondent No.4 are illegal,
arbitrary and in the teeth of the tender document itself and, therefore, the
same is liable to be quashed and the executing agency be directed to adopt
afresh tendering process to finalize the work in favour of the successful
47. Mr. Raghvendra Singh, learned Advocate General assisted by Mr.
Rishabh Kapoor appearing for respondent No.1 and 2, U.P. Jal Nigam has
made preliminary submissions regarding maintainability of the writ petition
on behalf of the petitioner and has submitted that the petitioner was not
found eligible and technically qualified by the Technical Evaluation
Committee and Tender Sanctioning Committee headed by the Chief
Engineer and Managing Director respectively inter alia for the following
(ii) Required design inlet norms not taken in design; and
(iii) Cash Credit facility not verified by the Bank.
Since, the petitioner has not challenged its disqualification and, it
appears that he would not have any objection if the tender was awarded to
Ashoka Buildcon Pvt. Ltd., the only bidder, which was found eligible by
the Tender Sanctioning Committee headed by the Managing Director, he is
not entitled to challenge the decision of the NMCG for qualifying two more
bidders and directing respondent No.1 to open and evaluate financial bids
of technically qualified bidders. Once the petitioner has not challenged its
disqualification, the writ petition on its behalf for finalizing the tender in
favour of respondent No.4 and issuing L.O.I. in its favour is not
In support of this submission, he has placed reliance on the judgment of
the Supreme Court in the case of Shagun Mahila Udyogik Sahakari
Sanstha Maryadit vs State of Maharashtra & Ors: (2011) 9 SCC 340.
He has also placed reliance on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the
case of Raunaq International Ltd., vs I.V.R. Construction Ltd., and
48. Learned Advocate General has also submitted that once the petitioner
has not challenged his disqualification, he cannot be said to be a 'person
aggrieved' to maintain the writ petition under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India. The petitioner is not prejudiced in any manner
inasmuch as he has not been found technically qualified. The 'person
aggrieved' is one who has suffered some legal injury and only such a person
would have right to approach this Court. He in support of this submission
has placed reliance on the judgment of the Supreme court in the case of
Jasbhai Motibhai Desai vs Roshan Kumar, : (1976) 1 SCC 761.
49. Next submission of the learned Advocate General is that the petitioner
has not challenged the order dated 25.08.2020 taken by the NMCG in
pursuance of which financial bids of three technical qualified bidders were
opened. Orders dated 02.09.2020 and 03.09.2020 are consequential orders
to the order dated 25.08.2020. Since the petitioner has not challenged the
main order dated 25.08.2020, the writ petition would not be maintainable to
challenge the consequential orders. In support of the aforesaid submission,
he has placed reliance on two judgments in the cases of P. Chitharanja
Menon and Ors vs A. Balakrishnan and Ors: (1977) 3 SCC 255 and
Amarjeet Singh and Ors vs Devi Ratan and Ors : (2010) 1 SCC 417.
50. Mr. Raghvendra Singh, learned Advocate General has also submitted
that in commercial matters even if some defects are found in decision
making process, the Court should exercise its jurisdiction under Article 226
of the Constitution of India only in furtherance of public interest. He has
further submitted that even if it is assumed that the decision of revocation
of the cancellation vide order dated 02.09.2020 is defective because of
some procedural aberration in decision making process, this Court should
exercise its discretion in furtherance of public interest and not otherwise.
51. The present work is of very large public interest inasmuch as untreated
sewage, waste and drainage water is being flown into river Gomti, one of
the main tributaries of river Ganga and the water of river Gomti is injurious
not only to humans but also to biodiversity and, any delay would not only
increase the cost but also to have adverse impact on the National Mission
for Clean Ganga. He has, therefore, submitted that looking at the large
public and national interest involved and the fact that the delay would
adversely affect the ambitious mission of clean Ganga and prevention of
abatement of pollution in river Gomti, this Court may not interfere with the
decision of the competent authority to award the contract in favour of the
technically qualified bidder, which is just, fair and reasonable. He has
placed reliance of the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Air
India Ltd. vs Cochin International Airport Ltd., & Ors: (2000) 2 SCC
52.   It has further been submitted that entering into a contract is a
commercial transaction and evaluation of tenders and awarding contracts
are commercial functions. If the award of contract is bonafide and in the
public interest, the Court should not interfere in exercise of powers of
judicial review even, if there is a procedural aberration or error in
assessment or prejudicial to a particular tenderer. The Court is required to
balance the public interest viz-a-viz private interest and private interest
cannot be protected at the cost of the public and national interest while
deciding a contractual dispute. To buttress this submission, he has placed
reliance upon the judgment in the case of Jagdish Mandal vs. State of
53.   Learned Advocate General has further submitted that it is a well
established principle that in contractual matters the Court should not
exercise the power of judicial review, if there is no arbitrariness or
favoritism while awarding the contract. In support of the aforesaid
submissions, he has placed reliance upon the judgment of Siemens
Aktiengeselischaft and Siemens Limited vs Delhi Metro Rail
Corporation Limited and Ors: (2014) 11 SCC 288.
54. Mr. J.N. Mathur, learned Senior Advocate assisted by Mr. Amrit Khare
has submitted that NMCG is an authority constituted in accordance with the
provisions of Sub-section 3 of the Section 3 of the Environmental
(Protection) Act, 1986 vide Notification No.S.O. 3187 (E) dated
07.10.2016. The NMCG is an approving authority for planning, financing,
execution and implementation of projects for prevention, control and
abatement of pollution in river Ganga in terms of said notification. Even in
terms of Administrative Approval and Expenditure Sanctioned (AA&ES)
dated 02.03.2019, overall financial and administrative control is vested with
the NMCG for clean Ganga mission. The U.P. Jal Nigam has been selected
as Executing Agency for the projects in the State of Uttar Pradesh to be
undertaken by the NMCG. However, the NMCG retains right to issue
directions to the U.P. Jal Nigam and, also right to seek compliance of all
observations made by it. Under notification dated 07.10.2016, the NMCG is
an ultimate authority to review, approve, monitor the overall execution and
implementation of the tender in question and, it is the final authority to take
all decision in respect of tenders floated by U.P. Jal Nigam.
55. When the NMCG received complainants regarding abrupt decision
taken by respondent No.1 on 29.07.2020 to cancel the tender process, it
directed respondent No.1 to submit its report on the complaints made by
bidders along with Technical Evaluation Report of all the bidders and
directed the U.P. Jal Nigam to proceed further only after getting instructions
from the NMCG.
56. It has been submitted that the petitioner has not challenged the decision
of the U.P. Jal Nigam to disqualify the petitioner in the technical evaluation
stage itself and, there is no challenge to said decision of the U.P. Jal Nigam
or NMCG and, therefore, the writ petition is not maintainable. It has been
further submitted that in sum and substance in pursuance of the
Corrigendum dated 29.07.2020 vide which the tender had been cancelled,
re-advertisement could have been issued and, the petitioner would have
another chance of being selected, if found qualified. He has, therefore,
submitted that mere chance of selection does not entail a vested right in an
interested person. He has placed reliance upon two judgments in the cases
of Commissioner of Police & Anr. vs Umesh Kumar (2020) 10 SCC 488
and Punjab Electricity Board and Ors vs. Malkiat Singh: (2005) 9 SCC
57. It has further been submitted that the NMCG is an expert body created
for the purposes as mentioned in the notification dated 07.10.2016. This
expert body has evaluated the entire tendering process by U.P. Jal Nigam
and, after taking into account the commercial and technical evaluation
involved in the project, decision has been taken to open the financial bids of
three technically qualified bidders. The petitioner was not found technically
qualified by U.P. Jal Nigam or by the NMCG. The impugned decision was
taken by the NMCG in pubic interest and same should not be interfered
with by this Court in exercise of powers of judicial review under Article
226 of the Constitution of India. He has placed reliance on the judgment of
the Supreme Court in the case of Bharat Coking Coal Ltd., vs AMR Dev
58. Mr. S.B. Pandey, learned Assistant Solicitor General assisted by Mr.
Raj Kumar Singh, learned counsel appearing for respondent No.3 and Mr.
Sudhir Kumar Pandey, learned counsel appearing for respondent No.4 have
made similar arguments advanced by learned Advocate General and Mr.
J.N. Mathur, learned Senior Advocate. Learned counsel for respondent No.4
has submitted that as per the notification dated 02.03.2019 placed along
with the supplementary affidavit filed on behalf of respondent No.1, U.P.
Jal Nigam is an executing agency for the projects to take up the I&D and
STP works pertaining to pollution abatement of river Gomti on DBOT
model. The condition on Administrative Approval and Expenditure
Sanction for the project specifically stipulates that executing agency shall
comply with all the observations of NMCG. He, therefore, has submitted
that overall control having been vested in the NMCG, it was well within its
power to call for a report from the U.P. Jal Nigam about the technical
evaluation of the bidders and having been found three bidders technically
qualified, direction was issued for opening their financial bids. Respondent
No.4 having being found eligible and financial bid most competitive, L.O.I.
has been issued in its favour. It is, therefore, submitted that since the
decision making process was fair, transparent and reasonable, this Court
may not interfere with the decision taken by the competent authority for
awarding contract.
59. We have considered the submissions of the learned counsel for the
parties and gone through the record.
60. The questions, which arise for consideration in the present case are:-
"(i) Whether NMCG does not have any authority to give directions to
U.P. Jal Nigam to not give effect to the Corrigendum dated
29.07.2020, cancelling the tendering process and examination of the
technical bids of all eight bidders including the petitioner by the
NMCG itself and then direction vide letter dated 25.08.2020 to U.P.
Jal Nigam to open financial bids of three bidders who were found
technically qualified and proceed with finalization of the tender?
(ii) Whether writ petition on behalf of the petitioner who has not
challenged his disqualification, is maintainable? and
(iii) Whether public interest in the present case would outweigh some
aberrations, if any, in the tendering process looking into the cause
for which tender has been invited particularly when there is no
61. The main thrust of the submission of Mr. S.D. Singh, learned counsel
appearing for the petitioner is that under Clause 15 of the NIT document, it
is the U.P. Jal Nigam, which has exclusive right to accept or reject any or
all the bids. NIT does not recognize any role of the NMCG in tendering
process. Complete authority and autonomy has been given to U.P. Jal
Nigam as 'owner' in this regard. The NMCG does not have any supervisory
or controlling power or authority in respect of the tendering process. Clause
6.3 of the NIT, which provides that effectiveness of the contract shall be as
of the date of the owner's signing contract subject to the final approval by
the NMCG, does not empower the NMCG to revive the cancelled tendering
process. Power of cancellation and acceptance is exclusively vested in the
U.P. Jal Nigam. Final approval by the NMCG does not mean that the
NMCG is vested with the power to re-valuate the technical and financial
bids, which is in the exclusive domain of the owner i.e. U.P. Jal Nigam.
Power to award the contract is vested in the owner only.
62. NMCG is the authority constituted vide Notification No. S.O.3187(E)
dated 07.10.2016 of the Ministry of Water Resources, River Development
and Ganga Rejuvenation under the provisions of Environment (Protection)
Act, 1986 for planning, financing, execution and implementation of
projects for prevention, control and abatement of pollution in river Ganga.
Under the notification dated 02.03.2019 issued by Government of India,
National Mission for Clean Ganga, Ministry of Water Resources, River
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation for Administrative Approval and
Expenditure Sanction for the project in question i.e. Interception and
Diversion of sewage plants at Lucknow at an estimated cost of Rs.298.12
crores, U.P. Jal Nigam has been chosen as an executing agency for the
project. The executing agency is duty bound to comply with all
observations of the funding agency i.e. NMCG before bidding and during
implementation. It is important to note that under the statutory notification
dated 07.10.2016 issued under Section 3(3) of the Environment (Protection)
Act, 1986, the NMCG is empowered to issue directions to any person or
authority, which it may consider necessary, for proper and prompt
execution of the projects or cancel such projects or stop release of funds
63. Relevant part of the said notification is extracted hereunder:-
"(f) approve the planning, financing and execution of programmes
for abatement of pollution in the River Ganga including
augmentation of sewerage and effluent treatment infrastructure,
catchment area treatment, protection of flood plains, creating public
awareness, conservation of aquatic and riparian life and biodiversity
and such other measures for promoting environmentally sustainable
(g) Coordination, monitoring and review of the implementation of
various programmes or activities taken up for prevention, control
and abatement of pollution and protection and management in the
(k) Issue such directions to any person or authority, as it may
consider necessary, for proper and prompt execution of the projects
or cancel such projects or stop release of funds or direct refund of
amount already and assign the same to any other person or
authority or board or corporation for prompt execution thereof.
(m) Take such other measures which may be necessary for
achievement of prevention, control and abatement of pollution,
rejuvenation and protection and management in river Ganga and its
64.     In view of the aforesaid, we find that under the said Statutory
notification itself, the NMCG is the ultimate authority to review, approve
and monitor the overall execution and implementation of the tender in
question. It is also empowered to give its observation before bidding and
during implementation and, the executing agency is obliged to comply with
all such observations and directions.
65. We find force in the submission of Mr. J.N. Mathur, learned Senior
Advocate appearing for respondent No.3 that vide notification dated
07.10.2016, NMCG has been vested with wide range of powers for issuing
directions, which it may consider necessary for proper and prompt
execution of the projects etc, and this power would include the power to
issue directions to the executing agency i.e. U.P. Jal Nigam during the
course of tendering process and, thereafter for proper implementation of the
66. We, therefore, do not find much substance in the submission of the
learned counsel for the petitioner that the NMCG does not have power to
revive the tendering process, which was cancelled by U.P. Jal Nigam vide
Corrigendum dated 29.07.2020 inasmuch as overall control and supervision
is vested with the NMCG and even final contract is subject to the approval
of the NMCG. We hold that the NMCG was well within the power to direct
the U.P. Jal Nigam not to give effect to Corrigendum dated 29.07.2020 and
further direction to open the financial bids of three technically qualified
bidders and proceed with the tendering process.
67. The project in question is funded 100% by the Central Government
Agency i.e. the NMCG. Clause 5.6.8 of the Manual for Procurement of
Works, 2019 issued by the Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure
provides that the bidding process can be rejected or fresh bidding can be
"(a) If the quantity and quality of requirements have changed
substantially or there is an un-rectifiable infirmity in the bidding
(b) when none of the lenders is substantially responsive to the
(c) none of the technical Proposals meets the minimum technical
(d) If effective competition is locking. However, lack of competition
shall not be determined solely on the basis of the number of Bidders.
(Please refer to para above also regarding receipt of a single offer;
(e) the Bids'/Proposals' prices are substantially higher than the
(f) If the bidder, whose bid has been found to be the lowest evaluated
bid withdraws or whose bid has been accepted, fails to sign the
procurement contract as may be required, or fails to provide the
security as may be required for the performance of the contract or
otherwise withdraws from the procurement process. Provided that the
procuring entity, on being satisfied that it is not a case of cartelization
and the integrity of the procurement process has been maintained,
may, for cogent reasons to be recorded in writing, offer the next
successful bidder, and if the offer is accepted, award the contract to
the next successful bidder at the price bid of the first successful
68. In the present case, Tender Evaluation Committee headed by the Chief
Engineer found three bidders, out of eight bidders, technically qualified and
they were held to be responsive bidders. However, Tender Sanctioning
Committee headed by the Managing Director found only one bidder i.e. M/
s Ashoka Buildcon Ltd., technically qualified and had cancelled the bidding
process by Corrigendum dated 29.07.2020 on the sole ground that only one
bidder was found technically qualified.
69. We find that such a course of action by the Executing Agency is against
the provisions of 5.6.8 of the Manual for Procurement of Works, 2019
inasmuch as tendering process could have been cancelled inter alia on the
ground that none of the tenders is substantially responsive to the
requirement of the procurement document. Here even Tender Sanctioning
Committee found one bidder substantially responsive and, therefore,
cancellation of the tendering process vide Corrigendum dated 29.07.2020 is
against the provisions of Manual for Procurement of Works, 2019 issued by
Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure. U.P. Procurement Manual
(Procurement of Goods) will not have relevance in the present case
inasmuch as the project is fully funded by the Central Government and not
by the State Government at all.
70. Exercising its powers vested under the statutory notification dated
07.10.2016 read with notification dated 02.03.2019 issued by Government
of India, the NMCG was well within the power to direct the Executing
Agency not to give effect to the Corrigendum dated 29.07.2020 for
cancelling the project and to avoid delay in execution of the project of vital
importance to abate and reduce the pollution level in river Gomti, which is
one of the main tributaries of river Ganga, had decided to examine the
technical bids itself and found three bidders technically qualified and,
therefore, issued directions to the Executing Agency to open the financial
bids of three responsive bidders and proceed for finalization of the
tendering process.
71. We hold that the course of action adopted by the NMCG is well within
its power and does not call for any interference by this Court.
72.   In view of the aforesaid discussion, question No.1 is answered
73. Technical bids of eight bidders were scrutinized at the level of the
Committee headed by the Chief Engineer on 26.07.2020, in which three
bidders were found eligible. The decision of the Tender Sanctioning
Committee headed by the Chief Engineer was subject to approval of the
Committee headed by the Managing Director. However, the Committee
headed by the Managing Director found only one bidder technically
qualified. The bidders who had participated in the tendering process made
complaints to the NMCG in respect of Corrigendum dated 29.07.2020,
whereby the tendering process was cancelled by the U.P. Jal Nigam. During
examination of the technical bid of the petitioner, details of cash credit
facility was not provided by the petitioner as per one of the tender
conditions. Technical Committee wrote a letter dated 09.06.2020 to Punjab
National Bank to verify the cash credit limit available with the petitioner,
but no response was ever given by the Bank. The petitioner did not fulfil
the technical criteria and he was not found technically qualified either by
the Committee headed by the Chief Engineer or by the Managing Director
and the NMCG itself. The petitioner has not challenged the decision
regarding his disqualification. The petitioner has challenged the decision of
the NMCG giving direction for not giving effect to Corrigendum dated
29.07.2020 and, the award of the contract in favour of respondent No.4.
74. We are of the view that once the petitioner has not challenged his
disqualification or he is not aggrieved by his disqualification, he has no
locus standi to challenge the grant of contract to respondent No.4.
75. The Supreme Court in the case of Raunaq International Ltd., vs
I.V.R. Construction Ltd., and Ors (supra) has held that award of tender
cannot be stayed at the instance of a party, which does not fulfil the
requisite criteria itself.
It would be apposite to extract para 27 of the aforesaid judgment:-
"27. In the present case, however, the relaxation was permissible
under the terms of the tender. The relaxation which the Board has
granted to M/s Raunaq International Ltd. is on valid principles
looking at the expertise of the tenderer and his past experience
although it does not exactly tally with the prescribed criteria. What is
more relevant, M/s I.V.R. Construction Ltd. who have challenged this
award of tender themselves do not fulfil the requisite criteria. They
do not possess the prescribed experience qualification. Therefore,
any judicial relief at the instance of a party which does not fulfil the
requisite criteria seems to be misplaced. Even if the criteria can be
relaxed both for M/s Raunaq International Ltd. and M/s I.V.R.
Construction Ltd., it is clear that the offer of M/s Raunaq
International Ltd. is lower and it is on this ground that the Board has
accepted the offer of M/s Raunaq International Ltd. We fail to see
how the award of tender can be stayed at the instance of a party
which does not fulfil the requisite criteria itself and whose offer is
higher than the offer which has been accepted. It is also obvious that
by stopping the performance of the contract so awarded, there is a
major detriment to the public because the construction of two
thermal power units, each of 210 MW, is held up on account of this
dispute. Shortages of power have become notorious. They also
seriously affect industrial development and the resulting job
opportunities for a large number of people. In the present case, there
is no overwhelming public interest in stopping the project. There is
no allegation whatsoever of any mala fides or collateral reasons for
granting the contract to M/s Raunaq International Ltd."
76. Once the petitioner has not challenged his disqualification or it is not
aggrieved by the decision to disqualify it, it cannot said to be a person
'aggrieved' when the contract has been awarded in favour of respondent
No.4, who has been found to be technically qualified firstly, by the
Committee headed by the Chief Engineer of the U.P. Jal Nigam, then by the
NMCG itself. If the petitioner is not a person aggrieved, he has no right to
maintain the writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India as
he is not prejudiced in any manner by awarding the contract to respondent
77. A person aggrieved has been defined by the Supreme Court in the case
of Jasbhai Motibhai Desai vs Roshan Kumar (supra).
Relevant para of the aforesaid judgment is reproduced hereunder:-
"13. This takes us to the further question: Who is an “aggrieved
person” and what are the qualifications requisite for such a status?
The expression “aggrieved person” denotes an elastic, and to an
extent, an elusive concept. It cannot be confined within the bounds of
a rigid, exact and comprehensive definition. At best, its features can
be described in a broad tentative manner. Its scope and meaning
depends on diverse, variable factors such as the content and intent of
the statute of which contravention is alleged, the specific
circumstances of the case, the nature and extent of the petitioner's
interest, and the nature and extent of the prejudice or injury suffered
by him. English courts have sometimes put a restricted and
sometimes a wide construction on the expression “aggrieved
person”. However, some general tests have been devised to ascertain
whether an applicant is eligible for this category so as to have the
necessary locus standi or “standing” to invoke certiorari
78. The petitioner has not challenged the decision of U.P. Jal Nigam to
disqualify him and qualify only one bidder i.e. M/s Ashoka Buildcon Ltd. It
appears that the petitioner would not have any grievance, if the tender was
awarded to M/s Ashoka Buildcon Ltd. Once the petitioner was satisfied
with the decision of the Technical Evaluation Committee and the
Committee headed by Managing Director, U.P. Jal Nigam, he cannot later
on challenge the decision to award contract in favour of respondent No.4.
79. We find that the writ petition by the petitioner is not maintainable on
this ground alone.
80. Even otherwise, if the tendering process was cancelled and fresh bids
would have been invited, the petitioner would have only a chance of being
selected, if he would have met the qualifying criteria. Mere chance of
selection does not entail a vested right in an interested person as held in the
decisions of the Supreme Court in the cases of Commissioner of Police &
Anr. vs Umesh Kumar (supra) and Punjab Electricity Board and Ors
81. Award of a contract, whether it is by a private party or public body or
the State, is essentially a commercial transaction. Paramount considerations
in arriving at commercial decision, are commercial considerations.
However, the State, its corporations and its instrumentalities are bound to
adhere to the norms and procedure laid down by them and cannot depart
from them arbitrarily. The decision may not be amenable to judicial review,
but the Court can examine the decision making process and interfere with
it, if it is found to be vitiated by malafide, unreasonableness or arbitrariness.
The Supreme Court in the case of Air India Ltd. vs Cochin International
Airport Ltd., & others (supra) in para 7 has held as under:-
"7. The law relating to award of a contract by the State, its
corporations and bodies acting as instrumentalities and agencies of
the Government has been settled by the decision of this Court in
Ramana Dayaram Shetty v. International Airport Authority of India:
(1979) 3 SCC 489; Fertilizer Corporation Kamgar Union v. Union of
India (1981) 1 SCC 568; CCE v. Dunlop India Ltd. (1985) 1 SCC
260, Tata Cellular v. Union of India (1994) 6 SCC 651, Ramniklal
N. Bhutta v. State of Maharashtra (1997) 1 SCC 134 and Raunaq
Internation Ltd. vs I.V.R. Construction Ltd.(1999) 1 SCC 492. The
award of a contract, whether it is by a private party or by a public
body or the State, is essentially a commercial transaction. In arriving
at a commercial decision considerations which are of paramount are
commercial considerations. The State can choose its own method to
arrive at a decision. It can fix its own terms of invitation to tender
and that is not open to judicial scrutiny. It can enter into
negotiations before finally deciding to accept one of the offers made
to it. Price need not always be the sole criterion for awarding a
contract. It is free to grant any relaxation, for bona fide reasons, if
the tender conditions permit such a relaxation. It may not accept the
offer even though it happens to be the highest or the lowest. But the
State, its corporations, instrumentalities and agencies are bound to
adhere to the norms, standards and procedures laid down by them
and cannot depart from them arbitrarily. Though that decision is not
amenable to judicial review, the Court can examine the decision
making process and interfere if it is found vitiated by mala fides,
unreasonableness and arbitrariness. The State, its corporations,
instrumentalities and agencies have the public duty to be fair to all
concerned. Even when some defect is found in the decision making
process the Court must exercise its discretionary power under Article
226 with great caution and should exercise it only in furtherance of
public interest and not merely on the making out of a legal point. The
Court should always keep the larger public interest in mind in order
to decide whether its intervention is called for or not. Only when it
comes to a conclusion that overwhelming public interest requires
82. We find that there has been no arbitrariness or malafide or illegality in
the finalization of the tender in favour of respondent No.4. Even otherwise,
we do not find sufficient ground to exercise our jurisdiction of judicial
review under Article 226 of the Constitution of India to interfere with the
award of the contract in favour of respondent No.4.
83.    Mission Namami Gange has huge public importance. Delay in
implementing the project would not only escalate the cost but also obstruct
the objective of reducing and abating the pollution level in river Gomti,
which has been referred to as a stinking drainage in Lucknow City.
84. Looking at the large public interest involved, even if it is assumed that
there has been some technical and procedural aberration in awarding the
contract in favour of respondent No.4 but since, same has been without any
malafide or arbitrariness, public interest would demand that such aberration
is to be ignored.
85. We find that the decision taken by the NMCG is bonafide in public
interest. Cancelling the tendering process vide Corrigendum dated
29.07.2020 was a procedural aberration, which has been corrected by the
NMCG vide order dated 25.08.2020.
86. The Supreme Court in the case of Jagdish Mandal vs. State of Orissa
"Judicial review of administrative action is intended to prevent
arbitrariness, irrationality, unreasonableness, bias and malafides. Its
purpose is to check whether choice or decision is made 'lawfully' and
not to check whether choice or decision is 'sound'. When the power
of judicial review is invoked in matters relating to tenders or award
of contracts, certain special features should be borne in mind. A
contract is a commercial transaction. Evaluating tenders and
awarding contracts are essentially commercial functions. Principles
of equity and natural justice stay at a distance. If the decision
relating to award of contract is bona fide and is in public interest,
courts will not, in exercise of power of judicial review, interfere even
if a procedural aberration or error in assessment or prejudice to a
tenderer, is made out. The power of judicial review will not be
permitted to be invoked to protect private interest at the cost of
public interest, or to decide contractual disputes. The tenderer or
contractor with a grievance can always seek damages in a civil
court. Attempts by unsuccessful tenderers with imaginary grievances,
wounded pride and business rivalry, to make mountains out of
molehills of some technical/procedural violation or some prejudice
to self, and persuade courts to interfere by exercising power of
judicial review, should be resisted. Such interferences, either interim
or final, may hold up public works for years, or delay relief and
succour to thousands and millions and may increase the project cost
manifold. Therefore, a court before interfering in tender or
contractual matters in exercise of power of judicial review, should
i) Whether the process adopted or decision made by the authority is
mala fide or intended to favour someone.
Whether the process adopted or decision made is so arbitrary and
irrational that the court can say : 'the decision is such that no
responsible authority acting reasonably and in accordance with
ii) Whether public interest is affected.
If the answers are in the negative, there should be no interference
under Article 226. Cases involving black-listing or imposition of
penal consequences on a tenderer/contractor or distribution of state
largesse (allotment of sites/shops, grant of licences, dealerships and
franchises) stand on a different footing as they may require a higher
87. This writ petition has been filed on technical grounds without there
being serious allegation about arbitrariness or favoritism. Even, otherwise
on the facts, we do not find that there has been any arbitrariness or
favoritism in awarding the contract in favour of respondent No.4.
88. The Supreme Court in the cases of Siemens Aktiengeselischaft and
Siemens Limited vs Delhi Metro Rail Corporation Limited and Ors
(supra) while dealing with the power of judicial review in tender matters
"23.There is no gainsaying that in any challenge to the award of
contact before the High Court and so also before this Court what is
to be examined is the legality and regularity of the process leading to
award of contract. What the Court has to constantly keep in mind is
that it does not sit in appeal over the soundness of the decision. The
Court can only examine whether the decision making process was
fair, reasonable and transparent. In cases involving award of
contracts, the Court ought to exercise judicial restraint where the
decision is bonafide with no perceptible injury to public interest."
89. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we hold that public interest would
outweigh private interest of the petitioner, if any, and, therefore, this Court
in exercising of its power of judicial review vested under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India, would not like to interfere with the award of contract
which has huge public importance. We, therefore, in view of the aforesaid
discussion, answer question No.3 accordingly.
90. Thus, considering the facts and circumstances of the case and
submissions of learned counsels for the petitioner and respondents, we do
not find any ground to interfere with the tendering process and award of
contract.
91. In view of the aforesaid, this writ petition is dismissed. No costs.
92. The respondents are directed to proceed with the execution of the work
in all earnestness and promptness so that pollution in river Gomti is
controlled and abated, consequently pollution in river Ganga would also get
abated, which is the main objective of 'Namami Gange Mission'.
Digitally signed by Justice Dinesh Digitally signed by RITU RAJ