1.     With the consent of the learned advocates appearing for
the respective parties, the present petition is taken up for
final hearing today.
2.     The petitioner apprehends that the petitioner is likely to
be detained under the PASA Act on the pretext of F.I.R/s for
the offence punishable u/s 323, 342,354, 354(A)(2), 375 etc. of
3.     During the course of hearing, the State was directed to
place on record the detention order for Court’s perusal and
consequently, the State has placed on record the detention
order dated 14.10.2021 passed by the detaining authority.
4.     Learned advocate for the petitioner has submitted that
the petition in the present form is maintainable and tenable
both on law as well as on facts to substantively challenge the
order of detention at pre-execution stage in view of the
decision of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Deepak Bajaj
V/s. State of Maharashtra and another reported in (2008)16
SCC     14.      According to him,      the Hon'ble     Apex        Court,
considering its earlier decision in the case of Additional
Secretary to the Government of India and others V/s. Smt.
Alka Subhash Gadia and another reported in 1992 Supp.(1)
SCC 496 and the objections taken at the pre-execution stage
by the other side therein, on the identical ground, has held
that "we are of the opinion that the five grounds mentioned
therein on which the Court can set-aside the detention order
at pre execution stage are only illustrative not exhaustive".
Learned advocate for the petitioner also relied upon the
decision of the Division Bench of this Court in the case of
Mahendrasinh Mangalsinh Jadeja V/s. State of Gujarat and
other delivered in Letters Patent Appeal No.1495 of 2013 on
24.12.2013. Lastly, he has submitted that it is an established
law that the detention in case of offence registered against
detenu under the Act, is against the law. According to him,
except aforesaid offence, there is no material to indicate that
the alleged activity of the petitioner is affecting or likely to
affect adversely to the maintenance of public order and hence,
the order of detention is illegal and bad in law.
5.     Learned A.G.P. for the State, on the other hand,
submitted that this petition is at pre-execution stage without
surrendering before challenging the order of detention.
Unless and until the petitioner surrenders, he would not be
entitled to get the order as well as the grounds thereunder
and the petitioner would not be entitled to copies of the same
by filing the present petition.
6.     The order of detention is passed on the basis of what has
come to be known as the subjective satisfaction of the
detaining authority such subjective satisfaction has to be
arrived at on two points. Firstly, on the veracity of facts
imputed to the person to be detained and secondly, on the
prognostication of the detaining authority that the person
concerned is likely to indulge again in the same kind of
notorious activities. Whereas, normal laws are primarily
concerned with the act of commission of the offence, the
detention laws are concerned with character of the person
who has committed or is likely to commit an offence. The
detaining authority has, therefore, to be satisfied that the
person sought to be detained is of such a type that he will
continue to violate the laws of the land if he is not
preventively detained. So, the commission of infraction of law,
not done in an organized or systematic manner, may not be
sufficient for the detaining authority to justifiably come to the
conclusion that there is no alternate but to preventively detain
the petitioner.
7.     No doubt, neither the possibility of launching of a
criminal       proceedings nor    pendency    of    any        criminal
proceedings is an absolute bar to an order of preventive
detention. But, failure of the detaining authority to consider
the possibility of either launching or pendency of criminal
proceedings may, in the circumstances of a case, lead to the
conclusions that the the detaining authority has not applied its
mind to the vital question whether it was necessary to make
an order of preventive detention. Since there is an allegation
that the order of detention is issued in a mechanical manner
without keeping in mind whether it was necessary to make
such an order when an ordinary criminal proceedings could
well serve the purpose. The detaining authority must satisfy
the court that the question too was borne in mind before the
order of detention was made. In the case on hand, the
detaining authority failed to satisfy the court that the
detaining authority so bore the question in mind and,
therefore, the court is justified in drawing the inference that
there was non application of mind by detaining authority to
the vital question whether it was necessary to preventively
detain the detenue. It is also fruitful to refer to the decision of
the Hon’ble Apex Court rendered in the case of Rekha V/s.
State of Tamil Nadu through Secretary to Government and
another reported in (2011)5 SCC 244 wherein, it is observed
by the Hon’ble Apex Court that if a person is liable to be tried,
or is actually being tried for a criminal offence but the
ordinary criminal law will not be able to deal with the
situation, then and only then, preventive detention be taken
recourse to.
8.      In light of the abovementioned decisions of the Hon'ble
Apex Court and as discussed by the Division Bench of this
Court in the case of Mahendrasinh Mangalsinh Jadeja (supra),
now, it is right time to examine whether in the facts of this
case, the Court should interfere with the preventive detention
order at the pre-execution stage. It is true that this petition is
filed at a pre-execution stage. However, from the grounds of
detention, produced for Court’s perusal, it appears that the
offence/s, as aforesaid, has been registered against the
petitioner. This fact has not been controverted by the
detaining authority. It also appears that on the basis of the
above offence/s, the detaining authority has come to the
subjective satisfaction that the activities of the petitioner as
"sexual offender" have disturbed the public order. The
preventive detention order mentions that the petitioner is a
"sexual offender".
9.     It appears that the subjective satisfaction arrived at by
the detaining authority cannot be said to be legal, valid and in
accordance with law inasmuch as the offences alleged in the
FIR/s cannot have any bearing on the public order since the
laws of the land are sufficient enough to take care of the
situation and that the allegations as have been levelled
against the detenue cannot be said to be germane for the
purpose of bringing the detenu within the meaning of Section
2(ha) of the Act and unless and until the material is there to
make out a case that the person concerned has become a
threat and a menace to the society so as to disturb the whole
tempo of the society and that the whole social apparatus is in
peril disturbing public order at the instance of such person. In
view of the allegations alleged in the aforesaid F.I.R/s., the
Court is of the opinion that the activities of the detenue
cannot be said to be dangerous to the maintenance of public
order and at the most fall under the maintenance of ”law and
order.” In this connection, it will be fruitful to refer to a
decision of the Supreme Court in Pushker Mukherjee v/s.
State of West Bengal [AIR 1970 SC 852], where the
distinction between 'law and order' and 'public order' has
been clearly laid down. The Court observed as follows :
“Does the expression "public order" take in every
kind of infraction of order or only some categories
thereof ? It is manifest that every act of assault or
injury to specific persons does not lead to public
disorder. When two people quarrel and fight and
assault each other inside a house or in a street, it
may be said that there is disorder but not public
disorder. Such cases are dealt with under the
powers vested in the executive authorities under
the provisions of ordinary criminal law but the
culprits cannot be detained on the ground that they
were disturbing public order. The contravention of
any law always affects order but before it can be
said to affect public order, it must affect the
community or the public at large. In this connection
we must draw a line of demarcation between
serious and aggravated forms of disorder which
directly affect the community or injure the public
interest and the relatively minor breaches of peace
of a purely local significance which primarily injure
specific individuals and only in a secondary sense
public interest. A mere disturbance of law and
order leading to disorder is thus not necessarily
sufficient for action under the Preventive Detention
Act but a disturbance which will affect public order
comes within the scope of the Act.”
10.    Therefore, it cannot be said that for the aforesaid
offence/s registered against the petitioner, the petitioner
could be considered to be a “sexual offender”, whose
preventive detention is must for maintenance of public order.
So, the Court is of the considered opinion that the petitioner is
not a "sexual offender" and his act, as alleged in the
detention order cannot disturb maintenance of public order
and, therefore, the instant case would fall within 3 rd and 4th
grounds namely it is passed for wrong purpose or it is passed
on vague, extraneous and irrelevant grounds mentioned in the
case of Alka Gadia (supra) and, therefore, order of preventive
detention at pre-execution stage calls for interference of this
Court. As the order of detention has been passed by the
detaining authority without having adequate grounds for
passing the said order, it cannot be sustained and deserves to
be quashed and set aside.
11.    In the result, the petition is hereby allowed. Impugned
order of detention dated 14.10.2021 passed by the detaining
authority against the petitioner is hereby quashed and set
aside. Rule is made absolute to the aforesaid extent. Direct
service is permitted.