The appellant has preferred this appeal under Section 374(2) of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973(2 of 1974) [in short Cr.P.C.] against the
judgment dated 28.06.2011 passed by the Court of 3 rd Additional Sessions
Judge, Indore in S.T.No.1042/2009, whereby the appellant has been
convicted under Section 302 of Indian Penal Code, 1860 (in short IPC) and
under Sec 25(1)(1-B) of Arms Act and sentenced to undergo life
imprisonment with fine of Rs. 1,000/- and 1 year R.I. with fine of Rs. 500/-
with default stipulation.
(i) About fifteen years ago complainant Saroj Kashyap's husband deceased
Surendra Kashyap purchased a hath thela placed near Mahalaxmi Temple,
opposite to Rajwada Indore from the appellant Basant Kala for an amount
of Rs. 40,000/- and ran a shop of bangles therein. Appellant occasionally
used to take an amount of Rs. 1,000/- as rent from the deceased and when
the deceased denied to give the rent amount, appellant got angry and was
having animosity with him. On 29.06.2009, at about 8:30 p.m. when
deceased was going towards Rajwada Gate, appellant came there from
Cr.Appeal No. 891 of 2011
opposite direction and with an intent to commit his murder inflicted two
knife blows on his chest, due to which he sustained grievous injuries and
cried for help saying “ mujhe Basant Kale ne chaku mara hai”.
Complainant – Saroj, her nephew Mahendra and neighbour Shopkeeper
Ravi ran towards deceased to see the incident, soon whereafter, appellant
ran away from the spot.
(ii)  Complainant - Saroj , Mahendra and Ravi immediately took the
deceased to Arpan Hospital and thereafter to M.Y. Hospital Indore in an
Auto rickshaw where at about 9:07 p.m. he was declared dead. On the same
day, at about 9:17 p.m. on the basis of telephonic information received
from M.Y. Hospital, HC Shivram Singh registered the merg intimation
report (Ex. P-4) at Police Station, Sarafa, Indore. Inspector G.S. Chadhar
rushed to M.Y. Hospital and at about 9:10 p.m. recorded dehati nalishi
(Ex. P-3) on the basis of statement of complainant - Saroj. On the same
day, he inspected the place of incident and prepared spot map (Ex. P-8),
seized plain and blood soaked soil from the place of incident, as per seizure
memo (Ex.P-9) and recorded statements of the complainant as well as
witnesses Mahendra, Ishant, Ravi and Karan Singh.
(iii) On the next day i.e. on 30.06.2009, ASI Gajanand went to M.Y.
Hospital Indore, called the witnesses issuing safina form (Ex.P-5) and
prepared naksha panchayatnama(Ex. P-6) of deceased's body and vide
Cr.Appeal No. 891 of 2011
letter (Ex. P-23) sent the same for post-mortem examination. On the same
day, at about 12:16 p.m. Dr.          N.M. Unda conducted post-mortem
examination of the body of the deceased and found following injuries on
(a)    Stab injury present on the left side of chest, 14.0 cm
above and 1.0 medial to left nipple just below the clavicle mid
point, 2.2. x 1.50 cm deep to the thoracic cavity. Obliquely
placed cut mark present in the underneath vascular. Structure
thoracic cavity and lung tissue upper lobe left side cut marks
in lung tissue 2x1 cm deep, total depth. 12.0 cm, direction of
wound is meteropostuing shift downwards. One end of the
wound is narrow clean cut and other end is slightly broad and
lacerated.
(b)    Stab wound present on the left side of chest wall just
over the nipple and are of a slightly obliquely placed. Size of
the wound is 2.5 x 1.50 cm, deep to the lung border and heart.
Cut mark size on lung tissue and heart are 1.0 cm through and
through the heart wall and its width is 0.5 cm in the bone.
Total depth is measured in the heart cavity to extend 12.0 cm.
One end of the wound is slightly broad and lacerated, left
margin clean cut and narrow.
Dr. N.M. Unda prepared post-mortem report (Ex. P-23 and P-24) and
opined that deceased died due to shock and hemorrhage as a result of stab
injuries to the chest. Both the injuries were caused by hard, sharp and
penetrating object and are sufficient to cause his death in ordinary course
of nature and his death was homicidal in nature.
(iv)   On 29.06.2009, Inspector G.S. Chadhar arrested the appellant as per
arrest memo (Ex. P-10), seized his blood stained shirt as per seizure memo
(Ex. P-11), recorded his memorandum statement (Ex. P-12) and on his
instance, seized the weapon - knife used in the crime from his possession
as per seizure memo (Ex. P-13). He vide letter dated 28.08.2009 (Ex.P-15)
sent the seized article for chemical examination to FSL, Rau, Indore and
after completion of investigation, filed the chargsheet before the Court of
Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, Indore, who committed the same to
the Court of Sessions Judge, Indore.
4.     Learned trial Court considering the material prima-facie available on
record, framed the charges u/S 302 of IPC and Section 25 of Arms Act
against the appellant, who abjured his guilt and prayed for trial. In his
statement recorded u/S 313 of Cr.P.C., the appellant pleaded his false
implication in the matter.
5.     Learned Trial Court after appreciating the oral as well as
documentary evidence available on record, recorded the findings that
Cr.Appeal No. 891 of 2011
prosecution proved his case beyond reasonable doubt against the appellant
for the offence punishable u/S 302 of IPC and Sec 25(1)(1-B) of Arms Act.
Therefore, vide judgment dated 28.06.2011 convicted him u/S 302 of IPC
and sentenced     him as mentioned in para 1 of this judgment. Being
aggrieved with the said judgment of conviction and order of sentence,
appellant has preferred this appeal for setting aside the impugned judgment
and discharging him from the charges framed against him.
6.     Learned counsel for the appellant submits that statements of
deceased's wife – complainant Saroj, son – Ishant, nephew – Mahendra and
neighbour Shopkeeper – Ravi are inconsistent on the point of place of
incident, series of occurrence and on other material issues which make
their presence doubtful on the spot at the time of incident. Complainant –
Saroj specifically deposed that incident occurred opposite to Rajwada
premises which is far off from complainant's shop and it was not possible
for her as well as other witnesses to witness the incident from there. Ravi
admitted in his cross-examination that he did not see the appellant
assaulting deceased. Ocular evidence and medical evidence are also
inconsistent. Contradictions and omissions in the statement of prosecution
witnesses on material issues have not been properly considered. Hence,
learned trial Court has committed a legal error while appreciating the
evidence available on record.       Thus, by setting aside the impugned
Cr.Appeal No. 891 of 2011
judgment of conviction and order of sentence, appellant may be acquitted
of the charges alleged against him.
7.     Per contra, learned counsel for the respondent/State while supporting
the impugned judgment of conviction and order of sentence submits that
judgment passed by the trial Court is based on proper appreciation of
evidence and material available on record and the same is well reasoned
establishing guilt of appellant beyond reasonable doubt. Therefore, by
affirming the impugned judgment of conviction and order of sentence, the
appeal filed by the appellant may be dismissed.
8.     Heard learned counsel for the parties at considerable length and
perused the record in depth.
9.     Present case is based on direct as well as on circumstantial evidence.
Prosecution has examined deceased's wife complainant - Saroj Kashyap
(PW-6), son Ishant (PW-8), nephew(PW-10) and neighbour shop keeper -
Ravi (PW-7) as eye-witnesses of the incident. Complainant Saroj
Kashyap(PW-6), Ishant (PW-8) and Mahendra (PW-10) deposed that
deceased purchased a hath thela placed near Mahalaxmi Mandir, opposite
to Rajwada Indore from the appellant for an amount of Rs. 40,000/- where
he ran a bangles shop. Saroj Kashyap (PW-6) and Mahendra (PW-10)
deposed that appellant even after sale of the said hath thela occasionally
used to demand and take an amount of Rs. 1,000/- as rent from the
Cr.Appeal No. 891 of 2011
deceased and when deceased denied to pay the rent, appellant got angry
and started having animosity with the deceased. Appellant has challenged
the aforesaid fact that the deceased purchased the said hath thela from him
and during cross-examination of both the above witnesses, it has
specifically been suggested on behalf of him that deceased took the said
hath thela only on rent from the appellant, therefore, this fact appears
undisputed that the deceased took aforesaid hath thela from the appellant
and there were differences between them about the ownership of the said
thela and also about the payment of rent of the same.
10.    Complainant Saroj (PW-6), Ravi (PW-7), Ishant(PW-8) and
Mahendra (PW-10), all have deposed that at the time of incident, they were
present near the place of incident. Saroj (PW-6) deposed that at that time,
she was present on her bangles shop which was about 15 ft away from the
place of incident. Ravi (PW-7) deposed that at that time, he was present on
his shoes shop placed on the footpath near complainant's bangles
shop(hath thela). Ishant (PW-8) and Mahendra (PW-10) deposed that at the
time of incident, they were also present at the complainant's shop.
Appellant has challenged the presence of these two witnesses Ishant and
Mahendra on the spot at the time of incident as they are chance witnesses.
Complainant Saroj (PW-6) and Ravi (PW-7) although deposed that Ishant
and Mahendra were present on the complainant's shop at the time of
Cr.Appeal No. 891 of 2011
incident, but both in their cross-examination have specifically stated that
after the incident, complainant and Ravi took the deceased to hospital. Ravi
(PW-7) in para 6 of his cross-examination stated that after the incident, he
took the deceased to hospital then deceased's nephew Mahendra (PW-10)
also came to the hospital, where           he narrated the incident to him.
Complainant Saroj (PW-6) in dehati nalishi(Ex. P-3) no where mentioned
about the presence of Ishant (PW-8) at the time of incident, therefore,
presence of both the above two witnesses i.e. Ishant and Mahendra near
the place of occurrence at the time of incident appears to be doubtful. But
so far as the presence of the complainant Saroj and Ravi at that time at their
respective shops is concerned, this is not disputed that their shops were
situated near Rajwada, and at the time of incident i.e. at about 8:30 p.m., it
was quite natural that they were present on their respective shops. Moreso,
appellant has not challenged their presence in their respective shops at the
time of incident, therefore it is established that both of them were very well
present at their respective shops at the time of incident.
11.    Both the above witnesses have supported the prosecution case.
Complainant Saroj (PW-6) deposed that on the date of incident at about 8-
8:30 p.m., when her husband deceased Surendra Kashyap was going
towards Rajwada Gate, appellant came there and inflicted knife blows on
his chest. She further deposed that when her husband screamed, she ran
Cr.Appeal No. 891 of 2011
towards him to see the incident and took him to hospital. Ravi (PW-7)
deposed that on the date of incident, at about 8-8:30 p.m., when he was at
his shoes shop, which is placed on the footpath near complainant's shop, he
saw the deceased running towards his shop in injured condition, screaming
'Basant Kale ne muje chaku mar diya hai'. He in para 7 of his cross-
examination specifically deposed that he saw the deceased first at the time
of incident. He in para 12 of his cross examination further deposed that he
did not see the appellant assaulting deceased by knife, but deceased told
him that appellant had assaulted him with knife.
12.    Statements of both the above witnesses are inconsistent on the point
whether at the time of incident, deceased was going towards Rajwada Gate
and fell down there as per statement of complainant – Saroj or coming from
Rajwada Gate side towards Ravi's shop and fell down near his shop as per
statement of Ravi. Complainant Saroj(PW-6) in para 6 & 7 has admitted
that at the time of incident Ravi was present at his shop and he took the
deceased to hospital in an auto rickshaw and she followed him and went to
the hospital in another auto rickshaw. She in the same para on being asked
whether Ravi informed her about the incident, answered that ' mujhe bhi
samne se dikh raha tha”.From all these facts, it is clearly established that
both the above witnesses were although present at their respective shops
situated near the place of incident and after hearing deceased's screams,
Cr.Appeal No. 891 of 2011
they rushed to the place of incident, but they themselves did not see the
appellant assaulting the deceased with knife.
13.    Ravi (PW-7) appears to be an independent witness who fairly
admitted in his cross-examination that he did not see the appellant
assaulting the deceased with knife, but he specifically deposed that at the
time of incident, he heard the deceased's screams saying “mujhe Basant
Kale ne chaku mara hai”. He further deposed that when he was taking the
deceased towards hospital, deceased told him that appellant had inflicted
knife blows to him. His above statement finds support from the statement
of complainant – Saroj (PW-6) as well as dehati nalishi (Ex. P-3) lodged
by her just after the incident. Complainant Saroj (PW-6) deposed that when
she heard deceased's screaming at the time of incident, she ran towards
him. Inspector G.S. Chadhar deposed that after the incident when he
reached to M.Y. Hospital then at about 21:10 p.m, he recorded dehati
nalishi(Ex.P-3) on the basis of complainant's statement wherein she stated
that at the time of incident, she heard her husband's screams saying “mujhe
Basant Kale ne chaku mara hai”.During cross-examination of the aforesaid
witnesses it has nowhere suggested on behalf of the appellant that there
was any prior enmity or animosity of the appellant with the witness Ravi,
whose statements are supported by the statement of complainant as well as
dehati nalishi (Ex.P-3) lodged by her. Therefore, there is no reason to
Cr.Appeal No. 891 of 2011
disbelieve the statement made by him about the incident.
14.    Aforesaid statements of Ravi as well as Saroj are although hearsay,
but the same were made contemporaneously with the acts or immediately
thereafter, therefore the same are very well admissible in the evidence as
per the provisions of Section 6 of the Evidence Act. In this regard,
observations made by Hon'ble Apex Court in the judgment rendered in the
case of Sukhar Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh [(1999)9 SCC 507]                  can
profitably be relied upon. Relevant paragraphs are reproduced below for
convenience and ready reference:
8. This Court in Gentela Vijayavardhan Rao and Another V.
State of A.P. 1996 (6) SCC 241 considering the law embodied
in Section 6 of the Evidence Act held thus: The principle of
law embodied in Section 6 of the Evidence Act is usually
known as the rule of res gestae recognized in English law. The
essence of the doctrine is that a fact which, though not in
issue, is so connected with the fact in issue "as to form part of
the same transaction" becomes relevant by itself. This rule is,
roughly speaking, an exception to the general rule that
hearsay evidence is not admissible. The rationale in making
certain statement or fact admissible under Section 6 of the
Evidence Act is on account of the spontaneity and immediacy
of such statement or fact in relation to the fact in issue. But it
is necessary that such fact or statement must be a part of the
same transaction. In other words, such statement must have
been made contemporaneous with the acts which constitute the
offence or at least immediately thereafter. But if there was an
interval, however slight it may be, which was sufficient enough
for fabrication then the statement is not part of res gestae.
9.In another recent judgment of this Court in Rattan Singh V.
State of H.P. 1997 (4) SCC 161, this Court examined the
applicability of Section 6 of the Evidence Act to the statement
of the deceased and held thus: . The aforesaid statement of
Kanta Devi can be admitted under Section 6 of the Evidence
Act on account of its proximity of time to the act of murder.
Illustration A to Section 6 makes it clear. It reads thus:
Cr.Appeal No. 891 of 2011
(a) A is accused of the murder of B by beating him. Whatever
was said or done by A or B or the bystanders at the beating, or
so shortly before or after it as to form part of the transaction,
is a relevant fact.
(emphasis supplied) Here the act of the assailant intruding
into the courtyard during dead of the night, victims
identification of the assailant, her pronouncement that
appellant was standing with a gun and his firing the gun at
her, are all circumstances so intertwined with each other by
proximity of time and space that the statement of the deceased
became part of the same transaction. Hence it is admissible
under Section 6 of the Evidence Act.
10.     Applying the ratio of the aforesaid two cases to the
evidence of PW 2, we have no hesitation to come to the
conclusion that his statement indicating that the injured told
him that his nephew has fired at him, would become
admissible under Section 6 of the Evidence Act. We are,
therefore, unable to accept the first submission of Ms
Goswami, learned counsel appearing for the appellant.
15.    In view of the aforesaid discussion, there is no doubt that statements
of complainant – Saroj (PW-6) and Ravi (PW-7) are relevant and
admissible. As Dr. N.M. Unda(PW-12) specifically stated and reported in
his post mortem report (Ex. P-23) that deceased's death was due to shock
and hemorrhage as a result of stab injuries on the chest within 24 hours
from the time of post-mortem examination and his death was homicidal in
nature and appellant has not challenged aforesaid facts, therefore,
statement made by the deceased at the time of incident and also when he
was on his way to hospital to witness – Ravi (PW-7) will be treated as his
oral dying declaration. Hence, the same is also admissible under Section
32 of the Evidence Act.
16.    Inspector G.S. Chadhar(PW-9) deposed that on 30.06.2009 i.e. on
Cr.Appeal No. 891 of 2011
the next day of incident, he interrogated appellant in Police Station Sarafa
and    seized his blood stained shirt as per seizure memo (Ex. P-11),
recorded his memorandum statement (Ex. P-12) and thereafter on his
instance, seized blood stained knife (Article 'C') from a room of his house
which was in his exclusive possession as per seizure memo (Ex. P-13).
Seizure witnesses Mahendra (PW-10) and Karan(PW-11) have supported
the aforesaid statement and deposed that on the next day of incident, police
interrogated appellant and seized his blood stained shirt in front of them.
They further deposed that on the same day, appellant's memorandum
statement(Ex. P-12) was recorded wherein he stated about the knife and
thereafter on his instance, a blood stained knife was seized from a room of
his house as per seizure memo (Ex. P-13). Appellant has challenged their
statements, but nothing material has come in their cross-examination on the
basis of which seizure of shirt and knife from his possession can be
doubted or disbelieved. As per FSL report(Ex.P-25), human blood was
found on both the articles which corroborates the prosecution story that
injuries found on the chest of the deceased were caused by the appellant
with the seized knife (Article 'C').
17.    Learned counsel for the appellant has argued that as incident took
place all of a sudden and only two injuries were found on the body of the
deceased, therefore it cannot be inferred that the said injuries were inflicted
Cr.Appeal No. 891 of 2011
or caused with an intent to commit murder of the deceased. Hence, act
alleged to be committed by the appellant at the most comes under Section
304(Part 2) of IPC and not u/S 302 of IPC. In this regard, learned counsel
for the appellant has pressed into service decision of Apex Court rendered
in the case of Atul Thakur Vs. State of Himachal Pradesh & Others
[(2018) 2 SCC 496] and judgment passed on 10.08.2021 by Division
Bench of this Court in the case of Irfan Vs. State of M.P. Through P.S.
Khajrana Indore in Cr.A. No.201/2009 in support of his above
18.    In both the above matters, sudden fight took place between the
deceased and accused persons, while in the present case, it has no where
suggested on behalf of the appellant that incident took place all of a
sudden. It has already been found proved that prior enmity or animosity
was going on between the appellant and deceased on account of payment
of rent of hath thela said to be purchased by the deceased from the
appellant. It has also been found proved that appellant inflicted two knife
blows on the vital part i.e.chest of the deceased, which in itself shows his
intention that the same were inflicted with an intent to commit murder of
the deceased. Thus, facts of the case in hand are different from the fact of
the cases relied upon(supra) by the learned counsel for appellant and thus
are of no assistance.
19.   In these circumstances, learned trial Court has not committed any
error in holding the appellant guilty for the offences punishable under
Section 302 of IPC as well as under Section 25 of Arms Act.
20.   Hence, we found no fault in the impugned judgment of conviction
and order of sentence passed by learned trial Court. There is no merit in
the appeal, the appeal thus is liable to be dismissed.
21.   In view of aforesaid discussions, the impugned judgment of
conviction and order of sentence passed by learned trial Court is hereby
affirmed.
22.   Accordingly, this appeal filed on behalf of the appellant is hereby
dismissed.