the facts and circumstances of the case."
2.    The writ applicant herein seeks direction upon
the    respondent         no.2    -      Registrar      of       Marriages
('Registrar") to correct the date of marriage in the
writ      applicant's         marriage         certificate           bearing
no.WZ/2021/2522 dated 26.07.2021. The writ applicant
by way of this writ application seeking change in the
marriage certificate from 17.07.2021 to 19.12.2021.
3. Mr. Anand Patel, the learned advocate appearing
for the writ applicant stated that the writ applicant
is living in Surat and her marriage was                     scheduled
to   take        place    on    17.07.2021         with     Mr.         Kushal
Batukkumar         Mishtri,    who    is     a  permanent        residence
permit holder of Germany and is working there as a
Technical         Development     Engineer.        However,          due         to
pandemic of COVID-19 and the restrictions imposed by
the Government on public gathering, the marriage was
scheduled in a banquet hall with a very small number
of relatives attending the marriage. Therefore, the
marriage invitation was also not prepared. Since, the
marriage ceremony was to be held in a banquet hall
(i.e. in a closed premises) in presence of very few
relatives,          they    performed          the    ceremonies                 of
exchanging garlands, tying mangalsutra and applying
sindhoor, copy of the photographs are duly annexed at
Annexure-4         of  the   writ     application.        However,             the
ceremony of "datta homa" and "Saptapadi" (i.e. taking
seven     steps       around    the       sacred    fire)       were           not
performed.         It  was  mutually         decided   by     the       family
members of bride and groom that after the cases of
COVID-19 decreases, the family would organize another
function in a party plot whereat the ceremony of
"datta homa" and "Saptapadi" would be performed in
presence of various relatives and friends. The said
subsequent          function  was    scheduled   to    be      held          on
19.12.2021 whereat the ceremonies of "datta homa" and
"saptapadi" were performed.
4. Mr. Anand Patel, the learned advocate appearing
for the writ applicant has relied on the order passed
by the Co-ordinate Bench of this Court in Special
Civil Application No.19647 of 2019 by order dated
09.01.2020. The Co-ordinate Bench of this Court in
paragraph Nos. 13, 14 and 15 has held and observed
"[13] In the situation as arisen in the
present case, it cannot be said that the
respondent authority is at fault in taking
the impugned decision. The respondent No.2
was within his power to issue the certificate
and was also within his power to pass the
impugned order dated 27.09.2019 as there is
no provision of law which can enable the
respondent No.2 to take cognizance of the
facts        prevailing       and to     entertain                an
application of the petitioner to rectify the
marriage certificate. At this stage, the
Court is bound to invoke Article 226 of the
Constitution        of     India  to     overcome               the
situation faced by the petitioner which
prevents the petitioner from co-habiting with
her husband in Germany.
[14] The petitioner is left without remedy as
on the one hand it cannot be said that
respondent No.2 has fallen in error for
invoking writ of mandamus, on the other hand,
the      date  of   marriage      in    the        marriage
certificate does not reflect the date of
marriage accordingly. This is attributable to
the factual prevalent circumstances in which
petitioner has no role to play. It is this
situation which the Court deems it fit to
invoke Article 226 of the Constitution of
India for remedy a situation.
[15] In the peculiar facts and circumstances
of the case, the Court deems it to be a fit
case to interfere and direct the respondent
No.2 to quash and set aside the impugned
order      dated  27.09.2019       and      direct             the
respondent No.2 to cancel the certificate of
marriage No.1727 dated 18.12.2017. At the
same time, permitted the petitioner to make a
fresh application with all the necessary
details about the ceremonisation of marriage
on 27.01.2018. The respondent No.2 shall
consider such application afresh and treat
the same to be made in time without being
influenced by the fact of issuing earlier
certificate as the same is treated to be
cancelled and the decision dated 27.09.2019,
which is ordered to be quashed and set aside
and issue fresh certificate of marriage."
5. Mr. C.J. Vin, the learned advocate appearing for
the respondent No.2 authority submitted that if an
application seeking change in the date in marriage
certificate would be preferred before the respondent
authority, the authority would decide the same within
a  period       of   four weeks    from   the  receipt        of        this
6.    Having heard the learned advocates appearing for
the parties.
7.       In the facts and circumstances of the present
case, this Court is inclined to direct the respondent
no.2 under exercising its extraordinary jurisdiction
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India to
consider the application which would be preferred by
the writ applicant seeking change in the date of
marriage certificate from 17.07.2021 to 19.12.2021,
in absence of any provisions of law enabling the
respondent no.2 to rectify the marriage certificate.
The      writ       applicant   is    directed     to   prefer          afresh
application within a period of one week before the
respondent No.2 - authority seeking change in the
memorandum of marriage from 17.07.2021 to 19.12.2021.
Once such an application is preferred by the writ
applicant, the respondent authority is directed to
carry       out       necessary  changes       considering       the         said
application and issued a certificate with the changed
date in the marriage certificate as 19.12.2021 in the
marriage            certificate.     Consequently,        the        earlier
marriage certificate would be quashed and set-aside.
Once the fresh marriage certificate is issued, the
earlier certificate would stands cancelled. The said
exercise           be    undertaken      by    the   respondent              no.2
authority preferably within a period of two weeks.
8.       With the aforesaid direction, the present writ
applicant stands allowed to the aforesaid extent.
Direct service, Today is permitted.