16.3.2017 passed by the respondent – authority, by which, the services as
Assistant Motor Vehicle Inspector, Class-III of the petitioner has been
terminated on the ground of lodging of an FIR under Sections 7, 8, 12,
13(1)(D) and 13(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act registered at ACB
[3].    Mr. Patel would submit that even otherwise `A’ summary report has
been filed in context of the FIR in question. The short ground on which
the petitioner has assailed the order of termination that it is contrary to the
law laid down in a decision rendered by the Division Bench of this Court
dated 24.07.2020 rendered in Letters Patent Appeal No.1596 of 2019 in
case of State of Gujarat v. Chetan Jayantilal Rajgor.
[4].    Mr. Patel, learned counsel for the petitioner would rely on the
orders passed in similar matter by this Court namely; SCA No.15419 of
2019 dated 18.1.2022. He further requested to pass the similar order in
this order. The order dated 18.1.2022 reads as under:
“1. Heard Mr.Jigar Gadhavi learned advocate for the petitioner and
Mr.Meet Thakkar learned AGP for the State.
2. The challenge is to the order dated 22.04.2014 passed by the
respondent by which the services of the petitioner were put to an end
alleging misconduct and financial irregularities.
3. The short contention raised by Mr.Gadhavi learned counsel for the
petitioner is that the services of the petitioner could not have been put
to an end without an appropriate notice and inquiry.
4. Mr.Thakkar learned AGP would submit that the conditions of the
order of appointment, particularly condition no.10 envisaged the
situation where in case of a misconduct, the services of the petitioner
could be put to an end without inquiry, particularly when he had
given an undertaking that he would, if found committing any
irregularities, not be entitled to any terminal benefits on being
terminated from service.
5. Mr.Meet Thakkar would also submit that the order of 2014 has
been challenged in the year 2019 after more than delay of five years.
6. The present issue is covered by a decision of the Division Bench of
this Court dated 24.07.2020 rendered in Letters Patent Appeal
No.1596 of 2019 in case of State of Gujarat v. Chetan Jayantilal
Rajgor and a recent judgment of Division Bench of this Court in
case of Kaminiben Thakorbhai Patel v. State of Gujarat rendered
in LPA No.761 of 2021. The said decision held as under:
“6. When the order of termination passed against the
appellants petitioners and impugned before the learned single
Judge is considered in light of the aforesaid principles laid
down, it could be discerned that the termination was founded
on the alleged misconduct of the petitioner that they fabricated
the documents or at least as parties to the process of such
fabrication in order to seek transfer and that they had
committed misconduct by submitting transfer applications
which was impermissible. Even otherwise the order was
manifestly on the ground of misconduct. It became stigmatic
order. It could not have been passed without full scale inquiry.
There was a clear nexus between the alleged misconduct and
the order of termination. 6.1 The Supreme Court in Gujarat
Steel Tubes Limited v. Gujarat Steel Tubes Mazdoor Sabha
[(1980) 2 SCC 593] stated and observed thus, "53. Masters
and servants cannot be permitted to play hide and seek with the
law of dismissals and the plain and proper criteria are not to
be misdirected by terminological cover-ups or by appeal to
psychic processes but must be grounded on the substantive
reason for the order, whether disclosed or undisclosed. The
Court will find out from other proceedings or documents
connected with the formal order of termination what the true
ground for the termination is. If, thus scrutinised, the order has
a punitive flavour in cause or consequence, it is dismissal. If it
falls short of this test, it cannot be called a punishment. To put
it slightly differently, a termination effected because the master
is satisfied of the misconduct and of the consequent desirability
of terminating the service of the delinquent servant, is a
dismissal, even if he had the right in law to terminate with an
innocent order under the standing order or otherwise. Whether,
in such a case the grounds are recorded in a different
proceeding from the formal order does not detract from its
nature. Nor the fact that, after being satisfied of the guilt, the
master abandons the enquiry and proceeds to terminate. Given
an alleged misconduct and a live nexus between it and the
termination of service the conclusion is dismissal, even if full
benefits as on simple termination, are given and non-injurious
terminology is used."
6.2 The law laid down in Chetan Rajgor (supra), in
Manishbhai Nayanbhai Mod (supra) as well as in Sandip
Ajitsinh Vaghela (supra) and in Rahul Vank (supra) holds the
field. In respect of the impugned order in the instant case, the
said law will apply. A vain attempt was made on behalf of the
respondents to submit that when learned single Judge decided
the petition and passed the impugned order, the above
decisions were not holding the field. This submission is
fallacious inasmuch as the decision in Manishbhai Nayanbhai
Modh (supra) was prior to the impugned order dated 26th
March, 2019. Even otherwise, it is trite principle that law
prevalent at the time of deciding the controversy shall govern
and shall have to be applied for crystalising the rights of the
parties.
7. We now advert to the nature of relief to be granted in the
facts of the present case. The termination of service having
been found stigmatic and without compliance of requirements
of holding full fledged inquiry, the same has to be set aside.
However, the petitioners were appointed initially for a period
of five years as per order dated 14th December, 2001. The
impugned order came to be passed on 16th October, 2003.
Therefore, while directing reinstatement of the appellants
petitioners after setting aside the impugned order, the relief of
reinstatement to the petitioners would ensue so as to make up
good the total period of five years of employment for the
petitioners. All the rest of the conditions of appointment shall
govern.
8. As far as the aspect of grant of back wages to the
appellants is concerned, while on behalf of the appellants, the
relief of back wages was pressed by submitting that the back
wages have to follow automatically when the reinstatement is
directed upon holding the termination illegal, certain
conspicuous aspects stare at the face of the controversy in this
case fir considering the issue of back wages. Not only that long
time has elapsed since the appellants are ordered to be
reinstated by this order and the principle of no work no pay
would apply. What becomes decisive in the matter on this score
is the factum that the appellants were appointed for five years
initially and during such five years their services came to be
terminated by passing the impugned order. They are reinstated
as per the above direction for the remainder period providing
further that all other conditions in respect of nature of their
appointment would operate. In such circumstances, the
question of grant of back wages does not arise. The appellants
will not be entitled to any back wages.”
7. The fact that there is a delay on the part of the petitioner in
approaching this Court has also been considered by this Court.
However, considering the decisions as cited herein above, the order
of termination dated 22.04.2014 is quashed and set aside. The
petitioner is directed to be reinstated without back-wages. It goes
without saying that the respondent authorities will not be precluded
from proceeding against the petitioner for the alleged misconduct in
accordance with law.
8. The petition is allowed in the aforesaid terms.”
[5].    In view of above and considering the decisions as cited herein
above, the order of termination dated 16.3.2017 is quashed and set aside.
The petitioner is directed to be reinstated without back-wages within ten
weeks from the date of certified copy of the order. It goes without saying
that the respondent authorities will not be precluded from proceeding
against the petitioner for the alleged misconduct in accordance with law.
[6].    The petition is allowed in the aforesaid terms. Rule is made
absolute to that extent. Direct Service is permitted.