Let there shall be no coercive steps (arrest) by the
investigating agency against the present applicant till
then.      However,         investigation      may   continue.           The
Investigating Officer shall not file charge-sheet without
prior permission of this Court.
Order in Special Criminal Application No.7670 of 2021
1.     By way of present petition under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India and Section 482 of the Criminal
Procedure Code, 1973, the petitioners have prayed for
quash the FIR being CR. No. I – 11196004210480
dated 17/06/2021 registered with Gotri Police
Station, Vadodara City, for the offences punishable
under Sections 323, 498(A), 376(2)(n), 377, 312,
313, 504, 506(2), 120(B) and 419 of the Indian Penal
Code and Sections 4, 4A, 4(2)(a), 4(2)(b) and 5 of
Gujarat Freedom of Religion Act, 2003 as amended in
the year 2021 and Sections 3(1)(r)(s), 3(2)(5), 3(2)(5-
a), 3(1)(w)(1)(2) of the Scheduled Caste and
Scheduled Tribe (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989.
(C) Pending admission, hearing and final disposal of
this petition, THIS HON’BLE COURT MAY BE PLEASED
TO stay, execution, implementation and operation of
the impugned FIR being CR. No. I – 11196004210480
dated 17/06/2021 registered with Gotri Police
Station, Vadodara City, for the offences punishable
under Sections 323, 498(A), 376(2)(n), 377, 312,
313, 504, 506(2), 120(B) and 419 of the Indian Penal
Code and Sections 4, 4A, 4(2)(a), 4(2)(b) and 5 of
Gujarat Freedom of Religion Act, 2003 as amended in
the year 2021 and Sections 3(1)(r)(s), 3(2)(5), 3(2)(5-
a), 3(1)(w)(1)(2) of the Scheduled Caste and
Scheduled Tribe (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989
and further also be pleased to order the immediate
and forthwith release of the Petitioner Nos.2, 3, 4, 6,
7, 8 on appropriate conditions as may be deemed fit
by the Hon’ble Court;”
2.      Heard         Mr.  Muhammad          Isa M.   Hakim,        learned
advocate for the petitioners and Mr. Mitesh Amin, learned
Public Prosecutor assisted by Mrs. Krina Calla, learned APP
for the respondent-State and Mr. Hitesh L. Gupta, learned
advocate for the applicant in Criminal Misc. Application
No.13761 of 2021.
3.      The brief facts giving rise to filing of present petition
3.1 The petitioner no.1 – informant and petitioner no.2-
accused no.1 are wife and husband respectively. Prior to
filing of this FIR, the informant Divyaben daughter of
Vijaybhai Jethabhai Rohit and accused no.2 – Samir
Abdulbhai Qureshi came to know each other in the year
2019 and developed intimate relationship. They came into
contact with each other through social media and on
account of their intimate relationship, they became aware
about each other’s identity, character, family details and
each other’s religion.
3.2 In view of aforesaid relationship, the informant and
accused no.1 executed an undertaking/understanding
agreement dated 08.02.2021 and the said agreement was
signed by the witnesses namely mother of the accused
no.1 and father of the informant and as per the
agreement, they have agreed to marry each other under
the     Special         Marriage Act,       1954  by   following         their
respective religions. Thereafter, in presence of their
parents and family members, got married as per Muslim
Rites and Rituals solemnized on 16.02.2021 and also
declared their marriage on oath jointly by way of affidavit
wherein they have categorically stated that the marriage
was without any force or coercion and out of their free will
and the marriage was registered with Vadodara Municipal
Corporation. On 20.02.2021, both have filed an application
under Section-15 of the Special Marriage Act in form
provided in Rule 30 and accordingly, marriage was
registered and certificate of marriage was issued under
Section 16 of the Special Marriage Act and the same was
witnessed by father of the informant, mother of accused
no.1 and two other witnesses.
3.3 Subsequently, due to some petty and trivial marital
and matrimonial issues arose between accused no.1 and
the informant, the informant had decided to left the
matrimonial house and went to parental home. On
17.06.2021, the impugned FIR came to be registered with
Gotri Police Station, Vadodara alleging that the accused
no.1 made forcible sexual intercourse, taking obscene
photographs of the informant, causing forcible miscarriage
and was compelled to forcibly convert her religion and
used casteist slurs. She has also alleged that there was a
conspiracy amongst the accused to commit the said
offences. Initially, four persons were arraigned as accused
namely husband, father-in-law, mother-in-law and sister-
in-law of the informant and accused no.6 to 8 were
arraigned subsequently who are relatives and in-laws of
the informant and witness/Kazi.
4.     In the aforesaid background of facts, the petitioners
have jointly sought consent quashing of the FIR mainly on
the ground that issues between husband and wife were
petty and trivial matrimonial disputes which have been
resolved and therefore, as they wanted to continue their
matrimonial and marital relationship and therefore, the
impugned FIR may be quashed with the consent of both
the parties.
5.     Mr. Hakim, learned advocate for the petitioners
would submit that in view of settlement, the petitioners
have a good prima-facie case and therefore, if the interim
relief for bail as prayed for, is not granted, then, they shall
suffer irreparable loss and injury by deprivation of their
personal liberties whereas grant of the same shall not
cause any harm or injury to the respondents.
6.     On the other hand, Mr. Hitesh L. Gupta, learned
advocate for the applicant – Meher Ismailbhai Malek
(Criminal Misc. Application No.13761 of 2021) would
submits that the applicant has not played any role in the
alleged offence and she has been arraigned as an accused
alleging that she is a friend of accused no.1 and accused
no.1 and the informant have stayed at her home. He
would further submits that instead of citing witness by the
police agency, she has been wrongly arraigned as an
accused in the alleged offence which is nothing but misuse
of process of law.
7.     Heard Mr. Mitesh Amin, learned Public Prosecutor
assisted       by      Mrs. Krina    Calla,    learned    APP      for      the
respondent-State at length.
8.     Having heard learned advocates appearing for the
respective parties and upon bare perusal of the impugned
FIR and material placed on record, it appears that the
petitioner no.1-informant was in relationship with the
accused no.1 and both of them had agreed to marry each
other and had followed the procedure like performed
Nikahnama, got their marriage registered under Special
Marriage Act, 1954 and lived together as husband and
wife. The petitioners no.2, 3, 4 and 5 are in-laws of the
informant whereas petitioners no.6, 7             and 8 are the
witnesses of the marriage.
9.     The petitioners are facing charges for the offences
punishable under the provisions of Gujarat Freedom of
Religion Act, 2021 (amendment). The Act, 2003, initially
brought into force in April, 2003. Section 3 of 2003 Act
provides for prohibition of conversion of any person from
one religion to another religion by use of force or by
allurement          or   by  any    fraudulent  means.        By       the
Amendment Act, 2021, which brought into force by way of
Notification         dated  04.06.2021,      a marriage      itself      is
presumed to be a medium for the purposes of unlawful
conversion if the marriage was by way of allurement, force
or by way of fraudulent means. In the new amendment,
Section 4(A) prescribes punishment of imprisonment in the
rage of 3 to 5 years for unlawful conversion. Section 4(B)
declares marriages by unlawful convesion as void. Section
4(C) deals with offence of organizations doing unlawful
conversion. Section 6 provides prior sanction of District
Magistrate is necessary to start prosecution against the
10. The        vires    of  the    Amendment       Act    have        been
challenged by           N.G.O.   JAMIAT-ULAMA-E-HIND GUJARAT
(Special Civil Application No.10304 of 2021) wherein
Division Bench of this Court vide order dated 19.08.2021
after referring the case of Shafin Jahan vs. Ashokan
reported in (2018) 16 SCC 368, have stayed the rigors of
Section 3, 4, 4A to 4C, 5, 6 and 6A observing that the
provisions shall not operate merely because of marriage is
solemnized by a person of one religion with a person of
another religion without force or by allurement or by
fraudulent means and such marriages cannot be termed
as marriages for the purposes of unlawful conversion. The
State has challenged the same before the Apex Court.
11. It is apt to rely and refer to the decision rendered in
case of Arnab Manoranjan Goswami versus State of
Maharashtra and Others reported in (2021) 2 SCC 427,
wherein it is held that the High Court must exercise its
power under Article 226 of the Constitution of India to
grant interim bail with caution and circumspection,
cognizant of the fact. The relevant paragraphs no.66 and
“66.       These principles are equally applicable to
the exercise of jurisdiction under Article 226 of the
Constitution when the court is called upon to secure
the liberty of the accused. The High Court must
exercise its power with caution and circumspection,
cognizant of the fact that this jurisdiction is not a
ready substitute for recourse to the remedy of bail
under Section 439 of the CrPC. In the backdrop of
these principles, it has become necessary to
scrutinize the contents of the FIR in the case at
hand. In this batch of cases, a prima facie evaluation
of the FIR does not establish the ingredients of the
offence of abetment of suicide under Section 306 of
the IPC. The appellants are residents of India and do
not pose a flight risk during the investigation or the
trial. There is no apprehension of tampering of
evidence or witnesses. Taking these factors into
consideration,     the     order    dated    11-11-2020
envisaged the release of the appellants on bail.
J       Human liberty and the role of Courts
67.        Human liberty is a precious constitutional
value, which is undoubtedly subject to regulation by
validly enacted legislation. As such, the citizen is
subject to the edicts of criminal law and procedure.
Section 482 recognizes the inherent power of the
High Court to make such orders as are necessary to
give effect to the provisions of the CrPC “or prevent
abuse of the process of any Court or otherwise to
secure the ends of justice. Decisions of this court
require the High Courts, in exercising the
jurisdiction entrusted to them under Section 482, to
act with circumspection. In emphasising that the
High Court must exercise this power with a sense of
restraint, the decisions of this Court are founded on
the basic principle that the due enforcement of
criminal law should not be obstructed by the
accused taking recourse to artifices and strategies.
The public interest in ensuring the due investigation
of crime is protected by ensuring that the inherent
power of the High Court is exercised with caution.
That indeed is one – and a significant - end of the
spectrum. The other end of the spectrum is equally
important: the recognition by Section 482 of the
power inhering in the High Court to prevent the
abuse of process or to secure the ends of justice is a
valuable safeguard for protecting liberty. The Code
of Criminal Procedure of 1898 was enacted by a
legislature which was not subject to constitutional
rights and limitations; yet it recognized the inherent
power in Section 561A. Post- Independence, the
recognition by Parliament of the inherent power of
the High Court must be construed as an aid to
preserve the constitutional value of liberty. The writ
of liberty runs through the fabric of the Constitution.
The need to ensure the fair investigation of crime is
undoubtedly important in itself, because it protects
at one level the rights of the victim and, at a more
fundamental level, the societal interest in ensuring
that crime is investigated and dealt with in
accordance with law. On the other hand, the misuse
of the criminal law is a matter of which the High
Court and the lower Courts in this country must be
alive. In the present case, the High Court could not
but have been cognizant of the specific ground
which was raised before it by the appellant that he
was being Section 482 of the CrPC 1973 made a
target as a part of a series of occurrences which
have been taking place since April 2020. The
specific case of the appellant is that he has been
targeted because his opinions on his television
channel are unpalatable to authority. Whether the
appellant has established a case for quashing the
FIR is something on which the High Court will take a
final view when the proceedings are listed before it
but we are clearly of the view that in failing to make
even a prima facie evaluation of the FIR, the High
Court abdicated its constitutional duty and function
as a protector of liberty. Courts must be alive to the
need to safeguard the public interest in ensuring
that the due enforcement of criminal law is not
obstructed. The fair investigation of crime is an aid
to it. Equally it is the duty of courts across the
spectrum – the district judiciary, the High Courts
and the Supreme Court – to ensure that the criminal
law does not become a weapon for the selective
harassment of citizens. Courts should be alive to
both ends of the spectrum – the need to ensure the
proper enforcement of criminal law on the one hand
and the need, on the other, of ensuring that the law
does not become a ruse for targeted harassment.
Liberty across human eras is as tenuous as tenuous
can be. Liberty survives by the vigilance of her
citizens, on the cacophony of the media and in the
dusty corridors of courts alive to the rule of (and not
by) law. Yet, much too often, liberty is a casualty
when one of these components is found wanting.”
12. In light of the aforesaid law laid down by the Apex
Court        and       considering      the     peculiar     facts         and
circumstances           of   the    case       more   particularly          the
settlement arrived at between the husband and wife i.e.
informant and accused no.1, the petitioners have made
out a prima-facie case for interim relief in the nature of
bail. Thus, without entering into merits of the
case, it is a fit case to exercise discretion under Article
226 of the Constitution of India to grant relief. Thus,
considering the nature of dispute, severity of punishment
and in absence of any past antecedents of like nature and
as there is no possibility of fleeing from justice, the
discretion is required to be exercised.
13.      Rule, returnable on 29.11.2021. Learned APP
waives service of rule for and on behalf of the respondent-
14. Thus, at the interim stage, without examining the
merits of the case, the petitioners no.1, 6, 7 and 8 are
ordered to be released on bail on executing a personal
bond of Rs.10,000/- (Rupees Ten thousand only) each,
with one surety of the like amount to the satisfaction of
the learned Trial Court and subject to the conditions that
(a) not take undue advantage of liberty or misuse
(b) not act in a manner injuries to the interest of the
(c)    surrender passports, if any, to the lower court
within a week from the date of their release;
(d) not leave India without prior permission of the
(e) furnish     latest address        of residence     to     the
Investigating Officer and also to the Court at the
time of execution of the bond and shall not
change the residence without prior permission of
Over and above the regular mode of service, direct
service through e-mode is also permitted.