1.     Heard Sri Ashok Kumar Singh, learned counsel for the
applicants and Dr. S.B. Maurya, learned AGA for the State-
2.     The instant application has been moved by the applicants
with a prayer to quash the entire proceeding of criminal case no.
1093 of 2020 under sections 147, 148, 149, 307, 504, 506 IPC,
pending in the court of Civil Judge (Junior Division)/Judicial
Magistrate, Garhmukteshwar, Hapur District Hapur as well as
charge sheet dated 26.8.2020 and cognizance order dated
3.     Opposite party no. 2 lodged FIR of the present case on
7.5.2020 against the applicants under Sections 147, 148, 149, 307,
504, 506 IPC at P.S. Simbhawali District Hapur and according to
the FIR, applicants who are 14 in numbers assaulted with intention
to commit murder of Inam and Danish (injured persons of the case)
and they opened fire from countrymade pistols and in the incident,
Inam and Danish sustained serious injuries. After registration of the
FIR, investigation of the matter was commenced and during
investigation, Investigating Officer recorded the statements of
opposite party no. 2, the informant and injured persons Inam and
Danish and also recorded the statement of other eye-witnesses and
obtained the injury reports of both the injured and submitted charge
sheet against the applicants on 26.8.2020 under sections 147, 148,
4.     In the incident two persons Inam and Danish sustained
injuries and according to the statement of injured-Inam, applicant
no. 2 caused fire arm injury to him and Danish through
countrymade pistol. Another injured-Danish in his statement
recorded during investigation also stated that applicants assaulted
them with intention to commit murder and applicant nos. 2 and 6
opened fire from countrymade pistols and due to fire opened by
them he and Inam sustained injuries. Injury reports of both the
injured persons, Inam and Danish are on record.
5.     From the perusal of the injury report of Inam, it appears that
he received a lacerated wound bone deep on the right side of scalp
and bleeding was present and Doctor also noted that at the time of
his medical examination, three episodes of vomiting and one
episode of seizure occurred and was advised to C.T. Scan of head.
From the perusal of his C.T. Scan report which is copied by the
Investigating Officer in the case diary during investigation which is
annexed alongwith annexure-2, it reflects that a hemorrhage in
right parietal temporal region and depressed fracture of frontal
bone was found and according to Doctor, injury was dangerous to
6.     Another injured-Danish was also medically examined on
15.5.2020 and according to his injury report he sustained one
abrasion of right side of forehead and a contusion of right side of
upper back of scapular region and according to the Doctor both the
injuries were simple in nature and caused by hard and blunt object.
7.     From the perusal of the injury report of both the injured
persons, it appears that injured Inam sustained serious fire arm
injury which was, according to the Doctor who conducted C.T.
Scan, dangerous to his life.
8.     It appears that after submission of the charge sheet on
26.8.2022, cognizance was taken and notices were issued to the
applicants and during the pendency of the case before committal,
applicants, opposite party no. 2-informant and injured persons
Inam and Danish compromised the matter and in this regard, they
executed a compromise on 31.5.2022 (annexed as annexure-6 to
the affidavit). Applicants want to quash proceedings pending before
trial court on the basis of settlement dated 31.5.2022.
Submissions on behalf of the applicants
9.     Learned counsel for the applicants submitted that applicants
have been made accused in the present case on the basis of false
and frivolous allegations and they neither assaulted nor they
caused any injury to anyone but in spite of that charge sheet has
been submitted against them in the present matter. He next
submitted that applicants and opposite party no. 2, the informant
and injured persons are residents of same village and locality and
they also having some relation, therefore, with the interference of
the respected persons of the locality, they have settled their dispute
and in this regard, a compromise has been executed between them
on 31.5.2022 which is annexed as annexure-6 to the affidavit in
support of the present application and therefore, the proceedings
pending against the applicants may be quashed on the basis of
compromise executed between the parties. He next submitted that
he is pressing the instant application only on the basis of
compromise executed between the parties and not on the merit of
the case.
10. Learned counsel further submitted that as both the parties
have amicably settled their dispute, therefore, no fruitful result
would be served if prosecution will continue as ultimate result of
the trial would be the acquittal. He next submitted that if
proceeding of the present case is quashed on the basis of the
compromise executed between the parties then their relationship
would be cordial one and they can live peacefully, therefore, he
submits even if, the case is of Section 307 IPC, proceeding pending
against the applicants may be quashed on the basis of compromise
executed between the parties.
11. Per contra, learned AGA submitted that as there are serious
allegations against the applicants and present matter relates to
sections 147, 148, 149 307, 504,506 IPC, therefore, on the basis of
compromise, proceeding pending against the applicants should not
be quashed. He next submitted that although this Court can
exercise its power under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to scuttle the
proceeding, on the basis of compromise even in non-compoundable
offences but where the offences are serious and heinous in nature
which affects the society at large then this Court should not quash
the proceedings pending against the accused persons on the basis of
compromise arrived between the parties. Learned AGA vehemently
submitted that there is specific allegation against the applicants
who are fourteen in numbers that they attacked upon injured
persons, Inam and Danish with intention to commit their murder.
Applicant nos. 2 and 6 also opened fire from their respective
countrymade pistols and due to the fire opened by them, two
persons i.e. Inam and Danish sustained injures and one injury of
injured-Inam was on his head which was found dangerous to life,
therefore, instant case cannot be said to be a case of private dispute
and as applicants attempted to commit murder of two persons with
country made pistols, therefore, it is clearly a crime against the
society and in such heinous cases, proceedings cannot be nibbed
from its bud on the basis of the compromise executed between the
accused persons, informant and injured persons, therefore, the
instant application moved by applicants being devoid of merit is
liable to be dismissed.
11. I have given my anxious consideration on the rival
submissions and perused the record of the case.
The brief facts of the case have already been narrated in previous
paragraphs. The gist of the allegation is that applicants who are
fourteen in numbers assaulted and tried to commit murder of two
persons Inam and Danish and applicant nos. 2 and 6 opened fire
from their countrymade pistols and due to the shot made by them,
two persons, Inam and Danish sustained injuries. Although injuries
sustained by Danish were found simple in nature but injury
sustained by Inam on his head was dangerous to life and both the
injured persons in their statements, recorded during investigation,
categorically stated that all the applicants participated in the
incident and according to injured-Inam, applicant no. 2 opened fire
while as per injured-Danish, applicant no. 2 and 6 both opened fire
from their countrymade pistols and due to the fire opened by them,
they sustained injuries. Therefore, from the perusal of the entire
evidence available on record, it is apparent that a prima facie
cognizable offence under sections 147, 148, 149 307, 504, 506 IPC
is made out against the applicants.
12. In case at hand, the question is, whether on the basis of
compromise executed between the parties proceeding of such cases
can be quashed.
13. The Apex Court in catena of judgements held that this Court
can exercise its power vested under section 482 Cr.P.C. beyond the
boundaries of Section 320 Cr.P.C. which states that only
compoundable offence can be compounded and this Court can even
quash the proceedings relate to non-compoundable offences on the
basis of the compromise executed between the parties but at the
same time Apex Court cautioned that the proceeding of serious and
heinous offences which affects the society at large, should not be
quashed on the basis of compromise executed between the parties.
14. The three Judges Bench of the Apex Court in Gian Singh
Vs. Punjab, reported in (2012)10 SCC 303 discussed the
circumstances very elaborately and held that this Court can quash
the proceedings in the cases of non-compoundable offences on the
basis of settlement arrived at between the parties and observed as
“58. Where the High Court quashes a criminal proceeding having regard to
the fact that the dispute between the offender and the victim has been settled
although the offences are not compoundable, it does so as in its opinion,
continuation of criminal proceedings will be an exercise in futility and justice
in the case demands that the dispute between the parties is put to an end and
peace is restored; securing the ends of justice being the ultimate guiding
factor. No doubt, crimes are acts which have harmful effect on the public and
consist in wrongdoing that seriously endangers and threatens the well-being
of the society and it is not safe to leave the crime-doer only because he and the
victim have settled the dispute amicably or that the victim has been paid
compensation, yet certain crimes have been made compoundable in law, with
or without the permission of the court. In respect of serious offences like
murder, rape, dacoity, etc., or other offences of mental depravity under IPC
or offences of moral turpitude under special statutes, like the Prevention of
Corruption Act or the offences committed by public servants while working
in that capacity, the settlement between the offender and the victim can have
no legal sanction at all. However, certain offences which overwhelmingly and
predominantly bear civil flavour having arisen out of civil, mercantile,
commercial, financial, partnership or such like transactions or the offences
arising out of matrimony, particularly relating to dowry, etc. or the family
dispute, where the wrong is basically to the victim and the offender and the
victim have settled all disputes between them amicably, irrespective of the fact
that such offences have not been made compoundable, the High Court may
within the framework of its inherent power, quash the criminal proceeding or
criminal complaint or FIR if it is satisfied that on the face of such settlement,
there is hardly any likelihood of the offender being convicted and by not
quashing the criminal proceedings, justice shall be casualty and ends of
justice shall be defeated. The above list is illustrative and not exhaustive. Each
case will depend on its own facts and no hard-and-fast category can be
15. In Nareinder Singh Vs. State of Punjab reported in (2014) 9
SCC 466, the Supreme Court held that in case of heinous and serious
offences, which are generally to be treated as crime against society, it is the
duty of the State to punish the offender. Hence, even when there is a
settlement, the view of the offender will not prevail since it is in the interest of
society that the offender should be punished to deter others from committing a
similar crime.
16. The Three Judges Bench of the Apex Court in the case of
Parbatbhai Aahir Alias Parbathbhai Bhimsinhbhai Karmur and
Others V. State of Gujrat and Another reported in [(2017) 9 SCC
641], after discussing its earlier judgements observed as follows:-
“16. The broad principles which emerge from the precedents on the subject,
may be summarised in the following propositions:
16.1. Section 482 preserves the inherent powers of the High Court to prevent
an abuse of the process of any court or to secure the ends of justice. The
provision does not confer new powers. It only recognises and preserves
powers which inhere in the High Court.
16.2. The invocation of the jurisdiction of the High Court to quash a first
information report or a criminal proceeding on the ground that a settlement
has been arrived at between the offender and the victim is not the same as the
invocation of jurisdiction for the purpose of compounding an offence. While
compounding an offence, the power of the court is governed by the provisions
of Section 320 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. The power to quash
under Section 482 is attracted even if the offence is non-compoundable.
16.3. In forming an opinion whether a criminal proceeding or complaint
should be quashed in exercise of its jurisdiction under Section 482, the High
Court must evaluate whether the ends of justice would justify the exercise of
the inherent power.
16.4. While the inherent power of the High Court has a wide ambit and
plenitude it has to be exercised (i) to secure the ends of justice, or (ii) to
prevent an abuse of the process of any court.
16.5. The decision as to whether a complaint or first information report
should be quashed on the ground that the offender and victim have settled the
dispute, revolves ultimately on the facts and circumstances of each case and
no exhaustive elaboration of principles can be formulated.
16.6. In the exercise of the power under Section 482 and while dealing with
a plea that the dispute has been settled, the High Court must have due
regard to the nature and gravity of the offence. Heinous and serious
offences involving mental depravity or offences such as murder, rape and
dacoity cannot appropriately be quashed though the victim or the family of
the victim have settled the dispute. Such offences are, truly speaking, not
private in nature but have a serious impact upon society. The decision to
continue with the trial in such cases is founded on the overriding element of
public interest in punishing persons for serious offences.
16.7. As distinguished from serious offences, there may be criminal cases
which have an overwhelming or predominant element of a civil dispute. They
stand on a distinct footing insofar as the exercise of the inherent power to
quash is concerned.
16.8. Criminal cases involving offences which arise from commercial,
financial, mercantile, partnership or similar transactions with an essentially
civil flavour may in appropriate situations fall for quashing where parties
have settled the dispute.
16.9. In such a case, the High Court may quash the criminal proceeding if in
view of the compromise between the disputants, the possibility of a conviction
is remote and the continuation of a criminal proceeding would cause
oppression and prejudice; and
16.10. There is yet an exception to the principle set out in propositions 16.8.
and 16.9. above. Economic offences involving the financial and economic
well-being of the State have implications which lie beyond the domain of a
mere dispute between private disputants. The High Court would be justified in
declining to quash where the offender is involved in an activity akin to a
financial or economic fraud or misdemeanor. The consequences of the act
complained of upon the financial or economic system will weigh in the
17. The Three Judge Bench of the Apex Court in State of
Madhya Pradesh V. Laxmi Narayan & Ors. reported in (2019) 5
SCC 688 laid down the following principles:-
15. Considering the law on the point and the other decisions of this Court on
the point, referred to hereinabove, it is observed and held as under:
15.1. That the power conferred under Section 482 of the Code to quash the
criminal proceedings for the non-compoundable offences under Section 320 of
the Code can be exercised having overwhelmingly and predominantly the civil
character, particularly those arising out of commercial transactions or arising
out of matrimonial relationship or family disputes and when the parties have
resolved the entire dispute amongst themselves;
15.2. Such power is not to be exercised in those prosecutions which involved
heinous and serious offences of mental depravity or offences like murder,
rape, dacoity, etc. Such offences are not private in nature and have a serious
15.3. Similarly, such power is not to be exercised for the offences under the
special statutes like the Prevention of Corruption Act or the offences
committed by public servants while working in that capacity are not to be
quashed merely on the basis of compromise between the victim and the
15.4. Offences under Section 307 IPC and the Arms Act, etc. would fall in
the category of heinous and serious offences and therefore are to be treated
as crime against the society and not against the individual alone, and
therefore, the criminal proceedings for the offence under Section 307 IPC
and/or the Arms Act, etc. which have a serious impact on the society cannot
be quashed in exercise of powers under Section 482 of the Code, on the
ground that the parties have resolved their entire dispute amongst
themselves. However, the High Court would not rest its decision merely
because there is a mention of Section 307 IPC in the FIR or the charge is
framed under this provision. It would be open to the High Court to examine
as to whether incorporation of Section 307 IPC is there for the sake of it or
the prosecution has collected sufficient evidence, which if proved, would
lead to framing the charge under Section 307 IPC. For this purpose, it
would be open to the High Court to go by the nature of injury sustained,
whether such injury is inflicted on the vital/delicate parts of the body, nature
of weapons used, etc. However, such an exercise by the High Court would
be permissible only after the evidence is collected after investigation and the
charge-sheet is filed/charge is framed and/or during the trial. Such exercise
is not permissible when the matter is still under investigation. Therefore, the
ultimate conclusion in paras 29.6 and 29.7 of the decision of this Court in
Narinder Singh (supra) should be read harmoniously and to be read as a
whole and in the circumstances stated hereinabove;
15.5. While exercising the power under Section 482 of the Code to quash the
criminal proceedings in respect of non-compoundable offences, which are
private in nature and do not have a serious impact on society, on the ground
that there is a settlement/compromise between the victim and the offender, the
High Court is required to consider the antecedents of the accused; the conduct
of the accused, namely, whether the accused was absconding and why he was
absconding, how he had managed with the complainant to enter into a
compromise, etc.”
18. The Apex Court in the case of Arun Singh and Others v.
State of Uttar Pradesh Through its Secretary and Another
reported in 2020 (3) SCC 736, held as under:-
“14. In another decision in Narinder Singh v. State of Punjab (supra) it has
been observed that in respect of offence against the society it is the duty to
punish the offender. Hence, even where there is a settlement between the
offender and victim the same shall not prevail since it is in interests of the
society that offender should be punished which acts as deterrent for others
from committing similar crime. On the other hand, there may be offences
falling in the category where the correctional objective of criminal law would
have to be given more weightage than the theory of deterrent punishment. In
such cases, the court may be of the opinion that a settlement between the
parties would lead to better relations between them and would resolve a
festering private dispute and thus may exercise power under Section 482
CrPC for quashing the proceedings or the complaint or the FIR as the case
may be.
19. The Apex Court in case of Ram Gopal & Another Vs. State
of Madhya Pradesh reported in [2021 0 Supreme (SC) 529] had
occasioned to discuss the issue and observed in paragraph -14 as
14. In other words, grave or serious offences or offences which involve moral
turpitude or have a harmful effect on the social and moral fabric of the society
or involve matters concerning public policy, cannot be construed betwixt two
individuals or groups only, for such offences have the potential to impact the
society at large. Effacing abominable offences through quashing process
would not only send a wrong signal to the community but may also accord an
undue benefit to unscrupulous habitual or professional offenders, who can
secure a ‘settlement’ through duress, threats, social boycotts, bribes or other
dubious means. It is well said that “let no guilty man escape, if it can be
20. The Supreme Court in case of Daxaben Vs. The State of
Gujarat & others 2022 LiveLaw (SC) 642 observed as follows:-
“38. However, before exercising its power under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C. to
quash an FIR, criminal complaint and/or criminal proceedings, the High
Court, as observed above, has to be circumspect and have due regard to the
nature and gravity of the offence. Heinous or serious crimes, which are not
private in nature and have a serious impact on society cannot be quashed on
the basis of a compromise between the offender and the complainant and/or
the victim. Crimes like murder, rape, burglary, dacoity and even abetment to
commit suicide are neither private nor civil in nature. Such crimes are against
the society. In no circumstances can prosecution be quashed on compromise,
when the offence is serious and grave and falls within the ambit of crime
against society.
39. Orders quashing FIRs and/or complaints relating to grave and serious
offences only on basis of an agreement with the complainant, would set a
dangerous precedent, where complaints would be lodged for oblique reasons,
with a view to extract money from the accused. Furthermore, financially
strong offenders would go scot free, even in cases of grave and serious
offences such as murder, rape, brideburning, etc. by buying off
informants/complainants and settling with them. This would render otiose
provisions such as Sections 306, 498A, 304-B etc. incorporated in the IPC as
a deterrent, with a specific social purpose.
“40. In Criminal Jurisprudence, the position of the complainant is only that of
the informant. Once an FIR and/or criminal complaint is lodged and a
criminal case is started by the State, it becomes a matter between the State
and the accused. The State has a duty to ensure that law and order is
maintained in society. It is for the state to prosecute offenders. In case of
grave and serious non-compoundable offences which impact society, the
informant and/or complainant only has the right of hearing, to the extent of
ensuring that justice is done by conviction and punishment of the offender. An
informant has no right in law to withdraw the complaint of a non-
compoundable offence of a grave, serious and/or heinous nature, which
impacts society.”
21. The Supreme Court in the case of P. Dharmraj Vs.
Shanmugam and others decided on 8th September 2022 in Crl.
Appeal Nos. 1515-1516 of 2022, after discussing in earlier
judgements observed in para-42 as follows:-
"Thus it is clear from the march of law that the Court has to go slow even
while exercising jurisdiction under Section 482 Cr.PC or Article 226 of the
Constitution in the matter of quashing of criminal proceedings on the basis of
a settlement reached between the parties, when the offences are capable of
having an impact not merely on the complainant and the accused but also on
22. From the decisions noticed above, the law as it stands is that
although this Court can invoke its jurisdiction u/s 482 Cr.P.C. even
in non-compoundable offence and can quash the proceedings on
the basis of settlement arrived at between the parties even in the
cases of non-compoundable offences but while exercising its
jurisdiction this Court must consider the fact that whether the
proceeding relates to any serious and heinous offences and whether
the crime in question has impact over the society. In cases of
serious nature which affects the society at large this Court should
not exercise its jurisdiction under section 482 Cr.P.C. for quashing
the proceedings on the basis of compromise executed between the
23. The three Judges Bench of the Supreme Court in case of
Laxmi Narayan (supra) specifically observed that an offence u/s
307 IPC is serious offence which affects the society at large and
proceedings of such offence should not be quashed on the basis of
compromise executed between the parties, however, the Apex
Court also held that considering the nature of injury and weapon
used proceedings relate to an offence u/s 307 IPC an also quashed
by this Court on the basis of settlement arrived at between the
24. Bearing in mind, the above principles laid down by the Apex
Court, I would analyze the fact of the present case.
25. The present case relates to the offence u/s 307 IPC in which
as many as fourteen accused persons were involved and fire arms
weapons were used. Two persons sustained injuries and injury of
one injured was found dangerous to life and after investigation,
chargesheet against the applicants has been filed u/s 147, 148, 149,
307, 504, 506 IPC. Thus, prima facie it appears that all the
applicants with common object participated in commission of
crime. Such offences have serious impact upon the society and
trial should continue in the public interest and accused persons of
such serious and heinous offences should be punished to deter
others from committing similar offences. In the case in hand,
offences for which applicants are facing prosecution are neither
offences arising out of commercial, financial, mercantile,
partnership or such similar transactions or has any element of civil
dispute, therefore, if in such cases settlement even if arrived at
between the accused persons and complainant-injured persons, the
same cannot constitute a valid ground to quash the charge sheet or
proceeding pending against the accused persons.
26. The case in hand is a State case in which after investigation,
complicity of the applicants were found correct and charge sheet
against them has been submitted, therefore, it has become a matter
between the State and the accused and it is the duty of the State to
ensure the law and order and to prosecute offender and in such
cases, informant or the victim has no right in law to drop the case
of non-compoundable offence of serious and heinous nature which
badly affects the society.
27. Therefore in my view the offences alleged to have been
committed by applicants are crime against the society and it can
not be said that the present dispute is private in nature and does not
affect the society at large. Therefore, proceedings of such cases
should not be quashed on the basis of settlement arrived at between
the parties.
28. Therefore, from the above discussion, I find no merit in the
argument advanced by learned counsel for the applicants.
Accordingly, the instant application is devoid of merit and is,
hereby dismissed.