ig       h              Vivek Singh Thakur, Judge (Oral)
Petitioner has approached this Court against dismissal of
H   her application, filed before the Magistrate, for release/de-freezing her
Saving Bank Accounts bearing No. 39816286371 of State Bank of
India and 10610100004166 of Bank of Baroda in Branches at Kasauli,
vide impugned order dated 21.2.2022 passed by Additional Chief
2.                 According to status report filed by Station House Officer,
Police Station Kasauli, District Solan, H.P., FIR No. 20 of 2020, dated
13.4.2020 was registered under Section 420 of the Indian Penal Code
in Police Station Kasauli, on the basis of complaint filed by complainant
Vartika Mehta against the petitioner, wherein it was alleged that since
about last 5 years petitioner Anita Aggarwal had been contacting
Whether the reporters of the local papers may be allowed to see the Judgment? Yes
2             Cr. Revision No. 200 of 2022
Vartika Mehta complainant and she persuaded and impressed the
complainant to invest by depositing amount with Adarsh Cooperative
Society, with assurance that she (Anita Aggarwal) was an authorized
agent for Kasauli for the said Society and there was no need to worry
about the money, but lateron, on the date of maturity of invested
amount, on contacting by the complainant, Anita Aggarwal started
avoiding her.
Thereafter, complainant came to know from other
residents of the town that Anita Aggarwal had cheated so many
persons in the like manner and had not refunded any amount of the
investors/depositors.
It was further alleged in the complaint that petitioner Anita
Aggarwal had contacted complainant Vartika Mehta for opening
account of RD etc. in the Post Office also, as she was also authorized
agent of the Post Office, but lateron complainant came to know that
Anita Aggarwal had cheated her either by depositing lesser amount or
by not opening the account or by opening the account for lesser
H   amount.    As per complainant, as and when Anita Aggarwal was
contacted for repayment of amount, she started misbehaving and
abusing.
4.            After registration of aforesaid FIR, investigation was
carried on.    As per status report, inquiry was conducted about the
deposit of amount, which was received by Anita Aggarwal from various
persons. For that purpose, correspondence took place between Police
and Yash Mehta, Area Manager of Adarsh Cooperative Society, Solan.
In response Yash Mehta sent record of the Society through e-mail
regarding deposit by petitioner Anita Aggarwal in the account of Vartika
and other account numbers. Inquiry and verification was conducted by
3           Cr. Revision No. 200 of 2022
the Police from the Post Office, wherein record of deposit of amount by
Anita Aggarwal in the account of Vartika, was also traced.
5.          As per status report, Anita Aggarwal received certain
amount from Vartika Mehta for deposit in the Post Office, but deposited
the same with Adarsh Cooperative Society. In this regard, it has been
alleged by the complainant that Anita Aggarwal had done so at her
own without informing the depositor of the amount.
As per investigation, Anita Aggarwal has been found a
registered agent of Credit Cooperative Society, who had received
money from the villagers for deposit in Adarsh Cooperative Society.
As per status report, amount of Vartika Mehta has been
found deposited in the account of Adarsh Credit Cooperative Society.
Further that, after closure of Society, agent Anita Aggarwal could not
ensure entries of payment of amount since December to March, 2020
and she had offered repayment of the said amount to Vartika Mehta,
but Vartika Mehta was asking for payment of entire amount in one go.
H   Deposit of amount in the Post Office was also verified by the
Investigating Agency by obtaining record from the Post Office.
8.          During investigation, on the basis of communication sent
by the Investigating Officer/SHO concerned, above mentioned account
numbers    of     petitioner   Anita   Aggarwal    were       ordered         to    be
seized/freezed.
9.          Petitioner had approached the Trial Court under Section
457 Cr.P.C. for release/de-freezing of account numbers of the
petitioner referred supra. The said application was dismissed by the
Magistrate on the ground that investigation was pending, but with
4           Cr. Revision No. 200 of 2022
direction to expedite the investigation and to submit final report at the
earliest.
10.          It has also been submitted by respondent-Investigating
Agency that investigation was complete and as per conclusion of
investigation, for the facts and circumstances of the case, no offence
was found to be committed by the petitioner and, therefore,
cancellation report was prepared and submitted to Law Officer for
vetting and verification, which was returned by the Law Officer with
certain comments and as per Investigating Agency steps for removing
objections raised by the Law Officer are in progress and investigation
is yet to be completed, wherein no person linked with Adarsh
Cooperative Society could be examined despite making all efforts and
visiting some places in Rajasthan.
11.          It has been stated in the status report that now office of
Adarsh Credit Cooperative Society at Solan has been closed and
Society is under liquidation and, therefore, investigation could not be
H   completed till date.
12.          Learned counsel for the petitioner to substantiate the claim
of the petitioner for release of accounts has placed reliance upon the
judgments of Uttrakhand High Court in Puran Chand Pal Vs. Punjab
National Bank, 2017 Cri. L.J. 4252; Delhi High Court in Muktaben M
Mashru Vs. State of NCT of Delhi and another, 265 (2019) DLT 651;
Madras High Court in TMT. T Subbulakshmi Vs. T. Yamini, 2016 Cri.
L.J. 2861; and Karnataka High Court in Smt. Lathifa Abubakkar Vs.
The State of Karnataka & others, 2012 Cri. L.J. 3487.
13.          As held by the Supreme Court in State of Maharashtra V.
Tapas D. Neogy, (1999) 7 SCC 685 that bank account of an accused
5             Cr. Revision No. 200 of 2022
or any of his relation is property within the meaning of Section 102 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure and Police Officer in course of
investigation, can seize or prohibit operation of the said account, if
such assets have direct link with the commission of offence which the
Police Officer is investigating into.
14.          Section    102    of   the of  Code     of    Criminal        Procedure
empowering the Police Officer to seize property reads as under:-
“102. Power of police officer to seize certain property.
(1) Any police officer, may seize any property which may be
alleged or suspected to have been stolen, or which may be
found under circumstances which create suspicion of the
commission of any offence.
(2) Such police officer, if subordinate to the officer in charge of
C a police station, shall forthwith report the seizure to that officer.
(3) Every police officer acting under sub- section (1) shall
forthwith report the seizure to the Magistrate having jurisdiction
ig    h          and where the property seized is such that it cannot be
conveniently transported to the Court, or where there is
difficulty in securing proper accommodation for the custody of
H                such property, or where the continued retention of the property
in police custody may not be considered necessary for the
purpose of investigation, he may give custody thereof to any
person on his executing a bond undertaking to produce the
property before the Court as and when required and to give
effect to the further orders of the Court as to the disposal of the
same.
Provided that where the property seized under Sub-
Section (1) is subject to speedy and natural decay and if the
person entitled to the possession of such property is unknown
or absent and the value of such property is less than five
hundred rupees, it may forthwith be sold by auction under the
orders of the Superintendent of Police and the provisions of
sections 457 and 458 shall, as nearly as may be practicable,
apply to the net proceeds of such sale.”
6            Cr. Revision No. 200 of 2022
15.         Section 102 of the Code of Criminal Procedure empowers
the Police Officer to seize certain property on existence of certain
condition which is pre-requisite, empowering the Police Officer to seize
such property. He can seize any property, but the said property should
have been the property which may be alleged or suspected to have
been stolen or which may be found under circumstances which create
suspicion of commission of any offence.
In present case, it is version of the Investigating Agency
that Anita Aggarwal received money from Vartika Mehta and deposited
the same in Adarsh Credit Cooperative Society, though some of those
deposits were directed to be deposited in the Post Office and status
report filed by the Investigating Agency nowhere reveals or alleges that
the bank accounts of Anita Aggarwal contains property received from
Vartika Mehta complainant or relevant accounts were used for
transaction at the time of commission of alleged offence of cheating so
as to create suspicion of commission of offence through these bank
H   accounts.   Admittedly, it is not a case that the property, i.e. Bank
Accounts of Anita Aggarwal, is suspected for depositing/withdrawing or
operating or transacting the stolen property.       Therefore, in present
case, necessary ingredient, empowering the Investigating Officer to
seize the Bank Accounts of petitioner are missing and thus
seizure/freezing of Bank Accounts of the petitioner is not sustainable.
17.         Undisputedly, investigation is still stated to be pending.
FIR was lodged in the year 2020. We are in 2023. No doubt, as
observed by the Magistrate, there was Covid-19 period, during which
everything was halted, but now more than sufficient time has passed
7               Cr. Revision No. 200 of 2022
after the period of Covid-19, but till date conclusion of investigation has
not been finalized.
18.          It is also noticeable that Instigating Agency had concluded
its investigation at one point of time and found that no offence was
committed by the petitioner and, therefore, cancellation report was
submitted to the Law Officer, but thereafter Law Officer raised certain
objections and the report alongwith record was returned to the
Investigating Agency, but till date investigation has no progress, even
for an inch. It is case of Investigating Agency that persons belonging
to Rajasthan are involved in the matter and, therefore, they cannot be
joined/associated or interrogated during investigation despite making
efforts and now all out efforts are being made to complete the
investigation.
19.          In the aforesaid circumstances, I find that in present case,
neither ingredients of Section 102 Cr.P.C. are existing to empower the
Police Officer to seize the bank accounts of the petitioner nor any
H   nexus or link has been pointed out, much less established, by the
Investigating    Agency   between    the    offence        allegedly,        as     per
complainant, committed by the petitioner and operation of bank
accounts concerned.       There is inordinate delay in concluding the
investigation and there is no plausible or valid reason to continue the
seizure/freezing of the bank accounts of the petitioner as there is
nothing to point out that how de-freezing of the account shall come in
the way of Investigating Agency in investigating and concluding the
investigation in the FIR concerned.        Commission of any offence or
leveling allegations of commission of offence is not sufficient to freeze
the accounts of a person except as permissible under law and
8            Cr. Revision No. 200 of 2022
pendency of investigation, that too for the last three years, is also not
permissible under law for infinite period, particularly when the property
is neither a suspected stolen property nor there is any nexus between
the property, i.e. Bank accounts and the commission of alleged offence
by the accused.
With the aforesaid discussion, I find that at this stage
petitioner is entitled for de-freezing of her accounts mentioned supra
and to operate them in accordance with law and, therefore, these
accounts are ordered to be released/de-freezed, but subject to
furnishing personal bond for an amount lying deposited in the bank
accounts at the time of freezing of these bank accounts by giving
undertaking therein to produce the said amount in the Court or
anywhere else, wherever directed by the Court during trial or on
conclusion of trial. The bond shall be executed to the satisfaction of
Trial Court having the jurisdiction over Police Station, Kasauli or to the
satisfaction of Magistrate available at Kasauli at the time of furnishing
H   the bond. In case petitioner furnishes the bonds, as directed supra,
concerned Magistrate shall pass an appropriate order immediately
thereafter but after accepting the personal bond to his/her satisfaction,
release/de-freeze the Bank accounts of the petitioner referred supra.
With the aforesaid observations, petition is allowed and
disposed of in aforesaid terms, alongwith pending application(s), if any.