1. Heard Sri Nishant Mishra, learned counsel for the petitioner
and Sri A.C. Tripathi, learned Standing Counsel for the State.
2. This writ petition has been filed claiming relief for quashing
the correspondence dated 30.06.2022 issued by the respondent
no.   2    requiring   the   petitioner   assessee    to   furnish
acknowledgement of online filing of the appeal.
3. The case, in nutshell, is that the assessee, which is a
registered public charitable trust and duly registered under the
Societies Registration Act and also under Section 12-AA of the
Income Tax Act, is constructing a charitable hospital and certain
exemption was claimed by the assessee which was not granted
by the assessment order passed on 12.01.2022 being order No.
ZD090122015905M. After passing of the said order, the
assessee reversed certain input tax credit through Form GSTR-
3B, which was filed on 08.02.2022. The department on
12.01.2022 passed a summary order under Rule 142 (5) of UP
GST Rules, 2017. The assessee in the meantime had tried to file
appeal online against the original order which was not accepted
and the web-portal displayed error.
4. The assessee also preferred an appeal online against the
summary order being order No. ZD090122015958B. The portal
of the department reflected that the order number entered is
already under appeal or appeal order has been passed. If error
persists, please call GST help desk or log your issues on
Grievance Redressal Portal for GST and quote error number.
The assessee, thereafter, moved a letter before the authority
making a complaint that the portal was not accepting the appeal
against the order passed by the department. A rectification order
under Section 161 was passed by the authorities on 19.04.2022,
pursuant to which the recovery proceeding was initiated against
the assessee on 21.04.2022. The Additional Commissioner,
Grade-II (Appeals)-1, Commercial Tax, Kanpur on 28.04.2022
had required the assessee to submit the acknowledgement of
appeal filed online. Hence, this petition.
5. Sri Nishant Mishra, learned counsel for the petitioner,
submitted that the online portal of the department is not
accepting the appeal filed by the assessee against the original
order and the department is insisting for placing the
acknowledgement of the appeal filed online and is not
accepting the appeal filed offline. He further contends that
Section 107 of CGST Act, 2008 provides for the filing of the
appeal against the order passed under the Act. According to
him, Rule 108 provides for the procedure and appeal to the
Appellate Authority is to be filed in Form GST APL-01
alongwith relevant documents either electronically or otherwise
as may be notified by the Commissioner. According to learned
counsel, till date the Commissioner has not notified the other
method through which an appeal could be filed.
6. He invited the attention of the Court to the definition clause 2
(80) wherein the word "notification" has been defined which
means a notification published in official gazette and the
expressions "notify" and "notified" shall be construed
accordingly. According to assessee's counsel, once the
Commissioner has not made any notification or the State
Government has issued any notification notifying the other
mode of filing of an appeal, then the filing of appeal offline by
the assessee cannot be denied by the department.
7. He next contended that in the counter affidavit there is no
denial to paragraph no. 32 of the petition wherein assessee has
taken a stand that till date no such notification has been issued
by the Commissioner notifying the same in the official gazette.
Reliance has been placed upon a Division Bench judgment of
Andhra Pradesh High Court in case of Ali Cotton Mill Vs.
(A.P.), wherein the Court held as under;
"10. As can be seen from Rule 108(1) of AP GST Rules, 2017, the
language employed therein is as clear as crystal to the effect that an
appeal to the appellate authority under Section 107(1) of the AP GST Act
shall be filed along with form GST APL-01 and the relevant documents
'either electronically or otherwise as may be notified by the Chief
Commissioner'. So, till the Chief Commissioner specifies one particular
mode of filing, the concerned appellant can choose to file the appeal
either electronically or otherwise i.e., manually. In that view, the
interpretation of the 1st respondent that since the Chief Commissioner has
not given notification that the manual filing of the appeal can be accepted
by the appellate authority, the appellant cannot file the appeal in manual
form is contrary to the purport of Rule 108(1) of AP GST Rules, 2017.
11. In similar circumstances, Division Bench of this Court in W.P.No.9324
of 2019, dated 01.08.2019, held thus:
"Having regard to the facts and submissions and as the case of the
petitioner requires adjudication on merits and when substantial justice is
pitted against technical considerations, it is always necessary to prefer the
ends of justice, we are of the considered view that the request of the
petitioner merits consideration. Such course also would help the
petitioner in having his cause decided on merits."
8. Per contra, Sri A.C. Tripathi, learned Standing Counsel,
submitted that the order which the assessee wants to challenge
before the Appellate Authority in shape of original order No.
ZD090122015905M only records the finding as to the demand
and penalty and the summary order which has been passed
under Rule 142 (5) of UP GST Rules should be challenged in
appeal before the authority. According to him, the reference
number of the said order is ZD090122015958B. The appeal
against the said order has already been preferred by the assessee
but he is not placing the acknowledgement slip before the
authorities for its due consideration.
9. Learned Standing Counsel further contended that the word
"notified" used in Rule 108 does not mean any notification
which is to be issued by the Commissioner but it is a circular
which Commissioner has issued in respect of filing of an
appeal. He further invited the attention of the Court to the letter
addressed by the Joint Commissioner (Legal), Commercial Tax
to the Additional Commissioner, Grade-I dated 31.08.2022
wherein the officer concerned has tried to convince the senior
officer that there being certain glitches in filing of appeal
against the order passed under Section 161 of the Act and the
assessee in those cases may prefer appeal offline.
10. According to him, in the present case, the appeal filed by
the assessee against the summary order was maintainable and
assessee has not placed before the Appellate Authority the
acknowledgement slip due to which the appeal was not being
heard and decided. He then invited the attention of the Court to
the circular issued by the Commissioner, Commercial Tax, U.P.
dated 11.08.2022 wherein the problem of technical glitches in
filing of appeal was discussed by the Commissioner and a
direction was issued to all the Appellate Authorities through out
the State to get the matter resolved through the IT Cell and
entertain the appeal online.
11. I have heard the respective counsel and perused the material
on record.
12. The short question for consideration before this Court is that
whether due to the mistake of the department or the technical
glitch in software when an appeal of assessee is not reflected on
the portal, whether the authorities can deny to entertain the
appeal filed offline on technical grounds.
13. This is a case where the Taxing Authorities of the State are
contesting tooth and nail up till this Court preventing the
assessee from consideration of his appeal offline though, prima
facie, it is clear that the appeal filed by the assessee is not being
reflected on the web-portal of the department. The department
is trying to justify its stand that an appeal will lie against a
summary order passed in DRC-07 under Rule 142(5) of the
Rules and not against the original order, which was passed
under      Section     74    of   the    Act    being   order     No.
14. Section 107 of the Act of 2017, which provides for appeal
against the adjudication order, clearly states that any person
aggrieved by any decision or order passed under the Act or the
State Goods and Services Tax Act or the Union Territory Goods
and Service Tax Act by an adjudicating authority may appeal to
such Appellate Authority. The legislature has not put any
embargo upon filing of an appeal before the Appellate Authority
by a person aggrieved, against any order.
15. The contention of learned Standing Counsel that an appeal
against order passed under Rule 142(5) that is a summary order,
is only maintainable cannot be accepted by this Court. The
legislature has used the word "any person aggrieved by any
decision or order passed under this Act". The order dated
12.01.2022 being order No. ZD090122015905M has been
passed by the Adjudicating Authority and the assessee if
aggrieved by that order cannot be stopped from challenging the
order before the Appellate Authority. It is the Appellate
Authority, who has to take final decision in the matter. The
Appellate Authority is there to adjudicate the matter, which is
before it under the provisions of the Act, and it cannot stop any
aggrieved person from approaching the forum through filing the
appeal restricting his right.
16. The Act has granted right to every person, who is aggrieved
by an order passed by the Adjudicating Authority to approach
the appellate forum as envisaged under Section 107. The act of
the respondents in not entertaining the appeal offline is an act
from stopping the assessee from getting his right adjudicated as
provided under the Act.
17. Moreover, Rule 108 which is the procedure laid down for
filing of an appeal clearly envisages situation where the appeal
has to be filed electronically i.e. online. It further provides that
appeal can also be filed otherwise as may be notified by the
Commissioner. In the State of Uttar Pradesh, the Commissioner
has not notified other mode of filing an appeal before the first
18. In the counter affidavit filed by the State, there is no denial
to paragraph no. 32 of the writ petition wherein specific
pleading has been made by the assessee that no other method
has been notified by the Commissioner for filing appeal other
than through electronic mode. The contention of learned
Standing Counsel that Commissioner has issued a circular does
not hold ground as the word 'notification' has been defined in
Section 2(80) of the Act, which means a notification published
in the official gazette and the expression 'notify' and 'notified'
shall be construed accordingly.
19. There is absolute clarity by the legislature as to the
notification which has to be published by the State Government
in the official gazette. Once no such notification has been
issued, it would be presumed that other mode of filing the
appeal would be offline.
20. The view taken by the Division Bench of Andhra Pradesh
High Court in Ali Cotton Mill (Supra) interpreting Rule 108 to
the extent that in case of notification not issued by the Chief
Commissioner, it will be presumed that other mode is only
through offline.
21. This Court finds that the taxing authorities cannot stop any
assessee from claiming his statutory right, as provided under
this Act in the garb of technicality.
22. In view of the said fact, the correspondence dated
30.06.2022 issued by the respondent No.2 is hereby set-aside.
Commercial Tax, Kanpur, is hereby directed to consider the
appeal of the assessee filed offline strictly in accordance with
law within a period of one month from the date of presentation
of a certified copy of this order before him.