Counsel for Appellant :- Renu Singh,Sr. Advocate
Counsel for Respondent :- G.A.
Order on Criminal Misc. Bail Application No.1 of 2021
Heard Sri V.P. Srivastava, learned Senior Counsel assisted by
Sri Rajiv Nayan Singh, learned counsel for accused-appellants,
Sri Om Prakash, learned A.G.A. for the State and perused the
This application has been preferred under Section 389(1)
Cr.P.C. seeking suspension of sentence and release of appellants
on bail during pendency of appeal filed against impugned
judgment and order dated 25.8.2021 passed by Additional
District & Sessions Judge, Court No.3, Kasganj in S.T. No.311
of 2019 (State Vs. Hasratulla Shervani and others), arising out
of Case Crime No.408 of 2012, under Sections 147, 148, 149,
District- Kasganj, convicting the accused-appellants Hasratulla
Dilshad, Habeeb, Samaruddin, Kamar and Samar under
and sentencing them to undergo rigorous imprisonment for two
years with a fine of Rs.1000/- each under Section 147 I.P.C. in
default undergo imprisonment for one month; to undergo
rigorous imprisonment for two years with a fine of Rs.1000/-
each under Section 148 I.P.C. in default undergo one month
imprisonment; to undergo rigorous imprisonment for seven
years with a fine of Rs.5000/- each under Section 307 read with
Section 149 I.P.C. in default undergo six months imprisonment;
to undergo rigorous imprisonment for one year with a fine of
Rs.1000/- each under Section 323 I.P.C. in default undergo one
month imprisonment; to undergo rigorous imprisonment for
five years with a fine of Rs.1000/- each under Section 452
I.P.C. in default undergo one month imprisonment; to undergo
rigorous imprisonment for one year with a fine of Rs.1000/-
each under Section 504 I.P.C. in default undergo one month
imprisonment; to undergo rigorous imprisonment for two years
with a fine of Rs.1000/- each under Section 506 I.P.C. in default
undergo imprisonment for one month; to undergo rigorous
imprisonment for two years with a fine of Rs.1000/- each under
Section 332 I.P.C. in default undergo imprisonment for one
month; to undergo rigorous imprisonment for two years with a
fine of Rs.1000/- each under Section 353 I.P.C. in default
imprisonment for one month.
The prosecution story in brief is that informant Shamsad has
lodged a first information report on 14.9.2012 at 11:45 p.m. at
Police Station- Dholana, District- Kasganj on the basis of
written complaint that on 20.5.2011 a false report was lodged
against informant by Shameem on account of which police has
arrested the informant and lodged in the lock up. On 30.8.2012
at about 02:00 p.m. accused-appellant Hasratulla Shervani
(MLA) along with his Bhanja Vazahat Shervani @ Majhale,
and Samar residents of Garhi along with 50 supporters came to
the police station and accused-appellant Hasratulla Shervani
asked from the gate of police station about informant Shamsad
and has instructed the police to beat him so badly so that he will
become crippled by foot and hand, otherwise they will ready for
the bad consequences. After that the accused-appellant
Hasratulla Shervani along with his supporters proceeded
towards the police lock-up and at that time the accused-
appellant Hasratulla Shervani was armed with riffle and gun
and supporters were armed with danda and caught hold his hand
in the lock-up from outside and assaulted upon him with
intention to kill him by butt of rifle and other guns, lathi and
danda. The S.O. Ram Murti Yadav intervened and anyhow he
saved him. It was also stated that the injury on his body was
grievous and he requested for his medical examination and
action against accused-appellants and further stated that
accused-appellant Hasratulla Shervani and his supporters had
abused him.
It is contended by learned counsel for accused-appellants that in
this case, the informant has turned hostile and other eye
witnesses have also turned hostile and only two police
personnel Rtd. S.I. Phool Singh (PW-1) and H.Ct. Chhote Lal
(PW-2) has supported the prosecution. It is further contended
that the injuries found on the body of the informant was of
simple nature. It is further contended that the accused-appellant
was not arrested at the police station. It is further contended that
the appeal is likely to take some time for its disposal, therefore,
they may be released on bail during pendency of appeal.
Learned A.G.A. for the State has opposed the bail application
and has submitted that it is the case that accused Hasratulla
Shervani was elected member of the Legislative Assembly has
crossed all the limits and has beaten the informant at the lock-
up of police station by calling him near and, pulling his hand
out side lock-up and has also obstructed the police in
performing their official duties. It is further contended that S.I.
Phool Singh, the then Station Officer had anyhow saved the
informant. It is further contended that due to the influence of
the accused-appellant Hasratulla Shervani all the witnesses of
the fact except police personnel have turned hostile. It is further
contended that in such a matter accused-appellants are not
entitled for bail during pendency of appeal. Learned A.G.A. for
the State has also pointed out that the case, which is decided by
the Special Court pertaining to MP/MLA are dealt by Special
Bench of this High Court, whereas against the judgment of
Additional Sessions Judge shall be heard by any Bench of this
I have gone through the file and has given thoughtful
consideration on the contention raised by learned counsel for
the parties and have also perused the injury report of the injured
Shamsad, who has turned hostile during his examination. The
injured Shamsad was medically examined on 23.5.2011 at
12:55 at C.H.C., Kasganj and the following injuries were found
1. abrasion 5 c.m. x 3 c.m. in front of upper part at right side of
the chest above right nipple.
2. contusion swelling 12 c.m. x 8 c.m. on the upper part of right
3. contusion 12 c.m. x 2.5 c.m. on right thigh in front of middle
and outer aspect, 15 c.m. above the right knee joint
4. Abrasion 1.5 c.m. x 2 c.m. on right knee joint with traumative
swelling in area of 3.5. c.m. x 2 c.m.
From perusal of the injury report, it prima facie supports the
contents of first information report, therefore, in above
circumstances and that the injured has turned hostile is of no
consequence. In this case it appears that on influence of
accused-appellant Hasratulla Shervani, the witnesses have
turned hostile. It was his duty to raise the issue of misuse of law
in Assembly and get it remedied but instead of it he himself
misused the law and took law in his hand and pressurized the
police personnel to adopt third degree and get him lodged in
police lock up, this act of the accused amounts to misuse of
police machinery, therefore, his act deserves no sympathy
instead of condemnation. Now a days, the legislatures and
political persons are thinking themselves as above the law. This
menace cannot be lightly taken and should be dealt with iron
hand. So far as the bail related to the accused-appellant
Hasratulla Shervani is concerned, his bail application is
So far as the rest accused-appellants Vazahat Shervani @
Kamar and Samar are concerned, their bail application is
allowed because they have followed him.
Let the appellants Vazahat Shervani @ Majhale, Shameem,
Yusuf, Dilshad, Habeeb, Samaruddin, Kamar and Samar be
released on bail on their furnishing personal bonds and two
sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction of court
concerned in S.T. No.311 of 2019 (State Vs. Hasratulla and
others), arising out of Case Crime No.408 of 2012, under
I.P.C., P.S.- Dholana, District- Kasganj and on furnishing
undertaking that they will co-operate with the hearing of appeal
and remain present on each and every date in person or through
counsel. The sentence awarded to the accused-appellants
Habeeb, Samaruddin, Kamar and Samar shall remain suspended
during pendency of appeal.
As soon as personal and surety bonds are furnished,
photocopies of the same are directed to be transmitted to this
Court forthwith by court concerned to be kept on the record of
this appeal.
The party shall file computer generated copy of order
downloaded from the official website of High Court Allahabad,
self attested by it along with a self attested identity proof of the
said person(s) (preferably Aadhar Card) mentioning the mobile
number(s) to which the said Aadhar Card is linked, before the
The concerned Court/Authority/Official shall verify the
authenticity of the computerized copy of the order from the
official website of High Court Allahabad and shall make a
declaration of such verification in writing.
List in the week commencing 10.1.2022 for final hearing of