Counsel for Respondents :- Sri. Syed Ali Murtaza, A.G.A.,
1.     Heard Shri Daya Shankar Mishra, learned Senior Advocate,
assisted by Shri Chandrakesh Mishra and Shri Abhishek Mishra
Advocates, learned Counsel appearing for the petitioner, Shri Syed
Ali Murtaza. learned Additional Government Advocate for the State-
respondents (1) Superintendent, Central Jail, Bareli, (2) the District
Magistrate, Shahjahanpur and (3) the State of Uttar Pradesh and Ms.
Sadhna Singh, learned Standing Counsel for the Union of India.
2.     The instant Writ Petition under Article 226 of the Constitution
of India has been filed by the petitioner Abhay Raj Gupta, who is in
custody in Central Jail, Bareilly, through his mother, seeking
issuance of a Writ of Habeas Corpus challenging his detention under
an order dated 23-01-2021 passed under Section 3 (2) of the
National Security Act, 19801 and the entire consequential
proceedings and continued detention as being illegal and
unconstitutional and a prayer has been made to issue a Writ of
Mandamus commanding the respondents to release the petitioner
from custody.
3.     The detention order dated 23-01-2021 states that the District
Magistrate has been satisfied that it has become necessary to pass a
detention order under Section 3 (2) of the NSA, 1980 to prevent the
petitioner from acting in any manner which would be prejudicial to
the maintenance of public order. The grounds of detention are
contained in a separate communication of the same date issued by
the District Magistrate, which narrates the incident which led to the
passing of the detention order. As per the report given by the
informant, the deceased Rakesh Yadav accompanied by Kuldeep
Jaiswal alias Sonu, Driver Shadab and the informant, reached the
P.W.D. Office at about 01:15 p.m. on 02-12-2019. Three unidentified
persons present there started firing at Rakesh Yadav with the
intention to kill him. As soon as Kuldeep Jaiswal alias Sonu took aim
with the licensee pistol of Rakesh, they fired at him also. People
starting running away. Rakesh Yadav was killed and Kuldeep Jaiswal
was admitted for treatment. On the information of the brother of the
deceased, Case Crime Number 837/19 under Sections 302, 307 IPC
was registered on 03-12-2019 at 00:53 in Police Station Sadar Bazar,
4.     The Second F.I.R. under Case Crime Number 873/19 under
Section 307 IPC was registered on 22-12-2019 in Police Station
Sadar Bazar, Shahjahanpur on the allegation that when the police
apprehended the petitioner to arrest him for the aforesaid incident
which occurred on 02-12-2019, he fired at the Police personnel with
the intention to kill. The petitioner was taken in custody and was
lodged in Jail on 23-12-2019.
5.     On the ground of the same incident, a third F.I.R. was lodged
under Section 2/3 of the Uttar Pradesh Gangsters and Anti-Social
Activities (Prevention) Act, 1986 as Case Crime No. 221/20 in
Police Station Sadar Bazar, Shahjahanpur, in which the petitioner is
in custody since 01-05-2020.
6.     The detention order states that because of the incident which
occurred in P.W.D. Office on 02-12-2019 at about 01:15, the students
present in the Gandhi Faiz-e-Aam College adjacent to the P.W.D.
College got panicked. Upon coming to know about the incident the
guardians of the students also got panicked and in talks with the
college management they expressed their concern regarding the
safety of their children. The Principal, G. F. College has given an
application in this regard to the Police, which establishes that
because of the offence of gruesome murder done by the petitioner’s
accomplices under a conspiracy hatched by him, people got afraid
and panicked and the public order was disturbed.
7. It has been averred in the writ petition that there has been an old
animosity between the deceased Rakesh Yadav and his family
members and the family members of the petitioner. The petitioner’s
grand father Radheyshyam had lodged a first information report in
relation to murder of the petitioner’s uncle Ashutosh Gupta against
Giran Yadav and Kamlesh Yadav uncles of the deceased Rakesh
Yadav and in that case Giran Yadav, father of the deceased Rakesh
Yadav had to remain in jail for a period of 18 months.
8.     The detention order has been challenged by means of the
instant Writ Petition mainly on five grounds. The first ground of
challenge is that the alleged incident was an offence against an
individual which affected “law and order”, but it does not affect
“public order” so as to attract the provisions of Section 3(2) of the
NSA, 1980. The second ground of challenge is that the incident
which took place on 02-12-2019 is a stale incident which has no
proximity with the detention order and the invocation of the
provisions of the NSA, 1980 after a long delay on 23-01-2021 was
neither warranted nor justified. The third ground of challenge is that
copies of the entire relevant material referred to and relied upon in
the detention order have not been provided to the petitioner. The
documents provided with the detention order have been mentioned in
an index, a copy whereof has been filed as Annexure No. 5 to the
writ petition and at serial No. 46 it mentions the bail application filed
in case crime No. 221 of 2020 under Section 2/3 of the Gangsters
Act contained one page only. The petitioner has filed a copy of the
index of the aforesaid bail application as Annexure No. 4 to the writ
petition which indicates that its index was of one page only and the
entire bail application consisted of as many as of 19 pages. The
copies of the report of the District Magistrate and that of the
advisory Board were not provided to the petitioner as also comments
on the said applications have not been provided to the petitioner in
violation of the principles of natural justice, which renders the
detention order unsustainable in law. Lastly the detention order has
been assailed on the ground that on 23-01-2021, i.e. on the date of
passing of the detention order, the petitioner was already in custody
and he had not even filed an application for Bail in Case Crime No.
221 of 2020 under the U. P. Gangsters and Anti-Social Activities
(Prevention) Act and there was no possibility of the petitioner acting
in any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of public order and in
these circumstances, the provisions of Section 3 (2) of the NSA,
1980 are not attracted and the detention order is unsustainable in law.
9.     In support of his submissions, Shri Daya Shankar Mishra,
learned Senior Advocate has placed reliance on the judgments in the
cases of Ichhu Devi Choraria Vs. Union of India and others, 1980
Beed and others, 1987 AIR 1977, State of U.P. Vs. Kamal Kishore
Saini, 1988 AIR 208, M. Ahamedkutty Vs. Union of India, 1990
Brijbasi Pathak Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh and others, 1985 (suppl.)
ACC 273, Mrs. T. Devaki Vs. Government of Tamil Nadu and
others, 1990 AIR 1086, Smt. Angoori Devi for Ram Ratan Vs. Union
of India and others, 1989 AIR 371, Ram Manohar Lohia Vs. State of
Bihar and another, AIR 1966 SC 740, Sant Singh Vs. District
Magistrate and others, 2000 CriLJ 2230, Ram Kripal Singh Vs.
State of U.P. And others, 1986 CriLJ 1437, Banka Sneha Sheela Vs.
The State of Telangana and others, (2021) 9 SCC 415, Mahesh
Kumar Chauhan alias Banti Vs. Union of India and others, 1990 0
Supreme (SC) 298, Prabhu Dayal Deorah etc. Vs. District
Magistrate, Kamrup and others, 1973 0 Supreme (SC) 320, Imran @
Tendu Vs. Adhikshak, Janpad Karagar, Muzaffar Nagar and others,
2018 0 Supreme (All) 346, Ayya alias Ayub Vs. State of U.P. and
another, 1989 AIR 364, SK. Serajul Vs. State of West Bengal, AIR
1975 Supreme Court 1517, Sk. Nizamuddin Vs. State of West
Bengal, 1975 CRI. L.J. 12, Jagan Nath Biswas Vs. The State of W.B,
Magistrate 24 Parganas and others, 1975 CRI. L.J. 1499, Vijay
Narain Singh Vs. State of Bihar and others, 1984 1 Crimes (SC) 914,
10.    The District Magistrate, Shahjahanpur has filed a counter
affidavit on behalf of the State-respondents stating that during the
course of investigation of the heinous crime committed in broad day
light in P.W.D. Office, in which one Rakesh Yadav was shot dead
and another person Kuldeep Jaiswal alias Sonu received grievous
injuries, the complicity of the petitioner came into knowledge. The
act of the petitioner created terror and panic in the locality and
peaceful atmosphere was disturbed and after considering this aspect
of the matter, the provisions of NSA, 1980 have been imposed upon
the petitioner, after considering the report of the Sponsoring
Authority, Police Authority and the entire facts available on record
and after serving relevant documents upon the petitioner through jail
11.    A counter affidavit has been filed on behalf of the Union of
India also stating that the report as envisaged under Section 3 (5) of
the NSA, 1980 forwarded by the Government of Uttar Pradesh by a
letter dated 01-02-2021 was received in the Ministry of Home
Affairs on 08-02-2021. The same was examined in detail alongwith
the documents attached therewith by the Deputy Secretary (Security)
who noted that there was no reason to interfere with the said
detention order. A copy of the representation dated 13-02-2021 of
the detenue alongwith para-wise comments of the detaining
authority, forwarded by the District Magistrate, Shahjahanpur by the
letter dated 15-02-2021, was received in the Ministry of Home
Affairs on 18-02-2021 and on 19-02-2021, the same was processed
for consideration of Union Home Secretary. Being aware of the
effects and sensitivity of detention under the NSA, 1980, the
representation was duly considered at various levels to ascertain the
merit. Thereafter, the Union Home Secretary having carefully gone
through the material on record, including the order of detention, the
grounds for detention, the representation of the detenue and the
comments of the detaining authority thereon concluded that the
detenue had failed to put forth any material cause or ground in his
representation to justify the revocation of the order by exercise of the
power of the Central Government under Section 14 of the NSA,
1980. He, therefore, rejected the representation and the detenue was
informed vide wireless message No. II/15028/25/2021-NSA dated
12.    Opposing the writ petition, Shri Syed Ali Murtaza, learned
A.G.A. has submitted that there is no thumb rule that the preventive
detention can be ordered only if a bail application is pending. Its
genesis lies under Article 22 of the Constitution of India. However,
normally preventive detention is ordered only when a bail
application is pending. As the petitioner was already in custody in a
case under Section 302 I.P.C., the NSA, 1980 was not invoked. The
cause of action for invoking the NSA, 1980, was that the petitioner
was granted bail in Case Crime No. 837 of 2019 and Case Crime No.
873 of 2019 and he had filed an application for bail in the case under
the Gangster Act. He has submitted that whether the case involves a
threat to maintenance of “public order” or “law and order” depends
upon the facts of each case and the order of preventive order has to
be passed by the detaining authority on the basis of his subjective
satisfaction in this regard. Mr. Murtaza has submitted that the
incident took place at a public place due to which the PWD office
and the nearby shops were closed and the students of college situated
nearby got panicked and, therefore, it involves breach of public order
and not merely a law and order. He has submitted that the detention
order under NSA, 1980 can be passed in any of the following
conditions: (a) if the accused is not in custody or when he is in
custody (b) the detaining authority is satisfied that he may be
enlarged on bail (c) where no bail application is pending.
13.    In response to the petitioner’s contention that the entire
relevant material was not provided to him, Sri Murtaza has submitted
that although the detention order refers to the two criminal cases
bearing Case Crime Nos. 837 of 2019 and 873 of 2019, but it is not a
ground of the detention order and it has not been relied upon by the
detaining authority. Hence, the first information report of these two
cases was not a relevant material required to be furnished by the
detaining authority. The bail applications filed by the petitioners
regarding these two cases were his own documents and, therefore,
the petitioner did not suffer any prejudice due to non-supply of the
bail applications and the connected documents. The material is to be
provided because it would affect the satisfaction of the detaining
authority regarding the grounds of detention and secondly to enable
the detenue to make an effective representation. The criminal cases
pending against the petitioner were not going to affect or change the
mind of the detaining authority.
14.    Sri Syed Ali Murtaza has further submitted that even if the
Court comes to the conclusion that the relevant material was not
provided to the petitioner, it would not affect the validity of the
detention order because the detention order has been passed on many
grounds and not on one. Section 5 A of the NSA, 1980 provides that
the detention order shall not be deemed to be invalid or inoperative
merely because one or some of the grounds for passing the detention
order is vague, non-existent, not relevant, not connected or not
proximately connected with such person or invalid for any other
reason, whatsoever.
15.    Sri Syed Ali Murtaza has placed reliance on judgments
rendered in Baby Devassy Chully alias Bobby Vs. Union of India
and others, (2013) 4 SCC 531, Arun Ghosh Vs. West Bengal, 1970
SC 1228, Alijan Miya Vs. District Magistrate, 1983 SC 1130 and
K.K. Saravana Vs. State of Tamil Nadu, (2008) 9 SCC 89 and
Kamarunnissa Vs. Union of India and another, AIR 1991 SC 1640.
16.    Ms. Sadhna Singh, learned counsel appearing for the Union of
India has advanced her submissions opposing the Writ Petition and
she has tried to justify the detention order. She has placed reliance on
Devesh Chourasia Vs. The District Magistrate, Jabalpur and Ors.,
WP No. 10177/2021 in The High Court of Madhya Pradesh (Indore
Bench) Decided On: 24.08.2021 and Pankaj Vs. State of U.P. and
17.    In the case of Devesh Chourasia vs. The District
Magistrate, Jabalpur and Ors., WP No. 10177/2021 Decided On
24.08.2021 placed by Ms. Sadhna Singh, an FIR was lodged against
employee of Pharmaceutical Department of a hospital under sections
274, 275, 308, 420, 120-B of IPC read with Sec. 53 of Disaster
Management Act, 2005 and Sec. 3 of the Epidemic Act, 1897 on the
allegations that the accused procured and used fake Remdesivir
injections to gain illegal profits during the pandemic era thereby
endangering human life. Keeping in view the peculiar facts of the
case and after taking into consideration numerous precedents on this
point, the Madhya Pradesh High Court summarized the principles
applicable to preventive detention as follows: -
“36. In view of aforesaid judgments of Supreme Court, we can
[1] It is not necessary that authority passing the detention order
must always be in possession of complete information at the time
of passing the order.
[2] The information on the strength of which detention order is
passed may fall far short of legal proof of any specific offence. If
order indicates strong probability of impending commission of a
prejudicial act, it is sufficient for passing a detention order.
[3] The Court is not obliged to enquire into the correctness/truth
of facts which are mentioned as grounds of detention.
[4] Whether grounds of detention mentioned in the order are
good or bad is within the domain of competent authority.
[5] The satisfaction of competent authority in passing the
detention order can be assailed on limited grounds including the
ground of mala-fide and no evidence at all.
[6] The jurisdiction under the NSA Act is different from that of
judicial trial in courts for offence and of judicial orders for
prevention of offence. Even unsuccessful judicial trial would not
operate as a bar to a detention order or make it mala-fide.
[7] An improperly recorded confession u/S. 161 of Cr.P.C. cannot
be used as substantive evidence against the accused in criminal
case but it cannot be completely brushed aside on that ground for
the purpose of preventive detention.
[8] The Court cannot examine the materials before it and give
finding that detaining authority should not have been satisfied on
the material before it. The sufficiency of ground of detention can
not be subject matter of judicial review.
[9] The justification for detention is suspicion or reasonable
probability and not criminal conviction which can only be
warranted by legal evidence. Thus, it is called as 'suspicious
jurisdiction'.
[10] In a habeas corpus petition, Court needs to examine whether
detention is prima-facie legal or not and is not required to
examine whether subjective satisfaction on a question of fact is
rightly reached or not.
[11] The statements/evidence gathered during investigation falls
within the ambit of "some evidence" which can form basis for
detaining a person.
[12] The detention order is an administrative order.”
18.     However, we are not inclined to follow the aforesaid decision
cited by Mr. Sadhna Singh as in this decision, Madhya High Court
has not taken into consideration the law laid down by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in the case of Vijay Narain Singh v. State of
“the view that “those who are responsible for the national security or
for the maintenance of public order must be the sole judges of what
the national security or public order requires” It is too perilous a
proposition. Our Constitution does not give a carte blanche to any
organ of the State to be the sole arbiter in such matters. Preventive
detention is considered so treacherous and such an anathema to
civilised thought and democratic polity that safeguards against undue
exercise of the power to detain without trial, have been built into the
Constitution itself and incorporated as Fundamental Rights. There
are two sentinels, one at either end. The Legislature is required to
make the law circumscribing the limits within which persons may
be preventively detained and providing for the safeguards
prescribed by the Constitution and the courts are required to
examine, when demanded, whether there has been any excessive
detention, that is whether the limits set by the Constitution and the
Legislature have been transgressed. Preventive detention is not
beyond judicial scrutiny.”      (emphasis supplied)
19.     The law relating to preventive detention vis-a-vis the
Fundamental Right to liberty guaranteed by Article 21 of the
Constitution of India has been discussed by the Hon’ble Supreme
Court in a recent decision in the case of Banka Sneha Sheela v.
“24. In Rekha v. State of T.N. [Rekha v. State of T.N., (2011) 5 SCC
244 : (2011) 2 SCC (Cri) 596] , a three-Judge Bench of this Court
spoke of the interplay between Articles 21 and 22 as follows: (SCC p.
“13. In our opinion, Article 22(3)(b) of the Constitution of India
which permits preventive detention is only an exception to Article 21
of the Constitution. An exception is an exception, and cannot
ordinarily nullify the full force of the main rule, which is the right to
liberty in Article 21 of the Constitution. Fundamental rights are
meant for protecting the civil liberties of the people, and not to put
them in jail for a long period without recourse to a lawyer and
without a trial. As observed in R. v. Secy. of State for the Home
Deptt., ex p Stafford [R. v. Secy. of State for the Home Deptt., ex p
Stafford, (1998) 1 WLR 503 (CA)] : (WLR p. 518 F-G)
‘… The imposition of what is in effect a substantial term of
imprisonment by the exercise of executive discretion, without trial,
lies uneasily with ordinary concepts of the rule of law.’
Article 22, hence, cannot be read in isolation but must be read as an
exception to Article 21. An exception can apply only in rare and
exceptional cases, and it cannot override the main rule.
14. Article 21 is the most important of the fundamental rights
guaranteed by the Constitution of India. Liberty of a citizen is a most
important right won by our forefathers after long, historical and
arduous struggles. Our Founding Fathers realised its value because
they had seen during the freedom struggle civil liberties of our
countrymen being trampled upon by foreigners, and that is why they
were determined that the right to individual liberty would be placed
on the highest pedestal along with the right to life as the basic right
of the people of India.
Article 22(1) of the Constitution makes it a fundamental right of a
person detained to consult and be defended by a lawyer of his choice.
But Article 22(3) specifically excludes the applicability of clause (1)
of Article 22 to cases of preventive detention. Therefore, we must
confine the power of preventive detention to very narrow limits,
otherwise the great right to liberty won by our Founding Fathers,
who were also freedom fighters, after long, arduous and historical
struggles, will become nugatory.”
25. This Court went on to discuss, in some detail, the conceptual
nature of preventive detention law as follows: (Rekha case [Rekha v.
State of T.N., (2011) 5 SCC 244 : (2011) 2 SCC (Cri) 596] , SCC p.
“29. Preventive detention is, by nature, repugnant to democratic
ideas and an anathema to the rule of law. No such law exists in the
USA and in England (except during war time). Since, however,
Article 22(3)(b) of the Constitution of India permits preventive
detention, we cannot hold it illegal but we must confine the power of
preventive detention within very narrow limits, otherwise we will be
taking away the great right to liberty guaranteed by Article 21 of the
Constitution of India which was won after long, arduous and
historic struggles. It follows, therefore, that if the ordinary law of the
land (the Penal Code and other penal statutes) can deal with a
situation, recourse to a preventive detention law will be illegal.
30.Whenever an order under a preventive detention law is
challenged one of the questions the court must ask in deciding its
legality is: was the ordinary law of the land sufficient to deal with
the situation? If the answer is in the affirmative, the detention
order will be illegal. In the present case, the charge against the
detenu was of selling expired drugs after changing their labels.
Surely the relevant provisions in the Penal Code and the Drugs and
Cosmetics Act were sufficient to deal with this situation. Hence, in
our opinion, for this reason also the detention order in question was
26. In an important passage, this Court then dealt with certain
general observations made by the Constitution Bench in Haradhan
Saha v. State of W.B. [Haradhan Saha v. State of W.B., (1975) 3 SCC
198 : 1974 SCC (Cri) 816] as follows: (Rekha case [Rekha v. State
of T.N., (2011) 5 SCC 244 : (2011) 2 SCC (Cri) 596] , SCC pp. 255-
“33. No doubt it has been held in the Constitution Bench decision in
Haradhan Saha case [Haradhan Saha v. State of W.B., (1975) 3 SCC
198 : 1974 SCC (Cri) 816] that even if a person is liable to be tried in
a criminal court for commission of a criminal offence, or is actually
being so tried, that does not debar the authorities from passing a
detention order under a preventive detention law. This observation, to
be understood correctly, must, however, be construed in the
background of the constitutional scheme in Articles 21 and 22 of the
Constitution (which we have already explained). [Ed.: The matter
between two asterisks has been emphasised in original.] Article 22(3)
(b) is only an exception to Article 21 and it is not itself a fundamental
right [Ed. : The matter between two asterisks has been emphasised in
original.] . It is Article 21 which is central to the whole chapter on
fundamental rights in our Constitution. The right to liberty means that
before sending a person to prison a trial must ordinarily be held
giving him an opportunity of placing his defence through his lawyer. It
follows that if a person is liable to be tried, or is actually being tried,
for a criminal offence, but the ordinary criminal law (the Penal Code
or other penal statutes) will not be able to deal with the situation,
then, and only then, can the preventive detention law be taken
recourse to.
34. Hence, the observation in SCC para 34 in Haradhan Saha case
[Haradhan Saha v. State of W.B., (1975) 3 SCC 198 : 1974 SCC (Cri)
816] cannot be regarded as an unqualified statement that in every
case where a person is liable to be tried, or is actually being tried, for
a crime in a criminal court a detention order can also be passed
under a preventive detention law.
35. It must be remembered that in cases of preventive detention no
offence is proved and the justification of such detention is suspicion or
reasonable probability, and there is no conviction which can only be
warranted by legal evidence. Preventive detention is often described
as a “jurisdiction of suspicion” (vide State of Maharashtra v.
Bhaurao Punjabrao Gawande [State of Maharashtra v. Bhaurao
SCC para 63). The detaining authority passes the order of detention
on subjective satisfaction. Since clause (3) of Article 22 specifically
excludes the applicability of clauses (1) and (2), the detenu is not
entitled to a lawyer or the right to be produced before a Magistrate
within 24 hours of arrest. To prevent misuse of this potentially
dangerous power the law of preventive detention has to be strictly
construed and meticulous compliance with the procedural safeguards,
however technical, is, in our opinion, mandatory and vital.
36. It has been held that the history of liberty is the history of
procedural safeguards. (See Kamleshkumar Ishwardas Patel v.
Union of India [Kamleshkumar Ishwardas Patel v. Union of India,
(1995) 4 SCC 51 : 1995 SCC (Cri) 643] vide para 49.) These
procedural safeguards are required to be zealously watched and
enforced by the court and their rigor cannot be allowed to be diluted
on the basis of the nature of the alleged activities of the detenu. As
observed in Rattan Singh v. State of Punjab [Rattan Singh v. State of
Punjab, (1981) 4 SCC 481 : 1981 SCC (Cri) 853] : (SCC p. 483,
‘4. … May be that the detenu is a smuggler whose tribe (and how
their numbers increase) deserves no sympathy since its activities have
paralysed the Indian economy. But the laws of preventive detention
afford only a modicum of safeguards to persons detained under them,
and if freedom and liberty are to have any meaning in our democratic
set-up, it is essential that at least those safeguards are not denied to
39. Personal liberty protected under Article 21 is so sacrosanct and
so high in the scale of constitutional values that it is the obligation of
the detaining authority to show that the impugned detention
meticulously accords with the procedure established by law. The
stringency and concern of judicial vigilance that is needed was aptly
described in the following words in Reverend Thomas Pelham Dale
case [Reverend Thomas Pelham Dale case, (1881) LR 6 QBD 376
‘Then comes the question upon the habeas corpus. It is a general
rule, which has always been acted upon by the courts of England,
that if any person procures the imprisonment of another he must take
care to do so by steps, all of which are entirely regular, and that if he
fails to follow every step in the process with extreme regularity the
court will not allow the imprisonment to continue.”
20.    Keeping in mind the aforesaid dictum of the Hon’ble Supreme
Court, we proceed to examine the grounds of challenge to the
validity of the detention order dated 23-01-2021. The first ground of
challenge is that the alleged incident was an offence against an
individual which affected “law and order”, but it does not affect
“public order” so as to attract the provisions of Section 3 (2) of the
21.     Before proceeding further, it would be appropriate to have a
look at Section 3 (2) of the NSA, 1980, which is as follows:
“3. Power to make orders detaining certain persons.—
(2) The Central Government or the State Government may, if satisfied
with respect to any person that with a view to preventing him from
acting in any manner prejudicial to the security of the State or from
acting in any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of public order
or from acting in any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of
supplies and services essential to the community it is necessary so to
do, make an order directing that such person be detained.
(3) If, having regard to the circumstances prevailing or likely to prevail in
any area within the local limits of the jurisdiction of a District Magistrate
or a Commissioner of Police, the State Government is satisfied that it is
necessary so to do, it may, by order in writing, direct, that during such
period as may be specified in the order, such District Magistrate or
Commissioner of Police may also, if satisfied as provided in sub-section
(2), exercise the powers conferred by the said sub-section:
Provided that the period specified in an order made by the State
Government under this sub-section shall not, in the first instance, exceed
three months, but the State Government may, if satisfied as aforesaid that
it is necessary so to do, amend such order to extend such period from time
to time by any period not exceeding three months at any one time.”
22.     An order of detention can be passed under the aforesaid
provision with a view to prevent a person from acting in any manner
prejudicial to the security of the State or from acting in any manner
prejudicial to the maintenance of public order. Numerous judgments
have been cited by the learned Senior Advocate appearing for the
petitioner as well as by the learned A.G.A. on the interpretation of
the phrase “public order”.
23.     We now proceed to examine a few precedents in detail so as to
ascertain whether the facts of the present case make out a case of
disturbance to “public order” or it would merely fall under the
category of a disturbance to “law and order”.
24.    In Arun Ghosh Vs. State of West Bengal4, the preventive
detention was ordered on the following allegations against the
“18-5-1966 Teased one Rekha Rani Barua, and when her father
protested confined and assaulted him.
29-3-1968 One Deepak Kumar Ray was wrongfully restrained and
assaulted with lathis and rods.
1-4-1968 Attempt was made to assault Deepak Kumar Ray at the
Malda Sadar Hospital where he was being treated for his injuries in
the previous assault.
2-9-1968 Threatened one Phanindra C. Das that he would insult his
daughter publicly.
26-10-1968 Embraced Uma Das d/o Phanindra C. Das and threw
white powder on her face (Criminal case started).
7-12-1968 Obscenely teased Smt Sima Das, sister of Uma Das and
beat her with chappals.
26-1-1969 Threatened the life of Phanindra C. Das.”
25.    In the light of the aforesaid facts, the Hon'ble Supreme Court
“3. The submission of the counsel is that these are stray acts
directed against individuals and are not subversive of public order
and therefore the detention on the ostensible ground of preventing
him from acting in a manner prejudicial to public order was not
justified. In support of this submission reference is made to three
cases of this Court: Dr Ram Manohar Lohia v. State of Bihar (1966)
1 SCR 709 ; Pushkar Mukherjee v. State of W.B. WP No. 179 of
1968, decided on November 7, 1968 : (1969) 1 SCC 10 and Shyamal
Chakraborty v. Commissioner of Police, Calcutta WP No. 102 of
1969, decided on August 4, 1969 : (1969) 2 SCC 426. In Dr Ram
Manohar Lohia case [(1966) 1 SCR 709] this Court pointed out the
difference between maintenance of law and order and its
disturbance and the maintenance of public order and its
disturbance. Public order was said to embrace more of the
community than law and order. Public order is the even tempo of
the life of the community taking the country as a whole or even a
specified locality. Disturbance of public order is to be
distinguished from acts directed against individuals which do not
disturb the society to the extent of causing a general disturbance
of public tranquility. It is the degree of disturbance and its affect
upon the life of the community in a locality which determines
whether the disturbance amounts only to a breach of law and
order. Take for instance, a man stabs another. People may be
shocked and even disturbed, but the life of the community keeps
moving at an even tempo, however much one may dislike the act.
Take another case of a town where there is communal tension. A
man stabs a member of the other community. This is an act of a very
different sort. Its implications are deeper and it affects the even
tempo of life and public order is jeopardized because the
repercussions of the act embrace large sections of the community
and incite them to make further breaches of the law and order and
to subvert the public order. An act by itself is not determinant of its
own gravity. In its quality it may not differ from another but in its
potentiality it may be very different. Take the case of assault on
girls. A guest at a hotel may kiss or make advances to half a dozen
chamber maids. He may annoy them and also the management but
he does not cause disturbance of public order. He may even have a
fracas with the friends of one of the girls but even then it would be a
case of breach of law and order only. Take another case of a man
who molests women in lonely places. As a result of his activities
girls going to colleges and schools are in constant danger and fear.
Women going for their ordinary business are afraid of being waylaid
and assaulted. The activity of this man in its essential quality is not
different from the act of the other man but in its potentiality and in
its affect upon the public tranquility there is a vast difference. The
act of the man who molests the girls in lonely places causes a
disturbance in the even tempo of living which is the first requirement
of public order. He disturbs the society and the community. His act
makes all the women apprehensive of their honour and he can be
said to be causing disturbance of public order and not merely
committing individual actions which may be taken note of by the
criminal prosecution agencies. It means therefore that the question
whether a man has only committed a breach of law and order or
has acted in a manner likely to cause a disturbance of the public
order is a question of degree and the extent of the reach of the act
upon the society. The French distinguish law and order and public
order by designating the latter as order publique. The latter
expression has been recognised as meaning something more than
ordinary maintenance of law and order. Justice Ramaswami in Writ
Petition No. 179 of 1968 drew a line of demarcation between the
serious and aggravated forms of breaches of public order which
affect the community or endanger the public interest at large from
minor breaches of peace which do not affect the public at large. He
drew an analogy between public and private crimes. The analogy is
useful but not to be pushed too far. A large number of acts directed
against persons or individuals may total up into a breach of public
order. In Dr Ram Manohar Lohia case examples were given by
Sarkar and Hidayatullah, JJ. They show how similar acts in
different contexts affect differently law and order on the one hand
and public order on the other. It is always a question of degree of
the harm and its affect upon the community. The question to ask is:
Does it lead to disturbance of the current of life of the community
so as to amount a disturbance of the public order or does it affect
merely an individual leaving the tranquility of the society
undisturbed? This question has to be faced in every case on facts.
There is no formula by which one case can be distinguished from
5. In the present case all acts of molestation were directed against
the family of Phanindra C. Das and were not directed against
women in general from the locality. Assaults also were on
individuals. The conduct may be reprehensible but it does not add
up to the situation where it may be said that the community at
large was being disturbed or in other words there was a breach of
public order or likelihood of a breach of public order. The case
falls within the dictum of Justice Ramaswami and the distinction
made in Dr Ram Manohar Lohia case.” (emphasis supplied)
26.     In Subhash Bhandari Vs. District Magistrate and others5,
the facts mentioned in the detention order were that: -
“...on September 15, 1984 there was a tender for the supply of
ballast in PWD in which tenders had been submitted by him in K.P.
Singh's name. You keep share with K.P. Singh. On account of your
and K.P. Singh's terror no other person submits any tender against
you people for which reason you people obtain tenders at rates of
your choice. If any other person submits his tender you and K.P.
Singh terrorise him. On account of the rates of his tender being
lower on September 15, 1984, the tender of the complainant was
accepted in one group and in the remaining groups the tenders of
K.P. Singh etc. were accepted. For this reason you and K.P. Singh
bore a grudge against the complainant.
On September 25, 1984 at about 3.45 p.m. when Surya Kumar was
going, in connection with his tender, in his Ambassador car No. USS
7418, accompanied by his brother-in-law, opposite to the National
Highway Khand, he saw some contractors. On reaching near them
the complainant had just started talking to them, when suddenly in
two cars, you with a pistol, Phool Chand with a revolver, Jaleel with
a revolver, Ashok with desi katta, Ashok Sonkar and Saarif with
hand-grenade and Shankar Dey with a gun along with three other
persons came and with intent to kill the complainant fired at the
complainant, threw hand-grenades which fell on the car of the
complainant. Consequently, there was a commotion. Traffic was
obstructed and public tranquillity was disturbed……..”
27.     In the backdrop of the above mentioned facts, the Hon’ble
Supreme Court proceeded to formulate the question to be decided as
“6. The High Court of Allahabad after hearing the parties and on a
consideration of the decisions cited before it found that whether an
act creates a mere law and order problem or affects the even tempo
of the life of the community, it is to be seen what is the extent of the
impact of the act in question upon the society as a whole; whether
the effect is restricted to an individual or a few individuals alone or
it creates a sense of insecurity, danger and apprehension in the
minds of the people in general apart from those who are the victims
of the incident; whether the act or acts disturb the even tempo of life
of the society or a section of society; whether the act leads to
disturbance of public order or only law and order. The High Court
further found that in the context the act committed tends to teach a
lesson to the complainant and to act as a warning to prospective
tenderers in future who may not dare to avail of the opportunity to
submit their tenders against that of the appellants. It was also found
that the impact and reach of the act in question goes beyond the
individual and affects the community of contractors who take
contracts for executing the public works. The court further held that
the order of detention made by the detaining authority is legal and
valid and the writ petitions were dismissed.
8. The main question which falls for decision is whether the act
referred to in the grounds of detention is directed against certain
individuals creating a law and order problem or the reach and
potentiality of the act is so deep as to disturb the society to the extent
of causing a general disturbance of public tranquility.”
28.    The aforesaid question was decided by the Hon’ble Supreme
“9. It has now been well settled by several decisions of this Court
(the latest one being Gulab Mehra v. State of U.P. [(1987) 4 SCC
302] judgment which was pronounced by us on September 15, 1987)
that public order is the even tempo of the life of the community taking
the country as a whole or even a specified locality. Disturbance of
public order is to be distinguished from acts directed against
individuals which do not disturb the society to the extent of causing a
general disturbance of public tranquillity. It is the degree of
disturbance and its effect upon the life of the community in a locality
which determines whether the disturbance amounts only to a breach
of law and order or it affects public order. It has also been observed
by this Court that an act by itself is not determinant of its own
gravity. In its quality it may not differ from another but in its
potentiality it may be very different. Therefore it is the impact, reach
and potentiality of the act which in certain circumstances affect the
even tempo of life of the community and thereby public order is
jeopardized. Such an individual act can be taken into consideration
by the detaining authority while passing an order of detention
against the person alleged to have committed the act.
10.     In the instant case the alleged act of assault by firearms is
confined to the complainant Surya Kumar and not to others. It is
an act infringing law and order and the reach and effect of the act
is not so extensive as to affect a considerable members (sic
number) of the society. In other words, this act does not disturb
public tranquillity nor does it create any terror or panic in the
minds of the people of the locality nor does it affect in any manner
the even tempo of the life of the community. This criminal act
emanates from business rivalry between the detenus and the
complainant. Therefore such an act cannot be the basis for
subjective satisfaction of the detaining authority to pass an order of
detention on the ground that the impugned act purports to affect
public order i.e. the even tempo of the life of the community which
is the sole basis for clamping the order of detention…..” (emphasis
29.     The following passage from the State of U.P. v. Kamal
Kishore Saini6, throws light on the difference between “public
order” and “law and order” in a very succinct manner: -
“8. The High Court has found that the incidents mentioned in Ground
1 and 2 are confined to law and order problem and not public order
inasmuch as these incidents concerned particular individuals and do
not create any terror or panic in the locality affecting the even tempo
of the life of the community. This Court in the case of Dr Ram
Manohar Lohia v. State of Bihar [AIR 1966 SC 740 : 1966 Cri LJ
“The contravention of law always affects order but before it can be
said to affect public order, it must affect the community or the public
at large. There are three concepts according to the learned Judge
(Hidayatullah, J.) i.e. ‘law and order’, ‘public order’ and ‘security of
the State’. It has been observed that to appreciate the scope and extent
of each of them one should imagine three concentric circles. The
largest of them represented law and order, next represented public
order and the smallest represented the security of the State. An act
might affect law and order but not public order just as an act might
affect public order but not the security of the State.” (Emphasis
30.     The detention order under challenge in a Full Bench decision
of this Court in Sheshdhar Misra versus Superintendent, Central
Jail, Naini7, was passed on the allegations that (1) the accused along
with his brother and father at about 5.30 p.m. shot dead Binda Prasad
Misra, Advocate, at Balwaghat crossing; On the occurrence of the
incident people closed the doors of their shops and houses and ran
away on account of fear and an atmosphere of terror and fear gripped
the public and (2) he threatened a witnesses of the Crime and in this
way spread fear and terror among the people and disturbed the public
order. This Court took into consideration the following previous
judgments of the Hon’ble Supreme Court passed in light of similar
“31. In Dipak Bose V. State of West Bengal, (1973) 4 SCC 43 : AIR
1972 SC 2686 the grounds of detention alleged that the detenu had
along with his associates committed murder on two different dates on
public road as a result of which fear and terror was created in the
locality which disturbed public order. The Court held that since the
even tempo of the life of the community was not disturbed the grounds
were not related to disturbance of public order. The Court observed:—
“Every assault in a public place like a public road and terminating
in the death of a victim is likely to cause horror and even panic and
terror in those who are spectators but that does not mean that all
such incidents do necessarily cause disturbance or dislocation of the
community life of the localities in which they are committed. There
is nothing in the two incidents set out in the grounds in the present
case to suggest that either of them was of that kind and gravity
which would jeopardise the maintenance of public order. No doubt
bombs were said to have been carried by those who are alleged to
have committed the two acts stated in the grounds. Possibly that was
done to terrify the respective victims to prevent them from offering
resistance. But it is not alleged in the grounds that they were
exploded to cause terror in the locality so that those living there
would be prevented from following their usual avocations of life.
The two incidents alleged against the petitioner thus pertain to
specific individuals and therefore related and fell within the area of
law and order. In respect of such acts the drastic provisions of the
Act are not contemplated to be resorted to and the ordinary
provisions of the penal laws would be sufficient to cope with them.”.
32. In Manu Bhushan v. State of West Bengal, (1973) 3 SCC 663 : AIR
1973 SC 295 it was held that a single incident of murderous assault
on a person in a public place, though created panic among the
people of the locality, could not be held to be an act prejudicial to
maintenance of public order. The Court observed that a solitary
assault on one individual which may well be equated with an
ordinary murder can hardly be said to disturb public peace or place
public order in jeopardy so as to bring the case within the purview of
the Act. It can only raise a law and order problem and no more, its
impact on the society as a whole cannot be said to be so extensive,
widespread and forceful as to disturb the normal life of the
community, thereby rudely shocking the balanced tempo of orderly
life of the general public.” (emphasis supplied)
31.    Finally, the majority judgment of the Full Bench held as
“35. The first information report which was lodged by Jagannath
brother of deceased Binda Prasad Misra, Advocate at the Police
Station on the basis of which the ground was formulated, itself stated
that there was a long standing enmity between the petitioner and
Binda Prasad, Advocate, which clearly indicates that the murderous
assault on Binda Prasad was made by the petitioner on account of
personal animosity. The allegations contained in ground No. 1 do not
suggest that the petitioner or his associates fired gun shots
indiscriminately or that they intended to terrorise or kill the local
residents. Since the murder was committed in a public place at a
crossing of roads it was bound to have created some disorder
temporarily as a result of which local residents closed the doors of
their houses and shops. The question arises did this single incident
cause such an impact that it disturbed the even tempo of the life of
the community affecting public order? No such inference is possible
on the facts stated in ground No. 1.
36. It is not possible to hold that the single act of murder alleged to
have been committed by the petitioner on account of personal
animosity had its impact on the society to such an extent as to
disturb the normal life of the community, thereby rudely shocking
the ordinary tempo of the normal life of the public. Merely because
the local residents closed the doors of their houses and shops does
not mean that the balanced tempo of the life of the general public
was disturbed as a result of which the members of the public could
not carry on normal avocation of their life.
37. The petitioner is alleged to have committed the murder of Binda
Prasad on account of enmity. There is nothing on record to suggest
that the petitioner had inclination or tendency to commit murders in
future also. It is true that we cannot sit in appeal over the
satisfaction of the detaining authority but the satisfaction of the
detaining authority must be based on material on the basis of which
a reasonable person could come to the same kind of satisfaction.
The material which was taken into account by the detaining
authority in the instant case relates to a single incident of
murderous assault on Binda Prasad. There was no material before
the detaining authority, nor any such material has been placed
before the Court to suggest that the petitioner if not detained would
have indulged into similar activities of murder.
38. Section 3 of the Act confers power on the detaining authority to
detain a person with a view to prevent him from acting in any manner
prejudicial to the maintenance of public order. This power can be
exercised only if the detaining authority on the basis of the past
prejudicial conduct of the detenu is satisfied about the probability of
the detenu acting similarly in future. This means that the past activity
of the detenu on the basis of which such a prognosis is made must be
reasonably suggestive of a repetitive tendency or inclination on the
part of the detenu to act likewise in future. These observations were
made by the Supreme Court in Lal Kamal Dass v. State of West
Bengal, (1975) 4 SCC 62 : AIR 1975 SC 753 where it was further
held that a solitary incident can hardly be suggestive of a tendency or
inclination of the detenu to indulge in an act likewise in future.
42.       A single murderous assault on an individual on account of
personal animosity and holding out threat to individual witnesses to
desist from deposing in court do not justify exercise of power under
S. 3(2) of the Act for detaining the petitioner. If a murder has been
committed or if the witnesses have been threatened or compelled to
file affidavit, the police have ample power under the ordinary laws
of the land to proceed against the petitioner. Preventive detention
under S. 3 of the Act cannot be invoked to deal with the crimes and
criminals who can adequately be proceeded against under the Penal
Code and under other ordinary laws of the land. If this is permitted
it would be frought with great danger. The provisions of the Act
conferring power for detention of a person without trial have to be
used strictly in accordance with the Act to achieve the object and
purpose designated under S. 3 of the Act. The detaining authority
has no power to detain a citizen merely because he is alleged to
have committed certain offences unless the offence has potentiality
and propensity to disturb the public peace and order. In the instant
case, I am of the opinion that the two grounds on which the
petitioner was detained do not relate to public order.”
32.    The law which has emerged from the precedents on this point
is that public order is said to embrace more of the community than
law and order. Public order is the even tempo of the life of the
community taking the country as a whole or even a specified locality.
The contravention of law always affects order but before it can be
said to affect public order, it must affect the community or the public
at large. Disturbance of public order is to be distinguished from acts
directed against individuals which do not disturb the society to the
extent of causing a general disturbance of public tranquility. It is the
degree of disturbance and its effect upon the life of the community in
a locality which determines whether the disturbance amounts only to
a breach of law and order or a disturbance to public order. It means
therefore that the question whether a person has only committed a
breach of law and order or has acted in a manner likely to cause a
disturbance of the public order is a question of degree and the extent
of the reach of the act upon the society, which depends the facts of
each particular case.
33.    Applying the principles which emerge from the aforesaid
precedents to the facts of the present case, we find that the allegation
against the petitioner is that as soon as the deceased Rakesh Yadav
accompanied by his driver and two other persons, reached the P.W.D.
Office, three unidentified persons present there since before started
firing at Rakesh Yadav with the intention to kill him and when a
person accompanying him took aim with the pistol, they fired at him
also. People starting running away. Rakesh Yadav was killed and
Kuldeep Jaiswal was admitted to a Hospital for treatment. It has
been averred in the writ petition that there was an old animosity
between the deceased Rakesh Yadav and his family members and the
family members of the petitioner. The petitioner’s grand father
Radheyshyam had lodged a first information report in relation to
murder of the petitioner’s uncle Ashutosh Gupta against Giran Yadav
and Kamlesh Yadav uncles of the deceased Rakesh Yadav and in that
case Giran Yadav father of the deceased Rakesh Yadav had to remain
in jail for a period of 18 months. Therefore, the offence was directed
against an individual and not against the society. The alleged act
directed against an individual was in violation of law, which
obviously disturbed the order in the locality for some time. This
conduct may be reprehensible and punishable, for which the
petitioner is being prosecuted and tried in accordance with the penal
statutes. But it does not add up to the situation where it may be said
that the community at large was disturbed by the petitioner’s act and
there was a breach of public order or likelihood of a breach of public
34.     Moreover, the detention order contains a bald averment that in
case the petitioner comes out on bail, he may again indulge in crime
but neither there is any reasonable basis to record this apprehension
nor is there any averment that the apprehended activity would be
prejudicial to public order and, therefore, it is necessary to detain
him with a view to prevent him from acting in any manner
prejudicial to the maintenance of public order. This power can be
exercised only if the detaining authority on the basis of the past
prejudicial conduct of the detenu is satisfied about the probability of
the detenu acting similarly in future. This means that the past activity
of the detenu on the basis of which such a prognosis is made must be
reasonably suggestive of a repetitive tendency or inclination on the
part of the detenu to act likewise in future, which is clearly missing
in the present case.
35.     Therefore, in our opinion, the act allegedly committed by the
petitioner on 02-12-2019 did not cause a disturbance of public order
as it did not disturb the society to the extent of causing a general
disturbance of public tranquility and the single act of murder of a
person because of old family animosity was not suggestive of a
repetitive tendency or inclination on the part of the petitioner to act
likewise in future so as to justify invocation of powers under Section
3 (2) of the NSA, 1980. The order of preventive detention passed
under Section 3 (2) of the Act is unsustainable for this reason.
36.     Now we proceed to examine the second ground of challenge,
i.e. that the incident which took place on 02-12-2019 is a stale
incident which is not proximate to the time when the detention order
was passed on 23-01-2021 and there was no live link between the
alleged prejudicial activity and the purpose of detention and for this
reason, the invocation of the provisions of the NSA, 1980 after a
long delay of about 14 months was neither warranted nor justified.
37.     Sri. D. S. Misra, learned Senior Advocate appearing for the
petitioner has placed reliance on the following dictum of the Hon’ble
Supreme Court in the case Ali Jaan Miyan Vs. District Magistrate,
“…….when there is undue and long delay between the prejudicial
activities and the passing of detention order, the Court has to
scrutinise whether the detaining authority has satisfactorily
explained such a delay and afforded a tenable and reasonable
explanation as to why such a delay has occasioned, when called
upon to answer and further the court has to investigate whether
the casual connection has been broken in the circumstances of
each case.
39.      In the instant case, the last offence was committed on 3-6-
1993 and the detention order was passed on 4-5-1994. No
explanation is forthcoming in the return. It is argued that the S.P.'s
report states that the detenu was absconding and case was filed
under S. 299, Cr.P.C. The period during which he was allegedly
absconding is not disclosed. In these circumstances, we are of the
opinion that the live link between the alleged incident or the series of
incidence and the detention order is snapped and there is no
proximity between the crime committed and the order of detention.”
38.     In Jagan Nath Biswas v. State of W.B.9,                   the Hon’ble
Supreme Court quashed the detention order holding that
“2.The incidents themselves look rather serious but also stale,
having regard to the long gap between the occurrences and the
order of detention. One should have expected some proximity in time
to provide a rational nexus between the incidents relied on and the
satisfaction arrived at.”
39.     In Mohd. Sahabuddin v. Distt. Magistrate, 24 Parganas10,
the Hon’ble Supeme Court quashed the order of preventive detention
on the sole ground that the order of preventive detention was passed
nearly seven months after the criminal incident.
40.     In Shalini Soni v. Union of India, 11, the Hon'ble Supreme
Court while examining the validity of a detention order held as
“.....It is an unwritten rule of the law, constitutional and
administrative, that whenever a decision making function is
entrusted to the subjective satisfaction of a statutory
functionary, there is an implicit obligation to apply his mind to
pertinent and proximate matters only, eschewing the irrelevant
41.     In the present case, the incident in question took place on 02-
12-2019, the petitioner was arrested on 22-12-2021, he was lodged
in jail on 23-12-2021 and he was continuing to be in custody till 23-
01-2021 – the date on which the impugned order of prevention was
passed. The incident which occurred on 02-12-2019, i.e. about 14
months prior to passing of the detention order, is certainly a stale
incident which is not proximate to the time when the detention order
dated 23-01-2021 was passed and there was no live link between the
alleged prejudicial activity and the purpose of detention and the
invocation of the provisions of the NSA, 1980 against the petitioner
after a long delay of about fourteen months was neither warranted
nor justified.
42.    The next ground of challenge to the detention order is that
copies of the entire material referred to and relied upon the detention
order has not been provided to the petitioner. None of the documents
relating to Case Crime Nos. 93 of 2019 and 666 of 2015 which have
been mentioned in the detention order dated 23.1.2021 has been
provided to the petitioner. The documents provided with the
detention order have been mentioned in an index, a copy whereof has
been filed as Annexure No. 5 to the writ petition and at serial No. 46
it mentions the bail application filed in case crime No. 221 of 2020
under Section 2/3 of the Gangsters Act consisting of one page only.
The petitioner has filed a copy of the index of the aforesaid bail
application as Annexure No. 4 to the writ petition which indicates
that its index was of one page only and the entire bail application
consisted of as many as of 19 pages, which vitiates the detention
43.    Before proceeding to examine this ground, it will be apt to
have a look at the Article 22(5) of the Constitution of India for a
better understanding of the rival submissions. It says: -
“When any person is detained in pursuance of an order made
under any law providing for preventive detention, the authority
making the order shall, as soon as may be, communicate to such
person the grounds on which the order has been made and shall
afford him the earliest opportunity of making a representation
against the order.”
44.    The effect and purport of the provision contained in Article 22
(5) has been explained by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Shalini
Soni v. Union of India (supra), in the following words: -
“7. The Article has two facets: (1) communication of the grounds on
which the order of detention has been made; (2) opportunity of
making a representation against the order of detention.
Communication of the grounds presupposes the formulation of the
grounds and formulation of the grounds requires and ensures the
application of the mind of the detaining authority to the facts and
materials before it, that is to say to pertinent and proximate matters
in regard to each individual case and excludes the elements of
arbitrariness and automatism (if one may be permitted to use the
word to describe a mechanical reaction without a conscious
application of the mind). It is an unwritten rule of the law,
constitutional and administrative, that whenever a decision making
function is entrusted to the subjective satisfaction of a statutory
functionary, there is an implicit obligation to apply his mind to
pertinent and proximate matters only, eschewing the irrelevant and
the remote. Where there is further an express statutory obligation to
communicate not merely the decision but the grounds on which the
decision is founded, it is a necessary corollary that the grounds
communicated, that is, the grounds so made known, should be seen
to pertain to pertinent and proximate matters and should comprise
all the constituent facts and materials that went in to make up the
mind of the statutory functionary and not merely the inferential
conclusions. Now, the decision to detain a person depends on the
subjective satisfaction of the detaining authority. The Constitution
and the statute cast a duty on the detaining authority to
communicate the grounds of detention to the detenu. From what
we have said above, it follows that the grounds communicated to
the detenu must reveal the whole of the factual material
considered by the detaining authority and not merely the
inferences of fact arrived at by the detaining authority. The matter
may also be looked at from the point of view of the second facet of
Article 22(5). An opportunity to make a representation against the
order of detention necessarily implies that the detenu is informed of
all that has been taken into account against him in arriving at the
decision to detain him. It means that the detenu is to be informed
not merely, as we said, of the inferences of fact but of all the factual
material which have led to the inferences of fact. If the detenu is not
to be so informed the opportunity so solemnly guaranteed by the
Constitution becomes reduced to an exercise in futility. Whatever
angle from which the question is looked at, it is clear that
“grounds” in Article 22(5) do not mean mere factual inferences but
mean factual inferences plus factual material which led to such
factual inferences. The “grounds” must be self-sufficient and self-
explanatory. In our view copies of documents to which reference
is made in the “grounds” must be supplied to the detenu as part of
8.This was what was decided by Bhagwati and Venkataramiah,
JJ. In Icchu Devi Choraria v. Union of India [(1980) 4 SCC 531].
It was observed by Bhagwati, J., who spoke for the court: (SCC
“Now it is obvious that when clause (5) of Article 22 and sub-
section (3) of Section 3 of the COFEPOSA Act provide that the
grounds of detention should be communicated to the detenu within
five or fifteen days, as the case may be, what is meant is that the
grounds of detention in their entirety must be furnished to the
detenu. If there are any documents, statements or other materials
relied upon in the grounds of detention, they must also be
communicated to the detenu, because being incorporated in the
grounds of detention, they form part of the grounds and the
grounds furnished to the detenu cannot be said to be complete
without them. It would not therefore be sufficient to communicate to
the detenu a bare recital of the grounds of detention, but copies of
the documents, statements and other materials relied upon in the
grounds of detention must also be furnished to the detenu within the
prescribed time subject of course to clause (6) of Article 22 in order
to constitute compliance with clause (5) of Article 22 and Section 3
sub-section (3) of the COFEPOSA Act. One of the primary objects
of communicating the grounds of detention to the detenu is to
enable the detenu, at the earliest opportunity, to make a
representation against his detention and it is difficult to see how the
detenu can possibly make an effective representation unless he is
also furnished copies of the documents, statements and other
materials relied upon in the grounds of detention. There can
therefore be no doubt that on a proper construction of clause (5) of
Article 22 read with Section 3 sub-section (3) of the COFEPOSA
Act, it is necessary for the valid continuance of detention that
subject to clause (6) of Article 22 copies of the documents,
statements and other materials relied upon in the grounds of
detention should be furnished to the detenu along with the grounds
of detention or in any event not later than five days and in
exceptional circumstances and for reasons to be recorded in
writing, not later than fifteen days from the date of detention. If this
requirement of clause (5) of Article 22 read with Section 3 sub-
section (3) is not satisfied, the continued detention of the detenu
would be illegal and void.”
45.    In M. Ahamedkutty v. Union of India12,                        the Hon’ble
Supreme Court was dealing with a challenge to a detention order on
the ground of non-supply of bail application and bail order to the
accused person and it will be useful to reproduce the relevant portion
of the judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme, which is as follows: -
“19.The next submission is that of non-supply of the bail application
and the bail order. This Court, as was observed in Mangalbhai
Motiram Patel v. State of Maharashtra [(1980) 4 SCC 470: 1981
SCC (Cri) 49: (1981) 1 SCR 852] has ‘forged’ certain procedural
safeguards for citizens under preventive detention. The
constitutional imperatives in Article 22(5) are twofold: (1) The
detaining authority must, as soon as may be, i.e. as soon as
practicable, after the detention communicate to the detenu the
grounds on which the order of detention has been made, and (2) the
detaining authority must afford the detenu the earliest opportunity
of making the representation against the order of detention. The
right is to make an effective representation and when some
documents are referred to or relied on in the grounds of detention,
without copies of such documents, the grounds of detention would
not be complete. The detenu has, therefore, the right to be
furnished with the grounds of detention along with the documents
so referred to or relied on. If there is failure or even delay in
furnishing those documents it would amount to denial of the right to
make an effective representation. This has been settled by a long
line of decisions: Ramachandra A. Kamat v. Union of India [(1980)
Coralie Mullin v. W. C. Khambra [(1980) 2 SCC 275: 1980 SCC
(Cri) 419: (1980) 2 SCR 1095], Ichhu Devi Choraria v. Union of
Pritam Nath Hoon v. Union of India [(1980) 4 SCC 525: 1981 SCC
(Cri) 19: (1981) 1 SCR 682], Tushar Thakker v. Union of India
v. Union of India [(1981) 2 SCC 427: 1981 SCC (Cri) 463], Kirit
Kumar Chaman Lal Kundaliya v. Union of India [(1981) 2 SCC
436: 1981 SCC (Cri) 471] and Ana Carolina D'Souza v. Union of
20. It is immaterial whether the detenu already knew about their
contents or not. In Mehrunissa v. State of Maharashtra [(1981) 2
SCC 709: 1981 SCC (Cri) 592] it was held that the fact that the
detenu was aware of the contents of the documents not furnished
was immaterial and non-furnishing of the copy of the seizure list
was held to be fatal. To appreciate this point one has to bear in
mind that the detenu is in jail and has no access to his own
documents. In Mohd. Zakir v. Delhi Administration [(1982) 3 SCC
216: 1982 SCC (Cri) 695] it was reiterated that it being a
constitutional imperative for the detaining authority to give the
documents relied on and referred to in the order of detention pari
passu the grounds of detention, those should be furnished at the
earliest so that the detenu could make an effective representation
immediately instead of waiting for the documents to be supplied
with. The question of demanding the documents was wholly
irrelevant and the infirmity in that regard was violative of
constitutional safeguards enshrined in Article 22(5).
21. It is also imperative that if the detenu was already in jail the
grounds of detention are to show the awareness of that fact on the
part of the detaining authority, otherwise there would be non-
application of mind and detention order vitiated thereby. In the
instant case though the order of detention ex facie did not mention
of the detenu having been in jail, in paragraph 3 of the grounds of
detention it was said that he was arrested by the Superintendent
(Intelligence) Air Customs, Trivandrum on January 31, 1988 and he
was produced before the Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate
(Economic Offences), Ernakulam the same day. It was clearly said:
“You were remanded to judicial custody and you were subsequently
released on bail.” From the records it appears that the bail
application and the bail order were furnished to the detaining
authority on his enquiry. It cannot, therefore, be said that the
detaining authority did not consider or rely on them. It is difficult,
therefore, to accept the submission of Mr Kunhikannan that those
were not relied on by the detaining authority. The bail application
contained the grounds for bail including that he had been falsely
implicated as an accused in the case at the instance of persons who
were inimically disposed towards him, and the bail order contained
the conditions subject to which the bail was granted including that
the accused, if released on bail, would report to the Superintendent
(Intelligence) Air Customs, Trivandrum on every Wednesday until
further order, and that “he will not change his residence without
prior permission of court to February 25, 1988”. This being the
position in law, and non-supply of the bail application and the bail
order having been apparent, the legal consequence is bound to
22. In Khudiram Das v. State of West Bengal [(1975) 2 SCC 81:
1975 SCC (Cri) 435: (1975) 2 SCR 832] this Court held that where
the liberty of the subject is involved it is the bounden duty of the
court to satisfy itself that all the safeguards provided by the law
have been scrupulously observed and that the subject is not deprived
of his personal liberty otherwise than in accordance with law. The
constitutional requirement of Article 22(5) is that all the basic facts
and particulars which influenced the detaining authority in arriving
at the requisite satisfaction leading to making the detention order
must be communicated to the detenu so that the detenu may have an
opportunity of making an effective representation against the order
“It is, therefore, not only the right of the court, but also its duty as
well, to examine what are the basic facts and materials which
actually in fact weighed with the detaining authority in reaching the
requisite satisfaction. The judicial scrutiny cannot be foreclosed by
a mere statement of the detaining authority that it has taken into
account only certain basic facts and materials and though other
basic facts and materials were before it, it has not allowed them to
influence its satisfaction. The court is entitled to examine the
correctness of this statement and determine for itself whether there
were any other basic facts or materials, apart from those admitted
by it, which could have reasonably influenced the decision of the
detaining authority and for that purpose, the court can certainly
require the detaining authority to produce and make available to the
court the entire record of the case which was before it. That is the
least the court can do to ensure observance of the requirements of
law by the detaining authority.”
46.    Sri. Daya Shankar Mishra, learned Senior Advocate for the
petitioner has placed reliance on a judgment of this Court in the case
“10. Sri Mishra thirdly submitted that relevant materials were not
placed before the detaining authority, the District Magistrate, as
stated in paragraphs 35 and 36 of the writ petition. This relevant
material consisted of the bail rejection order in the case of the
petitioner, the bail order granted to the co-accused Sanjay
Goswami, and the judgment of this Court in the case of Sunita
Goswami (copy of which is Annexure-RA-9 to the rejoinder
affidavit). This fact is also not disputed by the respondent. Hence in
our opinion this also vitiate the impugned order, as it is settled law
that the relevant material must be placed before the detaining
authority vide Inamul Huq v. Adhikshak Mandal/Janpad Karagar,
Habeas Corpus Petition No. 52650 of 2001 decided on 22.5.2001
(which decision has referred to several Supreme Court and High
Court decisions on the point). ….......”
47.    On the other hand, opposing this plea, Sri. Syed Ali Murtaza,
the learned A.G.A. has submitted that non-supply of a copy of the
entire bail application to the petitioner would not affect the validity
of the detention order as the bail application was the petitioner’s own
document and he already knew its contents. No prejudice has been
caused to the petitioner due to non-supply of a copy of his own bail
application. He has placed reliance on a judgment of the Hon’ble
Supreme Court in the case of Baby Devassy Chully v. Union of
India14, in which the Hon’ble Supreme Court was pleased to hold as
“19. …..There is no quarrel as to the proposition, in fact, the
sponsoring authority has to place all the relevant documents
before the detaining authority. We reiterate that all the documents
which are relevant, which have bearing on the issue, which are
likely to affect the mind of the detaining authority should be
placed before it. Further, a document which has no link with the
issue cannot be construed as relevant. …...”
48.    In the present case, the petitioner was arrested on 22-12-2021
and he was lodged in jail on 23-12-2021 and he was continuing to be
in custody till 23-01-2021 – the date on which the impugned order of
prevention was passed. Although the detention order makes a
reference to Case Crime No. 93 of 2019 and Case Crime No. 666 of
2015 and the petitioner’s application for bail in Case No. 221 of
2020, copies of any document regarding Case Crime Nos. 93 of 2019
and 666 of 2015 and that of the application for bail in case No. 221
of 2020 have not been supplied to the petitioner. The Court has to
bear in mind that the petitioner is in jail and has no access to his own
documents. It is immaterial whether the petitioner knew about the
facts of Case Crime Nos. 93 of 2019 and 666 of 2015 and the
contents of his bail application or not. The bail application contained
the grounds for bail and it has been referred to by the detaining
authority. Therefore, the Court is unable to accept the submission of
Sri Murtaza that the aforesaid documents were not relevant material
and non-supply of the same would not have any legal effect on the
order of detention. In view of the law laid down in the cases of
Shalini Soni and M. Ahamedkutty (Supra), we are of the view that
the petitioner was entitled to receive the entire material referred to or
relied upon by the detaining authority in the detention order and the
non-supply of copies of the documents relating to Case Crime Nos.
93 of 2019 and 666 of 2015 and that of the bail application in case
No. 221 of 2020 vitiates the detention order and its legal
consequence is bound to follow.
49.    Now we come to the last ground of challenge to the detention
orders that on 23-01-2021, i.e. on the date of passing of the detention
order, the petitioner was already in custody and he had not even filed
an application for Bail in Case Crime No. 221 of 2020 under the U.
P. Gangsters and Anti-Social Activities (Prevention) Act and there
was no possibility of the petitioner acting in any manner prejudicial
to the maintenance of public order and in these circumstances, the
provisions of Section 3 (2) of the NSA, 1980 are not attracted and
the detention order is unsustainable in law.
50.    Sri. Syed Ali Murtaza has submitted that there is no bar
against passing an order of preventive detention of a person who is
already in Jail. He has placed reliance upon a decision of the Hon’ble
Supreme Court in Kamarunnissa v. Union of India15, in which this
“11. Counsel for the detenus, however, vehemently argued that
since the detenus were in custody, there was no compelling
necessity to pass the detention orders for the obvious reason that
while in custody they were not likely to indulge in any prejudicial
activity such as smuggling. In support of this contention reliance
was placed on a host of decisions of this Court beginning with the
case of Vijay Narain Singh v. State of Bihar [(1984) 3 SCC 14 :
1984 SCC (Cri) 361] and ending with the case of Dharmendra
Suganchand Chelawat v. Union of India [(1990) 1 SCC 746 : 1990
SCC (Cri) 249]. It is necessary to bear in mind the fact that the
grounds of detention clearly reveal that the detaining authority
was aware of the fact that the detenus were apprehended while
they were about to board the flights to Hong Kong and Dubai on
October 5, 1989. He was also aware that the detenu M. M. Shahul
Hameed had secreted diamonds and precious stones in his rectum
while the other two detenus had swallowed 100 capsules each
containing foreign currency notes. He was also aware of the fact
that all the three detenus were produced before the Additional
Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Espalande, Bombay and two of
them had applied for bail. He was also conscious of the fact that
the hearing of the bail applications was postponed because
investigation was in progress. His past experience was also to the
effect that in such cases courts ordinarily enlarge the accused on
bail. He was also aware of the fact that the detenu M. M. Shahul
Hameed had not applied for bail. Conscious of the fact that all the
three detenus were in custody, he passed the impugned orders of
detention on November 10, 1989 as he had reason to believe that
the detenus would in all probability secure bail and if they are at
large, they would indulge in the same prejudicial activity. This
inference of the concerned officer cannot be described as bald and
not based on existing material since the manner in which the three
detenus were in the process of smuggling diamonds and currency
notes was itself indicative of they having received training in this
behalf. Even the detenus in their statements recorded on October
5, 1989 admitted that they had embarked on this activity after
receiving training. The fact that one of them secreted diamonds
and precious stones in two balloon rolls in his rectum speaks for
itself. Similarly the fact that the other two detenus had created
cavities for secreting as many as 100 capsules each in their bodies
was indicative of the fact that this was not to be a solitary
instance. All the three detenus had prepared themselves for
indulging in smuggling by creating cavities in their bodies after
receiving training. These were not ordinary carriers. These were
persons who had prepared themselves for a long term smuggling
programme and, therefore, the officer passing the detention orders
was justified in inferring that they would indulge in similar
activity in future because they were otherwise incapable of
earning such substantial amounts in ordinary life. Therefore, the
criticism that the officer had jumped to the conclusion that the
detenus would indulge in similar prejudicial activity without there
being any material on record is not justified. It is in this backdrop
of facts that we must consider the contention of the learned
counsel for the detenus whether or not there existed compelling
circumstances to pass the impugned orders of detention. We are
inclined to think, keeping in view the manner in which these
detenus received training before they indulged in the smuggling
activity, this was not a solitary effort, they had in fact prepared
themselves for a long term programme. The decisions of this Court
to which our attention was drawn by the learned counsel for the
petitioners lay down in no uncertain terms that detention orders
can validly be passed against detenus who are in jail, provided the
officer passing the order is alive to the fact of the detenus being in
custody and there is material on record to justify his conclusion
that they would indulge in similar activity if set at liberty…..”
51.    Sri. Murtaza has also cited the decision of Baby Devassy
Chully v. Union of India16, in which the Hon’ble Supreme Court
upheld the preventive detention of an accused who was already in
Jail on charges of smuggling, in view of the fact that he had been
granted bail but he had not availed the bail order and he could come
out of the Jail at any time and indulge in activities prejudicial to
maintenance of public order. The relevant portion of the said
“16. It is clear that if a person concerned is in custody and there is
no imminent possibility of his being released, the rule is that the
power of preventive detention should not be exercised. In the case
on hand, it is not in dispute that on 12-4-2005 itself, the competent
court has granted bail but the appellant did not avail such benefit.
In other words, on the date of the detention order i.e. 3-5-2005, by
virtue of the order granting bail even on 12-4-2005, it would be
possible for the detenu to come out without any difficulty. In such
circumstances, while reiterating the principle of this Court
enunciated in the above decision in Binod Singh case [Binod Singh
v. District Magistrate, Dhanbad, (1986) 4 SCC 416 : 1986 SCC
(Cri) 490] and in view of the fact that the detenu was having the
order of bail in his hand, it is presumed that at any moment, it
would be possible for him to come out and indulge in prejudicial
activities, hence, the said decision is not helpful to the case of the
appellant. In view of the above circumstances and of the fact that
the detaining authority was aware of the grant of bail and clearly
stated the same in the grounds of detention, we reject the contra
arguments made by the learned counsel for the appellant. On the
other hand, we hold that the detaining authority was conscious of
all relevant aspects and passed the impugned order of detention in
order to prevent the appellant from abetting the smuggling of goods
in future.”
52.    Sri. Murtaza has also placed reliance on the decision in
Ahamed Nassar v. State of T.N.17, in which it was held that
“in spite of rejection of the bail application by a court, it is open to
the detaining authority to come to his own satisfaction based on the
contents of the bail application keeping in mind the circumstances
that there is likelihood of the detenu being released on bail. Merely
because no bail application was then pending is no premise to hold
that there was no likelihood of his being released on bail. The words
“likely to be released” connote chances of being bailed out, in case
there be pending bail application or in case if it is moved in future is
decided.”
53.    Ms. Sadhana Singh Advocate appearing for the Union Of
India has placed reliance on the decision of this Court in Pankaj vs.
State of U.P. and Ors.18, in which the detaining authority has
recorded its' subjective satisfaction for detaining the petitioner on the
ground that “the incident had totally disturbed the public order in
the area and that the petitioner who was in judicial custody had
moved his bail application and there was real possibility of his being
released on bail and on his coming out of the jail he will again
indulge in activities which will disturb public order not only with the
area of P.S. Phugana but also in the whole district of
Muzaffarnagar.” In these circumstances, the Court held that it cannot
be said that the order has been passed without application of mind.
54.    From a perusal of aforesaid pronouncements, it is clear that
even in the case of a person in custody a detention order can validly
be passed (1) if the authority passing the order is aware of the fact
that he is actually in custody; (2) if he has reason to believe on the
basis of reliable material placed before him (a) that there is real
possibility of his being released on bail and, and (b) that on being so
released he would in all probability indulge in prejudicial activity;
and (3) if it is felt essential to detain him to prevent him from so
doing. If the authority passes an order after recording his satisfaction
in his behalf, such an order cannot be struck down on the ground that
the proper course for the authority was to oppose the bail and if bail
is granted notwithstanding such opposition to question the same
before a higher Court.
55.    In Kamarunnissa (Supra), one of the accused persons had
secreted diamonds and precious stones in his rectum while the other
two detenus had swallowed 100 capsules each containing foreign
currency notes. The detaining authority was ware of the fact that two
of the accused persons had applied bail and in such cases courts
ordinarily enlarge the accused on bail. He was also aware of the fact
that one of the detenus had not applied for bail. Conscious of the fact
that all the three detenus were in custody, he passed the impugned
orders of detention as he had reason to believe that the detenus
would in all probability secure bail and if they are at large, they
would indulge in the same prejudicial activity since the manner in
which the three detenus were in the process of smuggling diamonds
and currency notes was itself indicative of they having received
training in this behalf. The fact that one of them secreted diamonds
and precious stones in two balloon rolls in his rectum and that the
other two detenus had created cavities for secreting as many as 100
capsules each in their bodies was indicative of the fact that this was
not to be a solitary instance. All the three detenus had prepared
themselves for indulging in smuggling by creating cavities in their
bodies after receiving training. In Baby Devassy Chully (Supra)
also the Directorate of Revenue Intelligence had intercepted one sea-
faring vessel by carrying diesel oil of foreign origin which was
smuggled into India. The officers of the DRI seized the said diesel
oil weighing about 770 MTs, worth Rs 2 crores, under the Customs
Act, 1962, which was being delivered to the accused person. The
accused had been granted bail but he had not availed the same. The
Hon’ble Supreme Court had upheld the detention orders keeping in
view the peculiar facts of the aforesaid cases that the accused
persons were professional smugglers, on the ground that detention
orders can validly be passed against detenus who are in jail, provided
the officer passing the order is alive to the fact of the detenus being
in custody and there is material on record to justify his conclusion
that they would indulge in similar activity if set at liberty.
56.     While examining the applicability of the aforesaid decisions, it
would be appropriate to have a look at the law regarding application
of precedents, as explained by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Roger
Shashoua v. Mukesh Sharma19, in the following words: -
“55. ....It is well settled in law that the ratio decidendi of each case
has to be correctly understood. In Regional Manager v. Pawan
Kumar Dubey, a three-Judge Bench ruled: (SCC p. 338, para 7)
“7. … It is the rule deducible from the application of law to the facts
and circumstances of a case which constitutes its ratio decidendi and
not some conclusion based upon facts which may appear to be
similar. One additional or different fact can make a world of
difference between conclusions in two cases even when the same
principles are applied in each case to similar facts.”
56. In Director of Settlements v. M.R. Apparao, another three-Judge
Bench, dealing with the concept whether a decision is “declared
“7. … But what is binding is the ratio of the decision and not any
finding of facts. It is the principle found out upon a reading of a
judgment as a whole, in the light of the questions before the Court
that forms the ratio and not any particular word or sentence. To
determine whether a decision has “declared law” it cannot be said to
be a law when a point is disposed of on concession and what is
binding is the principle underlying a decision. A judgment of the
Court has to be read in the context of questions which arose for
consideration in the case in which the judgment was delivered. …”
57. In this context, a passage from CIT v. Sun Engg. Works (P) Ltd.
would be absolutely apt: (SCC pp. 385-86, para 39)
“39. … It is neither desirable nor permissible to pick out a word or a
sentence from the judgment of this Court, divorced from the context of
the question under consideration and treat it to be the complete
“law” declared by this Court. The judgment must be read as a whole
and the observations from the judgment have to be considered in the
light of the questions which were before this Court. A decision of this
Court takes its colour from the questions involved in the case in
which it is rendered and while applying the decision to a later case,
the courts must carefully try to ascertain the true principle laid
down by the decision of this Court and not to pick out words or
sentences from the judgment, divorced from the context of the
questions under consideration by this Court, to support their
58. In this context, we recapitulate what the Court had said in Ambica
Quarry Works v. State of Gujarat: (SCC p. 221, para 18)
“18. … The ratio of any decision must be understood in the
background of the facts of that case. It has been said long time ago
that a case is only an authority for what it actually decides, and not
what logically follows from it. (See Lord Halsbury in Quinn v.
59. From the aforesaid authorities, it is quite vivid that a ratio of a
judgment has the precedential value and it is obligatory on the part of
the court to cogitate on the judgment regard being had to the facts
exposited therein and the context in which the questions had arisen
and the law has been declared. It is also necessary to read the
judgment in entirety and if any principle has been laid down, it has to
be considered keeping in view the questions that arose for
consideration in the case. One is not expected to pick up a word or a
sentence from a judgment dehors from the context and understand the
ratio decidendi which has the precedential value. That apart, the
court before whom an authority is cited is required to consider what
has been decided therein but not what can be deduced by following
a syllogistic process.”
57.    Keeping in view the aforesaid dictum of the Hon’ble Supreme
Court, the aforesaid principles laid down in Kamarunnissa, Baby
Devassy Chully, Ahmad Nassar and Pankaj (Supra) in view of
the peculiar facts of those cases are not applicable to the facts of the
present case.
58.    Moreover, even in Baby Devassy Chully (Supra), the
Hon’ble Supreme Court has held that if a person is in custody and
there is no imminent possibility of his being released, the rule is that
the power of preventive detention should not be exercised. The
allegation against the petitioner is that he committed murder of a
person, regarding whom the petitioner claims to have an old family
animosity. He is not alleged to be a professional killer who would
again start indulging in similar activities as soon as he comes out on
bail. Moreover, a F.I.R. was lodged against the petitioner on the
ground of the same incident, under Sections 2/3 of the Uttar Pradesh
Gangsters and Anti-Social Activities (Prevention) Act, 1986 as Case
Crime No. 221/20 in Police Station Sadar Bazar, Shahjahanpur, in
which the petitioner was in custody since 01-05-2020 and as on the
date of passing of the detention order, he had not even filed an
application for bail. The bail application in the aforesaid case was
filed on 25-01-2021, although as per the submissions of Mr.
Murtaza, a copy of the bail application had been served on 21-01-
59.    In a case under the Uttar Pradesh Gangsters and Anti-Social
Activities (Prevention) Act, 1986 a bail order cannot be passed in a
manner in which it is passed in case of any offence under the I.P.C.
Section 19 of the aforesaid Act provides as follows: -
“19. Modified application of certain provisions of the Code. - (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code every offence
punishable under this Act or any rule made thereunder shall be
deemed to be a cognizable offence within the meaning of clause (c)
of Section 2 of the Code and cognizable case as defined in that
clause shall be construed accordingly.
(2) Section 167 of the Code shall apply in relation to case involving
an offence punishable under this Act or any rule made thereunder
(a) the reference in sub-section (1) thereof to "Judicial Magistrate"
shall be construed as a reference to "Judicial Magistrate or
(b) the references in sub-section (2) thereof to "fifteen days", "ninety
days" and "sixty days", wherever they occur, shall be construed as
references to "sixty days", "one year" and "one year", respectively;
(c) sub-section (2A) thereof shall be deemed to have been omitted.
(3) Sections 366, 367, 368 and 371 of the Code shall apply in
relation to a case involving an offence triable by a Special Court,
subject to the modification that the reference to "Court of Session"
wherever occurring herein, shall be construed as reference to
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, no person
accused of an offence punishable under this Act or any rule made
thereunder shall, if in custody, be released on bail or on his own
(a) the Public Prosecutor has been given an opportunity to oppose
(b) where the Public Prosecutor opposes the application, the Court
is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for believing that he is
not guilty of such offence and that he is not likely to commit any
offence while on bail.
(5) The limitations on granting of bail specified in sub-section (4)
are in addition to the limitations under the Code.”
60.    Keeping in view the fact that the petitioner was already in Jail
in a case under Sections 2/3 of the Uttar Pradesh Gangsters and Anti-
Social Activities (Prevention) Act, 1986, that he had not filed an
application for bail in the aforesaid case and that even when he
would file an application for bail, he would not be released on bail
unless (a) the Public Prosecutor is given an opportunity to oppose the
application for such release, and (b) the Court is satisfied that there
are reasonable grounds for believing that he is not guilty of such
offence and that he is not likely to commit any offence while on bail,
it cannot be accepted that there was any material for recording the
satisfaction of the detaining authority that with a view to preventing
the petitioner from acting in any manner prejudicial to the
maintenance of public order it was necessary to detain the petitioner
under the NSA, 1980. The satisfaction that it is necessary to detain
the petitioner for the purpose of preventing him from acting in a
manner prejudicial to the maintenance of public order is thus, the
basis of the order under section 3 (2) of the NSA, 1980 and this basis
is clearly absent in the present case. Therefore, the detention order
dated 23-01-2021 is unsustainable in law on this ground also.
61.           In view of the aforesaid discussion, the present Writ Petition is
allowed. The impugned order dated 23-01-2021 passed by the
District Magistrate, Shahjahanpur ordering detention of the
petitioner Abhay Raj Gupta under Section 3 (3) of the NSA, 1980 is
hereby quashed. The Respondents are commanded to release the
petitioner from detention under the aforesaid order dated 23-01-2021
forthwith.
Digitally signed by JUSTICE           Digitally signed by SUBHASH
Location: High Court of Judicature at Location: High Court of Judicature at