Dated this the 9th day of April, 2021
INTRODUCTION:    Have Muslim women lost their right to
invoke extra-judicial divorce, after the coming into
force of the Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act, 1939
is the short and straight forward question rising for
consideration in these cases.
2. These bunch of cases arise out of different
proceedings   before  the Family  Courts seeking   varied
reliefs.     The   issue  involved   in   as   above   is
inextricably connected to ultimate justice    which women
involved in all these cases seek. These cases speak in
abundance about the patriarchal mind-set followed in
the Society for decades depriving Muslim women their
right to invoke extra-judicial divorce.                                       While there
was a huge clamour to retain the practice of ‘triple
talaq’,          an      un-Islamic           practice;          no     such      open       and
apparent demand seems to exist to restore the right of
Muslim        women         to    invoke       extra-judicial             divorce.           The
above sketch the miseries of women despite the promise
guaranteed             under      Article         14     of    the    Constitution             of
3.       Islam lays great emphasis on the stability of
family.          According to the Holy Quran(1) “God did create
you from dust” then from sperm drop, then he made you
in      pairs         [Surah        (Chapter)             XXXV      Verse       11]. God's
declaration that men and women are created in pairs is
repeatedly stated in several verses to acknowledge the
spirit of marriage.                     They are made as a mate to find
comfort and purify their inner soul.                                It is also stated
that male and female together make a single self, which
1 In the judgment, translation of Quaranic verses are from The Meaning of The Glorious Qur'an – An
explanatory translation by Marmaduke Pickthall
symbolises raiment. Chapter II Verse 187 Quran states:
‘you are raiment for her and she is raiment for you’,
which highlights the closeness of a mate, like cloth;
for protection and comfort etc.                The spirit of marriage
lies in the closeness and bonding between the partners.
4. Chapter IV Verse 28 Quran states that man was
created       weak,      to     mean     that     his   decisions    are
vulnerable. The          very     concept      of   institutionalizing
marriage in Islam through a contract is to remind that
the parties to the marriage may error in their decision
and    they    may    fall     apart    in    conflict    to  remain  as
united.      Marriage as a contract guarantees both parties
permanent       rights     and     obligations.       The   Holy  Quran,
therefore, recognizes the right to divorce equally for
both men and women. However, the dilemma of Muslim
women, particularly in the State of Kerala, came into
the fore when a learned Single Judge of this Court in
K.C.Moyin v. Nafeesa & Others [1972 KLT 785] negated
the    right     of   Muslim     women     to   invoke    extra-judicial
divorce in light of the Dissolution of Muslim Marriages
Act, 1939, (in short ‘Act”).                        It is held that under no
circumstances, a muslim marriage cannot                            be dissolved
at the instance of wife, except in accordance with the
provisions of the Act.
5. Muslim Personal Law is broadly understood as
Shariah.           The word Shariah literally means “a way to
the       watering          place,      or     a   path     apparently  to  seek
felicity and salvation2. In Chapter XLV Verse 18 Quran
says: “Thus we put you on the right way of religion.
So follow it and follow not the whimsical desire of
those who have no knowledge”.                             Shariah primarily and
predominantly relates to ethical values essential for
both worlds.               Quran by itself did not promote straight
forward code of law.                    Many legal rules become part of
Shariah from the life and sayings of the last Prophet
Muhammad (This is called Hadith).                           After the demise of
the      Prophet,          Islamic       scholars        and  jurists  developed
Rules through legal reasoning (Ijtihad) and using legal
verdict (Fatwa).                   This is how principles of Islamic
2 Shari'ah Law: An introduction: Mohammad Hashim Kamali:
jurisprudence               called        'Fiqh'      developed.            Fiqh  is   the
corpus of legal principles deducted from the Holy Quran
for implementing Shariah3.                         The Holy Quran is neither a
legal document nor a code of law.                              Most of the ideas in
Holy Quran are interpreted through sayings and the life
of the Prophet.                  This gave rise for the formation of
different          schools          of      jurisprudence.             There    are   many
scholars of jurisprudence. The four prominent schools
of thought of Sunni Muslim are Hanafi, Maliki, Shafei
and     Hanbali.              They       developed         jurisprudence          not   to
create a separate denomination, but based on knowledge
or    enquiry            they       made.          These      scholars         themselves
declared that if any of their statement contradicts the
Book of Allah, and life of Prophet, then discard their
6.       Shariah         in      general       is     flexible,         especially
related to those matters giving guidance to temporal
affairs of human being.                          The learned author, Mohammad
3 For more reading on Fiqh, refer outlines of Mohammedan Law by Asaf A.A.Fyzee
4 Refer the Islamic digest of Aquedah and Fiqh by Mahmoud Rida Murad
Hashim Kamali in Shariah law, quoted great jurist Ibn
Qayyim al-Jawziyyah, who opined that Shariah are of two
kinds:     Firstly,      laws     which    do  not  change  with  the
vicissitudes of time and place or the propensities of
Ijtihad.       These are matters related to obligatoriness
and matters prescribed as illegal.                  The matters like
belief, principles of morality etc., falls under the
above category.           In second type, the learned jurist
states that such varieties of law are susceptible to
change      in    accordance        with    requirements   of  public
interest and prevailing circumstances such as quantum
and types of punishments.              Though, the Holy Quran gives
a clear guidance as to the areas of family law, it does
not by itself constitute a system. While conferring
rights on spouses for divorce, it did not lay down
exhaustive procedure to give effect to dissolution of
marriage.        This approach clearly gives an indication
that areas related to divorce are amenable to change
with regard to procedure and process without prejudice
to   the    right     conferred      on    a   spouse  to separate  or
severe the marital knot.
7. We have drawn the above prologue to underscore
the fact that there is a growing tendency to resist
changes being effected upon the Muslim community with
regard to the method and manner of effecting divorce
consistent with the Quranic injunctions.                  This dilemma
in our country is as old as the Dissolution of Marriage
Act, 1939.        The question involved in these cases also
has to be probed on the anvil of the personal law
protected under the statute, 'The Muslim Personal Law
8.    Considering the substantial questions of law
involved      in   the    matter,      we    requested  Sri.Mayankutty
Mather.K.I and Smt.Vaheeda Babu.M.A to assist the Court
as Amici Curiae. The Kerala Federation of Women Lawyers
through Smt.Shajna.M sought permission to address us,
which we permitted. We also heard the learned counsel
for the parties Sri.Babu Karukapadath, Sri.R.Ranjith
Manjeri, Sri.Narayanan.P, Smt.V.K.Hema and Smt.Athira
A.Menon. All the counsel was unanimous regarding the
right of the Muslim women to terminate their marriage
resorting to extra-judicial mode.                Nevertheless, the
lawyers had their own views as regards the practice and
procedures to be followed, which we shall advert to at
appropriate stage.
9.    These cases have been brought to this level in
light of Mat.A.No.89 of 2020, wherein a young woman,
hereinafter        referred      to    as  ‘Y’ (name   withheld  to
protect her privacy) was granted a decree of divorce by
the Family Court, Thalassery. ‘Y’ had instituted the
petition under the Act, on the grounds that her husband
‒ ‘X’,      was   impotent      and    treated her  with  cruelty.
Challenging, the decree ‘X’ has preferred the appeal.
10. When the appeal came up for consideration, we
directed the parties to appear in person.                 ‘Y’ stood
firm in her decision to dissolve her marriage with ‘X’.
On the other hand, ‘X’ stated that he is prepared to
subject himself to a potency test to prove the falsity
in ‘Y’ case.
11. Sri.Narayanan.P, the learned Counsel for ‘Y’
contended       that     it   is    because    of   the  decision  in
K.C.Moyin (supra), ‘Y’ has been made to go through the
ordeal of a long drawn adversarial litigation and is
being prevented to invoke her right for extra-judicial
divorce vis-a-vis Khula, as permitted and recognised
under     the     personal       law.    Hence,    K.C.Moyin  (supra)
requires reconsideration. He also submitted that ‘Y’
may be granted leave to pronounce Khula, so that her
miseries may not get prolonged. If Khula is accepted as
valid,     ‘Y’    has     no   objection     in   setting  aside  the
impugned decree on fault grounds and the appeal can be
disposed recording Khula.
12. Accordingly, without prejudice to the rights
of the parties, we granted leave. ‘Y’ pronounced Khula
and produced the same as additional evidence in the
appeal, which was accepted on board.
13.    Again     when     the    appeal     was  taken   up  for
hearing,       on    03/03.2021,        ‘Y’    stated   that   she  was
prepared      to    return     the    dower     to  ‘X’.   However,  on
17/03/2021, Sri.Babu Karukapadath submitted that ‘X’
had declined to accept the dower. Be that as it may, we
will discuss about the validity of Khula invoked by ‘Y’
at a later stage.
challenges the decree of the Family Court Kalpetta in
O.P.No.300/2019.          While the above matter was pending,
the    parties      were     referred       for   mediation.    In  the
mediation proceeding, Muhammad Musthafa B.K. agreed to
divorce his wife ‒ Harsha M.A.                 The Family Court based
on the mediation agreement, granted a decree of divorce
on mutual consent. This decree is challenged on the
ground     of   lack     of   consent      on   the  part  of  Muhammad
Musthafa B.K. The validity of divorce granted by the
Family Court on mutual consent of the parties under
Islamic law is also questioned.
15.    O.P.No.372/2020          is   filed  by   Farhana,   the
petitioner before the Family Court, Malappuram, seeking
dissolution of her marriage with her husband Noufal P.P
under the Act. She seeks for an expeditious disposal of
her case. Her counsel submitted that Farhana may be
granted the liberty to invoke extra-judicial divorce
available to a Muslim wife.
16.   O.P.Nos.124        and    133   of  2021  are  filed   by
Raseena Pareekunju challenging the proceedings of the
Family      Court,       Ernakulam        against   returning    joint
petitions       filed     with    her    husband-Mohammed   Asif   for
dissolution of their marriage by mutual consent and to
declare that their marriage stands dissolved as per
their personal law. According to them, their marriage
has been dissolved by mutual consent invoking Mubaraat,
an extra-judicial form of joint divorce, applicable to
Muslim husband and wife.               The Family Court refused to
accept      their     petitions       stating    that  there  is  no
substantial law to entertain such petitions.
17. Before        considering        the   question   on  the
legality of wife’s right to pronounce extra-judicial
divorce, we shall advert to various forms of divorce
recognised under Islamic law and                Muslim Personal Law
(Shariat) Application Act, 1937 (hereinafter referred
to as the 'Shariat Act 1937') in British India.
18. As seen from the Shariat Act extra-judicial
divorce was in vogue and recognized as legally valid in
British India. Section 2 of the Shariat Act statutorily
recognized        the     personal       law   and   dissolution  of
marriages without intervention of court through talaq,
illa, zihar, lian, khula, and mubaraat etc; There are
four     major     forms      of    dissolution    of  marriages  as
recognized under Islamic Law and protected under the
Shariat Act at the instance of the wife, they are ;
19. Talaq-e-tafwiz: This kind of divorce at the
instance          of   wife       is     based         on     a     contract.             In    the
contract, the party can agree the terms upon which
marital life has to be regulated. Dr.Justice Kauser
Edappagath(5) has stated that if the husband violates
the agreement, the wife is entitled to divorce without
intervention of the Court. Dr.Mufti Samiya Tabasum(6)
also explains divorce on the same lines. The learned
authors state that the above right can be exercised if
the husband marries another woman without her consent
or neglects or deserts her in violation of the marriage
conditions. Asaf A.A.Fyzee(7) refers to the above form
5. a sitting Judge of this Court in his book 'Divorce and Gender Equity in
Muslim Personal Law of India', at page 109
6 'Status of Muslim Women in India – Law Relating to Marriage, Divorce and Maintenance at page 164
7 “Outlines of Muhammadan Law”   by Asaf A.A.Fyzee (5 th Edn.) edited and revised by Tahir Mahmood at
of divorce as a delegated divorce.                   According to the
learned author, a stipulation in the contract that on
certain      specific      conditions       the  wife   can   pronounce
divorce      is   valid,     provided      that   the  option    is  not
absolute      and     unconditional        and   the   conditions    are
reasonable       and    not    opposed      to  public    policy.    The
essence of this form of divorce is that the husband
authorizes the wife to divorce him in the event of
breach of any of the conditions agreed at the time of
20. Khula: Khula is the form of divorce conferred
upon wife similar to talaq conferred upon the husband.
The    recognition       of    Khula     as  a  form   of   divorce   is
directly available from the Holy Quran.                  In Chapter II
Verses 228-229, Quran confers rights on both husband
and wife to unilaterally divorce the spouse.                      It is
apposite to refer to verses 228-229:
C.II V.228: Women who are divorced shall wait, keeping themselves
apart, three (monthly) courses.        And it is not lawful for them that
they should conceal that which Allah hath created in their wombs if
they are believers in Allah and the Last Day.        And their husbands would
do   better   to   take   them   back  in   that   case   if   they   desire   a
reconciliation.    And they (Women) have rights similar to those (of men)
over them in kindness, and men are a degree above them.                Allah is
C.II.V229.   Divorce must be pronounced twice and then (a woman)
must be retained in honour or released in kindness.             And it is not
lawful for you that ye take from women aught of that which ye have
given them; except (in the case) when both fear that they may not be
able to keep within the limits (imposed by) Allah. And if ye fear that
they may not be able to keep the limits of Allah, in that case it is no
sin for either of them if the woman ransom herself.              These are the
limits    (imposed    by)   Allah.    Transgress    them    not.    For    whoso
transgresseth Allah's limits: such are wrongdoers.
21. There are differences in opinion with regard
to the manner in which khula has to be effected. Some
of    the    authorities        state    that     the    consent      of    the
husband is a pre-requisite for a valid khula.                             This
aspect, we shall             advert to in the later part of the
22. Dr.Justice          Kauser    Edappagath       in    his    book( 8)
refers      to   wife’s     right     to   resort     to    'khula' as       an
8'Divorce and Gender Equity in Muslim Personal Law of India'
analogous right of the husband to pronounce Talaq, on
being convinced of irretrievable breakdown of marriage.
The learned author states that ‘khula’ is a divorce at
the instance of wife in which she agrees to give a
consideration to her husband for her release from the
marriage tie.
23. Mahmoud Rida Murad in his book(9) refers to
'khula' as an instant divorcement by which wife redeems
herself          from         the       marriage          for  a  ransom  or    a
compensation given to the husband.                            The learned author
The khula' is permissible whether the wife is in her menstrual period,
or not.      It is permissible for the husband to remarry the wife whom he
divorced by khula', with her consent after entering a new contract with
new dower.
24. Wael B.Hallaq in his book(10) refers to khula:
Another form of marital dissolution, apparently more widespread than
talaq is khula.            “If a woman dislikes her husband due to his ugly
9'The   Islamic Digest of Aqeedah and Fiqh' published by Islamic Cultural Center,
10 Sharia Theory Practice Transformations at page 283-284
appearance or as a result of discord between the two, and she fears
failure to fulfil her (marital) duties toward him, she may rid herself
of him for consideration.            But even though she may not dislike anything
(about   him),     and    they    amicably      agree     to   separate   (through   khula)
without a reason, it is also permissible.” Yet, despite this legal
permissibility, the jurists are unanimous in their view that it is
morally reprehensible to dissolve a marriage for no compelling reason.
Thus, khula is classified by many jurists into three types: permissible
(arising out of discord), reprehensible (without a compelling cause)
and forbidden. The forbidden type is one that arose out of a situation
where   a   husband      deliberately       oppressed       his    wife  with  a   view  to
accomplishing dissolution of the marriage through khula and still be
compensated for it.         If such an ambition is proven in a court of law,
the dissolution would still took effect, but the husband's compensation
would be forfeit.
in his book(11)quotes Hadith in Chapter 5 as follows:
1878. Narrated Ibn “Abbas: The wife of Thabit bin Qais came to the
Prophet and said, “O Allah's Messenger! I do not blame Thabit for
defects   in    his   character       of  his    religion,      but   I, being   a  Muslim,
dislike to behave in an un-Islamic manner (if I remain with him).” On
that Allah's Messenger said (to her), “Will you give back the garden
which your husband has given you (as Mahr)?” She said, “Yes.”                      Then the
11 Summarised Sahih Al-Bukhari – 61 The Book of Divorce – Chapter 5.
Prophet said to Thabit, “O Thabit! Accept your garden, and divorce her
26. The        learned       Amici       Curie      Sri.Mayankutty
Mather.K.I and Smt.Vaheeda Babu.M.A referred to various
authorities         and     submitted        that      all    schools    of
jurisprudence are unanimous in their opinion on the
right of wife to pronounce khula.
27. Mubaraat: Mubaraat is a form of separation by
mutual consent.          Dr.Justice Kauser Edappagath(12) after
referring to many authorities refers to 'mubaraat' as
dissolution        of    marriage      by    common     consent    of   the
spouses.      The learned author further states thus:
The word mubaraat indicates freeing of each other (from the marriage
tie) by mutual agreement.     No formal form is insisted upon for mubaraat
by the Sunnis.     The offer may come from either side.        When both the
parties enter into mubaraat, all mutual rights and obligations come to
an end.    Both   Shia and Sunni laws hold it an irrevocable divorce.
Iddat is compulsory after mubaraat as after khula. Under Sunni law,
when both the parties enter into mubaraat, all matrimonial rights which
they possess against each other fall to the ground.
12'Divorce and Gender Equity in Muslim Personal Law of India'
28. Dr.Mufti                Samiya           Tabasum(13)             states        that
Mubaraat          is    a    dissolution              of      marriage         contract      by
mutual consent.
29. Chapter IV verses 128 to 130 Quran apparently
refers to dissolution of marriage by mutual consent
when       an     attempt       to     resolve          the       differences          through
conciliation fails.                   It is appropriate to refer verses
128.     If a woman feareth ill-treatment from her husband, or desertion,
it   is    no  sin   for   them     twain if        they make       terms   of    peace between
themselves.        Peace is better.         But greed hath been made present in the
minds (of men).         If ye do good and keep from evil, lo! Allah is ever
Informed of what ye do.
129.    Ye will not be able to deal equally between (your) wives, however
much ye wish (to do so).                But turn not altogether away (from one),
leaving her as in suspense.                If ye do good and keep from evil, lo!
Allah is ever Forgiving, Merciful.
130.    But    if   they   separate,      Allah      will    compensate      each    out of  His
abundance.       Allah is ever All-Embracing, All-Knowing.
13 Status of Muslim Women in India – Law relating to Marriage, Divorce and Maintenance
30. Faskh:        Faskh is a form of judicial divorce.
This      mode     of     divorce      is  effected    through      the
intervention of court or through the authority at the
instance of wife.
31. Dr.Justice Kauser Edappagath refers Faskh as
Apart from the divorce which may emanate either from the husband or the
wife without the intervention of the court or any authority, Muslim law
also provides for the dissolution of marriage to the wife by decree of
the court.   It is called Faskh.
The word Faskh means annulment or abrogation.    It comes from a
root which means 'to annul; or 'to rescind'.    Hence it refers to the
power of a Muslim qazi to annul a marriage on the application of the
32. In Chapter-IV Verse 35 Quran allude to the
mode of divorce through the arbiter.               The verse reads
35. And if ye fear a breach between them twain (the man and wife),
appoint an arbiter from his folk and an arbiter from her folk.   If they
desire amendment Allah will make them of one mind.    Lo! Allah is ever
33. The Shariat Act refers to several forms of
annulment of marriage like Illa, Zihar, Lian.
34. The learned author, Asaf A.A. Fyzee refers to
the above forms of annulment of marriage as follows:
Although these two forms of divorce are mentioned in the Shariat Act
1937 they are very rare in India and of no practical importance.        In
illa the husband swears not to have intercourse with the wife and
abstains for four months or more.       The husband may revoke the oath by
resumption of marital life.       After the expiry of the period of four
months in Hanafi law the marriage is dissolved without legal process;
but aliter in Ithna Ashari and Shafei laws where legal proceedings are
necessary.    This form is obsolete in India and apparently there is no
case law on the subject.
In zihar the husband swears that to him the wife is like 'the
back of his mother'.     If he intends to revoke this declaration he has
to pay money by way of expiation or fast for a certain period.       After
the oath ha been taken the wife has the right to go to the court and
obtain divorce or restitution of conjugal rights on expiation. This is
an archaic form of oath and dates from pre-Islamic Arabia. Says Tyabji.
Zihar has hardly any significance so far as the law courts in
India   are  concerned.    The   words  do  not come  naturally  to Indian
Muslims.    A person wishing deliberately to give his wife a cause of
action for restitution of conjugal righs in India would probably adopt
an easier, more usual and better understood mode of doing so.
35. The learned author further refers to Lian as
The procedure of lian may be described briefly as follows.           A husband
accuses his wife of adultery but is unable to prove the allegation.
The wife in such cases is entitled to file a suit for dissolution of
marriage.    It is to be observed that a mere allegation or oath in the
form  of   an  anathema  does   not   dissolve   the  marriage.   A  qazi  must
intervene – in the Indian law a regular suit has to be filed.            At the
hearing of the suit the husband has two alternatives.          He may formally
retract the charge; and if this is done at or before the commencement
of the hearing (but not after the close of the evidence or the end of
the trial), the wife is not entitled to a dissolution.          If the husband
does not retract and persists in his attitude he is called upon to make
oaths.    This was followed by similar oaths of innocence made by the
wife.    The  four  oaths   are  tantamount    to  the  evidence  of  four  eye
witnesses required for the proof of adultery in Islam.             After these
mutual    imprecations   the    judge   pronounces    that  the   marriage   is
36. It      is    to     be     noted      that    many    modes     of
dissolution of marriage                existed prior to Islam which
were accepted by the Prophet with certain refinement
and    modifications.          The    Prophet    always    had  taken    a
liberal      view    in   the    matter     of  divorce    in  the    best
interest of the parties.
37. In      the    matter     of    Khula,   we   see   that    the
Prophet      asked     the    wife     to    return    the  garden     she
obtained from her husband. The pragmatic approach is
reflected in different Hadiths. Paramount consideration
in    such    a    situation       is    whether    annulment     is   for
reasonable cause or not and whether an attempt for
reconciliation         has     been     made    or   not.     The    legal
implication of the Quranic precepts are pragmatically
aligned to ensure fairness in such form of a divorce.
IV. The legal conundrum that has resulted from K.C.
38. A      learned     Single      Judge    of   this   Court    in
unequivocal        terms     defined      that   Muslim    wife    cannot
repudiate       a   marriage      dehors     the   provisions     of   the
Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act.                  The law laid down
as above was in a proceedings arising from a private
complaint filed by the husband against the wife and her
second husband and relatives.                  Wife and others were
prosecuted under Section 494 of the Indian Penal Code
for    an    offence      of   bigamy.       The   wife   defended   the
prosecution        contending       that    she   had   repudiated   the
marriage by Faskh.           The learned Single Judge was of the
view that unilateral repudiation of marriage by Faskh
without the intervention of court under the Dissolution
of Muslim Marriages Act is opposed to the law of the
land.      The learned Single Judge was of the view that
when a particular branch of law is codified, it is not
possible      to    travel     beyond     the   same   and   decide  the
rights of the parties.                We need to examine the law
declared by the learned Judge after adverting to the
object of the scheme of the above enactment.
39. In the first place, we need to ascertain the
meaning and rationale of the law from the circumstances
under      which      the     British      Government      enacted   the
Dissolution        of    Muslim     Marriages      Act.     As  observed
earlier, there are followers of different schools of
jurisprudence.                One      of     the      leading          schools        in the
Country, who have large followers, is the follower of
the Hanafi school.                  The learned author, Dr.Mufti Samiya
Tabasum(14) illustrates the reasons for the enactment,
stating that Hanafi wife found it difficult to dissolve
the marriage, as there was no provision for her to seek
divorce         on     the      disappearance               of      the     husband,      his
imprisonment,            neglect          of      his      matrimonial            obligation
etc., and this has forced her to get rid of undesired
marital           bonds       by      renouncing              her       faith.         It  is
appropriate           to      refer       the       statement           of     objects    and
reasons         of    the      aforesaid           enactment,            which      reads  as
There is no provision in the Hanafi Code of Muslim Law
enabling a married Muslim Woman to obtain a decree from the
Court dissolving her marriage in case the husband neglects
to maintain her, makes her life miserable by deserting or
persistently           maltreating            her      or      absconds         leaving   her
14 Status of Muslim Women in India – Law Relating to Marriage, Divorce and Maintenance
unprovided for and under certain other circumstances. The
absence of such a provision has entailed unspeakable misery
to innumerable Muslim women in British India. The Hanafi
Jurists, however, have clearly laid down that in cases in
which the application of Hanafi Law causes hardship, it is
permissible to apply the provisions of the "Maliki,Shafi's
or Hambali Law".         Acting on this principle the Ulemas have
issued fatwas to the effect that in cases enumerated in
clause 3, Part A of this Bill (now se e Section 2 of the Act) a
married Muslim woman may obtain a decree dissolving her
marriage.       A  lucid    exposition     of  this  principle  can  be
found in the book called “Heelatum Najeza” published by
Maulana Ashraf Ali Sahib who has made an exhaustive study
of    the     provisions      of    Maliki    law   which   under   the
circumstances prevailing in India may be applied to such
cases.     This has been approved by a large number of Ulemas
who have put their seals of approval on the book.
As the courts are sure to hesitate to apply the Maliki
Law to the case of a Muslim woman, legislation recognising
and enforcing the abovementioned principle is called for in
order to relieve the sufferings of countless Muslim women.
40. 'Is it the intention of the Legislature, to do
away with extra-judicial divorce otherwise followed by
the followers of different schools?', is the question
to be answered in this case.
41. Shariat Act recognized extra-judicial divorce
as   well     as   judicial      divorce.    The   Shariat   Act  was
enacted in an attempt to get rid of customary law that
was followed by the Muslims in India.               It was observed
in the statement and objects and reasons of the Shariat
Act that the status of Muslim women under the so called
customary law is simple and graceful. The customary law
appears to have affected the rights of Muslim women.
Therefore, it was felt, introduction of Muslim personal
law will automatically bring them to position to which
they are naturally entitled. Section 2 of the Shariat
Act      specifically               recognized    all    modes     of
extra-judicial         divorce      except  Faskh.    Faskh,   as  we
noted      earlier,       is    a    mode  of   divorce    with   the
intervention of an authority like Qazi.                   In Section 5
of the Shariat Act a provision was made to dissolve
marriage by the District Judge on a petition made by
Muslim      married      women.       This     would   show   that   the
intention of the Shariat Act is to entrust the mode of
dissolution of marriage by Faskh through the court.
Thus, under the Shariat Act, a Muslim women retained
the    right     of    all    modes     of   extra   judicial   divorce
recognized       under    their     personal     law  Shariat,   except
Faskh.      Then came the Dissolution of Muslim Marriages
Act.     It appears that inspite of Shariat Act, women
belonging to the Hanafi School of Law were not allowed
to   obtain      decree     from    the    court   to   dissolve   their
marriage.         Dissolution         of    Muslim    Marriages     Act,
therefore, was enacted to consolidate and clarify the
provisions of the Muslim law relating to the suit for
dissolution        of    marriage      by    married   Muslim   women.
Recitals prelude to the above enactment refers twin
reasons for bringing the legislation of the Dissolution
of    Muslim     Marriages       Act.      One    to  consolidate    and
clarify the law relating to dissolution of marriage by
Muslim     women;     the    other     is   to  remove  the   doubt  in
regard to the effect of renunciation of Islam by a
married Muslim woman.              Consequent to the enactment of
Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act, Section 5 of the
Shariat Act was repealed.                  This fortifies the legal
position that, what is consolidated in Dissolution of
Muslim     Marriages       Act    is   the    law relating    to  Faskh
alone.      The learned counsel Shri Narayanan P. as well
as    Smt.Shajna        M.,     rightly      pointed   out   that   the
intention of the Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act is
to    extend      judicial       divorce      to  all   Muslim    women
irrespective of the schools they follow.                 The statutory
provision never intended to do away with the practice
of    extra-judicial        divorce      otherwise   available    to  a
Muslim woman. We also note that reference of other
modes of extra-judicial divorce as referred in Section
2    of    the     Shariat       Act    remain    untouched    in   the
Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act.
42. Consolidation            of     law   of    Faskh   in    the
Dissolution        of   Muslim      Marriages     Act   enumerates   the
grounds      on   which     a    married     muslim    woman  would   be
entitled to divorce.            These grounds are illustrative in
nature and, not exhaustive.                 The specific grounds are
referred in Section 2(i) to 2(viii) of the Act.                  After
illustrating the grounds of divorce under Sections 2(i)
to    2(viii),       a   residuary       clause    is   provided   under
Section 2(ix) to secure divorce on any ground which is
recognized as valid for the dissolution of marriage
under     Muslim     law.      This    has    caused   some  amount   of
confusion       among      scholars,       litigant    public   etc.
Therefore, it is necessary to elucidate the difference
between 'forms of divorce' and 'grounds of divorce'.
The    'forms     of   divorce'      are    in  the   nature  of   right
conferred on Muslim women to annul their marriage.
Each     of     the     forms      have     distinct    character    and
identity.        In    the    form     of    talaq,   khula   etc,    it
proceeds from the unilateral will of the party, and in
the     matter      of     Mubaraat       and     Talaq-e-tafwiz     the
bilateral consent of the couple.                On the other hand, in
Faskh, the parties have no role.                  It is the authority
that    decides      the    fate    of    the   marriage.   It  is  to
impress      upon     the    authority       to  grant  a  decree   of
divorce, illustrations of the grounds of divorce have
been referred in Section 2 of the Dissolution of Muslim
Marriages       Act.       Thus,      all    the   grounds   including
residuary grounds under Section 2(ix) are required only
for the authority to act upon such matters.                 Once this
distinction is drawn, it is easy to understand, the
scope and merit of the Dissolution of Muslim Marriages
Act.      What    was    introduced       in   Dissolution of   Muslim
Marriages Act is the same provision conferring right on
the Muslim women under Section 5 of the Shariat Act in
a broader and larger frame                   encapsulating the Faskh
with all its essential elements for the independent
authority to decide.
43. The            renowned          Islamic      Law    Scholar,     Tahir
Mahmood(15) refers the background of the Dissolution of
Under Muslim law a kazi or court can dissolve the marriage of a woman
on her complaint based on the grounds specified in the Muslim legal
treatises.    This is known as faskh-e-nikah [dissolution of marriage].
The various schools of Muslim law differ in regard to its grounds and
procedure .. the most restrictive among them being the Hanafi school to
which a dominant majority of Muslims in this part of the world belong.
In India, as per the judicial practice settled by a Privy Council
decision the courts are however bound to apply in every disputed case
among the Muslims the school of law to which the parties belong.                Due
to this judge-made rule the courts cannot apply in any case any of the
other schools of law which are relatively liberal in allowing judicial
divorce at the behest of a wife.               Muslim wives desirous of getting rid
of their marriages were thus practically without a remedy until 1939.
The learned author further refers to the “impact on
rights to private divorce” as follows:
The title adopted for the Act was an inaccurate English translation of
the caption of the Kazmi Bill in Urdu – Qanoon-e-Faskh-e-Nikah [law for
judicial divorce].         In Muslim law “faskh” is only one part of the law
of divorce and means termination of marriage by a court on wife's
15  Muslim Law in India and Abroad (Second Edition)
request   on  any   ground  recognised   by  Muslim  law.   It  is  entirely
different from khula [divorce by husband in wife's demand] and talaq-e-
tafwiz [divorce by wife's own action in terms of her marrige contract],
both of which are different from faskh.          The Act was not meant to
abolish those rights of married women and restrict the Muslim law on
their divorce rights to faskh [divorce through court] only.
In a number of cases the courts have rightly explained the aims and
scope of the Act of 1939 in these terms:
(i) the Act is a piece of declaratory legislation and does
not amend all the rules of Muslim law;
(ii) the object of the Act is to ameliorate the lot of
Muslim wives and enlarge their rights, which object must be
(iii) the Act crystallizes only a portion of Muslim law and
should,   therefore,   be   applied  in  conjunction  with  the
provisions of the whole of Muslim law.
Fazal Begum v. Hakim Ali AIR 1941 Lah 22; Sofia Begum v.
Syed Zaheer Hasan Rizvi AIR 1947 All 16; Jamila Khatun v.
The confusion that the 1939 Act deprives Muslim women of their right to
get the marriage terminated without the intervention of the court was
created by Clause (ix) of Section 2 of the Act which says that the
court can dissolve a woman's marriage, besides the grounds mentioned in
that   Section,  also   “on  any   other   ground  recognized as  valid for
“dissolution of marriages under Muslim law.”           Here again the words
“dissolution of marriage” is an inaccurate translation of the word
faskh [judicial divorce].      These words cannot be interpreted to mean
that the Act was to abolish Muslim women's rights to khula and talaq-e-
Justice V.Khalid of the Kerala High Court [later elevated to Supreme
Court] once observed that a Muslim woman cannot now get her marriage
dissolved de hors the provisions of this Act “except perhaps in the
case of a talaq-e-tafwiz” – K.C.Moyin v. Nafeesa AIR 1973 Ker 176.
44. A learned single Judge of Allahabad High Court
in Mt.Sofia Begam v. Syed Zaheer Hazzm Rizvi AIR 1947
All 16      referred Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act as
a    distinct      endeavour        made     by   the    Legislature    to
ameliorate the suffering wife.
45. A learned single Judge of Nagpur Bench of the
High Court of Bombay in Jamila Khatun v. Kasim Ali
Abbas Ali [AIR 1951 Nagpur 375] placed reliance on the
Division Bench judgment of the Chief Court of Sind
reported in A.I.R (37) 1950 Sind 8 [Noor Bibi v. Pir
Bux] to hold that Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act
crystalises only a portion of Muslim law and it must be
read in conjunction with whole of the muslim law as it
46. On an overall analysis of the scheme of the
Shariat      Act    as   well     as    the  Dissolution   of  Muslim
Marriages Act as above, we are of the considered view
that the Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act restrict
Muslim women to annul their marriage invoking Faskh
except     through      the    intervention     of  the  Court.   All
other forms of extra-judicial divorce as referred in
Section 2 of the Shariat Act are thus available to a
Muslim      women.       We,    therefore,     hold   that   the  law
declared in K.C.Moyin's case (supra) is not good law.
47. The right to invoke khula conferred upon a
married Muslim women is an absolute right; akin to
talaq conferred upon the married Muslim men.                   In the
matter of other modes of divorce at the instance of
wife,     a   clear     procedure       is  available   to  hold  its
validity.         In     the     matter      of    khula,    there    are
differences of opinion in regard to procedures, methods
etc. In the leading case i.e. Mat.A.No.89 of 2020,
consolidated in this judgment, one of the issues is the
validity      of    khula    invoked      by   'Y'.    'X'   refused   to
receive the dower offered by her.                   The learned Amicus
Curiae Shri Mayankutty Mather submitted that a wife
should have some genuine reason for seeking divorce
from her husband. It is further submitted that like
talaq, there are no specific stages or procedures to be
complied by the wife before seeking divorce invoking
khula.      According to the learned Amicus Curiae, the
scholars      state     that     it   is    the   husband   who   should
divorce      his    wife    when     it    was   sought   by   the   wife
invoking her right of khula.                It is also submitted that
the husband cannot refuse to accede to the request of
the wife.        The learned Amicus Curiae Smt.Vaheeda Babu
referring       to    a   malayalam       authority    Islam,    Vol   3,
submitted that khula is a form of talaq at the instance
of the wife against the husband; and the husband is
entitled to demand from the wife what was given by him
to her. In Quran, in unequivocal terms, the right of
wife to invoke khula is declared in absolute terms
without any fixed conditions. However, the Prophet in a
pragamatic approach directed the wife to return what
she obtained from her husband. Interpretation of the
Quranic precepts           resulted in understanding the khula
in different ways.             As a result of this, khula and
mubaraat       are    often     misunderstood        as   the   same.   A
Division Bench of this Court in Binu P.A. v. Ashla N.A.
[ILR 2017 (2) Kerala 466]                  declared that the Family
Court can grant divorce on the basis of the agreement
executed      between      the     parties,      referring    khula   and
mubaraat      as    a  divorce      based     on   mutual   consent.    A
learned      Single     Judge     of   this    Court   in   Mohammed   v.
Sainaba Umma [1987 (1) KLT 712] recognized khula as a
ground of divorce as referable under Section 2 of the
Dissolution       of    Muslim     Marriages      Act.   This   judicial
declaration also added to the confusion to understand
khula as a ground of divorce.
37      The       learned        author          Dr.Mufti           Samiya        Tabasum(16)
refers to the formalities of khula as follows:
There is an offer by the wife to release her from the matrimonial tie.
The offer is made to the husband.                    The offer for Khula must also be
accepted, the divorce is not complete and it may be revoked by the
wife.      But once the offer has been accepted, the divorce is complete
and becomes irrevocable.             Offer and acceptance may either be oral or in
writing. The offer and acceptance must be                    made at one sitting, i.e. at
one place of meeting.
Under Sunni law the presence of witnesses is not necessary.                             But under
Shia     law,   the   offer     and    acceptance      of    Khula     must   be   made   in  the
presence of two competent witnesses.                  Further, under Shia law the Khula
is revocable by wife during Iddat.
According to the learned author, once the offer is
accepted, divorce becomes irrevocable.
48. Therefore, it is necessary to elucidate what
is khula; how is it effected; how its legal validity
can be recognised etc.
49. To understand the nature and legal validity of
khula, one needs to understand the general intent of
16 'Status of Muslim Women in India – Law Relating to Marriage, Divorce and Maintenance
Quranic precepts and conceptual idea of such precepts.
The idea of justice in Quran is rooted in fairness.
Marriage creates mutual rights and obligation.                    Chapter
IV    verse     1   Quran     refers      to   mutual    obligation     as
O mankind! Be careful of your duty to your Lord, Who created you from a
single soul and from it created its mate and from them twain hath
spread abroad a multitude of men and women. Be careful of your duty
toward Allah in Whom ye claim (your rights) of one another, and toward
the wombs (that bare you). Lo! Allah hath been a Watcher over you.
50. In Chapter IV, verse 58 Quaran, Allah commands
Lo! Allah commandeth you that ye restore deposits to their owners, and
if ye judge between mankind that ye judge justly. Lo! comely is this
which Allah admonisheth you. Lo! Allah is ever Hearer, Seer.
51. In Chapter V, verse 8 Quaran, it is stated as
Oh ye who believe! Be steadfast witnesses for Allah is equity, and let
not hatred of any people seduce you that ye deal not justly.           Deal
justly, that is nearer to your duty.       Observe your duty to Allah.  Lo!
Allah is Informed of what ye do.
52. This idea of fairness has to be followed by
the believer in every sphere of his life.                      This idea
has to be read into the right               conferred on the wife to
invoke khula.           That does not mean that khula would
depend on the fulfilling of any obligation on the part
of   the    wife     to   return     what    she  obtained   from  her
husband.       Quranic verses as referred in verses 228 and
229 in Chapter II in clear terms confers absolute right
on the wife to annul the marriage with her husband.
Husband's consent is not a precondition for essential
validity      of    khula.      Hadith     of  the   prophet  in  such
circumstances,         directing      the   wife   to  return  or  pay
compensation to the husband has to be understood to
ensure fairness of justice. A wife cannot walk away
from the marriage after obtaining material gain from
the husband, on her own volition, without returning
what she obtained.            The right of the husband to claim
back what was given in marriage cannot be construed to
mean khula can be effective only when husband consents
to the offer made by the wife.                Such an approach would
deny the right conferred upon wife under Quran.                 If the
wife invokes khula and refuses to return the dower or
what she had obtained from the husband, the husband can
very well approach the court of law for the return of
the same.
53. Tahir Mahmood(17), refers to khula as follows:
In Muslim law the concept of khula by women is the counterpart of talaq
by men.   Its law, explained below, is based on two verses of the Quran-
II: 229 which speaks of talaq and khula together, and IV:128 which
speaks only of Khula.
Under Muslim law drawn from these sources a married woman unhappy with
her marriage can decide to put an end to it and ask her husband to
divorce her by talaq.           As in talaq, reconciliation attempts must be
made in a case of khula too but, just as in talaq the last word is of
the husband, in khula the last word is of the wife.         If a wife finally
opts for khula, the husband cannot compel her to continue in marriage
and has to pronounce talaq which will be irrevocable.          He may ask the
wife to forego her unpaid dower which otherwise becomes immediately
payable by the husband in the case of a talaq by the husband.             The
Quran [IV:20-21] urges men not do so, but the jurists of the past had
ruled that if a husband insists on foregoing of dower by the wife she
has to agree to his demand.
17  Muslim Law in India and Abroad (Second Edition)
54. The learned author also refers to the opinion
of Abul Ala Maududi, a veteran religious scholar of the
subcontinent.         It is apposite to quote from page 139
The wife's right to Khula is parallel to the man's right of talaq.
Like  the   latter  the  former   too  is  unconditional.   It is indeed  a
mockery of the Shariat that we regard khula as something depending
either on the consent of the husband or on the verdict of the kazi.
The law of Islam is not responsible for the way Muslim women are being
denied their right in this respect.” – Abul Ala Maududi, Huqooq-uz-
ed, Lahore, 1964 [translated by me from Urdu].
55. Quran conferred a Muslim wife with right of
'khula' to annul the marriage without prescribing a
procedure which indicates to mean that fairness is a
matter      relative      consideration        in   a   context    to    be
followed in such course opted by a wife.                     As adverted
earlier, when the Prophet was approached by a wife to
invoke khula, he advised the wife to return the dower
and garden only to be considered as a part of equity
and fairness.         It cannot be treated as a pre-condition
to    validate       khula.     When    substantial       provisions     in
unequivocal terms confer a right on a Muslim wife,
procedural equity to be followed cannot override such
substantial        right.       Insistence      to   return   dower  or
payment       of     compensation,         therefore,     are   to   be
understood as husband is legitimately entitled to claim
back     what    is    otherwise      due    to   him  on   account  of
unilateral invocation of khula by wife.
56. Thus       it    is    clear     that   the   right   is  an
unconditional right conferred upon a muslim women to
invoke khula.
57. It      is    appropriate       to    refer   some   of  the
judicial precedents recognizing khula in India --
58. The earliest judgment is that of the Privy
Council decided on 1861 in Moonshee Buzul-Ul-Raheem v.
Luteefut-OOn-Nissa          (MANU/PR/0004/1861).        Privy   council
refers to khula as a form of divorce at the instance of
wife and opined that non payment of consideration by
wife does not invalidate such divorce.
59. In Masroor Ahmed v. State (NCT of Delhi) and
Another [2008 (103) DRJ 137], the learned Judge Badar
Durrez Ahmed in a matter arising under Section 482 of
the     Criminal      Procedure       Code,   1973    by  a   detailed
judgment referred to the right of Muslim wife to seek
divorce outside the court and observed as follows:
Khula, for example, is the mode of dissolution when the
wife does not want to continue with the marital tie. She proposes
to her husband for dissolution of the marriage. This may or may
not accompany her offer to give something in return. Generally,
the wife offers to give up her claim to Mahr (dower). Khula is a
divorce which proceeds from the wife which the husband cannot
refuse subject only to reasonable negotiation with regard to what
the wife has offered to give him in return.
60. The      Hon'ble     Supreme    Court   in   Juveria  Abdul
Majid Patni v. Atif Iqbal Mansoori and another [(2014)
10 SCC 736] considered extra-judicial divorce of khula
in the context of the Protection of Women from Domestic
Violence Act, 2005. The Apex Court recognized khula as
a mode of extra-judicial divorce to decide the issue
related to the said Act. The Apex Court in para 13 of
the    judgment      refers     mode     of  Khula  in para.13      as
From the discussion aforesaid, what we find is that `Khula' is a mode
of dissolution of marriage when the wife does not want to continue with
the marital tie. To settle the matter privately, the wife need only to
consult a Mufti (juris consult) of her school. The Mufti gives his
fatwa or advisory decision based on the Shariat of his school. Further,
if the wife does not want to continue with marital tie and takes mode
of `Khula' for dissolution of marriage, she is required to propose her
husband for dissolution of marriage. This may or may not accompany her
offer to give something in return. The wife may offer to give up her
claim to Mahr (dower). The `Khula' is a mode of divorce which proceeds
from the wife, the husband cannot refuse subject only to reasonable
negotiation with regard to what the wife has offered to give him in
return. The Mufti gives his fatwa or advisory decision based on the
Shariat of his school. However, if the matter is carried to the point
of litigation and cannot be settled privately then the Qazi(Judge) is
required to deliver a qaza (judgment) based upon the Shariat.
61. The      validity       of    khula  though  germane    for
consideration in Mat.A.No.89 of 2020, we               have adverted
to its various aspects only to reiterate the validity
does not depend on the acceptance and consent of the
husband.       The procedural aspect of khula, unless and
until declared through the secular law of this Country,
the     court    needs     to    refer     to    the    same    only     with
reference to the Quran and Hadiths.
62. We      notice     a   learned     Single     Judge     of   this
Court in Shihabudheen v. Shybi [2009 (4) KLT 96] placed
reliance      on    Mulla's      Principles       of   Mohammedan       Law,
Chapter 16, wherein 'khula' is referred as follows:
Section 319 of Mahommedan Law deals with khula and mubaraat. Under Sub
section (1) a marriage may be dissolved not only by talak, which is the
arbitrary act of the husband, but also by agreement between the husband
and wife. A dissolution of marriage by agreement may take the form of
khula or mubaraat. Sub Section 2 deals with divorce by khula which is a
divorce at the instance of the wife, in which she gives or agrees to
give a consideration to the husband for her release from the marriage
tie.   In  such   a  case,   the  terms   of  the   bargain  are   matters  of
arrangement between the husband and the wife and the wife, as the
consideration, may release her dyn-mahr (dower) and other rights, or
make any other agreement for the benefit of the husband. Khula is
effected by an offer from the wife to compensate the husband, if he
releases her from her marital ties, and acceptance by the husband of
the   offer.  Once   the  offer   is   accepted   it  operates   as  a  single
irrevocable divorce (talak-i-bain) and its operation is not postponed
until execution of the khulanama (deed of khula).
Though     the    issue     regarding      khula   had  not  directly
arisen for consideration, as the court was dealing with
the    matter     related      to    a   claim   under  Muslim   Women
(Protection of Rights on Divorce) Act, 1986 referable
to Section 3, passive acceptance of principles laid in
Mulla's Mohammedan Law is contrary to our view.
63. We have said previously that the signification
of invoking khula is absolute and does not depend upon
the consent or assent of the husband.                 Human minds are
vulnerable. Quran itself describes a human as fallible.
Sometimes, a decision to invoke khula by wife may be
due     to    perceptible         differences     she   had   in   the
relationship with her husband.                 What sprung into the
mind of an individual to take such a decision can be
cleared       through        the      medium    of    communication.
Communication would help to understand the notion and
thoughts       of    others.        Quran,   therefore,   thrust   on
conciliation as a medium of dispute resolution before
taking a concrete decision.
64. Chapter II verse 182 Quran says about dispute
resolution by way of conciliation as follows:
But he who feareth from a testator some unjust or sinful clause and
maketh peace between the parties, (it shall be) no sin for him. Lo!
Allah is Forgiving. Merciful.
65. Similarly         Chapter-IV     verse  35  Quran  states
about dispute resolution in marital dispute as follows:
And if ye fear a breach between them twain (the man and wife), appoint
an arbiter from his folk and as arbiter from her folk. If they desire
amendment Allah will make them of one mind. Lo! Allah is ever Knower.
66.    We have already referred to verses 128-129 of
Chapter-IV       Quran,     in   the    context  of  dissolution   of
marriage invoking faskh.               Chapter XLIX verses 9 and 10
9. And if two parties of believers fall to fighting, then make peace
between them. And if one party of them doth wrong to the other, fight
ye that which doth wrong till it returns unto the ordinance of Allah;
then, if it return, make peace between them justly, and act equitably.
Lo! Allah loveth the equitable.
10.    The believers are naught else than brothers.     Therefore, make
peace between your brothers and observe your duty to Allah that haply
ye may obtain mercy.
67. We will not be justified in recognising the
right of khula in the light of the personal law without
adverting      to    the    whole    scheme   of justice    referable
under the personal law.
68. When Quran itself speaks about conciliation to
resolve      the   disputes,       it   essentially  means    that  an
attempt for resolution of disputes shall be made at the
first instance.          This would guard against an impulsive
decision at the instance of the wife.                   Further, it
would     also      give     an    opportunity   to   air    out   the
grievances and resolve the disputes peacefully.                  If an
unbridled       power to invoke khula is given to a Muslim
wife, it may result in untold miseries and hardships to
both.     The very idea of legal system is to arrest human
tendencies       in   taking     decision    affecting   her   or  him
permeated by instincts and impulsiveness.                Law assures
common interest based on a jurisprudential footing on
an    overreaching        principles       of   idea  of   justice  to
protect all.
69. As we adverted earlier, divorce invoking khula
is    recognized       as   similar      right   conferred   upon  the
husband by way of talaq.              In Section 2 of Shariat Act,
khula and talaq juxtaposed as similar rights available
to wife and husband.
70. In Shamim Ara v. State of U.P. [(2002) 7 SCC
(Crl.) 1814], the Apex Court held that instantaneous
triple       talaq      not     preceded      by    the   attempt   of
reconciliation is bad in law.               In the majority decision
of    the    Constitutional         Bench    of  the   apex  court  in
Shayara Bano v. Union of India and Others [(2017) 9 SCC
1] it was held that triple talaq invoked without any
attempt for reconciliation is arbitrary and violative
of fundamental right contained in Article 14 of the
71. In such circumstances, we have to hold that
any invocation of khula without there being an attempt
for reconciliation would be bad in law. Though there
need not be any specific reasons to invoke khula, the
procedure of reconciliation itself become a reasonable
cause in as much as that it would reflect an attempt to
resolve the disputes amicably between parties.
72. The      learned      Amicus     Curiae  Shri   Mayankutty
Mather submitted that there are no specific stages of
procedures referred as a prerequisite compliance for
invoking khula for the reason that the women suffer
more in a problematic marital relationship.
73. To      conclude,       we    hold  that  Khula   will  be
treated as valid or effective under law only if it was
preceded by an effective attempt for reconciliation by
the parties.
74. Khula in acceptance in different jurisdiction
reflects its flexibility for adaption.               We have already
discussed about the right and procedure for khula.                The
varied nature of acceptance in different jurisdiction
therefore, may be useful here.
(a). IRAQ(18) A woman is allowed to seek khula’ if her
husband is infertile and they do not have children. In Iraq
it is stated in the law that infidelity constitutes as a
valid reason for divorce. When a woman is granted khula’
compensation can be greater or less than the dower.
(b). JORDAN,         MOROCCO       AND     SYRIA( 19)    In    morocco,    if    a
woman is coerced or harassed by her husband, the husband
has no entitlement to compensation. In Morocco, Syria and
Jordan,        compensation        other      than      money   can     include    child
care/ custody. In Jordan a new law been recently passed
that      allows      a   woman     to    end     her     marriage      by   using    the
principle of khula’ itself. The courts saw an exponential
increase in khula’ lawsuits, within the first two years of
passing        this     law.     The    law     has      yet   to   be    approved     by
parliament,         however,       and     it    is     still   condemned       by  many
lawyers to this day.
18 Interpretation of khula’ in Iraq available at; http://www.popflock.com/learn?s=khula'
19       Interpretation of khula’ in Jordan, Morocco and Syria available
at:https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Khul%27
(c). LEBANON(20)         Marriage         is    a   contract      under     Shia,
Sunni, and Druze personal status laws in Lebanon and it can
be terminated by divorce.
(d). MALAYSIA(21) Khula’ is conducted under section 49
of the Islamic Family Law Act (federal territories), 1984,
which       states       that   if    the       husband      does      not    agree     to
voluntarily pronounce a divorce (talaq), but the parties
agree to a divorce by redemption khula’ the court shall,
after      the    amount     of    the    payment        is   agreed     upon    by    the
parties, cause the husband to pronounce a divorce by khula’
and such divorce is irrevocable. In Malaysia, in the case
of     redemption          (khula’)      the        Islamic       Family     Law      Act/
Enactments do not expressly state that redemption (khula’)
without        the    consent      of    the      husband      will     be    affected,
however,        it    may   take    place       after      the    couple     have     gone
through a lengthy and elaborate procedure at the Shariah
court. khula’ in Malaysia is also known as “cerai tebus
20           Interpretation   of     khula’      in     Lebanon      is    available     at:
https://www.hrw.org/report/2015/01/19/unequal-and-unprotected/           womens-rights-
under-lebanese-personal-status-laws
21       Interpretation of khula’ available at: https://www.omicsonline.org/open-
access/judicial-separation-at-the-wifes-initiative-a-study-of-redemption-khulin-islamic-
law-and-contemporary-legislation-in-pakistan-and-2169-0170-1000212.php?
aid=82639#:~:text=In%20Malaysia%20Redemption%20(Khul'),the%20amount%20of
talaq” this basically involves the wife offering payment to
the     husband       to      pronounce        talaq       and     release      her     from
marriage. It’s covered under section 49 of the IFLA and the
payment can be as low as RM1, but the Shariah court can
decide on the amount based on the parties’ means under
section       49(3).      This     divorce       is    considered        permanent       and
ruju’ cannot be used to get back together.
(e). NIGERIA(22)            Khula’      is    the      most    common     form     of
divorce in Northern Nigeria. If a woman can provide enough
compensation on her own or with the help of family it is
likely that she will be able to get out of an unhappy
(f). NORTH        AMERICA(23)         Imams       in     North    America       have
adopted       multiple        approaches        towards         khula’.     One    of    the
biggest issues that cause Imams to differ in their views is
whether or not the women should return the mahr to the
husband. Another important issue for women in North America
is    getting       both      a   civil     decree        and     religious       divorce.
22 Interpretation of khula’ in Nigeria is available at: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Khul
23 Interpretation of khula’ in North America is available at:
https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Khul%27
Religious divorce is sought out as “a meaningful personal
and spiritual process” that is attained in addition to a
civil decree. Another important issue is that many women
are unaware of their Islamic right to seek khula’.
(g).PAKISTAN (Based on the works of Muhammad Munir)(24):
Pakistan practices Judicial Khula’. Unlike India, Pakistan
has over the years developed an impressively progressive
attitude towards khula’ and the muslim women’s right to an
independent      divorce.     Though    there   is   no   enacted   law   in
Pakistan, the institution of khula’ has been entrusted to
and developed by judicial precedents. In 1959, the Lahore
High Court gave a revolutionary decision in the case of
Mst.    Balqis     Fatima    v.    Najm-ul-Ikram     Qureshi    (PLD   1959
Lahore     566)    overruling      a  decision    in    a  previous    case
(Sayeeda     Khanam    v.   Muhammed     Sami,   PLD   1952   Lahore   113)
which     had    rejected     the    plea    that   incompatibility       of
temperament is a ground for dissolution of marriage. This
judgment, for the first time in Pakistan, recognised the
24 Muhammad Munir, Judicial Law Making: An Analysis of case law on khula
in   Pakistan    SSRN   Electronic    Journal   (2021),   available   at:
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/
right of khula’ for a muslim woman without the consent of
her husband.. In this case the court resorted to its own
interpretation of the verse 2:229 of the Quran and the
Hadith with reference to the case of Habibah, wife of Tabit
bin Qays, this decision was endorsed by the Supreme Court
of Pakistan in 1967 in the case of Khurshid Bibi v. Mohd.
Amin,    PLD    1967     SC   121.    Both   of  these  were  landmark
judgments      and    is    followed    till   date  in  Pakistan  and
In Mst. Zubaida v. Muhammad Akram (1988 MLD 2486) it was
held that; “Non payment of khula’ or non fulfilment of
conditions will not render the khula’ decree ineffective;
imposition of conditions merely creates a civil liability
and a decree of khula’ cannot be considered as dependent on
requiring the wife to fulfil the conditions first.”
In Khalid Mahmood v. Anees Bibi (PLD 2007 Lahore 626), the
“It is established…that court has the power to fix any
amount of compensation being the consideration of khula’ if
it is found after recording evidence that khula’ is not
claimed merely on the desire of the wife but the fault of
the husband is also the reason for recourse to khula’.”
(h). SAUDI        ARABIA(25)         Women    awarded      khula’     in    Saudi
Arabia       are      required         to     financially        compensate         their
husbands or give away marriage settlements. Sometimes this
may include custody rights to their children.
(i). YEMEN(26)         In     Yemen       khula’     is   recognised        as   a
judicially supervised annulment. Alcoholism, jail time for
more than three years, impotence, mental feebleness, and
hatred constitute as a valid reason for a woman to seek
(j). ZANZIBAR(27) Judicial khula’ in Zanzibar differs
from judicial khula’ in Arab countries that have recently
introduced         it   through        legislative        reform.      In   Zanzibar’s
Islamic       courts,       khula’      is     used   primarily       as   a   judicial
mechanism for ending a marriage. Judges view khula’ as a
right that a woman can exercise to extricate herself from
25 Interpretation of khula’ available at: https://www.wikiwand.com/en/Khula
26 Interpretation of khula’ Yemen is available at: https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Khul%27
27 https://www.researchgate.net/publication/325586515_It_is_Your_Right_to_Buy_a_Div
orce_Judicial_Khuluu_in_Zanzibar#:~:text=In%20Zanzibar's%20Islamic%20courts
marriage,      a   right    that    judges    sometimes   encourage   in
75. In the absence of any secular law governing
khula,     we    hold     that    khula    would   be   valid   if   the
following conditions are satisfied:
(i).     A declaration of repudiation or termination
of marriage by wife.
(ii). An       offer     to   return   dower   or   any   other
material gain received by her during marital tie.
(iii). An effective attempt for reconciliation was
preceded before the declaration of khula.
76. The Family Courts Act, 1984 provides for the
establishment        of    the   Family    Courts   to   exercise    the
jurisdiction        excercisable       by   District   Courts    or  any
subordinate civil courts under law in regard to the
matters specifically referred to in Section 7 of the
Family Courts Act.           Explanation (d) of Section 7(d) of
the Family Courts Act, confers the Family Court with
the jurisdiction to declare the matrimonial status of
any person.        Therefore, there is no difficulty for the
Family Court to endorse an extra-judicial divorce to
declare the matrimonial status of a person.                 In the
matter of talaq, khula, mubaraat, talaq-e-tafwiz, the
Family Courts shall entertain such applications moved
by either of the parties or both parties to declare the
marital      status     of   such     parties.   In  the matter  of
unilateral dissolution of marriage, invoking khula and
talaq, the scope of inquiry before the Family Courts is
limited.       In such proceedings, the court shall record
the khula or talaq to declare the marital status                 of
the parties after due notice to other party.                If any
person want to contest the effectiveness of khula or
talaq, it is open for such aggrieved person to contest
the same in appropriate manner known under law.              In the
matter      of    mubaraat       and    talaq-e-tafwiz,  on   being
satisfied that the dissolution is being effected on
mutual      consent,       the    Family     Court   without   further
inquiry shall declare the marital status.                   We notice
Family Courts are overburdened with large number of
cases.      The Family Court therefore, shall restrain from
adjudicating upon such extra judicial divorce unless it
is called upon to decide its validity in appropriate
manner.        The    Family      Court    in   such   matters   shall
endeavour        to    dispose       the    cases  treating     it  as
uncontested       matter,      without     any  delay   by  passing  a
formal order declaring the marital status.
77. Mat Appeal 89 of 2020: As afore noted, in this
appeal, 'X' challenged the decree of divorce granted on
the grounds of impotency and cruelty as referable under
the Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act.                   As already
discussed, pending the appeal we permitted 'Y', the
wife of 'X' to invoke khula to dissolve the marriage.
She invoked khula and has communicated the same to 'X',
which has been accepted in evidence by this Court. 'Y'
has expressed her stand that if khula is accepted by
this Court, she is willing to unconditionally withdraw
all allegations in the original petition with respect
to    impotency      and    cruelty      and  confine   her case  to
declaration of marital status on the basis of khula
invoked by her.          As we already noted, the Family Court
has    the    necessary       power     under   Explanation  (b)  of
Section 7(1) of the Family Courts Act to declare the
matrimonial        status.       Though    'Y'  had  instituted  the
petition to dissolve the marriage under the aforesaid
grounds, in view of the present circumstances, we have
no hesitation to declare that she has validly divorced
'X' on the basis of the khula, as the appeal is a
continuation of the original petition.                An attempt for
conciliation was made before this Court as well as
before the Family Court.                'Y' also offered to return
the dower but 'X' was not prepared to accept the same.
In the light of the law declared by us on procedure of
valid khula, we declare that khula invoked by 'Y' is
valid.      No doubt, if 'X' wants any compensation, or
return     of   any    valuables       he  gave   to  'Y'   during  the
subsistence of marriage, we reserve the liberty to 'X'
to approach the competent Family Court.                  Thus, we hold
that marriage between 'Y' and 'X' have come to an end
consequent to the invocation of khula by 'Y'. Thus                   we
set aside the impugned decree and judgment and dispose
the original petition filed by 'Y' recording the Khula.
The Mat. Appeal is accordingly disposed of.
79. Mat.Appeal         No.72/2021:       This   Mat   Appeal  is
filed by Muhammad Musthafa B.K. challenging a decree of
divorce      granted      by   the    Family   Court,    Kalpetta,   on
mutual consent.          In a petition filed by the respondent
wife    Harsha      M.A.,     under     the  Dissolution     of  Muslim
Marriages        Act,      the      parties     were    referred    for
mediation.         In    the    mediation     proceedings,     Muhammad
Musthafa agreed to divorce Harsha.                 It is based on the
said agreement, the Family Court granted a decree of
divorce.       Though the Family Court had not adverted to
it as a divorce based on mutual consent (mubaraat) as
recognised under Islamic law, it can be very well seen
that such a decree was passed, based on settlement
arrived at between the parties in the mediation.                    In
such circumstances, there is a bar under Section 19(2)
of the Family Courts Act for this Court to entertain
the    appeal     from    a   decree     passed  on  the   consent  of
parties.       Muhammad Musthafa has now contended that his
consent was obtained by committing fraud.                 However, he
does     not    dispute      the    signature    in   the   settlement
agreement.        Muhammad Musthafa is a literate person.
We, therefore, are of the considered view that decree
of divorce granted by the Family Court, Kalpetta, have
to be treated as divorce in the form of mubaraat.                  And
decree granted is only a declaration of status of the
parties       based      on     such     extra    judicial    divorce.
Accordingly,          we     dismiss        this   appeal     as   not
maintainable.         However we make it clear that dismissal
of     appeal      will      not     preclude     Muhammad    Musthafa
challenging       the    decree     in    appropriate   forum  on  the
ground of fraud.
80. OP (FC) 372/2020 :             This original petition was
filed by a Muslim wife seeking for expeditious disposal
of     O.P.No.286/2020          instituted      by    her   under   the
Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act.                  In the light of
the declaration that Muslim women have the right to
invoke extra-judicial divorce, we reserve the liberty
to the petitioner to resort to extra-judicial divorce.
We   have     already     issued     necessary     guidelines   to  the
Family Court in regard to disposal of pending matters
through       the    judgment       in     O.P.(FC).No.352/2020     and
connected      cases     dated     23/3/2021.      If   the  petitioner
wants     to   pursue     the    case     under   the  Dissolution   of
Muslim Marriages Act, the Family Court shall dispose
the case in accordance with the said guidelines.                    The
original petition is disposed of as above.
81. O.P.(FC).Nos.124/2021              and   133/2021:     These
original petitions were filed by same persons, namely,
Raseena      Pareekunju.          She     along    with   her   husband
Muhammed      Asif,     filed    a   petition     for  dissolution   of
marriage by Mutual consent under Section 9(2) of the
Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act. The Family Court
refused to entertain the petition stating that there is
no substantial provision under the Muslim law to grant
divorce on mutual consent.               That is challenged in O.P.
(FC).No.124/2021.            Thereafter,      it  appears    the   the
petitioner filed O.P. before the same Family Court for
declaration of marital status based on mubaraat.                  This
was returned with an endorsement as follows:
Quote the relevant provision of Muslim Marriage. Ad. Refused – 7
The above is challenged in O.P.(FC).No.133/2021.                     We
have already adverted that mubaraat is a form of an
extra-judicial divorce based on mutual consent under
Islamic law and same is valid as it remains untouched
by the Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act.                The Family
Court in such circumstances is neither called upon to
adjudicate nor called upon to dissolve the marriage by
decree of divorce.           On the other hand, the Family Court
only has to declare the marital status by endorsing the
mubaraat invoking jurisdiction under Explanation (b) of
Section      7(1)     of    the     Family    Courts   Act.    Once   a
declaration        of    joint     divorce    invoking    mubaraat   is
produced before the Family Court, the Family Court has
to pass a decree declaring the matrimonial status of
the parties.         The inquiry in such cases is limited to
the extent to find out whether both parties have agreed
upon to dissolve such marriage invoking mubaraat.                  Once
the Family Court is satisfied that mubaraat is executed
by both the parties, it shall declare the matrimonial
status     of    such    parties.        We  are  therefore,   of   the
considered       view    that     the    Family  Court   is  bound   to
entertain      a   petition      for    declaration   of   the  status
based on mubaraat.           The Family Court shall dispose such
matter, if both the parties have filed petition, after
making     a   formal      inquiry      without   any  further   delay
treating it as an uncontested matter in the light of
the guidelines issued by us in the judgment in O.P.
(FC).No.352/2020 and connected cases dated 23/3/2021.
The original petitions are disposed of as above.
82. Before parting with the judgment, we place on
record     our    appreciation        for   the   valuable  assistance
rendered       by Shri Mayankutty Mather K.I., Smt.Vaheeda
Babu     M.A.     and    Smt.Shajna        M.   for   the  commendable
articulation of the legal issues involved.