Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India
Extraordinary original jurisdiction
In the matter of Public interest litigation
Shrikant prasad                           Petitioner
Through home secretary, ministry of home affairs
North block, new delhi 110001
Ministry of law and justice
Shastri bhawan ,new delhi 110001
3.Government of Andhra Pradesh
a.p secretariat office, velagapudi 522503
4.government of arunachal Pradesh
Civil secretariat ,itanagar 791111
Assam sachivalaya ,dispur 781006
Main secretariat ,patna 800015
7.Governemnt of chattisgarh
Mahanadi bhawan ,mantralaya nayaraipur 492002
8.Government of goa secretariat
Porvroim bardez, goa 403521
Sachivalaya ,Gandhi nagar ,382010
10.Government of Haryana
Haryana civil secretariat ,sec 1 chandigarh-160019
11.Government of himachal Pradesh
H.P secretariat ,shimla 171002
12.Government of jammu Kashmir
Civil secretariat ,jammu 180001
13.Government of Jharkhand
Project building ,dhurwa road ranchi 834004
14.Governemnt of Karnataka
Vidhana shoudha , bangaluru 560001
Secretariat, thiruvananthapuram 695001
16.Government of Madhya Pradesh
Mantrayalaya, ballabh bhawan Bhopal 462004
17.Government of Maharashtra
Main building,mantralaya, Mumbai 400032
18.government of Manipur
South block,old secretariat ,imphal 795001
19.Government of Meghalaya
Rilang  building   ,Meghalaya   secretariat shillong,
20.Government of Mizoram
New secretariat complex ,aizawl 796001
21.government of Nagaland
Civil secretariat kohima 797004
Odisha secretariat,bhubaneshwar 751001
24.government of rajasthan
New secretariat ,gangtok   737101
26. Government of  Tamilnadu
27. Government of  telangana
Rama   Krishna rao  bhawan   ,adarsh  nagar Hyderabad
28. Government of  tripura
29. Government of  uttar Pradesh
Lal bahadur shastri bhawan lucknow 226001
30. Government of uttrakahnd
Subhash road, uttrakhand dehradun 248001
31. Government of west Bengal
Sarat   chatterjee    road   ,mandirtalashivpur,howrah
32.union territory of Andaman and nicobar
Andaman and nicobar, portblair 744101
33. union territory of delhi
Delhi secretariat ,ip estate new delhi 110002
34. union territory of puducherry
Main building , chief puducherry 605001
Through registrar general
George town Chennai 600108
Through registrar general
Nyay marg ,prayagraj 211001
Through registrar general
Jawaharlal Nehru marg ,patna 800028
41.jammu Kashmir high court
Through registrar general
Noor bagh ,Srinagar 190009
Through registrar general
Chandni chowl ,cuttack 753002
Through registrar general
45.madhya Pradesh high court
Through registrar general
Marine drive ,kochi 682031
Through registrar general
Justice sb marg new delhi 110003
49.himachal Pradesh high court
Through registrar general
50.punjab and Haryana high court
Through registrar general
Sector 1 chandigarh 160001
Through registrar general
53.uttrakhand high court
Through registrar general
Ghansi bazaar ,madina 500066
59.andhra  Pradesh high court
Through registrar general
Hon’ble The Chief Justice of India and His Lordship’s
Justices of the Supreme Court of India.
The Humble petition of the Petitioner above named.
1.   That the present writ petition is being filed
seeking issuance of Writ in the    nature of Mandamus,
order, Direction or any other Appropriate Writ as
fundamental  rights  of   the   persons  who   are
involved in crminal cases ie- (accused ,victims and
prisoners)    has   been violated    as   under   Article   21
and seeking relief by invoke      the power   under Article
142 of the constitution of india for _appointment of
judges  and   magistrates    in  the   subordinate   criminal
courts  of   india  as   per  the   decision  held   by   this
court  in   All india   judges    association   vs   union of
india& ors 2001. Attached as Annexure 1, Page no 34-35
1a . That the Petitioner-in-person has not represented
any government authority for the relief          claimed    in
the  instant   writ   petition   as   it  is  not   necessary
because    it   is    already     in    the   knowledge     of
authorities/department that a large number of judges
are required . Attached as Annexure 2,Page no 3 6 - 4 1
1b. That the Petitioner-in-person has not filed any
other Petition either before this Hon’ble           Court   or
any other court seeking similar relief.
2.That the     petitioner    named   shrikant   Prasad   is a
final   year   student    of    law   at   faculty    of   law
,university         of         delhi.email         id        –
barristershrikant@gmail.com, Mobile no-9990110881
Petitioner is a student and do not have any source            of
income and petitioner Proof of identity is attached in
the petition.   Attached as page no 53
3.That  the   petitioner     has   based  the     instant   writ
petition   from    authentic    information     and    documents
obtained  from    various   government   departments,portals
and RTI applications.
4.This   writ    petition     arises    out     of   with    the
observation    of    the   long    pendency     of    cases    in
subordinates courts of India for           years     and years
where more than 2.99 crore cases are pending 56000
cases pending since more than30years.
5.The  delays    in   the  administration        of     justice
causing mental harassment of victims and accuse which
is the denial of Article 21 of the constitution of
India  as  held    in   Hussainara   Khatoon     (IV)   v  Home
Secretary, State of Bihar [(1980) 1 SCC 98 by this
honourable court.
6.That  the   Petitioner-in-person      has   not   represented
any government authority for the relief            claimed     in
the  instant   writ   petition    as  it   is    not   necessary
because it is already in the knowledge         of
authorities/department that a large number of judges
are required to adjudicate the matters expeditiously.
Attached as Annexure 2 ,page 36-41
7.That the    petition, if   allowed,   would benefit the
citizens of this country generally as rule of law is
essential for democracy and such brazen violation of
law by the respondents can be stopped by the orders
of this Hon’ble Court only.
8.That the persons affected by such acts of       the State
are numerous and are not in a position to approach the
Hon’ble   Court   hence  the   petitioner  is  filing   the
present PIL on behalf of such affected persons.
9. That the present petitioner has not filed any other
petition in any High Court or the Supreme Court of
India on the subject matter of the present petition.
10.Court may impose exemplary cost if it find that the
petition was frivolous or instituted with oblique or
malafide motive or lacks bonafide.
A.There   are   3,44,73,068   Cases   pending  in   India’s
district courts out of which 2,50,23,800 are pending
in criminal side. The issue of judicial backlog and
delay is widely acknowledged and extensively written
about,   but   it   seems   to  be  nowhere close  to   being
resolved.    Today,   a   litigant  can  be stuck  in   court
corridors for decades if a case goes all the way to the
Supreme Court. The original litigant may not be alive by
the time the apex court resolves the issue. It is a
stretch to describe any verdict given after
decades as ‘justice’. Attached as Annexure 3,page 42
B)apart from the cost to the litigant, these delays
imply that judges, particularly those in the superior
courts are hearing older cases rather than         dealing
with current pressing issues. Such delays also favour
the illegal actions of one        party, while prolonging
the violation of the rights of the other. The root
cause of this level of pendency is the shortage of
judges.Issues are starting with listing practices.
No of judges in per million population –Annexure 4 page 43
C)On an average, a district court judges or magistrate
has about 50 to 60 cases listed before him daily. It
is impossible to meaningfully hear so many cases in a
day. Multiple adjournments thus become inevitable. This
happens every day in each     court
across the country, throughout the year. The backlogs
keep piling up as daily problems intensify over time
and  become    structural   problems     that    cripple   the
functioning of the institution.
D)There are 20 judges per 10 lakh people in the country
as compared to 17 in 2014, the Law Ministry said on 6
february 2019 which is a very low in        numbers to deals
with the cases of 133 crore
population. Attached as Annexure 4,page 43.
E)Over   5,000   vacancies   are   vacant    in    district   &
subordinate    courts the    submission    made by minister
of state for law PP Chaudhary in Parliament on 18th
December 2018 in parliament.
Data attached as Annexure 5,page no -44
F)We are fortunate that the eCourts project has made
available vast quantities of judicial data. Such wide
availability   of  judicial   data   enables   us   to    dive
deeper  into   the   problem   of   pendency    to   determine
specific   causes.    It  helps    us   identify     that   the
pendency problem varies from state to state and even
from district to district.
G)The causes of pendency range from inadequate staff
support and lawyers asking for frequent adjournments
to witnesses not turning up and the lawyer being
underprepared.       There      is     no     one-size-fits-all
administering      justice.     The    establishment     of     a
dedicated and trained cadre to provide support to the
judiciary    through    case   management,     assistance   with
budgeting, handling administrative tasks and ensuring
maintenance of court infrastructure will              go a long
way in enabling the judiciary to focus on the
administration of justice.
.Rti application transferred to all high courts for vacant posts
Attached as Annexure 6, Page 45
.Reply of rti by Guwahati and uttrakhand high court   Attached as
1. are the respondent legally justified in not
increasing     the  number     of    magistrates    and
judges     in   subordinate     courts   of  India   by
appointments.
2. Does the pendency of cases for several years
in subordinate courts not denies the right to
life granted to the citizens of India by the
constitution of India 1950.
3. Does the omission of respondents in increasing
the numbers of judicial officers at districts
courts     justified      by     non-compliance      of
directions used by this honourable court in
association & Ors vs Union of India and Ors 2002
4. Does such a long-awaited conclusion of cases are
fruitful for the victims and accused.
5. if an accuse is ultimately gained acquittal after
years then would the unlawful detention not a
violation of constitutional rights.
The problem of pendency is known to everyone who is
somehow involved in seeking justice. Pendency is a
problem arising due to a long clog of different sets
of problems with different natures that were left
unnoticed. The Stakeholders are also significant for
the purpose of the accumulation of the backlog at an
increasing rate. All those problems increase the time
consumed by the Court of Law, resulting in a delay in
providing       the Justice sought.   Major  among   those
A.       ADMINISTRATIVE PROBLEM:    Our legal system is
clogged with pending cases, and the         situation has
deteriorated not just because of a lack of judges to
dispose of the matter, but other factors have also
contributed to the worsening of the situation of huge
arrears    of   pending    cases   in   the   country.   One
important factor can be categorized as administrative
problems, which is not given much emphasis, but its
role   in    worsening    of   the    situation   has   been
paramount. A report published by the Supreme Court of
India mentioned that the subordinate judiciary has
not  been     provided   with   a   sufficient   number   of
courtrooms,       support     staff      and    residential
accommodation for judges, which leads to a severe
shortage of resources required to dispose of a case
within   a   reasonable    period   of   time. This   report
stated that the subordinate judiciary requires more
than 5000 courtrooms to accommodate more than 20000
judicial officers, and the number of courtrooms in
the present scenario is not sufficient to cater to
the demand. These problems do not end here; there is
also a need to fill more than 40000 staff positions,
which have been lying vacant for many years and the
administration has done very little to address this
issue. The data provided reveals the deteriorating
condition   of  our   subordinate    judiciary   along  with
constant pressure under which they are working every
day due to a lack of human resources. These problems
require immediate attention along with proper actions
from the administration with the objective to resolve
them [ii]. Along with heavy working burden already on
the subordinate judiciary due to the reasons above,
the problem is grave due to fewer working days.
Infrastructure is the basic requirement for anybody
to work   to   the   best  of   its ability.    Courts have
formed  devoted    stakes   for   court  administrators   to
benefit   court   processes,     enhance   case   drive  for
productive    judicial    time.    But  some   courts   have
occupied up such posts and many courts have not yet
filled the devoted stakes so far. Old technology used
in administration and the slow change is a heavy loss
on adaptation and a hindrance to the efficiency of
courts.   The    low   budget    allocation    towards   the
Judicial infrastructure has resulted in a depleted
structure of buildings which is miserably grim due to
which   the   Judges   are   unable   to  deliver    quality
judgments in efficient time.
Every   case   that   is  heard   in  the   Court   of  Law,
requires a certain time to be heard before it attains
finality. But the time invested in the investigation,
hearing of the cases, and delivery of the judgment is
not the best effective and efficient utilization of
the Courts Time. In January; 2019, the Supreme Court
Judge asked People not to file frivolous cases and
stop wasting the time of the courts. Many procedural
conducts are not being followed by the Courts, like,
providing   more    than  three   adjournments   in   cases,
which is not advised by the Law and leads to the
pendency of cases.
It  is   an  evident    situation  that   if  a   person  is
overwhelmed by the work supposed to be completed by
him, the effectiveness and efficiency of the person
will deteriorate at a high scale. A similar situation
can  be   seen   in   the  Indian   Judiciary,   where   the
Judicial officers are overwhelmed by the count of
cases they have to deal with, and with the continuous
addition of new cases. The problem of pendency arose
due to the lack of the appointment of new Judicial
officers to match the requirement and fill up the
vacant positions.
The new cases are increasing exponentially. As the
literacy rate is increasing, the awareness of the
people regarding their rights and the obligations the
state has towards them is increasing too. This has
resulted in approaching the Court of Law in case of
any violation, more frequently than it was seen in
the  past.  Among   the   proportion  of  Pending  Cases,
major cases are related to the State or the Centre.
There   are   many    problems    identified   with   the
Administration    of    police   which   are   frequently
handicapped for the need for recent and technical
equipment to accumulate evidence. Even with a lot of
inspiring examples that are results of the police
administration’s hard work and devotion, the lack of
orderliness made by the old technology used by them
and the slow rate of change cannot be overlooked.
Recently the working hours of subordinate courts in
India is from 10 am to 5 pm even thereafter it is
more common that judges come around 10:30 am. The
regular matters are dealt with 10:00 am to 1:00 pm
and after the lunch hours, the Fresh matters of daily
basis are taken up.
what the common practice of the judges is that if
there are no fresh cases or there are less fresh
cases on any particular day they never hesitate in
leaving the court.
It is also undisputed that the subordinate courts are
closed   on    Saturday   as   well   except   the   remand
magistrate who remains available 24*7.
Pendency    is    a  problem   that   requires   different
perspectives to be resolved, as it has many factors.
All  the  problems    that   are  major  reasons   for  the
increasing   pendency    rate   can  be  dealt  with   some
advancement in the procedure and perspective.
1. Judicial administration
The  clogged  legal  system   of   our  country can  be
unclogged by enhancing the existing situation and by
providing a better environment to work.
i.) For productivity enhancement: Due to a
lack of administrative support the productivity of
the Judicial system can be enhanced again by some
a.) The number of days of work that is done in higher
courts should be increased so the judicial officers
are able to handle an increased number of cases by
their end to overcome the pendency.
a.) In the thirteenth Finance Commission report, it
was mentioned that in    view   of  enhancement in  the
management of the courts and resultant improvement in
the disposition in the pendency can be dealt with the
appointment of professionals in the name of court
managers to assist the judges. A lack of staff is a
major dent in the management of the courts. As per
the supreme court’s report, it was evident that the
Subordinate courts were understaffed because of which
the management of the courtrooms is difficult. This
was a major step towards better management.
b.) In accordance with the constitution of India i.e.
Article 127 and 128, the Supreme Court and the High
Court  can  act   in  order  to  appoint   effective  and
efficient Judges with experience as AD-HOC Judges and
presence of retired Judges.
iii.) Definite time frame:
Time is a factor that if used more than required, to
complete a task, can create a problem. Similarly, in
the judiciary, the consumption of the time by the
Court more   than   required in one case creates      the
problem of pendency. There are many changes that can
be  adopted  to   resolve  and  reduce   the  problem  of
pendency at a higher rate. Those being:
a) There should be a specification regarding the time
consumption with regards to an offence and the trial
b) There should be an annual target and action plan
for subordinate Judiciary and high courts for the
disposal of cases every year which can make the pace
of a case go a little faster, thus, coping up to the
c) Stricter   rules of  conduct to be   applicable  to
officials  to   ensure adequate  performance   in  the
duties and tasks which are a part of creating the
problem of pendency.
iv.) Strict regulation with regards to adjournment of
the cases: As per the guidelines of the Code of civil
procedure order number 17 of rules 1, the Court of
law should provide adjournment of a case not more
than three times to parties. There is an ignorance of
the order in the practical practice that creates an
opportunity for people to misuse and wastes the time
of the Hon’ble courts by having adjournments more
than three times in their respective cases.
1.) There should be the establishment of new Non-
Judicial bodies for the Subordinate Courts as well so
that they are not indulged in completing the non-
Judicial aspects of the trial.
1.) Infrastructure resolve:
A quality infrastructure can help a person
complete  assigned  work  in  the most  effective and
efficient manner possible. Similarly, in the Judicial
System, the infrastructure plays an important role in
the enhancement of delivery. Many resolves can be
adopted with regards to the infrastructure:
i.) Land for infrastructure is important and it is
the duty of the state to provide such land for the
formation of the Court Premises which is best suited.
And  due  to  lack of   abundance of  the  ground the
infrastructure should be undertaken to be vertical.
Because of which there will be a more effective usage
of space at the allocated land.
ii.) The change in the low budget allocation towards
the Judicial infrastructure has to be initiated as a
result of which the depleted structure of buildings
which is miserably grim due to which the Judges are
unable  to  deliver   quality  judgments  in  the  most
efficient time can be exterminated.
The issue of pendency cannot be addressed unless the
problem of the shortage in the appointment of the
Judicial officers is dealt with. It is visible that
the Judiciary lacks in the number of the Judicial
officers and that is not compensated with the number
of new appointments that are being done but a new
framework is required to deal with the situation:
The one hundred and twentieth Law Commission of India
report  also  suggested   the  fixation  of  the  judge
strength formula.
The resolution of the issue pertaining to
the litigation is not the result of the new cases and
more   awareness   of   people   regarding   what   can
constitute an infringement in their right. It is also
a result of the non-dealing of the existent cases in
a quality manner. A person cannot be restrained from
the filing of the new case when they feel that their
right   has   been    violated.     But    the    Executive,
legislature and Judicial administration can play a
major role in dealing with existing cases and newly
filed cases in a planned manner:
1.) Pre-litigation Mediation can be a method that can
be undertaken towards the reduction of the Pendency
in  the   judicial   system.    In    this   method,    Legal
Services Authorities can regulate the inflow of the
cases   into   court    by   conducting      pre-litigation
mediation.   ADR   should  be    followed     in   order   to
discourage litigation.
2.)  For  the   settlement   of   the    Civil   and   Family
related matters, regularly organized Lok Adalats can
be planned and enacted upon. This action will reduce
the burden on the Judiciary and the System will be
able to overcome the Pendency.
3.) There is a huge workload on the Judiciary as they
have to deal with every possible claim irrespective
of it being a minor claim or a major claim. This
problem   can   be   addressed     by   setting     up   Gram
Nyayalayas, which can be an effective and efficient
way to manage these claims from rural areas.
4.)  Establishment     of   the  Legal   care  and   Support
centres   by  the High Judicial system        at the rural
areas or village areas to address the very grass root
level issues in order to make the State litigations
more effective and friendly to the litigants.
5.)   The    Courts   can    improve    their   ability   of
management by utilizing the Administrative mechanisms
Nyayalayas to their full potential. And set up more
tribunals Fast Track Courts (FTCs) and Special courts
for better managing the important cases in a faster
and more efficient manner.
1.  This    honourable    court   pleased   to  direct   All
respondents to fill the vacant posts of subordinate
courts    and    also    to   increase    the    number   of
subordinates    courts   judges  in   the  proportion   laid
down in All India judges associations &ors versus
union of India &ors 2002 sc.
2.Direct the respondents to make formal guidelines
and rule of procedures for the appointment of judges
within the time-bound duration, as currently it takes
years from the date of the examination till selection
and joining of posts.
3.Direct the respondents to take care and maintain
the    infrastructures       of      subordinates      courts,  as
currently    most   of    the   subordinates      courts    are in
dilapidated conditions which causes obstructions in
the proper administration of justice.
4.this honourable court is pleased to issue any writ,
directions or any order or anything in the interest
of justice as thinks fit with exercising powers under
article 142 of the constitution of India.
1 january 2021              barristershrikant@gmail.com