Sinnam Singh vs. State of MP and Ors.
Shri Prashant Sharma, Counsel for the petitioner.
Shri Varun Kaushik, Govt. Advocate for the respondents/
This petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India
has been filed against the order dated 02/01/2018 passed by
Commandant, 2nd Battalion, SAF, Gwalior thereby putting the
services of the petitioner to an end under Regulation 59 of the
(2)    Against the said order, the petitioner had preferred an
appeal which has been dismissed by order dated 09/04/2018
passed by Inspector General of Police, SAF, Gwalior Range,
Gwalior. Thereafter, the petitioner preferred a mercy appeal
which too has been dismissed by the respondents by the
impugned order dated 30/08/2018.
(3)    It is the case of the petitioner that an advertisement was
issued in the year 2014 for recruitment on the post of Constable
and after due medical and character verification, the petitioner
was granted appointment by appointment order dated 01/01/2014
(Annexure P4). The petitioner was appointed on probation of two
years. One of the conditions of the appointment order was that in
the light of Rule 12 of the Madhya Pradesh Government Servants
Sinnam Singh vs. State of MP and Ors.
(Temporary and Quasi-permanent Service) Rules, 1960 ( in short
''the Rules,1960''), the services of the petitioner can be
discontinued by giving one month's notice or one month's
advance salary in lieu thereof.
(3)    It is submitted that on account of sickness of the father of
the petitioner, he remained absent from his duties w.e.f.
15/04/2017 and did not submit his joining thereafter. Therefore,
the services of the petitioner were discontinued by order dated
02/01/2018 as per the provisions of Regulation 59 of the Madhya
Pradesh Police Regulations. It is the case of the petitioner that
since the father of the petitioner was of old-age and had fallen
sick which was in the knowledge of the Department, yet the
services of the petitioner were put to an end. The petitioner
preferred an appeal along with medical documents of the sickness
of the father of the petitioner but the same was not taken into
consideration and the appeal was rejected. The copy of the
medical certificates of the sickness of the father of the petitioner
have been filed as Annexure P5. Thereafter, the mercy appeal has
also been dismissed.
(4)    It is submitted by the Counsel for the petitioner that in the
impugned order dated 02/01/2018, the respondent No.4 did not
disclose the reasons for putting the services of the petitioner to an
Sinnam Singh vs. State of MP and Ors.
end but in the appeal, it was specifically mentioned that the
petitioner was in habit of remaining on unauthorized absence and
on one occasion, one minor penalty was also imposed. Multiple
opportunities were given to the petitioner to improve his conduct
but he did not improve. The petitioner had remained on
unauthorized absence for 102 days from his Training Institute and
when he was sent back to his original Unit, then again he
remained on unauthorized absence for 54 days and accordingly, it
was held that from 15/04/2017 the petitioner remained on
unauthorized absence till passing of the impugned order dated
02/01/2018. It is submitted that the reason assigned by the
Appellate Authority is stigmatic in nature and, therefore, a
Departmental Enquiry should have been conducted against the
petitioner.  It is further submitted that the original period of
probation was for two years and according to Regulation 59 of
Madhya Pradesh Police Regulations, the period of probation can
be extended by further period of six months for two times. It is
submitted that since the petitioner was appointed in the year 2014
and although no specific order was issued thereby confirming him
in service but as the probation period of the petitioner was not
extended after completion of his three years (including the
extension period), therefore, it has to be presumed that the
Sinnam Singh vs. State of MP and Ors.
petitioner was confirmed in the service and accordingly, his
services could not have been terminated without holding a
(5)    Per contra, the petition is vehemently opposed by the
Counsel for the State. It is submitted that in the impugned order
dated 02/01/2018, no reasons were assigned, therefore, it was a
discontinuation simplictor without any allegation/stigma. Only in
the memo of appeal, as the petitioner had raised a question of
absence of reasons, therefore, in order to consider the grounds
raised in the appeal, the Appellate Authority has considered the
previous conduct of the petitioner, which cannot be said to be
stigmatic in nature. It is further submitted that there is no
provision of law which provides that if order of extension of
probation is not passed after completion of probation period, then
an employee shall be treated to be confirmed in the service.
(6)    Heard the learned Counsel for the parties.
(7)    So far as the factual aspects are concerned, it has not
disputed by the petitioner that he remained on unauthorized
absence for a period of 102 days in the Training Institute. When
he was sent back, he also did not attend in his Unit for a period of
54 days and from 15/04/2017 till passing of the impugned order
dated 02/01/2018, the petitioner was on unauthorized absence.
Sinnam Singh vs. State of MP and Ors.
The only explanation which he has given for his unauthorized
absence is that the father of the petitioner was sick. The petitioner
has filed the medical certificates purportedly issued by Medical
Officer (issued by Gazetted /Non-Gazetted Government Servant
of Madhya Pradesh). Undisputedly, the father of the petitioner
was not a Government employee. The petitioner has not filed any
medical prescriptions of his father to show that his father was
seriously sick. The petitioner also could not point out any legal
provision of law which authorizes an employee to remain on
unauthorized absence without informing and seeking leave from
the Department on any ground. The Government employee cannot
be permitted to remain on unauthorized absence without
informing the Department and specifically when the petitioner
was a Constable in SAF, which is a uniform disciplined force.
(8)    Accordingly, in absence of any medical prescriptions and
receipts of medicines, this Court is of the considered opinion that
the petitioner has failed to make out a prima facie case to show
that his father had fallen seriously sick. Even otherwise, in
absence of any prior sanction, the petitioner could not have
remained     on    unauthorized      absence    from     15/04/2017.
Furthermore, from the medical documents, it appears that the
father of the petitioner was suffering from joint pain, thus, it
Sinnam Singh vs. State of MP and Ors.
cannot be said that the father of petitioner was suffering from any
serious ailment.
(9)    The counsel for the petitioner could not point out any
provision of law which provides that in case if the probation
period is not extended after the period of three years (including
two extensions) from the date of appointment, then the petitioner
has to be treated as a confirmed employee.
(10) The Supreme Court in the case of Tarsem Lal Verma vs.
Union of India and Others, reported in (1997) 9 SCC 243 has
held that mere expiry of one year beyond the original two-year
period of probation would not result in automatic confirmation.
(11) The Supreme Court in the case of Registrar, High Court
of Gujarat vs. C.G. Sharma, reported in (2005) 1 SCC 132, has
held that even if the period of two years of probation expires and
the probationer is allowed to continue after a period of two years,
automatic confirmation cannot be claimed as a matter of right
because in terms of the Rules, the confirmation order can be
passed only if there is vacancy and the work is found to be
satisfactory, which are the prerequisites or preconditions for
(12) The Supreme Court in the case of C. V. Satheeshchandran
vs. General Manager, UCO Bank and Others, reported in
Sinnam Singh vs. State of MP and Ors.
(2008) 2 SCC 653, has held that expiry of the probation period
does not necessarily mean confirmation and at the end/ expiry of
the period of probation, normally an order confirming the officer
is required to be passed and if no such order is passed, he shall be
deemed to have continued on probation unless the terms of
appointment or the relevant rules governing the service
conditions provide otherwise.
(13) Under these circumstances, it would be appropriate to
consider the Service Rules governing the service conditions of
the employees of the State Government.
(14)     Rule 8 of Madhya Pradesh Civil Services (General
Conditions of Services) Rules, 1961 [in short '' the Rules, 1961'']
"8.Probation.- (1) A person appointed to a
service or post by direct recruitment shall ordinarily
be placed on probation for such period as may be
prescribed.
(2) The appointing authority may, for
sufficient reasons, extend the period of probation by a
further period not exceeding one year.
training and pass such departmental examination
during the period of his probation as may be
prescribed.
(4) The services of a probationer may be
terminated during the period of probation if in the
opinion of the appointing authority he is not likely to
shape into a suitable Government servant.
(5) The services of a probationer who has
not passed the departmental examination or who is
found unsuitable for the service or post may be
Sinnam Singh vs. State of MP and Ors.
terminated at the end of the period of his probation.
probation: and passing of the prescribed departmental
examination, if any, the probationer shall, if there is a
permanent post available, be confirmed in the service
or post to which he has been appointed, either a
certificate shall be issued in his favour by the
appointing authority to the effect that the probationer
would have been confirmed but for the non-
availability of the permanent post and that as soon as
a permanent post becomes available he will be
[(7) A probationer, who has neither been
confirmed, nor a certificate issued in his favour under
sub-rule (6), nor discharged from service under sub-
rule (4), shall be deemed to have been appointed as a
temporary Government servant with effect from the
date of expiry of probation and his conditions of
service shall be governed by the Madhya Pradesh
Government Servants (Temporary and Quasi-
Rule 2(d) and Rule 12 of Rules, 1960 read as under:-
"2. In these rules, unless there is anything
(d) "Temporary service" means officiating or
substantive service in a temporary post, and
officiating service in a permanent post, under State
Government and also includes the period of leave
with allowance taken while on temporary service and
complete years of approved war-service, which have
been counted for fixation of pay and seniority.
12.(a) Subject to any provision contained in the
order of appointment or in any agreement between the
Government and the temporary Government servant
who is not in quasi-permanent service shall be liable
to termination at any time by notice in writing given
either by the Government servant to the appointing
authority or by the appointing authority to the
Sinnam Singh vs. State of MP and Ors.
[Provided that the services of any such
Government servant may be terminated forthwith and
on such termination, the Government servant shall be
entitled to claim a sum equivalent to the amount of his
pay plus allowances for the period of the notice at the
same rates at which he was drawing them immediately
before such termination or, as the case may be, for the
period by which such notice falls short of one month :]
Provided further that the payment of allowances
shall be subject to the conditions under which such
allowances are admissible.
(b) The period of such notice shall be one
month unless otherwise agreed between the Government
(15)    Rules 8(7) of the Rules, 1961 provides that a Probationer,
who has neither been confirmed, nor a certificate issued in his
favour under sub-rule (6), nor discharged from service under sub-
rule(4), shall be deemed to have been appointed as a temporary
Government servant with effect from the date of expiry of
probation and his conditions of service shall be governed by the
(16) From the plain reading of Rule 12 of the Rules, 1960, it is
clear that the services of a temporary Government employee are
liable to be terminated at any time by notice in writing given
either by the Government servant to the appointing authority or
by the appointing authority to the Government servant. Provided
that the services of any Government servant may be terminated
forthwith and on such termination, the Government servant shall
Sinnam Singh vs. State of MP and Ors.
be entitled to claim a sum equivalent to the amount of his pay
plus allowances for the period of the notice at the same rates at
which he was drawing them immediately before such termination
or as the case may be, for the period by which such notice falls
short of one month.
(17)    Thus, it is clear that the services of temporary employee
can be terminated by issuing one month's notice or by making
payment of one month's advance salary in lieu of notice. If the
order dated 02/01/2018 is tested in the light of Rule 12 of the
Rules, 1960, then it is clear that neither one month's notice has
been given nor one month's salary in advance has been paid in
lieu of the notice as required under Rule 12 of the Rules, 1960.
(18)    As per Rule 12(b) of the Rules, 1960, the period of notice
shall be one month notice unless otherwise agreed between the
Government and Government servant.
(19)    Now the next question for consideration is as to whether
the order dated 02/01/2018 is bad in law in absence of one
month's notice or advance salary of one month or not?
(20)     Rule 12 of the Rules, 1960, provides that in case of
immediate termination, an employee can claim a sum equivalent
to the amount of his pay of one month. The use of words “ is
entitled to claim'' clearly indicates that the instant termination
Sinnam Singh vs. State of MP and Ors.
without one month's salary would be an irregularity and can be
rectified by directing the respondents to pay one month's salary in
lieu of one month's notice.
(21)    Under these circumstances, this Court is of the considered
opinion that the impugned order dated 02/01/2018 (Annexure P3)
passed Commandant, 2nd Battalion, SAF, Gwalior is required to
be modified and accordingly, it is directed that the petitioner shall
be entitled for one month's salary in lieu of one month's notice.
With aforesaid modification, the orders dated 02/01/2018,
09/04/2018 and 30/08/2018 are hereby affirmed. It is directed that
the petitioner shall be entitled for one month's salary in lieu of
one month's notice as provided under Rule 12 (b) of the Rules,
1960. Let one month's salary be paid to the petitioner within a
period of three months from today.
(22)     With aforesaid observations, this petition is finally
disposed.