State of Himachal Pradesh and others
Whether approved for reporting?1 Yes
For the Petitioner            :       Mr. Kush Sharma, Advocate
vice Mr. Raj Negi, Advocate.
For the Respondents:                   Mr. Ashok Sharma, Advocate
Bhupinder Thakur and Mr.
The short question that arises for consideration
in this petition is whether a woman employee working as
Whether the reporters of the local papers may be allowed to see the Judgment?Yes
Language Teacher on contract basis with the Government is
entitled to avail maternity leave even in case where she
gets the child through arrangement by surrogate parents?
2.            The petitioner joined as a Language Teacher on
and is currently posted at Government
petitioner was blessed with a baby on 10.09.2020 through
surrogacy treatment from Fortis La Femme Hospital S-549
The petitioner had applied for maternity leave to the
District Kullu( respondent No.4), who in turn forwarded the
same to 3rd respondent i.e. Deputy Director, Higher
Education, Kullu, seeking clarification as to whether the
petitioner is entitled     for maternity leave on surrogacy.
H   However, no action whatsoever
application of the petitioner, constraining
instant   petition,    seeking   therein   a     direction       to     the
respondents to sanction/grant the maternity leave to the
petitioner.
3.            The respondents have filed short reply wherein
they have not denied that the petitioner had been blessed
with a baby through surrogacy and had applied for
maternity leave. The only ground taken for non grant of
the leave was that as per Notification of H.P. Government
issued vide Finance Department No. Fin.(C)-A(3)-1/2008
Loose dated 21.12.2017, maternity leave is admissible on
adoption of a child as per Rule 43(1) of CCS (Leave) Rules
1972 for 180 days, but there is no clarification in the said
notification regarding admissibility of maternity leave to a
female Government employee on surrogacy.
We have heard the learned counsel for the
parties and have gone through the material placed on
record.
The question of becoming parents through
surrogacy came to be considered by the Hon’ble Supreme
Court in Baby Manji Yamada versus Union of India and
H   another (2008) 13 SCC 518. Even though, the dispute
therein was between biological parents and host, however,
various forms of surrogacy were discussed by the Hon’ble
Supreme Court in the said judgment from paragraphs 8 to
16 which read as follows:
“8.   Surrogacy   is       a   well     known        method        of
reproduction whereby a woman agrees to become
pregnant for the purpose of gestating and giving
birth to a child she will not raise but hand over to a
contracted party. She may be the child's genetic
mother (the more traditional form for surrogacy) or
she may be, as a gestational carrier, carry the
pregnancy to delivery after having been implanted
with an embryo. In some cases surrogacy is the only
available option for parents who wish to have a child
that is biologically related to them.
9. The word "surrogate", from Latin "subrogare",
means "appointed to act in the place of". The
intended parent(s) is the individual or couple who
intends to rear the child after its birth.
10. In "traditional surrogacy" (also known as the
Straight method) the surrogate is pregnant with her
own biological child, but this child was conceived
C  with the intention of relinquishing the child to be
raised by others; by the biological father and
possibly his spouse or partner, either male or
ig  h   female. The child may be conceived via home
artificial insemination using fresh of frozen sperm or
impregnated via IUI (intrauterine insemination), or
ICI (intra cervical insemination) which is performed
H       11. In "gestational surrogacy" (also know as the
Host method) the surrogate becomes pregnant via
embryo transfer with a child of which she is not the
biological mother. She may have made an
arrangement to relinquish it to the biological
mother or father to raise, or to a parent who is
themselves unrelated to the child (e. g. because the
child was conceived using egg donation, germ
donation or is the result of a donated embryo). The
surrogate mother may be called the gestational
carrier.
12. "Altruistic surrogacy" is a situation where the
surrogate receives no financial reward for her
pregnancy or the relinquishment of the child
(although usually all expenses related to the
pregnancy and birth are paid by the intended
parents such as medical expenses, maternity  .
clothing, and other related expenses).
13. "Commercial surrogacy" is a form of surrogacy
in which a gestational carrier is paid to carry a child
to maturity in her womb and is usually resorted to
by well off infertile couples who can afford the cost
involved or people who save and borrow in order to
complete their dream of being parents. This medical
procedure is legal in several countries including in
India where due to excellent medical infrastructure,
high international demand and ready availability of
poor surrogates it is reaching industry proportions.
Commercial surrogacy is sometimes referred to by
the emotionally charged and potentially offensive
C  terms "wombs for rent", "outsourced pregnancies"
or "baby farms".
14. Intended parents may arrange a surrogate
ig  h   pregnancy because a woman who intends to parent
is infertile in such a way that she cannot carry a
pregnancy to term. Examples include a woman who
has had a hysterectomy, has a uterine
malformation, has had recurrent pregnancy loss or
H       has a healthy condition that makes it dangerous for
her to be pregnant. A female intending parent may
also be fertile and healthy, but unwilling to undergo
pregnancy.
15. Alternatively, the intended parent may be a
single male or a male homosexual couple.
16.   Surrogates   may    be    relatives,      friends,      or
previous strangers. Many surrogate arrangements
are made through agencies that help match up
intended parents with women who want to be
surrogates for a fee. The agencies often help
manage the complex medical and legal aspects
involved. Surrogacy arrangements can also be
made independently. In compensated surrogacies .
the amount a surrogate receives varies widely from
almost nothing above expenses to over $ 30,000.
Careful screening is needed to assure their health
as the gestational carrier incurs potential obstetrical
risks.”
It is no longer res integra that a female
contractual employee/adhoc employee is entitled                             to
maternity leave at par with the female regular employee.
Reference in this regard can conveniently be made to the
judgment rendered by the Division Bench of this Court of
which one of us (Justice Tarlok Singh Chauhan) was a
member in ‘State of H.P. and others versus Sudesh
Kumari’ 2015 (1) Him. L.R.(DB) 36, wherein it was held
“8. The claim of maternity leave is founded on the
grounds of fair play and social justice. There cannot
be discrimination and if any discrimination is made,
it is in breach of Articles 14 and 15 of the
Constitution. Articles 41, 42, and 43 deals with the
subject and we deem it appropriate to reproduce the
"41.Right to work, to education and to public
assistance in certain cases.- The State shall,
within the limits of its economic capacity and
unemployment, old age, sickness and
development, make effective provision for
securing the right to work, to education and
disablement, and in          other   cases  of
undeserved want.
42. Provision for just and humane conditions
of work and maternity relief.- The State shall
make provision for securing just and humane
conditions of work and for maternity relief.
43. Living wage, etc., for workers.- The State
ou    shall endeavour to secure, by suitable
legislation or economic organization or in any
other way, to all workers, agricultural,
rt  industrial or otherwise, work, a living wage,
conditions of work ensuring a decent
standard of life and full enjoyment of leisure
and social and cultural opportunities and, in
C        particular, the State shall endeavour to
promote cottage industries on an individual or
co-operative basis in rural areas."
ig  h   9. In case titled Municipal Corporation of Delhi v.
Female Workers and anr., 2000 3 SCC 224, it has
H             "27. The provisions of the Act which have
been set out above would indicate that they
are wholly in consonance with the Directive
Principles of State Policy, as set out in Article
39 and in other Articles, specially Article 42. A
woman employee, at the time of advanced
pregnancy cannot be compelled to undertake
hard labour as it would be detrimental to her
health and also to the health of the foetus. It
is for this reason that it is provided in the Act
that she would be entitled to maternity leave
for certain periods prior to and after delivery.
We have scanned the different provisions of
the Act, but we do not find anything
contained in the Act which entitles only
regular women employees to the benefit of
maternity leave and not to those who are
engaged on casual basis or on muster roll on
daily wage basis.
28. The Industrial Tribunal, which has given
an award in favour of the respondents, has
noticed that women employees have been
engaged by the Corporation on muster roll,
that is to say, on daily wage basis for doing
various kinds of works in projects like
construction of buildings, digging of trenches,
making of roads, etc., but have been denied
the benefit of maternity leave. The Tribunal
has found that though the women employees
were on muster roll and had been working for
the Corporation for more than 10 years, they
were not regularized. The Tribunal, however,
came to the conclusion that the provisions of
the Maternity Benefit Act had not been
applied to the Corporation and, therefore, it
C   felt that there was a lacuna in the Act. It
further felt that having regard to the
activities of the Corporation, which had
employed more than a thousand women
ig  h    employees, it should have been brought
within the purview of the Act so that the
maternity benefits contemplated by the Act
could be extended to the women employees
of the Corporation. It felt that this lacuna
could be removed by the State Govt. by
H        issuing the necessary notification under the
Proviso to Section 2 of the Maternity Act. This
Proviso lays down as under :
"Provided that the State Government may,
with the approval of the Central Government,
after giving not less than two month's notice
of its intention of so doing, by notification in
the Official Gazette, declare that all or any of
the provisions of this Act shall apply also to
any other establishment or class of
establishments,      industrial,   commercial,
agricultural or otherwise."
30. We appreciate the efforts of the Industrial
Tribunal in issuing the above directions so as
to provide the benefit of the Act to the
muster roll women employees of the
Corporation. This direction is fully in
consonance with the reference made to the
Industrial Tribunal. The question referred for
adjudication has already been reproduced in
the earlier part of the judgment. It falls in two
(i) Whether the female workers working on
muster roll should be given any maternity
(ii) If so, what directions are necessary in this
regard.
33. A just social order can be achieved only
C   when inequalities are obliterated and
everyone is provided what is legally due.
Women who constitute almost half of the
segment of our society have to be honoured
ig  h    and treated with dignity at places where they
work to earn their livelihood. Whatever be
the nature of their duties, their avocation and
the place where they work; they must be
provided all the facilities to which they are
entitled. To become a mother is the most
H        natural phenomena in the life of a woman.
Whatever is needed to facilitate the birth of
child to a woman who is in service, the
employer has to be considerate and
sympathetic towards her and must realise
the physical difficulties which a working
woman would face in performing her duties
at the work place while carrying a baby in the
womb or while rearing up the child after
birth. The Maternity Benefit Act, 1961 aims to
provide all these facilities to a working
woman in a dignified manner so that she
may overcome the state of motherhood
honourably, peaceably, undeterred by the
fear of being victimised for forced absence
during the pre or post-natal period."
10. In Ms. Sonika Kohli & Anr. vs. Union of India,
2004 3 SLJ 54 CAT, it has been held in paras 12 and
13, the relevant portion of which is quoted as
"12. An almost a new point of controversy
has been raised with regard to the
admissibility of maternity leave to female
teachers. In some of the O.As. it has been
prayed that the benefit of maternity leave,
which has hitherto been denied by the
ou       respondent-Administration, be directed to be
extended in accordance with the rules. Mr.
R.P. Bali, learned Counsel for some of the
rt     applicants urged that the action of the
respondents in denying the benefit of
maternity leave like other regular employees
is violative of the principles enshrined in
C           Articles 14 and 15 of the Constitution of
India as it denies the benefit of beneficial
provisions of law to a female teacher. Mr.
N.K. Bhardwaj, learned Counsel for the
ig  h            Administration urged that maternity leave is
not admissible to contract employees as
they are not covered by the Punjab CSR
Vol.1, Part-1. According to him, the benefit of
maternity leave with pay is payable to
permanent/regular female employees and
H                that the Administration is justified in carving
out a distinction between the regular female
teachers and the teachers appointed on part
time or contract basis, as is in the present
case. Let us examine the respective
contentions of the parties.
13. The claim for maternity leave is founded
on grounds of fair play and social justice.
Before the advent of the Constitution and for
a sufficiently long time, thereafter it was
customary or say traditional for women to
stick to their homes but now they seek
various jobs so as to attain economic
independence by utilizing their talent,
education, industry etc. Sometimes the jobs
are taken up by them to overcome economic
hardship. For a woman to become a mother
is most natural phenomenon in her life.
Whatever is needed to facilitate the birth of
a child to a women who is in service, the
employer has to be considerate and
sympathetic towards her and must realize
the physical difficulties which a working
women would face in performing her duties
at work place while carrying a baby in the
womb or while bearing a child after birth.
Our constitution which, in its preamble,
promises social and economic justice,
ou    enshrines certain radical provisions in the
form of Articles 42 and 43 which deal with
the just and humane conditions of work and
rt  maternity relief as well as living wage
conditions of work ensuring a decent
standard of life, and full enjoyment of leisure
and social and cultural opportunities. These
C        principles are required to be followed by the
State as enjoined by Article 39. In the
background of these Articles, the Parliament
has enacted Maternity Benefit Act, 1961 (Act
ig  h         No. 53 of 1961) with a view to regulate the
employment        of   women       in   certain
establishments for certain periods before
and after child birth and to provide for
maternity    benefit    and     certain   other
H       11. It is also apt to reproduce para 3 of the
judgment delivered in Rattan Lal and others vs.
State of Haryana and others, 1985 3 SLR 548.
"3. We strongly deprecate the policy of the
State Government under which         'ad hoc'
teachers are denied the salary and
allowances for the period of the summer
vacation by resorting to the fictional breaks
of the type referred to above. These 'ad hoc'
teachers shall be paid salary and allowances
for the period of summer vacation as long as
they hold the office under this order. Those
who are entitled to maternity or medical
leave shall also be granted such leave in
accordance with the rules."
12. The Jammu and Kashmir High Court in case
titled Tasneem Firdous vs. State and others,2006 2
SLJ 699, held that the employees working on
contractual basis are also entitled to maternity
leave. The relevant portion of para 6 of the
judgment is reproduced as under:
ou     "6. In subjective context the matter assumes
a larger dimensions because it overflows the
rt   contours of an individual case or a singular
instance and almost borders on the rights of
women and obligation of the State to protect
and preserve them, to which, besides
C         statutory constitutional considerations, the
international covenants also bind the
government. Reference in this behalf may be
made to "Convention on the Elimination of
ig  h          all Forms of Discrimination against Women"
adopted by Community of nations on
18.12.1979 to which government of India too
13. In paras 6 and 37 of the judgment in Municipal
H       Corporation of Delhi v. Female Workers and anr.,
2000    3   SCC   224,     while       considering         the
constitutional contours of the matter, the Hon'ble
apex Court observed as under:
"6 …. It is in this background that we have
to look to our Constitution which, in
its Preamble, promises social and economic
justice. We may first look at the
Fundamental Rights contained in Chapter III
of the Constitution. Article 14 provides that
the State shall not deny to any person
equality before law or the equal protection
of the laws within the territory of India.
Dealing with this Article vis-a-vis the Labour
Laws, this Court in Hindustan Antibiotics Ltd.
v. Workmen, 1967 AIR(SC) 948, has held
that labour to whichever sector it may
belong in a particular region and in a
particular industry will be treated on equal
basis. Article 15 provides that the State shall
not discriminate against any citizen on
grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex,
place of birth or any of them. Clause (3) of
this Article provides as under :-
"(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent the
State from making any special provision for
women and children".
37 .."2. In order to prevent discrimination
C   against women on the grounds of marriage
or maternity and to ensure their effective
right to work, States Parties shall take
ig  h    (a) To prohibit, subject to the imposition of
sanctions, dismissal on the grounds of
pregnancy or of maternity leave and
discrimination in dismissals on the basis of
H        (b) To introduce maternity leave with pay or
with comparable social benefits without loss
of former employment, seniority or social
(c) To encourage the provision of the
necessary supporting social services to
enable parents to combine family obligations
with work responsibilities and participation in
public life, in particular through promoting
the establishment and development of a
network of child-care facilities;
(d) To provide special protection to women
during pregnancy in types of work proved to
be harmful to them.
3. Protective legislation relating to matters
covered in this article shall be reviewed
periodically in the light of scientific and
technological knowledge and shall be
revised, repealed or extended as necessary."
14. Having said so, the office memorandum dated
31.7.2009 and circular dated 2.9.2009, made by
the State are quashed and all female employees
whether on contract, ad hoc, permanent and
temporary are held entitled to materiality leave at
par with the regular employees.
15. For the reasons discussed herein above, the
applications, if any.”
Rule 43 of the CCS(Leave) Rules reads as under:
ig  h    (1) A female Government servant (including an
apprentice) with less than two surviving children
may be granted maternity leave by an authority
H        competent to grant leave for a period of 1[180 days]
from the date of its commencement.
(2) During such period, she shall be paid leave salary
equal to the pay drawn immediately before
proceeding on leave.
NOTE:- In the case of a person to whom Employees’
State Insurance Act, 1948 (34 of 1948), applies, the
amount of leave salary payable under this rule shall
be reduced by the amount of benefit payable under
the said Act for the corresponding period.
2[(3) Maternity leave not exceeding 45 days may
also be granted to a female Government servant
(irrespective of the number of surviving children)
during the entire service of that female Government
servant in case of miscarriage including abortion on
production of medical certificate as laid down in Rule
Provided that the maternity leave granted and
availed of before the commencement of the CCS
(Leave) Amendment Rules, 1995, shall not be taken
into account for the purpose of this sub-rule.]
(4) (a) Maternity leave may be combined with leave
of any other kind.
(b) Notwithstanding the requirement of production of
medical certificate contained in sub-rule (1) of Rule
30 or sub-rule (1) of Rule 31, leave of the kind due
and admissible (including commuted leave for a
period not exceeding 60 days and leave not due)
upto a maximum of 1[two years] may, if applied for,
C    be granted in continuation of maternity leave
granted under sub-rule (1).
(5) Maternity leave shall not be debited against the
leave account.”
Once, the respondents admit that the minor
child is that of the petitioner, then she is entitled to the
H   leave akin to the persons, who are granted leave in terms
of the rules (ibid).   The purpose of the said rules is for
proper bonding between the child and parents.                  Even, in
the case of adoption, the adoptive mother does not give
birth to the child, yet the necessity         of bonding of the
mother with the adopted child has been recognized by the
9.           This issue has been considered in detail by the
learned Single Judge of the Delhi High Court in Rama
Pandey versus Union of India and others 2015 Labour
Industrial Cases 3921 wherein it was held that the
commissioning mother’s entitlement to maternity leave
cannot be denied only on the ground that she did not bear
A Division Bench of the Bombay High Court in
Hema     Vijay       Menon             versus        State        of
Maharashtra and others AIR 2015 Bombay 231 while
following the aforesaid judgment observed as under:
ig  h            7. On hearing the learned counsel for the parties, it
appears that the Joint Director of Higher Education,
Nagpur, was not justified in refusing maternity leave
H                to   the   petitioner.        According       to
Dictionary, maternity means- motherhood. Maternity
means the period during pregnancy and shortly after
the child's birth. If Maternity means motherhood, it
would not be proper to distinguish between a natural
and biological mother and a mother who has
begotten a child through surrogacy or has adopted a
child from the date of his/ her birth. The object of
maternity    leave       is    to     protect      the     dignity      of
motherhood    by   providing    for   full    and     healthy
maintenance of the woman and her child. Maternity
leave is intended to achieve the object of ensuring
social justice to women. Motherhood and childhood
both require special attention. Not only are the
health issues of the mother and the child considered
while providing for maternity leave but the leave is
provided for creating a bond of affection between
the two. It is said that being a mother is one of the
most rewarding jobs on the earth and also one of the
most challenging. To distinguish between a mother
who begets a child through surrogacy and a natural
mother who gives birth to a child, would result in
insulting womanhood and the intention of a woman
to bring up a child begotten through surrogacy, as
her own. A commissioning mother like the petitioner
C  would have the same rights and obligations towards
the child as the natural mother. Motherhood never
ig  h   ends on the birth of the child and a commissioning
mother like the petitioner cannot be refused paid
maternity leave. A woman cannot be discriminated,
as far as maternity benefits are concerned, only on
H       the ground that she has obtained the baby through
surrogacy. Though the petitioner did not give birth to
the child, the child was placed in the secured hands
of the petitioner as soon as it was born. A newly born
child cannot be left at the mercy of others. A
maternity leave to the commissioning mother like
the petitioner would be necessary. A newly born child
needs rearing and that is the most crucial period
during which the child requires the care and
attention of his mother. There is a tremendous
amount of learning that takes place in the first year
stated    hereinabove,         would
of the baby's life, the baby learns a lot too. Also, the
bond of affection has to be developed. A mother, as
commissioning mother or a mother securing a child
through surrogacy. Any other interpretation would
result in frustrating the object of providing maternity
leave to a mother, who has begotten the child.
8. As rightly pointed out on behalf of the petitioner,
there is nothing in Rule 74 of the the Maharashtra
Civil Services (Leave) Rules, 1961, which would
disentitle a woman, who has attained motherhood
through the surrogacy procedure to maternity leave.
Rule 74 provides for maternity leave to a female
C  government employee. We do not find anything in
Rule 74 which disentitles the petitioner to maternity
leave, like any other female government servant,
ig  h   only because she has attained motherhood through
the route of surrogacy procedure. It is worthwhile to
note that by the Government Resolution dated
H       28.07.1995, maternity leave is not only provided to a
natural mother but is also provided to an adoptive
mother, who adopts a child on its birth. The only
reason for refusing maternity leave to the petitioner
is   that   there    is    nothing    in    the     Government
Resolution, dated 28.07.1995 for providing maternity
leave to the mother who begets the child through
surrogacy. If the Government Resolution, dated
28.07.1995 provides maternity leave to an adoptive
mother, it is difficult to gauge why maternity leave
should be refused to the mother, who secures the
any distinction whatsoever between an adoptive
child through surrogacy. In our view, there cannot be
mother that adopts a child and a mother that begets
a child through a surrogate mother, after implanting
an embryo in the womb of the surrogate mother. In
our view, the case of the mother who begets a child
through surrogacy procedure, by implanting an
embryo created by using either the eggs or sperm of
the intended parents in the womb of the surrogate
mother, would stand on a better footing than the
case of an adoptive mother. At least, there cannot be
any distinction between the two. Right to life under
Article 21 of the Constitution of India includes the
right to motherhood and also the right of every child
C  to full development. If the government can provide
maternity leave to an adoptive mother, it is difficult
ig  h   to digest the refusal on the part of the Government
to provide maternity leave to a mother who begets a
child through the surrogacy procedure. We do not
find any propriety in the action on the part of the
H       Joint   Director   of   Higher   Education,
rejecting the claim of the petitioner for maternity
leave. The action of the respondent Nos. 1 to 3 is
clearly arbitrary, discriminatory and violative of the
provisions of Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution of
India. It is useful to refer to the unreported judgment
of the Delhi High Court in the case of Rama Pande
vs. Union of India, and relied on by the learned
counsel for the petitioner, in this regard.”
11.       Similar reiteration of law can be found in the
judgment rendered by the learned Single Judge of the
Chhattisgarh High Court in
Limited and others 2017 Labour Industrial Cases
1506 wherein it was held as under:
“22.According to Shorter Oxford English Dictionary
(Fifth Edition), "maternity" means (1) the quality or
condition of being a mother; motherhood and (2) the
qualities or conduct characteristic of a mother;
motherliness. According to other Oxford English
Dictionaries, "maternity" means motherhood.
23. According to Black's Law Dictionary (Eighth
C   Edition), "maternity" means the state or condition of
motherhood.
mother,    especially       a    biological       one;
ig  h         24. Maternity means the period during pregnancy
and shortly after the child's birth. If maternity means
motherhood, it would not be proper to distinguish
H             between a natural and biological mother and a
mother who has begotten a child through surrogacy.
The object of maternity leave is to protect the
dignity of motherhood by providing for full and
healthy maintenance of the woman and her child.
Maternity leave is intended to achieve the object of
ensuring social justice to women. Motherhood and
childhood both require special attention. Not only are
the health issues of the mother and the child
considered while providing for maternity leave but
the leave is provided for creating a bond of affection
between the two.
25. Right to life under Article 21 of the Constitution
of India includes the right to motherhood and also
the right of every child to full development.
26. The Supreme Court in Lakshmi Kant Pandey (AIR
1984 SC 469) (supra) while expanding the scope of
right to life held that right to life includes the right to
motherhood and also the right of every child to full
development, and observed as under: -
"6. ... Children are a "supremely important
rt  national asset" and the future well-being of
the nation depends on how its children grow
and develop. The great poet Milton put it
admirably when he said: "Child shows the
C         man as morning shows the day" and the
Study Team on Social Welfare said much to
the same effect when it observed that "the
physical and mental health of the nation is
ig  h          determined largely by the manner in which it
is shaped in the early stages". The child is a
soul with a being, a nature and capacities of
its own, who must be helped to find them, to
grow into their maturity, into fulness of
physical and vital energy and the utmost
H              breadth, depth and height of its emotional,
intellectual and spiritual being; otherwise
there cannot be a healthy growth of the
27. In Municipal Corporation of Delhi (AIR 2000 SC
1274, paras 30 and 35) (supra), the question before
the Supreme Court was whether female workers
working in muster roll in the Corporation are entitled
for maternity benefit at par with regular employees
under the provisions of the Maternity Benefit Act,
1961. The Supreme Court noticed the constitutional
provisions contained in Articles 38, 39, 42 and 43 of
the Constitution of India and Sections 2 and 5 of the
Maternity Benefit Act, 1961 as well as Article 11 of
the "Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of
Discrimination against Women" adopted by the
United Nations on 18-12-1979 and held that female
workers working in muster roll are entitled to all
benefits conceived under the Maternity Benefit Act,
1961. It was observed as under: -
"33. ... To become a mother is the most
ou   natural phenomenon in the life of a woman.
Whatever is needed to facilitate the birth of
child to a woman who is in service, the
rt employer has to be considerate and
sympathetic towards her and must realise the
physical difficulties which a working woman
would face in performing her duties at the
C        work place while carrying a baby in the womb
or while rearing up the child after birth. ..."
38. These principles which are contained in
ig  h         Article 11, reproduced above, have to be read
into the contract of service between the
Municipal Corporation of Delhi and the women
employees (muster roll); and so read these
employees immediately become entitled to all
H             the benefits conceived under the Maternity
Benefit Act, 1961. We conclude our discussion
by providing that the direction issued by the
Industrial Tribunal shall be complied with by
the Municipal Corporation of Delhi by
approaching the State Government as also the
Central Government for issuing necessary
notification under the proviso to sub- section
(1) of Section 2 of the Maternity Benefit Act,
1961, if it has not already been issued. In the
meantime, the benefits under the Act shall be
provided to the women (muster roll)
employees of the Corporation who have been
working with them on daily wages."
12.          Article 42 of the Constitution of India reads as
“42. Provision for just and humane conditions
of work and maternity relief:- The State shall
make provision for securing just and humane
conditions of work and for maternity relief.”
It was long felt that the working women were
unable to depute their time towards their children due to
exigencies of service. Hence, the concept of grant of child
leave was introduced to ensure the welfare of the
child so as to enable the mother to avail child care leave
whenever she feels that the child needs the care. This is in
tune with the international covenants and treaties to which
India is a signatory.
14.          As rightly held by the Bombay High Court, the
object of the maternity leave is to protect the dignity of
H   motherhood by providing for full and healthy maintenance
to the woman and her child. Maternity leave is intended to
achieve the object of ensuring social justice to women.
Motherhood and childhood both require special attention.
15.          Not only are the health issues            of the mother
and the child     considered while      providing for maternity
leave, but the leave is provided for creating a bond                          of
affection between the two. To distinguish between                              a
mother who begets a child through surrogacy and a natural
mother, who gives birth to a child, would result in insulting
womanhood and the intention of a woman to bring up a
child begotten through surrogacy. Motherhood never ends
on the birth of the child and a commissioning mother
cannot be refused paid maternity leave. A woman cannot
discriminated,    as   far    as    maternity         benefits        are
concerned, only on the ground that she has obtained the
baby through surrogacy. A newly born child cannot be left
at the mercy of others as it needs rearing and that is the
most crucial period during which            the child requires care
and attention of his mother.            The tremendous amount of
learning that takes place in the first year of the baby’s life,
H   the baby learns a lot too. A bond of affection has also to be
developed.
16.         In view of the aforesaid discussion, we find merit
in this petition and the same is accordingly allowed and the
respondents are        directed to sanction/grant                 maternity
leave to the petitioner in terms of Rule 43(1) of the CCS
(Leave) Rules, 1972.    Pending application, if any, also
stands disposed of.