The advocates desirous of filing their cases before the High Court of Orissa
shall file their cases through e-filing portal of High Court. They are advised to register
themselves in the e-filing 3.0 version and file their case through e-filing facilities of
High Court. The link is provided in the website and is also given below for reference.
https://www.orissahighcourt.nic.in/e-filing/
https://filing.ecourts.gov.in/pdedev/
In case advocates are facing any difficulties in filing their cases, they may avail the
facilities at the e-filing counter of the respective Districts. The staff in-charge of the e-
filing centre shall assist the advocates for the purpose of e-filing.
The District Judges of the concerned districts where the Virtual High Court has
been established shall conduct hands on training programmes at least twice a month
for the first three months for the interested advocates at such time and date as they
deem fit depending upon the requirement and after three months as and when
required.     The   training  shall   be   imparted   by   the   Master    Trainer/  System
officer/System Assistant posted in the respective districts. Advocates are requested to
see the videos/FAQs in the website of the High court of Orissa whose link is provided
https://www.orissahighcourt.nic.in/e-filing/tutorials.php
i.   The advocate who have registered themselves in the e-filing portal and have
filed the cases are to make the payment through the e payment portal
whose link is given below:
ii.    Payment of court fee through e-filing portal shall be same as applicable for
High court provided under Part IV, Chapter XX of the Rules of the High
Court of Orissa 1948.
i.    The cases which will be e-filed shall be scrutinized by the Stamp Reporters at
the High Court. The concerned advocates shall receive a message through their
registered mobile numbers in case any defects are pointed out in their cases.
ii. Thereafter, the advocates shall visit the website of the High Court to know the
exact defects pointed out by the Stamp Reporter and take steps for removal of
such defects. The link for the same is provided below:
https://www.orissahighcourt.nic.in/new-cases-filed/
iii. Advocates shall remove the defects through e-filing facilities. If any original
document is required to be filed for removing the defect, such document shall
be submitted at the office of the Virtual High Court in the respective districts
which shall be forwarded by the concerned staff to the High Court by registered
post through the Issue and Despatch section of the concerned district court.
Filing of interim applications and additional documents in pending cases
i. The interim applications and additional documents required to be filed in a
pending case can be done through e-filing.
ii. Requisite required to be filed in a pending case shall be submitted in the office
of the Virtual High Court. The concerned staff in-charge shall send the same to
the High Court by registered post through the Issue and Despatch section of
the concerned district court.
For urgent listing of their cases the advocates can mention through the Online
Mentioning Portal of the High court of Orissa between 8 AM to 12 Noon on each
working day in the link provided in the website of the High Court Orissa. The
mentioning may be made by filling the required fields in the portal. The portal is
self explanatory and user friendly. After completion of the process of
mentioning, an acknowledgement will be generated in the said portal. The
online requests for listing shall be examined at the High court and listed on the
basis of the urgency.
The Link of the Portal will be provided in the Website.
An automated message will be sent to the registered mobile number of the
advocate concerned in the event of listing of the case.
Learned Counsel/Parties in person are requested to follow the instructions
given below carefully while joining V.C. through the respective link which are
published every day in the notice whose link is give below
https://www.orissahighcourt.nic.in/cause-list/
In case of any difficulty, the Court Master may be contacted through the
helpline numbers assigned to a particular Bench published in the Cause List.
Note: It is not mandatory to attend the dedicated virtual High court
Centre for hearing of the matter. The virtual hearing can be done from any
location as per the rules specified hereinafter.
iii. Advocates/ Party-in-Person shall join the V.C. two items prior to his/her matter
in order to prevent undue load in the V.C. session which may lead to
disconnection and disruption in Court proceeding e.g. Learned Counsel whose
case is listed at item no.11 shall join the V.C. only when item no. 09 is taken
up by the Court and not before that.
iv. Advocates/Party-in-person shall keep their microphones muted except while
interacting with the Bench.
v. Advocates/Party-in-person whose cases are listed as item nos.1 & 2 shall join
the V.C. sufficiently prior to start of Court time.
vi. Advocates/Parties are requested to regularly watch the Display Board on the
website of the High Court which is available at www.ohcdb.in and also
displayed on the screen outside the Virtual Court room to ascertain which Item
Number is being taken up by the Bench. It is advised to keep the browser
refreshed frequently while viewing this website through mobile/personal laptop
to avoid lag in reflection of updated data in said website.
vii. If any person wants to test his/her proper VC connectivity, it shall be done
sufficiently prior to start of Court proceedings. Once the Court proceeding
begins, no attempt shall be made by anyone to test or join the V.C. except for
the hearing purpose in the manner stated above.
viii.        Advocates are requested to write their respective item numbers, name of
the advocate appearing and the name of the place from which appearing, while
joining the V.C. Session through Zoom Meetings.
ix. Advocates who are interested to conduct their cases through the Virtual High
Court shall intimate the item no. and the Bench to the concerned staff in
charge of the Virtual High Court centre in the district immediately after the
publication of the cause list, preferably from 8 PM to 10 PM in the preceding
day of the hearing on the mobile number of the staff in charge of Virtual Court
or from 9.30 AM to 10.15 AM on the day of hearing at the Virtual High Court
Centre. A worksheet shall be prepared by the staff in charge before
commencement of Court proceedings i.e., 10.30 AM to coordinate the Virtual
hearings in different Benches.
x.    Upon receipt of such information, the concerned staff in-charge of the centre
shall allocate the Cabin and shall intimate the concerned court master
regarding the appearance of the concerned advocate through the Virtual court
room of the concerned District.
xi. In the event more than one case is to be conducted at the same time in
different Benches, the concerned staff in charge shall take steps well in
advance to allocate VC Cabins/Virtual Court Room/VWDC of the District Court
for the said purpose as far as practicable and subject to availability without
causing hindrance to the regular and scheduled functioning of the District
xii. In case none of the above VC facilities becomes available to facilitate any
Advocate when the matter is called for hearing, the concerned staff in charge of
the centre shall use the webcam of his office computer to inform the difficulty
to the Hon’ble Judge(s) presiding over the Bench. The matter may be taken up
on availability of the cabin, subject to the permission of the Bench.
(Guidelines for appearing through Video Conferencing from Remote Locations)
If the learned counsel/party in person intends to appear through Video
Conferencing from their respective homes/offices/any other remote location,
they may follow the procedure laid down below:
i.   Learned    counsel/Litigants/party    in  person    may  appear   through   Video
Conferencing before a Bench by following the Zoom VC Manual at Annexure-II
published regularly with the Notice of High Court of Orissa.
ii. The VC link for every Bench is mentioned in the Cause List Notice. While
accessing this notice/document in soft format in website of Hon’ble Court, the
concerned Advocates may please click such link for appearing before their
concerned Bench. Please ensure that the link is not shared with anyone
unconnected with the case. The Bench may direct for removal of any
participant during Virtual Hearing for any reason deemed fit and proper. In
case of any difficulty, the helpline numbers assigned to a particular Bench may
please be contacted.
iii. The concerned Bench may direct as to which and how many number of
participants may be joined in VC session at a time keeping in view the
functionality of VC software and various related factors.
iv. Sometimes to avoid disturbance or overlapping of sound or upon direction of
the Bench, the operator may restrict the un-muting facility. In such a case,
advocates are requested to wait till their item number is called. Please do not
un-mute the microphone until item number reaches. Microphone should again
be muted once the interaction with the Bench is over.
v. If for any reason, Video conferencing cannot be held through Zoom Application,
the case may be heard in any other method as the Bench directs.
vi. Robust      bandwidth/network      connectivity   has  to  be  ensured    by   the
Advocate/Party in such device through which it is intended to join the Video
Conferencing. It shall also be the responsibility of the Advocate/Party to
arrange camera, microphone etc which are required for joining Video
vii. It is highly important that if VC is being joined through a mobile phone then its
network signal should be steady and no call should be made to / from such
phone during VC session or else the connection shall get disrupted.
viii. In case for any reason connection gets disconnected before the hearing of the
matter is over, Advocates/Parties shall again follow the same method as stated
above to rejoin the Video Conferencing.
ix. All applicable decorum as maintained in a Courtroom shall be maintained by
Advocates/Parties appearing through Video Conferencing and they should be
properly dressed.
x. Only one person may speak at a time or else there will be overlapping of voices
and echo shall be caused thereby disturbing the proceeding. The participant of
the VC who is not interacting with the Bench should mute the microphone to
avoid disturbance/overlapping of sounds.
xi. If any participant of the VC shall perform any act which is either not related to
the hearing or is done without the permission of the Bench then he/she may
get disconnected from VC and action as directed by the Bench may be taken in
the matter.
xii. Recording and/or publishing or sharing of the VC proceeding is strictly
prohibited.
i.    Copy applications shall be filed at the copying section of the District Court/
outlying station by 3 PM every working day;
ii.    Copy applications so received shall be scanned at the e-Filing Station after 3
iii.    There shall be dedicated email ids of the Copying Section of the High Court
and the Copying Sections of district receiving copy application on behalf of
the respective Virtual High Court Centre. The Copying Section of the District
Court shall send the scanned copies in PDF format along with an excel sheet
with the details of the copy applications from the dedicated email id of the
copying section to the dedicated email id of the Copying Section of the High
Court. It is made clear that all the copy applications received in a day shall
be scanned and attached in a single mail to be forwarded to dedicated e-mail
ID of the copying section of the High Court of Orissa by the respective
iv.     Upon receipt of the said application, it shall be downloaded and the normal
process of requisition of records, assessment of amount of Court fee to be
deposited shall be made and the same shall be prepared in another PDF
format which shall be notified in the website of High Court of Orissa.
v. The Advocate shall visit the website of High Court of Orissa for payment of
requisite fees and after depositing the requisite fees through the Link which
shall be published in the website, furnish the said receipt to the Staff in-
Charge at the Virtual High Court centre;
vi. The dedicated Section of the High Court of Orissa upon receipt of payment
for the certified copy shall send it through post for which no extra payment
shall be borne by the Advocate/party in person.
vii. The Advocate concerned who shall apply for the certified copy shall receive 3
messages which shall be sent by the certified copy application system of the
High Court of Orissa i.e.
viii. It is hereby notified that your application for the certified copy has been
received by the High Court of Orissa;
ix. It is hereby notified that the total amount for the certified copy has been
notified in the website of the High Court of Orissa. Kindly visit the website
for the total amount and pay it online through the link provided;
x. It is hereby notified that the certified copy applied by you bas been prepared
and has been dispatched to Virtual High Court at your respective District.
xi. The copying section of the respective Districts shall supply the certified copy
and take a signature of the concerned Advocate/Party in person on the said
register as proof of supply of the certified copy.
xii. The rules of the Copying applicable to the High Court of Orissa shall also be
applicable to the certified copies filed through above procedure.
xiii. The payment for the certified copy shall be made by the Advocate holding
the power /Party in person for the case through e-payment gateway of SBI.
The link for the e-payment gateway shall be published in the website of the
High Court of Orissa.
xiv.  The advocate should be cautious in making the payment through the
payment gateway and should fill up the correct details, information and
amount as there shall be no refund of excess/wrong payment and the same
shall be forfeited.
xv.  The reports shall be generated at 6 PM on each working day of High Court of
Orissa and the certified copy shall be processed only after successful
payment.
xvi.  The payment shall only be possible through internet banking, SBI cards,
Rupay Cards and UPI. Payment through Master Cards and VISA Cards will
not be available at initial stage.
Guidelines for functioning of Virtual High Court in Districts
In continuation to the general SOP issued, the following guidelines are formulated
for smooth functioning of the Virtual High Court in the Districts of Sambalpur,
(Ganjam), Bhubaneswar (Khurda), Puri, Bhadrak and Balasore..
1. The Advocates/ Parties in person can appear through the Virtual High
Court Centres and conduct their cases before High Court of Orissa.
2. Special care is to be taken to ensure that the Virtual Court Centres are
echo proof and proceedings inside the centre are not audible outside.
Sound proofing of walls, ceiling and other necessary infrastructure are
required to be ensured in such a manner that the voice is not audible to
the other nearby rooms or to the next VC cabin wherever there are
more than one or likely to be made operational besides the 1st cabin in
future.
3. As far as practicable, the space for the Virtual Court Centre is to be
allocated inside the existing court building as per the information
submitted earlier by the concerned districts to this court. Prefabricated
cabins are also to be explored for the above purpose. If no space is
available and if any new construction is undertaken then the matter is
to be intimated in advance to the Registrar (Vigilance) of the Court.
4. The Advocates are to be made aware of the facilities made available to
them to file cases directly in the High Court of Orissa through e-filing
portal, remove defects in their cases, mention through online
mentioning portal, appear virtually through the above Virtual Court
Centres and obtain certified copies of orders/judgment. Training
programs may also be held to create awareness among the Advocates
and use of the equipments is to be demonstrated.
5. The existing e-filing stations are to be utilized for the e-filing of cases
in the High Court of Orissa. Stations having more than one e-filing
counter shall dedicate one counter for the High Court. In case of
multiple advocates filing at the same time, facilities would be there to
get tokens to simply submit the case records and later collect the filing
number.
6. Two staffs from the High Court would be deputed to each of the
concerned districts to make the Virtual High Court of Orissa
operational and the District Courts are requested to provide support as
and when required to make the project a successful one.
7. The Technical Personnel provided to the District Courts shall assist in
these VC cabins on priority basis until other staffs are allocated for the
said purpose and in their absence the System Officer/System
Assistant/Technical Assistant will provide the necessary assistance for
the smooth functioning of the Virtual High Court Centres. Staff of the
district courts must be imparted training through the master trainers, if
available at the headquarters, or through the System officers/System
8. The District Judges of the concerned districts where the Virtual High
Court Centres have been established shall conduct hands on training
programmes at least twice a month for the first three months for the
interested advocates and their clients at such time and date as they
deem fit depending upon the requirement and after three months as
and when required. The training shall be imparted by the Master
Trainer/ System officer/System Assistant posted in the respective
districts. Advocates are requested to watch the instructions/Tutorial
videos/FAQs uploaded on the website of the High court of Orissa the
link for which is provided below.
https://www.orissahighcourt.nic.in/e-filing/tutorials.php
9. The advocates and the staff engaged in the VC cabin are to be
impressed upon to follow the rules and manuals which are published
on the website of the Hon’ble Court every day.
Administrative Guidelines for the District Judges with respect
to Virtual Court Centres
1. The CCR of the staff in charge of the Virtual High Court shall be dependent
upon the performance report of the concerned Registrar/JIC, Nizarat and the
CCR shall be entered by the concerned controlling officer at the High Court
in consonance with the performance report.
2. In case the staff in charge of the Virtual High Court of Orissa is on leave for
a considerable period/EL, prior intimation be made to the High Court to
provide a substitute for the same and in case the staff in charge avails Casual
leave due to any emergency, the District Court shall provide one of their
staff to remain in day to day routine charge of the concerned staff in charge
of the Virtual Court Centre to ensure that the work is not affected.
3. The attendance of the Staff in charge and the other staffs deputed by the
High Court shall be maintained by the District Office in a separate Register
which shall be put up before the Registrar Civil Courts/JIC, Nizarat on each
working day as per High Court of Orissa Calendar.
4. Another group D staff is to be engaged by the District Office to assist the
said Centre.
5. The Virtual High Courts of the aforementioned districts would be provided
with the following articles for which tender has already been floated and
would been delivered soon:
• One All in one Desktop/Desktop with accessories
• One speaker with camera
• FTTH connectivity and onetime cost for implementation of
(In case of delay of the delivery of the tendered articles, for
the purpose of testing, the District Courts are requested to
provide the equivalent ICT hardware articles which have
recently been provided to the Districts through OCAC (or
through GeM for Sambalpur).
At present there will be an additional need of one Display
Monitor, Two computers and two tables for the functioning
of the back office rooms and the same shall be assigned
from the ICT hardware articles which have recently been
provided to the Districts through OCAC (or through GeM
for Sambalpur) till the High Court provides the same.
6. A separate Register shall be maintained by the copying section of the
respective Districts for receiving the copy applications pertaining to cases of
High court. The Register shall be put up before the Judge-in-Charge,
Copying of the respective places in the similar manner as done for copy
applications of the District Courts. Applications received shall be forwarded
from dedicated e-mail IDs of the district courts’ copying sections to the e-
mail of the Copying Section of High Court (supdt.copying-ohc@gov.in) on
the same day. Online certified Copy is likely to be introduced soon to ease
out the physical process.
7. A register shall be maintained by the staff in charge regarding the number of
cases taken up through the Virtual Centre with name of the Advocate/ Party
in person along with case number and Court number. Daily information
regarding appearance of advocates/parties in person in Court proceeding,
certified copies and other related activities may be maintained by the staff in
charge for submission of monthly statements.
8. District Courts to provide two clerical staff on rotation basis who shall assist
the staff in charge of the Virtual High Court and shall function in his place in
case of any emergency or till the High Court deploys another staff in place
of the presently deputed staff. The concerned district court staff shall get
themselves acquainted with the functioning of the virtual High Court.
9. The Registrar of the respective district headquarters and JIC Nizarat for the
centres outside headquarters shall be nodal officer of the Virtual High Court.