02.       Nothing can be more befitting starter to this judgment than an
observation adored with realization of constitutional guardianship of the
rights of an Indian citizen/subject qua his/her property as served by the
Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in the case titled “State of Punjab Vs Gurdial
Singh & Ors” reported in 1980 AIR SC 319. One liner statement bearing an
awakening edict embedded in para 16 is by Justice Krishna Iyer and which is,
“It is fundamental that compulsory taking of a man's property is a serious
matter and smaller the man the more serious the matter.”
03.      The present case bears a paradox which is that the petitioners acted
as law abiding citizens despite being the sufferer as against the respondents 3
to 5 who had opted to act as law avoiding public officials being found
disturbing the sensitivity of afore-cited statement on a serious note as a small
piece of property of an ordinary family of the petitioners was taken by seizure
& usurpation by the J&K Police least serious for and without bearing any
semblance of process of law. To add an insult to the injury, the J&K Police,
acting post-facto, dictated an offer of rent at a rate of its own picking to be
imposed upon the hapless owner family but without even a single penny of
rental landing in the hands of the deprived owner family till date and this is
what is the cry for justice in the present writ petition which has waited for
seven long years of sufferance to earn final disposal from this Court. In fact,
there should be no hesitation to confess on record that in a way this court has
also contributed to the prolonging in providing the riddance to the aggrieved
family. This Police Bossism against the owner family had come into play in
February, 2013 lasting onwards with only relieving factor being that plot
property got released in October, 2018 when the J&K Police itself felt no
more urge to enjoy and extend the seizure and usurpation leaving the
petitioners high and dry without even a word of thanks for their solace.
04.      The petitioners are successors-in-interest of late Shardha Ram and all
of whom have come to succeed to a piece of property existing in the form of a
plot of land measuring 07 kanals 18 marlas falling under khasra no. 247 in
village Kartholi, ward no. 12 Bari Brahmana, Samba. There is no denial &
dispute whatsoever as to this status of the petitioners qua said plot property.
05.      J&K Police Establishment's Police Central Store in February 2013
came to lay its sight and hand on this plot property of the petitioners for the
purpose of coal dumping even though the petitioners were unaware and
unwilling to let the Police Establishment make use of their said plot property
but felt helpless to take on the displeasure of the then police officials
possessed of the mood to take over the said plot property of the petitioners,
and, thus, the petitioners’ silence and submission was read as their consent to
let the use and occupation of their plot property by the Police Establishment
for dumping of coal stock. It is pertinent to observe here that as the plot
property is in the very close vicinity of the Railway Station Bari Brahmana,
so the dumping of coal consignment and supply transported through Railway
for the J&K Police at the vacant site of plot property of the petitioners was
perhaps invitingly serving the convenience of the Police Establishment. The
only saving satisfaction of the situation for the petitioners was that they were
at least tempted with offer of monthly rental for the use and occupation of
their plot property by the J&K Police least realizing even that was to prove a
mirage for them.
06.      For the purpose of rent assessment, the concerned section of the
office of the Director General of Police, J&K, Srinagar, came to set the file
work in motion by addressing a letter no.Prov-1/UE-60/2013/31435-39 dated
14-06-2014 to the Superintendent of Police, Samba requesting him to get the
rent of the said plot property assessed through concerned Govt. Department
and report back. File process was taken forward by the SDPO Bari Brahmana
writing series of letters one of which being no. 1158/80B dated 03/07/2014
to the Naib Tehsildar Bari Brahmana and another no. 1251-52/80B dated
15/07/2014 to the Assistant Executive Engineer, PWD Bari Brahmana. The
Engineering Department through concerned official came to register
disability to make assessment of rent for the vacant plot property as the
mechanism available with the Engineering Department was with respect to
buildings and other structures.
07.      The aforesaid motion of file process had led the exercise to be taken
up with and by the revenue office of the Assistant Commissioner (Rev.)
Samba. This revenue establishment side exercise led to the District Rent
Assessment Committee, Samba headed by the Deputy Commissioner, Samba
carrying out the rent assessment of the petitioners' plot of property of 7
Kanals 18 marlas at the rate of Rs. 42,500/- per month for the year 2013-14
and Rs. 51,300/- per month for the year 2014-15. This assessment exercise
got documented on record vide Report no. DCS/SM/14-15/297-99 dated 30-
03-2015. This assessment exercise was done at the instance of the J&K
08.      Upon the basis of rent so assessed and proposed by the District Rent
Assessment Committee Samba, the respondent no. 4- SSP Samba had even
registered   a    requisition   vide   Communication     no.   GB/    Land-Kala
Ram/2015/2757-59 dated 30-03-2015 for sanction of funds amounting to Rs.
5,52,500/- for the year 2013-14 and Rs. 6,15,600/- for the year 2014-15 thus
totaling to amount of Rs. 11,68,100/- for two years period.
09.      As the rate of rent so assessed and recommended was serving the
taste of the then concerned higher officials of the J&K Police Headquarter
(PHQ), so the same was rejected in terms of PHQ Order no. 558 of 2016
dated 19/02/2016. This was the last so called an act of official responsibility
carried out at the end of the J&K Police Establishment and then onwards
abandoning the exercise to decide as to how much rent was to be payable to
the petitioners whose plot property was being used free unmindful of the fact
that the use and occupation of plot property was literally nothing but sheer act
of trespassing and perpetuation thereof.
10.      The very text of the above said order itself exhibits the fact that even
the legal sensitivity of the respondent no. 3, the Director General of Police,
J&K with respect to patent wrong in action against the petitioners qua their
own plot property, was almost missing with respect to the proposition in hand
before him. The order is reproduced as under:-
“Whereas a piece of land measuring 07 kanals and 18
marlas under khasra No. 247 situated at Kartholi, Bari
Brahmana belonging to one Kala Ram S/o Late Sardha Ram R/o
Village Kartholi, Bari Brahmana is under the occupation of
J&K Police w.e.f. February, 2013.
Whereas the landlord represented for payment of rent
for the said piece of land situated at Kartholi, Bari Brahmana
having remained under the occupation of J&K Police.
Where as a report was sought from SSP Samba which
revealed that no rent has been paid to the landlord. However,
District Rent Assessment Committee, Samba had assessed rent
for the said piece of land @ Rs.42,500/- PM for the year 2013-14
and Rs. 51,300/- for the year 2014-15 and sought necessary
sanction/allotment of funds for further disbursement to the
Whereas SSP Samba was informed that rent of the land
is governed by the Standing government Orders/SROs issued
from time to time and was asked to get rent of the land assessed
afresh and process the rent case in pursuance of Government
Order No. Home-225(P) of 2009 dated 23.03.2009.
Whereas DC Samba vide letter No. DCM/SM/2015-16/94
dated 23.05.2015 intimated that the rates for the land under the
occupation of Security Forces/Police have already been decided
by Home Department dealing with the procedure and no further
action is required to be taken by the DRAC. However, DRAC
Samba has verified the title and quantum of the land involved in
the case.
Whereas SSP Samba vide order No. 396 of 2015 dated
14.07.2015 accorded sanction to the payment of rent in favour of
the landlord for the land measuring 07 marlas and 18 marlas
situated at Kartholi, Bari Brahmana in pursuance to the rates
governed by Government Order No. Home-35(P) of 2009 dated
Whereas SSP Samba calculated the rentals for the period
February, 2013 to May, 2015 to the tune of Rs. 2,48,850/- and
requested for release of funds vide his letter No. GB/Land-Kala
Ram/2018/4612-15 dated 30.05.2015 for further disbursement to
the landlord, which were accordingly allotted by PHQ vide
order issued under endorsement No. PHQ/Acctt/Bdt/2015-
16/4449-52 dated 03.07.2015.
Whereas SSP Samba released the due rentals in favour of
the landlord through cheque bearing No. 547417 dated
31.07.2015 amounting to Rs. 2,23,965/- after deducting income
tax @ 10% through SDPO Bari Brahmana vide letter No.
Acctt/2015/7915 dated 04.08.2015 but the landlord refused to
receive the said cheque.
Whereas the landlord approached the Hon‟ble High
Court of Jammu and Kashmir at Jammu and filed a writ
petition No. 1302/2015 demanding rentals for the land
measuring 07 kanals and 18 marlas under khasra No. 247
situated at Kartholi, Bari Brahmana having remained under the
occupation of J&K Police on the basis of assessment made by the
Whereas the Hon‟ble Court issued an interim order
dated 11.09.2015 with the following directions:-
“In the meantime, subject to objections from other
side and till next date before the Bench,
petitioner in terms of Annexure „H‟ (rent assessed
by DRAC Samba) to the petition within the notice
after through deliberations came to the conclusion that the rent
of the land under the occupation of Security Forces/Police is
governed by Standing Government Orders/ SROs issued from
time to time and not on the basis of assessment made by DRAC.
The claim of the petitioner for payment of rentals for the said
piece of land as per assessment made by DRAC Samba being
devoid of any merit and needs to be rejected.
Therefore, the rentals for the land measuring 07 kanals
and 18 marlas under khasra No. 247 situated at Kartholi, Bari
Brahmana having remained under the occupation of J&K Police
w.e.f. February, 2013 was sanctioned by SSP Samba in
pursuance to Government Order No. Home-35(P) of 2009 dated
16.01.2009, as applicable to the case. Hence, the claim of the
petitioner demanding rentals as per the assessment made by
DRAC Samba is bereft of any logic or reasoning and is
accordingly rejected.”
11.     Finding themselves both helpless and clueless at the hands of the
Police Establishment, the petitioners came to file the present writ petition on
14/09/2018 after suffering four years of continuing deprivation of their plot
property at the hands of the J&K Police without earning a single penny of
rental return. In the writ petition the petitioners have asked for the following
A)     Writ, order or direction in the form of writ of mandamus
commanding upon the respondents to pay the rent to the
petitioners assessed by the District Rent Assessment Committee,
Samba, of the land measuring 07 Kanals 18 Marlas falling under
Khasra No. 247 situated at Village Kartholi, Ward No. 12, Bari -
Brahmana, Tehsil Bari - Brahmana, District Samba, owned by
the petitioners herein presently under occupation of police
department for dumping of coal since 1st of February, 2013.
A-1.      Writ, order or direction in the form of writ of certiorari
to quash the PHQ Order No. 558 OF 2016 dated 19-02-
2016 i.e. Annexure-J.
B)    Further, writ, order or direction in the form of writ of
Mandamus Commanding upon the official respondents to pay
the rent to the petitioners of the land measuring 07 KanaIs 18
Marlas falling under Khasra No. 247, situated at Village
Brahmana, District Samba, owned by the petitioners herein
presently under occupation of police department for dumping of
coal, on regular basis after getting it assessed by the competent
authority viz. District Rent Assessment Committee, Samba for
each year till the land is vacated and its possession is officially
handed over to the petitioners herein.
C)     Such other additional or alternative relief which this Hon'ble
Court deems fit and proper in the facts and circumstances of the
case may also be granted in favour of the petitioner herein and
against the respondents. I.
12.      The respondent no. 4 & 5, who being the Sr. Superintendent of
Police, (SSP) Samba and Sub-Divisional Police Officer SDPO Samba, came
forward with their reply, supplemented with vehement submissions by the
learned Additional Advocate General Mr. Raman Sharma, riding on the
recitals and decision of the PHQ Order no. 558 of 2016. The basis used,
rather usurped, by the Authority issuing said PHQ Order no. 558 of 2016 is a
Govt. Order no. Home-225(P) of 2009 dated 23/03/2009 read with Govt.
Order no. Home-35 (P) of 2008 dated 16/01/2009 dealing with rent
assessment subject.
13.      Govt. Order no. Home-225(P) of 2009 dated 23.03.2009 has a
headline which reads as under:-
14.      The very opening lines of said Govt. order self-states the purpose for
which it was brought into effect. The opening of the Govt. order is “Sanction
is hereby accorded to the adoption of following procedure for the assessment
and payment of rent for private buildings and land under the occupation of
security forces and the Police Department engaged in counter insurgency
duties.” It is in the backdrop of this statement of the Govt. order no. Home-
225(P) of 2009 dated 23.03.2009 that a mechanism was sought to be put in
place for the purpose of assessment of rate of rent to be payable for buildings
and the land to come or coming under the occupation of the Security Forces
and the Police Department deployed for the stated purpose. Had the
Government of the State of Jammu & Kashmir, acting through the Financial
Commissioner, Home Department in issuing the Govt. order no. Home-
225(P) of 2009 dated 23.03.2009, intended the Govt. order no. Home-225(P)
of 2009 to apply simpliciter with respect to every kind of occupation of the
security forces and the J&K Police Department qua the private buildings and
the private land, then the expression “engaged in counter insurgency duties”
would not have been given space in the said Govt. order but since the
presence of very said expression is the key meant to understand the intent &
import of said Govt. order. It is easily understandable that a contingency
based occupation of private land and buildings by the security forces and the
Police Department in the State of J&K was meant not to earn burden of
routine rate of rent of buildings and land which otherwise was meant to be
payable for routine occupation of private land and buildings by the security
forces and the Police Department.
15.      Govt. order no. Home-225(P) of 2009 dated 23.03.2009 bears
relation to Govt. Order no. 35(P) of 2009 dated 16.01.2009, a perusal whereof
reveals that for the purpose of issuing the said Govt. order no. 35(P) of 2009
dated 16.01.2009, the then State Government had appointed a committee
vide Govt. order no. 864(P) of 2008 dated 15.12.2008 which had
recommended to the Government a rationalization of rent rate structure of
land appurtenant to buildings/hotels and the portion of hotels not
occupied/under-utilization partly or wholly by the Security Forces or on the
counter insurgency duty and to streamline the procedure of payment of rent
and remove anomalies in the rate structures. In terms of Govt. Order no.
Home-35(P) of 2009 dated 16.01.2009, the rates of rent for the land under
occupation of the Jammu & Kashmir Police, Security Forces/ Army on
internal security/counter insurgency duties came to be fixed in accordance
with SRO 104 dated 11.04.2008 issued under the J&K Requisitioning and
Acquisition of Immoveable Property Act, 1968. Thus, as per said Govt. order
only those cases pertaining to the occupation of land and buildings by the
Security Forces and the Jammu & Kashmir Police were/are supposed to be
dealt with for the purposes of rent fixation in which the occupation of the
private property by the Security Forces/ Jammu & Kashmir Police was/is
relatable to deployment for internal security/counter insurgency.
16.      Obviously, the rent fixation in terms of the aforesaid said
Government orders is at a rate which is at a lower rate than the routine rate
assessment and which routine rent assessment in this case was carried out by
the   District  Rent   Assessment     committee    headed    by   the  Deputy
Commissioner, Samba. The respondent no. 3-the Director General of Police,
J&K, as being the top head of the Police Establishment, acting with an
uncharitable mind set, was prejudiced to impose a lower rate of rent for the
use and occupation of the land of the petitioners at the rates as forthcoming
from the mechanism of Govt. order no. Home-225(P) of 2009 dated
23.03.2009 read with Govt. Order no. Home-35(P) of 2009 dated 16.01.2009
so the respondent no. 3 was least interested to re-examine the position that the
rent as assessed by the District Rent Assessment Committee, Samba was the
actual one to be payable and not the one as workable in terms of
aforementioned two Govt. orders.
17.      If the insistence of the learned AAG is to be accepted for applying
Govt. order no. 225(P) of 2009, then even a routine Police Chowki if housed
in a rented accommodation is to be held deployed in counter insurgency
duties and not for routine police duty and accordingly rent assessment for use
and occupation of rented accommodation has to be as per Govt. order no.
18.      Govt. order no. 225’s text and context is self speaking and self-
clearing. Rent assessment is on lower side because purpose is security forces
deployment related which is keeping in view any emergent call for
deployment of security forces in any part of the then State of J& K at any
given point of time requiring urgent occupation of private properties as well
for deployment specific purpose meant for safety and security of person and
property of the residents of J&K and so in order to save public exchequer
getting taxed for routine rental payments the rate assessment has to be on
lower side. Security Forces has wide reference to all forces including J&K
Police when deployed for security related exigency but not routine duty.
19.      This Court is left to bear the puzzle and pain of fact as to under
which police official of the time the forced entry upon said plot property of
the petitioners was carried out and which event did not bother any higher
police official concerned either to settle the rent rate first before continuing
any further with the usurpation of the plot property in reference or hand over
back to the petitioners at the earliest occasion available with a note of
apology to the petitioners on the acts of omission and commission of the
erring police officials concerned in literally having acted as medieval time
zamindar to overpower a private property. J&K Police had lot to explain its
conduct, rather misconduct in real terms, and still it has not dawned upon it to
reconcile and make amends with the gravity of wrong set into effect at its
end. The gravity of the situation is to be seen from the fact that at the relevant
point of time when the petitioners’ plot property was so grabbed by the J&K
Police, the right to property in the then State of J&K was still a fundamental
right by reference to the Constitution Of India and not relegated to be a
constitutional right as was in the rest of India by virtue of Constitution 44th
20.      Now, before coming to decide by denouncement the insistence on the
part of the respondent no. 3 to import and impose the rent payable to the
petitioners at the rate in terms of Govt. Order no. 225 (P) of 2009, this court
would be failing cause of justice by parting with the judgment by letting the
opportunity to go by without sensitizing the Public Administration/
Authorities, be it of the highest echelon or the lowest rung , that a citizen
bears his/her person and the property as his/her sovereignty and from this
he/she pools his/her respective share to constitute the Sovereignty of the State
and when the sovereignty of a citizen is injured/wronged then the Sovereignty
of the State also suffers corresponding and instant injury/wrong
notwithstanding who is the guilty hand doing the injury/wrong. It is on this
solemn recognition that the Rule of Law is mandated and meant to be the sole
working principle of and for the State and its agencies/functionaries. Public
Administration/Authorities, including the Police Establishment, need to free
themselves from a deep seated belief system that they have power of action
with respect to person and property of a citizen/non citizen of India by
reference to the law of authority, whereas the constitutional fact and reality is
that their duty of action viz a viz the person and property of a citizen/non
citizen is to be on an authority of the law. A law given authority to a Public
Functionary/Authority for dealing with affairs of person and property of a
citizen of India cannot be usurped to be a personal authority of the Public
Functionary/Authority to be used and flaunted on personal propensities and
if this simple legal mantra is kept in daily recitation and remembrance by the
Public Functionaries and Authorities to attend and actuate their respective
acts and decisions then the governance of India will be, sooner than later, by
the rule of law free from the vice of the law of the ruler which the present
case history exhibited as if for the J&K Police the regime was that of a police
21.       Following para for the judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of
India in the case of Tukaram Kana Joshi & Ors Vs M.I.D.C., 2013 AIR
SC 565 will suffice to summarise the factual and legal wrap of the case in
“9. ……………………….There is a distinction, a true and
concrete distinction, between the principle of "eminent domain"
and "police power" of the State. Under certain circumstances, the
police power of the State may be used temporarily, to take
possession of property but the present case clearly shows that
neither of the said powers have been exercised. A question then
arises with respect to the authority or power under which the
State entered upon the land. It is evident that the act of the State
amounts to encroachment, in exercise of "absolute power" which
in common parlance is also called abuse of power or use of muscle
power. To further clarify this position, it must be noted that the
authorities have treated the land owner as a 'subject' of medieval
India, but not as a 'citizen' under our constitution.”
22.      Perhaps this a case where the petitioners instead of asking for rent for
the use and occupation of their plot property ought to have asked for damages
from the respondent no. 3 to 5’s end given the fact that the petitioners had
suffered loss of their plot property at the hands of the respondents without
any course of law. Such like fact situation has been attended by the Hon’ble
Supreme Court of India in the case of Vidya Devi Vs State of Himachal
Pradesh, 2020 AIR SC 4709 in terms of the following passages as
“10.1. The Appellant was forcibly expropriated of her property
in 1967, when the right to property was a fundamental right
guaranteed by Article 31 in Part III of the Constitution.
Article 31 guaranteed the right to private property,
which could not be deprived without due process of law and upon
just and fair compensation.
10.2.     The right to property ceased to be a fundamental right by the
Constitution (Forty Fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, however, it
continued to be a human right in a welfare State, and a Constitutional
right under Article 300 A of the Constitution. Article 300 A provides that
no person shall be deprived of his property save by authority of law. The
State cannot dispossess a citizen of his property except in accordance
with the procedure established by law. The obligation to pay
compensation, though not expressly included in Article 300 A, can be
inferred in that Article.
To forcibly dispossess a person of his private property, without
following due process of law, would be violative of a human right, as also
the constitutional right under Article 300 A of the Constitution. Reliance
is placed on the judgment in Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd. v.
Darius Shapur Chenai, wherein this Court held that:
“ 6. … Having regard to the provisions contained in Article
300A of the Constitution, the State in exercise of its power of
"eminent domain" may interfere with the right of property of
a person by acquiring the same but the same must be for a
public purpose and reasonable compensation therefor must be
paid.”
In N. Padmamma v. S. Ramakrishna Reddy, this Court held that:
“21. If the right of property is a human right as also a
constitutional right, the same cannot be taken away except in
accordance with law. Article 300A of the Constitution protects
such right. The provisions of the Act seeking to divest such
right, keeping in view of the provisions of Article 300A of the
Constitution of India, must be strictly construed.”
In Delhi Airtech Services Pvt. Ltd. & Ors. v. State of U.P. &
Ors., this Court recognized the right to property as a basic human right
in the following words:
“30. It is accepted in every jurisprudence and by different
political thinkers that some amount of property right is an
indispensable safeguard against tyranny and economic
oppression of the Government. Jefferson was of the view that
liberty cannot long subsist without the support of property.
"Property must be secured, else liberty cannot subsist" was
the opinion of John Adams. Indeed the view that property
itself is the seed bed which must be conserved if other
constitutional values are to flourish is the consensus among
political thinkers and jurists.”
In Jilubhai Nanbhai Khachar v. State of Gujarat, this Court
“48. …In other words, Article 300A only limits the powers of
the State that no person shall be deprived of his property save
by authority of law. There has to be no deprivation without
any sanction of law. Deprivation by any other mode is not
acquisition or taking possession under Article 300A. In other
words, if there is no law, there is no deprivation.”
10.5.      In a democratic polity governed by the rule of law, the State
could not have deprived a citizen of their property without the sanction
of law. Reliance is placed on the judgment of this Court in Tukaram
Kana Joshi & Ors. v. M.I.D.C. & Ors. wherein it was held that the State
must comply with the procedure for acquisition, requisition, or any other
permissible statutory mode. The State being a welfare State governed by
the rule of law cannot arrogate to itself a status beyond what is provided
by the Constitution.
This Court in State of Haryana v. Mukesh Kumar (AIR 2012
SC 559) held that the right to property is now considered to be not only a
constitutional or statutory right, but also a human right. Human rights
have been considered in the realm of individual rights such as right to
shelter, livelihood, health, employment, etc. Human rights have gained a
multifaceted dimension.”
23.      Coming back to the final closure of this case, this court in the light of
facts and circumstances as referred hereto before, hold that the it is the rent
assessment as made by the District Rent Assessment Committee Samba in
terms of its report no. DCS/SM/14-15/297-99 dated 30/03/2015 for the given
two years period of occupation that is 2013-14 and 2014-15, which is to be
applicable and payable from the respondents 3’s end to the petitioner and is to
be so paid. Further, this Court for the un-assessed period of 2015-16, 2016-17
and 2017-18 directs the respondent no. 2- the District Rent Assessment
Committee Samba headed by the Deputy Commissioner, Samba to assess the
corresponding rent rate for the aforesaid three years and convey the final rent
assessment report to the respondent no. 3 within a period of three months
from the date of receipt of the present judgment by the Deputy Commissioner
Samba. Upon receipt of the rent assessment report from the respondent no. 2 ,
the respondent no. 3- Director General Of Police, J&K to make full and final
payment of the entire rent for the period 2013-14 to 2017-18 as per
assessment made by the respondent no. 2 . The aggregate amount so payable
to the petitioners is to bear interest @ 9% p.a. with effect from October 2018
onward till actual payment of the entire amount. Consequently, this Court
quashes the respondent no. 3’s Order no. 558 of 2016 dated 19/02/2016 as
being arbitrary and baseless.
24.       The compliance to the directions of this court hereby given shall be
carried out by the respondent no. 3 within period of two months from the date
of receipt of the rent assessment report from the respondent no. 2. Disposal of
this writ petition cannot be without burdening the respondent no. 3 with
exemplary costs for the litigation burden suffered by the petitioners for the
situation not of their making and as such an amount of rupees one lac (Rs 1
lac) is awarded as costs payable in favour of the petitioners and to be paid by
the respondent no. 3’s end.