Bachelor of Electrical & Electronics Engineering. The petitioner belongs to
Christian Adi-Dravida. The 1st respondent has given a community
certificate to the petitioner as Backward Class as per G.O.Ms.1564, Social
Welfare Department dated 30.07.1985. The petitioner married one girl,
namely, G.Amutha, who studied up to Master of Physical Education. She
belongs to Hindu Arunthathiyar community. The marriage between the
petitioner and the said Amutha was solemnized on 02.03.2009 at Thippi
wife of the petitioner was given the Community Certificate as Scheduled
Caste as per SI.No.5 of SC/ST (Amendment) Act, 1976.
2. Under these circumstances, the petitioner relying on
G.O.Ms.No.188, Personnel and Administrative Reforms (Personnel-P)
Department dated 28.12.1976, has submitted an application for grant of
inter-caste marriage certificate for the purpose of availing the benefits of
priority in public employments.
3. The learned counsel for the petitioner relied on the said
G.O.Ms.No.188 dated 28.12.1976 and contended that the Government
Order says that "Where one of the spouses belongs to SC/ST, then inter-
caste marriage certificate has to be issued in favour of the petitioner”. In
the present case, the petitioner was issued with the community certificate as
'Backward Caste' and his wife was issued with the community certificate as
'Scheduled Caste' and therefore, it is an inter-caste marriage and
accordingly, the petitioner is entitled to get inter-caste marriage certificate
for the purpose of availing the benefits including priority in public
employment.
4. The learned Government Advocate contended that the
Government has issued clarification that conversion of religion would not
entail a person to get an inter-caste marriage certificate.
5. In this regard, the clarification was issued by the Government
in letter No.235, Social Welfare Department dated 21.07.1997. As per the
said clarification, change of religion could not be a ground to grant inter-
caste marriage certificate. Relying on the said clarification letter, the
learned Government counsel reiterated that the case of the petitioner was
rightly rejected. Even in the impugned order, it is stated that, as per the
inquiry report received from the Revenue Inspector, Mettur, the petitioner
S.Paulraj as well as his wife Smt.G.Amutha by birth belongs to Christian
Adi-Dravidar and Hindu Arunthathiyar community, respectively. Therefore,
the inter-caste marriage certificate cannot be granted.
6. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Soosai Etc. Vs.
Union of India and others – 1986 AIR 733, delivered a judgment on
30.09.1985 and made an observation that "The expression Scheduled Caste
is defined in clause 24 of Article 366 to mean such castes, races or tribes
or parts of or groups within such castes, races or tribes as are deemed
under Article 341 to be Scheduled Castes for the purpose of this
The Apex Court further observed that "Now it cannot be disputed
that the Caste System is a feature of the Hindu Social structure. It is a
social phenomenon peculiar to Hindu Society. The division of the Hindu
social order by reference at one time to professional or vocational
occupation was moulded into a structural hierarchy which over the
centuries crystallized into a stratification where the place of the
individual was determined by birth. Those who occupied the lowest rung
of the social ladder were treated as existing beyond the periphery of
civilised society, and were indeed not even "touchable". This social
attitude committed those castes to severe social and economic disabilities
and cultural and educational backwardness"
7. The issue regarding the inter-caste marriage was considered in
the case of M.A.Salam Vs. Principal Secretary to Government of
Andhra Pradesh - 2003 (1) ALD 699, on 27 December, 2002 by the
Andhra Pradesh High Court, wherein, the following observations were
"The purpose of issuing G.O.Ms.No.371 was in
case of inter-caste marriage, if the off-spring suffered the
same social stigma or status of either of the parents who
comes from a lower caste then the off-spring is also entitled
for the benefit of reservation. In other words as an example -
if a Brahmin (OC) man marries a Scheduled Tribe lady, but
the couple and the propency are accepted into Brahmin
community and the boy is raised in the surroundings of
Brahmins and live like a Brahmin, he never had the stigma of
being called as Scheduled Tribe and hence he cannot claim
the reservation as Scheduled Tribe.      The reservations are
provided only for those who are suppressed and had social
stigma. Had it been a case that upon marriage the Brahmin
man was also accepted into Scheduled Tribe and the family
lived with and in the surroundings of the Scheduled Tribes
and the boy being brought up as Scheduled Tribe, then he can
claim as Scheduled Tribe.       In this background and legal
position what has to be seen now is whether Sri Mohd.Abdul
Salaam had a Muslim life with Muslim surroundings or
Christian life with Christian Surroundings."
8. It is also brought to the notice of this Court that the Social
Welfare Department of the Tamil Nadu Government recently considered
this issue and passed orders, wherein, the types of inter-caste marriages are
categorically stated as two categories, which are as follows:
“Category-I : Either of the Spouse of the inter-
caste marriage couples should be from Scheduled Caste or
Scheduled Tribes while the other spouse may be from any
other community.
Category-II : Either of the spouse should be from
Forward or other community and the other spouse from
Thus, except the cases falling under the categories stated in the
Government Order, no other couples are entitled to get inter-caste marriage
certificate.
9. This Court is of the considered opinion that conversion from
one religion to another religion will not change the caste of a person which
he belongs.        In the present case, the petitioner admittedly belongs to
Christian Adi-Dravidar community and by virtue of conversion to
Christianity he was issued with the Backward Class certificate. However,
by birth, the petitioner belongs to 'Adi-Dravidar' community and change of
religion will not change the community. The classification of Scheduled
Caste, Scheduled Tribes, Most Backward Classes, Backward Classes and
Other castes will not change the caste.
10. However, various communities are classified for the purpose
of issuance of certificate and they are based on the social structure and
other factors. Thus, many number of castes are classified as Scheduled
Caste and Scheduled Tribes and uplifted communities are classified as other
Classes, based on certain assessments.
11. Therefore, the classification cannot be a ground for the
purpose of issuing an inter-caste marriage certificate. The certificate itself
is named as “inter-caste marriage certificate”. Therefore, by conversion
from one religion to another religion, the caste of the person remains
unchanged and therefore based on the conversion to other religion, inter-
caste marriage certificate cannot be issued.
12. In the event of converted person claiming inter-caste marriage
certificate, it would pave way for the citizen to abuse the benefit to be
granted under the inter-caste marriage quota. The repercussion will be large
and therefore the inter-caste marriage certificate has to be issued only if any
one of the spouses belongs to the Scheduled Caste and other spouse belongs
to the other caste, but not otherwise.
13. In the present case, admittedly the petitioner belongs to
Christian Adi-Dravidar, which is also a Schedule Caste community and by
virtue of conversion to Christianity he was issued with the Backward Class
Certificate. The wife of the petitioner, admittedly is a Scheduled Caste.
When, both the petitioner and his wife belongs to Scheduled Caste
community by birth, merely because the petitioner by virtue of conversion
changed the religion would not entail him to get the inter-caste marriage
certificate.
14. The very purpose and object of issuance of inter-caste
marriage certificate is to provide certain welfare schemes and in such
circumstances the classification of various castes as Backward Class,
Scheduled Caste, Most Backward Class and other classes cannot be a
ground to claim inter-caste marriage certificate. It is the caste / community
which has to be taken into consideration and when both the husband and
wife belongs to the same caste / community, then they are not entitled for
the inter-caste marriage certificate for the purpose of availing the benefits
under various schemes. Thus, the order impugned passed is in consonance
with the principles laid down.
15. Thus, there is no infirmity in the impugned order dated
19.06.2016.      Accordingly,   the   Writ   Petition  stands    dismissed.
Consequently, connected Miscellaneous Petitions are also closed. No costs.