1.    Heard Sri Satya Dheer Singh Jadaun, Advocate learned counsel for
the applicant, Sri Jitendra Prasad Mishra, Advocate learned counsel for
the first informant and Sri Sanjay Kumar Singh, Advocate learned
Additional Government Advocate for the State of U.P. and perused the
2.    These two petitions are connected together as they relate to the
same case and are of the same accused and as such are being decided by a
common order.
3.    Criminal Misc. Application U/S 482 Cr.P.C. (hereinafter referred to
as “the 482 petition”) has been filed by the applicant- Bal Kumar Patel
@ Raj Kumar with the following prayers:-
“It is, therefore, most respectfully prayed that this Hon'ble Court may
kindly be pleased to allow this application and quash the proceedings of
Criminal Case No. 02 of 2022 arising out of Case Crime No. 0831 of
2020 under Sections 419, 420 and 406 I.P.C. Police Station Kotwali
Nagar District Banda on which cognizance was taken up on 2.11.2021
following the submission of charge sheet against the applicant on
29.9.2021 by the police of Police Station Kotwali Nagar District Banda
and also further be pleased to pass an interim order in favour of the
applicant, granting protection from arrest by directing the investigative
authorities not to take any coercive action against him; so that justice be
done.
3. That it is further prayed that during the pendency of the present
criminal misc. application, the proceedings of Criminal Case No. 02 of
2022 arising out of Case Crime No. 0831 of 2020 under Sections 419,
420 and 406 I.P.C. Police Station Kotwali Nagar District Banda on
which cognizance was taken up on 2.11.2021 following the submission of
charge sheet against the applicant on 29.9.2021 by the police of Police
Station Kotwali Nagar District Banda may remain stayed and also
further be pleased to pass an interim order in favour of the applicant,
granting protection from arrest by directing the investigative authorities
not to take any coercive action against him and / or be pleased fit and
proper to pass such order as the Hon’ble Court deem fit and proper in
the facts and circumstances of the present case; so that justice be done.”
(hereinafter referred to as “the anticipatory bail application”) has been
filed by the applicant- Bal Kumar Patel @ Raj Kumar with the
“It is, therefore, most respectfully prayed that this Hon'ble Court may be
pleased to allow the application and direct that in the event of the
applicant’s arrest in Case Crime No. 831 of 2020 u/s 419, 420 and 406
I.P.C., registered at Police Station Kotwali Nagar, District Banda, he
3                A482 No. 10778 of 2022 with connected matter
It is further prayed that during the pendency of this application before
this Hon’ble Court the interim order be issued directing the P.S. Kotwali
Nagar, District Band (or any other investigating agency of the State of
U.P.) not to apprehend the applicant in Case Crime No. 831 of 2020 u/s
419, 420 and 406 I.P.C., And/or may pass such other & further order as
this Hon’ble Court, may deem, just and proper in the facts and
circumstances of the case.”
5.     A counter affidavit dated 21.05.2021 has been filed in the
anticipatory bail application which has been sworn by Mohammad Akram
Sub-Inspector, Police Station Kotwali Nagar, District Banda. In the said
counter affidavit paragraph 10 & 12 referred to the applicant having
criminal history and thereby stating in both the paragraphs that he is a
habitual criminal. Paragraph 10 & 12 of the said counter affidavit is
“10. That the contents of paragraph No. 14 of the affidavit are wrong
and as such are denied. The true fact is that the applicant is named
accused and man of habitual criminal and has long criminal history.
Photostat copy of the criminal history of the applicant is being filed
herewith and marked as Annexure No. C.A.1 to this affidavit.
12. That the contents of paragraph No. 16, 17, 18 & 19 of the affidavit
are wrong and as such are denied. The true fact is that the applicant is
named accused and he taken money from the informant on the false
pretext of sand business and he did not return the money of the
informant and has committed fraud. It is further submitted that the
applicant is habitual criminal and has long criminal history.”
6.     Annexure-CA-1 to the said counter affidavit is stated to be the
criminal history of the applicant. A perusal of the same shows that there
are 18 criminal cases against him. Annexure-CA-1 to the said counter
affidavit is extracted herein-below:-
4                  A482 No. 10778 of 2022 with connected matter
7.    A rejoinder affidavit dated 20.08.2022 to the counter affidavit dated
21.05.2022 of the State has been filed in the anticipatory bail application
explaining the criminal history of the applicant.
8.    In the 482 petition a counter affidavit of the State dated 10.06.2022
has been filed which is sworn by Brahmdev Goswami, Sub-Inspector,
Police Station Kotwali Nagar, District Banda. In para no.12 of the said
affidavit which is in reply to para 19 and 20 of the affidavit in support of
the 482 petition, it is stated that the accused applicant has no criminal
history to his credit. The said para is quoted herein-below:-
"12. That the contents of paragraph no.19 & 20 of the affidavit are
wrong and denied. In reply, it is stated that accused applicant and
co-accused in premeditated manner committed collusive fraud and
cheating with the informant and during the course of investigation,
investigating officer recorded statement of informant and witnesses who
have supported prosecution story beyond all reasonable doubts and the
investigating officer after thorough investigation collected credible and
concrete evidence and submitted charge sheet dated 21.09.2021 against
the accused applicant under Section 419, 420, 406 IPC and the learned
Magistrate has taken cognizance on the charge sheet vide order dated
02.11.2021 and the case was registered as Criminal Case No.02 of 2022
5                A482 No. 10778 of 2022 with connected matter
and the case was pending in the court of Chief Judicial Magistrate,
According to DCRB and CCTNS reports, the accused applicants has no
criminal history to his credit. Copies of the DCRB and CCTNS reports
are being file herewith and marked as Annexure No.C.A.-1 to this
affidavit."
9.     Phased with the averment in the 482 petition with regards to the
criminal history of the applicant particularly the fact that the applicant
states to be having criminal history but the counter affidavit of the State
stating that he has no criminal history to his credit, this Court passed an
order on 28.07.2022 with regards to the same. The same is extracted
“Heard Sri Durgesh Kumar Singh, learned counsel for the applicant, Sri
Jitendra Prasad Mishra, learned counsel for the first informant and Sri
Gyan Prakash Singh, learned counsel for the State.
Learned counsel for the applicant has provided copy of the petition and
counter affidavit filed by State to learned counsel for the State today in
Court as due to unfortunate incident of fire on 17.07.2022 in the office of
the Advocate General, many files have been burnt and it was impossible
to locate the file due to the extensive fire in the record rooms.
Learned counsel for the first informant states that the applicant has
criminal history of 11 cases to which learned counsel for the applicant
states that the present case is a case in which the applicant has been
falsely implicated. He states that although in para no.20 of the affidavit
filed in support of present application under Section 482 Cr.P.C. it is
stated that the applicant has criminal history and it has been disclosed
in his anticipatory bail application but in the counter affidavit filed on
behalf of the State, in para no.12, there is a specific recital that the
applicant has no criminal history. Para no.20 of the affidavit filed in
support of present application under Section 482 Cr.P.C is quoted
"20. That, the applicant has dutifully explained his criminal history in
his anticipatory bail application which is already pending before this
Hon'ble Court. It is irrelevant for the purpose of deciding the present
petition."
The counter affidavit of the State dated 10.06.2022 is on record which
has been sworn by Brahmdev Goswami in the capacity of Sub-Inspector,
Police Station Kotwali Nagar, District Banda. In para no.12 of the said
affidavit which is in reply to para 19 and 20 of the affidavit in support of
the application under Section 482 Cr.P.C., it is stated that the accused
applicant has no criminal history to his credit. The said para is quoted
"12. That the contents of paragraph no.19 & 20 of the affidavit are
wrong and denied. In reply, it is stated that accused applicant and
co-accused in premeditated manner committed collusive fraud and
cheating with the informant and during the course of investigation,
6               A482 No. 10778 of 2022 with connected matter
investigating officer recorded statement of informant and witnesses who
have supported prosecution story beyond all reasonable doubts and the
investigating officer after thorough investigation collected credible and
concrete evidence and submitted charge sheet dated 21.09.2021 against
the accused applicant under Section 419, 420, 406 IPC and the learned
Magistrate has taken cognizance on the charge sheet vide order dated
02.11.2021 and the case was registered as Criminal Case No.02 of 2022
and the case was pending in the court of Chief Judicial Magistrate,
According to DCRB and CCTNS reports, the accused applicants has no
criminal history to his credit. Copies of the DCRB and CCTNS reports
are being file herewith and marked as Annexure No.C.A.-1 to this
affidavit."
This Court is at loss to appreciate the contents of para no.12 of the
counter affidavit as on the own pleadings of the applicant, he has his
criminal history which has been explained in his anticipatory bail
application which is stated to be pending before this Court. The first
impression which the Court gets from the said counter affidavit is that
the deponent of the counter affidavit is trying to conceal the criminal
history for the reasons best known to him, he is trying that the accused
may not disclose his entire criminal history in the matter and to the
contrary, prima-facie is giving a wrong statement in para no.12 of the
same in which he states that the applicant has no criminal history to his
credit.
In these circumstances, let the matter be taken up by Superintendent of
Police, Banda forthwith who shall file his personal affidavit in the
matter within seven days from today disclosing the criminal history of
the applicant and also disclosing as to why the same has not been
disclosed in the counter affidavit filed earlier in the matter. He is free to
initiate any action against the deponent of the counter affidavit for the
contents of para 12 if he finds it to be untrue. If any action is taken, the
same shall also be disclosed in his personal affidavit. If the said
personal affidavit is not filed, Superintendent of Police, Banda shall be
personally present before this Court on the next date.
If the criminal history of the applicant is found, the Court may further
consider to proceed against the deponent of the counter affidavit for
filing false affidavit.
The Registrar General of this Court and learned counsel for the State
shall communicate this order by tomorrow to Superintendent of Police,
10.   In compliance of the order dated 28.07.2022, a personal affidavit
dated 05.08.2022 sworn by Sri Abhinandan, the Superintendent of Police,
Banda has been filed containing 11 paragraphs in all. The said paragraphs
are quoted herein-below:-
“1. That the deponent is presently posted as Superintendent of Police,
District Banda and in compliance of the Hon’ble Court’s order dated
28.07.2022, he is filing the instant personal affidavit in the above-noted
7               A482 No. 10778 of 2022 with connected matter
matter. The deponent has perused the record as available to him and as
such, he is well acquainted with the facts deposed herein below. The
deponent is enclosing his photograph and the photocopy of his identity
card according to the provisions of Rules of Court, 1952.
2. That this Hon’ble Court had been pleased to direct, vide order dated
28.07.2022, the Superintendent of Police, Banda shall file his personal
affidavit disclosing as to why the same has not been disclosed in the
counter affidavit filed earlier in the matter. Further the Hon’ble Court
has been pleased to direct that he is free to initiate any action against
the deponent of the counter affidavit for the contents of para 12 if he
finds it to be untrue. If any action is taken, the same shall also be
disclosed in his personal affidavit. If the said personal affidavit is not
filed, Superintendent of Police, Banda shall be personally present before
the Hon’ble Court on the next date.
3. That in compliance of the aforesaid order (supra), the deponent is
filing the instant personal affidavit and prays this Hon’ble Court may
kindly be pleased to permit the instant affidavit to be taken on record.
4. That at the very outset, the deponent tenders her unconditional,
unqualified, unfettered and sincere apology for the inconvenience
caused to this Hon’ble Court, though the same was inadvertent.
5. That the deponent noted the justified concern expressed by the
Hon’ble High Court as to why, when the applicant himself had
indicated that he had some criminal history (although explained) yet, it
was stated in the paragraph no. of the counter affidavit sworn by
Sub-Inspector Brahmdev Goswami at Police Station Kotwali Nagar,
District Banda that the applicant had no criminal history according to
the reports of DCRB and CCTNS. Admittedly, if the knowledge of the
deponent was confined to criminal history of the applicant or lack of it,
in District Banda, the correct averment should have read that to the best
of his knowledge, he had no criminal history in District Banda.
6. That stating the DCRB and CCTNS records did not contain any
criminal history gives the impression of a clean chit to the applicant and
appears to state that he has no criminal history. Since the applicant does
have a criminal history, the aforesaid averment, even if it is a bonafide
example of unhappy drafting but, it cannot be condoned.
7. That however, the applicant has criminal history of long criminal
cases in different districts viz. 01 criminal case in District Banda
(criminal case in question), 10 criminal cases in District Chitrakoot, 10
criminal cases in District Raibareli, 04 criminal cases in District
Pratapgarh, 01 criminal case in District Mirzapur and 01 criminal case
in District Prayagraj. A copy of the chart reflecting the entire criminal
history of the applicant is being enclosed herewith and marked as
annexure no. 1 to this affidavit.
8. That it is humbly submitted that the deponent took a serious note of
the lapse aforesaid committed by the Sub-Inspector and passed an order
dated 30.07.2022 to conduct a preliminary inquiry by the Additional
Superintendent of Police, District Banda, into the apparently arbitrary,
negligent and irresponsible manner, in which the counter affidavit dated
10.06.2022 had been filed by the Sub-Inspector Brahmdev Goswami at
Police Station Kotwali Nagar, District Banda. A copy of the order dated
30.07.2022 passed by the deponent is being enclosed herewith and
8            A482 No. 10778 of 2022 with connected matter
9. That the deponent assures this Hon’ble Court that the most stringent
action as per the relevant and extant law and rules, will be taken against
the delinquent police officer.
10. That the deponent humbly reiterates his unconditional, unfettered
and unqualified apologies to this Hon’ble Court for the inconvenience
caused, and he is sincerely sorry for the same, though the same was
inadvertent.
11. That in view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances, stated above, it
is humbly prayed that this Hon’ble Court may pass such other or
further order, which this Hon’ble Court may deem fit and proper under
the facts and circumstances of the present case, so that the justice may
be done.”
11.    Annexure-1 to the said personal affidavit is a chart showing the
criminal history of the applicant. The same has been referred to in
paragraph 7 of the said personal affidavit. The criminal history as stated in
the said chart is of 27 criminal cases. The case mentioned at Serial No. 27
being Case Crime No. 831 of 2020, under Sections 419, 420, 406 I.P.C.,
Police Station Kotwali Nagar, District Banda is the case which is the
subject matter in the 482 petition and the anticipatory bail application
also. The list of 27 cases distributed in five columns in the said chart is
extracted herein-below:-
12.    An affidavit dated 16.08.2022 in the 482 petition has been filed on
behalf of the applicant in response to the personal affidavit of the
Superintendent of Police, Banda in which an explanation has been given
about the criminal history of the applicant as detailed in Annexure-1 to the
said personal affidavit from paragraph nos. 8 to 22 of it stating therein that
the cases from Serial Nos. 1 to 5 have ended in acquittal as per the
Goshwara register, but the lawyer of the applicant is making an effort to
obtain the certified copies of the judgements of the said cases, the case at
Serial No. 6 is a punitive proceeding, the cases at Serial Nos. 7, 8 and 9
are non cognizable offences, the case at Serial No. 10 has ended in
acquittal, the cases at Serial Nos. 11 to 17 related to obtaining firearm
licences by the applicant from the places where he was living at that time,
the said weapons were seized which were then released in his favour on
the orders of the concerned District Magistrate, the case mentioned at
Serial No. 18 also ended in acquittal, the case at Serial No. 19 though a
charge-sheet has been sent to the concerned court in which cognizance
has been taken but the applicant has not received any summons or notices
till date, the cases at Serial Nos. 20 & 21 are the cases in which the
applicant is not named in the first information report, no charge-sheet has
been submitted against him and he has neither been summoned nor has
received any notice till date, the case at Serial No. 22 has been withdrawn
10              A482 No. 10778 of 2022 with connected matter
under Section 321 Cr.P.C., the case at Serial No. 23 has ended in Final
Report in favour of the applicant, for the cases at Serial Nos. 24 & 25 the
applicant has no knowledge of any charge-sheet being submitted against
him and neither has he received any summon or any notice till date and
the case at Serial No. 26 is a case simple in nature.
13.   An affidavit of compliance dated 06.09.2022 has been filed by Sri
Abhinandan, the Superintendent of Police, Banda in the anticipatory bail
application containing 12 paragraphs in all. The same are extracted
“1. That the deponent is presently Superintendent of Police, Banda, and
he is filing the instant affidavit in the above noted matter. The deponent
has perused the record as available to him and as such, he is well
acquainted with the facts deposed herein below. The deponent is
enclosing his photograph and the photocopy of his identity card
according to the provisions of Rules of Court, 1952.
2. That this Hon’ble Court had been pleased to direct, vide order dated
02.09.2022, the State to file a proper affidavit about criminal history of
the applicant.
3. That in compliance of the aforesaid order (supra), the deponent is
filing the instant affidavit, and humbly prays that this Hon’ble Court
may graciously be pleased to permit the instant affidavit to be taken on
record.
4. That the deponent at the very outset tenders his unconditional,
unqualified, unfettered and sincere apologies for the inconvenience
caused to this Hon’ble Court, though the same was inadvertent.
5. That it is humbly prayed that this Hon’ble Court may graciously be
pleased to permit the instant affidavit to be read in conjunction with the
affidavit sworn by Superintendent of Police, Banda and filed on
05.08.2022 in criminal misc. application (under section 482 Cr.P.C.) no.
10778 of 2022.
6. That taking serious note of the negligence and irresponsible manner
in which the counter affidavit dated 10.06.2022 had been filed by the
Sub-Inspector Brahm Dev Goswami of Police Station Kotwali Nagar
District Banda in the aforesaid (supra) application under section 482
Cr.P.C., the deponent had ordered the Addl. Superintendent of Police,
Banda to conduct a preliminary inquiry against him by order dated
30.07.2022. A copy of the order dated 30.07.2022 passed by the
deponent is being enclosed herewith and marked as annexure no. 1 to
this affidavit.
7. That it was prima-facie found that the said Sub-Inspector named
Brahm Dev Goswami had been guilty of gross negligence and
carelessness, therefore, a show cause notice dated 24.08.2022 was
issued to him requiring him to submit a reply within 15 days why action
against him be not taken under the relevant and extant rules. A copy of
the show cause notice dated 24.08.2022 issued by the deponent is being
11                A482 No. 10778 of 2022 with connected matter
enclosed herewith and marked as annexure no. 2 to this affidavit.
8. That considering the serious nature of the allegations against the
concerned Sub-Inspector, the deponent invoked the powers vested in him
under rule 17(1)(Ka) of the Non-Gazetted Police Officers (Punishment
& Appeal) Rules, 1991 and by order dated 24.08.2022 suspended the
concerned Sub-Inspector Brahm Dev Goswami, and it was also
communicated to him that a departmental inquiry against him was
contemplated. A copy of the order of suspension dated 24.08.2022
passed by deponent is being enclosed herewith and marked as annexure
no. 3 to this affidavit.
9. That with regard to the incomplete criminal history (showing only 18
cases), which was attached as annexure no. CA-1 to the counter
affidavit sworn by Sub-Inspector Mohammad Akram of Police Station
Kotwali, District Banda dated 21.05.2021, the deponent took serious
note of this egregious lapse on the part of the delinquent officer and by
order dated 01.09.2022, the deponent ordered the Addl. Superintendent
of Police, Banda to conduct a preliminary inquiry as permitted under
the relevant and extant rules. A copy of the order dated 01.09.2022
passed by the deponent is being enclosed herewith and marked as
annexure no. 4 to this affidavit.
10. That the fact is that there are a total of 27 criminal cases comprising
the history of the applicant. A list of the complete criminal history is
being enclosed herewith and marked as annexure no. 5 to this affidavit.
11. That the deponent humbly reiterates his unconditional and
unqualified apologies to this Hon’ble Court for the inconvenience
caused, though the same was inadvertent.
12. That in view of the facts and circumstances of the case, stated above,
it is expedient in the interest of justice that this Hon’ble Court may
graciously be pleased to reject the bail application of the applicant.”
14.    Annexure-5 to the said affidavit which is refereed to in paragraph
10 is the criminal history of 27 cases against the applicant which are the
same as stated in the personal affidavit filed in the 482 petition and have
been quoted above and as such are not being quoted as being repetitive.
15.    The prosecution case as per the first information report lodged on
11.10.2020 by Ramakant Tripathi as Case Crime No. 0831 of 2020, under
Banda against the applicant and Bhanu Pratap Chaturvedi son of Virendra
Chaturvedi alleges therein that he is a contractor in P.W.D. and lives in
Gali No. 9, Swaraj Colony, District Banda. Bhanu Pratap Chaturvedi is
his relative. He is a Lekhpal in Banda. In March 2017, Bhanu Pratap
Chaturvedi came to his house and told him that there is big work of sand
in which if he invests once then he would have no tension any time. The
12           A482 No. 10778 of 2022 with connected matter
first informant told him that there is a marriage in the house till 10 th
December and as such he cannot invest money. On 14 th December he told
that on 17.12.2017 “Sahab” will be coming who will them make him a
partner of 10 percent. On 17.12.2017 the first informant with Bhanu
Pratap Chaturvedi went to the Irrigation Inspection Bungalow, Banda and
then an information was sent to Sahab who after 10 months called them
on which Chaturvedi introduced each other and then he came to know that
Sahab is former M.P. Bal Kumar Patel after which Chaturvedi told him to
give money. Then Bal Kumar Patel former M.P. told him that he will be in
Rai Bareilly and Rs. 5 lakhs be deposited in his Account No.
06122800100031928 in Punjab National Bank. The first informant then
on 20.12.2017 through RTGS transferred Rs. 5 lakhs in the said account.
Whenever he used to call Bal Kumar Patel and ask him for getting the
agreement done he used to say for getting it done in a day or two. One day
Chaturvedi called the first informant and said that on 28.05.2018 the
Member of Parliament Bal Kumar Patel is coming and will be meeting in
the Inspection Bungalow as there is lot of sand and there will be a
requirement of about 50-60 lakhs for which he is trying to make
arrangement through his friends. Then contractor Rudra Prakash,
contractor Satendra Shukla and his relative Yogesh Pandey agreed to
invest money and on 28th May they reached Inspection Bungalow where
Bal Kumar Patel told them that a lease has been granted in favour of his
son Sudheer and a required rawanna is to be filled. On believing the same,
Rudra Prakash gave Rs. 10 lakhs, Satendra Shukla gave Rs. 20 lakhs and
Yogesh Pandey gave Rs. 9 lakhs to which Yogesh was told that he would
be a partner of only 9 percent on which he said that he would send the
money or get it transferred through RTGS after which he transferred Rs.
16 lakhs through RTGS in the account of Bal Kumar Patel. Bal Kumar
Patel used to delay the talks and then on 27.12.2018 the first informant
through RTI requested for information as to whether any file has been
approved for lease of sand in the name of Sudheer, Rama Shanker Patel
and Dev Sharan Patel for Manpur Khurd Naraini to which he did not get
any reply and then he himself went to the concerned department and
13           A482 No. 10778 of 2022 with connected matter
inquired from there and came to know that there is no file for the said
names. He then tried to contact Bal Kumar Patel former M.P. on phone on
which he used to say sometimes he is in Delhi, sometimes in Rae Bareilly
and sometimes in Pratapgarh and later on in the year 2019 he left
Samajwadi Party and joined Congress Party and contested the elections
from Banda Chitrakoot Loksabha constituency but lost it. The first
informant and his persons have a belief that Bhanu Pratap Chaturvedi and
Bal Kumar Patel former M.P. have together committed cheating and fraud
with him and his associates Rudra Prakash, Satendra Shukla and Yogesh
Pandey. The first informant and his associates then went 2-3 times to the
house of Bal Kumar Patel in Chitrakoot and asked about the partnership
to which he tried to mislead them and then they demanded their money
back which is also being avoided by him. He has not returned Rs. 65
lakhs due on the first informant and his associates and is neither
responding to their phone calls. Bal Kumar Patel @ Raj Kumar former
M.P. was called repeated times and then on 07.07.2020 he promised to
return the money in September 2020 but now is not responding to the
phone calls. Some unknown people came to the house of the first
informant and gave a threat that he should forget the money given to Bal
Kumar Patel otherwise it will not be good for him. He and his family is
under threat of life. He prays that a first information report be lodged.
Along with the first information report enclosures being RTGS receipts,
the application and receipt of registry of RTI have been enclosed. The first
information report has thus been lodged.
16.   Learned counsel for the applicant argued that the first information
report has been lodged under misconception. The deal between the first
informant and his friends and relatives with the applicant and co-accused
was a business transaction. There was no offer and assurance given by the
applicant either to the first informant or his associates. The offence is
petty in nature. The statements of the first informant and the witnesses
recorded during investigation are stereo typed statements. The present
dispute is a private dispute. It is argued while placing Annexure-4 to the
14            A482 No. 10778 of 2022 with connected matter
paper-book of the 482 petition that an application under Section 156 (3)
Cr.P.C. was filed by Bal Kumar Patel @ Raj Kumar (the applicant)
against Ramakant Tripathi (the first informant), Yogesh Pandey, Rudra
Prakash and Satendra Shukla alleging therein that the accused persons had
given money for purchase of land but some dispute arose between the
parties and as such the applicant gave an application dated 17.11.2020 to
the Superintendent of Police, Chitrakoot to the said effect and since there
was no action on it an application under Section 156 (3) Cr.P.C. has been
moved by him. Paragraph 4 of the affidavit and Annexure-4 being the said
application dated 17.11.2020 (page numbers 62 and 63 of the paper-book)
and the application under Section 156 (3) Cr.P.C. (page numbers 64 to 67
of the paper-book) have been placed before the Court. It is argued that the
same is the reason for false implication of the applicant. It is argued that
the present dispute if any is a private dispute arising out of business
transaction and as such the proceedings deserve to be quashed. There is
no criminality in the allegations. It is argued that subsequent to lodging of
the first information report the investigation concluded and a charge-sheet
dated 21.09.2021 has been submitted against the applicant and co-accused
Bhanu Pratap Chaturvedi under Sections 419, 420, 406 I.P.C. on which
vide order dated 02.11.2021 they have been summoned to face trial which
is totally illegal. While placing the anticipatory bail application, learned
counsel argued that if this Court is not of the view of allowing the 482
petition then the applicant may be granted anticipatory bail till conclusion
of trial, the arguments and grounds are the same as argued.
17.    Learned counsel for the first informant while opposing the prayers
of the 482 petition and the anticipatory bail application argued that the
intention of the applicant to cheat was right from the very inception as is
apparent from the allegations itself. Money was taken on false assurance.
The applicant has not only cheated the first informant but many other
people. While placing paragraph 2 of his counter affidavit dated
27.08.2022 in the anticipatory bail application it is argued that the
Investigating Officer tried to serve notice under Section 41 (A) Cr.P.C. to
15          A482 No. 10778 of 2022 with connected matter
the applicant but the applicant did not meet him and as such he pasted the
said notice at his house. Subsequently the Investigating Officer received a
call from the mobile phone of one Dinesh Kumar Patel stating that the
applicant is busy in elections and cannot come and since notice under
Section 41 (A) Cr.P.C. has been sent to him, he may talk to him on phone
only on which the Investigating Officer talked to the applicant on phone
and recorded his statement on phone itself. Learned counsel has placed
CD No. 25 dated 18.09.2021 which is annexed as Annexure-CA-1 to the
counter affidavit to demonstrate the same and while further elaborating
his argument has stated that the same would go to show that the applicant
never cooperated in the investigation and even the Investigating Officer
felt handicapped in recording his statement under Section 161 Cr.P.C.
which was done by him on telephone.
Learned counsel has further argued that a recording of the demand
of money and the conversation between the parties as was recorded was
given to the Investigating Officer by the first informant in a pen-drive
which was sealed by him and made part of the case diary. Paragraph 7 of
the additional submissions in the counter affidavit dated 27.08.2022 in the
anticipatory bail application and Annexure-7 to the same being CD No. 5
dated 24.11.2020 in which a note has been made by the Investigating
Officer regarding the said pen-drive and making it part of the case diary
has been placed before the Court to demonstrate the same. It is further
argued that the alleged application dated 17.11.2020 addressed to the
Superintendent of Police, District Chitrakoot and the application under
Section 156 (3) Cr.P.C. as stated to have been moved by the applicant
against the first informant and his associates is a totally false version
containing a concocted story. It is argued while placing the counter
affidavit that the applicant is a man of criminal antecedents. Paragraph 18
of the said counter affidavit has further been placed to argue that the
applicant was a member of dreaded Dadua gang and is involved in
criminal activities since the year 1979 which is still continuing. It is
further argued that there are 27 cases against the applicant. Learned
16           A482 No. 10778 of 2022 with connected matter
counsel argued that the 482 petition and the anticipatory bail application
deserve to be dismissed.
18.     Learned counsel for the State also opposed the 482 petition and the
anticipatory bail application and argued that the applicant is named in the
first information report and there are allegations against him. There has
been misrepresentation on behalf of the applicant and he was actively
involved in the conversation due to which money was transferred in his
account. There was mens rea on his part. It is argued that the applicant has
not cooperated in the investigation as is apparent from the case diary. A
notice under Section 41 (A) Cr.P.C. was tried to be served on him but
could not be served and as such the same was pasted at his house after
which the Investigating Officer received a call from some person of the
applicant stating about the inability of the applicant to appear before the
Investigating Officer and then the Investigating Officer recorded his
statement under Section 161 Cr.P.C. through telephone only. It is argued
that although there was a non-disclosure of the criminal antecedents of the
applicant in the counter affidavit previously but the affidavit of
compliance of the Superintendent of Police, Banda in both the petitions
goes to show that there are 27 cases including the present case in which
the applicant has been involved. It is argued that the Superintendent of
Police, Banda has taken action against the earlier deponent of the counter
affidavit dated 10.06.2022 who did not at all disclose the criminal
antecedents of the applicant but stated in paragraph 12 that the applicant
has no criminal history to his credit. It is further argued that the
investigation in the matter has concluded in which credible evidence has
been found against the applicant. There has been transfer of money which
is a recorded event and recorded transaction. The money has gone in the
bank account of the applicant. A charge-sheet has been submitted after
thorough investigation upon which the court concerned has taken
cognizance in the present case. It is argued that as such the 482 petition
and the anticipatory bail application deserve to be dismissed.
19.     After having heard learned counsels for the parties and perusing the
17            A482 No. 10778 of 2022 with connected matter
records, it is apparent that the applicant is named in the first information
report. The transaction of money has been through bank transfers as have
been stated in the first information report. The allegations prima facie
show active participation of the applicant along with co-accused while
dealing with the first informant and his associates. The matter has been
investigated and charge-sheet has been submitted on which the court
concerned has taken cognizance and summoned the applicant and
co-accused. The application given to the Superintendent of Police, District
Chitrakoot by the applicant is dated 17.11.2020 and the application
allegedly moved under Section 156 (3) Cr.P.C. is an undated application
and even unnumbered. Even on probe to the learned counsel for the
applicant its date could not be disclosed. More so the first information
report of the present case has been lodged on 11.10.2020 whereas the
application allegedly moved before the Superintendent of Police, District
Chitrakoot is dated 17.11.2020 which is after about 01 month and 07 days
of lodging of the present first information report. The application under
Section 156 (3) Cr.P.C. if moved has to be obviously after 17.11.2020
which is the date of the application mentioned as alleged to be given to
the Superintendent of Police, District Chitrakoot. The same is thus after
lodging of the present first information report and is a defence of the
accused in the present case.
20.    The law with regard to quashing of proceedings / charge-sheet is
well settled.
ii)    State of Haryana and Ors. Vs. Bhajan Lal and Others :
iii)   State of Bihar Vs. P. P. Sharma : 1992 Supp (1) SCC
iv)    Trisuns Chemical Industry Vs. Rajesh Agarwal and Ors.
v)     M. Krishnan Vs. Vijay Singh & Anr. : (2001) 8 SCC 645;
vi)    Zandu Pharmaceuticals Works Ltd. Vs. Mohd. Sharaful
18               A482 No. 10778 of 2022 with connected matter
vii)    M. N. Ojha Vs. Alok Kumar Srivastava : (2009) 9 SCC
viii)   Joseph Salvaraj A. Vs. State of Gujarat and Ors. : (2011)
ix)     Arun Bhandari Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh and Ors.:
x)      Md. Allauddin Khan Vs. State of Bihar : (2019) 6 SCC
xi)     Anand Kumar Mohatta and Anr. Vs. State (NCT of
xii)    Rajeev Kourav Vs. Balasaheb & others : (2020) 3 SCC
xiii)   Nallapareddy Sridhar Reddy Vs. The State of Andhra
it has been held by the Apex Court that exercise of inherent power of the
High Court under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure is an
exceptional one. Great care should be taken by the High Court before
embarking to scrutinize the complaint/FIR/charge-sheet in deciding
whether the rarest of the rare case is made out to scuttle the prosecution in
its inception.
21.    Further in the case of Priti Saraf & anr. Vs. State of NCT of Delhi
& anr. : 2021 SCC Online SC 206 the Apex Court while considering the
powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C. has held as follows:
"23.    It being a settled principle of law that to exercise powers under
Section 482 CrPC, the complaint in its entirety shall have to be
examined on the basis of the allegation made in the complaint/FIR/
charge-sheet and the High Court at that stage was not under an
obligation to go into the matter or examine its correctness. Whatever
appears on the face of the complaint/FIR/charge-sheet shall be taken
into consideration without any critical examination of the same. The
offence ought to appear ex facie on the complaint/FIR/charge-sheet and
other documentary evidence, if any, on record.
24.     The question which is raised for consideration is that in what
circumstances and categories of cases, a criminal proceeding may be
quashed either in exercise of the extraordinary powers of the High Court
under Article 226 of the Constitution, or in the exercise of the inherent
powers of the High Court under Section 482 CrPC. This has often been
hotly debated before this Court and various High Courts. Though in a
19               A482 No. 10778 of 2022 with connected matter
series of decisions, this question has been answered on several
occasions by this Court, yet the same still comes up for consideration
and is seriously debated.
25.     In this backdrop, the scope and ambit of the inherent jurisdiction
of the High Court under Section 482 CrPC has been examined in the
judgment of this Court in State of Haryana and Others Vs. Bhajan Lal
and Others, (1992 Suppl (1) SCC 335). The relevant para is mentioned
"102. In the backdrop of the interpretation of the
various relevant provisions of the Code under Chapter
XIV and of the principles of law enunciated by this
Court in a series of decisions relating to the exercise of
the extraordinary power under Article 226 or the
following categories of cases by way of illustration
wherein such power could be exercised either to prevent
abuse of the process of any court or otherwise to secure
the ends of justice, though it may not be possible to lay
down any precise, clearly defined and sufficiently
channelised and inflexible guidelines or rigid formulae
and to give an exhaustive list of myriad kinds of cases
wherein such power should be exercised.
(1) Where the allegations made in the first information
report or the complaint, even if they are taken at their
face value and accepted in their entirety do not prima
facie constitute any offence or make out a case against
the accused.
(2) Where the allegations in the first information report
and other materials, if any, accompanying the FIR do
not disclose a cognizable offence, justifying an
investigation by police officers under Section 156(1) of
the Code except under an order of a Magistrate within
the purview of Section 155(2) of the Code.
(3) Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the
FIR or complaint and the evidence collected in support
of the same do not disclose the commission of any
(4) Where, the allegations in the FIR do not constitute a
cognizable offence but constitute only a non-cognizable
offence, no investigation is permitted by a police officer
without an order of a Magistrate as contemplated under
Section 155(2) of the Code.
(5) Where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint
are so absurd and inherently improbable on the basis of
which no prudent person can ever reach a just
conclusion that there is sufficient ground for proceeding
against the accused.
(6) Where there is an express legal bar engrafted in any
of the provisions of the Code or the concerned Act
(under which a criminal proceeding is instituted) to the
20                A482 No. 10778 of 2022 with connected matter
institution and continuance of the proceedings and/or
where there is a specific provision in the Code or the
concerned Act, providing efficacious redress for the
grievance of the aggrieved party.
(7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended
with malafide and/or where the proceeding is
maliciously instituted with an ulterior motive for
wreaking vengeance on the accused and with a view to
26. This Court has clarified the broad contours and parameters in laying
down the guidelines which have to be kept in mind by the High Courts
while exercising inherent powers under Section 482 CrPC. The aforesaid
principles laid down by this Court are illustrative and not exhaustive.
Nevertheless, it throws light on the circumstances and the situation
which is to be kept in mind when the High Court exercises its inherent
powers under Section 482 CrPC.
27. It has been further elucidated recently by this Court in Arnab
Manoranjan Goswami Vs. State of Maharashtra and Others, 2020 SCC
Online SC 964 where jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 226 of
the Constitution of India and Section 482 CrPC has been analyzed at
great length.
28. It is thus settled that the exercise of inherent power of the High Court
is an extraordinary power which has to be exercised with great care and
circumspection before embarking to scrutinize the complaint/FIR/
charge-sheet in deciding whether the case is the rarest of rare case, to
scuttle the prosecution at its inception."
22.    In the case of Ramveer Upadhyay Vs. State of U.P. : 2002 SCC
Online SC 484 the Apex Court has held in paragraphs 27, 38 and 39 that
quashing of a criminal case by exercising jurisdiction under Section 482
Cr.P.C. should be done in exceptional cases only. It was further held that
criminal proceedings cannot be nipped in the bud, whether the allegations
are true or untrue would have to be decided in the trial, the court cannot
examine the correctness of the allegations in the complaint. Paragraphs
27, 38 and 39 are quoted herein:
"27.      Even though, the inherent power of the High Court under
Section 482 of the Cr.P.C., to interfere with criminal proceedings is wide,
such power has to be exercised with circumspection, in exceptional
cases. Jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C is not to be exercised
for the asking.
38.       Ends of justice would be better served if valuable time of the
Court is spent on hearing appeals rather than entertaining petitions
under Section 482 at an interlocutory stage which might ultimately
result in miscarriage of justice as held in Hamida v. Rashid @ Rasheed
and Others, (2008) 1 SCC 474.
39.      In our considered opinion criminal proceedings cannot be
nipped in the bud by exercise of jurisdiction under Section 482 of the
Cr.P.C. only because the complaint has been lodged by a political rival.
It is possible that a false complaint may have been lodged at the behest
of a political opponent. However, such possibility would not justify
interference under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C. to quash the criminal
proceedings. As observed above, the possibility of retaliation on the part
of the petitioners by the acts alleged, after closure of the earlier
criminal case cannot be ruled out. The allegations in the complaint
constitute offence under the Atrocities Act. Whether the allegations are
true or untrue, would have to be decided in the trial. In exercise of
power under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C., the Court does not examine the
correctness of the allegations in a complaint except in exceptionally rare
cases where it is patently clear that the allegations are frivolous or do
not disclose any offence. The Complaint Case No.19/2018 is not such a
case which should be quashed at the inception itself without further
Trial. The High Court rightly dismissed the application under Section
482 of the Cr.P.C."
23.     Further in the case of Daxaben Vs. State of Gujarat : 2022 SCC
Online SC 936 in para 49 the Apex Court has held as under:
"49. In exercise of power under section 482 of the Cr.P.C., 1973
the Court does not examine the correctness of the allegation in the
complaint except in exceptionally rare cases where it is patently
clear that the allegations are frivolous or do not disclose any
offence."
24.     Thus, it is trite law that at the stage of quashing only the material of
the prosecution has to be seen and the court cannot delve into the
correctness of the allegations or the defence of the accused and then
proceed to examine the matter on its merit by weighing the evidence so
produced. The disputed questions of facts of the case cannot be adjudged
and adjudicated at this stage while exercising powers under Section 482
Cr.P.C. and only the prima facie prosecution case has to be looked into as
it is. Evidence needs to be led to substantiate the defence of the accused.
The accused can raise their grievances while claiming discharge at the
appropriate stage before the trial court.
25.     The law with regards to anticipatory bail is also well settled.
In the case of Bhadresh Bipinbhai Sheth v. State of Gujarat :
(2016) 1 SCC 152 the law relating to anticipatory bail has been reiterated.
22               A482 No. 10778 of 2022 with connected matter
“21. Before we proceed further, we would like to discuss the law
relating to grant of anticipatory bail as has been developed
through judicial interpretative process. A judgment which needs to
be pointed out is a Constitution Bench judgment of this Court in
Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia v. State of Punjab [(1980) 2 SCC 565 :
1980 SCC (Cri) 465]. The Constitution Bench in this case
emphasised that provision of anticipatory bail enshrined in
Section 438 of the Code is conceptualised under Article 21 of the
Constitution which relates to personal liberty. Therefore, such a
provision calls for liberal interpretation of Section 438 of the Code
in light of Article 21 of the Constitution. The Code explains that an
anticipatory bail is a pre-arrest legal process which directs that if
the person in whose favour it is issued is thereafter arrested on the
accusation in respect of which the direction is issued, he shall be
released on bail. The distinction between an ordinary order of bail
and an order of anticipatory bail is that whereas the former is
granted after arrest and therefore means release from the custody
of the police, the latter is granted in anticipation of arrest and is
therefore, effective at the very moment of arrest. A direction under
Section 438 is therefore intended to confer conditional immunity
from the “touch” or confinement contemplated by Section 46 of
the Code. The essence of this provision is brought out in the
following manner : (Gurbaksh Singh case [(1980) 2 SCC 565 :
1980 SCC (Cri) 465] , SCC p. 586, para 26)
“26. We find a great deal of substance in Mr Tarkunde's submission that
since denial of bail amounts to deprivation of personal liberty, the court
should lean against the imposition of unnecessary restrictions on the
scope of Section 438, especially when no such restrictions have been
imposed by the legislature in the terms of that section. Section 438 is a
procedural provision which is concerned with the personal liberty of the
individual, who is entitled to the benefit of the presumption of innocence
since he is not, on the date of his application for anticipatory bail,
convicted of the offence in respect of which he seeks bail. An
overgenerous infusion of constraints and conditions which are not to be
found in Section 438 can make its provisions constitutionally vulnerable
since the right to personal freedom cannot be made to depend on
compliance with unreasonable restrictions. The beneficent provision
contained in Section 438 must be saved, not jettisoned. No doubt can
linger after the decision in Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India [(1978) 1
SCC 248] , that in order to meet the challenge of Article 21 of the
Constitution, the procedure established by law for depriving a person of
his liberty must be fair, just and reasonable. Section 438, in the form in
which it is conceived by the legislature, is open to no exception on the
ground that it prescribes a procedure which is unjust or unfair. We
ought, at all costs, to avoid throwing it open to a Constitutional
challenge by reading words in it which are not to be found therein.”
22.      Though the Court observed that the principles which govern the
grant of ordinary bail may not furnish an exact parallel to the right to
anticipatory bail, still such principles have to be kept in mind, namely,
the object of bail which is to secure the attendance of the accused at the
23               A482 No. 10778 of 2022 with connected matter
trial, and the proper test to be applied in the solution of the question
whether bail should be granted or refused is whether it is probable that
the party will appear to take his trial. Otherwise, bail is not to be
withheld as a punishment. The Court has also to consider whether there
is any possibility of the accused tampering with the evidence or
influencing witnesses, etc. Once these tests are satisfied, bail should be
granted to an undertrial which is also important as viewed from another
angle, namely, an accused person who enjoys freedom is in a much
better position to look after his case and to properly defend himself than
if he were in custody. Thus, grant or non-grant of bail depends upon a
variety of circumstances and the cumulative effect thereof enters into
judicial verdict. The Court stresses that any single circumstance cannot
be treated as of universal validity or as necessarily justifying the grant
or refusal of bail. After clarifying this position, the Court discussed the
inferences of anticipatory bail in the following manner: (Gurbaksh Singh
case [(1980) 2 SCC 565 : 1980 SCC (Cri) 465], SCC p. 588, para 31).
“31. In regard to anticipatory bail, if the proposed accusation appears
to stem not from motives of furthering the ends of justice but from some
ulterior motive, the object being to injure and humiliate the applicant by
having him arrested, a direction for the release of the applicant on bail
in the event of his arrest would generally be made. On the other hand, if
it appears likely, considering the antecedents of the applicant, that
taking advantage of the order of anticipatory bail he will flee from
justice, such an order would not be made. But the converse of these
propositions is not necessarily true. That is to say, it cannot be laid down
as an inexorable rule that anticipatory bail cannot be granted unless the
proposed accusation appears to be actuated by mala fides; and, equally,
that anticipatory bail must be granted if there is no fear that the
applicant will abscond. There are several other considerations, too
numerous to enumerate, the combined effect of which must weigh with
the court while granting or rejecting anticipatory bail. The nature and
seriousness of the proposed charges, the context of the events likely to
lead to the making of the charges, a reasonable possibility of the
applicant's presence not being secured at the trial, a reasonable
apprehension that witnesses will be tampered with and ‘the larger
interests of the public or the State’ are some of the considerations which
the court has to keep in mind while deciding an application for
anticipatory bail. The relevance of these considerations was pointed out
in State v. Captain Jagjit Singh [AIR 1962 SC 253 : (1962) 1 Cri LJ
215 : (1962) 3 SCR 622] , which, though, was a case under the old
Section 498 which corresponds to the present Section 439 of the Code. It
is of paramount consideration to remember that the freedom of the
individual is as necessary for the survival of the society as it is for the
egoistic purposes of the individual. A person seeking anticipatory bail is
still a free man entitled to the presumption of innocence. He is willing to
submit to restraints on his freedom, by the acceptance of conditions
which the court may think fit to impose, in consideration of the
assurance that if arrested, he shall be enlarged on bail.”
26.   The Apex Court in the case of Narinderjit Singh Sahni v. Union of
India : (2002) 2 SCC 210 has observed that accused facing a charge
under sections 406, 409, 420 and 120-B is ordinarily not entitled to
24              A482 No. 10778 of 2022 with connected matter
invoke the provisions of section 438 of the Criminal Procedure Code
unless it is established that such criminal accusation is not a bonafide one.
27.      While considering the scope of anticipatory bail under section 438
of Criminal Procedure Code the Apex Court in the case of Adri Dharan
Das v. State of West Bengal : (2005) 4 SCC 303, relying on the earlier
Constitutional Bench judgment in case of Balachand Jain v. State of
Madhya Pradesh : (1976) 4 SCC 572, in para 7 has observed thus:-
“7. The facility which Section 438 of the Code gives is generally referred to as
“anticipatory bail”. This expression which was used by the Law Commission in its
41st Report is neither used in the section nor in its marginal note. But the expression
“anticipatory bail” is a convenient mode of indication that it is possible to apply for
bail in anticipation of arrest. Any order of bail can be effective only from the time of
arrest of the accused. Wharton's Law Lexicon explains “bail” as “to set at liberty a
person arrested or imprisoned, on security being taken for his appearance”. Thus bail
is basically release from restraint, more particularly the custody of police. The
distinction between an ordinary order of bail and an order under Section 438 of the
Code is that whereas the former is granted after arrest, and therefore means release
from custody of the police, the latter is granted in anticipation of arrest and is
therefore effective at the very moment of arrest. (See Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia v. State of
Punjab [(1980) 2 SCC 565 : 1980 SCC (Cri) 465] .) Section 46(1) of the Code, which
deals with how arrests are to be made, provides that in making an arrest the police
officer or other person making the same “shall actually touch or confine the body of
the person to be arrested, unless there be a submission to the custody by word or
action”. The order under Section 438 of the Code is intended to confer conditional
immunity from the touch as envisaged by Section 46(1) of the Code or any
confinement. The Apex Court in Balchand Jain v. State of M.P. [(1976) 4 SCC 572 :
1976 SCC (Cri) 689 : AIR 1977 SC 366] has described the expression “anticipatory
bail” as misnomer. It is well known that bail is ordinary manifestation of arrest, that
the court thinks first to make an order is that in the event of arrest a person shall be
released on bail. Manifestly there is no question of release on bail unless the accused
is arrested, and therefore, it is only on an arrest being effected the order becomes
operative. The power exercisable under Section 438 is somewhat extraordinary in
character and it is only in exceptional cases where it appears that the person may be
falsely implicated or where there are reasonable grounds for holding that a person
accused of an offence is not likely to otherwise misuse his liberty, then power is to be
exercised under Section 438. The power being of important nature it is entrusted only
to the higher echelons of judicial forums i.e. the Court of Session or the High Court. It
is the power exercisable in case of an anticipated accusation of non-bailable offence.
The object which is sought to be achieved by Section 438 of the Code is that the
moment a person is arrested, if he has already obtained an order from the Court of
Session or the High Court, he shall be released immediately on bail without being sent
to jail.”
28.      Looking to the discussions as above, facts of the case, the prima
facie allegations against the applicant, the law on the subject and the
criminal antecedents of the applicant, this Court does not deem it proper
to quash the proceedings in the 482 petition as prayed for.
25           A482 No. 10778 of 2022 with connected matter
In so far as the anticipatory bail application is concerned, although
a case for interference could have been made out but looking to the facts
and circumstances of the case cumulatively that the applicant was a public
representative earlier, the fact that he was involved earlier in many
criminal cases, the non-cooperation by him in the investigation by not
making himself available at the call of the Investigating Officer, the
recorded fact of transfer of money in his bank account, the allegation of
the applicant misrepresenting the first informant right from the inception
of the talks, the allegation of threat being extended to the first informant
by the henchmen of the applicant, the evidence as collected after which
the investigation being concluded by filing a charge-sheet against the
applicant and co-accused and as such the case being prima facie proved,
the court taking cognizance on it and summoning the accused persons, the
fact that there was absolutely no reason for the first informant to falsely
implicate the applicant, the hesitation of general public of making
allegations against a politician or a public representative but still lodging a
first information report and the law as stated above, this Court rejects the
anticipatory bail application also.
29.     Accordingly, the 482 petition and the anticipatory bail
application are rejected. The interim order dated 07.09.2022 passed in
the 482 petition stands discharged.
30.     Before parting with the case it would be apt to give certain
directions with regard to filing of counter affidavit specially with regard
to the criminal antecedents of an accused. The present case is a glaring
example of how things have moved specially with regards to the criminal
antecedents of the accused in counter affidavit dated 10.06.2022 being
filed by Brahmdev Goswami, Sub-Inspector, Police Station Kotwali
Nagar, District Banda on behalf of the State of U.P. initially by
mentioning in it that he has no criminal history to his credit after which
on the statement of learned counsel for the first informant that the
applicant has a criminal history of 11 cases, this Court took cognizance of
it and passed an order on 28.07.2022 to the said effect after which the
26          A482 No. 10778 of 2022 with connected matter
personal affidavit of the Superintendent of Police, Banda was filed and
then it was disclosed that the applicant has a criminal history of 27 cases
including the present case. Although the criminal antecedents of a person
may not be the sole decisive factor in a case but surely need to be looked
upon while deciding a matter. The affidavit of compliance of the
Superintendent of Police, Banda in the anticipatory bail application
though shows that the some action has been initiated against the
deponent of the earlier counter affidavit but the manner in which this fact
has emerged and that too on the pointing out of learned counsel for the
first informant is a matter of concern. There may be a case where the first
informant may not be represented in a Court of law and thus the Court
believing the affidavit filed by the State / Police authorities to be true
proceeds to hear and decide the matter but the actual fact about the
criminal history of the accused would not come before the Court.
With the present digital age where everything is now possible and
available with the press of a button or a click of a mouse, it cannot be
said that the criminal history of a person cannot be gathered by the police
agency instantaneously through a dedicated portal for it for reporting it
to the Courts. If the same is not updated or is non functional, it is a matter
of concern.
31.     The Principal Secretary (Home), Government of Uttar Pradesh,
Lucknow and the Director General of Police, Government of Uttar
Pradesh, Lucknow are directed to look into this issue and do the needful
and also take up the issue at their level for having the details of criminal
history of a person at one stroke. Even responsibility should be fixed for
the person responding in Court(s) through instructions / reply / affidavit
or otherwise for disclosing the entire criminal history of the accused
failing which there should be some deterrent for it to avoid intentional
efforts to shield the accused persons and not disclose their criminal
history before the concerned courts.
32.     The Registrar General of this Court and the learned Additional
Government Advocate for the State of U.P. are directed to send a copy of
27            A482 No. 10778 of 2022 with connected matter
this order within a week from today to the Principal Secretary (Home),
Government of Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow, the Director General of Police,
Government of Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow and the Superintendent of
Police, Banda for necessary compliance and the needful.