Petitioner a medical practitioner has presented this
petition under Articles 226 & 227, grieving against the
complaint dated 20.12.2011 made by the 2nd Respondent
– Hospital, cognizance whereof having been taken, the
1st Respondent has issued Notice dated 23.12.2011
(Annexure K) initiating the proceedings for the alleged
2.    After service of notice, the 1st respondent-
Karnataka    Medical    Council  has  entered    appearance
through its Panel Counsel and filed its Statement of
Objections on 04.04.2012. The 2nd             Respondent –
complainant having been represented by its private
counsel, has also filed its Statement of Objections on
01.03.2017.     The 3rd    Respondent – doctor,      despite
service of notice, has chosen to remain unrepresented.
The 4th    Respondent whose husband was the patient is
represented by her counsel as well.       All the advocates
appearing for the respondents resist the petition making
submission in justification of the impugned proceedings.
(i) The petitioner was a Visiting Doctor and the 3rd
Respondent was the Visiting Consultant Surgeon during
the relevant period i.e., 2011 in the 2nd Respondent –
Hospital; a patient namely, Mr. Jayaprakash, i.e., the
husband of 4th Respondent herein underwent a serious
surgical treatment in the 3rd week of September, 2011.
Some medical complications having arisen, the patient
was shifted to Apollo Hospital on 29.03.2011, wherein
better medical facilities were available.
(ii) Some ruckus allegedly having been generated
by   the    4th  Respondent   &  her  father Puttegowda
accompanied by hooligans, petitioner lodged an FIR on
02.10.2011 with the Kengeri Police, Bengaluru. The 4th
Respondent      too filed a police complaint against the
petitioner for offences punishable u/s 506 (criminal
intimidation) & u/s 338 (causing grievous hurt). This
complaint having been investigated, Police have filed a
‘B’   Report    dated   11.10.2011   (Annexure-C)  What
happened to petitioner’s complaint remains inscrutable.
(iii)   On    19.10.2011,   the   4th  Respondent
accompanied by media people visited the premises of 2nd
Respondent – Hospital and coerced for        payment of
Rs.40 Lakh towards reimbursement of Apollo Hospital
Medical bills. The 4th Respondent claiming to have paid
the same shooted a Legal Notice dated 21.12.2011
(Annexure-G) asking the Petitioner and 3rd Respondent
to reimburse the same. In addition, it had also sought
for a compensation of Rs.10 Lakh. Petitioner sent his
reply dated 02.01.2012 (Annexure-H) denying the Notice
(iv) The 2nd Respondent – Hospital also filed a
complaint    before   the   1st Respondent    –  KMC     on
22.12.2011 alleging professional misconduct against the
petitioner.     The same having been registered, the
petitioner has been issued the subject Notice which he is
calling in question in this petition inter alia on the
grounds of lack of jurisdiction, absence of jurisdictional
facts malafide.
4.    Having heard the learned counsel for the
parties and having perused the petition papers, this
Court is inclined to grant indulgence in the matter for the
following reasons:
(a) What the Apex Court in JACOB MATHEW v.
STATE     OF   PUNJAB   (2005)   6  SCC    1  observed   at
paragraph 48 of the decision reads as under:
“…Negligence in the context of the
medical profession necessarily calls for a
treatment with a difference. To infer rashness
or negligence on the part of a professional, in
particular a doctor, additional considerations
apply. A case of occupational negligence is
different from one of professional negligence.
A simple lack of care, an error of judgment or
an accident, is not proof of negligence on the
part of a medical professional. So long as a
doctor follows a practice acceptable to the
medical profession of that day, he cannot be
held liable for negligence merely because a
better alternative course or method of
treatment was also available or simply
because a more skilled doctor would not have
chosen to follow or resort to that practice or
procedure which the accused followed. When
it comes to the failure of taking precautions,
what has to be seen is whether those
precautions were taken which the ordinary
experience of men has found to be sufficient;
a failure to use special or extraordinary
precautions which might have prevented the
particular happening cannot be the standard
for judging the alleged negligence. So also,
the standard of care, while assessing the
practice as adopted, is judged in the light of
knowledge available at the time of the
incident, and not at the date of trial. Similarly,
when the charge of negligence arises out of
failure to use some particular equipment, the
charge would fail if the equipment was not
generally available at that particular time
(that is, the time of the incident) at which it is
suggested it should have been used….”
(b)    The above observations of the Apex Court
should be the prelude to approach of the court to
make the decision in the petition at hands. The
complaint in question has been lodged before the
Karnataka Medical Council by the 2nd      Respondent –
Hospital in which the services of the petitioner and the
3rd Respondent were engaged. Thus, obviously the
complaint is not from the side of aggrieved patient nor
on his behalf. There is no explanation whatsoever for
the patient’s side for not making the complaint, even
though they could have lodged an FIR with the Police.
At least some explanation ought to have been offered
by the 2nd Respondent-Hospital in its complaint itself.
It is not that such a complaint is not maintainable in
law, the definition of misconduct having been widened
by the successive amendment to the Rules. Thus, the
issue is not as to the maintainability of the complaint
but its prima facie consideration-worthiness, in the
light  of  other   attending  circumstances   that are
discussed infra.
(c)   The 4th Respondent being the wife of
patient who admittedly was treated by the petitioner
and the 3rd Respondent, has not filed any Statement
of Objections supporting the case of 2nd Respondent-
Hospital, nor even a Memo is filed adopting the said
Objections to the Writ Petition. Although some xerox
copies of photographs of the patient assumedly
snapped whilst he was on the operation theatre are
produced in the midst of the hearing this day, from
these photographs, nothing can be ascertained as to
alleged misconduct of the petitioner. A cursory glance
at these photographs irks an unassumed onlooker,
that is beside the point, more particularly when the
surgery    was    admittedly    conducted   by   the   3rd
Respondent-Senior Surgeon, the petitioner being only
a Visiting Doctor in the 2nd Respondent – Hospital had
only assisted. These facts raise a thick ring of doubt in
the   allegations.   Petitioner   had  lodged   a   Police
complaint against the 4th Respondent, her father &
others    for   manhandling     him   and   for   robbing
Rs.80,000/-.     A counter FIR was lodged by the 4th
Respondent subsequently at Sadashivanagar Police
Station who after investigation, have filed a ‘B’ Report
dated 11.10.2011.      It is not the case of any of the
Respondents that any protest petition to the said
report has been filed in the light of decision of the
Apex Court in RUPEN DEOL BAJAJ vs. K.P. SINGH
GILL, AIR 1996 SC 309. Not even a whisper is made
by the 4th Respondent as to why no such course of
action has been taken.
(d)   It is significant to note that the filing of ‘B’
report was preceded by a considered expert opinion
obtained from Victoria Hospital, Bengaluru, specifically
formulating certain questions and soliciting relevant
information as to the professional deficiency in medical
service. This is perfectly in accord with the decision of
Apex Court in JACOB MATHEW, supra, wherein it is
observed as under:
“…The investigating officer should, before
proceeding against the doctor accused of rash
or negligent act or omission, obtain an
independent and competent medical opinion
preferably from a doctor in government service
qualified in that branch of medical practice who
can normally be expected to give an impartial
and unbiased opinion applying Bolam's test to
the facts collected in the investigation…”
A Professor cum Head of the Department, Surgical
Gastroenterology,      who having examined the Medical
Records at the hands of 2nd Respondent – Hospital, gave
an elaborate Report dated 29.11.2012         which reads as
“(1) Dr. Nagesh along with Dr. Ravindra
Alur is found to be competent enough with
enough      qualification    to   perform    the
laparoscopic cholecystectomy. (2) Perforation
of the duodenum, the transverse colon, small
intestine, diaphragm, etc due to a thermal
injury is a known/recognized complication of
any laparoscopic surgical procedure. (3) The
operating surgeon has thought of such
complications when the patient’s conditions
started deteriorating and he has also made an
attempt to look for collections following
peroration by submitting the patient for
ultrasound examination of the abdomen.(4)
The Nova Medical Centre of Sadashivnagar
has got a tie up with MS. Ramaiah Memorial
Speciality Hospital and Dr. Nagesh with his
team wanted to shift the patient to this higher
centre for further management. (5) As per the
letter of the Nova Medical Centre it looks
reasonably well equipped to carry out
laparoscopic day care procedures such as
laparoscopic cholecystectomy, etc. (6) it has
been observed that the Histo-Pathalogy
Report shows the date as 19/09/2011. But
name, age, lab.no. etc coincides. This may
be a typographical error I suppose. In view of
the above facts, I am of the opinion that
there is no medical negligence on part of Dr.
Nagesh and his team.”
It is not the case of respondents that the said expert
opinion was truncated, ill-informed or otherwise
unworthy of credence.
(e)   The 2nd Respondent – Hospital in which the
husband of 4th        Respondent had undergone surgical
treatment had sent a Legal Notice dated 21.12.2011 to
the Petitioner & the 3rd Respondent – Surgeon wherein
paragraphs 10 to 13 read as under:
“(10) It is submitted that since the
expenditure towards the patient’s treatment
was increasing day by day and the patient’s
wife, father and other family members
requested out client to settle the bills of M/s.
Apollo Hospital on behalf of the first and
second of you, they had to agree and pay an
amount of Rs.40.00 lakhs        to M/s. Apollo
Hospital, Bangalore towards the treatment of
the patient. (11) For the aforesaid acts and
omissions of both first and second of you as
stated above, your are jointly liable to pay a
sum of Rs.40.00 lakhs (Rupees Forty Lakhs
Only) towards refund of amount paid by our
client to M/s. Apollo Hospitals for the
treatment that the patient is being undergoing
and Rs.10 lakhs compensation in the form of
damages for mental agony that our client had
undergone in this regard which is still
continuing. (12) Both first and second of you
are therefore, hereby called upon to meet the
authorities immediately on receipt of this
notice and settle the matter and to refund the
amount paid to M/s. Apollo Hospitals as stated
above immediately on receipt of this legal
notice failing which our client would be
constrained to initiate appropriate civil,
consumer and criminal or any other
proceedings available to our client against
both of you under the law...”
The contents of this Notice when construed in the light of
other    attending  material,   generates   a   reasonable
impression that the 2nd Respondent – Hospital desired to
recover from the Petitioner & 3rd Respondent-Surgeon, a
sum of Rs.40 Lakh, contending that on the request of the
patient’s wife, her father & other family members, this
amount was paid towards Apollo Hospital bills of the
patient. Petitioner sent his reply dated 02.01.2012
denying     the  Notice   claim   and   alleging   a  fowl
arrangement between the 2nd Respondent – Hospital and
the 4th Respondent. It is in the light of this, the
complaint in question was put at the hands of KMC, by
(f)   The complaint lodged by the 2nd Respondent-
Hospital with the 1st Respondent – KMC at paragraph 9
“Complications are known to occur in
surgery. But it is the responsibility of the
surgeon to communicate with the patient and
family, reassure them and take due
responsibility to take further steps in the
treatment to cure the patient.              This
irresponsible behavior of Dr. Nagesh and Dr.
Ravindra Alur of disappearing from the scene,
not communicating and not being with family
during the critical period, not taking
responsibility for the case of the patient who
has suffered the complications during surgery
performed by them, not meeting and
discussing with the staff of the Nova medical
Centers, not responding to our repeated
requests at his home and repeated telephone
calls amounts to gross negligence and blatant
professional misconduct and unethical practice
on the part of Dr. Nagesh and Dr Ravindra
The    2nd   Respondent    in   so  many     words,   states
“complications are known to occur in surgery.” This is
what the expert opinion of HOD of Gastroenterology,
Victoria Hospital had also said vouching the professional
qualification & efficiency of the petitioner and that there
was no culpable negligence on his part. The provisions of
law i.e., Chapter VII of the Indian Medical Council
(Professional Conduct, Etiquette and Ethics) Regulations,
2002 read with Section 15 of the Karnataka Medical
Registration Act, 1961, cannot be used either by the
complainant or by the disciplinary authority i.e., KMC as
the machinery for recovery of the money, in the guise of
disciplinary proceedings. A law cannot be used for a
purpose for which it is not made vide HEYDON’S RULE
(1584) 76 ER 637. The definition of ‘misconduct’ has
been broadened by amendment to law, as passionately
contended by learned counsel appearing for the 4th
Respondent, though true, cannot come to the rescue of
impugned proceedings.
(g)   All the above aspects have not been examined
by the 1st Respondent – KMC before registering the
complaint in question and issuing notice to the petitioner.
As already observed by the Apex Court, in matters of
professional misconduct of a doctor, the disciplinary
authority like the KMC has to act with due seriousness
and read between the lines before registering the
complaint, and without ascertaining the prima facie case
worthy of investigation. It cannot act as a post office
which transmits the mail to the addressee,. Setting in
motion     the   disciplinary    proceedings  against  the
professionals and more particularly, the doctors, is a
more serious matter than setting the criminal law in
motion. Onset of such proceedings has deleterious effect
on public interest since that would drive the delinquent
doctor to    ‘defensive medicine’ to the prejudice of the
patient. Therefore, such proceedings cannot be initiated
just for an askance. A preliminary enquiry is eminently
warranted in cases like this.
(h)   The above view is supported by the decision
of  Apex    Court   in   BOMBAY     HOSPITAL   &  MEDICAL
RESEARCH CENTRE vs. ASHA JAISWAL in Civil Appeal
No.1658/2010      disposed    off  on  30.11.2021  wherein
paragraph 31 reads as under:
“In another judgment reported as Arun
Kumar Manglik v. Chirayu Health and
Medicare Private Limited and Anr, is Court
held that the standard of care as enunciated
in Bolam case must evolve in consonance with
its subsequent interpretation by English and
Indian Courts. The threshold to prove
unreasonableness is set with due regard to
the risks associated with medical treatment
and the conditions under which medical
professionals’ function. The Court held as
under: ‘In the practice of medicine, there
could be varying approaches to treatment.
There can be a genuine difference of opinion.
However, while adopting a course of
treatment, the medical professional must
ensure that it is not unreasonable. The
threshold to prove unreasonableness is set
with due regard to the risks associated with
medical treatment and the conditions under
which medical professionals function. This is
to avoid a situation where doctors resort to
“defensive medicine” to avoid claims of
negligence, often to the detriment of the
patient. Hence, in a specific case where
unreasonableness in professional conduct has
been proven with regard to the circumstances
of that case, a professional cannot escape
liability for medical evidence merely by relying
on a body of professional opinion.’”
(i) What this Court in W.P.No.21688/2009 between
DR   GANESH        NAYAK   vs.   V.SHAMANNA    &    OTHERS
disposed off on 14.01.2022 had observed comes to the
aid of petitioner:
“…medical and paramedical professionals
are inevitable for a healthy society; Vedic
literature lauds medical practitioners and
medicine as ‘vaidyo naaraayano harihi’, nearly
meaning that a true doctor as a healer is God
and that a true medicine is like the sacred
water from the river Ganga; during COVID
pandemic, how the doctors and paramedics
served our society does not fade away from
the public memory; society has to gratefully
appreciate the valuable services rendered by
the medicos; however, at times, being the
victims, the medicos are made to apologize to
the attackers and this led to the State
enacting the Prevention of Violence Against
Doctors, Medical Professionals and Medical
Institutions Act, 2018; having said all this,
this court hastens to add that the doctors' is a
profession wherein service ought to be the
motto     and    not   the   profit;  as   any
professionals, they too are not immune from
legal action for medical negligence, as
observed by the Apex Court in INDIAN
(j)   All the above having been said, there is yet
another aspect: the incident in question happened more
than a decade ago. It is not the case of Medical Council
that post incident any objections have been received
about the professional conduct of the petitioner. The
enquiry has been interdicted by a Coordinate Bench of
this Court by the interim order, all through. Years have
rolled and much water has flowed under the bridges;
cause of justice would be served more by the quashment
of impugned proceedings than by their continuance in
the given circumstances.
In the above circumstances, this petition succeeds;
a Writ of Certiorari issues quashing the impugned
complaint and the Notice, costs having been made easy.
Liberty is reserved to the 2nd Respondent – Hospital
and the 4th Respondent i.e., wife of the patient to pursue
civil remedies in accordance with law, if they so choose.
Nothing observed hereinabove would come in their way
and that all contentions in that regard are also kept