1. The legal fraternity has been comfortable with the status quo of physically attending
Court every day for aeons. The advent of the Covid-19 pandemic has propelled us out
of this inertia into a virtual world. Till we are in a position to fully resume physical
filings and hearings, E-filings and hearings through Video Conferencing are likely to
play a significant role.
2. Having ourselves been at the receiving end of certain technological glitches, the
undersigned Advocates-on-Record have conducted a Survey with the aim of
collecting quantifiable information to address the problems faced by practicing
Advocates in respect of the virtual / digital systems in place. The instant Report is the
end-product of this exercise.
3. At the outset, we clarify that the mandate of the Survey was not to determine whether
or not physical hearings or filings should resume, but to find ways and means to
improve the digital systems in place at present. We hope that the suggestions and
feedback received from the participants of the Survey are duly considered so as to
ensure that we have more robust and efficient virtual systems in place.
4. The Survey, which was split into 3 Sections i.e. E-filing, Mentioning & Listing and
Video Conferencing, was designed and developed by the undersigned Advocates-on-
Record with assistance from friends within the legal fraternity. The questions were
formulated in a manner so as to have a maximum of Yes / No or Multiple-Choice
Answers with a view to facilitate data collection and analysis. The questions marked
with a red asterisk were the only ones which were mandatory. The complete
questionnaire is appended to this Report as ‘Appendix – I’.
5. The link for the Survey was circulated widely to Advocates through e-mail and
WhatsApp. The data was consolidated using a Google Sheet linked to the Survey,
without any human interference. After the survey was concluded, we manually
perused the responses and eliminated 3 responses, which we felt were spurious.
6. In total, we received 227 genuine responses, which comprise:
7. A consolidated list of all the Advocates who participated in the Survey is appended
to this Report as ‘Appendix – II’. The above responses were received from the
participants during the period between 13th – 20th July, 2020. We feel that the above
sample [comprising Advocates predominantly practicing in Delhi] is broad and large
enough to be truly reflective of the views of a wide section of Advocates with varying
years of experience at the Bar.
because of technical issues.
9. 98 out of 166 [59%] Advocates stated that they preferred E-filing to Physical Filing.
However, a significant portion [41%] of Advocates had faced some problems with
the E-filing mechanism. By and large, Advocates feel that the interface is not user-
friendly, unnecessarily requires filling in of too many details at the Advocates’
end, and that the support from the Registry is inadequate. Advocates are also
anxious about the Diary Numbers not being generated immediately on E-filing,
unlike a physical filing. This leads to uncertainty for the Advocate and the Client
about whether the filing has been acknowledged by the Registry and whether this
would cause further delay in the process. Only 4 participants actually expressed
“satisfaction” with the existing E-filing system.
10. Participants also gave feedback that they found the defect curing system for E-filing
to be tedious, and that most clerks are struggling with the same. They expressed
concerns regarding filing of voluminous petitions, as the process of uploading the
petition and the printing of the same by the Registry caused a lot of delay. Advocates
also found the Caveat filing process to be cumbersome. On some occasions, the
Caveat was not registered at all or the name of the AoR was not reflected in the Cause
List. This implied that the AoR was neither notified of the listing of the case nor was
the link for the Virtual Court hearing shared with her / him, leading, among others, to
adverse orders being passed in some cases.
most efficient.
12. The only significant information which needs to be manually filled in the Delhi High
Court E-filing System is the details of the parties. The entire case file can thereafter
be uploaded as a single PDF file, after being appropriately bookmarked. The Diary
Number is generated immediately. Unlike the Hon’ble Supreme Court, where each
page on which a defect is cured has to be separately uploaded, in the Delhi High Court,
the entire final PDF file, after curing defects is uploaded again in the Re-filing
Section. The entire process, it has been suggested, is simpler and faster than what is
currently employed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court.
13. The responses to the following question i.e. “Have any of your fresh matters been
listed after 23.03.2020?” indicate that a large number of the Advocates [41.8%] were
able to get their matters listed only after filing a Mentioning Application indicating
some urgency.
within this time frame.
There has been a significant delay of 10 days or more in listing of the cases of a large
proportion of participants i.e. 34%. On some occasions, this delay has been caused
despite filing a Mentioning Application, which has remained pending for several days.
mentioning.
16. The feedback received indicates that the support from the Registry for mentioning
and listing of matters is inadequate and that calls to the helpline numbers often go
unanswered. It is also felt that a time limit ought to be set for allowing or
rejecting a Mentioning Application. Advocates also called for greater consistency
and transparency in procedures as well as better co-ordination inter se between
different Sections of the Registry. There is also a concern that only fresh matters are
considered urgent, whereas pending matters (after notice matters) are not being listed.
17. 92.5% of the 227 participants in the Survey have taken part in hearings through
Video Conferencing in the Hon’ble Supreme Court. While a small majority i.e.
113 out of 210 [53.8%] participants stated that they found the link sharing mechanism
to be satisfactory, a substantial proportion [46.2%] did not. The current system
involves sharing the link on a WhatsApp Group specifically created each day for each
Virtual Court comprising the concerned AoRs. The primary concern expressed by
most participants is that only a single person is responsible for co-ordinating the
entire link sharing exercise, which leads to him being overburdened and
unavailable to address grievances. A significant number of Advocates have
experienced some stress owing to the link being shared at the last minute,
especially if they had to forward the link to a Senior Advocate / Arguing Counsel.
Further, Advocates who had filed Caveats sometimes did not receive the link, making
it difficult for them to appear.
18. An overwhelming majority of 75.7% [159 out of 210] participants stated that
they had faced several technical issues during hearings conducted on the VIDYO
App on a regular basis. All of these technical complications, when taken
cumulatively, deny an effective opportunity of hearing, which is a valuable
fundamental right.
19. Advocates were routinely either unable to log in or were automatically logged
out during Court proceedings, probably due to bandwidth / capacity issues with the
App. They also faced difficulties in re-joining the hearing if they were logged out for
some reason. Participants also complained that they were completely subject to
the mercy of the Control Room and, on several occasions, were not unmuted in
time, and hence were unable to present their arguments. The situation is even
more chaotic in batch matters where a large number of Advocates are appearing.
Some Advocates have also stated that they have been disconnected by the
Control Room too early or while orders were being dictated in their cases.
20. Adverse orders have been passed against as many as 19 participants in their absence,
when they were unable to connect due to a technical problem. Further, Advocates
who had matters listed before different Virtual Courts on the same day, found it
difficult to keep track of, and attend to, their matters unless they owned multiple
devices.
21. Concerns were also raised regarding the audio / video quality, both qua the
arguing Advocate and the Bench. On account of the fact that the screen sharing
feature on the VIDYO App is not very effective, Advocates are, by and large,
precluded from showing certain documents or Judgments to the Bench, which could
ordinarily have been handed across in Court. Participants also felt that there ought to
be a viewing room for Advocates or litigants who just wished to observe Court
proceedings, without participating in them.
connecting via the link shared.
While Advocates routinely post the problems faced by them on the WhatsApp
Group created for link sharing, there is no response. Participants have tried using
the chat window on the VIDYO App to convey any problems to the Control Room,
but even these have not been attended to. A significant number of Advocates [60 of
158 i.e. 38%] have stated that they have been unable to lodge any complaint because
they were unaware of an Authority for grievance redressal.
hearing.
most popular choice amongst Advocates.
25. Based on the feedback received from the participants in the Survey, we have compiled
the following broad suggestions.
26. Advocates should not be required to manually fill in so many details while E-filing.
These details are already available in the Petition, and providing them separately is
not only repetitive but also a waste of time. Instead, the entire Petition along with
Annexures can be uploaded as a single document, and only party details can be
required to be manually filled, as is done by the Delhi High Court. The system will
have to be equipped to accept / upload large file sizes.
27. An option ought to be provided to upload the entire Petition again, after curing
defects, instead of single pages.
28. Diary Number generation can be computerized so that an AoR receives the same
immediately upon successfully completing an E-filing.
29. Care should be taken to register Caveats immediately and reflect the name of the AoR
for the Caveator in the Cause List.
30. The Registry staff is required to be adequately trained in the technology and
modalities of E-filing. More dedicated helpline numbers with adequate staff should
be made available to provide support and respond to queries of Advocates.
31. Different modes of payment, such as Internet Banking and UPIs [such as PayTM,
Google Pay etc.], which are ordinarily available for online payments on several
websites, should be made available for E-filing as well. Printable receipts should be
provided immediately upon payment of the requisite fees.
32. Previously, a Petition which has been numbered and verified would ordinarily get
listed within 5 working days in due course. While it is understandable that there has
been a reduction in the number of Registry Staff and also in Benches due to the
pandemic, rules and procedures can be put in place to list fresh Matters and fresh
Applications in pending matters in regular course within a reasonable time (preferably
within 7 working days). This will eliminate the need to file a Mentioning Application
in every matter and also the uncertainty associated with a case / application not being
listed. Mentioning Applications can then be strictly restricted to matters with some
genuine urgency.
33. Some time limit ought to be fixed for deciding a Mentioning Application. It is
suggested that Mentioning Applications preferably be decided within 24 hours and an
outer limit of 48 hours be fixed. If rejected, reasons should be provided. A procedure
ought to be devised to permit oral mentioning before an appropriate Virtual Court.
34. The Registry Staff is required to be adequately trained to reduce delay in the listing
process. More dedicated helpline numbers with adequate staff should be made
available.
35. The link for hearings for different Virtual Courts can either be published along with
the Cause List or sent to the concerned AoRs by automated e-mails sufficiently in
advance. This can, in the long run, eliminate the time and resources consumed in
creating WhatsApp Groups for different Virtual Courts every day for this purpose,
and also reduce the anxiety caused due to receipt of links at the last minute.
36. The responses suggest that the VIDYO App has proved to be problematic in practice.
An alternative software application, such as Cisco Webex, which the participants have
found to be more efficient and preferable, may be considered for usage by the Hon’ble
Supreme Court. Cisco Webex and some other software applications have a separate
viewing room, which enable Advocates and litigants to observe court proceedings,
without participating in them. Alternatively, it was also suggested that the Hon’ble
Supreme Court explore the possibility of having a separate software application
developed which integrates the best practices across various applications. In any
event, the VIDYO App, it was felt, needs a complete overhaul and the technology /
bandwidth issues need to be immediately improved to ensure that Advocates do not
routinely face problems with logging in, being automatically logged out and poor
audio / video quality.
37. There should be separate designated IT / support staff for each Virtual Court, whose
phone numbers should be made available to the Advocates. These officers should be
constantly available on telephone to address and resolve any technical issues faced
during the hearing.
38. The Control Room staff must be trained and sensitized to be able to better handle this
new form of hearing. They should be cautious about when it is appropriate to
disconnect an Advocate, so that they are not prematurely logged out. There have been
a lot of complaints regarding the Control Room not unmuting / enabling video access
in a timely manner. Either Advocates can be given control to enable their audio / video
access in time for their cases, or utmost care has to be taken by the Control Room
staff to unmute the concerned Advocates promptly so that they are not prevented from
presenting their arguments. The Control Room should be alert and trained to read and
respond to the messages sent in the chat window.
39. While passovers are being granted by most of the Hon’ble Benches in case of any
technical difficulty, as a matter of practice, cases could be called out slowly, with a
brief time gap, to be able to assess whether the concerned Advocate is unavailable or
is present but has not been unmuted. If the Advocate is still unable to appear at the
end of the Court session, perhaps the matter can be adjourned. In no circumstance
should an adverse order be passed if the concerned Advocate was unable to appear
due to a technical problem.
40. Cases, particularly large batch matters, can be heard in a staggered fashion with fixed
time slots to prevent overcrowding. A proper system and order for presentation of
arguments can be devised for such batch matters, where a large number of Advocates
are appearing.
41. A feature enabling Advocates to open links for different Virtual Courts in different
tabs on the same device could be included. This will be of great assistance to Senior
Advocates and other Advocates who may have multiple matters in different Courts
on the same day, as everybody cannot be expected to have multiple personal devices
to deal with such an eventuality.
42. Consultation between the arguing and the briefing Counsel or passing of instructions
from a litigant to a lawyer can be tricky during the course of a virtual hearing. The
possibility of a separate and private discussion room which can be used by the lawyers
/ clients during the hearing can be explored. Alternatively, the hearing can be paused
briefly or the matter passed over, while the lawyers consult or obtain instructions.
43. Upon a thorough analysis of the survey data, we have found that while a significant
number of participant Advocates appear to have used the prevailing systems of E-
filing and Virtual Hearing of the Hon’ble Supreme Court, they are discouraged by the
numerous technical complications faced while using the same. In fact, we have also
received feedback from some participants that they have deferred getting their fresh
matters listed for hearing [except in case of an urgency] because of the stress and
anxiety regarding whether the virtual hearing would be effective.
44. While we acknowledge the proactive steps that have been taken by the Hon’ble
Supreme Court in these unprecedented times, and are very grateful for the same, the
Survey Data indicates that there is considerable scope for change and improvement
in the existing platforms. If appropriate steps are taken immediately, we can have