R/SPECIAL CIVIL APPLICATION NO. 13381 of 2021
R/SPECIAL CIVIL APPLICATION NO. 8465 of 2021
R/SPECIAL CIVIL APPLICATION NO. 14735 of 2021
R/SPECIAL CIVIL APPLICATION NO. 14774 of 2021
R/SPECIAL CIVIL APPLICATION NO. 1950 of 2019
1    Whether Reporters of Local Papers may be allowed                  NO
to see the judgment ?
2    To be referred to the Reporter or not ?                           NO
3    Whether their Lordships wish to see the fair copy                 NO
4    Whether this case involves a substantial question                 NO
of law as to the interpretation of the Constitution
of India or any order made thereunder ?
HASIT DAVE, MR. ANAND NAINAWATI, MR. HARSH N. PAREKH, for the
MR DEVANG VYAS,(2794) for the Respondent(s) No. 1,2,3,7
RULE SERVED for the Respondent(s) No. 6
MR. NIKUNT K RAVAL for the Respondent(s) No. 4,5
1.     These are the group of petitions which are being
disposed of by a common order for the reason that they all
contain identical question of law and the facts are largely
similar, however, they may differ.
2.     The lead matter is Special Civil Application No. 5562 of
2021 and the facts are drawn from the said matter for the
purpose of adjudication.
3.     M/s. Aztec Fluids & Machinery Pvt. Ltd. - petitioner
herein is a Private Limited Company engaged in the business
of trading and manufacturing of goods like Inkjet Printers,
Laser Printers and parts as well as accessories of such
printers. The petitioner no.2 is the Managing Director and
also a member of the petitioner. He is a citizen of this Country
and is entitled to the constitutional guarantees enshrined
under the Constitution of India.
3.1. The respondent no.1 is the Union of India whereas the
respondent nos. 2 to 7 are the officers of the Union of India.
The respondent nos. 2 and 3 are the officers of Customs
having jurisdiction over the imports made by the petitioner
under       Ahmedabad       Customs       Commissionerate           including
Ahmedabad Air Cargo Complex as well Khodiyar ICD. The
respondent No.4 is the Commissioner of Customs in charge of
Nhava Sheva Port where the petitioner has imported certain
consignments of the goods. The respondent no.5 is the
Additional Commissioner of Customs in charge of Air Cargo
Complex at Sahar Customs Station where also the petitioner
has    imported       certain consignments        of    the    goods.         The
respondent no.6 is the Deputy Commissioner of Customs in
charge of ACC, New Delhi and the respondent no.7 is the
Additional        Director  General     of   Directorate       of    Revenue
Intelligence, Chennai Zonal Unit which is an agency for
conducting inquiry and investigation in respect of imports and
exports made in the country and also for causing inquiry and
investigation with regard to provisions of the Customs Act,
1962 for imports and exports made in the country.
3.2. The challenge is made to the action of the respondent
no.7 which has initiated the proceedings and conducted
inquiry/investigation for the imports made by the petitioner at
various Customs Stations under jurisdiction of respondent
nos. 2 to 6 and those proceedings are under challenge.
3.3. The petitioner is a Company registered and incorporated
in year 2010 and thus, it is conducting trading business for
last 11 years. The petitioner has been importing goods like
Machine, parts and accessories of CIJ Printer and such goods
from foreign countries. They are being imported from China
during the period from 2014 to 2021.
3.4. Chapter 84 of the Customs Tariff is for machinery and
mechanical        appliances  and    various    goods      like      Nuclear
Reactors, Boilers, machinery and mechanical appliances and
parts thereof classified under Chapter 84 of the Customs
Tariff. Under Heading 8443 of the Tariff, the goods covered
are like Printing machinery used for printing by means of
plates,      cylinders  and  other     printing   components,             other
printers, copying machines and Facsimile machines, whether
or not combined and parts and accessories thereof.
3.5. The Petitioner has declared classification of the goods
imported by them under Customs Tariff Heading Nos.
84433250/40, 84433290, 84439951/59 and 84718000. All the
consignments of the goods imported by the Petitioner at the
Customs Stations under jurisdiction of Respondent Nos. 2 to 6
have been classified by the proper Customs Officers in charge
of    such        Custom   Stations     under     the     above        referred
classifications and the proper officers of Customs in charge of
these Customs Stations have finally assessed the import
documents like Bills of Entry and Airway Bills filed by the
Petitioner         for the   imported         goods    under        the       said
classifications. Custom duties leviable on the imported goods
in accordance with the rates applicable under the above
referred Customs Tariff Headings have also been finally
assessed by such Customs Officers and the duties so assessed
have been fully paid by the petitioner for the said period. In
absence of any kind of dispute on such facts, the petitioner
has chosen not to produce any documents in respect of such
assessment and collection of such duties.
3.6. It is the case of the petitioner that this petition involves
consignments which had been allowed to be cleared for home
consumption which have been sold by the petitioner to their
customers as the petitioner is engaged in trading business.
The sales has been effected by following due procedure and
appropriate taxes leviable on such trading business also have
been paid.
3.7. Around February, 2020, the office of DRI, Chennai Zonal
Unit came across the imports made by the petitioner and
thereupon, the respondent no.7 initiated investigation against
the petitioner. The DRI Officers formed a belief that the goods
imported by the petitioner were classifiable under CTH
84433910, 84433990 and 84439960 and the rate of custom
duties on the goods under these classifications was higher
than the rates applicable for the classifications declared by
the petitioner. According to the DRI Officers, the petitioner
had misclassified the CIJ Printers, parts of CIJ Printers and
Laser Marking Machines for availing lower rate of duty or full
exemption         and  on those   notion,   the    investigation           was
conducted by respondent no.7 at all the Customs Stations
under       jurisdiction  of  respondent     nos.     2     to      6.     The
representative of the petitioner’s Customs House Agent and
the 2nd petitioner were also called at Chennai Zonal Office of
DRI and the statements were recorded by the DRI Officers in
respect of the imports of the goods imported by the petitioner.
It is also alleged that during the investigation, the petitioner
was forced and pressurized to make monetary deposits
towards the custom duties allegedly short paid on the
imported goods and it is also further stated that the petitioner
left with no alternative and has deposited Rs. 50 lakhs during
investigation. Two TR-6 Challans bearing No.1846 dated
17.3.2020 and No.1 dated 20.4.2020 prepared for deposit of
such sum of Rs.50 lakhs and the 7th respondent has
transferred the same to the credit of the Central Government
at Ahmedabad in the account of the Principal Commissioner of
Customs, Ahmedabad - respondent no.2 herein.
3.8. As a result of inquiry and investigation by the Additional
Director General, DRI, Chennai, it has issued Show Cause
Notice being F.No.DRI/CZU/VIII/26/17/2020 dated 24.02.2021
invoking the provisions of Section 28(4) of the Customs Act.
The Additional Director General, DRI, Chennai, has proposed
to reassess transactions of imports made by the petitioner at
various Customs Stations and differential custom duties were
also proposed to be demanded and recovered from the
petitioner for the goods imported at such Customs Stations
alleging that they have misclassified the imported goods and
paid a reduced rate of duty or availed exemption from custom
duties by resorting to the wrong classification for the goods in
3.9. The petitioner has to show cause to the respondent nos.
2 to 6 as to why the reassessment and recovery should not be
made as proposed along with the interest, penalty and
confiscation of the goods, etc. It is alleged by the petitioner
that the proceedings initiated by the respondent no.7 are
wholly illegal and without jurisdiction because the DRI Officer
is not the proper officer who can invoke Section 28 of the
Customs         Act and therefore,      the notice   issued         by     the
respondent no.7 under Section 28 of the Customs Act is ex-
facie illegal and without any authority or jurisdiction.
3.10. It has heavily relied upon the decision in case of M/s.
Canon India Pvt. Ltd. vs. Commissioner of Customs [2021(3)
3.11. It is urged that the entire proceedings of issuance of the
show cause notice under Section 28 of the Customs Act is
invalid and without authority of law since the DRI Officer is
not the proper officer of the Customs and even the action
taken is liable to be set aside when the proceedings itself is by
DRI officer. It is also further the grievance of the petitioner
that all concluded transactions are proposed to be reassessed
for which the DRI Officer has initiated proceeding for
recovery of duty allegedly not paid on the goods imported by
the petitioner and such proceeding is initiated under Section
28(4) of the Customs Act however, such reassessment
resulting in recovery of short paid customs duties could be
initiated only by "the proper Officer" because only the proper
officer has conferred power of review and reassessment under
Section 28 of the Act. The reassessment under Section 28 of
the Act is permissible only by the Officer who has carried out
the assessment in the first place and not by any officer who is
not involved in the assessment when the goods were imported
and allowed to be cleared for the home consumption.
3.12. As held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in M/s. Canon
India Pct. Ltd. (supra) the Additional Director General of DRI
is not “the proper officer to exercise the power under Section
28(4). Therefore, a serious challenge is made to the said show
cause notice dated 24.02.2021.
3.13. It is further the case of the petitioner that the amount of
Rs. 50 lakhs deposited by the petitioner under pressure and
force during the investigation is also required to be returned
and the same is to be construed as only deposit and without
following due procedure of assessment, such amount cannot
be retained by the authority and the same is in violation of
Article 265 of the Constitution of India. He has sought to rely
on some of the decisions for the said purpose.
3.14. In the said premises, the following prayers are sought: -
(A)     That Your Lordships may be pleased to issue
a Writ of Prohibition or any other appropriate writ,
direction of order completely and permanently
prohibiting all the Respondents herein from taking
any actions against the Petitioner pursuant to
proceeding by way of Show                       Cause          Notice
F.No.DRI/CZU/VIII/26/17/2020                                     dated
(B)      That Your Lordships may be pleased to issue
a Writ of Mandamus or any other appropriate writ,
order or direction quashing and setting aside Show
Cause Notice: F.No.DRI/CZU/VIII/26/17/2020 dated
24.02.2021 (Annexure "A") issued by the DRI Officer
i.e. Additional Director General of DRI, with a
direction in the Petitioner's favour to return, restitute
and refund Rs.50 lakhs deposited by the Petitioner
during investigation;
(C) Pending hearing and final disposal of the present
petition. Your Lordships may be pleased to stay all
actions including adjudication of Show Cause Notice
F.No.DRI/CZU/VIII/26/17/2020             dated        24.02.2021
(D)      An ex-parte ad-interim relief in terms of para
20(C) above may be kindly be granted;
(E) Any other further relief as may be deemed fit in
the facts and circumstances of the case may also
please be granted.”
4.     This Court (Coram:- Mr. Vikram Nath, the Then Hon’ble
The Chief Justice as his Lordship then was and Mr. Bhargav D.
Karia,     J.)    admitted   this   matter      and     issued     notice         on
26.03.2021 with the following order: -
“Heard Shri Paresh M. Dave, learned counsel for
the petitioner.
By means of this petition under Article 226 of the
Constitution,    the      petitioner      has      prayed           for
quashing     of    a     show       cause      notice           dated
24.02.2021 issued by the Additional Director
General, Directorate        of     Revenue         Intelligence,
Chennai     Zonal Unit, on the ground that the said
officer cannot fall within the definition of a proper
officer and as such could not have                  issued the
notice under Sections 28 and 124 of the Customs
Act, 1962. Reliance has been placed upon a recent
judgment of the Supreme Court dated 09.03.2021
passed     in Civil      Appeal        No.1827           of 2018,
M/s.Canon       India          Private        Limited              vs.
Commissioner      of    Customs,         wherein          it      has
been     held that officers of Directorate of Revenue
Intelligence would not fall within the domain of
proper officer for initiating proceedings under
Section 28 of the Customs Act, 1962. Prima
facie case for interim relief is made out. As an
interim measure, we provide that                            further
proceedings pursuant to the impugned show
cause notice shall remain stayed. However, any
proper officer duly authorized                 may initiate
appropriate proceedings, if deems fit and permissible
in law.”
4.1. The interim relief granted by the Court has continued till
5.     In response to the said notice, learned Additional
Solicitor General Mr. Devang Vyas has appeared and resisted
these petitions strenuously.
5.1. The affidavit-in-reply is filed for and on behalf of
respondent nos. 1,2, 3 and 7. The Additional Director General,
Directorate of Revenue Intelligence, Chennai Zonal Unit has
denied all the allegations and contentions. According to the
respondents, the petition itself is not maintainable and
deserves to be dismissed in limini.
5.2. It is further urged that the intelligence gathered
indicated that the petitioners were importing CIJ printers,
Laser Marking Machines, Parts and accessories of CIJ printers
used for product marking and coding by misdeclaring them as
Inkjet printers, Laser printers and parts and accessories of
printing         machinery    and     misclassifying      them           under
84433240/84433250            and      84433290/84439951/84439959
respectively of the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 and it wrongly
availed exemption Notification No. 24/2005 SI No. 2E which
pertains to goods of CTH 84433250 in order to evade and pay
lower Basic Customs Duties (BCD) and other applicable
duties.      The   investigation   therefore   was     initiated         under
summons proceedings.
5.3. The statements were recorded of Shri Pulin Vaidhya,
Managing Director on 20.02.2020. It is being revealed from
the statement that they were classifying the CIJ printers
under 84433250 since September, 2016. No reason was
attributed for the same and they also frequently changing the
ports and adopting different classification for parts of CIJ
printers. They have changed the port of import from ICD
Sabarmati once the classification issue was raised by Customs
and the duty payment under protest was not informed to the
other ports.
5.4. In the statement of Shri Pratik Shukla, CHA, M/s. CNG
Logistics Pvt. Ltd. on 03.11.2020 revealed that the importer
informed that the imported product is classifiable under
84433250 by showing them the catalogue that they have
claimed NIL rate of duty exemption under Notification No.
24/2005 SI. No. 2E and the Managing Director – petitioner
no.2 had informed that his competitors were clearing similar
products with NIL rate of duty by claiming Notification
No.24/2004 SI. No. 2E as Inkjet Printers and hence, they
started filing the documents by claiming the notification
exemption and they were asked to clear parts under
84439959 but the customs did not allow the classification and
hence, they started classifying the parts under 84439990,
which the company also accepted.
5.5. According to the statement of the petitioner no.2 on
15.12.2020, these printers were used for coding and marking
of details such as batch no., expiry date, QR code, logo and he
along with his Custom House Agent arrived at the HSN based
on the classification being adopted by other companies
importing these printers, whereas the version of the CHA is
that they were filing the BoE classifying the CIJ printers under
84433250 after getting approval from the company.
5.6. According to the respondents, the investigation further
revealed that description of these machines is different in the
website of the importer/brochure submitted by the importer
as well as on the website of supplier than the description
given in the invoices and bills of entry. This terms not only
the misdeclaration of goods as “Inkjet Printer” in Bills of
Entry in order to misclassify them and evade custom duty, but
the petitioners have willfully misstated the facts to the
department by wrongly classifying the subject goods under
CTH 84433250 instead of actual classification under CTH
5.7. According to the respondents, the declared classification
for CIJ printers and Laser marking machines and their parts
during the period from 01.02.2016 to 15.02.2020 under CTH
Nos. 84433240 and 84433250 is wrong and liable for
rejection. For Laser Making Machines re-classification under
CTH No.84433990 for CIJ printers 84433910 and for parts of
CIJ printers 84439960 would be necessary and thus, the duty
short paid by the petitioner in respect of import of such goods
during the period from 01.02.2016 to 15.02.2020 in respect of
goods imported through Ahmedabad Air Cargo, Nhava Sheva
amounts to Rs. 2,58,79,376/- (Rupees two crore fifty eight
lakhs seventy nine thousand three hundred and seventy six
only) and the same is liable to be recovered in terms of
Section 28 (4) of the Customs Act, 1962, along with applicable
interest in terms of Section 28 (AA) and hence, the same was
demanded by way of show cause notice.
5.8. It is denied that the power of issuance of show cause
notice and the power of adjudication is not with the
respondent no. 7 as he is not 'proper officer’ under Section
28(4) of the Customs Act, 1962 as, as per the decision of M/s.
Canon India Pvt. Ltd. (supra) the authorities appointed in the
Directorate of Revenue Intelligence (DRI) are not the proper
officer under Section 28(4) of the Customs Act and not
empowered in law to issue and adjudicate Show cause notice
under Section 28(4) of the Customs Act, 1962.
5.9. It is urged that 09.03.2021 order is not final and the
review is filed on 07.04.2021 before the Apex Court, therefore
the matter cannot be decided.
5.10. Reliance is placed on the decision of Calcutta High
Court in case of of Directorate of Revenue vs. Navneet Kumar
[(2020) 371 ELT 270] that the Directorate of Revenue
Intelligence is only an arm of the Customs department and not
alien to the Customs department. It has further explained that
the DRI was set up under the Notification dated 04.12.1957
issued by the Ministry of Finance. Various Notifications were
issued from time to time under Section 2(34) read with
Section 4 of the Customs Act, 1962, according to the
respondents, have not been placed before the Apex Court
which resulted into the order dated 09.03.2021. They have
tabulated the notifications right from 1990 to 2015.
5.11. It is further contended that the Apex Court in case of
Commissioner of Customs vs. Sayed Ali [265 ELT 17] vide
judgment dated 18.02.2011 held that unless and until the
officers are appointed as proper officer under Section 2(34)
read with Section 4 & 5 of the Customs Act 1962, assigning
the function of adjudication under Section 28, it is not
possible to conclude that the officers are empowered to
discharge         the function of   issuing Show Cause Notice.
Thereafter, the Finance Act, 2011 inserted sub-section (11) in
Section 28 of the Act and also simultaneously issued
Notification No.44/2011-Cus. (N.T.) dated 06.07.2011 under
Section 2(34) of the Customs Act, 1962 assigning the function
of proper officer under Section 17 & 28 of the Customs Act,
1962 to the DRI officers. This amendment in the Act in light of
Apex Court decision in Sayed Ali (supra), a bill was placed
before the Parliament of India and it was clarified that true
legislative intent is that the show cause notices issued by
Customs Officers, i.e., officers of the Commissionerates of
Customs         (Preventive), Directorate    General      of     Revenue
Intelligence (DRI), Directorate of Central Excise Intelligence
(DGCEI) and Central Excise Commissionerates for demanding
customs duty not levied or short levied or erroneously
refunded in respect of goods imported are valid, irrespective
of the fact that any specific assignment as proper officer was
issued or not. It was therefore urged that the Parliament has
validated the true legislative intent for empowering DRI
officers in addition for investigating cases of short levy, non
levy and erroneous refunds.
5.12. It is further the say of the respondent that the decision
of the Supreme Court has to be read in light of the facts and
provision of the Act which came into consideration. The Apex
Court, upon arguments placed by the petitioner in case of
M/s. Canon India Pvt. Ltd. (supra) has held that there is no
entrustment of powers on officers of DRI for issuing show
cause notice under section 6 of the Customs when in fact a
very officer of the DRI notified as proper officer under Section
2(34) of the Customs Act and is assigned the functions of
adjudication under Section 17 and 28 of the Act, the plea
raised by the petitioner loses significance. Moreover, when
the Apex Court in case of Sayed Ali (supra) held that the
Government had to issue notification under Section 2(34) of
the Customs Act, 1962 by specifically assigning the functions
specified for adjudication which has been done in the
Notification No.44/2011-Cus (N.T) on 06.07.2011.
5.13. It is further argued that the Apex Court in the case of
Sayed Ali (supra) has stated that the source of power to act as
a "proper officer" is Section 2(34) of the Customs Act and not
Sections 4 and 5 of the Customs Act. Sections 4 & 5 of the
Customs Act, 1962 merely authorizes the Board to appoint
officers of Customs and confer on them the powers and duties
to be exercised for the purpose of Section 28 of the Act. An
officer of customs has to be designated as "proper officer"
under Section 2(34) of the Act by assigning the function of
levy and collection of duty by the Board or the Commissioner
5.14. It is also contended by the respondents that in light of
the judgment of the Apex Court in case of Sayed Ali (supra)
the notifications as tabulated in the said affidavit-in-reply
were issued by the Central Government under Sections 4 & 5
read with Section 2(34) of the Customs Act appointing the DRI
officers as proper officers. It is emphasized that the Apex
Court in M/s. Canon India Pvt. Ltd. (supra) observed that
unless the authorities are notified as proper officers under
Section 6 (which applies to officers of other department
appointed as customs officers) they are not considered as
"proper officers". The attention of the Apex Court in the case
of Canon India had not been invited to the Notifications
referred to in the table in para 12 of the said affidavit and also
to the decisions of the Division Benches of various High
Courts detailed in para 15 of the affidavit.
5.15. It is urged that the attention of the Apex Court was not
invited to the amendment made to Section 28 of Finance Act,
2011 and when the Notifications and decisions are not
considered while passing the order, then such decision is only
persuasive. In such circumstances, it is urged that the Court
may consider this notifications.
5.16. It is further stated that as against the order of the Canon
India dated 09.03.2021 the department had filed review
petitions on 07.04.2021 and the same are pending. The
mention was made on 06.07.2021 through video conference
and request was made to Hon’ble the Chief Justice by learned
Solicitor General of India and the matters are still pending so
also the Canon India decision is not final which is contested by
the department in view of the difference of reasoning
rendered in Sayed Ali and various notifications tabulated in
the affidavit.
5.17. Reliance is placed on the decision of Madras High Court
in the case of      Sri Sathya Jewellery vs. the Principal
Commissioner of Customs [WP. No.3144 of 2016 and allied
matters, decided on 15.04.2021], where the Court declined to
apply the said decision of the Canon India and relegated the
petitioners to appellate remedy since the facts were to be
investigated and the Canon India was a decision which was a
Civil Appeal against the order of the High Court and the said
decision was not accepted and not final in view of the review
petition filed.
5.18. The respondents have also replied on the decisions of
Karnataka High Court in case of The Commissioner of
Customs vs. M/s. Rajesh Exports Ltd. [CSTA 04/2009, decided
on 25.08.2021] and The Commissioner of Customs Vs M/s.
Bank of Nova Scotia [CSTA 5/2009], wherein the hearing of
the appeal was deferred and the parties were given liberty to
mention the matters as and when the proceedings in review
petition is concluded before the Supreme Court.
5.19. It is further urged that various High Courts have
considered the contentions and either stayed the adjudication
of the show cause notice where the adjudication is pending till
the outcome of the review petition filed in the Apex Court or
directed the adjudicating authority to decide the issue of
jurisdiction in accordance with law or directed to exhaust the
remedies          available under    the      law   where       already          an
adjudication order had been passed.
5.20. The High Court of Bombay in WP No. 1088/2021
disposed of the matter with a direction to the adjudicating
authority to decide the issue of jurisdiction in accordance with
law. Likewise, Delhi High Court in WP(C) No. 6044/2021 also
did the same. The Calcutta High Court in WPO No. 592/2021
also firstly directed the adjudication on the jurisdictional issue
and pass the final order. High Court of Madras in WP No.
12502/2021 directed the parties to approach the appellate
authority whereas the Telangana High Court at Hyderabad in
IA No. 01/2021 in WP No. 8460/2021 gave interim stay.
5.21. According to the respondent, the review application is
submitted under Section 27 of the Customs Act, therefore, the
refund of duty of Rs. 50 Lakhs is a process to be followed. It is
further urged that the Court may not consider the demand of
the petitioner for refund of duty as there is an alternative
remedy available to the petitioner.
5.22. The respondent has attempted to further highlight the
issue which fall for consideration before the Apex Court at
para 4 of the decision. The framing of the issue by the Apex
Court in para 6, 9 and 12 also have been heavily relied upon.
It is further submitted by the respondents that the Finance
Act, 2011         (Act No.08 of 2011)      dated 08.04.2011               has
introduced the concept "Self Assessment of Customs” duty
with effect from 08.04.2011 and the Central Board of Excise
and Customs has issued Circular No.17/2011- Customs dated
08.04.2011 regarding implementation of Self Assessment in
Customs which states that “the responsibility for assessment
would be shifted to the importer / exporter, the Customs
officers would have the power to verify such assessments and
make re-assessment where warranted. The importer or
exporter at the time of self assessment will ensure that he
declares the correct classification, applicable rate of duty,
value, and benefit of exemption notifications claimed, if any, in
respect of the imported/export goods while presenting Bill of
Entry or Shipping Bill.”
5.23. According to the respondents, in the present case, the
investigation was brought to light the misclassification of
import products resorted to by the petitioner for evasion of
appropriate customs duty. Thus, it is urged to dismiss the
petition as the same is not maintainable.
6.     The       written submissions      given   by    the     respondent
reiterates what has been contended in the affidavit-in-reply. It
also tries to emphasize that certain statutory provisions such
as Section 28(11), as also, applicable notifications have
skipped the attention of the Apex Court which was crucial
statutory provision and which can be said to be distinguishing
factor so far as M/s. Canon India judgment is concerned. It is
further urged that Section 28(11) begins with non-obstantive
clause and it refers to ‘proper officer’ as also use of word
‘officers’. Such use of plural indicates that the parliament was
conscious with regard to the scheme of the Act and exercise
of powers by various officers as proper officers under different
sections. No infirmity is found in appointment of DRI Officers
to act as Customs Officers under Notification No. 17/2002
dated 07.03.2002. It is further submitted that in the Canon
India, the Apex Court has relied on Section 6 which is for
entrustment of functions of the officers of Customs on certain
other officers which are any officers of Central of State
Government or of a local body. It is therefore urged that by
conjoint reading of Section 4, notifications issued and Section
6, it becomes clear that Section 6 is only for the purposes of
those officers who are not specifically appointed under
Section 4. It is further submitted that subsequent notifications
entrusting specific functions being assigned to officers of DRI
to function as proper officers, is a consequence of Sections 4
and 5 and the appointments made thereunder. The law is
clear so far as the powers of review are concerned and even
at the stage of Section 28, the proper officer does not exercise
the powers of review. However, the proper officers exercise
independent powers as proper officers subject to provisions
and conditions laid in Section 28. Therefore, “in that view of
the matter also it cannot be said that the show cause notices
will have to be issued by the same officer who has done
assessment or reassessment of the duties under Section 17.”
6.1. It is emphasized that Section 28(11) refers to the proper
officer and officers in plural is very significant as it clearly
reflects the legislative intent to recover the duty short paid,
not paid or erroneously refunded by assigning powers under
Section 28 to multiple officers. “By not noticing this difference
of singular word ‘officer’ in Section 17(4) and plural word
‘officers’ in Section 28(11) as apparent from the order dated
09.03.2021, this crucial aspect has been lost sight of and has
caused the fatal error therein. Without striking 28(11) of the
statute, the Hon’ble Court cannot take away the powers
vested in officers other than the assessing officer and his
successor in office.”
6.2. In short, it has questioned the decision of the Apex Court
by stating that “there is an error apparent on the face of the
record in para 21 as Hon’ble Supreme Court has held that
officers of DRI should have been entrusted with functions of
customs officers under Section 6 of the Customs Act by the
Central Government. This error has crept in as DRI has been
considered as a separate department in this order dated
09.03.2021, which it is not. The administrative structure of
CBIC, under which DRI has been assigned the enforcement
function under the Customs Act, has not been considered by
the Hon’ble Supreme Court. Entrustment under Section 6 is
done only to those officers of Central Government, State
Government and Local Bodies who are not the officers of
Customs and who are not under the administrative control of
6.3. The heading of Section 6 itself specifies that it is meant
for “entrustment of functions of Board and Customs Officers
to certain other officers.” DRI officers are fully under the
administrative control of CBIC and have been appointed as
officers of Customs under Section 4(1) of the Act, as
mentioned in the Act.
6.4. It is therefore urged that the Court may decide these
matters on their independent individual facts instead of
merely relying on the decision of Canon India.
7.     The       petitioners have    also     submitted     their        written
submissions which urges that it is impermissible for a
subordinate Court to independently consider an issue that has
been finally decided by the Apex Court and even though
certain provisions of law were not considered by the Apex
Court, a subordinate Court cannot examine the same issue
again on the basis that the relevant provisions were not
brought to the notice of the Court.
7.1. The reliance is placed on the decision of Apex Court in
case of Ambica Prasad Mishra [AIR 1980 SC 1762] and the
decision of the Full Bench of this Court in case of Sarjubhaiya
7.2. It is urged that since it is conclusively held by the Apex
Court in case of M/s. Canon India that a DRI officer is not a
proper officer of Customs for initiating recovery proceedings
under Section 24(4) of the Customs Act and proceedings
initiated by a DRI officer by issuing show cause notices is
invalid, without any authority of law and liable to be set aside
along with ensuing demands.
7.3. This Court in case of CMR Chiho Industries India Pvt.
Ltd. vs. Union of India [SCA 10521/2020, decided on
06.04.2021] has also rejected the review application rendered
on 10.08.2021, therefore, the Court cannot take any other
decision than that. Moreover, the final orders in cases like
Commissioner vs. Agarwal Metals & Alloys also has been
passed after the decision of Canon India. Therefore, in the
instant case, the Court needs to hold that the reassessment
cannot be undertaken by the DRI.
8.     We have also heard extensively learned advocates
appearing for both the sides.
9.     Learned advocates appearing for the petitioners have
relied      upon    following authorities    in    support        of     their
(i)     Judgment of Hon’ble Supreme Court in case of M/s.
Canon India Pvt. Ltd. vs. Commissioner of Customs
(ii)    Copy of the status of Review Application filed in
Commissioner of Customs vs. Sony India Pvt. Ltd. [Diary
(iii) Judgment of Hon’ble Supreme Court in case of
Commissioner of Customs, Kandla vs. M/s. Agarwal
Metals and Alloys [Civil Appeal No. 3411/2020, dated
(iv)    Judgment of this Court in case of M/s. CMR CHIHO
Industries India Pvt. Ltd. vs. Union of India [SCA
10521/2020, dated 06.04.2021];
(v)     Judgment of Madras High Court in case of M/s.
Quantum Coal Energy (P) Ltd. vs. the Commissioner of
Customs [W.P.(MD) Nos. 10186 & 10187/2014 and M.P.
(MD) Nos. 1&1 of 2014, dated 16.03.2021];
(vi)    Judgment of Madras High Court in case of Deepak
Gopaldas Bajaj vs. The Commissioner of Customs [W.P.
(MD) Nos. 4032 to 4034/2018, dated 08.09.2021];
(vii) Shree Chamundi Mopeds Ltd. vs. Church of South
(viii) Notification No. 96/2009- Cus. dated 11.09.2009;
(ix)    Notification No. 64/2008- Cus. dated 09.05.2008;
(xi)    Collector of Customs, Calcutta vs. Tin Plate Co.of
(xii) Metal Forgings vs. Union of India [2002 (146) ELT
(xiii) Assistant     Collector,        CE,   Bombay           vs.       The
Elphinstone      Spinning     and       Weaving      Mills         Co.Ltd.
(xiv) Collector of C.Ex., Calcutta vs. Pradyumna Steel
(xv) CCE,       Vadodara      vs.      Gujarat     Container           Ltd.
[2016(43) str 90 (Guj.)].
10.      Learned advocates appearing for the respondents have
relied upon following decisions in support of their arguments:
(i)    Judgment of Calcutta High Court in case of of
Directorate of Revenue vs. Navneet Kumar [(2020) 371
(ii) Judgment of Apex Court in case of Commissioner of
Customs vs. Sayed Ali [265 ELT 17];
(iii) Judgment of Madras High Court in the case of Sri
Sathya Jewellery vs. the Principal Commissioner of
Customs [WP. No.3144 of 2016 and allied matters,
decided on 15.04.2021];
(iv) Judgment of Karnataka High Court in case of The
Commissioner of Customs vs. M/s. Rajesh Exports Ltd.
[CSTA 04/2009, decided on 25.08.2021];
(v) Judgment of Karnataka High Court in case of The
Commissioner of Customs Vs M/s. Bank of Nova Scotia
(vi) Order of the Apex Court in case of Union of India
vs. Godrej and Boyce Manufacturing Co. Ltd. [Special
Leave to Appeal No. 1513/2022, dated 11.02.2022];
(viii) Order of Delhi High Court in the case of Shri
Rajesh Vedprakash Gupta and Others vs. Additional
Director General (Adj.) and Others [W.P. (C) No.
6044/2021, dated 8.07.2021];
(ix)     Order of Bombay High Court in the case of Om
Drishian International Ltd. vs. Additional Director,
Directorate of Revenue Intelligence and Anr. [W.P. No.
1088/2021, dated 24.09.2021];
(x) Judgment of Madras High Court in the case of M/s.
R.K.K.R. Steel vs. The Central Board of Excise and
Customs [W.P. Nos. 10276 to 10281/2011, dated
(xi) Order of Bombay High Court in case of Coastal
Energy Pvt. Ltd. and another vs. Union of India [WP (L)
No. 10206/2021, dated 230.09.2021];
(xii) Order of Punjab and Haryana High Court in case of
Gautam Spinners vs. Deputy Director, Directorate of
Revenue        Intelligence       [WP  16799/2021,              dated
(xiii)       Judgment of this Court in case of Swari
Menthol and Allied Chem. Ltd. vs. Jt. DIR, DRI [(2014)
11.    This Court at the outset needs to consider the decision of
the Apex Court rendered in case of M/s. Canon India Pvt.
11.1.           In case of M/s.    Canon   India    Pvt.      Ltd.       on
19.08.2014, a show cause notice was issued under Section
28(4) of the Customs Act, 1962 alleging that the Customs
Authorities had been induced to clear the cameras by willful
misstatement and suppression of facts about the cameras.
While the decision to clear the goods for import because they
were exempted from customs duties under notification was
taken by the Deputy Commissioner, Appraisal Group, Delhi Air
Cargo, a show cause notice has been issued by the Additional
Director General, Directorate of Revenue Intelligence.
11.2. The question that arose was whether the Directorate of
Revenue Intelligence had authority in law to issue show cause
notice under Section 28(4) for recovery of duties allegedly not
levied or paid when the goods have been cleared for import by
the Deputy Commissioner of Customs who decided that the
goods are exempted. According to the Apex Court, the
redressal of the same was to look into the powers conferred
under Section 28(4) of the Act. The Court held that the section
empowers the recovery of duties not paid, part paid or
erroneously refunded by collusion or any willful misstatement
and conferred the power of recovery of proper officer. So who
can be called the proper officer? The Court also said that the
statute where conferred the said power to perform an act on
different officers, the two officers specifically when they
belong to different departments, cannot exercise their powers
under same case. When one officer exercised his powers of
assessment, the power to order reassessment must be
exercised by the same officer or his successor officer and not
by any officer in any department as designated to be an officer
of the same rank.
11.3. While analyzing Section 28A(4) of the Customs Act, the
Apex Court held that the provision must be construed as
conferring the power of such review on the same officer or his
successor who has been assigned the function of assessment.
An officer who did the assessment could only undertake
reassessment and after extensive analysis, the Court held that
the entire proceeding initiated by the Additional Director,
General of DRI by issuing show cause notices in all the
matters are invalid, without any authority of law and liable to
be set aside and accordingly, ensuing demands also have been
set aside.
11.4.     Apt would be to reproduce the relevant finding,
discussion and the ratio: -
“9. The question that arises is whether the
Directorate of Revenue Intelligence had authority in
law to issue a show cause notice under Section 28(4)
of the Act for recovery of duties allegedly not levied
or paid when the goods have been cleared for import
by a Deputy Commissioner of Customs who decided
that the goods are exempted. It is necessary that the
answer must flow from the power conferred by the
statute i.e. under Section 28(4) of the Act. This
Section empowers the recovery of duty not paid, part
paid or erroneously refunded by reason of collusion
or any wilful mis-statement or suppression of facts
and confers the power of recovery on “the proper
officer”. The obvious intention is to confer the power
to recover such duties not on any proper officer but
only on “the proper officer”. This Court in
Consolidated Coffee Ltd. and Another vs. Coffee
Board, Bangalore2 has held:-
“14. ...Secondly, and more importantly, the user of
the definite article ‘the’ before the word ‘agreement’
is, in our view, very significant.
Parliament has not said ‘an agreement’ or ‘any 2
(1980) 3 SCC 358 agreement’ for or in relation to
such export and in the context the expression ‘the
agreement’ would refer to that agreement which is
implicit in the sale occasioning the export.” In Shri
Ishar Alloy Steels Ltd. vs. Jayaswals Neco Ltd.3 has
“9. ...’The’ is the word used before nouns, with a
specifying or particularising effect as opposed to the
indefinite or generalizing force of ‘a’ or ‘an’. It
determines what particular thing is meant; that is,
what particular thing we are to assume to be meant.
‘The’ is always mentioned to denote a particular
thing or a person.”
10. There are only two articles ‘a (or an)’ and ‘the’.
`A (or an)’ is known as the Indefinite Article because
it does not specifically refer to a particular person or
thing. On the other hand, ‘the’ is called the Definite
Article because it points out and refers to a particular
person or thing. There is no doubt that, if Parliament
intended that any proper officer could have exercised
power under Section 28 (4), it could have used the
word ‘any’.
11. Parliament has employed the article “the” not
accidently but with the intention to designate the
proper officer who had assessed the goods at the
time of 3 (2001) 3 SCC 609 clearance. It must be
clarified that the proper officer need not be the very
officer who cleared the goods but may be his
successor in office or any other officer authorised to
exercise the powers within the same office. In this
case, anyone authorised from the Appraisal Group.
Assessment is a term which includes determination of
the dutiability of any goods and the amount of duty
payable with reference to, inter alia, exemption or
concession of customs duty vide Section 2 (2) (c) of
the Customs Act, 1962 4.
12. The nature of the power to recover the duty, not
paid or short paid after the goods have been assessed
and cleared for import, is broadly a power to review
the earlier decision of assessment. Such a power is
not inherent in any authority. Indeed, it has been
conferred by Section 28 and other related provisions.
The power has been so conferred specifically on “the
proper officer” which must necessarily mean the
proper officer who, in the first 4 Section 2.
Definitions – In this Act, unless the context otherwise
… (2) “assessment” means determination of the
dutiability of any goods and the amount of duty, tax,
cess or any other sum so payable, if any, under this
Act or under the Customs Tariff Act , 1975 (51 of
1975) (hereinafter referred to as the Customs Tariff
Act) or under any other law for the time being in
force, with reference to –
(c) exemption or concession of duty, tax, cess or any
other sum, consequent upon any notification issued
therefor under this Act or under the Customs Tariff
Act or under any other law for the time being in
force; instance, assessed and cleared the goods i.e.
the Deputy Commissioner Appraisal Group. Indeed,
this must be so because no fiscal statute has been
shown to us where the power to re-open assessment
or recover duties which have escaped assessment has
been conferred on an officer other than the officer of
the rank of the officer who initially took the decision
to assess the goods.
13. Where the statute confers the same power to
perform an act on different officers, as in this case,
the two officers, especially when they belong to
different departments, cannot exercise their powers
in the same case. Where one officer has exercised his
powers of assessment, the power to order re-
assessment must also be exercised by the same
officer or his successor and not by another officer of
another department though he is designated to be an
officer of the same rank. In our view, this would
result into an anarchical and unruly operation of a
statute which is not contemplated by any canon of
construction of statute.
14. It is well known that when a statute directs that
the things be done in a certain way, it must be done
in that way alone. As in this case, when the statute
directs that “the proper officer” can determine duty
not levied/not paid, it does not mean any proper
officer but that proper officer alone. We find it
completely impermissible to allow an officer, who has
not passed the original order of assessment, to re-
open the assessment on the grounds that the duty
was not paid/not levied, by the original officer who
had decided to clear the goods and who was
competent and authorised to make the assessment.
The nature of the power conferred by Section 28 (4)
to recover duties which have escaped assessment is
in the nature of an administrative review of an act.
The section must therefore be construed as
conferring the power of such review on the same
officer or his successor or any other officer who has
been assigned the function of assessment. In other
words, an officer who did the assessment, could only
undertake re-assessment [which is involved in
15. It is obvious that the re-assessment and recovery
of duties i.e. contemplated by Section 28(4) is by the
same authority and not by any superior authority
such as Appellate or Revisional Authority. It is,
therefore, clear to us that the Additional Director
General of DRI was not “the” proper officer to
exercise the power under Section 28(4) and the
initiation of the recovery proceedings in the present
case is without any jurisdiction and liable to be set
aside.
16. At this stage, we must also examine whether the
Additional Director General of the DRI who issued
the recovery notice under Section 28(4) was even a
proper officer. The Additional Director General can
be considered to be a proper officer only if it is shown
that he was a Customs officer under the Customs Act.
In addition, that he was entrusted with the functions
of the proper officer under Section 6 of the Customs
Act. The Additional Director General of the DRI can
be considered to be a Customs officer only if he is
shown to have been appointed as Customs officer
under the Customs Act.
17. Shri Sanjay Jain, learned Additional Solicitor
General, relied on a Notification No.17/2002 -
Customs (NT) dated 7.3.2002 to show all Additional
Directors General of the DRI have been appointed as
Commissioners of Customs. At the relevant time, the
Central Government was the appropriate authority to
issue such a notification. This notification shows that
all Additional Directors General, mentioned in
Column (2), are appointed as Commissioners of
18. The next step is to see whether an Additional
Director General of the DRI who has been appointed
as an officer of Customs, under the notification dated
7.3.2002, has been entrusted with the functions
under Section 28 as a proper officer under the
Customs Act. In support of the contention that he has
been so entrusted with the functions of a proper
officer under Section 28 of the Customs Act, Shri
Sanjay Jain, learned Additional Solicitor General
relied on a Notification No.40/2012 dated 2.5.2012
issued by the Central Board of Excise and Customs.
The notification confers various functions referred to
in Column (3) of the notification under the Customs
Act on officers referred to in Column (2). The
relevant part of the notification reads as follows:-
“[To be published in the Gazette of India,
Government        of    India      Ministry       of       Finance
(Department of Revenue) Notification No.40/2012-
Customs (N.T.) New Delhi, dated the 2nd May, 2012
S.O. (E). – In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-
section (34) of section 2 of the Customs Act, 1962 (52
of 1962), the Central Board of Excise and Customs,
hereby assigns the officers and above the rank of
officers mentioned in Column (2) of the Table below,
the functions as the proper officers in relation to the
various sections of the Customs Act, 1962, given in
the corresponding entry in Column (3) of the said
Sl. Designation      Functions          under            Section
N of            the of             the                Customs
2. Additional        (i)Sub-section (5) or                        of
Commissioner section 46; and (ii) Section 149
19. It appears that a Deputy Commissioner or
Assistant Commissioner of Customs has been
entrusted with the functions under Section 28, vide
Sl. No.3 above. By reason of the fact that the
functions are assigned to officers referred to in
Column (3) and those officers above the rank of
officers mentioned in Column (2), the Commissioner
of Customs would be included as an officer entitled to
perform the function under Section 28 of the Act
conferred on a Deputy Commissioner or Assistant
Commissioner but the notification appears to be ill-
founded. The notification is purported to have been
issued in exercise of powers under sub-Section (34)
of Section 2 of the Customs Act. This section does not
confer any powers on any authority to entrust any
functions to officers. The sub-Section is part of the
definitions clause of the Act, it merely defines a
proper officer, it reads as follows:-
“2. Definitions – In this Act, unless the context
otherwise requires, -
… (34) ‘proper officer’, in relation to any functions to
be performed under this Act, means the officer of
customs who is assigned those functions by the Board
or the [Principal Commissioner of Customs or
Commissioner of Customs]. “
20. Section 6 is the only Section which provides for
entrustment of functions of Customs officer on other
officers of the Central or the State Government or
local authority, it reads as follows:-
“6. Entrustment of functions of Board and customs
officers on certain other officers – The Central
Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette,     entrust          either     conditionally              or
unconditionally to any officer of the Central or the
State Government or a local authority any functions
of the Board or any officer of customs under this
21. If it was intended that officers of the Directorate
of Revenue Intelligence who are officers of Central
Government should be entrusted with functions of
the Customs officers, it was imperative that the
Central Government should have done so in exercise
of its power under Section 6 of the Act. The reason
why such a power is conferred on the Central
Government is obvious and that is because the
Central Government is the authority which appoints
both the officers of the Directorate of Revenue
Intelligence which is set up under the Notification
dated 04.12.1957 issued by the Ministry of Finance
and Customs officers who, till 11.5.2002, were
appointed by the Central Government. The
notification which purports to entrust functions as
proper officer under the Customs Act has been issued
by the Central Board of Excise and Customs in
exercise of non-existing power under Section 2 (34)
of the Customs Act. The notification is obviously
invalid having been issued by an authority which had
no power to do so in purported exercise of powers
under a section which does not confer any such
power.
22. In the above context, it would be useful to refer to
the decision of this Court in the case of
Commissioner of Customs vs. Sayed Ali and Another5
wherein the proper officer in respect of the
jurisdictional area was considered. The consideration
made is as hereunder:-
“16. It was submitted that in the instant case, the
import manifest and the bill of entry were filed before
the Additional Collector of Customs (Imports),
Mumbai; the bill of entry was duly assessed, and the
benefit of the exemption was extended, subject to
execution of a bond by the importer which was duly
executed undertaking the obligation of export. The
learned counsel argued that the function of the
preventive staff is confined to goods which are not
manifested as in respect of manifested goods, where
the bills of entry are to be filed, the entire function of
assessment, clearance, etc. is carried out by the
appraising      officers        functioning        under           the
Commissioner of Customs (Imports).
17. Before adverting to the rival submissions, it
would be expedient to survey the relevant provisions
of the Act. Section 28 of the Act, which is relevant for
our purpose, provides for issue of notice for payment
of duty that has not been paid, or has been short-
levied or erroneously refunded, and provides that:
“28. Notice for payment of duties, interest, etc. – (1)
When any duty has not been levied or has been short-
levied or erroneously refunded, or when any interest
payable has not been paid, part paid or erroneously
refunded, the proper officer may,-
(a) in the case of any import made by any individual
for his personal use or by Government or by any
educational, research 5 (2011) 3 SCC 537 or
charitable institution or hospital, within one year;
(b) in any other case, within six months, from the
relevant date, serve notice on the person chargeable
with the duty or interest which has not been levied or
charged or which has been so short-
levied or part paid or to whom the refund has
erroneously been made, requiring him to show cause
why he should not pay the amount specified in the
Provided that where any duty has not been levied or
has been short-levied or the interest has not been
charged or has been part paid or the duty or interest
has been erroneously refunded by reason of collusion
or any wilful mis-statement or suppression of facts by
the importer or the exporter or the agent or
employee of the importer or exporter, the provisions
of this sub-section shall have effect as if for the words
‘one year’ and ‘six months’, the words ‘five years’
were substituted.”
18. It is plain from the provision that the ‘proper
officer’ being subjectively satisfied on the basis of the
material that may be with him that customs duty has
not been levied or short levied or erroneously
refunded on an import made by any individual for his
personal use or by the Government or by any
educational, research or charitable institution or
hospital, within one year and in all other cases within
six months from the relevant date, may cause service
of notice on the person chargeable, requiring him to
show cause why he should not pay the amount
specified in the notice. It is evident that the notice
under the said provision has to be issued by the
‘proper officer’.
19. Section 2(34) of the Act defines a ‘proper officer’,
(34) ‘proper officer’, in relation to any functions to be
performed under this Act, means the officer of
customs who is assigned those functions by the Board
or the Commissioner of Customs;’ It is clear from a
mere look at the provision that only such officers of
customs who have been assigned specific functions
would be ‘proper officers’ in terms of Section 2(34)
the Act. Specific entrustment of function by either
the Board or the Commissioner of Customs is
therefore, the governing test to determine whether
an ‘officer of customs’ is the ‘proper officer’.
20. From a conjoint reading of Sections 2(34) and 28
of the Act, it is manifest that only such a Customs
Officer who has been assigned the specific functions
of assessment and re- assessment of duty in the
jurisdictional area where the import concerned has
been affected, by either the Board or the
Commissioner of Customs, in terms of Section 2(34)
of the Act is competent to issue notice undersection
28 of the Act. Any other reading of Section 28 would
render the provisions of Section 2(34) of the Act
otiose inasmuch as the test contemplated under
Section 2(34) of the Act is that of specific conferment
of such functions.”
23. We, therefore, hold that the entire proceeding in
the present case initiated by the Additional Director
General of the DRI by issuing show cause notices in
all the matters before us are invalid without any
authority of law and liable to be set-aside and the
ensuing demands are also set- aside.”
11.5. It is noteworthy that before the Apex Court, it also
examined the issue of limitation by considering the fact that a
show cause notice under Section 28(4) could be issued within
5 years from the relevant date which means the date on which
the goods were assessed and cleared in case the duty was not
paid, short paid or erroneously refunded by reason of
collusion or any misstatement or suppression of facts. On
having found that the importer had not made any willful
misstatement or suppression of facts, the Court therefore held
that extended period of limitation of 5 years was not available
to any authority to reopen under Section 28(4) as it was
difficult to hold that there was any willful misstatement on
12.    In case of Commissioner of Customs, Kandla vs. M/s.
Agarwal Metals and Alloys [Civil Appeal No. 3411/2020,
decided on 31.08.2021], the identical issue had arisen and
the Apex Court in wake of the decision of Three Judges Bench
of the Apex Court in M/s. Canon India Pvt. Ltd. (supra) had
dismissed the appeals as the show cause notice was also
issued by the Additional Director General, Directorate of
Intelligence who is held to be not the proper officer within the
meaning of Section 28(4) read with Section 2(34) of the
The appeals are dismissed in terms of the signed
order. Pending applications, if any, stand disposed
13.    This Court in case of CMR Chiho Industries India Pvt.
Ltd.(supra), was considering the question as to whether the
search carried out by the officials of the DRI at the
warehouse/factory premises of M/s.             CMR       Chiho       Industries
India     Pvt.    Ltd., Mehsana, where it was permissible in wake
of the decision of the Apex Court in case of M/s. Canon India.
It was alleged by the department that the petitioner had
misdeclared the product as “discarded              and      non-serviceable
semi-broken/broken motor” by mentioning CTH 7204 49 00
under the Other Ferrous Waste and scrap. This Court relying
on the decision of the Apex Court rendered in case of M/s.
Canon India Pvt. Ltd., in case of seizure of goods under
Section 110, followed the ration of M/s. Canon India decision.
“28. As can be noticed from the detailed
submissions      and      the ratio         laid       down            in
Cannon India Pvt. Ltd. (supra) in the instant case
also, the importer has filed bills of Entry at Thar Dry
Port, ICD Customs, Sanand and declared the
description of the product as “Discarded and Non—
serviceable semi broken Motor Scrap” classifying
the same under the Custom Tariff Act 7204 49 00
under the heading of other Ferrous Waste and
Scrap. The benefit of concessional rate of 2.5% had
been availed     by     the       petitioner        vide         serial
No.368      of   Notification No.50/2017:CUS                     dated
30.06.2017. The said serial No.368 is notified
for “melting scrap of iron or steel (other than
stainless steel)” for chapter 7204 in the said
29. It is alleged in the show cause notice and in the
affidavit in reply that, the importer was aware that
the scrap contained 10% of Copper, which is
evident from the certificate of analysis and Form 9
furnished by the petitioner to the authority.
Therefore, it was the DRI, which formed the
“reasonable belief” that the importer took undue
benefit of concessional rate of duty of 2.5% instead of
the paying the effective rate of 5%, resulting into
short     payment       of         custom duty            to        the
Government.Therefore,             the     DRI placed under
detention the imported motor scrap (raw material)
of    59,45,032     kilo       grams       of imported motor
scrap, nondismantled and 9,39,619 kgs of dismantled
and segregated scrap of various types.
30. Thus, the estimated value of scrap of
Rs.5,83,62,131 were placed under detention by DRI
on 29.07.2020 and the same had been handedover to
Chiho Industries India Pvt. Ltd.                         petitioner
herein,    under     proper         Suparat      Nama            dated
29.07.2020      for   safe         custody.     These           goods
were further        placed           under       seizure              on
03.08.2020 as they were liable for confiscation
according to the authority under Section 111
of    the    Act. According to the respondents, the
entire matter is currently under investigation of
DRI, the Deputy Director, DRI Zonal Unit has
given 'no objection' to the provisional release
to     the seized goods on 11.08.2020 since, the
importerpetitioner requested for release of the
seized goods vide letter dated 05.08.2020. It is quite
obvious that at the time of import of the goods, the
petitioner had declared the description of the
product as “Discarded in nonserviceable motor
scrap under Customs Tariff Heading 7204 49 00
under “other ferrous waste” and because of
that 2.5% of rate of concessional duty had been made
available under Notification 50/2017:CUS dated
30.06.2017. What is not being disputed is that the
certificate of analysis and Form9 as also other
relevant materials had been placed before the
Custom      Authority     which        examined           the same
and cleared the goods of import. It was later
on that the DRI with a “reasonable belief” that there
was an undue benefit of the concessional rate
of duty taken which resulted into the short
payment of custom duty, placed the goods under
detention and they were subjected to confiscation.
It is quite obvious that the officer, who had
permitted the import of the goods is not the one
who had formed a reasonable belief                       of         the
petitioner    having       taken      undue benefit of the
concessional rate of duty. It is the officer of the DRI,
who was not anywhere in the picture when the
import took place, had acted and              detained            the
goods and later on also confiscated the same. A
very serious challenge in the instant case is also to
the action of the DRI officer of detention and seizure
dated 29.07.2020 and 03.08.2020 so also of the
confiscation dated 11.08.2020 along with the
challenge to the very action of show cause notice on
the part of the respondent.
31. What is vital for the Court to regard is the
factual details    of the         case on        hand before
applying the judgment of the Cannon India
Pvt.Ltd. (supra) while exercising powers of
detention, the DRI alleges that the custom
authorities had been induced by the petitioner to
clear the goods which had been imported by
alleged willful misstatement and suppression of the
facts and this action according to the DRI had
led    to    the     wrongful        availment          of        the
concessional rate of duty. This misdeclaration
of the product along with the concessional rate of
duty resulted into the short payment of custom duty
and therefore, it chose to not only exercise the
powers of detention, but also of seizure on
11.08.2020. The provisional release order was
also passed on receipt of certain securities from the
petitioner.
32. The relevant permissions in connection with
the detention and seizure if are briefly noticed,
Section 111 lays down that if the proper officer has
a reason to believe that any goods are liable of
confiscation under the customs act, he may seize
such goods.
32.1. Section 110A of the Act is an attaching
section where the provisional release of seized
goods pending adjudication is contained, which
says that any goods, documents or things seized
or bank     account      provisionally attached               under
Section 110 of the Act, may, pending the order of
the adjudicating officer, be released to the owner or
the bank account holder on taking a bond from him in
the proper form with such security and conditions as
the adjudicating authority may require.
32.2. Section 110(2) of the Customs Act also
provides    that   where any       goods       are         seized
under subsection (1) and no notice in respect of the
same is given within six months under clause (a) of
section 124, the goods shall be returned to the
person from whose possession they were seized.
32.3. It is also further provided that not only
the principles of natural justice shall have to be
adhered to. It is obvious that there has to be a show
cause notice before confiscation of the goods within
six months after once the seizure of the                   goods
takes place under Section 110 (1) of the Act.
32.4. Section 124 of the Act provides for
issuance of show cause notice before the
confiscation of the goods and states that no
order of confiscation or imposing of any penalty on
any person shall be made under this chapter
unless the owner of the goods or such person (a) is
given a notice in writing with the prior
approval of the officer of Customs not below the rank
of    an   Assistant     Commissioner        of       Customs
informing him of the grounds on which it is
proposed to confiscate the goods or to impose a
penalty; (b) is given an opportunity of making a
representation in writing within such reasonable time
as may be specified in the notice against the
grounds of confiscation or imposition of penalty
mentioned     therein;        and  (c)     is      given           a
reasonable opportunity of being heard in the
matter, Provided that the notice referred to in clause
(a) and the representation referred to in clause (b)
may at the request of the person concerned
be oral. Provided further that notwithstanding
the issuance of notice under this section,                     the
proper officer may issue a supplementary notice
under such the circumstances
and in such manner as may be prescribed.
32.5. It also appears that under Section 125
of the Customs Act, there is an option to pay the fine
in lieu of confiscation as the said
provision provides that “whenever confiscation of any
goods is authorized by this Act, the officer adjudging
it    may,       in    case        of    any      goods,           the
importation or exportation whereof is prohibited
under this Act or under any other law for
the time being in force, and shall, in the case of any
other goods, give to the owner of the goods or,
where such owner is not known, the person
from whose possession or custody such goods have
been seized, an option to pay in lieu of
confiscation such fine as the said officer thinks fit”.
33. Thus,     after   once        the    officer       concerned
forms a reasonable belief in relation to the
goods imported, firstly what happened was the
detention and thereafter, the seizure of the
goods.
33.1. Such goods had been periodically released
but      before undertaking            the       process              of
confiscation, opportunity of payment of fine also can
be given and there is a detailed procedure
mandated before         actually        confiscation            takes
place.
33.2. Since the availing of due opportunity for
following of principles of natural justice is an
integral     part    of       the     scheme          of        these
provisions, issuance of show cause notice is by way of
following the prescribed procedure.
33.3. And yet, what would be vital to examine is
whether the exercise of forming reasonable
belief in wake of noticeable material before the
authority could be held justifiable and whether the
issuance of notice by the officer concerned of DRI,
in wake of the latest decision, would warrant
interference on the ground of the same being
non est without any authority.
34. The Deputy Director, DRI                 respondent No.3
herein in his affidavitinreply has alleged that there
is already improper declaration of description
of imported goods and consequential claim and
thereby, availment of undue benefit of concessional
rate of custom duty at the rate of 2.5% instead of
5%. The goods imported are not melting scrap
of Iron and Steel, but also contained Copper
scrap     and     Aluminum           scrap. According to the
Department, the petitioners were aware that the
imported products were labeled as “Discarded and
nonserviceable semibroken motor scrap” and they
simply cannot be termed as melting scrap of
Iron     or    Steel     (other        than stainless             steel)
falling under Customs Heading 72044900. They
have     admitted      that        they     are importing the
motor scrap consisting Iron Scrap 85%,                         Copper
Scrap 10%          and Aluminum                Scrap           5% in
approximate. They are alleged of intentionally
not declaring their products properly in the
bills of Entry at the time of import under
Section 46 of the Act in terms of Section 17 of the
Customs Act. Section 17 provides that an
importer entering any imported goods under
Section     46    or     an        exporter      entering            any
export goods under Section 50 of the Act shall save
as otherwise provided in Section 85, self assess the
duty, if any, leviable on such goods.
35. Admittedly, the description in the Bill of Entry
“Discarded       and       nonserviceable              semibroken
motor scrap” even on inspection of the goods
were found exactly as entered into the Bill of Entry
i.e. discarded and nonserviceable broken motor
scrap. The only reason after having allowed the
import for not allowing the benefit of reduced rate
of duty is because the Copper scrap and the
Aluminum scrap in the material imported to the
extent of 10% and 5% respectively and approximately
could be taken out eventually from these broken
motors. That essentially appears to be the reason
for disallowing of the exemption. As is apparent
from the material in the certificate of analysis
produced at the time of clearance of the goods itself,
of the Copper scrap is also disclosed. It is not
disputed by the respondent No.3 that such
certificate of analysis had been produced. The
same has also finds a specific mention in
the panchnama dated 03.08.2020 and in the
letter dated 03.08.2020 addressed to the petitioner
by the Assistant Commissioner, ICD, Sanand.
35.1.        It    is    in       the    beginning          of       this
communication referred to “during the course of
post clearance audit of the Bills of Entry filed by you
in respect of clearance of goods viz.,“Discarded
and nonserviceable semibroken motor scrap”. It
has been noticed that the documents like bill
of     lading, PSIC         and certificate          of       analysis
indicate that the imported scrap                     consisted of
(i) Copper scrap, Barley/Birch (ii) Aluminum scrap
(iii) Iron scrap (HMS).
35.2. The       petitioner         is   absolutely        right          in
pointing out that if the exemption was not
available to the petitioner on the basis of the
documents, which had been produced at the time of
import, the Assessing Officer of the Customs
could have denied the same and with the full
knowledge, he had permitted assessment of the
goods under the Customs Tariff Heading 7204 49 00
as Iron and Steel scrap and permitted the
exemption             available            under Notification
50/2017:CUS dated 30.06.2017 under serial No.368.
36. It can be noticed that from the disclosure
made by the petitioner that it had claimed the
classification and exemption by bringing to the
notice of the department all relevant details and
therefore, to term this as a misdeclaration and to
arrive      at     a subjective satisfaction               for        not
allowing       the     benefit        of Notification on              the
ground of existence of the Copper in the scrap
motors, by the DRI Officer surely in wake of the
decision of      Canon India Pvt. Ltd (supra) shall
need to be interfered with. The assessment
once when is done by the concerned officer of
the Custom Department, the reassessment by the DRI
Officer, who invoked the powers, not being the
proper officer as per the decision of Canon India Pvt.
Ltd. (supra) would warrant                 indulgence.              And,
hence, his reasonable belief would also have no
bearing when otherwise the authority concerned had
allowed the import on the basis of the material which
had been already made available                          by           the
petitioner. Thus, on the count of the DRI
officer not being a proper officer under the law as
the action on the part of the officer of DRI is
not to be sustained. Again, assuming that he
would have powers to reassess the very fact that
entire material was with the assessing officer, it
was for him to assess otherwise. Besides, vide
notification issued by the Central Board of Excise &
Customs, that is, notification no. 40/2012 – customs
(NT) dated 2.5.2012 and more particularly, item
no.6 whereby, the Intelligence Officer in the Director
General of Revenue Intelligence and Directorate
General of Central Excise Intelligence, have been
assigned the powers of various sections including the
powers under subsection (1) and (2) of section
110 of the Act, which notification has been
considered by the Apex Court with reference to
assigning the powers of section 28 of the Act and
has been held to be invalid. The learned
counsel for the Union, could not dispute the said
proposition as well as the applicability of the
judgment to the facts of the present case,
therefore, applying the principles enunciated in the
case of Canon India Private Ltd (supra) the petition
deserves to be allowed.
37. The decision of the Apex Court rendered in case
of Commissioner of Customs, Calcutta vs.
G.C.Jain, reported in 2011 (269) E.L.T. 307 shall
also need to be referred to at this stage where
dispute was whether Butyl Acrylate Monomer (BAM)
can be said to be an adhesive for the purpose of
allowing the duty free clearances against advance
license issued under the DEEC scheme.
“24.It is also observed that the demand is hit                      by
the     bar     of   limitation        inasmuch              as the
appellant had cleared the goods in question
after    declaring    the        same     in     the bills           of
entries and giving correct classification of the
same.     Availing   of benefit       of     a     notification,
which      the Revenue subsequently                formed an
opinion was not available, cannot lead to the charge
of misdeclaration     or       misstatement,         etc.        And
even if an importer has wrongly claimed his benefit
of the exemption, it is for the department to
find out the correct legal position and to allow or
disallow the same. In          the    instant        case         the
appellant had declared the goods as Butyl
Acrylate Monomer with correct classification of
the same and the word ‘adhesive’ was added
in the    exbond    bill      as   per     the      appellant’s
understanding that BAM is an adhesive. In
these circumstances it was for the Revenue to check
whether BAM was covered by the expression
adhesive or not and if even after drawing of
samples they have allowed the clearances to be
effective as an adhesives appellant cannot be
held responsible for the same and subsequently, if
the Revenue has changed their opinion as regards
the     adhesive    character         of    BAM, extended
period cannot be invoked against them. As such
we are of the view that the demand of duty in
respect     of   14 consignments is also barred by
limitation.”
37.1. It is of course for the department to
find out the correct legal position as to the
classification   and      if     the     department              has
permitted the clearance, and subsequently changed
its opinion, to hold the petitioner liable and
responsible and alleged him of misdeclaration
since is impermissible.
38. Here is the case where the petitioner has
filed Electronic Bill of Entry in the EDI system,
where it can claim a particular exemption or                         a
particular classification. On subsequently having
noticed that the Copper and Aluminum elements
would not permit the exemption under the
Notification at the rate of 2.5% by itself would not
make the import of the goods as clandestinely having
been done, the least that could have been done was
to term the same as mala fide when otherwise
the relevant material had been already placed with
the department.
38.1. As        mentioned            hereinabove,                the
communication dated 03.08.2020 in post clearance
audit of Bill of Entry was on the basis of
various documents including the certificate of
analysis, when it was realized by the department that
the product consists of the Copper scrap also
to the extent of around 10%. The DRI has
firstly detained the goods, which later on
had been seized. Assuming that the stage of
adjudication of show cause notice is yet to come, this
Court has no intent to go into the issue of
classification at all as it would be for the
proper officer to workout the same on following the
due     procedure     and        on   requisite          scrutiny
however, noticing that the order of detention and
seizure by the DRI itself is unsustainable, we
allow the petition by quashing and setting aside the
seizure and the panchnama.
38.2       Resultantly, this Petition is allowed,
quashing and setting aside the detention and
seizure dated 29.07.2020 (AnnexureH ), dated
13.1. It is given to understand that this decision has not been
challenged by the respondent and thus, respondent – Union of
India has accepted the same.
14.    This Court since has followed the ratio laid down by the
Apex Court in case of M/s. Canon India Private Limited
(supra), there is no reason as to why in all these matters
where the show cause notices have been issued by the
respondent after knowing fully well the decision of M/s. Canon
India, should not follow the very ratio as has been done in
case of CMR Chiho Industries India Pvt. Ltd.(supra).
15.    As noted hereinabove, the arguments advanced of there
being no infirmity in appointment of the DRI officers as
Customs Officers under Notification No. 17/2002 dated
07.03.2002        and   the   discussion       on  Section       6     for      the
entrustment of the functions of the officers of the customs on
certain other officers which are the officers of the Central or
State Government or a Local Body, by emphasizing on a
conjoint reading of Sections 4 and 6 will surely not be within
the purview of this Court. It also amounts to being wiser than
the highest Court of the Country and is simply impermissible
to even allow such arguments to be advanced before this
Court when not only the review has not been so far decided,
but, subsequently another Bench of three judges in case of
Commissioner of Customs, Kandla vs. M/s. Agarwal Metals &
Alloys [Civil Appeal No. 3411/2020, decided on 31.08.2021]
has also followed the decision of M/s. Canon India Private
Limited. There has been no review also sought of this decision
where the appeal has been dismissed of the Commissioner of
Customs, Kandla relying on the decision of M/s. Canon India
16.    Apt would be to remind the respondent of the decision of
the Constitutional Bench rendered in case of Ambika Prasad
Mishra vs. State of U.P. [1980 (3) SCC 719] where the Court
has held that, it is wise to remember that fatal flaws silenced
by    earlier     rulings   cannot survive after death because                     a
decision does not lose its authority "merely because it was
badly      argued,  inadequately      considered    and      fallaciously
reasoned". And none of these misfortunes can be imputed
to Bharati's case [AIR 1973 SC 1461].
17.    The Full Bench of this Court in case of Sarjubhaiya
Mathurbhai Kahar vs. Commissioner of Police, Vadodara
[1984 (1) GLR 538] had come heavily when despite the
decision of the High Court in a subsequent case, the party
proceeded to deal with the question before it as if the decision
would not be applicable and the justification drown was that
relevant provision was not brought to the notice of the
18.    The Apex Court in a decision of B.M.Lakhani vs.
Malkapur Municipality [AIR 1970 SC 1002] held that the
decision was binding on the High Court and the High Court
could not ignore it because it thought that the relevant
provisions were not brought to the notice of the Court. The
Court has emphatically held that “a new ground of challenge
even on the basis of approach made in the later decision of
the Supreme Court may not be available before the Court to
the petitioner in a matter before it.” Apt would be to refer to
the said decision:-
“3. Two questions fall to be determined in this appeal
(I) whether a suit for refund of tax paid to the
Municipality is maintainable; and (2) if the suit is
maintainable, whether the levy of tax by the
Municipality was valid in law.
4. The first question is concluded by the judgment of
this Court in Bharat Kala Bhandar's case, 1965-3 SCR
499 = . That case arose under the C.F. & Berar
Municipalities Act, 1922. The right of a Municipality
governed by that Act to levy under Section 66(1)(b) a
tax on bales of cotton ginned at the prescribed rate
was challenged by a taxpayer. This Court held that
levy of tax on cotton ginned by the taxpayer in excess
of the amount prescribed by Article 276 of the
Constitution was invalid, and since the Municipality
had no authority to levy the tax in excess of the rate
permitted by the Constitution, the assessment
proceedings levying tax in excess of the permissible
limit were invalid, and a suit for refund of tax in
excess of the amount permitted by Article 276 was
maintainable. The decision was binding on the High
Court and the High Court could not ignore it because
they thought that "relevant provisions were not
brought to the notice of the Court".
5. We may also observe that the judgment in Firm
Seth Radha Kishan v. Administrator Municipal
Committee, Ludhiana 1964-2 SCR 273 : on which
reliance was placed by the High Court has no
relevance. In that case under the Rules of the
Municipality of Ludhiana tax on common salt
imported within the Municipal limits could be levied
at a certain rate, and on all other kinds of salts at a
higher rate. On the Sambhur salt imported by the
appellants duty was levied at the higher rate. The
appellants then filed a suit for decree for refund of
excess tax levied, contending that Sambhur salt was
common salt. This Court held that the Civil Court had
no jurisdiction to entertain the suit, for the liability to
pay terminal tax was created by the Act and a remedy
was also provided against improper enforcement of
the Act. In a case where the Municipality has
undoubted power to levy a tax under a provision of
the Act, in respect of any article, and it levies tax
under another provision of the Act not applicable to
it, the Municipality merely commits an error in
collecting the tax at the rate collected, and no
question of jurisdiction arises, the party aggrieved
must seek remedy in the manner prescribed by the
Act. In the present case, however, there is a bar
against levy in excess of the amount specified in the
Constitution, and not a mere question of levy of tax
under an inapplicable entry.
6.Again it was implicit in the judgment of the Full
Bench that the suit was maintainable. If the suit was
not maintainable the question whether to the claim
made under Section 48 of the Act had application
could not arise. Section 48 lays down the conditions
subject to which the suit may be filed. Whether
Section 48 of the C.P. & Berar Municipalities Act is
not applicable, because the tax contravened Section
142-A of the Government of India Act, 1935,
or Article 276 of the Constitution, could only fall to
be determined if a suit for refund lay. The High Court
was, in our judgment, in error in setting aside the
decree passed by the District Court on the ground
that a suit for refund of tax was not maintainable.
7. On the second question the argument of the
Municipality has also not much substance. The
Municipality was constituted in 1905 under Section
41(1)(a)(b) of the Berar Municipal Act, 1888, a tax
called "the Bale and Boja tax" was levied by the
Municipality with effect from October 1, 1912, on
cotton ginned and pressed in Ginning and. Pressing
Factories at the rate of 8 pies per bale of 10 maunds,
and 10 pies per bale of 14 maunds. On October 2,
1989, the Municipality resolved to revise the rates
and by notification dated January 2, 1940, under
Section 87(5) of the C.P. & Berar Municipalities Act,
1922, tax was permitted to be levied at the rate of
four annas per bale with effect from October, 1,
8. The Berar Municipal Act was promulgated by the
Viceroy & Governor-General, Berar being then not a.
part of British India. By a notification of the.
'Governor-General dated June 22, 1924, under the
Indian (Foreign Jurisdiction) Order in Council the
Berar Municipal Act was repealed, and the Central
Provinces Municipalities Act 2 of 1922 was applied to
the Berar Area. After the Government of India Act,
1935, the Berar Laws (Provincial) Act, 1941 was
enacted, and Berar was under Section 47 of the
Government of India Act to be administered together
with the Central Provinces as one of the Provinces
under that Act. Various Acts" including the Central
Provinces Municipalities Act 2 of 1922 were extended
to the Berar with certain modifications under the
Central. Provinces and Berar Act 15 of 1941. By that
Act the title of Act 2 of 1922 was altered: it read
"Central Provinces and Berar Municipalities Act".,
By Section 8 of the Act it was provided that the
Central Provinces Municipalities Act, 1922, which
had been applied to Berar by order under the Indian
(Foreign Jurisdiction) Order in Council, 1902, shall
cease to have effect "provided that all appointments,
delegations, notifications, orders, byelaws, rules and
regulations which have been made or issued, or
deemed to have been made or issued and all other
things done or deemed to have been done under, or
in pursuance" of, any provision of any of the said
Order m Council, and which are in force at the
commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to have
been made or issued or done under or in pursuance
of the corresponding provision of that Act as now
extended to, and in force in, Berar."
Notifications issued under the Berar Municipal Act
and the Central "Provinces Municipalities Act in force
at the commencement of Act 15 of 1941 applied to
the Municipalities in the former Berar area. In the
meanwhile S.     142-A was        incorporated           in      the
Government of India Act, 1935, by India & Burma
6, Ch. 5, as from April 1,1939, imposing limit upon
taxes, professions, trades and callings. But by the
proviso to Sub-section (2) of Section 142-A levy by
the Provinces or Municipal bodies of tax on
profession, trade, calling or employment, at rates
exceeding the rates prescribed by the Government of
India Act were to remain in operation until provision
to the contrary was made by the Parliament. To give
effect to the limitation imposed by Section 142-A the
Parliament enacted the Professions Tax Limitation
Act XX of 1941. The relevant provisions of Act 20 of
1941 are as follows:
Section 2 - Notwithstanding the provisions of any law
for the time being in force, any taxes payable in
respect of any one person to a Province., or to any
one municipality, district board, local board? or other
local authority in any Province, by way of tax on
professions, trades, callings or employments, shall
from and after the commencement of this Act cease
to be levied to the extent in which such taxes exceed
fifty rupees per annum.
Section 3- The provisions of Section 2 shall not apply
to any tax specified in the Schedule.
The Schedule is as follows:
THE SCHEDULE Taxes to which Section 2 does not
apply.
1.The tax on professions, trades and callings,
imposed through fees for annual licences, under
Chapter XII of the Calcutta Municipal Act, 1928.
2. The tax on trades, professions and callings,
imposed under Clause (f) of Sub-sections (1) of
Section 123 of the Bengal Municipal Act, 1932.
3. The tax on trades and callings carried on within
the municipal limits and deriving special advantages
from, or imposing special burdens on, municipal
services, imposed under Clause (ii) of Sub-section (1)
of Section 128 of the United Provinces Municipalities
4. The tax on persons exercising any profession or
art, or carrying on any trade or calling, within the
limits of the Municipality, imposed under Clause (b)
of Section (1) of Section 66 of the Central Provinces
5, The tax on companies, imposed under Section 110
of the Madras City Municipal Act, 1919.
9. The Professions Tax Limitation Act, 1941, was
repealed by the Adaptation of Laws Order, 1950, and
limitations on the tax on professions, trades, callings
and employment were continued by Article 278 of the
Constitution after the repeal of the Government of
10. It may be recalled that the notification enhancing
the rate of "Bale and Boja tax" was issued after
Section 142-A of the Government of India Act, 1935,
was incorporated. The only notification In force was
the notification issued in 1912. The notification of
1940 was not saved by the proviso to Section 142-A
of the Government of India Act, 1935. But the
Municipality collected tax at rates set out in the
notification of .1940. It is clear, however, that if the
notification of 1940 was ineffective under the
Government of India Act, it could not be revived
under the Constitution Article 276(2) proviso. The
notification relied upon by the Municipality was
brought into operation after the Constitutional
prohibition under Section 142-A of the Government of
India Act became effective on April 1, 1939. The
modification of rates was plainly ineffective, for the
rates prescribed thereby were not in operation in the
financial year ending March 31, 1939.
11. No claim to recover the tax could therefore, be
founded on that notification. But it was urged that
the earlier notification of 1912 was in any case
effective in the financial year ending March 31, 1939,
and tax could be levied under that notification which
was indisputably in operation in the financial year.
This Court has however held in Municipal Committee,
Akot v. Manilal Manekji Pvt Ltd. 1967-2 SCR 100 : ;
on interpretation of Sections 2 and 3 and Item 4 of
the Schedule to the Professions Tax Limitation Act 20
of 1941 that the rate fixed by the earlier notification
was also not saved from the operation of Section 2.
This Court was of the view that by virtue of Item 4 of
the Schedule only the tax on persons, exercising
professions imposed under Clause (b) of Sub-section
(1) of Section 66 of the Central Provinces
Municipalities Act, 1922, was saved from the
operation of Section. 2 of Act 20 of 1941 and not the
tax under Section 66 of the Central Provinces &
Berar Municipalities Act, 1922, and the tax levied by
the respondent Municipality was levied under the
latter Act. That decision is binding upon us. It must
therefore be held that the rate of tax prescribed by
the notification of 1912 alone could be enforced,
subject to the limit prescribed by Article 276(2) of the
Constitution. The Municipality was therefore
incompetent to levy a tax at a rate exceeding Rs,
250/- for the whole year.
12. The appeal is allowed and the decree passed by
the Trial Court is restored. The Municipality will pay
the costs in this Court and in the High Court.”
19.    Thus, not only the binding decision of the Apex Court in
case of Canon India (supra) will govern the fate of each
matter where the issuance of show cause notice is by the DRI
and in contravention of the ratio laid down, it is also for this
Court to ignore such ratio by holding that this issue also could
be    approached      in  different     ways. Nor    would        it     make
permissible to defend the action of the State on the ground of
cause expounded in the show cause notice when the very
authority as per the decision lacked authority to issue the
same. This Court much awaited for the outcome of review
which is pending. However, as agreed to by both the sides,
there is no certainty of its finalization and again, all the
appeals are finalized subject to the outcome of reply.
20.    The amendment in the act has been brought on the
statute and whether it can have effect retrospectively when in
case of all these matters, show cause notices have been issued
prior to the amendment having come into force is not the
question to be deliberated upon as argued by both the sides.
21.    Resultantly, all these petitions are Allowed. Show cause
notice issued in each case by the DRI is quashed on the basis
of the ratio laid down in M/s. Canon India (Supra) without
entering into the merits of individual case. This would be
subject to the outcome of review pending before the Apex
Court in Commissioner of Customs Vs. M/s. Canon India Pvt.
9580/2021)        filed    on   07.04.2021].       Furthermore,              this
quashment shall not in any manner preclude the Revenue to
initiate action on        merit, if permissible under the law, by
proper authority.