1.        The petitioner-Tajinder Singh alias Happy S/o. Mohinder Singh, Ward
No. 4, Simbal Camp, Tehsil R. S. Pura, District, Jammu(hereinafter to
referred as the detenue) has challenged order No. PITNDPS 05 of 2022
dated 27.07.2022 passed by the Divisional Commissioner, Jammu
(hereinafter to be referred as the Detaining Authority), whereby he has
been taken into preventive custody in terms of Section 3 of the
Prevention of Illicit Traffic in Narcotics Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances Act, 1988 (hereinafter to be referred as the PITNDPS Act).
2.        It has been contended in the petition that the detenue/petitioner has been
taken into preventive custody on the basis of an order that has been
passed without application of mind. It is further contended that perusal
of the order would show that the same has been passed on the grounds
which are alien to requirements of Section 3 of the PITNDPS Act as the
impugned order of detention has been passed on the ground that the
activities of the petitioner pose a serious threat to the health and welfare
of the people. It is also contended that the mandate of Section 3 of the
PITNDPS Act is not fulfilled in the instant case, inasmuch as the
impugned order of detention has been passed on the basis of only a
single incident relating to recovery of few grams of heroin. It has also
been contended that the petitioner has not been provided the translated
version of the grounds of detention etc. which prevented him from
making an effective representation against the order of detention. Thus,
according to the petitioner, statutory and constitutional safeguards
available to the petitioner have been observed in breach.
3. The petition has been resisted by the respondents by filing a counter
affidavit. In their counter affidavit, the respondents have submitted that
the petitioner is a habitual drug peddler and smuggler who is indulging
in illicit traffic of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances. It has
been contended that the detenu poses a serious threat to the lives of
young generation as well as to the economy of the Union Territory. It
has been submitted that the petitioner has been found involved in
numerous offences and various FIRs have been registered against the
petitioner in District Jammu. It has been submitted that the petitioner
has been provided all the relevant record along with detention order and
the grounds of detention, whereafter, the Executing Officer has made
him to understand the grounds of detention in Hindi/Dogri, a language
which is understood by the petitioner. It has also been contended that
the subjective satisfaction arrived at by the Detaining Authority cannot
be subjected to judicial review by this Court in exercise of writ
jurisdiction and that the petitioner instead of availing the alternative
remedy of filing a representation before the Advisory Board, cannot
maintain the instant writ petition.
4. I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record of
the case as well as the detention record produced by the respondents.
5. The primary ground that has been projected by the learned senior
counsel appearing for the petitioner for assailing the impugned order of
detention is that there has been non application of mind on the part of
the Detaining Authority in passing the impugned order of detention. It
has been contended that the Detaining Authority has recorded in the
impugned order of detention that the activities of the petitioner pose a
serious threat to the health and welfare of the people which is not a
ground for resorting to preventive detention in terms of Section 3 of the
6. A perusal of the provisions contained in Section 3 of the PITNDPS Act
would show that a Detaining Authority, if satisfied with respect to any
person that with a view to prevent him from engaging in illicit traffic in
narcotics drugs and psychotropic substances, it is necessary so to do,
can make an order directing the said person be detained, meaning
thereby that order of preventive detention under section 3 of the
PITNDPS Act can be passed on the ground of preventing a person from
engaging in illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances.
7. A perusal of the impugned order of detention shows that the Detaining
Authority has observed that the petitioner is engaged in repeated cases
of illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances which
pose a serious threat to the health and welfare of the people. The order
goes on to observe that with a view to prevent the petitioner from
committing any of the acts within the meaning of illicit traffic and also
against the general public especially the younger generation from the
use and occupation of the drugs, it is necessary to detain him.
8. From the above, it is clear that the Detaining Authority has spelt out in
the order of detention that activities of the petitioner pose a serious
threat to the health and welfare of the people as he is engaged in
repeated illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances and
with a view to prevent him from doing so, the order of detention has
been passed. The Detaining Authority is, therefore, aware of the
situation that the petitioner is indulging in illicit traffic in narcotic drugs
and psychotropic substances and in order to prevent him from doing so,
it is necessary to detain him. Merely, because the Detaining Authority
has also observed that the activities of the petitioner pose a serious
threat to the health and welfare of the people would not render the
impugned order of detention illegal when it is clearly discernible from
the contents of the impugned order of detention that the Detaining
Authority has after recording subjective satisfaction that the petitioner is
indulging in illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances
and that it is necessary to prevent him from doing so, passed impugned
order of detention. Thus, it cannot be stated that the Detaining Authority
has passed the impugned order of detention on a ground which is alien
to the provisions contained in Section 3 of the PIT NDPS Act.
9.  Next, it has been contended by the learned senior counsel appearing for
the petitioner that most of the FIRs reference whereof is made in the
grounds of detention relate to offences other than offences under NDPS
Act and only two FIRs, i.e, FIR No. 76/2019 and FIR No. 62/2022 are
related to offences under NDPS Act. On this ground, it has been urged
that only on the basis of two instances, the impugned order of detention
could not have been passed. It has also been contended that even in
these two FIRs, the quantity of contraband substance recovered from
the petitioner is only a few grams.
10. So far as the question whether only two incidents were sufficient for the
Detaining Authority to initiate proceedings for preventive detention is
concerned, it is to be noted that it is for the Detaining Authority to have
subjective satisfaction about the apprehension of the petitioner
indulging in illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances.
Even one incident may be sufficient to satisfy the Detaining Authority.
It all depends upon the nature of the incident. In the instant case, the
Detaining Authority was fully satisfied that there was apprehension that
the petitioner would indulge in illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances, in case he was allowed to remain free. The
sufficiency of the material or the degree of probative criteria for
satisfaction for the detention is the domain of the Detaining Authority.
This Court cannot sit in appeal or exercise its powers of judicial review
in this regard. The contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is
therefore, without any substance.
11. It has been contended that most of the incidents reference whereof is
made in the grounds of detention are stale in nature and on the basis of
these stale incidents which have no live and proximate link to the
requirement of placing the petitioner in preventive custody, the
impugned order of detention could not have been passed. The ground
urged by the petitioner, as it appears, is without any merit for the reason
that one of the incidents relates to June, 2022, when contraband drugs
were recovered from the possession of the petitioner and FIR No.
62/2022 was registered against him with Police Station, Miran Sahib.
The impugned order of detention has been passed on 27.07.2022 and as
such, the latest incident mentioned in the grounds of detention has live
and proximate link to the necessity of passing the impugned order of
detention.
12. The reference of earlier incidents made by the Detaining Authority in
the grounds of detention is only to show that the petitioner had the
propensity and tendency to indulge in criminal activities as also
activities related to drug trafficking. Merely because reference has been
made to these past incidents, it cannot be stated that the petitioner has
been subjected to preventive custody on the basis of stale incidents.
13. It has also been contended by the learned senior counsel for the
petitioner that the translated version of the material relied upon for
formulating the grounds of detention has not been supplied to the
petitioner which has hampered him from making an effective
representation against the impugned order of detention. It has been
contended that the petitioner is a semiliterate person as such, he could
not understand the technical language used in the grounds of detention.
14.      In the above context, a perusal of the record of detention shows that the
petitioner has been provided all the materials including the detention
order, grounds of detention, police dossier, FIRs and the material
collected during investigation. The detention record contains affidavit
sworn in by the Executing Official, namely, PSI Mohd. Altaf, Police
Station, Miran Sahib in which he has clearly stated that the petitioner
was explained the grounds of detention in the language which he
understands fully and the report of execution reveals that the petitioner
has been made to understand the grounds of detention in Hindi/Dogri
languages which is fully understood by him. In the face of this affidavit
of the Executing Official, it cannot be stated that the petitioner was not
made aware about the grounds of detention in the language he
understands.
15.      Viewed in the above context, I do not find any ground to interfere with
the impugned order of detention. The writ petition lacks merit and is
dismissed as such.
16.      Record of detention be returned to the learned counsel for the
respondents.