For Respondent(s)          :    Mr Farzand Ali, GA-cum-AAG assisted by
This Larger Bench has been constituted under the
orders of Hon’ble The Chief Justice for answering the following
“Whether non surrendering of a prisoner to the prison
authorities after expiry of the period of parole would amount
to escape from lawful custody and therefore, ordinarily,
such prisoner would not be entitled to be transferred to
Open Air Camp, on account of inhibition contained in Rule
3(c) of the Rules of 1972 ?”
A Division Bench of this Court in Yogesh Kumar
Devangan vs. State and Ors. (DBCr.WP No.541/2019)
decided on 06.10.2020, while dealing with the provisions of Rule
3(c) of the Rajasthan Prisoners Open Air Camp Rules, 1972 (for
short ‘the Rules of 1972’), has considered the case of a prisoner,
whose request for sending him to Open Air Camp has been
rejected by the Prisoners Open Air Camp Advisory Committee (for
short ‘the Advisory Committee’) on the ground that after
completion of regular parole of 20 days, the prisoner did not
report to the concerned Jail Superintendent and absconded and as
such by the mandate of Rule 3(c) of the Rules of 1972, he is not
entitled to be shifted to Open Air Camp. The Division Bench, in
the above referred case, has taken a view that such act of the
prisoner of not reporting to the Jail Authorities on completion of
his parole cannot be equated with the case of the prisoners, who
have escaped from the jails or have attempted to do so and also
held that the Rule 3(c) of the Rules of 1972 cannot be taken up as
an absolute bar and it is upon the Advisory Committee to consider
the application after due application of mind on merits.
Another Division Bench of this Court in the present case
is not agreeable to the view taken by the Division Bench of this
Court in Yogesh Kumar Devangan vs. State and Ors. (supra) and
opined that if a prisoner, released on parole, does not surrender
before the Jail Authorities on completion of parole period, it would
amount to escaping from the lawful custody and thus, ordinarily
be not eligible to be transferred to Open Air Camp on account of
inhibition contained in Rule 3(c) of the Rules of 1972. The Division
Bench in this case, therefore, requested Hon’ble The Chief Justice
to refer the above question for consideration by a Larger Bench.
Learned counsel Mr Kalu Ram Bhati has argued that the
law laid down in Yogesh Kumar Devangan vs. State and Ors.
(supra) is correct law. It is submitted that a prisoner, who fails to
report to the Jail Authorities on completion of his parole, cannot
be equated with the prisoners, who have escaped from the jails or
attempted to do so. It is further argued that the object of Open Air
Camp is to bring the convict-prisoner into main stream of society
and while considering the matter under adjudication, the aim and
object of Open Air Camp must be taken into consideration.
Learned counsel Mr Ramandeep Singh Siddhu Kharlia
has argued that prisoners, who have failed to report back to the
Jail Authorities on completion of their parole period are different
from those prisoners, who absconded or escaped from the jail or
attempted to do so and cases of such prisoners are not liable to be
considered as per Rule 3(c) of the Rules of 1972 but can only be
considered as per Rule 3(g) of the Rules of 1972.                      Mr Kharlia
further   argued    that    provisions         of      Parole    Rules   prescribe
punishment for such overstaying prisoners and it applies to them
under the jail punishment category, therefore, denying admission
to Open Air Camp in addition to such punishment would amount to
double jeopardy, which is violative of Articles 14, 20 and 21 of the
Constitution of India.
Learned counsel Mr Nikhil Dungawat has argued that
Rules of 1972 is a welfare legislation and is directory in nature.
While referring to Parole Rules, it is argued that in the said Rules,
the   expression   used     is   “overstays”           and     not “escaped”    or
“absconded” for the prisoners, who fail to return to the prison and
deal with their penalty separately under the rules and other laws,
therefore, these two terms cannot be equated. It is further argued
that punishing the prisoner for overstaying and simultaneously
denying admission to Open Air Camp would amount to double
jeopardy and is violative of Article 20(2) of the Constitution of
Learned    counsel       Mr      Gajendra          Singh  Butati   has
contended that reformative approach should be taken for transfer
of a prisoner to Open Air Camp and denial for the same would
amount to violation of fundamental rights therefore, any rule,
order or provision of law cannot debar a prisoner from his right to
be reformed. He has further argued that there is difference
between “custody parole” and “regular parole” and that the
expression “lawful custody” cannot be replaced by “legal custody”.
He went on to explain that, when the prisoner is on regular parole,
he is not in the custody of the State in any manner. It is also
submitted that Rule 3(c) of the Rules of 1972 is only about the
‘substance’ of custody (lawful or unlawful) but not about the ‘form’
of custody (physical or constructive).
The sum and substance of the arguments of learned
Mr Nikhil Dungawat and Mr Gajendra Singh Butati is that the view
expressed by the Division Bench of this Court in Yogesh Kumar
Devangan vs. State and Ors. (supra) is the correct law and the
question referred to the Larger Bench should be answered in
Learned counsel Mr Ashok Chhangani though argued
that a prisoner on parole is well within the ‘legal custody’ of the
State Authorities but it should be held that the action of a prisoner
of not reporting to Jail Authorities after expiry of the parole period
should not be treated as an absolute bar to send him to the Open
Air Camp and Advisory Committee should apply its mind and
should take into consideration the circumstances under which, a
prisoner fails to report to the Jail Authorities after expiry of parole
Per contra, Mr Farzand Ali, learned GA-cum-Additional
Advocate General has argued that there is no specific provision in
CrPC with regard to parole and all the laws and rules promulgated
in this regard are for the welfare of              prisoners and, therefore, a
prisoner cannot ask for sending him/her in the Open Air Camp as
a matter of right. It is further argued that the period for which a
prisoner stays on parole is treated as imprisonment served and is
not considered as suspension of sentence and as such the parole
only changes the mode of undergoing the sentence.                   He further
argued that lawful custody has a wider connotation and includes
legal custody, judicial custody and police custody while referring to
the provisions of sections 417-419 CrPC. He has submitted that
since the day, a prisoner is sentenced and warrant is issued,
he/she remains in the lawful custody of the State till he/she
serves the entire punishment and failure to surrender to the
prison authorities after expiry of parole period amounts to escape
from the lawful custody. Lastly, it is argued that the principle laid
down by the Division Bench of this Court in Yogesh Kumar
Devangan vs. State and Ors. (supra) is not a correct law and the
question referred through this reference should be answered in
Now the question emerges whether a prisoner, while
out of prison or jail premises on parole, will remain in lawful
custody of State or not.
If the answer is in negative, the inhibition contained in
Rule 3(c) of Rules of 1972 will not affect the entitlement of a
prisoner for his admission in Open Air Camp, however, if the
answer is in affirmative, then the case of such prisoner is required
to be considered and decided in the light of Rule 3(c) of the Rules
We     are   of   the     view       that      with  the authoritative
pronouncement of a Constitutional Bench of Hon’ble Supreme
Court in Sunil Fulchand Shah vs. Union of India (UOI) and
Ors., AIR 2000 SC 1023, it is settled that a prisoner released on
parole, remains in legal custody of the State and under the control of
its agent. Even while on parole, the prisoner continues to serve the
sentence or undergo the period of detention in a different manner than
from being in jail. He cannot be termed as a free person.
The Hon’ble Supreme Court in Sunil Fulchand Shah vs.
Union of India (UOI) and Ors. (supra) has summarised the issue as
“16. Since, release on parole is only a temporary
arrangement by which a detenu is released for a temporary
fixed period to meet certain situations, it does not interrupt
the period of detention and, thus, needs to be counted
towards the total period of detention unless the rules,
instructions or terms for grant of parole, prescribe
otherwise. The period during which parole is availed of is
not aimed to extend the outer limit of the maximum period
of detention indicated in the order of detention. The period
during which a detenu has been out of custody on
temporary release on parole, unless otherwise prescribed
by the order granting parole, or by rules or instructions, has
to be included as a part of the total period of detention
because of the very nature of parole. An order made under
Section 12 of temporary release of a detenu on parole does
not bring the detention to an end for any period - it does not
interrupt the period  of detention - it only changes the mode
of detention by restraining the movement of the detenu in
accordance with the conditions prescribed in the order of
parole. The detenu is not a free man while out on parole.
Even while on parole he continues to serve the sentence or
undergo the period of detention in a manner different than
from being in custody. He is not a free person. Parole does
not keep the period of detention in a state of suspended
animation. The period of detention keeps ticking during this
period of temporary release of a detenu also because a
parolee remains in legal custody of the State and under the
control of its agents, subject at any time, for breach of
condition, to be returned to custody.”
The Division Bench in this case also placed reliance on
the above judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court.
So in the light of the above judgment, it can be said
that a prisoner while out of prison or jail premises on parole will
remain in lawful custody of the State.
To clarify further will take note of relevant provisions of
some Statutes, which may have some bearing in this matter:-
“418. Execution of sentence of imprisonment.—(1) Where
the accused is sentenced to imprisonment for life or to
imprisonment for a term in cases other than those provided for
by section 413, the Court passing the sentence shall forthwith
forward a warrant to the jail or other place in which he is, or is to
be, confined, and, unless the accused is already confined in
such jail or other place, shall forward him to such jail or other
Provided that where the accused is sentenced to imprisonment
till the rising of the Court, it shall not be necessary to prepare or
forward a warrant to a jail, and the accused may be confined in
such place as the Court may direct.
(2) Where the accused is not present in Court when he is
sentenced to such imprisonment as is mentioned in sub-section
(1), the Court shall issue a warrant for his arrest for the purpose
of forwarding him to the jail or other place in which he is to be
confined; and in such case, the sentence shall commence on
the date of his arrest.
419. Direction of warrant for execution.—Every warrant for
the execution of a sentence of imprisonment shall be directed to
the officer in charge of the jail or other place in which the
prisoner is, or is to be, confined.”
Form No.34 appended to the Second Schedule of
To the Officer in charge of the Jail at………….
WHEREAS on the ……… day of ………, ………. (name of
prisoner), the (Ist, 2nd, 3rd, as the case may be) prisoner in
case No…………… of the Calendar for 20…………,was
convicted before me ……… (name and official designation) of
the offence of ……..(mention the offence or offences concisely)
under section ……….(or sections) of the Indian Penal Code (or
of …………..Act…), and was sentenced to ……… (state the
This is to authorise and required you to receive the
said…………. (prisoner’s name) into your custody in the said
Jail, together with this warrant, and thereby carry the aforesaid
sentence into execution according to law.
Dated, this ………… day of…………,20………..
(Seal of the Court)                                        (Signature)”
“55. Extramural custody, control and employment of
prisoners.— A prisoner, when being taken to or from any
prison in which he may be lawfully confined, or whenever
he is working outside or is otherwise beyond the limits of
any such prison in or under the lawful custody or control
of a prison-officer belonging to such person, shall be
deemed to be in prison and shall be subject to all the
same incidents as if he were actually in prison.”
Rajasthan Prisoners Release on Parole Rules, 2021 :-
The Rajasthan Prisoners Release on Parole Rules, 2021
(hereinafter to be referred as ‘Rules of 2021’) are enacted by the
Government of Rajasthan        in exercise of powers conferred by sub-
clause (27-a) of Section 59 of the Prisoners Act, 1894 (Central Act
9 of 1894). In the said Rules, the “Parole”                    means conditional
enlargement of a prisoner from the jail under the Rules. A prisoner
sentenced to imprisonment for not less than one year may,
subject to good behavior, submit an application for parole (Rule-
5). The Rules further prescribes three types of parole, which can
A prisoner for regular parole (Rule 10) should have
completed with remission, if any, one-fourth of his sentence and
subject to good conduct in jail, may be released on first parole for
20 days including the days of journey to home and back and
thereafter for 30 days for second parole and 40 days respectively
for third parole subject to his good behaviour during first and
second parole. If during the third parole, behaviour of a prisoner
remains good and his character has been exceedingly well and
there are no chance that he is likely to relapse into crime, his case
can be recommended for permanent parole.
In case of emergent parole (Rule 11), a prisoner can be
released on parole in emergent cases involving humanitarian
consideration such as on account of illness of any close relative
i.e. father, mother, wife, husband, children, brother or unmarried
sister; death of any close relative; damage to life or property from
any natural calamity;        marriage of a prisoner, his/her son or
daughter or brothers/sister in case his/her parents are not alive
and delivery of prisoner’s wife. The emergent parole can be
granted for 7 days by the Superintendent of Jail and for 15 days
by the Inspector General of Prisons or District Magistrate.
A prisoner can be released on special parole (Rule 13)
in grave situation such as natural calamity or pandemic or
epidemic for a period of 90 days, who has already availed first,
second and third parole peacefully and his behaviour has been
good during that period.
As per Rule 14, the period for which a prisoner stays on
parole under Rule 10, without violation of any conditions, shall be
treated as imprison served by him, however, all other kinds of
parole shall be treated as sentence suspended.
Rule 15 says that aim of parole is to encourage good
conduct of prisoner and it cannot be claimed as a matter of right
by any prisoner.
Certain categories of prisoners are not entitled for
release on parole unless they have not served half of the sentence
including remission [Rule 16 (1)] and certain categories of
prisoners are not at all entitled for release on parole [Rule 16(2)].
In case of rejection of application for parole, provision
of appeal is also provided and in certain conditions, parole can
also be revoked (Rule 18 & 19).
Punishment is also provided in case of breach of
conditions of parole (Rule 20).
In exercise of powers conferred by clause (18) of
Section 59 of the Prisoners Act, 1894 (Central Act 9 of 1894), the
enacted the above referred Rules. Rule 3
elaborates ineligibility of prisons for admission in Open Air Camp.
Rule 4 speaks the eligibility of a prisoner for admission to Open Air
From the combined reading of the above provisions, the
picture emerges out is this that a prisoner after being sentenced
by a competent court is sent to jail/prison through a warrant to be
issued by a court, which has passed the sentence. Every warrant
for the execution of a sentence of imprisonment shall be directed
to the officer in charge of the jail or other place in which the
prisoner is, or is to be, confined. While serving the sentence, a
prisoner can be allowed to avail parole under the Rules of 2021 on
fulfilling the certain requirements and can also be sent to the open
air camp as per the provisions of Rule 1972.
Jail or prisons, in which the prisoners are or to be,
detained, are governed by the provisions of the Prisoners Act of
1894 and the Rules made thereunder.
The Hon’ble Supreme Court in Global Energy Ltd. &
Ors. Vs. Central Electricity Regulatory Commission, reported
in AIR 2009 SC 3194 has held that “Indisputably, a subordinate
legislation should be read in the context of the Act.”
As observed earlier, the Rules of 2021 and Rules of
1972 are enacted by the State Government in exercise of powers
conferred by sub-clauses (18) and (27-a) of Section 59 of the Act
of 1894, therefore, the said rules have to be read in context of
provisions of Act of 1894.
A plain reading of Section 55 of the Act of 1894
suggests that a prisoner while outside the jail or prison shall be
(12 of 15)          [CRLRF-1/2021]
deemed to be in prison and shall be subject to all such incidents
as if he were actually in prison.
So even if a prisoner is outside the jail or prison on
parole, by virtue of Section 55 of the Act of 1894 he shall be
deemed to be in prison and subjected to all the same incidents as
applicable to a prisoner detained in a jail or prison. Needless to
say, a prisoner detained in jail or prison is always in lawful custody
of State until proved otherwise.
While keeping into consideration the entire conspectus
and being conscious of the fact that the fundamental underlying
concept of parole is to provide opportunities to the prisoners to
integrate with the society on the incentive of maintaining good
behaviour, it is relevant that good behaviour is ascertained
through Superintendent of Jail and remains at the fulcrum of the
The parole, as a privilege, is granted to the prisoners,
while keeping the good behaviour of the inmate/parolee as a
yardstick of measuring level of discipline while in custody.
The purpose of parole is to release the prisoner so as to
enable him to connect with the society to achieve the goals of the
golden principles of reformation and rehabilitation. It is important
to simultaneously balance the principles of deterrence and
It is the State's duty that while taking the prisoners
towards reformation and rehabilitation, a cautious approach has to
be maintained so that the objective of incentivizing the custody is
not diluted.
The word 'parole' derives its origin from the French
word "Je donne ma parole", which means, "I give my word" i.e.
the word of honour.
The criteria of good behaviour is incentivized by means
of providing the prisoner with relief of parole while nurturing him
for rehabilitation and reformation.
The step by step increase of liberties in the shape of
parole are to usher the prisoner in a regime of increased freedom
and decreased rigour of custody. While taking this in a reverse
analogy, in case the discipline of the parole is allowed to be
breached without any consequences, the same shall result into
denting the incentive of maintaining good behaviour, while
undergoing custody.
All  the    social    objectives          of    the reformation    and
rehabilitation shall be washed away or surely diluted, if the
parole is stigmatized with impunity by frequent breaches without
The incentive of freedom has to be weighed against
disincentive of breach, while keeping the good behaviour as an
effective criteria to measure both.
Thus, it is clear that while weighing the incentive
against disincentive, the disciplinary issue has to be of stellar
standard, so as to ensure that the parole, which is undoubtedly a
part of the custody period, has the same sanctity, as is given to
the custody, and any violation of the parole conditions has to be
viewed seriously so as to enable the system to grant more and
more paroles to the inmates, while strengthening the system of
rehabilitation and reformation. The legal position has to give an
unequivocal mandate that any violation of parole tenure has to be
viewed on the same pedestal as breaching of custody.
In view of the above analysis, the only conclusion,
which can be drawn is that in the event of failure of a prisoner to
report back to the jail authorities on completion of parole would
amount to escape from lawful custody.
The    contention       of     the      learned     counsel   for  the
petitioners that denial of opportunity to a prisoner for admission in
open air camp, on account of his overstay amounts to double
jeopardy, is without any merit. Rule 15 of Rules of 2021 clearly
says that grant of parole to a prisoner should be regarded as
occasion to encourage good conduct and it cannot be claimed as a
matter of right by a prisoner. Preamble of Rules of 1972 also says
that these rules are framed for sending convicts to open air camps
with a view to encourage good conduct, satisfactory performance
of work and to promote life of self-discipline among the convicts of
Rajasthan. When a prisoner cannot claim parole or admission in
open air camp as a matter of right, in our view, any ineligibility
provided in the Rules of 2021 and Rules of 1972, which disentitles
a prisoner to get the benefit of parole or admission in open air
camp respectively, cannot be equated with any punishment
provided under any law for breach of conditions of parole or for
escaping the prison or jail.
So far as contention of learned counsel Mr Ashok
Chhangani that in every case, there is no absolute bar in Rule 3(c)
of the Rules of 1972 regarding transfer of a prisoner to Open Air
Camp is concerned, we are not supposed to enter into this
controversy as it is not the question precisely referred to answer.
However,      the     Division        Bench        of this   Court    in
Parvezshah vs. State of Rajasthan & Ors. (D.B.Criminal
Writs No.101/2019) decided on 13.03.2019 has taken into
consideration the Rule 3 of Rules of 1972 and held as under:
“6. Thus as laid down by this Court in Gaju Ram &
Mohan Lal’s case (supra), the inhibition covered by Rule
3 of the Rules of 1972 regarding transfer of the prisoners
to Open Air Camp cannot operate as absolute bar and
the application preferred on behalf of the convict has to
be considered on merits after due application of mind,
keeping in view the spirit of the provisions of the said
rule.”
Hence, in view of the above referred decision, we need
not to pass any order on this issue.
Accordingly, we answer the question of law referred for
(i)         The answer to the question of law referred for
adjudication is in affirmative. The view expressed by Division
Bench of this Court in Yogesh Kumar Devangan vs. State and Ors.
(supra) is not the correct law.
(ii)        Failure of a prisoner to surrender to the prison
authorities on completion of parole period would amount to escape
from the lawful custody of the State and ordinarily such prisoner
would not be entitled to be transferred to Open Air Camp as per
Rule 3(c) of the Rules of 1972.