1.     This hearing has been done through hybrid mode.
2.     Let the plaint be registered as a suit.
3.     Issue summons to the Defendants through all modes upon filing of
4.     The summons to the Defendants shall indicate that a written statement
to the plaint shall be positively filed within 30 days from date of receipt of
summons. Along with the written statement, the Defendants shall also file an
affidavit of admission/denial of the documents of the Plaintiff, without
which the written statement shall not be taken on record.
5.     Liberty is given to the Plaintiff to file a replication within 15 days of
the receipt of the written statement(s). Along with the replication, if any,
filed by the Plaintiff, an affidavit of admission/denial of documents of the
CS(COMM) 228/2022                                                                  Page 1 of 7
Defendants, be filed by the Plaintiff, without which the replication shall not
be taken on record. If any of the parties wish to seek inspection of any
documents, the same shall be sought and given within the timelines.
6.     List before the Joint Registrar for marking of exhibits on 20th July,
2022. It is made clear that any party unjustifiably denying documents would
be liable to be burdened with costs.
7.     List before Court on 19th September, 2022.
I.A.5591/2022 (u/O XXXIX Rule 1 and 2 CPC)
8.     A new counsel has been engaged by the Defendants. Mr. Siddharth
Yadav, ld. Counsel for the Defendants, under instructions by Mr. Rahul Das
– Director of Defendant No.1 Company, submits that the Defendants are no
longer willing to give up the mark ‘VELVET MATTE’.
9.     On the last date of hearing i.e., 12th April, 2022, the following order
was passed by this Court:
“1. This hearing has been done through hybrid mode.
2. Mr. Pravin Anand, Id. Counsel appearing for
Defendant Nos.1, 2 and 3 submits that the
Defendants are willing to give up the mark 'VELVET
4. Accordingly, since this is a fresh suit, let the parties
file a comprehensive application under Order XXIII
Rule 3 CPC recording the undertakings on behalf of
the Defendants so that the matter can be finally
disposed of.
10.    It is clear from the above order that, on the said date, the Defendants
had instructed their counsels that they were willing to give up the mark
‘VELVET MATTE’, and the matter was accordingly adjourned to enable the
parties to file a joint application under Order XXIII Rule 3 CPC. Today,
CS(COMM) 228/2022                                                                   Page 2 of 7
there has been a change of counsels, as also, a change of stand.
11.     The case of the Plaintiff is that it adopted the mark ‘VELVET MATTE’
in respect of cosmetics being, inter alia, lipstick, lip gloss, liquid pre-
makeup base, lip color, lip liner, in the year 2009 as a sub-brand/mark under
the umbrella brand/ house mark ‘COLORBAR’. The Plaintiff is the
registered proprietor of the mark ‘VELVET MATTE’ bearing Registration
No.3370299 in Class 3. The said mark was applied on 22nd September, 2016
and the user claim is of 12th August, 2009 onwards. Various variants of the
mark have also been used by the Plaintiff. The sales of the products sold
under the brand/mark‘VELVET MATTE’ are stated to be more than Rs.687
lakhs for the previous year 2020-2021. The Plaintiff has also promoted this
mark on social media and other websites, and the promotional expenses in
respect of the same is to the tune of Rs.1,496 lakhs for the year 2021-2022.
12.     The Defendant No.2 is a Canadian company which is also engaged in
the business of manufacturing and selling cosmetic products. It uses the
identical mark ‘VELVET MATTE’ in respect of an identical class of products
i.e., lip gloss, lipsticks, and other cosmetics. Upon acquiring knowledge of
the Defendants’ use of the mark ‘VELVET MATTE’, the Plaintiff had
issued a cease and desist notice to the Defendant on 16th November, 2021.
Vide Reply dated 9th December, 2021, the Defendants did not agree to
comply with the requisition of the Plaintiff, and argued that the mark
‘VELVET MATTE’ is common to trade and descriptive, as also, that there
are several distinguishing factors between the Plaintiff’s and Defendants’
13.     Mr. Chandra, ld. Counsel for the Plaintiff submits that the various
links which were cited by the Defendants in the reply to the cease and desist
CS(COMM) 228/2022                                                                  Page 3 of 7
notice are no longer active, and no products are available on the said links.
The Plaintiff has also protected its mark ‘VELVET MATTE’ by opposing
other manufacturers who applied for the said mark, such as Loreal, Renee
Cosmetics, etc. It is, thus, submitted that the mark ‘VELVET MATTE’ being
a registered trademark, the same deserves to be protected.
14.    On the other hand, Mr. Yadav, ld. Counsel for the Defendants has
handed over various listings from e-commerce platforms to argue that the
mark ‘VELVET MATTE’ is used by several cosmetics manufacturers.
15.    The Court has heard ld. Counsels for the parties and has perused the
documents. The first and the foremost fact which is noticed by the Court is
that ld. Counsel for the Defendants, under instructions from their clients, had
made a submission on the last date stating that they were willing to give up
the mark ‘VELVET MATTE’. However, upon change of counsels now, there
appears to be a rethinking and the said statement is sought to be resiled
16.    Further, the allegations of third-party use would require to be gone
into by the Court. A perusal of the printouts which have been handed over to
the Court shows that certain products are shown to be sold under the mark
‘VELVET MATTE’ on some international e-commerce platforms. The other
printouts relate to manufacturers who are not so well-known. In any event, it
is the settled position in law as per the judgment of the ld. Single Judge of
this Court in M/s. Info Edge (India) Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. v. Shailesh Gupta &
Anr. [2002 SCC OnLine Del 239] that the mere fact that the Plaintiff may
not take action against certain third-party users would not deprive the
Plaintiff from seeking protection against those who are affecting the
Plaintiff’s business. The relevant extract from the said judgment in Info
CS(COMM) 228/2022                                                               Page 4 of 7
“26. It was also contended by the counsel for the
defendant that there are many websites and domain
names almost with similar name, which re-existing
and, therefore, there cannot be any monopoly to the
plaintiff and also that the plaintiff having not
proceeded against them for similar reliefs, is not
entitled to proceed only against the defendant. The said
contention was refuted by the plaintiff by placing on
record a chart that the other websites with almost
similar names are either non-functional or are foreign
language websites and they have nothing to do with
jobs. It is thus prima facie established that those
websites/domain names stand apart and on a different
footing from the domain names of the plaintiffs and the
defendant. There is neither any occasion nor is there
any immediate necessity for the plaintiff to proceed
against those websites/domain names, which are non-
functional and non-relatable to the activity of
employment and jobs. The plaintiff, therefore, cannot
be denied relief and an injunction only because it has
not proceeded against other similar names. As a
matter of fact, when action is initiated, one similar
domain name has to be always the first and that
cannot be the reason for denying injunction to the
plaintiff.”
17.    Ld. Counsel for the Defendants further submits that the Plaintiff uses
the mark ‘COLORBAR VELVET MATTE’ whereas the Defendants use the
mark ‘FACES CANADA VELVET MATTE’. In the opinion of this Court, this
fact, by itself, would not make a difference inasmuch as a large quantum of
sales are on e-commerce platforms and when one searches for the mark
‘VELVET MATTE’, the Defendants’ products may also be thrown up in
search due to the use of the said mark.
18.    The Defendants have also applied for the registration of the mark
‘VELVET MATTE’, and hence, the Defendants cannot be allowed to argue
that the said mark is generic or descriptive or common to the trade.
Therefore, the Defendants are estopped from claiming the same. This is the
settled legal position as per the judgement of this Court in Automatic
Electric Limited v. R. K. Dhawan & Ors. [77 (1999) DLT 292]. The
relevant observations from the said judgment read as under:
“16. The defendants got their trade mark "DIMMER
DOT" registered in Australia. The fact that the
defendant itself has sought to claim trade proprietary
right and monopoly in "DIMMER DOT", it does not
lie in their mouth to say that the word "DIMMER" is
a generic expression. User of the word "DIMMER"
by others cannot be a defense available to the
defendants, if it could be shown that the same is being
used in violation of the statutory right of the plaintiff.
In this connection, reference may be made to the
decision of this Court in Prakash Road line Ltd. Vs.
Prakash Parcel Service (P) Ltd.; reported in 1992(2)
Arbitration Law Reporter page 174. Reference may
also be made to the decision in P.M. Diesels Ltd. Vs .
S.M. Diesels; reported in MANU/DE/0636/1994 :
AIR1994Delhi264 . It was held in those decision that if
the plaintiff is a proprietor of the registered trade
mark, the same gives to the proprietor of the registered
trade mark the exclusive right to use the trade mark
with relation to goods in respect of which the trade
mark is registered under the provisions of Section 28 of
the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act. It was also held
that such statutory right cannot be lost merely on the
question of principles of delay, laches or acquiescence.
It was also held that in general mere delay after
knowledge of infringement does not deprive the
registered proprietor of a trade mark of his statutory
CS(COMM) 228/2022                                                                Page 6 of 7
rights or of the appropriate remedy for the enforcement
of those rights so long as the said delay is not an
inordinate delay. In my considered opinion, the ratio of
the aforesaid decisions are squarely applicable to the
facts of the present case.”
19.    Moreover, the manner in which the Defendants have sought to resile
from the statement made on the last date of hearing shows that the intention
of the Defendants is merely to gain time and avoid the injunction.
20.    Under these circumstances, this Court is convinced that the Plaintiff
has made out a prima facie case for grant of an ad interim injunction. The
balance of convenience lies in favour of the Plaintiff and irreparable injury
would be caused to the Plaintiff if the Defendants are not restrained. The
Defendants shall stand restrained from manufacturing, selling and offering
for sale cosmetics and other allied products under the mark ‘VELVET
MATTE’ or any other mark identical or deceptively similar to the Plaintiff’s
mark VELVET MATTE, till the next date of hearing.
21.    If there are any listings of the impugned products of the Defendants
on e-commerce platforms, the Defendants shall take steps to take down
these listings within a period of one week from today.
22.    Written statement and reply be filed strictly in accordance with the
timelines as prescribed under the Commercial Courts Act, 2015.
23.    List on 19th September, 2022.