Case :- CRIMINAL REVISION DEFECTIVE No. - 8 of 2010
Opposite Party :- State of U.P. and Another
Counsel for Revisionist :- B.K. Srivastava
Counsel for Opposite Party :- Govt. Advocate,Abdul Rafey
Case called out. No one appeared on behalf of the revisionist to
press this revision.
The present revision alongwith application for condonation of
delay in filing the revision has been filed against the judgment
and order dated 29.01.2009 passed by the District and Sessions
Judge, Faizabad in Criminal Appeal No. 121 of 2008 (Raj
Kumar Singh Vs. State of U.P.).
Considering the explanation given in the affidavit filed in
support of application for condonation of delay on being found
sufficient, the same is allowed.
As per case of prosecution some altercation took place on
16.04.2003 between the revisionist-Ambika (First informant)
and Raj Kumar Singh at Sugarcane Weighing Centre, Mayo
Bazar, Village Viyulpur and in regard to this incident an FIR
was lodged under Section 504/506 IPC and Section 7 Criminal
Faizabad and after investigation charge-sheet was filed. Upon
denial the accused was put to trial. In trial prosecution
examined four witness of fact.
The trial court convicted the private opposite party-Raj Kumar
Singh vide judgment and order dated 30.09.2008 and thereafter
the private opposite party- Rajkumar Singh preferred the appeal
being aggrieved by the judgment and order dated 30.09.2008
passed by the Judicial Magistrate-III, in Criminal Case No. 956
of 2007 (State Vs. Raj Kumar Singh) in Crime No. 164 of 2003,
under Sections 504/506(2) IPC and Section 7 Criminal Law
and vide judgment under revision dated 29.01.2009, the
appellate court acquitted the private opposite party-Raj Kumar
Singh. The relevant portion of judgment dated 29.01.2009
"Therefore, this is a anonymous position that the informant in
the F.I.R. and in his on oath statement had stated that the
accused had abused him and threatened him at the Cane
Weighing Centre at the time of incident whereas his son P.W. 2
who is stated as a witness, has stated in his testimony that the
incident took place between him and the accused and it is he
who had narrated the incident to his father on his arrival. This
anonymous position revealed in the prosecution evidence, had
not been considered by the learned court below in its judgment
and has given a mixed finding that the incident took place
between the informant and his son (P.W. 2) whereas this
position is neither stated in the FIR nor corroborated by the
statement of P.W. 2.
The witnesses named in the F.I.R. namely, P.W.3 Suresh alias
Ramashanker and P.W. 4 Ram Bahadur Singh have not
supported the prosecution case and are declared hostile. Thus,
the position is that P.W. 2, the son of the informant, has
narrated a different version of the occurrence showing
deviation from F.I.R. version and the independent witnesses
have not corroborated the incident."
The scope of criminal revision is very limited as observed by
the Hon'ble Apex Court in catena of judgments. Revisional
Jurisdiction can be invoked where the decision under challenge
is grossly erroneous, there is no compliance with the provisions
of law, the finding recorded is based on no evidence, material
evidence is ignored or judicial discretion is exercised arbitrarily
or perversely. Another well accepted norm is that the revisional
jurisdiction of the higher court is a very limited one and cannot
be exercised in a routine manner. The revisional court has
simply to confine to the legality and propriety of the findings
and as to whether the subordinate court acted within it's
jurisdiction. A revisional court has no jurisdiction to set aside
the findings of facts recorded by the Magistrate and impose and
substitute its own findings. Sections 397 to 401 Cr.P.C. confer
only limited power on revisional court to the extent of
satisfying the legality, propriety or regularlity of the
proceedings or orders of the lower court and not to act like
appellate court for other purposes including the recording of
new findings of fact on fresh appraisal of evidence. The High
Court in its revisional powers could not have interfered with the
findings of facts recorded by the lower court only because the
High Court could have arrived at a different or another
conclusion. Findings of acquittal recorded by subordinate court
cannot be converted into conviction by High Court in exercise
of revisional jurisdiction u/s 401 (3) Cr.P.C.
Here, it may be profitable to refer to the decision of the
Supreme Court in Madan Lal Kapur vs. Rajiv Thapar and
others, (2007) 7 SCC 623, wherein the obligation of a
revisional court to decide on merits, has been approved as the
only lawful course of action by their Lordships, in the following
"4. The matter relates to administration of criminal justice. As
held by this Court, a criminal matter cannot be dismissed for
default and it must be decided on merits. Only on that ground
the appeal deserves to be allowed.
5. Thus in Bani Singh v. State of U.P. [(1996) 4 SCC 720 : 1996
SCC (Cri) 848], a three-Judge Bench of this Court held that a
criminal appeal should not be dismissed in default but should
be decided on merits. If despite notice neither the appellant nor
his counsel is present, the court should decide the appeal on
merits. If the appellant is in jail the court can appoint a lawyer
at State expense to assist it. This would equally apply to the
6. In Bani Singh v. State of U.P. [(1996) 4 SCC 720 : 1996 SCC
(Cri) 848] the Supreme Court overruled its earlier decision in
Ram Naresh Yadav v. State of Bihar[AIR 1987 SC 1500 : 1987
Cri LJ 1856] in which it was held that a criminal appeal can be
dismissed for default.
7. In Parasuram Patel v. State of Orissa [(1994) 4 SCC 664 :
1994 SCC (Cri) 1320] the Supreme Court held that a criminal
appeal cannot be dismissed for default.
8. In our opinion the same reasoning applies to criminal
revisions also, and hence a criminal revision cannot also be
dismissed in default."
In view of settled principles, this Court considered the judgment
and order under revision with the assistance of Sri Diwaker
Singh, learned A.G.A.
On due consideration this Court finds that the appellate court
after due consideration of the statement of informant P.W. 1
namely Ambika Singh(revisionist) as also the statement of his
son P.W. 2 Sheo Kumar Singh, who appeared before the trial
court and stated that incident took place at Sugarcane Weighing
Centre, between him and private opposite party Raj Kumar
Singh and not between the private opposite party Raj Kumar
Singh and the informant passed the judgment of acquittal.
This Court also considered the fact that P.W. 3 and P.W. 4
namely Suresh alias Ramakant Upadhyay and Ram Bahadur
Singh respective, who are the witnesses of fact, did not
supported the story of the prosecution.
This Court is of the view that the findings of the appellate court
is not perverse as the same are basically based on the statement
of P.W.-2 Sheo Kumar, who is son of injured- informant
Thus, the present revision lacks merit and is accordingly
dismissed.