1.    This appeal is directed against a judgment and award
dated 7th February 2020 passed by learned Commissioner for
Employees’ Compensation and Judge, Tenth Labour Court,
Mumbai, in Application (ECA) No. 336/C-80 of 2014, whereby,
the application preferred by respondent No.1-original applicant
came to be allowed and appellant and respondent No.2-employer
were directed to jointly and severally pay an amount of
Rs.8,70,576/- alongwith simple interest at the rate of 12% per
annum from the date of accident till realization for the
permanent     disablement    suffered  during    the    course     of
employment.     In  addition,  respondent    No.2-employer       was
saddled with a penalty of 40% of the compensation. (The parties
are hereinafter referred to in the capacity they were arrayed
before the learned Commissioner for Employees’ Compensation).
2.    The appeal arises in the backdrop of the following facts :
(a) Respondent     No.1-applicant   was      in    the
employment with respondent No.2-opponent No.1
as a Driver on tanker bearing No. GH-16/ X-7166,
which was insured with the appellant/original
opponent No.2.
(b)       On 18th March 2014, while the applicant
was on the wheel of the above-numbered vehicle, at
Mohol, District Solapur, a motor cyclist threw a
stone   towards   applicant.  The   latter    suffered
grievous injuries on his head and face. Initially, the
applicant was taken for treatment at Chhatrapati
Shivaji Maharaj Hospital at Solapur. Later on, the
applicant was referred to Lokmanya Tilak Medical
On account of the injuries sustained in the
accident, the applicant was required to undergo
evisceration of the right eye. The applicant, thus,
suffered 100% permanent disability, which entailed
the consequence of incapacitating the applicant
from working as a driver. Thus, the applicant
preferred an application for compensation before
the learned Commissioner.
(c)       The   opponent     No.1/employer     did    not
appear    despite   service   of  notice.  Hence,     the
application proceeded ex-parte against opponent
(d)       The opponent No.2-insurer resisted the
application    by   fling   written   statement.     The
employer-employee       relationship    between       the
opponent No.1 and the applicant was put in
contest. The mode and manner of the alleged
accident and      the injuries and the consequent
disability, stated to have been sustained by the
applicant, were denied.
(e)       The    learned   Commissioner      recorded
evidence of the applicant Keshar Gopal Singh
Thakur (AW-1) and Dr.Naresh M. Khanna (AW-2),
Orthopedic    Surgeon,    who    had  examined      the
applicant, and issued the disability certifcate
(Exh.U-19).     The   learned    Commissioner      also
perused the documents tendered on behalf of the
applicant, including the medical record and the
discharge cards issued by Chhatrapati Shivaji
Maharaj Hospital, Solapur and Sion Hospital,
documentary evidence and the material on record,
the learned Commissioner was persuaded to record
a fnding that though the permanent partial
disability was certifed at 54%, yet the applicant,
having lost the right eye, was totally incapacitated
from performing the work of a driver. Thus, the
learned Commissioner opined that the applicant
suffered   100%     loss  of   earning.  Resultantly,
applying the     prescribed   formula,  the    learned
Commissioner      awarded    the   compensation      as
indicated above.
3.    Being aggrieved by and dissatisfed with the impugned
judgment and award, the opponent No.2/insurer is in appeal.
4.    Having regard to the nature of controversy sought to be
raised on behalf of the appellant-insurer, by an order dated 18 th
June 2021, the parties were notifed that an endeavour would be
made to dispose of the appeal fnally at the stage of admission.
5.    I have heard Ms.Kalpana Trivedi, the learned counsel for
the appellant and Mr.Gatane, the learned counsel for the
respondent No.1-applicant, at length. With the assistance of the
learned counsels for the parties, I have perused the pleadings,
depositions and documents, which were on the fle of the
learned Commissioner, and a compilation of which is tendered
by the learned counsel for the appellant.
6.    At  the  outset,  Mr.Gatane,    the  learned   counsel      for
respondent No.1-original applicant would urge that in view of
the interdict contained in section 30 of the Employees
Compensation Act, 1923 (‘the Act, 1923’), this appeal cannot be
entertained as it does not involve any substantial question of
law. An endeavour was made to demonstrate that the grounds
sought to be raised by the appellant, in support of the instant
appeal, are essentially rooted in facts. The questions as to
whether employer-employee relationship exists, whether the
employee suffered injuries in an accident and the nature and
extent of disability suffered therein are all questions of facts.
7.    Mr. Gatane, the learned counsel for respondent No.1 would
further urge that the appellant having not contested the
application    before  the   learned   Commissioner,       cannot     be
permitted to now agitate the questions of facts. It was urged
with a degree of vehemence that this Court in exercise of limited
appellate jurisdiction cannot entertain the aforesaid grounds of
challenge since no substantial question of law arises for
consideration. In the case at hand, according to Mr. Gatane, the
question as to whether the applicant suffered 100% functional
disability is essentially a question of fact. Therefore, the appeal
deserves to be dismissed at the threshold.
8.    On the aspect of the limited nature of the appellate
jurisdiction, circumscribed by the provisions contained in
section 30 of the Act, 1923, Mr.Gatane placed reliance on the
judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of North East
Karnataka Road Transport Corporation Vs. Sujatha 1, wherein
limited nature of appeal under section 30 of the Act 1923 was
9. At the outset, we may take note of the
fact, being     a    settled   principle,   that    the
question as to whether the employee met
with an accident, whether the accident occurred
during the course of employment,          whether     it
arose out of an employment, how and in what
manner the accident occurred,             who      was
negligent     in    causing     the accident, whether
there existed any relationship of employee         and
employer, what was the age and monthly
salary of the employee, how many are the
dependents of the deceased employee, the extent of
disability caused to the employee due to
injuries suffered in an accident, whether there
was any insurance coverage obtained by the
employer to cover the incident etc. are some
of the material issues which arise for the
just decision of the Commissioner in a claim
petition when an employee suffers any bodily injury
or dies during the course of his employment and
he/his LRs sue/s his employer to claim
compensation under the Act.
10. The afore-mentioned questions are essentially
the questions of fact and, therefore, they
are required to be proved with the aid of evidence.
Once they are proved either way, the fndings
recorded thereon are regarded as the fndings of
fact.
11. The appeal provided under Section 30 of the
Act to the High Court against the order of
the Commissioner lie only against the specifc
orders set out in clause (a) to (e) of Section 30 of
the Act with a further rider contained in frst
proviso to the Section that the appeal must involve
substantial question of law.
12. In other       words,    the    appeal    provided
under Section 30 of the Act to the High Court
against the order of the Commissioner is not like a
Regular First Appeal akin to Section 96 of
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 which can be
heard both on facts and        law.    The    appellate
jurisdiction of the High Court to decide the
substantial questions of law arising in the case.”
9.      Indeed, in view of the clear and explicit provisions
contained in section 30 of the Act, 1923, the jurisdiction which
the High Court exercises in an appeal thereunder hinges upon
existence of a substantial question of law for determination. All
issues on facts and law are not open for challenge in an appeal
under section 30 of the Act, 1923.
10.   Ms.Trivedi, the learned counsel for the appellant would,
however, urge that the fact that the learned Commissioner
recorded a fnding that the applicant suffered total disablement
within the meaning of section 2(1)(l) of the Act, 1923 without
there being evidence of the doctor in support of the claim that
the applicant lost right eye, on account of the injury sustained
in the accident, itself constitutes a substantial question of law.
11.   Indisputably, the disability certifcate (Exh.U-19) was
issued by Dr. Naresh Khanna (AW-2) an Orthopedic Surgeon. In
this view of the matter, in my considered view, the instant
appeal raises a substantial question of law as to whether the
learned Commissioner, in the backdrop of the evidence on
record, was justifed in recording a fnding that the applicant
suffered total disablement within the meaning of section 2(1)(l)
of the Act, 1923 and the consequent 100% loss of earning
capacity.
12.   Elaborating the aforesaid submission, Ms. Trivedi would
urge that, on the one hand, Dr.Naresh Khanna (AW-2)
categorically asserted that he had not taken into account the
damage to eye in assessing the disability, and, on the other
hand, there is no explanation much less plausible one as to why
there is no certifcate from an eye surgeon to the effect that the
applicant lost right eye on account of the injuries sustained in
the accident. In the absence of positive evidence to indicate that
the applicant lost right eye, the learned Commissioner fell in
grave error in drawing an inference that the applicant suffered
total disablement. This fnding vitiated the entire judgment,
submitted Ms. Trivedi.
13.   In the circumstances of the case, according to Ms.Trivedi,
a remand of the matter to the learned Commissioner for a fresh
determination is warranted.
14.   Mr.Gatane, the learned counsel for respondent No.1-
original applicant joined the issue by canvassing a submission
that the aforesaid submission on behalf of the appellant is
based on an incorrect appreciation of the governing provisions.
Inviting the attention of the Court to Entry 4, Part I of Schedule
I appended to Act, 1923 and comparing and contrasting the
same with Entry 25 of Part II of the said Schedule, Mr. Gatane
would urge that the case at hand is one of permanent total
disablement and not permanent partial disablement.
15.   Mr. Gatane controverted the submissions on behalf of the
appellant that there is no material on record to indicate that the
applicant had lost the right eye, on account of the injuries
sustained in the accident. Inviting the attention of the Court to
the medical record maintained at Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj
Hospital at Solapur and Sion Hospital, Mumbai, Mr.Gatane
would urge that there is clear evidence to indicate that the right
eye of the applicant was eviscerated. In the face of such
material, mere non-examination of the doctor, who performed
the eye surgery, cannot defeat the legitimate claim of the
applicant, submitted Mr.Gatane.
16.   Section    2(1)(g)   of   the   Act,    1923    defnes       “partial
"2(1)(g)  “partial   disablement"    means,    where     the
disablement is of a temporary nature, such disablement as
reduces the earning capacity of a [employee] in any
employment in which he was engaged at the time of the
accident resulting in the disablement, and, where the
disablement is of a permanent nature, such disablement as
reduces his earning capacity in every employment which he
was capable of undertaking at that time: provided that
every injury specifed [in Part II of Schedule I] shall be
deemed to result in permanent partial disablement.”
17.   Whereas ‘total disablement’ is defned in clause (l) as
"2(1)(l)  total disablement" means such disablement,
whether of a temporary or permanent nature, as
incapacitates a *[employee] for all work which he was
capable of performing at the time of the accident resulting
Provided that permanent total disablement shall be
deemed to result from every injury specifed in Part I of
Schedule I or from any combination of injuries specifed in
Part II thereof where the aggregate percentage of the loss of
earning capacity, as specifed in the said Part II against
those injuries, amounts to one hundred per cent. or more;
18.    Entry 4 of the Schedule I, Part I referred to in section 2(1)
Serial        Description of Injury     Percentage of loss of
which eyesight is essential.
19.    Entry 25 of the Schedule I, Part II, referred to in clause (1)
of section 2(1) of the Act, 1923 reads as under :
Serial        Description of Injury     Percentage of loss of
20.    In the facts of the case, the fate of the appeal hinges upon
the determination of the question as to whether the injury
suffered     by     the    applicant    constitutes     permanent        total
disablement or permanent partial disablement within the
meaning of the aforesaid provisions.
21.    A brief resume of the evidence may be apposite. Keshar
Gopal Singh Thakur (AW-1) affrmed that on account of the
injuries sustained in the accident, he was initially admitted at
Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Hospital at Solapur on 18 th March
2014 and discharged on 23rd March 2014. Later on, he was
shifted to Sion Hospital, Mumbai on 24th March 2014 and
discharged on 30th March 2014. On account of the injuries
sustained in the accident, he is incapacitated to work as a
driver resulting in loss of 100% earning capacity.
22.   Dr.Naresh Khanna (AW-2) professed to lend support to the
claim of the applicant. Dr. Khanna claimed to have clinically
and radio-logically examined the applicant and found the
1) Remnants of Head injury.
2) Headache, Dizziness, irritability,
3) Unable to do day to day activities.
4) Unable to drive vehicle due to loos of right eye.
5) Lapse of memory seen.
It was, however, clarifed that he did not take into account
eye damage in assessing the disablement.
23.   In the cross-examination of the applicant an endeavour
was made to draw home the point that he had not availed
treatment from Dr.Khanna. He had approached Sion Hospital,
Mumbai for disability certifcate. However, it was not issued. The
applicant, however, did not cave in to the suggestion that he had
not sustained the injury while driving the vehicle and he was
assaulted by a motorcyclist on account of rivalry.
24.    Dr.Khanna (AW-2), in turn, conceded that he had not
treated the applicant. The latter had approached him for issue
of disability certifcate only.
25.    On the basis of the aforesaid manner, in which the
applicant and Dr.Khanna fared in the cross examination,
Ms.Trivedi strenuously urged that the claim of the applicant
that he had lost right eye on account of the injuries sustained in
the accident cannot be said to have been established. Had there
been no other evidence, this submission would have carried
some conviction. However, there is evidence in the form of
medical record, which establishes that the applicant was
initially admitted in Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Hospital,
Solapur and later on shifted to Sion Hospital, Mumbai.
26.    The record maintained at Sion Hospital, Mumbai, in the
regular course of business, clearly indicates that the applicant
was admitted therein on 24th March 2014 and discharged on 30 th
March 2014. Surgery was performed on 25th March 2014. This
record lends unfinching corroboration to the claim of the
applicant. It further records that the right eye evisceration with
vertical scleral suture and horizontal conjunctival suture, using
it 6-0 viayl (IV) sedation, was done on 25 th March 2014. In the
face of this material, wherein the evisceration of right eye is
recorded at multiple places and even on discharge cards
evidencing subsequent admission in the hospital, I fnd it rather
diffcult to accede to the submission on behalf of the appellant
that there is no material to substantiate the claim of the
applicant that he lost right eye in the accident. By way of
illustration, it would be suffce to record that the medical record
(at Page 83) indicates that the applicant had ‘right empty socket’
and was admitted on 12th June 2014 and discharged on 13 th
June 2013. Evisceration of right eye is noted at multiple places
in the medical record.
27.    The crucial question which wrenches to the fore is whether
the aforesaid injury resulting in evisceration of right eye led to
permanent total disablement. Mr. Gatane, the learned counsel
for respondent No.1-applicant would urge that the question
cannot be decided bereft of the work which the applicant was
performing before he met with the accident. With the loss of
right eye, the applicant could not work as a driver any more,
and, therefore, the learned Commissioner was justifed in
awarding the compensation on the premise that the applicant
suffered 100% loss of earning capacity.
28.   In contrast, Ms. Trivedi attempted to salvage the position
by putting-forth a submission that there is no material to show
that the applicant surrendered the license to drive the vehicle.
Thus, it cannot be said that the applicant suffered 100% loss of
earning capacity.
29.   I fnd substance in the submission of Mr.Gatane. The
aspect of loss of earning capacity which an injury entails is
necessarily required to be determined keeping in view the
distinction between the ‘physical disability’ and ‘functional
disability’. Whether the applicant is incapacitated to perform the
work which he was performing before the accident is the
question which the learned Commissioner is required to pose
unto himself. If the answer is in the affrmative, despite the
physical disability having been assessed at a lower threshold, an
interference that the injury resulted in 100% loss of earning
capacity can be legitimately sustained.
30.   A useful reference in this context can be made to a
judgment of a learned Single Judge of this Court in the case of
Laxman Patil & Anr. 2, wherein in a somewhat identical fact-
situation, this Court, after considering the pronouncements
which govern the determination of permanent total disablement
permanent partial disablement, held that the case was one of
total disablement envisaged under section 2(1)(1) of the Act,
31.   In the case of Manoj Patil (Supra), the applicant therein
had lost vision of the right eye and movement of the right leg. A
submission was sought to be canvassed therein that those
injuries by themselves did not render him incapacitated to carry
on some other or lesser scale of activities and functions in order
to continue to earn his livelihood and thus the applicant should
not have been awarded compensation on the premise that the
applicant    had    suffered  total disablement.    Repelling      the
submission, this Court held that the disablement was total. To
arrive at the said conclusion, reliance was placed on the
judgments of the Supreme Court in the cases of Pratap Narain
and S. Suresh        Vs.
Oriental Insurance Company Limited and Another 4.
32.   In the case of Pratap Narain Singh Deo (Supra), the
Supreme Court expounded the connotation of the term ‘total
disablement’; in the context of the facts of the said case,         as
“5 The expression "total disablement" has been defned
in section 2(1)(l) of the Act as follows:
"(1) "total disablement" means such disablement,
whether of a temporary or permanent nature, as
incapacitates a workman for all work which he
was capable of performing at the time of the
accident resulting in such disablement."
It has not been disputed before us that the injury was of
such a nature as to cause permanent disablement to the
respondent, and the question for consideration is whether
the disablement incapacitated the respondent for all work
which he was capable of performing at the time of the
accident. The Commissioner has examined the question
"The injured workman in this case is carpenter
by profession....By loss of the left hand above the
elbow, he has evidently been rendered unft for
the work of carpenter as the work of carpentry
This is obviously a reasonable and correct fnding. Counsel
for the appellant has not been able to assail it on any
ground and it does not require to be corrected in this
appeal.
There is also no justifcation for the other argument which
has been advanced with reference to item 3 of Part II of
Schedule I, because it was not the appellant's case before
the Commissioner that amputation of the arm was from 8"
from tip of acromion to less than 41/2" below the tip of
olecranon. A new case cannot therefore be allowed to be set
up on facts which have not been admitted or established."
33.   In the case of S. Suresh (Supra), while reversing the
decision of a Division Bench of the Karnataka High Court, the
Supreme Court exposited the meaning of the expression ‘total
disablement’ in section 2(1)(l) of the Act, 1923 as under :
“7     The correctness of the impugned judgment is
questioned mainly on the ground that the claimant being a
lorry driver, the loss of his right leg ipso facto meant a "total
disablement" as understood in terms of Section 2(1)(l) of the
Act and as such the compensation payable to the claimant
had to be computed on that basis.
8      In support of the plea, reliance is placed on a four-
Judge Bench decision of this Court in Pratap Narain Singh
Deo vs. Srinivas Sabata & Anr.1 In that case, a carpenter
had suffered amputation of his left arm from the elbow. This
Court held that this amounted to a total disability as the
injury was of such a nature that the claimant had been
disabled from all work which he was capable of performing
at the time of the accident. It was observed as under:
"5. The expression "total disablement" has been
defned in Section 2(1)(l) of the Act as follows:
(1) "total disablement" means such disablement
whether of a temporary or permanent nature, as
incapacitates workman for all work which he was
capable of performing at the time of the accident
resulting in such disablement. It has not been
disputed before us that the injury was of such a
nature as to cause permanent disablement to the
respondent, and the question for consideration is
whether the disablement incapacitated the
respondent for all work which he was capable of
performing at the time of the accident. The
Commissioner has examined the question and
The injured workman in this case is carpenter by
profession....By loss of the left hand above the
elbow, he has evidently been rendered unft for the
work of carpenter as the work of carpentry cannot
be done by one hand only. This is obviously a
9. In our view, the ratio of the said judgment is squarely
applicable to the facts at hand. We are of the opinion that
on account of amputation of his right leg below knee, he is
rendered unft for the work of a driver, which he was
performing at the time of the accident resulting in the said
disablement. Therefore, he has lost 100% of his earning
capacity as a lorry driver, more so, when he is disqualifed
from even getting a driving licence under the Motor Vehicles
34.   It would be contextually relevant to note that another
learned Single Judge of this Court in the case of Shaikh Salim
occasion to consider the extent of disablement in the case of the
driver who had suffered injuries in an accident. The medical
offcer had certifed the disability at 30% only. Repelling the
submission that the disability thus could not to be construed to
be total, the learned Single Judge in the fact-situation of the
“16 Though under the medical terms, the disability is only
30 % but while computing the compensation the loss of
earning capacity is to be considered as because of the loss of
vision of right eye, the appellant would not be in a position
to continue with his avocation as a driver. It is not disputed
that the appellant was driver by profession. In view of the
fact that he had to surrender his licence, the appellant
would not be in a position to drive the vehicle and continue
as driver. Going through the defnition of partial
disablement and the total disablement as is envisaged in
Section 2 (g) and (l) respectively, it is evident that the
disablement to be considered is with regard to the reduction
in the earning capacity of the workman in any employment,
in which he was engaged at the time of accident resulting in
disablement. In the present case though the medical
disablement is about 30 %, still the said disablement is of
permanent nature and has rendered appellant unft for the
work of driver.
17. It is not only the aspect of medical disablement i.e.
required to be considered but taking into account the object
and the spirit behind the provisions of the Workmen's
Compensation Act and the defnition of total disablement
which means such a disablement whether of a temporary or
permanent nature as incapacitates workman for all work,
which he was capable of performing at the time of accident
resulting in such disablement is required to be taken into
consideration. The expression " incapacitates workman for
all work which he was capable of performing at the time of
accident resulting in such disablement " would mean the
workman having been rendered incapable of performing that
" work " which he had undertaken at the time of accident.
The appellant being a qualifed driver and was performing
his duty as a driver, because of the loss of vision of right eye
he has been incapacitated for all work as driver, he has been
rendered unft for the work of driver. The Commissioner, in
such circumstances, committed a serious error of law in
applying Section 4 ( 1) (c) instead of Section 4 (1) (b) of the
Workmen's Compensation Act. Once we come to the
conclusion that it is the case of permanent total
disablement, Section 4 (1) (b) of the Act would be applicable.
Consequently, Schedule I Part I and Item 4 would be
applicable and not Schedule I Part II Item 25 as has been
applied by the Commissioner. Item 4 of Part I of Schedule I
lays down that if the loss of sight is to such an extent which
renders claimant unable to perform any work for which eye
sight is essential, then 100 % loss of earning capacity is to
be considered. The claimant being driver, because of loss of
vision of right eye, the claimant had to surrender licence
rendering him unable to perform any work of driver thereby
resulting in 100 % loss of earning capacity.”
35.   In view of the aforesaid exposition of law, it is too late in
the day to urge that the work which the employee was
performing before the accident has no relevance to the
determination of the question as to whether the employee is
permanently incapacitated to perform the said work.
36.   The submission on behalf of the appellant that, in the case
at hand, the applicant has not placed on record evidence to
show that he was required to surrender the license, though
appears attractive at the frst blush, does not hold much
ground. It is trite that with the loss of right eye, the applicant
would not be able to drive the vehicle. Failure to place evidence
to show that the applicant, in fact, surrendered the license thus
does not distract materially the claim of the applicant that he is
completely incapacitated from working as a driver.
37.   For the foregoing reasons, I am persuaded to hold that the
learned     Commissioner        was      justifed     in     awarding       the
compensation on the premise that the applicant suffered
permanent total disablement and 100% loss of earning capacity.
Consequently, no interference is warranted in the impugned
judgment and award.
The appeal stands dismissed with costs.
Pending    application, if  any,   also    stands
disposed of.