Heard Sri Shailesh Kumar Tripathi, learned counsel for the revisionists as well
as learned A.G.A. and perused the records of the instant revision.
After hearing learned counsel for the revisionists and learned A.G.A. for the
State, the Court is proposing to decide the revision at the admission stage itself.
Aggrieved and dissatisfied by the order of learned Additional Sessions Judge,
Court no.5, Varanasi, whereby the learned Judge has decided/rejected paper
No.31'Kha' seeking DISCHARGE under section 227 of Cr.P.C. from the
allegations under section 498A, 306, 379, 323, 494, 504, 506 IPC, Police
Station-Maduadeeh, District-Varanasi vide its order dated 28.02.2022 on behalf
of all the seven charge sheeted accused persons, now revisionists, the present
revision has been preferred.
Before addressing on the legal points of the issue, it is imperative in the interest
of justice to give skeleton facts of the case, so as to appreciate the legality and
validity of the order impugned in its correct/proper prospective.
Deceased (Ms. Anchal Rajbhar) during her life time, has lodged the present FIR
against Sushil Kumar, the husband and all his family members on 22.09.2018,
under sections 323, 494, 504, 506, 379 IPC with the allegations :-
a) that both of them resides as husband and wife at Madauli, Post-Bhullanpur,
police station-Maduadeeh, District-Varanasi ;
b) From this relationship, both of them got one son namely Ayush(2 years) ;
c) Sushil Kumar was already married with some other lady and having two
children from her and without divorcing her, rather without disclosing this fact
he got married with the deceased ;
d) After enticing the informant, who is married lady again solemnized marriage
on 21.02.2010 at Durgakund Temple, Varanasi with the consent of both ;
e) Soon after the marriage when this fact came to the knowledge of other family
members, namely the named accused persons of the FIR, they have started
misbehaving torturing and abusing her and has made her life miserable for
almost about 10-12 years ;
f)Their atrocities crossed all the limits when her husband under the pressure of
his family members have virtually deserted her and now kept a new lady ;
g) The informant, Anchal Rajbhar after lodging the aforesaid FIR, has consumed
some poisonous substance on the same day i.e. on 22.09.2018.
After lodging of the FIR, and thereafter, her sad demise by consuming some
poisonous substance, the police has started deep probe into the matter and
eventually has filed their report under sections 173(2) Cr.P.C. on 20.11.2011,
under section 323, 494, 504, 506, 379, 306, 498A IPC against all the named
accused persons except Section 494 IPC, which was additional against
revisionist no.1. On this charge sheet, learnd concerned Magistrate has taken the
cognizance on 23.11.2018.
From the records of the case, para 20 of the affidavit, its own admission by the
revisionist no.1 that he got married third time with one Abhilash Singh on
15.09.2018 and this marriage was registered before Marriage Registrar Officer-I,
Varanasi without giving divorce to her earlier two wives.
This seems to be the sole reason whereby the deceased (Anchal Rajbhar) has
taken this extreme step by consuming some poisonous substance and committed
From the forensic examination of deceased's viscera, deadly poison Aluminium
Phosphate was found.
On these factual aspect of the issue, learned counsel for the revisionists have
pointed out certain glaring and astonishing procedural loopholes during the
investigation viz, the case crime no.424 of 2018 was got registered by Ms.
Anchal Rajbhar (hence deceased) on 22.09.2018 at 18:37 hrs. whereas on the
same day, she was admitted at Ganga Hospital and Trauma Center, Varanasi and
its medical officer have informed the police on 22.09.2018 at 2 p.m. regarding
admission of Anchal Rajbharas suspected case of poison and its G.D. entry
no.048 on 22.09.2018 at 7:01 hrs. Thereafter, she was brought to SSPG, District
Hospital, Varanasi on 22.09.2018 at 06:50 hrs where it was endorsed that she
was brought dead. Her inquest was done on 23.09.2018 at 1:17 pm - 1:35 pm at
SSPG Hospital, Varanasi and thereafter, her autopsy was done on 23.09.2018.
Her dead body was brought at 3:30 pm whereas post mortem report was done at
1:35 pm to 2:00 pm on 23.09.2018. From all these facts and figures, learned
counsel for the revisionists tried to raise his castle of arguments on these
Since, the Court is deciding this revision at the admission stage itself, it is not
proper on my part to make comment upon these alleged inconsistencies.
Moreover, when the third or fourth agency intervened into the matter, their
perception should not come into the way while adjudicating the discharge
application. The Court is not supposed to hold a mini trial at the stage of
deciding the discharge application.
Besides this, it was argued that the Investigating Officer of the case erroneously
charge-sheeted the revisionists without examining the evidences on record in its
correct prospective and have done a perfunctory investigation. There is no
parallel between the material collected during the investigation and the charge
I have carefully gone through the impugned order dated 28.02.2022 passed by
learned Trial Judge, Varanasi while rejecting the application 31-Kha under
section 227 of Cr.P.C. The relevant paragraphs of the impugned orders are paras
7, 8, 9 and 10.
In para 7 of the impugned judgment, it is culled out that since the deceased was
not his legally weeded wife and as such Section 498A IPC would not be
attracted. This submission was dealt with by the learned trial Judge.
In para 8 of the order, it is mentioned that revisionist and the deceased were
residing as husband and wife and from this "relationship", son Ayush was born,
who is two years old now. It is alleged that a sweeping allegation of alleged
atrocities were made in the FIR against her in-laws and the date-wise harassment
has not been narrated. This aspect of the issue was dealt with by the learned trial
In para 9 of the order, it was argued by the learned counsel that there is nothing
on record to show that revisionist at any point of time, abetted or goaded the
deceased to take this extreme step as contemplated in Section 107 IPC.
All these issues were raised by the revisionists and learned trial Judge, after
considering all these aspects of the issue, has passed an order on 28.02.2022
which is under challenge.
I have keenly perused the order under challenge and submissions advanced by
learned counsel for the revisionists.
Before coming to the legal aspect of the issue, it is imperative to spell out the
provision of Section 227 Cr.P.C., which reads thus :-
"Section 227. - If, upon consideration of the record of the case and the
documents submitted therewith, and after hearing the submissions of the
accused and the prosecution in this behalf, the Judge considers that there is no
sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused, he shall discharge the
accused and record his reasons for so doing."
(1) If, after such consideration and hearing as aforesaid, the Judge is of opinion
that there is ground for presuming that the accused has committed an offence
(a) is not exclusively triable by the Court of Session, he may, frame a
charge against the accused and, by order, transfer the case for trial to
the Chief Judicial Magistrate, and thereupon the Chief Judicial
Magistrate shall try the offence in accordance with the procedure for
the trial of warrant- cases instituted on a police report;
(b) is exclusively triable by the Court, he shall frame in writing a
charge against the accused.
(2) Where the Judge frames any charge under clause (b) of sub- section (1), the
charge shall be read and explained to the accused and the accused shall be
asked whether he pleads guilty of the offence charged or claims to be tried.
Thus, from the above, it is absolutely clear that the purpose and the object of
Section 227/228 Cr.P.C. is to ensure that the Court should be satisfied that the
accusation made against the accused are not frivolous and that there is some
material for proceedings against him.
It would be hazardous to act on the discrepancies unless they are so fatal and
glaring as to affect the credibility of the prosecution case without affording
reasonable opportunity to the prosecution to substantiate the allegations.
In the instant case where the deceased herself has lodged the FIR, gave vivid
details of the atrocities faced by her from her own husband and his other family
members. She states that, both of them got married in Durgakund Temple in the
year 2010 and remained as husband and wife, given birth to a baby boy who is
now of two years. This was husband's second marriage with the informant with
whom she has given birth to a baby boy, now without divorcing her, Sushil
Kumar was going to marry third time. The cumulative effect of all these factors
lead the poor girl to commit suicide.
Learned counsel for the revisionists has drawn the attention of the Court to the
latest judgment of Hon'ble the Apex Court in the case of Sanjay Kumar Rai VS.
State of U.P. (Criminal Appeal No.472 of 2021) decided on 07.05.2021,
whereby, the Court has opined, paragraph no.16 of which is quoted
"Further, it is well settled that the trial court while considering the
discharge application is not to act as a mere post office. The Court
has to sift through the evidence in order to find out whether there
are sufficient grounds to try the suspect. The court has to consider
the broad probabilities, total effect of evidence and documents
produced and the basic infirmities appearing in the case and so on.
[Union of India V. Prafulla Kumar Samal]. Likewise, the Court has
sufficient discretion to order further investigation in appropriate
cases, if need be.
Learned A.G.A., per contra, has emphasized on the following citation of Hon'ble
the Apex Court, which deserves the attention of the Court while deciding the
(i) Tarun Jit Tejpal Vs. State of Goa and anr. reported in 2019 SCC Online SC
(ii) Sajjan Kumar Vs. CBI reported in (2010) 9 SCC 368;
(iii) Kanti Bhadra Shah Vs. State of West Bengal reported in (2000) 1 SCC
In support of his submissions that factors to be taken into account while
deciding the DISCHARGE application.
In the case of Tarun Jit Tejpal (supra) and Sajjan Kumar's (supra), following
points were reduced after trashing number of decisions viz :-
SCC (Cri) 1371] , this Court on consideration of the various decisions about the
scope of sections 227 and 228 of the Code, laid down the following principles:
"(i) The Judge while considering the question of framing the
charges under section 227 CrPC has the undoubted power to sift
and weigh the evidence for the limited purpose of finding out
whether or not a prima facie case against the accused has been
made out. The test to determine prima facie case would depend upon
the facts of each case.
(ii) Where the materials placed before the court disclose grave
suspicion against the accused which has not been properly
explained, the court will be fully justified in framing a charge and
proceeding with the trial.
(iii) The court cannot act merely as a post office or a mouthpiece of
the prosecution but has to consider the broad probabilities of the
case, the total effect of the evidence and the documents produced
before the court, any basic infirmities, etc. However, at this stage,
there cannot be a roving enquiry into the pros and cons of the
matter and weigh the evidence as if he was conducting a trial.
(iv) If on the basis of the material on record, the court could form
an opinion that the accused might have committed offence, it can
frame the charge, though for conviction the conclusion is required
to be proved beyond reasonable doubt that the accused has
committed the offence.
(v) At the time of framing of the charges, the probative value of the
material on record cannot be gone into but before framing a charge
the court must apply its judicial mind on the material placed on
record and must be satisfied that the commission of offence by the
accused was possible.
(vi) At the stage of sections 227 and 228, the court is required to
evaluate the material and documents on record with a view to find
out if the facts emerging therefrom taken at their face value disclose
the existence of all the ingredients constituting the alleged offence.
For this limited purpose, sift the evidence as it cannot be expected
even at that initial stage to accept all that the prosecution states as
gospel truth even if it is opposed to common sense or the broad
probabilities of the case.
(vii) If two views are possible and one of them gives rise to suspicion
only, as distinguished from grave suspicion, the trial Judge will be
empowered to discharge the accused and at this stage, he is not to
see whether the trial will end in conviction or acquittal."
If we read carefully the provisions of Section 227 and 228 of Cr.P.C. in
conjointly, it would be clear that at the beginning and the initial stage of the trial,
the truth, veracity and effect of the evidence which the prosecutor proposes to
adduce and not to be meticulously judged at the stage of discharge.
Now in any weight to be attached to the probable defence of the accused, it is
not obligatory for the judge at the stage of trial to consider in any detail and
weigh over a sensitive blame whether, if proved, would be incompatible with the
innocence of the accused or not. The standard of test and judgment which is to
be finally applied before recording a finding regarding the guilt or otherwise of
the accused is not exactly to be applied at the stage of deciding the matter under
Section 227 of Cr.P.C. At that stage, the Court is not to see whether there is
sufficient ground for conviction of the accused or whether the trial is sure to end
in his conviction.
Strong suspicion against the accused, if the matter remains in the region of
suspicion, cannot take the place of proof of his guilt at the conclusion of the
trial. But at the stage, if there is a story suspicion which leads, the Court may
well within in his power to frame the charge and put that person for trial.
It would, under such circumstances, not open for the Court to say that there is
there is no sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused person.
Thus, thrashing all above principles of law mentioned above, the Court is of the
considered opinion, that there shall be more than prima facie case against the
accused for which he is required to be tried. There is sufficient ample material
against the accused. The alleged anomalies or inconsistencies during
investigation (a third agency) would not be of much relevance at the stage of
discharge. The nature of accusation in the FIR and during investigation material
collected by the Investigating Officer and its cumulative effect in its nascent
form is the material on which discharge has to be decided.
Learned counsel for the revisionists have laid excessive emphasis that there is no
material on record which attracts Section 306 IPC against revisionist no.1. It is
urged that for prima facie attracting Section 306 IPC, the prosecution has to
collect sufficient material which falls within the four corners of Section 107 IPC.
Ostensibly, the arguments advanced seems to be lucrative one, but analysing the
same with attending facts of the instant case, it hollowness become apparent.
Thus, to attract Section 306 IPC which prescribes abetment to commit suicide.
Abetment to commit suicide is provided under section 107 IPC which reads thus
"107. Abetment of a thing.—A person abets the doing of a thing, who
(First) — Instigates any person to do that thing; or
(Secondly) —Engages with one or more other person or persons in
any conspiracy for the doing of that thing, if an act or illegal
omission takes place in pursuance of that conspiracy, and in order
to the doing of that thing; or
(Thirdly) — Intentionally aids, by any act or illegal omission, the
doing of that thing. Explanation 1.—A person who, by wilful
misrepresentation, or by wilful concealment of a material fact which
he is bound to disclose, voluntarily causes or procures, or attempts
to cause or procure, a thing to be done, is said to instigate the doing
of that thing. Explanation 2.—Whoever, either prior to or at the
time of the commission of an act, does anything in order to facilitate
the commission of that act, and thereby facilitate the commission
thereof, is said to aid the doing of that act."
Now, if we test these essentials of basic feature qua the facts in hand, it is clear
that deceased during her lifetime has lodged the present FIR against her husband
and other in-laws for atrocities. Admittedly, the deceased was his second wife
allegedly, married in 2010 and she has got one son with the revisionist. Abruptly,
the deceased came to know that her husband is going to marry with third lady
Abhilasha on 11.09.2018 in Sarang Nath Temple and had applied for the
registration of marriage. This fact, came to the knowledge of deceased on
13.09.2018 for which deceased herself lodged an FIR on 22.9.2018 against
Sushil Kumar and his family members for the alleged atrocities upon her.
The Court is of the considered opinion that the FIR for all the practical purposes
could be considered as her dying declaration as the deceased herself is the
author of the FIR. After lodging of the FIR, she has committed suicide just next
day after its lodging.
Admittedly, the deceased comes from rural background from whom her husband
as her saviour. No Indian lady is ready to share her husband at any cost. They
are literally possessive about their husband. It would be biggest jolt for any
married woman that her husband is being shared by some other lady or he is
going to marry some other lady. In such awkward situation, it would be
impossible to expect any sanity from them. Exactly, same thing happen in this
case too, where soon after coming to know that her husband got married in
clandestine way with some other lady, by itself is more than sufficient reason to
commit suicide. Sushil Kumar, the husband seems to be the main culprit at least
to be tried for the offence under section 306 IPC. It is the deceased herself who
lodges the FIR against all the revisionist for committing atrocities upon her,
could be tested at the time of the trial and as such, no good ground for discharge.
Learned counsel for the revisionist strenuously pointed out various loop holes in
the investigation, time in the FIR, post mortem report and other documents,
thereafter urges that if all are lined up, the prosecution case goes haywire. As
mentioned above, at the stage of DISCHARGE, the Court are not expected to
have roving inquiry about the material collected during investigation or its
impact on the trial. The Court is not supposed to hold a mini trial at the stage of
deciding the DISCHARGE application.
I have carefully heard the submissions advanced and the Court cannot appreciate
these arguments at the stage of discharge on the account that at this juncture, a
prima facie satisfaction is required to be recorded. The Court is not required to
hold a mini trial at the stage of discharge nor meticulous examination of these
alleged loop holes or shortcomings during investigation or its ultimate impact on
the success or failure of the trial are required to be appreciated. The learned trial
Judge, after reading the order dated 28.02.2022 and judging the same on the
parameters laid by Hon'ble the Apex Court, I do not find any shortcomings in it,
which requires interference in the revisional jurisdiction of this Court.
This revision is devoid of merit and thus, DISMISSED as such.
The trial Court is hereby directed to frame the charge as early as possible and
initiate the trial of the accused persons.