The present Intra Court Appeal is filed by the appellant
against the impugned order, dated 26.2.2019, passed in Writ
Petition No.52010/2016 by the learned Single Judge of this Court
allowing the writ petition filed by one Sri M.B. Nagaraju/respondent
No.3 herein and quashing the order, dated 20.8.2016, passed by
the Assistant Commissioner with an observation that the appellant
herein shall be at liberty to take recourse to such remedy as may
be available to him under the law.
2. It is the case of the 3rd respondent, who is the petitioner
before the learned Single Judge that he had purchased a property
bearing Municipal Assessment No.3327/3081 measuring East to
West 30 feet and North to South 50 feet situated at K.R.S.
Agrahara, Ward No.22, Kunigal Town under a registered Sale Deed,
dated 1.12.2006, in the name of the appellant/Nanjappa with a
condition that the same has to be re-conveyed in his name (3rd
respondent) and the entire sale consideration was paid by the 3rd
respondent. Thereafter, the appellant/Nanjappa herein executed a
registered Gift Deed, dated       23.2.2011, in favour of the 3rd
respondent/M.B. Nagaraju in respect of the said property clearly
mentioning in the Gift Deed that the entire sale consideration is
paid by the 3rd respondent.          Thereafter on 25.2.2016,     the
appellant/Nanjappa    filed  an  application    before the  Assistant
Commissioner for a declaration that the Gift Deed is null and void
and in turn, the Assistant Commissioner by the order, dated
20.8.2016,    allowed    the   application  filed   by  the  present
appellant/Nanjappa, who was         the 3rd respondent before the
learned Single Judge and cancelled the registered Gift Deed, dated
23.2.2011, with a direction to the Sub-Registrar, Anekal, to re-
register the right in respect of the said property in favour of
present appellant/Nanjappa, which was challenged by the 3rd
respondent/M.B.    Nagaraju      by   filing a  writ  petition  i.e.,
W.P.No.52010/2016 before this Court for the relief sought for.
3. The learned Single Judge of this Court after hearing both
parties and considering the material on record by the impugned
order, dated 26th February, 2019 allowed the writ petition and
quashed the order, dated 20th August, 2016 passed by the Assistant
Commissioner holding that the Gift Deed, dated 23.2.2011, does
not contain any such stipulation that the transferee shall maintain
the Senior Citizen.  However, it was observed that the present
appellant/Nanjappa would be at liberty to take recourse to such
remedy as may be available to him under the law. Hence, the
present Intra Court Appeal is filed.
4. We have heard the learned Counsel for the parties to the
5. Sri Aditya Sondhi, learned Senior Counsel for the appellant
contended with vehemence that the impugned order passed by the
learned Single Judge allowing the writ petition filed by the 3rd
respondent    cannot be sustained and hence, is liable to be set
aside. He would further contend that the impugned order is neither
correct nor maintainable on the ground that Sub-sections (1) and
(2) of Section 23 of the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and
Senior Citizens Act, 2007 (for short, hereinafter referred to as ‘the
Senior Citizens Act’) are applicable to the facts and circumstances
of the case.    He would further contend that the learned Single
Judge has failed to appreciate the fact that the ‘Act’ in question
was framed with a view to provide maintenance and welfare of the
parents and the senior citizen which is directly     recognized and
guaranteed under the Constitution of India and all matters
incidental thereto. Further to ensure the life, the property of the
senior citizens are protected and they are able to live with security
and dignity. Thus the act recognises the vulnerable position of the
senior citizen in the present society and intends to provide
mechanism to avoid their suffering and to ensure that the life and
property of the senior citizen are secured.
6.  The learned Senior Counsel further contended that the
definition of the words ‘children’, ‘parent’, ‘relative’, ‘senior citizens’
and ‘welfare’ under Section 2(a), (d), (g), (h) and (k) of the Senior
Citizens   Act includes children, son,      daughter, grandson         and
granddaughter but does not include a minor, father or mother
whether biological, adoptive or step-father or step-mother whether
or not the father or the mother is a senior citizen, legal heir of the
childless senior citizen, who is not a minor and is in possession of or
would inherit his property after his death, any person being a
citizen of India, who has attained the age of sixty years or above,
are entitled for food, health care, recreation centres and other
amenities necessary for the senior citizens which aspects are not
considered by the learned Single Judge.
7. The learned Senior Counsel for the appellant would further
contend that the learned Single Judge committed an error in law
and on facts as Section 23(1) of the Act does not mandate, the
requirement to provide basic amenities and basic physical needs in
the Transfer Deed, should be in ‘writing’, but the learned Single
Judge has proceeded to hold that the requirement to provide basic
amenities and basic physical needs in the Transfer Deed, should be
expressly provided in the Transfer Deed. However, a perusal of
Section 23(1) of the Senior Citizens Act does not stipulate any such
condition and the order passed by the learned Single Judge is
contrary to the earlier decisions of this Court, High Courts of Kerala,
Punjab and Haryana and Madras. He would further contend that
the condition of the requirements in the Transfer Deed to be in
‘writing’ mandated by the learned Single Judge of this Court infact,
makes it an additional requirement which is not stipulated in
Section 23(1) of the Senior Citizens Act. If the intention of the
legislature was that the condition mentioned in Section 23 of the
said Act ought to be in writing in the document of transfer, then it
would have provided for the same expressly. He would further
contend that any requirement to be in writing is contrary to the
Section 23(1) and the object of the Act, as several parents/senior
citizen/relatives, fall prey to the pretended emotions of their
children and relatives, who prey on assets and properties, in their
lifetime gift properties in favour of their children and relatives on
the hope that they would be loved and taken care of during their
sunset years.     All these aspects of the matter have not been
considered by the learned Single Judge while passing the impugned
8. The learned Senior Counsel for the appellant would further
contend that the requirement of writing in the transfer of Document
mandated by the learned Single Judge is erroneous and as such,
the impugned order defeats the object of Maintenance and Welfare
of Parents and Senior Citizens Act which is a beneficial legislation
which should be read and interpreted in favour of the senior
citizens. Therefore, he sought to allow the writ appeal.
9. In support of his contentions, the learned Senior Counsel
for the appellant relied upon the following decisions:
i)   Commissioner of Income Tax -vs- Hindustan Bulk
Carriers reported in (2003)3 SCC 57;
ii)  Smt.    S.   Vanitha   -vs-   Deputy   Commissioner,
Bengaluru Urban District and Others reported in AIR
iii) N.D. Vanamala -vs- State of Karnataka and Others,
in Writ Appeal No.96/2019 (GM-RES) in Writ Petition
No.54488/2017 (DB) Decided on 29th June, 2022
iv)   Prashanth Kumar and Another -vs- The Deputy
Commissioner-cum-District Magistrate (Decided on
vi)   M. Shanmugam Pillai -vs- The District Collector and
Others reported in
vii)  Amrita Bhatia -vs- Balkeet Singh Bhatia reported in
viii) Subhashini    -vs-  District Collector  and   Others
reported in 2020 SCC online Ker 4080
x)    P.V.   Krishnamarar    -vs-  M.V.   Anitha  in   SLP
xi)  Deepika Singh -vs- Central Administrative Tribunal
and Others reported in 2022 SCC Online SC 1088;
xii) The ESI Corporation -vs- M/s. Radhika Theatre
reported in 2022 Live Law (SC) 53.
10. Per contra, Sri R.S. Ravi, learned Senior Counsel for the
respondent No.3 while justifying the impugned order passed by the
learned Single Judge of this Court contended that as per Sub-
Section (1) of Section 23 of the Senior Citizens Act, two conditions
must be fulfilled i.e., the transfer must have been made subject to
condition that the transferee shall provide basic amenities and basic
physical needs to the transferor and such transferee refuses or fails
to provide such amenities and physical needs to the transferor and
if both the conditions are satisfied, by a legal friction, the transfer
shall be deemed to have been made by fraud or coercion or under
undue influence.     Such a transfer then becomes voidable at the
instance of the transferor and the Maintenance Tribunal gets
jurisdiction to declare the transfer as void.
11.  The learned Senior Counsel for respondent No.3 would
further contend that in the Gift Deed, there is no stipulation
mentioned with regard to maintenance of the transferor by the
transferee.      Section 122 of the Transfer of Property Act is not
applicable in view of the overriding effect of the provisions of
Section 3 of the Senior Citizens Act. Thereby, he submits that the
impugned order passed by the learned Single Judge is just and
proper and does not call for any interference of the order in
exercise of powers in the Intra-Court Appeal.
12.    In support of his contentions, he relied upon the
following dictums:
i)      Sudesh Chhikara    -vs- Ramti    Dev     and Another
reported   in   LAWs   (SC)-2022-12-17     particularly
ii)     Full Bench decision of the Kerala High Court in the
case of Subhashini -vs- District Collector, Kozhikode
reported in LAWS (SC) 2022-9-81; and
iii)    N.D. Vanamala -vs- State of Karnataka and Others
reported in AIR 2019 Kar. 247.
13. In view of the aforesaid rival contentions urged by the
learned Counsel for the parties, the only point that would arise for
our consideration in the present Intra Court Appeal is:
"Whether the appellant has made out a case to
set aside the impugned order passed by the
learned Single Judge of this Court allowing the
writ petition filed by the 3rd respondent in view
of   the   provisions   of  Section   23  of  the
Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior
Citizens Act, 2007 in the peculiar facts and
circumstances of the present case?"
14.   We have given our anxious consideration to the
arguments advanced by the learned Counsel for the parties and
perused the entire material available on record carefully.
15.   It is an undisputed fact that the 3rd respondent
purchased       the    property     bearing    Municipal   Assessment
No.3327/3081 measuring East to West 30 ft. and North to South 50
ft., situated at K.R.S. Agrahara, Ward No.22, Kunigal Town in the
name of the appellant under the registered Sale Deed, dated
1.12.2006, and the entire sale consideration was paid by the 3rd
respondent as mentioned in the Gift Deed. It is also not in dispute
that the appellant executed a registered Gift Deed on 23.2.2011 in
favour of the 3rd respondent in respect of the said property without
stipulating any condition in the Gift Deed.
16.   It is also not in dispute that the appellant had filed an
application before the Assistant Commissioner on 25.2.2015 and
the Assistant Commissioner, by the order dated 20.8.2016 allowed
the application filed under Section 23(1) and (2) of the Senior
Citizens Act with a direction to the authorities concerned to
reinstate the right in respect of said site in favour of the present
17. At this stage, it is relevant to consider the provisions of
Section 23 of the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior
Citizens Protection Act, 2007. which reads as under:
"23. Transfer of property to be void in certain
circumstances.—
after   the  commencement       of  this   Act,  has
transferred by way of gift or otherwise, his
property,    subject   to  the   condition   that  the
transferee shall provide the basic amenities and
basic        physical        needs        to       the
transferor and such transferee refuses or fails to
provide such amenities and physical needs, the
said transfer of property shall be deemed to have
been made by fraud or coercion or under undue
influence and shall at the option of the transferor
be      declared     void     by     the      Tribunal.
(2) Where any senior citizen has a right to receive
maintenance out of an estate and such estate or
part thereof is transferred, the right to receive
maintenance      may    be   enforced    against   the
transferee if the transferee has notice of the right,
or if the transfer is gratuitous; but not against the
transferee for consideration and without notice of
(3) If, any senior citizen is incapable of enforcing
the rights under sub-sections (1) and (2), action
may be taken on his behalf by any of the
organisation referred to in Explanation to sub-
section (1) of section 5."
18.   On careful reading of the aforesaid provisions makes it
clear that all kinds of transfers as is clear from the use of the
expression 'by way of gift or otherwise' so as to attract the
provisions of Sub-section (1) of Section 23 of the Senior Citizens
Act, the following two conditions must be fulfilled:
a) The transfer must have been made subject to the
condition that the transferee shall provide the
basic amenities and basic physical needs to the
b) The transferee refuses or fails to provide such
amenities and physical needs to the transferor.
19. If both the aforesaid conditions are satisfied, by a legal
fiction, the transfer shall be deemed to have been made by fraud or
coercion or undue influence.        Such a transfer then becomes
voidable at the instance of the transferor and the Maintenance
Tribunal gets jurisdiction to declare the transfer as void.
20.    Though a specific contention is urged by the learned
Senior Counsel for the appellant that in view of the scope and
object of the Senior Citizens Act, it is deemed that the transferee
shall provide the basic amenities and basic physical needs to the
transferor and such transferee refuses or fails to provide such
amenities and physical needs, the said transfer of property made by
him would be null and void, it is an undisputed fact that when a
senior citizen parts with his or her property by executing a gift or a
release or otherwise in favour of his or her near and dear ones, a
condition of looking after the senior citizen is not necessarily
attached to it.    On the contrary, very often, such transfers are
made out of love and affection without any expectation in return.
Therefore, when it is alleged that the conditions mentioned in Sub-
section (1) of Section 23 of the Senior Citizens Act are attached to
a transfer, existence of such conditions must be established before
21. In the present case, on careful perusal of the document
executed by the appellant in favour of the 3rd respondent, who
happens to be the brother of the appellant, it does not contain any
stipulation that the 3rd respondent is under the obligation to
maintain the present appellant. In the absence of the same and in
view of the provisions of Sub-sections (1) and (2) of Section 23 of
the Senior Citizens Act, the transaction could be declared as null
and void provided the same contains the stipulation that the
transferee shall maintain the senior citizen and the aforesaid Gift
Deed does not contain any such stipulation. In the absence of any
condition stipulated in the documents, the provisions of Sub-
sections (1) and (2) of Section 23 of the Senior Citizens Act are not
22.     Our view is fortified by the dictum of the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in the case of Sudesh Chhikara -vs- Ramti Devi
reported in LAWS (SC) 2022-12-17 wherein at paragraphs-12, 13
and 14 it is held as under:
"12. Sub-section (1) of Section 23 covers all kinds
of transfers as is clear from the use of the
expression “by way of gift or otherwise”. For
attracting sub-section (1) of Section 23, the
following two conditions must be fulfilled:
a. The transfer must have been made
satisfied, by a legal fiction, the transfer shall
be deemed to have been made by fraud or
coercion or undue influence. Such a transfer
then becomes voidable at the instance of the
transferor and the Maintenance Tribunal gets
jurisdiction to declare the transfer as void.
13. When a senior citizen parts with his or her
property by executing a gift or a release or
otherwise in favour of his or her near and dear
ones, a condition of looking after the senior
citizen is not necessarily attached to it. On the
contrary, very often, such transfers are made
out    of  love   and    affection   without    any
expectation in return. Therefore, when it is
alleged that the conditions mentioned in sub-
section (1) of Section 23 are attached to a
transfer, existence of such conditions must be
established before the Tribunal.
14. Careful    perusal   of  the   petition   under
Section 23 filed by respondent no. 1 shows
that it is not even pleaded that the release
deed was executed subject to a condition that
the transferees (the daughters of respondent
no. 1) would provide the basic amenities and
basic physical needs to respondent no. 1. Even
in the impugned order dated 22nd May 2018
passed by the Maintenance Tribunal, no such
finding has been recorded. It seems that oral
evidence was not adduced by the parties. As
can be seen from the impugned judgment of
the Tribunal, immediately after a reply was
filed by the appellant that the petition was
fixed for arguments. Effecting transfer subject
to a condition of providing the basic amenities
and basic physical needs to the transferor -
senior citizen is sine qua non for applicability of
sub-section (1) of Section 23. In the present
case, as stated earlier, it is not even pleaded
by respondent no. 1 that the release deed was
executed subject to such a condition."
23. Though in the present case, a specific contention is being
taken by the learned Senior Counsel for the appellant that, the
appellant being the absolute owner of the property in question, out
of  love   and   affection   executed    a  Gift  in  favour    of his
brother/respondent No.3 under a Gift Deed, dated 23.2.2012, with
a ray of hope that the 3rd respondent/brother would take care of
basic needs of medical necessities as his son was not keeping well
and his daughter was settled with her husband, but respondent
No.3 has changed attitude towards him and has failed to show even
love and affection towards him.      The fact remains that, on the
application filed by the appellant against respondent No.3, the
Assistant Commissioner, who is the authority under the provisions
of Sub-sections (1) and (2) of Section 23 of the Senior Citizens Act
has allowed the application filed by the present appellant ignoring
the conditions stipulated under the provisions of Sub-sections (1)
and (2) of the Senior Citizens Act as held by the Hon'ble Supreme
Court.   Thereby, the learned Single Judge has rightly allowed the
writ petition.   In identical circumstances, the Full Bench of the
Kerala High Court in the case of Subhashini -vs- District Collector,
Kozhikode reported in LAWS (KER)-2020-9-81 at paragraph-52
"52. We conclude by answering the reference,
that the condition as required under Section 23(1)
for provision of basic amenities and basic physical
needs to a senior citizen has to be expressly
stated in the document of transfer, which transfer
can only be one by way of gift or which partakes
the character of gift or a similar gratuitous
transfer. It is the jurisdictional fact, which the
Tribunal will have to look into before invoking
Section 23(1) and proceeding on a summary
enquiry. We answer the reference agreeing with
the decision in W.A. No. 2012 of 2012 dated
28.11.2012 [Malukutty Ponnarassery v. P. Rajan
Ponnarassery]. We find Shabeen Martin v. Muriel
[2016 (5) KHC 603] and Sundhari v. Revenue
1082]   to   be   wrongly  decided.   We  approve
Radhamani v. State of Kerala [2016 (1) KHC 9]
which had a recital in the document akin to that
required under Section 23(1)."
24. On careful reading of the contents of the Gift Deed, dated
23.2.2012, the impugned order passed by the learned Single Judge
of this Court is in consonance with the provisions of Sub-sections
(1) and (2) of Section 23 of the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents
and Senior Citizens Act, 2007, as the Gift Deed, dated 23.2.2011,
does not contain any stipulation that respondent No.3 is under
obligation to maintain the present appellant. In the absence of the
same, it cannot be held that the impugned order passed by the
learned Single Judge is not in consonance with the provisions of
Section 23 of the Senior Citizens Act.
25. Though our conscious is in favour of the welfare of the
Senior Citizens considering the scope and object of Maintenance
and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007, but our hands
are tied in view of the dictum of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the
case of Sudesh Chhikara, wherein while interpreting the very
provisions of Sub-section (1) of Section 23 of the said Act, it has
been held that the two conditions must be stipulated in the
document,    which   is binding   on   all including this  Court as
contemplated under Article 141 of the Constitution of India.
26. The judgments relied upon by the learned Senior Counsel
for the appellant are not applicable to the peculiar facts and
circumstances of the present case, in view of the latest dictum of
the Hon'ble Supreme Court rendered on 6th December 2022 in the
case of Sudesh Chhikara -vs- Ramthi Devi reported in LAWS(SC)
27.  For the reasons stated above, the point raised in the
present Intra Court Appeal is answered in the negative holding that
the appellant has not made out any ground to interfere with the
impugned order, dated 26.2.2019, passed by the learned Single
Judge in Writ Petition No.52010/2016.
28. In view of the above, we pass the following:
i)      This Intra Court Appeal is hereby dismissed as being
devoid of any merit;
ii)     The impugned order, dated 26th February, 2019
passed in Writ Petition No.52010/2016 by the learned
Single Judge of this Court is confirmed.