The instant writ petition has been filed invoking writ
jurisdiction of this Court for issuance of a writ in the nature of
Mandamus directing the respondents to terminate the pregnancy of
victim “X” daughter of the petitioner in view of the provision of the
Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971.
2.           Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner
contends that the minor victim 'X' has filed the instant petition through
her natural guardian-her father. She contends that the petitioner was
subjected to rape as a result whereof she got pregnant. An FIR No. 440
dated 21.10.2022 under Sections 363, 366-A, 376, 450 and 34 of the
IPC and Section 4 and 17 of the Protection of Children from Sexual
Offences, Act, 2012 has been registered at Police Station Punhana,
District Nuh. She submits that the petitioner is a minor and continuation
of the pregnancy will cause a great physical and psychological trauma
to the minor and further contends that she being dependent for her own
self is not in a situation to take care of the child in case she is supposed
to give birth. Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that since the
pregnancy is more than 24 weeks old, the petitioner is bound to
approach this Court for seeking termination of the pregnancy in
accordance with the statutory mandate.
3.            Vide order dated 09.11.2022, the petitioner was directed to
appear before the Medical Board of the Shaheed Hasan Khan Mewati
Govt. Medical College & Hospital, Mewat. A report from the Board of
Directors was also called for in this regard.
4.            Pursuant to the said order, the petitioner appeared before
the Medical Board of the Shaheed Hasan Khan Mewati Govt. Medical
College & Hospital, Mewat and subjected herself to the medical
examination. A report of Board of Directors has been handed over to
the Court today and the same is taken on record as Mark 'A'. The
relevant extract of the said report as under:-
Report of Board of Doctors on Victim "X" in CWP
No. 25508-2022 titled as Mrs. X versus State of Haryana
In reference to letter No. SHKM/MS/2022/11303
dated 18/11/2022 issued by the Medical Superintendent
Office, in compliance of the orders passed by the Hon'ble
High Court on dated 18.11.2022, a Board of the Doctors
was constituted to conduct the Medical Examination of the
Victim "X" on dated 19.11.2022. During the medical
examination of the Victim X, the following are the
observations of the Board:
1. According to history patient's last menstrual period is
not known.
2. On clinical examination Height of the uterus is
corresponding to 26 weeks of gestation.
3. Patient's general condition and vital parameters are
normal.
4. There is history of itching and evidence of skin lesions
over both upper and lower extremities.
5. Hemoglobin is 11.9 gram% and other investigations are
within normal limits.
6. Ultrasound done on 12/11/2022 there is single live
intrauterine pregnancy of 24 weeks 2 days with no gross
congenital anomalies.
7. Based on history and mental status examination, it is
found that she is mentally fit at present to understand the
nature of procedure & its consequences.
Medical Board on opinion that:-
• According to the MTP amendment Act, 2021. pregnancy
can be terminated upto 24 weeks of gestation and above
that period of gestation, it is at discretion of the Hon'ble
• X is a minor (teenage pregnancy) considered high risk
pregnancy and continuation of pregnancy may cause
grave injury to her mental health.
•She is fit for termination of pregnancy.
•Termination of pregnancy around 25-26 weeks of gestation
is associated with potential risk of medical and surgical
complications as well as mental agony.
Submitted, pls.
SHKM GMC, Nalhar, Nuh                            Dept. of Paediatrics
5.          She refers to provisions of Section 3 of the Medical
Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971 wherein pregnancies are permitted
to be terminated by a Registered Medical Practitioner. Section 3 of the
Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971 is extracted hereinafter
“3. When pregnancies may be terminated by registered
medical practitioners.-
1.      Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian
Penal Code (45 of 1860), a registered medical practitioner
shall not be guilty of any offence under that Code or under
any other law for the time being in force, if any pregnancy
is terminated by him in accordance with the provisions of
this Act.
2.      Subject to the provisions of sub-section (4), a
pregnancy may be terminated by a registered medical
(a) where the length of the pregnancy does not exceed
twelve weeks, if such medical practitioner is, or
(b) where the length of the pregnancy exceeds twelve
weeks but does not exceed twenty weeks, if not less than
two registered medical practitioners are, of opinion,
formed in good faith, that-
(i) the continuance of the pregnancy would involve a risk
to the life of the pregnant woman or of grave injury to her
physical or mental health; or
(ii) there is a substantial risk that if the child were born, it
would suffer from such physical or mental abnormalities
as to be seriously handicapped. Explanation 1.-Where any
pregnancy is alleged by the pregnant woman to have been
caused by rape, the anguish caused by such pregnancy
shall be presumed to constitute a grave injury to the
mental health of the pregnant woman. Explanation 2.-
Where any pregnancy occurs as a result of failure of any
device or method used by any married woman or her
husband for the purpose of limiting the number of
children, the anguish caused by such unwanted pregnancy
may be presumed to constitute a grave injury to the mental
health of the pregnant woman.
3. In determining whether the continuance of a pregnancy
would involve such risk of injury to the health as is
mentioned in sub-section (2), account may be taken to the
pregnant woman's actual or reasonable foreseeable
environment.
4. (a) No pregnancy of a woman, who has not attained the
age of eighteen years, or, who, having attained the age of
eighteen years, is a 4 [mentally ill person], shall be
terminated except with the consent in writing of her
guardian.
(b) Save as otherwise provided in clause (a), no
pregnancy shall be terminated except with the consent of
the pregnant woman.”
6.            That the continuation of the said pregnancy is likely to
cause great pain to the petitioner who is a minor and to her it will be a
persistent reminder of the atrocity to which she had been subjected to.
Furthermore, taking into consideration her tender age, it would also
cause a great mental harm to the well being of the child. The anguish
caused by the pregnancy is itself sufficient to constitute grave injury to
the mental health of the petitioner and that it would rather be in the
betterment and best interest of the unborn child as well as the petitioner
that the pregnancy is permitted to be terminated. She further contends
that the minor has held detailed deliberation with her father and they
have voluntarily come to the conclusion that it would be in the larger
interest of the petitioner that the pregnancy is terminated in accordance
with the law.
7.            I have heard the learned counsel(s) appearing on behalf of
the respective parties.
8.            The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matter of “X versus
Union of India” reported as (2020) 19 SCC 806, has while considering
the case regarding medical termination of pregnancy of a 13 year old
rape victim, held that:-
“3. Considering the age of the petitioner, the
trauma she has suffered because of the sexual abuse and
the agony she is going through at present and above all
the report of the Medical Board constituted by this Court,
we think it appropriate that termination of the pregnancy
should be allowed”.
9.            It is not in dispute that the victim is a minor even as on
date and is dependant on her family. She is yet to complete her
education and pursue her goals in life. It can also not be lost sight of the
fact that the pregnancy is an outcome of violation of the minor. It is a
testimony to her bruised body and soul. The child, if born, is not a
reminder of good memories, but shall be a reminder of trauma and
agony she had to undergo. As an unwanted child, the member is also
likely to either live a tormenting life filled up with taunts to his origin
or only to be given away. In either of the said situation, the mother as
well as the child suffer social stigma and incarceration for rest of their
lives. The same is not in the best interest of either the mother and her
family already having expressed their unwillingness to bring up the
child, it may not even be advancing the cause of the unborn, who will
grapple to come to terms with life and be subjected to maltreatment for
no fault. Such decision are tough, however life is not just about being
able to breathe-it is about being able to live with dignity. Where the
denial of dignity and social as well as family acceptance or approval is
a writing on the wall, it compounds agony of the child and lead to
greater injustice. Balance thus needs to be drawn to examine the over
all well being. Whether to shape the trauma of a victim or to prolong it
by delivery of the child, who is to be only victimized. The choices thus
reduce and it seems more prudent to allow the termination of
10.          There is also no reason for this Court to presume that the
opinion given by the Medical Board concerned is not in good faith and
as to how the continuation of this pregnancy would be in larger interest
of the mother.
11.          At this stage, the petitioner contends that Medical Board of
Mewat is a medical college which is nearer to the petitioner with a
higher centrally equipped functional ICU and that the said Medical
College may be directed to conduct the medical termination of the
pregnancy in accordance with the law.
12.          Resultantly, the Director of Medical Board of the Shaheed
Hasan Khan Mewati Govt. Medical College & Hospital, Mewat is
directed to take all appropriate and necessary steps needed to carry out
the medical termination of the pregnancy of the petitioner upon
satisfaction of all such necessary conditions as prescribed in law.
13.          The petitioner shall approach the Medical College and/or
the authorities of the said College on or before 25.11.2022 whereupon
expeditious steps shall be taken for termination of the pregnancy in
accordance with law.
14.           The petitioner would be at liberty to espouse her financial
status before the authorities concerned and be entitled to the benefit
under the prevalent schemes in accordance with the rules.
15.           A copy of this order be handed over to the learned counsel
appearing on behalf of the respective parties under the signatures of the
Consequently, the present petition is allowed.
Whether speaking/reasoned       :     Yes/No
Whether reportable              :     Yes/No