WPA(P) 299 of 2021
... for the State Election Commission
...for the State
... for Union of India
1.        CAN 7 of 2022 has been filed by the petitioner
seeking a direction to the respondent No. 4 State
Election Commissioner to deploy central paramilitary
forces in the elections of 108 Municipalities in the State
scheduled on 27.02.2022. Further prayers have been
made seeking direction for effective CCTV surveillance, to
appoint independent impartial general observer and
micro-observer, to direct verification of EPIC cards/photo
identity cards before entry inside the polling stations by
CRPF, to hold respondent No. 4 personally liable to
discharge his duty as directed by the earlier order.
2.        The above prayers have been made by pleading
that the State Election Commission vide notification
dated 03.02.2022 has declared that the election for 108
Municipalities in the State will be held on 27.02.2022.
The last date of filing nomination was 09.02.2022. It is
alleged that large number of BJP candidates were
forcibly prevented by the goons of the ruling party from
filing their nominations. In respect of one Rakesh
Majumdar from Ward No. 6 of Guskara Municipality, it is
alleged that though he had reached on time but his
nomination paper was not accepted on the ground that
he had reached the office of the concerned authority late.
It is further alleged that there is a state of terror
prevailing in the State and in almost 10% of the
Municipalities which are going for polls, the ruling party
candidates have won uncontested as the nominations
were not allowed to be filled up by other candidates.
Further allegation has been made that State Election
Commission is acting in partisan manner and that
despite the announcement of the date of elections, acting
against Model Code of Conduct, the Government of the
State through its Chief Minister is undertaking new
schemes to woo its voters. Alleged incidents of violence
during the polls for Municipal Corporation Bidhannagar,
Asansol, Siliguri and Chandernagore which took place
on 12.02.2022 have been stated in the application.
3.        The respondents have filed their affidavit in
opposition and the affidavit in reply has also been filed.
4.        Submission of Counsel for the petitioner is that
the   candidates    have   been    prevented   from    filing
nomination forms in the forthcoming elections which
resulted into uncontested victory of the candidates of the
ruling party and that the State Government after
declaration of elections by violating the Model Code of
Conduct has floated two new schemes. Referring to the
various   newspaper     reports   filed  along   with     the
applications he has submitted that in the Elections of
four Municipal Corporations already held, there was
large scale violence and that the complaints in this
regard have not been considered. He has also submitted
that in respect of Contai Municipality, notice dated
19.02.2022 has been issued stating that Mauve Paper
Seals will not be used in 150 ballot units and that in
terms of the earlier order of this Court dated 10.02.2022
the Election Commission did not take any decision for
deployment of the paramilitary forces, therefore, now the
direction be issued by this Court to deploy Paramilitary
Forces in forthcoming Municipality Elections. He has
also submitted that earlier Division Bench judgment in
the matter of Basabi Raichoudhury vs. State of West
Bengal & Ors., 2013 SCC OnLine Cal 15463 has no
application in the facts of the present case. In support of
his submission to deploy paramilitary forces he has
placed reliance upon the orders dated 23.11.2021 in the
matter of All India Trinamool Congress & Anr. vs.
Manik Das & Ors., CONMT. PET. (C) No. 884/2021 in
W.P.    (Crl.)  No.   455/2021     and   the   order    dated
25.11.2021 passed in All India Trinamool Congress &
Anr. vs. State of Tripura and Ors., Writ Petition
Criminal No. 455/2021. He has pressed his prayer for
appointment of independent observer.
5.         Learned Counsel for the Election Commission
has opposed the prayer and has submitted that earlier
direction of this Court dated 10th of February, 2022 was
duly complied with and assessment of ground situation
to deploy paramilitary forces was done and no need for
the same was found. He has denied the allegations that
any candidate has been illegally prevented from filing the
nomination form and has submitted that the dispute
which the petitioners are raising is factual in nature for
which proper remedy will be to file election petition. He
has also referred to the order of the Single Judge of this
Court in WPA No. 2466 of 2022 filed by Rakesh
Majumdar.      In   respect   of  the   Elections    of   the
Bidhannagar,      Asansol,  Siliguri  and   Chandernagore
Municipal Corporations, he has submitted that only
stray incidents of violence had placed and that the
newspaper reports are conflicting. He has referred to the
newspaper reports enclosed along with the affidavit-in-
opposition in support of his submission that the earlier
elections were held peacefully. In respect of the detailed
allegations  about   irregularities  in  four   Municipal
Corporation Elections already held, he has referred to
the reports filed along with affidavit-in-opposition and
has submitted that each of the allegation has been
replied in these reports indicating that the allegations
are incorrect. He has referred to the minutes of meeting
dated 10th of February, 2022 held by the Election
Commission with the State official and submitted that
direction issued by this Court in the order dated
10.02.2022 was duly complied with. He has also
submitted that two schemes were floated by the State
Government earlier and they are not new schemes,
therefore, not covered by the Model Code of Conduct,
hence permitted by the Election Commission. He has
also submitted that there is no need for appointing the
observers by this Court as the Election Commission itself
is an independent body.
6.        Learned Advocate General has submitted that
in view of Article 243-ZA(1) of the Constitution it is for
the Election Commission to take a decision about calling
the paramilitary forces and this issue has also been
considered by this Court in the earlier orders. He has
submitted that in respect of 108 Municipalities no
evidence of any violence on any candidate has been
placed on record and that the only grievance pleaded in
the CAN is that the candidates were prevented from filing
the nomination form but even the particulars thereof
have not been placed on record. He has objected to the
pleadings contained in paragraph 5 to 7 of CAN 7 by
referring to the affidavits sworn in support thereof. He
has also submitted that the complaints enclosed with
the affidavit-in-reply were made between the period 14th
of February to 17th of February which was after filing of
CAN 7 on 14th of February. He has also submitted that
whenever any complaint of violence was received, the
same was duly looked into. He has also submitted that
the complaints enclosed from page 61 to 72, CAN are of
the same date by the same person, hence they are
suspicious and that the Model Code of Conduct itself
provide for appointment of the observer by the Election
Commission.       He   has   also  submitted   that   the
photographs enclosed at page 87 of the CAN were prior
to the issuance of the election notification and that the
person shown therein was the administrator of the
Municipality and that photograph was taken during the
community outreach programme. He has also submitted
that the two schemes were floated by the State prior to
the declaration of election and were stopped during the
COVID and restarted, therefore, Code of Conduct will not
apply. He has fairly stated that it is necessary to have
Mauve Paper Seals for all ballot units during the
elections and that the necessary notice dated 20th of
February, 2022 has also been issued in this regard.
7.         Learned Counsel for the respondent No. 2 has
submitted that the allegation against the respondent No.
2 is in respect of distribution of title deeds violation of
Model Code of Conduct but these title deeds were
registered   much     prior  to   publication  of  election
notification on 3rd of February, 2022 and formal
felicitation programme for the beneficiaries was also
announced prior to 1st of February, 2022, hence there is
no violation of Code of Conduct.
8.         We have heard the learned Counsel for the
parties and perused the records. The first issue raised by
the petitioner is in respect of deployment of paramilitary
forces in forthcoming 108 Municipality Elections. This
Court on earlier two occasions, i.e, at the stage of
Kolkata Municipal Corporation and at the stage of
Bidhannagar,     Asansol,   Siliguri and    Chandernagore
Municipal Corporation elections had considered this
prayer. After duly considering the Division Bench
judgment of this Court in the matter of Basabi
Raichoudhury     (supra)  and    orders    of  the   Hon’ble
Supreme Court in the case of All India Trinamool
Congress (Supra), before the elections of the four
Municipal Corporations this Court had passed the order
dated 10.02.2022 to the following effect:
“14. The issue relating to deployment of
paramilitary forces had come up before this
Court     during    the     Kolkata      Municipal
Corporation elections when this Court taking
note of the Division Bench judgment in the
matter of Basabi Raichoudhury (Supra) in the
order dated 17th December, 2021 passed in
MAT 1354 of 2021 had held as under:
“The     deployment       of     Central
Paramilitary Forces during the elections
has been opposed by learned Advocate
General    placing    reliance    upon    the
Division Bench judgment of this Court in
the   matter   of Basabi      Raichoudhury
(supra) wherein it has been held that:
“After hearing the learned
length, we are of the considered
opinion     that    the    petition   is
premature. Apart from that, we
find that in the matter of holding
election, law and order situation
has to be considered by the State
Election Commission and there are
various factors for requisition of
the Central Paramilitary Forces,
such as, law and order situation
and paucity of State Forces etc.
Such a matter has to be considered
by the State Election Commission
and the State Government and, in
case of any dispute between them,
the State Election Commission had
approached this Court earlier. In
judicial review, the Court cannot
decide        whether         Central
Paramilitary forces are necessary
in any of the election. These are the
decisions   to   be   taken   by   the
constitutional bodies like the State
Election   Commission,     the   State
Government, etc. Ordinarily, it is
not for the Court to interfere with
such matter. It is the duty of the
Election   Commission     to   ensure
that free and fair election is held
and for that, necessary step to be
taken by them.
in the writ petition, we find that
the same is not only premature but
on merits this writ petition is
misconceived also.”
So far, no instance of violence has
been pointed out nor along with the writ
petition, any such material has been
enclosed which furnishes a ground for
deployment of the Central Paramilitary
Forces    in   the    forthcoming    Kolkata
Therefore, at this stage, we do not find
sufficient material to accept the prayer.
However, we take note of the submission
of   the   learned      Additional    Solicitor
General    that     within   six   hours,   the
Central Paramilitary Forces can be sent
to avoid any untoward incident. Hence,
we direct the Election Commission to
take an appropriate decision having due
regard   to     the   ground     situation   in
consultation with the State authorities
for deployment of Central Paramilitary
Forces, in case, if the need so arises, to
ensure free and fearless elections.
So far as the judgment of the
Hon’ble Supreme Court relied upon by
the learned Counsel for the parties in the
case of deployment of Paramilitary Forces
in the Municipal Election in the State of
Tripura, the fact situation noted therein
was different and even otherwise, the
Hon’ble Supreme Court by order dated
23rd November, 2021 had directed the
DGP and IGP (Law and Order, Tripura) to
hold a meeting with the State Election
Commission for the purpose of assessing
requirement      of  sufficient   strength    of
Paramilitary Forces and further directed
that after making an assessment of the
situation,   if   so   required,    requisition
should be submitted to the CRPF or to
the Ministry of Home Affairs. Hence, a
decision in this regard is required to be
taken by the concerned State authorities
and   the   State     Election   Commission,
keeping in view the ground situation.”
15. It is essentially for the State Election
Commission, which has been vested with the
responsibility to ensure free, fair and fearless
elections, to assess the ground situation and to
take a decision in respect of deployment of
paramilitary forces if the circumstances so
demand. Instances have been pointed out to
this Court about the violence during election
and post-poll violence on the earlier occasions
during elections in Bidhannagar. Hence, the
Election Commission along with the State
Authorities is required to do reappraisal of the
ground situation prevailing in Bidhannagar
and take a decision to deploy the paramilitary
forces if required.
16. Therefore, we hereby direct that the
Commissioner, State Election Commission will
hold the joint meeting with the Chief Secretary
and Home Secretary of the State and the
Director General and Inspector General of
Police   within    12  hours    and   will do   the
reappraisal     of   the   ground    situation   in
Bidhannagar Municipal Corporation area and
ascertain if deployment of paramilitary forces is
necessary for ensuring the peaceful conduct of
election of Bidhannagar Municipal Corporation
and if require, he will submit and requisition to
the Union Ministry of Home Affairs or the
competent      authority    for    deployment     of
paramilitary forces and any request in this
regard will be duly considered having regard to
the ground situation and in the interest of
ensuring peace, security and orderly conduct of
the    forthcoming      Bidhannagar       Municipal
Corporation Election without any delay. In
case, if the Commissioner, State Election
Commission forms an opinion that deployment
of the paramilitary forces during Bidhannagar
Municipal    Corporation     election   is   not
necessary, then he will be personally liable to
ensure that no violence takes place and free,
fearless and peaceful elections are held in
9.        We find that the above direction of this Court
dated 10th of February, 2022 was almost in terms of the
order of the Hon’ble Supreme Court dated 23rd of
November, 2021 in the case of All India Trinamool
Congress (supra). So far as further reliance upon the
order of the Hon’ble Supreme Court dated 25.11.2021 in
All India Trinamool Congress & Anr. vs. State of
Tripura and Ors., W.P. (Crl.) No. 455/2021 by the
Counsel for the petitioner is concerned, a perusal of the
said order indicates that as per the earlier direction of
the Hon’ble Supreme Court, after considering the ground
situation, a decision was already taken to deploy the
paramilitary forces and subsequently the issue was only
to provide additional companies of CRPF. But in the
present case the Election Commission has yet to take the
decision to deploy the paramilitary forces after assessing
the ground situation.
10.       In   respect of  elections  of   108  Municipal
Council, though an allegation has been made that the
candidates   have   been   prevented   from   filing  their
nomination paper but neither the names of those
candidates are disclosed nor their supporting affidavits
have been filed. The name of only one candidate, i.e.,
Rakesh    Majumdar    from   Ward    No.  6  of    Guskara
Municipality has been disclosed with the allegation that
he was not permitted to file his nomination by the
concerned authority but the record reflects that the said
candidate had filed WPA No. 2466 of 2022 raising this
grievance and Single Bench of this Court by order dated
11.02.2022 has held that the petition involves disputed
questions of facts and in view of the constitutional bar
the petition was not entertained. In respect of the four
Municipal Corporations where elections have already
held conflicting material has been placed on record
about the violence. Even otherwise that material cannot
form the basis for issuing direction in respect of
remaining 108 Municipalities, as decision for deployment
of the paramilitary forces in a particular Municipality is
to be taken on the basis of the ground situation existing
11.       At this juncture it would be worth mentioning
that by the order dated 10th of February, 2022 this Court
had directed the State Election Commissioner to hold a
meeting and ascertain if deployment of paramilitary
forces is necessary during elections in Bidhannagar
Municipal Corporation. The minutes of the meeting
dated 10th of February, 2022 have been placed before us
but those minutes only reflect certain discussions based
on oral information submitted by the State authorities.
The Election Commission is required to ascertain the
ground situation after calling the reports and also
gathering the information from relevant sources about
the conditions prevailing in the concerned Municipality
where election is scheduled.
12.       Hence, we direct that the Commissioner, State
Election Commission will collect information in respect
of the conditions prevailing in each of the Municipalities
where the elections are scheduled and will hold the joint
meeting with the Home Secretary of the State and the
Director General and Inspector General of the Police
within 24 hours and will examine the ground situation of
each of the 108 Municipalities and take a decision in
writing in respect of deployment of paramilitary forces by
mentioning the relevant circumstances in support of his
decision to deploy/not to deploy the paramilitary forces.
If the Commissioner, State Election Commission takes
the decision not to deploy the paramilitary forces, then
he will be personally liable to ensure no violence takes
place and free, fair and fearless elections take place in
the municipality where paramilitary forces are not
13.        The next issue raised by the Counsel for the
petitioner is about the order dated 19.02.2022 issued by
the Municipality returning officer Contai Municipality to
the effect that Mauve Paper Seals for 150 ballot units will
not be used in the given number of ballot units.
Subsequent order dated 20th of February, 2022 has been
placed on record which clarifies that for 138 ballot units
mentioned in the order dated 11.02.2022 Mauve Paper
Seals will be used. It is not disputed by the learned
Advocate General that Mauve Paper Seals should be
used in all ballot units. That is also required for fair
election process. Therefore, the Election Commission is
directed to ensure that Mauve Paper Seals are used in all
the ballot units.
14.        Further issue has been raised by the Counsel
for the petitioner in respect of deployment of the
observers    and   micro-observers   in  the   forthcoming
Municipality Elections. The Model Code of Conduct has
been placed before this Court which provide that:
State  Election   Commission     shall   appoint
Observers to oversee the entire election process
as well as the conduct of poll at the Polling
Station. In case of any complaint about the
conduct   of  poll,  the   candidates    or  the
concerned political parties may bring it the
notice of the Observers.”
15.        In terms of the above the State Election
Commission is required to appoint the observers.
Needless to say that observers should be an independent
person. Having regard to the nature of allegations which
have been made in this petition we are of the opinion
that Election Commission should appoint impartial
officers of IAS cadre as observers.
16.        An issue has also been raised by the Counsel
for the petitioner in respect of floating of two schemes,
namely Duare Sarkar (DS) and Paray Samadhan (PS) by
the notification dated 25th of January, 2022 in violation
of Model Code of Conduct and in this regard the
communication        of  the  Election  Commission     dated
18.02.2022 has been referred to stating that the Election
Commission had no objection in continuation of the
schemes. Sub-clause (viii) of Clause VIII of Model Code of
Conduct provides that:
“VIII(viii) From the time the elections to a
Municipality    are  announced   and   till  the
elections are over, no authority of the Central
or State Government or board of a councillors
of Municipality shall, in the municipal area or
for   the   benefit  of   the  Municipal    area
(a) Announce or promise any financial
(b) allow laying of foundation stone etc.
of projects or schemes of any kind,
(c)make any promises of construction of
roads, provision of drinking water
facilities etc., or
(d) announce or promise or commence
any new scheme or project:
Provided that this restriction shall not
affect continuing schemes, essential
repair works, measures necessary for
public health and sanitation and
public    utility   interests  and  relief
measures necessitated by calamities
and      disasters     and    any  other
emergency measures that may be
(e)Make any appointment for temporary
17.       In terms of the above clause, announcement or
promise or commencement of any new scheme or project
is not permissible but continuation of scheme is not
affected. The proviso makes it clear that the restriction
does   not   apply    to   continuing      scheme,   measures
necessary for public health etc. If any scheme was
stopped earlier then restarting that scheme during the
Model Code of Conduct cannot be said to be covered by
“continuing schemes”. The communication of the District
Municipal Election Officer dated 03.02.2022 is also on
record seeking clarification about implementation of
above two schemes in areas where the elections are to be
held. Hence, we direct the State Election Commission to
examine if the schemes have been allowed to operate
violating the Model Code of Conduct and not to permit
their implantation till the elections are over if they violate
the Code of Conduct. Same is the position in respect of
the distribution of title deeds. Though it has been stated
before us that title deeds were registered prior to
declaration of the elections but their distribution during
the elections may influence the voters, therefore, the
Election Commission is also required to examine it and
take a decision. Let this exercise be completed within 24
18.       So far as the issue of installation of CCTV
camera, etc. are concerned, this Court by order dated
23rd December, 2021 passed in MAT 1354 of 2021 and
connected applications had issued following directions:-
“(i) The respondent State Election Commission
is directed to preserve CCTV footage of all
polling    stations    of   Kolkata     Municipal
Corporation Elections held on 19th December,
(ii) The State Election Commission is also
directed to preserve the diaries of the presiding
officer and register containing the thumb
impression/signature      of  voters   of all the
polling booths in a sealed cover with immediate
effect.
(iii) The State Election Commission is directed
to preserve the control unit of EVM machines
in terms of Rules 61N of the Rules of 1995
without any delay.
(iv) State Election Commission is also directed
to preserve voting record prepared from the
EVM in terms of Rules 61N until further
orders.
(v)    For the   forthcoming    elections of  the
remaining Municipal Corporations/Municipal
Councils, local bodies, in order to maintain the
transparency and fairness, we direct that the
State Election Commission shall take steps to
install CCTV cameras at conspicuous spots in
all main and ancillary booths across the State
and will preserve the CCTV footages so that in
case of need it can be sent for audit.”
19.        We direct that above directions will apply
mutatis mutandis in the forthcoming 108 Municipality
20.        A prayer for cancellation of the elections held
on 12.02.2022 in Municipal Corporations Bidhannagar,
Asansol, Siliguri and Chandernagore has also been made
but this prayer has not been pressed at this stage,
therefore, liberty is granted to file a separate application
in this regard if so desired.
21.      CAN 7 of 2022 filed in WPA (P) 299 of 2021 is
accordingly disposed of.