1.     These criminal revision petitions under Section 397 read
with Section 401 Cr.P.C. has been preferred against the order
dated    01.11.2018     passed       by      the      learned  Special   Judge,
(Prevention of Corruption Act), Jodhpur in Criminal Regular Case
No.35/2014, whereby the learned court below framed the charges
against the accused-petitioners for the offences under Sections
(2 of 10)                [CRLR-95/2019]
13(1)(d) and 13(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act and under
2.    Brief facts of this case, as placed by learned counsel for the
accused-petitioners, are that certain Councilors of Municipality,
Jaisalmer submitted a complaint before the office of the concerned
Anti Corruption Bureau, which was registered as complaint
2.1   Upon    the  investigation        made         into    the aforementioned
complainant, it was found that one Laxmi Narayan Sharma, the
then Lower Division Clerk, Municipality, Jaisalmer, in the year
1985, being an employee of the said Municipality, had got allotted
a plot of land in a colony on subsidized rates; however since the
said plot was falling in a pit, therefore, he made another
application before the Municipality for exchange of the said plot
with another plot of land in the same colony; whereupon his
brother Jeevan Lal drawn the comments that the plot of land can
be exchanged, whereas as per the relevant rules, Jeevan Lal was
supposed to make comments otherwise than the one as made.
2.2   The present accused-petitioner Advocate Rani Dan, who was
the Legal Advisor also alleged to have not given the correct legal
opinion in the matter, and also, the present accused-petitioner,
Gopi Kishan, the then Chairman, on the basis of such incorrect
legal opinion had issued the patta in question, allegedly contrary
to the rules.
2.3   As per the prosecution, from the aforementioned backdrop,
the accused persons, in their capacity as a public servants, had
acquired for themselves the pecuniary benefits, while adopting the
corrupt and illegal means, thereby causing the Municipality/State
Exchequer a huge loss to the tune of Rs.7,18, 800/-.
(3 of 10)           [CRLR-95/2019]
2.4   On the basis of the aforementioned report, a case was
registered, and upon due investigation, a charge-sheet was
submitted under Sections 13(1)(d) & 13(2) of the Prevention of
Corruption Act as well as Section 120-B IPC against the accused
persons, namely, Laxmi Narayan, Jeevan Lal, Rani Dan (present
petitioner) and Gopi Kishan (present petitioner).
3.    Learned counsel for the accused-petitioner submitted that
being the employee of the Municipality, the said Laxmi Narayan
was rightly allotted the plot of land in question, in a lawful
manner, and the same kind of allotment was also made in favour
of other employees of the Municipality. Learned counsel further
submitted that the earlier plot of land, that was allotted to Laxmi
Narayan was falling in a pit and therefore, he sought exchange
thereof by allotment of another plot of land in the same colony, on
count of the earlier plot being not suitable for the usage of Laxmi
3.1   Learned counsel also submitted that the Laxmi Narayan has
also surrendered the lease deed issued in respect of the allotment
of the first plot, and thus, there was no irregularity in making the
allotment of the second plot in question, as alleged by the
3.2   As regards the case found to be made out against petitioner-
Rani Dan, learned counsel submitted that the said petitioner has
only given a legal opinion, and it was not proved that such opinion
was given by receiving any illegal gratification, nor there was any
conspiracy behind furnishing of such legal opinion. Moreover, as
per learned counsel, merely for giving a legal opinion, no offence
can be made out against an Advocate (enrolled and registered as
a lawyer and not holding any office as an employee), that too, in
(4 of 10)                 [CRLR-95/2019]
absence of the sufficient evidence available on record. Further, as
per learned counsel, the prosecution has devised the methodology
of pick and choose so as to implicate the present accused-
petitioners in this case, as the charge-sheet was filed, while
keeping aside certain other persons so as to enable them to evade
the prosecution.
3.3   As regards the accused-petitioner Gopi Kishan, learned
counsel submitted that the dispute with regard to the plot of land
in question is going on since 1983; in case, the said petitioner
wishes to extend any unlawful pecuniary benefit to Laxmi
Narayan, then certainly, Laxmi Narayan would not have been
asked to deposit the amount as per the prevailing rates; thus, the
act of the said petitioner cannot be said to be unlawful in any
manner whatsoever, nor there is even an iota of evidence
available on record, which could show any conspiracy hatched at
the instance of the accused-petitioner Gopi Kishan.
3.4   Thus, as per learned counsel, the learned court below has
erred in passing the impugned order of framing of charges against
the accused-petitioners, without taking into due consideration the
overall facts and circumstances of the case and without duly
appreciating the evidence placed on record before it. Learned
counsel therefore, submitted that the impugned order of framing
of charges cannot be sustained in the eye of law, and accordingly,
deserves to be quashed and set aside by this Court.
4.    On   the  other   hand,       learned        Public     Prosecution,  while
opposing the aforesaid submissions made on behalf of the
accused-petitioners, submitted that the learned court below has
taken into due consideration the overall facts and circumstances of
the case and made a due appreciation of all the evidence placed
(5 of 10)                [CRLR-95/2019]
on record before it; the said due appreciation is discernible on
record, more particularly, in view of the fact that the charge
against the accused-petitioners to the effect of causing a huge
loss to the tune of Rs.7,18,800/- to the Municipality/State
Exchequer, was duly proved by the prosecution by leading cogent
and sufficient evidence on record before the learned trial court.
Thus, the impugned order has been passed, after due examination
of each and every aspect of the case, as required at the stage of
framing   of   charges.     Moreover,         as     per     the learned   Public
Prosecutor, at the stage of framing of charges, the concerned
court is not required to delve into a detailed analysis or roving
5.    Heard learned counsel for the parties as well as perused the
record of the case.
6.    As regards the case of petitioner-Gopi Kishan, this Court
finds that at the stage of framing of charge, the learned trial court
is not required to conduct a meticulous appreciation of evidence or
a roving inquiry into the same, as was laid down by the Hon’ble
Apex Court in the judgments rendered in Ashish Chadha v.
Asha Kumari and Ors (2012) 1 SCC 680 and State of NCT of
Delhi and Ors. vs. Shiv Charan Bansal and Ors. (2020) 2
6.1. At the stage of framing of charge, the Court is only required
to prima facie presume whether a case against the accused
person(s) may be made out. And that the facts that emerge from
the case may be taken at face value; if they disclose the existence
of ingredients constituting the alleged offences, then the charges
may be framed.
(6 of 10)               [CRLR-95/2019]
6.2. The word “presuming” in Section 228 Cr.P.C. has been
consciously inserted by the legislature, with the intention that if
the Court strongly suspects that the accused is in any way
connected with the commission of the alleged offences, then it
may proceed to frame charges against the accused. The said word
must be read ejusdem generis to the opinion that there is a
ground for forming an opinion that the accused has committed the
alleged offence.
6.3. It would also be immaterial whether the said opinion has
been formed either on the basis of direct, or circumstantial
6.4. The Hon’ble High Courts’ revisional jurisdiction under Section
397 Cr.P.C. is limited, more so when the order of the lower court is
one of framing of charge against the accused.
6.5. The order passed by the court framing charges against the
accused, need not be a detailed order as Section 228 Cr.P.C. is
tentative, meaning thereby, if a strong suspicion exists in the mind
of the court at the said stage, then the same is sufficient for the
court to proceed with the framing of the charge against the
accused. And if a prayer for discharge has been made before a
revisional court, then the same may only be allowed if the court
finds that the materials on record are wholly insufficient for the
purpose of trial.
7.    Now coming to the case of the petitioner-Rani Dan, who is
an Advocate, controlled and registered with the Bar Council and
not holding any office in the capacity of being an employee, this
Court is conscious of the precedent law laid down by the Hon’ble
Supreme     Court     in    Central          Bureau          of Investigation,
(7 of 10)           [CRLR-95/2019]
relevant portion of which reads as under:
16. . . . As stated earlier, the only allegation against
him is that he submitted false legal opinion about the
genuineness of the properties in question. It is the
definite stand of the Respondent herein that he has
rendered Legal Scrutiny Reports in all the cases after
perusing the documents submitted by the Bank. It is
also his claim that rendition of legal opinion cannot be
construed as an offence. He further pointed out that it
is not possible for the panel advocate to investigate the
genuineness of the documents and in the present case,
he only perused the contents and concluded whether
the title was conveyed through a document or not. It is
also brought to our notice that LW-5 (Listed Witness),
who is the Law Officer of Vijaya Bank, has given a
statement regarding flaw in respect of title of several
properties. It is the claim of the Respondent that in his
statement, LW-5 has not even made a single comment
as to the veracity of the legal opinion rendered by the
Respondent herein. In other words, it is the claim of
the Respondent that none of the witnesses have
spoken to any overt act on his part or his involvement
in the alleged conspiracy. Learned senior Counsel for
the Respondent has also pointed out that out of 78
witnesses no one has made any relevant comment or
statement about the alleged involvement of the
Respondent herein in the matter in question.
23. A lawyer does not tell his client that he shall win
the case in all circumstances. Likewise a physician
would not assure the patient of full recovery in every
case. A surgeon cannot and does not guarantee that
the result of surgery would invariably be beneficial,
much less to the extent of 100% for the person
operated on. The only assurance which such a
professional can give or can be given by implication is
that he is possessed of the requisite skill in that branch
of profession which he is practising and while
undertaking the performance of the task entrusted to
him, he would be exercising his skill with reasonable
competence. This is what the person approaching the
professional can expect. Judged by this standard, a
professional may be held liable for negligence on one of
the two findings, viz., either he was not possessed of
(8 of 10)           [CRLR-95/2019]
the requisite skill which he professed to have
possessed, or, he did not exercise, with reasonable
competence in the given case, the skill which he did
possess.
26. Therefore, the liability against an opining advocate
arises only when the lawyer was an active participant in
a plan to defraud the Bank. In the given case, there is
no evidence to prove that A-6 was abetting or aiding
the original conspirators.
27. However, it is beyond doubt that a lawyer owes an
"unremitting loyalty" to the interests of the client and it
is the lawyer's responsibility to act in a manner that
would best advance the interest of the client. Merely
because his opinion may not be acceptable, he cannot
be mulcted with the criminal prosecution, particularly,
in the absence of tangible evidence that he associated
with other conspirators. At the most, he may be liable
for gross negligence or professional misconduct if it is
established by acceptable evidence and cannot be
charged for the offence Under Sections 420 and 109 of
Indian Penal Code along with other conspirators without
proper and acceptable link between them. It is further
made clear that if there is a link or evidence to connect
him with the other conspirators for causing loss to the
institution, undoubtedly, the prosecuting authorities are
entitled to proceed under criminal prosecution. Such
tangible materials are lacking in the case of the
Respondent herein.
7.1   The case of petitioner-Rani Dan, Advocate, when seen in
light of the aforementioned precedential backdrop, and more
particularly when it is apparent on the face of the record that the
role of the said petitioner, in the present case, was exercised only
as an Advocate, this Court is being conscious of the settled legal
position, finds that an Advocate, though is bound by his
professional conduct, but can only give his advice to the best of
his ability and capacity; an Advocate never gives to his client an
assurance that his legal opinion/advice would result into a win-win
situation for his client, in any circumstances. Once an advice is
given by an Advocate, it is the prerogative of the party concerned
(9 of 10)            [CRLR-95/2019]
to adhere to such advice or not. Such professional advice however,
cannot attract criminal proceedings, as the professional advice is a
very delicate issue between a client and an Advocate, for which
the Advocate cannot be held criminally liable. Thus, if any legal
advice rendered by an Advocate goes wrong, the same would not
subject him to criminal prosecution, as a lawyer.
7.2   As observed above, an Advocate, at the most, may be liable
for gross negligence or professional misconduct, if it is established
by placing a cogent evidence on record, but an Advocate cannot
be charged for the offences, as alleged herein, alongwith other
conspirators. Thus, when there is nothing substantial on record to
show that the petitioner-Rani Dan was hand in glove with other
conspirators, so as to deliberately cause a financial loss to the
State Exchequer, this Court is of the firm opinion that merely on
the   basis   of  a   professional          advice/opinion,   the   lawyer’s
prosecution, as done in the present case, cannot be sustained in
the eye of law.
7.3   This is more so when the prosecution has failed to prima
facie prove that the petitioner-Rani Dan, Advocate was involved
into a conspiracy of causing a financial loss to the State
7.4   If an Advocate is being prosecuted, as done in the present
case, merely for rendering a legal advice/opinion, it shall not be
possible for any lawyer to render such professional advice, more
particularly, when such a professional advice, if found to be non-
favourable for the client, the same would result into criminal
prosecution against a lawyer, and in such circumstances, the
system of justice delivery would suffer, as lawyers being an
(10 of 10)               [CRLR-95/2019]
important component of the justice delivery system would not be
able to give their professional advice without fear and favour.
8.     As an upshot of the above discussion, this Court finds that
the impugned order dated 01.11.2018 does not suffer from any
legal infirmity, so far as petitioner-Gopi Kishan is concerned,
so as to call for any interference by this Court, at this stage.
However, so far as petitioner-Rani Dan is concerned, this
Court, in view of the aforesaid precedent law and the observations
made hereinabove, deems it appropriate to discharge him of all
the charges/offences alleged against him, while quashing and
setting aside the impugned order, qua him.
9.     Consequently, the petition No.95/2019 preferred by
petitioner-Gopi      Kishan       is     dismissed.           However,  petition
No.1309/2018 preferred by petitioner-Rani Dan is allowed,
and accordingly, while quashing and setting aside the impugned
order dated 01.11.2018 passed by the learned Special Judge,
Sessions Court (Prevention of Corruption Act), Jodhpur in Criminal
Regular Case No.35/2014 qua the petitioner-Rani Dan, he is
discharged of all the charges/offences alleged against him, in the
present case. All pending applications stand disposed of.