By way of the present application bearing Crl. M.A.
No.19908/2022 filed in OMP (COMM.) No.361/2019 under section
340 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 („Cr.P.C.‟ for short), the
applicant Kamal Kumar, seeks action against the petitioner Milan
Saini and his Special Power of Attorney-holder („ SPA-holder‟ for
short) Siri Chand Saini inter-alia for committing perjury. Another
application bearing Crl. M.A. No.19909/2022 has been filed by the
same applicant in OMP (CONT.) No.1/2017 under section 340
Cr.P.C., containing identical allegations.
2.    In view of the commonality of the allegations and issues involved,
both applications are being decided by the present common judgment.
3.    To crystallize the allegations made in the applications, reference may
be made to the following paragraphs of one of the applications, which
are mutatis mutandis the same in the other application :
Paras of Crl. M.A. 19908/2022
“8. That a bare look at the aforesaid purported signatures [on the
documents listed at S. Nos. a to c of Para 7, above] of the alleged
Attorney (Mr. Siri Chand Saini) vis-à-vis his signature on the
alleged Power of Attorney (dated 09.07.2019) would reveal that the
same are starkly different and ex-facie have been signed by different
persons. As submitted above, a copy of the alleged Power of
Attorney (dated 09.07.2019) it is available at pages 4 to 6 of Index-
II of the petition Paper-book before this Hon‘ble Court.
OMP (COMM) 361/2019 & OMP (CONT.) 1/2017                                     Page 2 of 16
“9. That the Applicant has filed the present application after
noticing the said difference in the signatures of the alleged Attorney.
Out of abundant caution, the Applicant obtained certified copies of
the above documents (listed at S. Nos. a to c of Para 7, above) from
this Hon‘ble Court and approached M/s Truth Labs Forensic
110029 for forensic examination of those signatures.
“10. That M/s Truth Labs Forensic Services has since given its
Report dated 04.08.2022 to the effect that differences between the
admitted signatures (on the Power of Attorney) and the questioned
signatures (on the above documents -listed at S. Nos. a to c of para
7, above) are fundamental in nature and beyond the limit of
natural variations.
“12 It further observed that ―Both questioned and admitted
signatures also do not agree in their general handwriting
characteristics such as relative size and different alignment of
characters with respect to each other, relative spacing between
them, speed and skill, movement, slant etc.‖
“12 That with the above observations and findings, M/s Truth Labs
Forensic Services has opined that ―Cumulative consideration of all
the above led me to the opinion that the person who write admitted
signatures marked a1 to A6 did not write the questioned signatures
marked QI state that to Q10.‖
(there is a second para 12 in the application)
“14. Now that the Report and finding of a Forensic expert is
available, it is quite certain beyond the realm of any doubt that
signatures the above documents (listed at S. Nos. a to c of para 7,
above) are forged and not genuine. The same are not that of the
purported Attorney (Mr. Siri Chand Saini). It is also evident that
someone, other than the alleged Attorney (Mr. Siri Chand Saini) has
signed the documents the above documents (listed at S. Nos. a to c
of para 7, above) and presented/filed the above-captioned petition
under Section 34 of the Act before this Hon‘ble Court as if the same
has been signed, sworn and filed by the alleged Attorney (Mr. Siri
OMP (COMM) 361/2019 & OMP (CONT.) 1/2017                                       Page 3 of 16
“15. It is submitted that after it was revealed that such fake/forged
signatures were used by the Petitioner and his Power of Attorney,
the Applicant also compared the same with the signatures and
details in affidavits, vakalatnama, applications and other documents
filed by the Petitioner through the same alleged Power of Attorney
in the enforcement petition under Section 36(OMP (ENF) (COMM)
No. 16/2020), the Appeal under Section 37 of the Act (FAO(Comm)
63/2022) and the contempt petition numbered as OMP (CONT)
1/2017. All these proceedings arise from the same arbitral award
under challenge in the captioned petition. It was further revealed
that there was several discrepancies it is also fully established that
fake and forged signatures of the alleged Attorney (Mr. Siri Chand
Saini), have been used before this Hon‘ble Court in the above-
captioned present proceedings, as genuine signatures of the alleged
Attorney (Mr. Siri Chand Saini), with utmost dishonest and malafide
intentions.
“16. The Applicant submits that the above documents (listed at S.
Nos. a to c of para 7, above) with the fake and forged signatures of
the alleged Attorney (Mr. Siri Chand Saini) are not correct and
genuine documents, but the same have been sued (sic,used) in these
proceedings as genuine documents to the gross prejudice of the
Applicant and also deceiving this Hon‘ble Court.
“17. The Applicant made further enquiries and came to know that
there is no address as ―House No.396, BasaiDarapur, New Delhi-
110015‖. The address of the alleged Attorney (Mr. Siri Chand
Saini), as given in the alleged Power of Attorney dated 09.07.2019
is wrong. It is pertinent to mention here that the affidavits filed in
the appeal also states the address as ―396, BasaiDarapur, New
“18. That the Applicant also made on-line enquiries of the
―Electoral Roll 2022 U05 NCT of Delhi‖ and came to know that in
WZ Block, there is House No.396. The complete address therefore is
OMP (COMM) 361/2019 & OMP (CONT.) 1/2017                                     Page 4 of 16
“18.1 It further transpired that the name of the person residing
at WZ-396, BasaiDarapur, New Delhi-110015 is ‗Shri
Chand’, and not ‗Siri Chand Saini‘, as stated in the Power of
Attorney dated 09.07.2019, and in various affidavits filed
before this Hon‘ble Court in the name of the said alleged
“18.2 Furthermore, the age of the said Shri Chand is ‗71‘
years, as on 2019, whereas in the affidavits filed before this
Hon‘ble Court in the name of the said alleged Attorney, the
age of the said alleged Attorney has wrongly been stated as
‗62‘ years. The same age is stated in affidavit in support of the
above captioned petition.
“18.3 Still further, the father‘s name of ‗Shri Chand‘, as per
the aforesaid Electoral Roll is ‗Prithwi Singh‘, whereas in the
Power of Attorney dated 09.07.2019, the name of Siri Chand
has been stated as ‗Pirthi’. The affidavit in support of the
above captioned petition bears the different fathers name i.e.
“18.4 Clearly, therefore, the name, the age, the father‘s name
and the address of the alleged Attorney (Mr. Siri Chand
Saini), as given in the Power of Attorney dated 09.07.2019, as
also in various Affidavits filed before this Hon‘ble Court in the
name of the said alleged Attorney, are wrong.
“18.5 The identity of the alleged Attorney of the Petitioner is
not ascertainable and of doubtful providence. In the respectful
submission of the Applicant, there exists no person in the name
of Siri Chand, son of Prithi, residing at 396, Basai Darapur,
“18.6 All this has been done purposely to mislead this Hon‘ble
Court and a huge fraud has been, and is still being played
upon this Hon‘ble Court and the Applicant by the Petitioner.
The Respondent has also committed perjury upon this Hon‘ble
OMP (COMM) 361/2019 & OMP (CONT.) 1/2017                                      Page 5 of 16
―22. From the above it is quite obvious that various grievous
offences including under sections 177, 181, 182, 205, 463, 466, 471,
471 (sic, mentioned twice), etc. of Indian Penal Code, 1860 have
been committed by the Petitioner, his Special Power of Attorney and
various other unknown persons under criminal conspiracy with
each other. It is respectfully submitted that even the attempt to
commit such offences as well as the abetment is also punishable
under the law. Though the commission of various offences is a
matter of record, however, the individual role of each of such
persons who have been part of the criminal conspiracy and/or who
are guilty of abetment of such offences will be revealed only after a
proper investigation by the trail (sic) court/investigation agency.
The Applicant has, therefore, filed the present application under the
provisions of the section 340 read with section 195 and 482 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 further read with section 151 of
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 as it is expedient in the interests
of justice that an inquiry should be made into these offences which
have been committed in or in relation to the proceedings before this
4.    Based upon the allegations extracted above, the applicant seeks
initiation of an inquiry in terms of section 340 Cr.P.C. into the alleged
offences committed by the petitioner, his SPA-holder and other
unknown persons, in relation to the present proceedings; and upon
such inquiry being made, for filing of a complaint before the
concerned criminal court for prosecution of the accused persons.
5.    In essence and substance, the allegations made in the applications,
based on which the applicant seeks initiation of inquiry under section
340 Cr.P.C. are the following:
5.1.    That the SPA-holder Siri Chand Saini has forged his own
signatures on the vakalatnama, at the foot of the pleadings at
OMP (COMM) 361/2019 & OMP (CONT.) 1/2017                                      Page 6 of 16
various points, and in the affidavits filed in support of the
pleadings/applications in the present matters;
5.2.   That the true name of the SPA-holder is not Siri Chand Saini
but Shri Chand Saini; that his father‟s name is not Pirthi but
Prithwi; and that his true address is not House No.396 Basai
Darapur, New Delhi but WZ-396 Basai Darapur, New Delhi;
5.3.   The allegation that the SPA-holder has forged his own
signatures is sought to be supported by a purported Forensic
Analysis Report dated 04.08.2022 rendered by a private
forensic laboratory called M/s Truth Labs Forensic Services. In
that report the author says, that upon comparison with the
admitted signatures of the SPA-holder on Special Power of
Attorney dated 09.07.2019, in his opinion, the SPA-holder
“…did not write the questioned signatures…” that appear on
the various pleadings, applications and documents filed in the
present proceedings;
5.4.   The allegation that the name, parentage, address and age of the
SPA-holder are also not his true name, parentage, address and
age, proceeds on the basis of the records available in the
Electoral Roll 2022 for the concerned Assembly Constituency
where the SPA-holder is enrolled as a voter.
6.       The applicant seeks to rely upon the verdicts of the Supreme Court in
Iqbal Singh Marwah vs. Meenakshi Marwah1 and a later decision in
State of Punjab vs. Jasbir Singh2.
OMP (COMM) 361/2019 & OMP (CONT.) 1/2017                              Page 7 of 16
7.    At the preliminary hearing of the present applications on 28.09.2022,
Mr. Siri Chand Saini was present in-person. Since Mr. Milan Saini
ordinarily resides in California USA, he had joined the hearing via
video-conferencing. In order to ascertain the essential position as
regards the allegations in the applications, at the hearing on
28.09.2022 this court had put certain queries to elucidate answers
from the said persons. The gist of the answers was recorded in order
dated 28.09.2022. The within-named Siri Chand Saini and Milan
Saini had this to say:
7.1. Milan Saini confirmed that he had appointed Siri Chand Saini as
his SPA-holder vide Special Power of Attorney dated
7.2. On being queried, Milan Saini further confirmed that he had
instructed Siri Chand Saini to sign the vakalatnama, pleadings
and affidavits which are subject-matter of the allegations in the
present applications, for and on his behalf; and further confirmed
that he stands by the contents of the pleadings and affidavits so
7.3. Furthermore, Siri Chand Saini presented his identity credentials
by way of his PAN Card and Aadhaar Card, which were seen
and copies were retained on the court record. Siri Chand Saini
was also identified by his counsel, thereby confirming his
identity.
7.4. On being queried as to whether the signatures appearing on the
vakalatnama, pleadings and affidavits were his signatures, Siri
Chand Saini confirmed that they are.
OMP (COMM) 361/2019 & OMP (CONT.) 1/2017                             Page 8 of 16
8.    Suffice it to say therefore, that insofar as Milan Saini, the petitioner
who appointed the SPA-holder to represent him in the matter; and Siri
Chand Saini, the SPA-holder so appointed, are concerned, there is
neither any dispute nor discord between them as to the authenticity
and validity of the signatures of the SPA-holder appearing on the
record of these proceedings; nor does Milan Saini dispute the contents
of what has been said thereby. Factually therefore, the applicant has
no case to allege forgery, or creation of any false documents, on any
count whatsoever.
9.    Though there are also allegations as to the name, parentage, address
and age of Siri Chand Saini being false, in the opinion of this court, to
say that someone‟s name is not Siri Chand Saini but Shri Chand
Saini; that his father‟s name is not Pirthi but Prithwi; that his address
is not 396 but WZ-396; or that his age is not 62 but 71 as per some
other records, when there is no dispute about those aspects between
the principal and the appointed attorney; nor does anything on merits
even remotely turn upon these frivolous typographical errors or
omissions, is, to say the least, an exercise in utter uselessness; which
must be considered only to be summarily rejected.
10.   Now, to answer the interpretation and construction sought to be
placed by the applicant on when a person can be alleged to have
forged his own signatures, the essential ingredients of the offences
under sections 436 and 464 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 („IPC‟ for
short) are required to be noticed.
OMP (COMM) 361/2019 & OMP (CONT.) 1/2017                              Page 9 of 16
11.   The relevant portions of the aforesaid provisions are extracted below:
463. Forgery.—Whoever makes any false documents or false
electronic record or part of a document or electronic record, with
intent to cause damage or injury, to the public or to any person, or
to support any claim or title, or to cause any person to part with
property, or to enter into any express or implied contract, or with
intent to commit fraud or that fraud may be committed, commits
forgery.
464. Making a false document.—A person is said to make a false
document or false electronic record—
(a) makes, signs, seals or executes a document or part of a
(b) makes or transmits any electronic record or part of any
electronic record;
(c) affixes any electronic signature on any electronic record;
(d) makes any mark denoting the execution of a document or
the authenticity of the electronic signature,
with the intention of causing it to be believed that such
document or part of a document, electronic record or
electronic signature was made, signed, sealed, executed,
transmitted or affixed by or by the authority of a person by
whom or by whose authority he knows that it was not made,
signed, sealed, executed or affixed; or
Explanation 1.—A man's signature of his own name may amount to
forgery.
(a) A signs his own name to a bill of exchange, intending that it may
be believed that the bill was drawn by another person of the same
name. A has committed forgery.
OMP (COMM) 361/2019 & OMP (CONT.) 1/2017                                     Page 10 of 16
12.      In one of its recent decisions in Sheila Sebastian vs. R. Jawaharaj
and Anr.3 the Supreme Court explains the crux of sections 463 and
464 IPC, where it inter-alia observes as follows:
―19. A close scrutiny of the aforesaid provisions makes it clear that,
Section 463 defines the offence of forgery, while Section 464
substantiates the same by providing an answer as to when a false
document could be said to have been made for the purpose of
committing an offence of forgery under Section 463 IPC. Therefore,
we can safely deduce that Section 464 defines one of the ingredients
of forgery i.e. making of a false document. Further, Section 465
provides punishment for the commission of the offence of forgery. In
order to sustain a conviction under Section 465, first it has to be
proved that forgery was committed under Section 463, implying that
ingredients under Section 464 should also be satisfied. Therefore
unless and until ingredients under Section 463 are satisfied a person
cannot be convicted under Section 465 by solely relying on the
ingredients of Section 464, as the offence of forgery would remain
incomplete.
"21. It is observed in Mohd. Ibrahim v. State of Bihar [Mohd.
Ibrahim v. State of Bihar, (2009) 8 SCC 751 : (2009) 3 SCC (Cri)
929] that: (SCC p. 756, para 14)
―14. … a person is said to have made a ―false document‖, if
(i) he made or executed a document claiming to be
someone else or authorised by someone else; or
OMP (COMM) 361/2019 & OMP (CONT.) 1/2017                                           Page 11 of 16
(ii) he altered or tampered a document; or
(iii) he obtained a document by practising deception,
or from a person not in control of his senses.‖
―22. In Mohd. Ibrahim [Mohd. Ibrahim v. State of Bihar, (2009) 8
SCC 751 : (2009) 3 SCC (Cri) 929] , this Court had the occasion to
examine forgery of a document purporting to be a valuable security
(Section 467 IPC) and using of forged document as genuine (Section
471 IPC). While considering the basic ingredients of both the
offences, this Court observed that to attract the offence of forgery as
defined under Section 463 IPC depends upon creation of a
document as defined under Section 464 IPC. It is further observed
that mere execution of a sale deed by claiming that property being
sold was executant's property, did not amount to commission of
offences punishable under Sections 467 and 471 IPC even if title of
property did not vest in the executant.
―24. In Mir Nagvi Askari v. CBI [Mir Nagvi Askari v. CBI, (2009)
15 SCC 643 : (2010) 2 SCC (Cri) 718], this Court, after analysing
the facts of that case, came to observe as follows: (SCC p. 687, para
―164. A person is said to make a false document or record if
he satisfies one of the three conditions as noticed
hereinbefore and provided for under the said section. The
first condition being that the document has been falsified
with the intention of causing it to be believed that such
document has been made by a person, by whom the person
falsifying the document knows that it was not made. Clearly
the documents in question in the present case, even if it be
assumed to have been made dishonestly or fraudulently, had
not been made with the intention of causing it to be believed
that they were made by or under the authority of someone
else. The second criteria of the section deals with a case
where a person without lawful authority alters a document
after it has been made. There has been no allegation of
alteration of the voucher in question after they have been
made. Therefore, in our opinion the second criteria of the
OMP (COMM) 361/2019 & OMP (CONT.) 1/2017                                     Page 12 of 16
said section is also not applicable to the present case. The
third and final condition of Section 464 deals with a
document, signed by a person who due to his mental
capacity does not know the contents of the documents which
were made i.e. because of intoxication or unsoundness of
mind, etc. Such is also not the case before us. Indisputably
therefore the accused before us could not have been
convicted with the making of a false document.‖
―26. The definition of ―false document‖ is a part of the definition of
―forgery‖. Both must be read together. ―Forgery‖ and ―fraud‖ are
essentially matters of evidence which could be proved as a fact by
direct evidence or by inferences drawn from proved facts. In the
case in hand, there is no finding recorded by the trial court that the
respondents have made any false document or part of the
document/record to execute mortgage deed under the guise of that
―false document‖. Hence, neither Respondent 1 nor Respondent 2
can be held as makers of the forged documents. It is the imposter
who can be said to have made the false document by committing
forgery. In such an event the trial court as well as the appellate
court misguided themselves by convicting the accused. Therefore,
the High Court has rightly acquitted the accused based on the
settled legal position and we find no reason to interfere with the
same.”
13.   In the first place therefore, to allege that a person has forged his own
signatures, is a very tall order. The foundation of that allegation falls
once the person signing admits the signatures to be his own. It falls
even further once the person on whose behalf he has signed also
admits such person‟s authority to sign, as also the latter‟s signatures.
That is not to mention that both the principal and the SPA-holder even
admit to the contents of the documents so signed.
OMP (COMM) 361/2019 & OMP (CONT.) 1/2017                                     Page 13 of 16
14.     Explanation I to section 464 IPC which says that a man‟s signatures
of his own name may amount to forgery, is contextualized by the
illustration that follows, to say that a person signing a document (a
bill of exchange in the illustration) intending that it may be believed
that the document was drawn by some other person of the same name,
commits forgery. There is nothing even remotely similar happening in
the present case.
15.     Before concluding, a word about the applicability of section 340
Cr.P.C. to the principal allegation made in the present case may also
be in order. In the leading decision on the point in Iqbal Singh
Marwah (supra), while upholding the decision in Sachida Nand
Singh& Anr vs. State of Bihar & Anr.4, the Supreme Court has ruled
―33. In view of the discussion made above, we are of the opinion
that Sachida Nand Singh [(1998) 2 SCC 493 : 1998 SCC (Cri) 660]
has been correctly decided and the view taken therein is the correct
view. Section 195(1)(b)(ii) CrPC would be attracted only when the
offences enumerated in the said provision have been committed with
respect to a document after it has been produced or given in
evidence in a proceeding in any court i.e. during the time when the
document was in custodia legis.‖
In the present case, the allegation is of signatures having been
forged on the vakalatnama, pleadings and applications before these
were filed in court. There is no allegation of any forgery having been
committed during the time when the documents were in custodia
OMP (COMM) 361/2019 & OMP (CONT.) 1/2017                                      Page 14 of 16
legis. Clearly therefore, section 195(1)(b)(ii) Cr.P.C. would not be
attracted. Besides, the Supreme Court has further opined that :
―23. In view of the language used in Section 340 CrPC the court is
not bound to make a complaint regarding commission of an offence
referred to in Section 195(1)(b), as the section is conditioned by the
words ―court is of opinion that it is expedient in the interests of
justice‖. This shows that such a course will be adopted only if the
interest of justice requires and not in every case. Before filing of the
complaint, the court may hold a preliminary enquiry and record a
finding to the effect that it is expedient in the interests of justice that
enquiry should be made into any of the offences referred to in
Section 195(1)(b). This expediency will normally be judged by the
court by weighing not the magnitude of injury suffered by the person
affected by such forgery or forged document, but having regard to
the effect or impact, such commission of offence has upon
administration of justice. It is possible that such forged document or
forgery may cause a very serious or substantial injury to a person in
the sense that it may deprive him of a very valuable property or
status or the like, but such document may be just a piece of evidence
produced or given in evidence in court, where voluminous evidence
may have been adduced and the effect of such piece of evidence on
the broad concept of administration of justice may be minimal. In
such circumstances, the court may not consider it expedient in the
interest of justice to make a complaint. The broad view of clause
(b)(ii), as canvassed by learned counsel for the appellants, would
render the victim of such forgery or forged document remediless.
Any interpretation which leads to a situation where a victim of a
crime is rendered remediless, has to be discarded.‖
(emphasis supplied)
As observed above, what is alleged to have been done by the
petitioner and the SPA-holder, though the allegations are meritless
even otherwise, does not affect the administration of justice even
minimally. For this additional reason, the applications are wholly
without merit.
OMP (COMM) 361/2019 & OMP (CONT.) 1/2017                                          Page 15 of 16
16.   Accordingly, the allegations contained in the applications are so
completely bereft of a factual basis or merit, that in the opinion of this
court, no further judicial time or ink need be wasted on them.
17.   The applications are accordingly dismissed in-limine. In order to
emphasize the frivolity of the applications, the dismissal is subject to
payment of costs of Re.1/- by the applicant.
18.   Costs be treated as paid.
OMP (COMM) 361/2019 & OMP (CONT.) 1/2017                             Page 16 of 16