1.      The petitioner in this CRLMC seeks the indulgence of the
Court U/S.482 of Cr.P.C. to quash the complaint in 1.C.C. Case
No.60 of 2014 of the Court of learned S.D.J.M., Angul in an
application U/S.482 of Cr.P.C. for not arraigning the trust as an
CRLMC No.1392 of 2016                                   Page 1 of 12
accused in terms of Section 141 of Negotiable Instruments Act,
1881 (for short the N.I. Act).
2.      Facts in precise are opposite party No.2-Kanheilal
Choudhury instituted the complaint in 1.C.C. Case No.60 of 2014
against the petitioner as General Secretary, M/s. Bijay Laxmi
Trust and opposite party No.3- Dinabandhu Mishra in the Court of
learned S.D.J.M., Angul for commission of offences U/S.138 of
N.I. Act on account of dishonour of cheque bearing No.083955
dated 31.12.2013 issued by opposite party No.3 as President of
M/s. Bijay Laxmi Trust for an amount of Rs.7,30,550/- (Rupees
Seven Lakh Thirty Thousand and Five Hundred Fifty) as the
cheque on presentation returned back to opposite party No.2 as
unpaid with endorsement from Bank of Baroda, Angul Branch on
18.02.2014 “account closed”. Opposite party No.2 accordingly
issued Demand notice to petitioner and opposite party No.3 within
the prescribed period and when they did not respond, opposite
party No.2 instituted the aforesaid complaint. On perusal of
complaint and initial statement of complainant filed in the shape of
affidavit together with documents annexed with the affidavit,
learned S.D.J.M., Angul by the impugned order took cognizance
of offence U/S.138 of N.I. Act and issued process in the form of
CRLMC No.1392 of 2016                                   Page 2 of 12
summons to the petitioner and opposite party No.3. On receipt of
summon, the petitioner approach this Court by way of this
CRLMC petition U/S.482 of Cr.P.C.
3.      In the course of hearing of the CRLMC, Mr. Mohit
Agarwal, learned counsel for the petitioner has raised a
preliminary objection at the threshold on the maintainability of the
complaint for want of trust arraigned as an accused in pursuance to
the provision of Section 141 of N.I. Act. In raising such objection,
learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that the cheque in
question was neither issued by the petitioner in individual capacity
nor in the capacity of a General Secretary of the Trust, but the
cheque was issued by the opposite party No.3 as the President of
Trust and thereby, primarily the criminal liability cannot be
fastened on the petitioner. It is further submitted by him that
Section 141 of N.I. Act mandates impletion of the trust as a party
since the cheque in question was issued by a person for/on behalf
of the trust and when the mandatory provision has not been
complied, the complaint itself is not maintainable. Learned
counsel for the petitioner by submitting inter alia above issue of
maintainability of the complaint prays to quash it by relying upon
the decisions in Dillip Hariramani v. Bank of Baroda; AIR 2022
CRLMC No.1392 of 2016                                    Page 3 of 12
SC 2258 and Aparna A. Saha v. Self Developers Pvt. Ltd and
others; AIR 2013 SC 3210.
4.      In reply, Mr. Amit Prasad Bose, learned counsel for
opposite party No.2 has submitted that although the trust has not
been made as an accused in the complaint, but that per se would
not absolve the petitioner from the liability arising out of cheque
issued for the trust and she, accordingly, is vicariously liable as a
General Secretary of the Trust with her husband-opposite party
No.3 who had issued the cheque for the trust and the provisions of
Section 141 of N.I. Act would not stand on the way of discharge
of the liability of the petitioner and her husband arising out of the
cheque which was dishonored and thereby, the complaint is
squarely maintainable. It is, therefore, contended by the learned
counsel for the opposite party No.2 that not only the complaint is
maintainable but also the order passed by the learned S.D.J.M.,
Angul taking cognizance of offence is valid and the present
CRLMC being unmerited is liable to be dismissed. He accordingly
has prayed to dismiss the CRLMC.
5.      Aforesaid rival submissions make it very clear that the
singular question required to be decided here is the maintainability
of the complaint in absence of trust as an accused person by taking
CRLMC No.1392 of 2016                                    Page 4 of 12
into consideration the provision of Section 141 of N.I. Act which
primarily lays down the criminal liability for commission of
offence U/S.138 of N.I. Act by Companies and the same is
“141. Offences by companies.-
(1) If the person committing an offence under section
138 is a company, every person who, at the time of
offence was committed, was incharge of, and was
responsible to the company for the conduct of the
business of the company, as well as the company,
shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall
be liable to be proceeded against and punished
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section
shall render any person liable to punishment if he
proves that the offence was committed without his
knowledge, or that he had exercised all due diligence
to prevent the commission of such offence:
[Provided further that where a person is nominated
as a Director of a company by virtue of his holding
any office or employment in the Central Government
or State Government or a financial corporation
owned or controlled by the Central Government or
the State Government, as the case may be, he shall
not be liable for prosecution under this Chapter.]
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(1), where any offence under this Act has been
committed by a company and it is proved that the
offence has been committed with the consent or
connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the
part of, any director, manager, secretary or other
officer of the company, such director, manager,
secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be
guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.- For the purpose of this section,-
CRLMC No.1392 of 2016                                       Page 5 of 12
(a) “company” means, any body corporate and
includes a firm or other association of individuals;
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner
in the firm.”
5.1.    A comparative reference of Section 138 and Section 141 of
N.I. Act makes it apparently clear that Section 138 of N.I. Act
prescribes criminal liability on a individual person who issues a
cheque towards discharge of a debt or liability in whole or in part
when such cheque is dishonoured by the bank on presentation,
whereas Section 141 of N.I. Act refers about criminal liability for
commission of offence of Section 138 of N.I. Act by the
companies in case the cheque was issued for the company and
such criminal liability extends to every person who at the time the
offence was committed, was in-charge of, and was responsible to
the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as
well as the company who shall be liable to be proceeded against
and if found guilty, be punished accordingly. The explanation
appended to Section 141 of N.I. Act indicates that for the purpose
of this Section; (a) “Company” means anybody corporate and
includes a firm or other association of individuals; and (b)
“Director” in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
CRLMC No.1392 of 2016                                     Page 6 of 12
5.2.    For better appreciation to analyze the contentions raised by
the parties, the description of accused as appended in Column
No.2 of the complaint is exactly reproduced as under:
Name, Address of the accused           1. Bijaya Manjari Satpathy, aged
persons                                   about 32 years, General
5.3.    For clarity of understanding, the paragraphs-(i) and (ii) as
stated in Column-7 of the complaint are also exactly extracted as
“(i) That, the accused persons are namely Bijaya
Laxmi Trust, W/O. Dinabandhu Mishra and Mr.
Dinabandhu Mishra, President of M/s. Bijaya Laxmi
Trust, S/O. Late Bansidhar Mishra, both are residing
at Qtr. No. T.A/123, Nalco Nahar, P.O/P.S. Nalco
(ii) That, in order to clear up the outstanding dues of
the vacant premises of the complainant at
Panchmahala, a post dated cheque bearing
No.083955,        Dt.31.12.2013        amounting      of
and Five Hundred Fifty) only was issued by the
accused persons to the complainant along with an
affidavit made by the accused persons on
6.      A bare perusal of the averments made in the complaint
would unambiguously disclose that there are no averments in the
complaint who, at the time when offence was committed, was in-
charge of, and was responsible to the trust for the conduct of its
business. Besides, the petitioner is admittedly neither the signatory
of the cheque nor is there any averment made by the complainant
in the complaint that the petitioner was in-charge of and was
responsible to the trust for the conduct of its business. Undeniably
the trust has not been made or implicated as an accused in the
complaint.
7.      There appears no hesitation in the mind of the Court that
the complaint suffers from the above infirmity as noted, but
whether such infirmity would go to the root of the maintainability
of the complaint so as to make it incurable may also be required to
be answered in this case inasmuch as the petitioner prays for
quashing of the complaint, whereas the opposite party No.2 has
alternatively prayed not to quash the complaint against opposite
party No.3. In order to answer the same, this Court falls back to
the law laid down in Pawan Kumar Goel v. State of Uttar
Pradesh and another; 2022 SCC Online SC 1598, wherein at
paragraph-25, the apex Court has observed thus:
CRLMC No.1392 of 2016                                    Page 8 of 12
“This Court has been firm with the stand that if the
complainant fails to make specific averments against
the company in the complaint for the commission of
an offence under Section 138 of NI Act, the same
cannot be rectified by taking recourse to general
principles of criminal jurisprudence. Needless to say,
the provisions of Section 141 impose vicarious
liability by deeming fiction which pre-supposes and
requires the commission of the offence by the
company or firm. Therefore, unless the company or
firm has committed the offence as a principal
accused, the persons mentioned in sub-Section (1)
and (2) would not be liable to be convicted on the
basis of the principles of vicarious liability.”
8.     In Dillip Hariramani(supra) as relied on by the petitioner
the Apex Court in paragraph-16 of the decision has observed
“Such vicarious liability arises only when the
company or firm commits the offence as the
primary offender.”
In laying down the aforesaid principle in the above case,
the Apex Court has referred the principle summarized on Section
141 of N.I. Act lays down earlier by it in National Small
(2010) 3 SCC 330 wherein the Apex Court at paragraph-39 has
laid down the principle as follows:-
“(i) The primary responsibility is on the
complainant to make specific averments as are
required under the law in the complaint so as to
make the accused vicariously liable. For fastening
the criminal liability, there is no presumption that
every Director knows about the transaction.
CRLMC No.1392 of 2016                                         Page 9 of 12
Directors liable for the offence. The criminal
liability can be fastened only on those who, at the
time of the commission of offence, were in charge
of and were responsible for the conduct of the
business of the company.
(iii) Vicarious liability can be inferred against
a company registered or incorporated under the
Companies Act, 1956 only if the requisite
statements, which are required to be averred in
the complaint/petition, are made so as to make the
accused therein vicariously liable for the offence
committed by the company along with averments
in the petition containing that the accused were in
charge of and responsible for the business of the
company and by virtue of their position they are
liable to be proceeded with.
(iv)Vicarious liability on the part of a person
must be pleaded and proved and not inferred.
(vii) The person sought to be made liable
should be in charge of and responsible for the
conduct of the business of the company at the
relevant time. This has to be averred as a fact as
there is no deemed liability of a Director in such
cases.”
9.     In Aparna(supra) the Apex Court in paragraph-28 has held
“Under Section 138 of N.I. Act, in case of
issuance of cheque from joint accounts, a joint
account holder cannot be prosecuted unless the
cheque has been signed by each and every person
who is a joint account holder. The said principle
is an exception of Section 141 of N.I. Act.”
10.    In the ultimate appraisal of totality of facts and law
involved in this case, there appears hardly any dispute about
CRLMC No.1392 of 2016                                      Page 10 of 12
petitioner not to be a signatory of the cheque and her implication
in this case as General Secretary of the Trust is without arraigning
the “Trust” as an accused in the complaint, but Section 141 of NI
Act makes it obligatory for the complainant-OP No.2 in this case
to arraign the Trust as an accused to make the person in charge of
and responsible to such Trust for the conduct of its business as
vicariously liable for dishonor of cheque issued for the Trust,
which was not done in this case, nonetheless there is no averment
in the complaint as to who, at the time of the commission of
offence, was in charge of and was responsible to the Trust and
further, such inherent defect remains incurable in view of the law
laid down in Pawan(supra) which lacuna under law gets further
widened when the complainant fails to discharge his primary
responsibility to make specific averment as required under Section
141 of NI Act so as to make either the petitioner as the Secretary
or OP No. 3 as the President of Trust vicariously liable for
dishonor of cheque. Hence, the mandate of Section 141 of NI Act
having not pleaded and established remotely in this case together
with admittedly the incurable and inherent defect of non-impletion
of the Trust as an accused in the complaint makes it very clear that
the complaint is not maintainable in the eye of law and therefore,
CRLMC No.1392 of 2016                                    Page 11 of 12
the further proceeding in the complaint is nothing but an abuse of
process of Court and to secure the ends of justice, the complaint as
a whole being unsustainable in the eye of law needs to be quashed
and accordingly, the complaint in 1.C.C. Case No.60 of 2014 of
the Court of learned S.D.J.M., Angul is hereby quashed.
11.      Resultantly, the CRLMC is accordingly allowed to the
extent indicated above on contest, but in the circumstance, there is
no order as to costs.
Dated the 1st of December, 2022/Subhasmita
CRLMC No.1392 of 2016                                      Page 12 of 12