1.      The present petition has been filed with the following prayers:
“In the aforesaid facts and circumstances, this Hon'ble
Court may be graciously pleased to grant the following
a) to issue appropriate writ and or directions in
the nature of certiorari/ mandamus thereby set
aside and quash the Petitioner's dismissal from
No.TFD/HO/VIG/90/03/Vol.II/1610/140              dated
19.03.2013 as well as the Memorandum
No.TFD/HONIG/90/03/Vol.II/1590/1889              dated
26.02.2013 issued by the Respondents;
b) to issue appropriate writ and or directions in
the nature of mandamus thereby direct the
Respondents to re-instate/ re employ the Petitioner
with all consequential benefits and forthwith pay
the amount due & payable to the Petitioner as per
c) to issue appropriate writ and or directions in the
nature of mandamus thereby direct the
Respondents to grant and pay with retrospective
effect all past & present service continuity benefits,
arrears of salary and allowances as per rules
calculated on the basis of applicable pay scales
w.e.f. 17.10.2003 and as per 6& 7 Pay commission
and promotion status w.e.f 1.01.2006 and 2016,
respectively i.e. as Senior Accountant on basic pay
Rs.58600/- p.m. (revised basic pay ofRs.66,000/-
p.m.) plus DA 17%, HR.A 16% and allowances as
per Rules of TRIFED, Govt. of India;
d) to issue appropriate writ and or directions in
the nature of mandamus thereby direct the
Respondents to pay the aforesaid amounts and all
dues along with interest @ 9% p.a. from the date
due till the date of payment;
e) Pass any other order or direction as deemed
appropriate in the facts and circumstances of the
case in the interest of justice.”
2.      The present petition has been filed assailing the order dated
March 19, 2013 of the respondent, whereby the petitioner was
dismissed from service under Rule 19(i) of the CCS (CCA) Rules,
1965 (‘Rules of 1965’, hereinafter) based upon his conviction under
Section 7 and Section 15 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988
(‘Act of 1988’, hereinafter) vide judgments dated November 22, 2012
and December 3, 2012 of the Special Court, Delhi. The petitioner had
challenged the conviction orders before this Court, resulting in his
acquittal and exoneration from all charges.
3.      The petitioner herein was appointed as Accounts Clerk by the
respondent vide letter dated October 22, 1990.     He was promoted to
the post of Accountant Grade-II and further promoted to the post of
4.      Ms. Purnima Maheshwari, learned Counsel for the petitioner,
stated that the petitioner was falsely implicated in a criminal case
under Section 7 and Section 15 of the Act of 1988 registered by the
Central Bureau of Investigation (‘CBI’, for short), and the respondent
vide letter dated October 20, 2003 suspended the petitioner w.e.f.
October 17, 2003 and paid only subsistence allowance during the
period from October 17, 2003 till February 2013. The petitioner was
convicted in the criminal case by the Special Court, Delhi vide
conviction and sentencing orders dated November 22, 2012 and
December 3, 2012 respectively. Thereafter, a Memorandum dated
February 26, 2013 was issued by the respondent, proposing the penalty
of dismissal from service to the petitioner, and calling upon him to
submit his reply to the same. He submitted the reply/representation on
March 11, 2013 informing the respondent that he had assailed the
conviction order in appeal, bearing Criminal Appeal No. 106/2013
which was pending before this Court. Vide order dated January 22,
2013 this Court suspended the sentence and granted bail to the
petitioner while requisitioning the Trial Court record. Therefore, the
petitioner requested the respondent to keep the proposed punishment in
abeyance. Ms. Maheshwari also stated that though there was no
separate charge memo or inquiry / departmental proceedings conducted
against the petitioner, the respondent suo moto proceeded against him
by passing the final order dated March 19, 2013 and imposing the
penalty of dismissal of the petitioner.
5.      The appeal was decided by this Court vide order dated May 4,
2020 resulting in the acquittal and exoneration of the petitioner from
all charges. The State / CBI has not preferred any appeal before the
Supreme Court and the stipulated time of appeal of 90 days has
expired. It is her contention that therefore, the Judgment of May 4,
2020 has attained finality.
6.      She also stated that the petitioner, after his acquittal, submitted
various representations dated July 24, 2020, August 23, 2020,
September 16, 2020, October 12, 2020, December 23, 2020 and a legal
notice dated January 12, 2021, requesting his reinstatement along with
full arrears of salary and other service benefits. However, the
respondent did not comply with the request and vide reply dated
January 13, 2021 stated that the petitioner is at liberty to challenge the
order of dismissal before the competent Court.
7.      Ms. Maheshwari also submitted that the petitioner is entitled to
the benefits of the 6th and 7th Pay Commission and also promotion to
the higher rank of Senior Accountant in the revised pay-scales of
₹66,000/- per month along with usual allowances as per rules, which
similarly placed employees of the respondent are presently receiving.
8.      She also stated that the petitioner has exhausted the alternative
remedy available to him by approaching the Central Administrative
Tribunal, New Delhi vide OA. No. 454/2021, which was dismissed on
the ground that the respondent is not amenable to the jurisdiction of the
Central Administrative Tribunal as it is not notified under Section 14
(2) of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985.
9.       She contended that the respondent, vide the impugned order
has condemned the petitioner unheard. The allegations against the
petitioner have not been established by way of a regular departmental
inquiry and the petitioner was denied reasonable opportunity to defend
himself.    No inquiry was held according to procedure established by
the competent authority prior to imposing the penalty of dismissal from
service.   According to her, this is violative of Article 311 of the
Constitution of India. That apart, no cogent reasons were assigned for
rejection of the petitioner’s reinstatement, causing serious miscarriage
of justice.   Further, the respondent has arbitrarily and vexatiously
denied past and present service benefits and payment of salary and
allowances as per rules, even though the petitioner has an unblemished
record with the respondent. According to Ms. Maheshwari, this act of
the respondent is marred with irregularity and mala fide, and is also in
violation of Article 14 and Article 16 of the Constitution of India. It is
also contended that the acquittal of the petitioner is on merits and not
on technical grounds.
10.      A counter-affidavit has been filed on behalf of the respondent
wherein it is stated that the CBI arrested the petitioner for having
attempted to obtain illegal gratification on October 17, 2003. He was
placed under suspension w.e.f. March 17, 2003 vide order dated March
20, 2003, in terms of Rule 10 (2) of the Rules of 1965. The suspension
of the petitioner was extended from time to time as per the prescribed
procedure.
11.     Mr. Rajesh Gogna, learned CGSC appearing on behalf of the
respondent has submitted that the Special Court, CBI, Central District,
Delhi, vide order dated November 22, 2012 convicted the petitioner
under Section 7 and Section 15 of the Act of 1988, on the ground that
the petitioner tried to extract a bribe for processing the release of an
amount outstanding to a vendor.        As per the order passed by the
Special Judge, CBI, the petitioner was sentenced to undergo one year
of rigorous imprisonment and a fine of ₹ 5000 under Section 7 of the
Act of 1988 and also one year of rigorous imprisonment and a fine of ₹
5000 under Section 15 of the Act of 1988.
12.     It is also submitted that the respondent, after going through the
Judgment dated November 22, 2012, came to the conclusion that the
charges established against the petitioner involved moral turpitude and
showed a lack of integrity and honesty, which made him unsuitable for
retention in the services of the respondent. Thereafter a show-cause
notice was issued, to which the petitioner replied. After considering all
the relevant facts including the reply to the show-cause notice, it was
decided to dismiss the petitioner from the services of the respondent.
13.     Subsequently, it was informed by the petitioner that his
conviction was set aside and that he was acquitted by this Court vide
Judgment dated May 4, 2020. The petitioner demanded salary and
allowances for the period when he remained suspended / dismissed,
vide legal notice dated January 12, 2021. He also claimed annual
increment, gratuity, earned leaves, bonus and group insurance from the
respondent and demanded that he be reinstated in service. In reply to
the legal notice, the respondent informed the petitioner that there has
been no communication from the CBI that the Judgment dated May 4,
2020 has been accepted as final by them and that they are not intending
to challenge the same before the Supreme Court. The petitioner was
further requested to provide any such communication from the CBI. It
is Mr. Gogna’s contention that this petition is not maintainable in the
absence of any communication stating that the CBI has no intention of
challenging the said Judgment before the Supreme Court. He would
contest the statement of Ms. Maheshwari that the period of limitation
for filing an appeal before the Supreme Court has already lapsed. Due
to the pandemic, the provisions of the Limitation Act, 1963 have not
been made strictly applicable and therefore, the expiration of the
limitation period is not a ground for arriving at the conclusion that no
challenge is going to be made against the Judgment of May 4, 2020.
14.      He also submitted that it is settled law that the competent
authority can still decide whether the services of the petitioner should
be reinstated or dispensed of in view of his conduct of demanding
bribe from a vendor.
15.      Mr. Gogna has admitted that no separate chargesheet /
investigation was conducted while dismissing the services of the
petitioner, as the mandate of Rule 19(i) of the Rules of 1965
contemplate that conviction on a criminal charge is sufficient enough
to discharge the services of an employee through dismissal. The order
dated March 19, 2013 is a speaking order duly passed by the
competent authority, after analysing the judgment of conviction and
also the conduct of the petitioner. He also stated that there is no reason
for the respondent to recall the order dated March 19, 2013, as the
16.      With regard to the issue of entitlement of the petitioner to
salary and benefits of the 6th and 7th Pay Commission, he submitted
that there is no obligation on part of the respondent to pay salary for
the period when the petitioner was dismissed upon conviction by the
Court of competent jurisdiction and his appeal was pending before this
17.      Mr. Gogna would also submit that as per provisions of the
Rules of 1965, even if the CBI confirms that it has accepted the
Judgment of May 4, 2020 as final, the respondent still has the option to
consider as to whether the petitioner is entitled to be reinstated. The
respondent shall exercise its option only when a clear communication
is received from the CBI in that regard.
18.      He has denied the contention of Ms. Maheshwari that the
respondent has not disclosed any reasons for refusing the petitioner to
rejoin his services. In paragraph 2 of the reply notice dated January
31, 2021, it was specifically stated that the respondent was waiting for
a communication from the CBI intimating that it is not willing to
challenge the Judgment dated May 4, 2020 passed by this Court.
19.      He would also contend that the acquittal of the petitioner is not
an honourable acquittal. The same was not on merits and the petitioner
was merely accorded the benefit of doubt. In such a case, there is no
obligation on part of the respondent to necessarily reinstate the services
of the petitioner.
20.      Having heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused
the record, the question which arises for consideration is that, whether
in view of the Judgment of this Court dated May 4, 2020 whereby the
conviction of the petitioner for offences under the Act of 1988 has
been set aside, the petitioner is entitled to reinstatement. By the order
of conviction dated November 22, 2012 and the order of sentencing
dated December 13, 2012 passed by the Special Judge, CBI, the
petitioner was convicted under Section 7 and Section 15 of the Act of
1988. He was sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for one
year under Section 7 of the Act of 1988 and another one year under
Section 15 of the Act of 1988, along with a fine of ₹5,000/- each under
both the provisions, default whereof would warrant simple
imprisonment for one month each.
21.     On appeal, this Court has set aside the conviction by holding in
paragraphs 42 and 43 as under: -
“42. The prosecution case meets its Waterloo on the above
aspect in the contradiction appearing in its case put up in the
charge sheet as compared to the evidence recorded in the trial.
Whereas in the complaint (Ex.PW13/A), the charge sheet and
the sanction order, it was the specific case of the CBI that the
whole talk about dividing the amount of Rs.4 lacs in two
installments took place on 16.10.2003 and not on 17.10.2003.
However, during the trial, as per the complainant’s testimony,
the entire conversation of splitting of amount in two
installments took place on 17.10.2003 and not on 16.10.2003.
43. Further, as per prosecution case, the prime witnesses i.e.,
the complainant and Dr. Shaukatullah were stated to be
present on 16.10.2003 and 17.10.2003 in the hotel room when
the appellant is stated to have visited and demanded the bribe
amount. A combined reading of their testimonies would show
that Dr. Shaukatullah has not stated the material particulars of
the conversation as deposed by the complainant. So far as
demand made on 16.10.2003 is concerned, he has neither
given any details nor stated any amount. For the demand
stated to be made on 17.10.2003 although the complainant had
stated that initially Rs.4 lacs were agreed to be paid but later,
the amount was agreed to be paid in two equal installments but
Dr. Shaukatullah is completely silent on this aspect. He rather
stated that the agreed amount was Rs.4.35 lacs. So far as the
independent witness namely, Satbir Singh, stated to be hiding
in the bathroom, is concerned, he has also not stated the
details of conversation as stated by the complainant. Further,
he did not witness the conversation but only heard it only
through an earphone.”
22.      It may be stated here that pursuant to his conviction by the
Special Judge, CBI, the petitioner who was working with the
respondent organisation, was issued a Memorandum, informing that
the disciplinary authority has proposed the penalty of dismissal under
Rule 19 (i) of the CCS (CCA) Rules, 1965 and calling upon him to
reply to the same.
23.      On March 13, 2013, the petitioner was dismissed under the
said provision. The submission of Ms. Maheshwari is primarily that
the petitioner, having been acquitted in the appeal and the CBI not
having preferred any appeal thereto before the Supreme Court, is
entitled to reinstatement. Mr. Gogna has contended otherwise
inasmuch as, the petitioner is not entitled to reinstatement
automatically. Moreover, it is his submission that the acquittal granted
by this Court was not an honourable acquittal, but merely an acquittal
where a benefit of doubt was granted, because the prosecution had
failed to prove the charges against the petitioner.
24.      The law in this regard is quite well settled. The Supreme Court
in its decision in the case of Union Territory, Chandigarh
Administration & Ors. v. Pradeep Kumar & Anr., (2018) 1 SCC 797,
has held that the mere acquittal in a criminal case is not conclusive of
the suitability of the candidate to the post concerned. If a person is
acquitted or discharged, it cannot always be inferred that he was falsely
implicated or that he had no criminal antecedents. If it is not an
honourable acquittal, the candidate cannot claim the benefit of the
case. The Supreme Court, in paragraph 10 has also referred to its
earlier decision in the case of Inspector General v. S. Samuthiram,
(2013) 1 SCC 598, wherein the expression honourable acquittal was
considered. The relevant paragraph is reproduced hereunder: -
“10. The acquittal in a criminal case is not conclusive of the
suitability of the candidates in the post concerned. If a person
is acquitted or discharged, it cannot always be inferred that he
was falsely involved or he had no criminal antecedents. Unless
it is an honourable acquittal, the candidate cannot claim the
benefit of the case. What is honourable acquittal, was
considered by this Court in Inspector General of Police v. S.
Samuthiram, in which this Court held as under: (SCC p. 609,
“24. The meaning of the expression “honourable
acquittal” came up for consideration before this Court in
RBI v. Bhopal Singh Panchal . In that case, this Court has
considered the impact of Regulation 46(4) dealing with
honourable acquittal by a criminal court on the
disciplinary proceedings. In that context, this Court held
that the mere acquittal does not entitle an employee to
reinstatement in service, the acquittal, it was held, has to
be honourable. The expressions “honourable acquittal”,
“acquitted of blame”, “fully exonerated” are unknown to
the Code of Criminal Procedure or the Penal Code, which
are coined by judicial pronouncements. It is difficult to
define precisely what is meant by the expression
“honourably acquitted”. When the accused is acquitted
after full consideration of prosecution evidence and that
the prosecution had miserably failed to prove the charges
levelled against the accused, it can possibly be said that
the accused was honourably acquitted.””
25.      Looking from the prism of the law, as has been laid down by
the Supreme Court, it is to be seen whether the acquittal of the
petitioner by this Court in the criminal appeal bearing CRL. A. No.
106/2013, would create any entitlement on part of the petitioner to be
reinstated.
26.      The charge against the petitioner as noted above is that he had
demanded a bribe. The finding of this Court on the aspect of the
demand is in paragraphs 42 to 45 of the Judgment dated May 5, 2020,
reproduced hereunder for expediency: -
“42. The prosecution case meets its Waterloo on the above
aspect in the contradiction appearing in its case put up in the
charge sheet as compared to the evidence recorded in the trial.
Whereas in the complaint (Ex.PW13/A), the charge sheet and
the sanction order, it was the specific case of the CBI that the
whole talk about dividing the amount of Rs.4 lacs in two
installments took place on 16.10.2003 and not on 17.10.2003.
However, during the trial, as per the complainant’s testimony,
the entire conversation of splitting of amount in two installments
took place on 17.10.2003 and not on 16.10.2003.
43.       Further, as per prosecution case, the prime witnesses
i.e., the complainant and Dr. Shaukatullah were stated to be
present on 16.10.2003 and 17.10.2003 in the hotel room when
the appellant is stated to have visited and demanded the bribe
amount. A combined reading of their testimonies would show
that Dr. Shaukatullah has not stated the material particulars of
the conversation as deposed by the complainant. So far as
demand made on 16.10.2003 is concerned, he has neither given
any details nor stated any amount. For the demand stated to be
made on 17.10.2003 although the complainant had stated that
initially Rs.4 lacs were agreed to be paid but later, the amount
was agreed to be paid in two equal installments but Dr.
Shaukatullah is completely silent on this aspect. He rather
stated that the agreed amount was Rs.4.35 lacs. So far as the
independent witness namely, Satbir Singh, stated to be hiding in
the bathroom, is concerned, he has also not stated the details of
conversation as stated by the complainant. Further, he did not
witness the conversation but only heard it only through an
earphone.
44.      In A. Subair v. State of Kerala reported as (2009) 6 SCC
587, it was held that the prosecution in order to prove the
charge under the above provisions has to establish by proper
proof, the demand and acceptance of the illegal gratification
and until that is established, the accused should be considered
to be innocent.
45.      In the opinion of this Court, the prosecution is duty
bound to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt against the
appellant by clear, cogent & convincing evidence which has not
been done in the present case. In the opinion of this Court,
keeping in view the above contradictions in the prosecution
case, it is held that the prosecution has failed to prove the
demand of Rs.4 lacs by the appellant beyond reasonable doubt
and as such the appellant is entitled to the benefit of doubt.”
27.      A perusal of the above would reveal that the basis for this
Court to set aside the conviction was primarily that there were
contradictions in the case of the prosecution, due to which it failed to
prove the demand of ₹4,00,000/- by the petitioner beyond reasonable
doubt, and that as such, he is entitled to the benefit of doubt. The
Judgment also indicates that the petitioner had indeed visited the hotel
where the complainant and Dr. Shaukatullah were staying, as is clear
from the statement of the petitioner himself. The prosecution relied
upon the statement of independent witness one Satbir Singh, who was
hiding in the bathroom and heard the conversation through an
earphone. The evidence of Satbir Singh was discarded as he did not
depose on any other aspect of the conversation as stated by the
complainant.
28.      At this juncture, I must state, that the nature of the charges
levied against petitioner, coupled with the fact that he was merely
accorded the benefit of doubt on account of the failure of the
prosecution to prove their case beyond reasonable doubt, would cast a
shadow of doubt, in the eyes of the employer, insofar as his suitability
for re-employment / reinstatement in public service is concerned. In
this regard, I may refer to the observations made by the Supreme Court
in the case of Krishnakant Raghunath Bibhavnekar v. State of
Maharashtra and Ors., 1997 3 SCC 636 as reproduced below:
“………The object of sanction of law behind prosecution is to
put an end to crime against the society and laws thereby intends
to restore social order and stability. The purpose of the
prosecution of a public servant is to maintain discipline in
service, integrity, honesty and truthful conduct in performance
of public duty or for modulation of his conduct to further the
efficiency in public service. The Constitution has given full faith
and credit to public acts. Conduct of a public servant has to be
an open book; corrupt would be known to everyone. The
reputation would gain notoriety. Though legal evidence may be
insufficient to bring home the guilt beyond doubt or foolproof.
The act of reinstatement sends ripples among the people in the
office/locality and sows wrong signals for degeneration of
morality, integrity and rightful conduct and efficient
performance of public duty. The constitutional animation of
public faith and credit given to public acts would be
undermined. Every act or the conduct of a public servant should
be to effectuate the public purpose and constitutional objective.
Public servant renders himself accountable to the public………”
Further, in the case of T.N.C.S. Corpn. Ltd. v. K. Meerabhai,
(2006) 2 SCC 255, the Supreme Court in paragraph 35 has held as
“35. In the instant case, the charged employee holds a
position of trust where honesty and integrity are inbuilt
requirements of functioning and, therefore, in our opinion, the
matter should be dealt with firmly with firm hands and not
leniently. In the instant case, the respondent deals with public
money and is engaged in financial transactions or acts in a
fiduciary capacity and, therefore, highest degree of integrity
and trustworthiness is a must and unexceptionable. Judged in
that background, the conclusion of the learned Single Judge as
affirmed by the Division Bench of the High Court do not
appear to be proper. We have no hesitation to set aside the
same and restore the order passed by the disciplinary
authorities upholding the order of dismissal.”
29.      While there are no standards in service jurisprudence as to how
integrity, honesty and trustworthiness of an employee can be
measured, the meaning of these terms in general parlance has to be
taken into accord. No doubt, the prosecution of the petitioner, who
was an accountant in public service, has culminated in his acquittal on
account of the benefit of doubt, however while seeking reinstatement,
such acquittal alone cannot be claimed to be an indubitable testament
to the bona fide conduct of the petitioner.
30.      The issue can also be seen from another angle, inasmuch as, it
is a settled position of law that the nature of evidence required to be
seen in criminal proceedings and in disciplinary proceedings is
different. In disciplinary proceedings, the charge framed needs to be
proved on preponderance of probability, unlike in a criminal case
where the offence has to be proved beyond reasonable doubt. Had
disciplinary proceedings been initiated against the petitioner on the
charge which was the subject matter of the criminal proceedings on the
basis of the evidence that has surfaced, i.e., the fact the petitioner had
visited the hotel and that Satbir Singh, the independent witness who
was hiding in the bathroom had heard the conversation wherein the
petitioner had made a demand of ₹4,00,000/-, the same would have
been a sufficient ground for dismissal of the petitioner from service.
31.       Given the nature of the offence for which the petitioner was
proceeded against, and the conviction having been set aside only on a
technical ground that the offence could not be proved by the
prosecution beyond reasonable doubt, and the acquittal not being an
honourable acquittal, it must be held that the reinstatement of the
petitioner cannot flow as a matter of right. This Court is of the view
that the petitioner is not entitled to the prayers made in the petition,
inter alia, for setting aside the order of dismissal dated March 19, 2013
and reinstating him in service. If such a relief is granted, it would have
the effect of turning a blind eye towards the concern of the employer
regarding the integrity, honesty and trustworthiness of the employee.
Such a concern of the employer cannot be ignored merely because the
petitioner was accorded the benefit of doubt in a criminal case, more
so, in light of the judgments referred to above.
32.       The petition is dismissed. No costs.