Dharmendrabhai in the year 2007 and whereas on account of some marital
discord, the daughter of the complainant was staying in her parental home
since few days and on 15.07.2021, the daughter of the complainant had gone
missing and whereas the present FIR came to be filed thereafter. Learned
Senior Advocate Mr. Panchal would take this Court through the averments/
allegations made in the FIR in detail. Learned Senior Advocate would try to
emphasize that the daughter of the complainant as well as accused No.1 i.e.
her husband were living separately from at least 2013. Learned Senior
Advocate would submit that in the interregnum, more particularly the
marriage span being of almost 14 years, the daughter of the complainant had
at some point of time gone back to her parental home and as per the
averments in the FIR itself, she had been called by the applicants to come
back to her matrimonial home, more particularly with a condition that a
house would be purchased in the name of the daughter of the complainant.
Learned Senior Advocate would submit that as far as the allegations against
the applicants are concerned, general allegations for offences punishable
under Section 498(A) of the IPC have been levelled and whereas learned
Senior Advocate would submit that there are no allegations against the
applicants for having committed any other offences as found in the FIR.
Learned Senior Advocate would draw the attention of this Court to birth
certificate of the son of the daughter of the complainant, wherein according
to the learned Senior Advocate, they were staying independently and
whereas the address of the house is mentioned in the said birth certificate.
Learned Senior Advocate would further draw the attention of this Court to
a document, whereby the house which the daughter of the complainant and
her husband were last staying together, was also purchased in the name of
the daughter of the complainant and her husband and whereas it is
submitted that they were staying there at least from the year 2018 onwards.
Learned Senior Advocate would thereafter draw the attention of this Court
to a Chart at Para 5 of the application and would submit that the present
applicant No.1 is working in the police force and he had been posted at
various places throughout the State of Gujarat and whereas list of places
have been shown in the Chart along with time period and whereas learned
Senior Advocate would submit that except for visiting their son and his
family, the present applicants had never stayed with the daughter of the
complainant and her husband in a single house. Learned Senior Advocate
would thereafter draw the attention of this Court to a Janvajog Entry No.
156 of 2021, dated 15.07.2021 and would submit that in the said Janvajog
Entry there is a reference to a letter written by the daughter of the
complainant when she had left her house and whereas pertinently learned
Senior Advocate would emphasize on the fact that in the said Janvajog
Entry, the complainant clearly states that he dose not have any suspicion on
anybody with regard to his daughter having gone missing. Learned Senior
Advocate would thereafter refer to transcript of an audio clip sent by the
daughter of the complainant when he had gone missing and whereas
according to the learned Senior Advocate, in the said audio clip while the
daughter of the complainant states that she is not ready to take any more
tension and therefore she was going to commit suicide and whereas it was
submitted that the husband of the daughter of the complainant had allegedly
threatened the daughter of the complainant that he would commit suicide
and therefore the daughter of the complainant being fed up by such threats,
had stated that today she will commit suicide and will show him. Learned
Senior Advocate would emphasize on the fact that the daughter of the
complainant wanted to live in her parental house and whereas her family
members wanted to send her to the matrimonial house and therefore it
appears that she had decided to end her life.
4.     At the direction of this Court, learned APP Mr. Dabhi had produced
copy of the suicide note written by the        daughter of the complainant,
wherein in addition to ask for her forgiveness from her family members,
there are no allegations whatsoever made against the applicants herein and
whereas some allegations are levelled against the husband of the daughter of
the complainant. Learned Senior Advocate would further submit in this
regard that as such, fortunately the daughter of the complainant did not
commit suicide and whereas she was traced out/returned back and whereas
insofar as the husband of the daughter of the complainant is concerned, he
is lodged in jail in connection with the present FIR. Learned Senior
Advocate would thus submit that the FIR does not state any specific
allegation against the present applicants, while it appears that the FIR was
filed when the daughter of the complainant had gone missing and
furthermore, at the relevant point of time neither in the Janvajog Entry nor
in the audio clip forwarded by the daughter of the complainant reflect any
harassment by the applicants herein. Learned Senior Advocate would rely
upon the decision of learned Co-ordinate Bench of this Court dated
17.03.2022 in Criminal Misc. Application No. 14824 of 2021, whereby
accused No.4 is stated to have been released on anticipatory bail. Submitting
thus learned Senior Advocate would request this Court to release the
applicants on anticipatory bail.
Learned Senior Advocate for the applicants on instructions
states that the applicants are ready and willing to abide by all the conditions
including imposition of conditions with regard to powers of Investigating
Agency to file an application before the competent Court for their remand.
Learned Senior Advocate would further submit that upon filing of such
application by the Investigating Agency, the right of applicants-accused to
oppose such application on merits may be kept open.
5.      This application is vehemently opposed by learned Advocate Mr.
Bhavdutt H. Bhatt for the original complainant. Learned Advocate Mr.
Bhatt would submit that while it is attempted to be stated that the applicants
were living separately, but infact according to learned Advocate, the
applicants were staying in the same building. It is submitted by learned
Advocate that very serious allegations have been levelled against the accused
including the present applicants in the FIR and whereas this Court may not
exercise discretion in favour of the applicants. Learned Advocate would
further submit that as such, few days before the incident, all the accused
including the present applicants had visited the house of the complainant
and had threatened the daughter of the complainant, when husband of the
daughter of the complainant had gone missing that he might commit
suicide. Learned Advocate Mr. Bhatt would further submit that as such even
later on, the applicant No.1, had threatened one Rinnkuben who is a witness
in the case and had made statement in favour of the daughter of the
complainant. Learned Advocate Mr. Bhatt would therefore submit that this
Court may not exercise discretion in favour of the present applicants.
6.      As against the same, learned Additional Public Prosecutor Mr. Dabhi
appearing on behalf of the respondent-State has also resisted grant of
anticipatory bail in favour of the present applicants. Learned APP would
submit that the daughter of the complainant after she had returned
back/traced out, had given a statement on 18.01.2022, wherein she has
reiterated allegations made in the FIR. Learned APP would also draw the
attention of this Court to the statement of one Rinkuben, who had inter alia
stated that there were problems between the daughter of the complainant
and the accused and whereas according to the said statement, applicant
No.1 herein was having short-temper and he used to harass the daughter of
the complainant. Thus submitting learned APP would request this Court not
to exercise discretion in favour of the applicants.
7.      In rejoinder learned Senior Advocate Mr. Panchal would submit that
while the daughter of the complainant had been traced out/ returned back
on 25.12.2021, her statement is recorded after approximately 22 days which
gave her and her family members enough time to decide the future course
of action and thus her statement was nothing but a reiteration of the FIR.
Learned Senior Advocate would therefore request this Court to release the
8.      Heard learned Advocates for the respective parties, who have not
submitted anything further.
9.      At the outset. it is required to be noted that the FIR inter alia makes
allegations against the husband of the daughter of the complainant, father-
in-law, mother-in-law - present applicants, brother-in-law, sisters-in-laws
and husband's sisters-in-laws. It would also be pertinent to note that except
the present applicants and their son i.e. husband of the daughter of the
complainant who is in custody, all other accused have been released on
anticipatory bail. It would also pertinent to mention that similar type of
allegations have been levelled against the accused No.4 - brother-in-law who
has been released on anticipatory bail by co-ordinate Bench of this Court
vide order dated 17.03.2022 in Criminal Misc. Application No. 14824 of
2021. Insofar as the aspect of grant of anticipatory bail is concerned, it is
required to be noted that the span of marriage life between the daughter of
the complainant and the son of the applicants was of approximately 14
years and whereas it appears that during the marriage period, the applicants,
more or less were residing separately, more particularly the applicant No.1
being a police officer, was posted at various places. It may have been that
during the time when the applicant No.1, was facing proceedings under the
Prevention of Corruption Act, that he may have lived with his son and her
daughter-in-law, but at the same time the documents relied upon by the
applicants which are not controverted by the complainant clearly reflect that
the daughter of the complainant                and her husband were staying
10.     Perusal of the FIR also reveals that allegations against the applicants
are with regard to offence punishable under Section 498(A) and whereas
while it is stated that the daughter of the complainant was not accorded
proper dignity by her in-laws including the applicants, but in the considered
opinion of this Court, that by itself may not be a relevant ground to refuse
grant of anticipatory bail. From the narration of events, it appears to this
Court that while there used to be marital discords between the daughter of
the complainant and her husband and whereas the daughter of the
complainant used to come to her parental house at that stage, and whereas
from the suicide note as well as the audio clip, it could be culled out that
since the family members were of the opinion that the daughter of the
complainant should return back, therefore she had contemplated to commit
suicide. It also appears that the daughter of the complainant was also
disturbed by the threats administered by her husband that he would commit
suicide and whereas the daughter of the complainant appears to have
wanted to teach lesson to her husband. It also appears that the crux of the
allegations including the allegations with regard to the offence under Section
377 etc. of the IPC, are against the husband of the daughter of the
complainant. Furthermore, as mentioned hereinabove that similar types of
allegations have been levelled against the accused No.4 - brother-in-law who
has been released on anticipatory bail by co-ordinate Bench of this Court
vide order dated 17.03.2022 in Criminal Misc. Application No. 14824 of
2021, therefore, in the considered opinion of this Court, the ground of
parity would apply in favour of the applicants.
11.     Insofar as the submissions with regard to Rinkuben, it appears that
the Rinkuben had given an application with regard to the alleged threats by
the present applicants to one of her relatives and whereas it does not appear
that such an application had either been inquired or the said Rinkuben had
followed the said application. As far as the statements of the said Rinkuben
are concerned, this Court notes that the Rinkuben had alleged more than
what is alleged in the FIR itself, inasmuch as the Rinkuben had alleged that
the first informant had given Rs. 10 Lacs for purchase of the flat and
whereas the first informant himself does not make any allegation with
regard to the same. Under such circumstances, this Court would not accord
any importance to the statement of Rinkuben at this stage.
12.     In this view of the matter, in the considered opinion of this Court,
since the gravity of the allegations against the applicants are not such that
the applicants should be denied benefit of anticipatory bail, the applicant
being a public servant and the applicant No.2 being his wife, there could not
be any apprehension that the applicants wold flee from trial. Insofar as the
allegation that since the applicant No.1 is a police inspector, he might
tamper with the investigation, in the considered opinion of this Court,
appropriate conditions can be set out to ensure that the such apprehension
are allayed.
13.     In this view of the matter and considering the law laid down by the
Hon’ble Apex Court in the case of Siddharam Satlingappa Mhetre v. State of
Maharashtra and Ors. reported in (2011)1 SCC 694, this Court is inclined to
consider this application.
14.     In the result, the present application is allowed by directing that in the
event of applicants herein being arrested pursuant to the FIR being C.R.
No. 11191013211096 of 2021 registered with Krushnanagar Police Station,
District Ahmedabad, the applicants shall be released on bail on furnishing a
personal bond of Rs.25,000/- (Rupees Twenty Five Thousand only) each
with one surety of like amount, on the following conditions :
(a)      shall cooperate with the investigation and make themselves
available for interrogation whenever required;
(b)      shall remain present at the concerned Police Station on
16.06.2022 between 11:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m.;
(c)      shall not directly or indirectly make any inducement, threat or
promise to any person acquainted with the fact of the case so
as to dissuade him from disclosing such facts to the Court or
(d)      shall not obstruct or hamper the police investigation and not
to play mischief with the evidence collected or yet to be
(e)      shall at the time of execution of bond, furnish the address to
the Investigating Officer and the Court concerned and shall
not change their residence till the final disposal of the case or
(f)      shall not leave India without the permission of the Court and,
if having passports shall surrender the same before the Trial
Court within a week.
15.     Despite this order, it would be open for the Investigating Agency to
file an application for police remand of the applicants to the competent
Magistrate, if he thinks it just and proper and learned Magistrate would
decide it on merits. The applicants shall remain present before the learned
Magistrate on the first date of hearing of such application and on all
subsequent occasions, as may be directed by the learned Magistrate. This
would be sufficient to treat the accused in the judicial custody for the
purpose of entertaining application of the prosecution for police remand.
This is, however, without prejudice to the right of the accused to seek stay
against an order of remand, if ultimately granted, and the power of the
learned Magistrate to consider such a request in accordance with law. It is
clarified that the applicants, even if, remanded to the police custody, upon
completion of such period of police remand, shall be set free immediately,
subject to other conditions of this anticipatory bail order.
16.      At the trial, the Trial Court shall not be influenced by the prima facie
observations made by this Court while enlarging the applicants on bail. Rule
is made absolute to the aforesaid extent. Direct service is permitted.