Learned senior counsel for the petitioners has referred to the
Judgment delivered by this Court in the case of Vijay Madanlal
Choudhary & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors.decided on 27.07.2022,
wherein the consequence of failure of prosecution for the scheduled
offence has been provided in the following terms;-
“187. ……..(d) The offence under Section 3 of the
2002 Act is dependent on illegal gain of property
as a result of criminal activity relating to a
scheduled offence. It is concerning the process or
activity connected with such property, which
constitutes the offence of money-laundering. The
Authorities under the 2002 Act cannot prosecute any
person on notional basis or on the assumption that
a scheduled offence has been committed, unless it
is so registered with the jurisdictional police and
/or pending enquiry/trial including by way of
criminal complaint before the competent forum. If
the person is finally discharged/acquitted of the
scheduled offence or the criminal case against him
is quashed by the Court of competent jurisdiction,
there can be no offence of money-laundering against
him or any one claiming such property being the
property linked to stated scheduled offence through
17:48:46 IST           Learned senior counsel has submitted that in the present
case,        prosecution   of  the  petitioners  in  relation  to  the
scheduled         offence,   on  which   the  proceedings   under  the
Prevention of Money-laundering Act, 2022 (PMLA) were based,
have already come to an end with the petitioners having been
discharged from V.G.R. Case No. 59 of 2009(T.R. Case No. 80
of 2011) by the order dated 27.11.2020, as passed by the High
Court of Orissa in Criminal Revision No. 831 of 2018. Learned
counsel would submit that in the given state of facts and the
law declared by this Court, there cannot be any prosecution
for the alleged offence of money-laundering in relation to
the said offence for which, the petitioners have already been
Learned  Additional   Solicitor     General   appearing  for  the
respondents    though   has    not    disputed   the   order   dated
27.11.2020   passed   by    the   High    Court,   discharging   the
petitioners from the scheduled offence but has submitted that
he has not received further instructions as to whether the
prosecuting agency has challenged the said order or not.
The  record   as  it  stands    today,   the   petitioners  stand
discharged of the scheduled offence and therefore, in view of
the law declared by this Court, there could arise no question
of they being prosecuted for illegal gain of property as a
result  of  the   criminal   activity    relating   to  the  alleged
scheduled offence.
That being the position, we find no reason to allow the
proceedings against the petitioners under PMLA to proceed
However,   taking  note    of   the   submissions   made  by  the
learned Additional Solicitor General and in the interest of
justice,  we  reserve  the  liberty  for  the  respondents  in
seeking revival of these proceedings if the order discharging
the petitioners is annulled or in any manner varied, and if
there be any legitimate ground to proceed under PMLA.
Subject to the observations and liberty foregoing, this
petition  is   allowed  while   quashing   the  proceeding  in
Complaint Case No. 05 of 2020 dated 10.01.2020 pending in the
Court of Sessions Court, Khurdha at Bhubaneswar cum Special
Court under the Prevention of Money-laundering Act, 2002.
All pending applications also stand disposed of.
(FOR ADMISSION and IA No.41806/2021-STAY APPLICATION
Date : 03-11-2022 This matter was called on for hearing today.
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
This petition is allowed in terms of the signed order.
All pending applications also stand disposed of.
(Signed order is placed in the file)