1.     The present Appeal has been filed under Clause X of the Letters
Patent, against the impugned judgement/ order dated 10.02.2021 passed by
the Learned Single Judge in W.P.(C) No. 4617/2020 titled “Paras Khuttan
2.     The facts of the case reveal that the Appellant before this Court
applied in pursuant to the advertisement issued by Gas Authority of India
LPA 285/2021                                                      Page 1 of 29
Limited (hereinafter referred to as GAIL), and was finally offered an
appointment vide letter dated 30.07.2019 to the post of Manager (Law).
3.     The Appellant joined as Manager Law on 13.12.2019. While he was
on probation, he resigned from the post of Manager (Law). He submitted
his resignation on 15.01.2020 from the post of Manager Law requesting the
employer to relieve him on or before 22.01.2020. The Respondent employer
sent an E-mail on 23.01.2020 and the Appellant was directed to serve three
months’ notice or three months’ pay in lieu of such notice.
4.     The Appellant with quite promptitude submitted a reply to the E-mail
on 27.01.2020 stating that he is a probationer, and in respect of a
probationer, the issue of giving three months’ prior notice or pay in lieu of
three months’ notice does not arise, and he again made a request for
relieving him on 17.02.2020.
5.     The Appellant on 03.02.2020 again requested the Authorities to
relieve him and to re-consider the requirement of serving three months’
notice as he was a probationer. However, the employer vide letter dated
05.02.2020 informed the Appellant that the resignation of the Appellant had
been accepted with effect from 17.02.2020.         However, his request for
waiving the notice period was turned down.
6.     The Appellant vide E-mail dated 06.02.2020 was directed to deposit a
sum of Rs. 1,74,253/- i.e. three months pay in lieu of the notice period.
7.     The Appellant left with no other choice as he wanted to leave the
Organization, deposited Rs. 1,74,253/- on 07.02.2020 and the same was
informed to the Authorities. He was relieved on 07.02.2020.
8.     The Appellant has further stated that on 23.03.2020, a nationwide
lockdown was declared by the Government of India, and, therefore, on
LPA 285/2021                                                          Page 2 of 29
account of lockdown he was not able to protest in time. However, he
submitted a representation to the Chairman & Managing Director of GAIL
on 27.05.2020 to refund the sum of Rs. 1,74,253/-.
9.     The DGM (HR-ES) rejected the representation/ appeal of the
Appellant vide order dated 03.07.2020 and in those circumstances a Writ
Petition was preferred before this Court i.e. W.P.(C) No. 4617/20200 titled
Paras Khuttan Vs. Gail India Ltd & Anr. The Learned Single Judge has
dismissed the Writ Petition.
10.    The contention of the Appellant before this Court is that he was
working as a probationer, and in absence of rules/ laws in respect of
probationer to give three months notice or to pay salary in lieu of notice, the
forced recovery of Rs. 1,74,253/- is bad in law and he is entitled for refund.
11.    Learned Counsel for the Appellant has vehemently placed reliance
upon the judgment delivered in the case of Medha Moitra V Union of
India & Ors, MANU/WB/2399/2019, and his contention is that in a similar
circumstances, the Calcutta High Court has allowed the Writ Petition. The
reliance has also been placed upon the judgement delivered by Punjab and
Haryana High Court in the case of Nitin Gupta Vs. Post Graduate Institute
of Medical Education and Research, 2007 (2) SCC 434. Learned Counsel
for the Appellant has vehemently argued before this Court that he has
submitted an Appeal to the Chairman & Managing Director for refund of the
amount which was paid by him under coercion in lieu of three month notice.
However, his appeal/ representation was rejected by an authority not
competent to do so, contrary to the statutory provisions as contained under
the GAIL (General Terms and Conditions of Services) Rules.
LPA 285/2021                                                          Page 3 of 29
12.    Learned Counsel for the Appellant has also argued before this Court
that the order dated 03.07.2020 passed by the General Manager rejecting the
representation is voilative of principles of natural justice and fair-play as no
opportunity of hearing was granted to the Petitioner, and, therefore, the
order is bad in law.
13.    The Appellant has also taken a ground stating that the Learned Single
Judge has erroneously kept the probatioanary and regular employees in one
class, and by erroneous interpretation of the Rules governing the field, the
Learned Single Judge has arrived at a conclusion that the Appellant was
liable to pay three months’ salary in lieu of three months’ notice, and,
therefore, the order passed by Learned Single Judge deserves to be set aside.
14.    It has been vehemently argued that the Clause relating to payment of
three months’ salary is applicable only to “employees” and not to
“probationers”, and, therefore the order passed by the Learned Single Judge
deserves to be set aside, and Appellant is entitled for refund of the amount
deposited under protest.
15.    On the other hand, Learned Counsel for the Respondent has
vehemently argued before this Court that the Petitioner was serving as an
employee of GAIL, and the statutory provision governing the field
categorically provides that an employee on resignation has to give three
months’ notice or pay three months’ pay in lieu of the notice. Therefore,
since the Petitioner was serving as an employee, the aforesaid mandatory
condition could not have been waived, and, therefore, the Appellant was
rightly directed to pay the salary as per the Rules governing the field. Hence
the Learned Single Judge is justified in dismissing the Writ Petition.
LPA 285/2021                                                           Page 4 of 29
16.    Learned Counsel appearing for the Respondent Employer has also
argued before this Court that the Rules governing the field do not place the
probationers in a different category, and the meaning and definition of
employee includes the probationers also in the matter of resignation.
17.    He has stated that even a probationer who is working on probation has
to serve three months’ notice/ three months’ salary as the Rules Governing
the field clearly mandate for serving three months’ notice or payment in lieu
thereof.    The Learned Single Judge is justified in dismissing the Writ
Petition and the appeal also deserves to be dismissed.
18.    Learned Counsel for the Respondent has read out the statutory
provision of governing the field, and his contention is that by no stretch of
imagination, the requirement of three months’ notice period or payment in
lieu thereof can be waived off even though the employee was serving on
probation.
19.    Learned Counsel for the Respondent has also argued before this Court
that the Appellant/ Petitioner has estopped from making a claim of refund as
he has deposited the amount with open eyes and after he was relieved on
deposition of such an amount. At this juncture, reliance has been placed
upon a judgment delivered in the case of B.L. Sreedhar vs. K.-M.
Munireddy, (2003) 2 SCC 355. Learned Counsel for the Respondent has
prayed for dismissal of the Appeal.
20.    Heard the Learned Counsel for the Parties at length, and perused the
record. The matter is being disposed off at admission stage itself with the
consent of the parties.
21.    The undisputed facts of the case reveal that in October, 2018, the
Respondent GAIL which is a Public Sector Undertaking, invited the
LPA 285/2021                                                        Page 5 of 29
applications under the special recruitment drive for SC/ST/ OBC (Non
Creamy Layer) and PWDs Candidates in Executive Cadre, and the
Appellant was shortlisted for interview vide call letter dated 25.03.2019.
22.    The appointment order was issued on 30.07.2019 appointing the
Appellant on the basis of Manager Law in E-3 Grade carrying a Pay-Scale
of Rs. 70,000 – 2,00,000. The appointment letter which is on record makes
it very clear that the Appellant was appointed on probation for initial period
of one year and after successful completion of the same, he was entitled to
be confirmed.
23.    The relevant terms and conditions in respect of the post of Manager
(Law) in E-3 Grade which are part of the appointment order (Annexure A2)
are reproduced as under:
Terms and conditions of appointment of SHRI PARAS
KHUTTAN to the post of MANAGER (LAW) in E-3 Grade
l.(a) The appointment carries with it the liability to serve in
any part of India or abroad. During your service in GAIL
(India) Limited, you are liable to be seconded, deputed or
transferred to any other Company, including a
Government Department, Joint venture or Subsidiary
Company of GAIL (India) Limited, PSUs, etc., and you
will be bound by such transfer order. In case of your
deputation, transfer or secondment, you will be guided
and regulated by the terms and conditions of such
transfer, deputation or secondment as amended from
time to time.
l.(b) During your service in the company, you shall be liable
to be transferred to any office, project or any other place
or location or job with suitable designation where you
may be posted for any of the Company's work in any part
of India or abroad as may be required by the Competent
2.(a) The appointee will be on probation for a period of one
year from the date of appointment during which his/her
performance will be watched with a view to determine
his/her suitability for confirmation to the appointed post.
This period, if necessary, may be extended at the
discretion of Competent Authority. During probation
period and/or extended period of probation, the services
are liable to be terminated at any time without notice or
without assigning any reasons therefore. The appointee
will be issued formal orders of confirmation on
satisfactory completion of probation period or the
extended period of probation, as the case may be. The
appointee will be considered to be continuing on
probation until so confirmed in writing.
2.(b) After satisfactory completion of probation, the services
will be liable to termination by giving three months'
notice on , either side without assigning any reasons
thereof; provided also that Appointing Authority shall
have right to terminate the services of the appointee
forthwith or from any subsequent date on payment of a
sum equivalent to the amount of pay and dearness
allowance last drawn by the appointee for the period of
notice in lieu of the notice period or period by which
such notice falls short of.
2.(c) Confirmation of appointee on initial appointment in the
company shall be subject to satisfactory verification of
character & antecedents in the prescribed form by the
prescribed authorities in accordance with the directives
issued from time to time. In case of employees joining
from Government/ Public Sector Undertakings/ State
Governments, such verification is not required provided
LPA 285/2021                                                          Page 7 of 29
their character & antecedents verification was done
earlier by the previous employers and intimation given to
the company to this effect.
2.(d) Confirmation of appointee on initial appointment in the
Company shall also be subject to satisfactory verification
of caste certificate [In case appointee belongs to SC/ ST/
OBC (NCL) category] in the prescribed form by the
competent Authority in accordance with the guidelines
issued from time to time. ”
24.    The aforesaid terms and conditions of the appointment order makes it
very clear that Appellant was appointed on probation for one year and
competent authority was given a discretion to extend the period of
probation. It was also categorically mentioned that during the period of
probation, or during the extended period of probation, the services were
liable to be terminated at any point of time without notice or without
assigning any reason therefor.
25.    Not only this, the appointment order also makes it very clear that after
competition of probationary period successfully, the probationer shall be
treated as a regular employee of the Company.
26.    The Rules governing the field relating to terms and conditions of
service in respect of GAIL Employees are known as GAIL ( General Terms
and Conditions of service Rules), and Rule 2, Rule 3, Rule 4, Rule 7 and
Rule 8 are reproduced as under:
2.1 These Rules shall be applicable to all employees of
the Company except:
i)     Employees on deputation and/or Foreign
Service      unless    their    terms      of
deputation/foreign      service      stipulate
otherwise.
ii)    Casual/ Daily rated / Part-Time / ad-hoc /
contract/apprentices and Trainee employees
in whose case provision of other Rules
specifically made, would be applicable.
iii)   Any other employee who may be excluded,
at the discretion of the Management, from
operation of any or all of these rules, wholly
or partially, as may be decided by the
Chairman & Managing Director of the
2.2 Masculine gender also refers to feminine gender.
In these Rules, unless there is anything repugnant to the
subject or context:
a)    'Appointing Authority' in relation to an employee
Management to make appointment to the category
or grade or post in which the employee for the time
being is included or to the post which the employee
for the time being holds.
b)     'Board' means the Board of Directors of the
c)     'The Company' means GAIL (India) Limited
d)     'Management' means the Chairman and Managing
Director or Director (HR) or any other Executive
of the Company so authorised.
e)      'Competent Authority' with reference to the
exercise of any powers under the Rules mean the
Executives or authority to whom such powers are
LPA 285/2021                                                          Page 9 of 29
delegated by the Management, either in general or
in particular.
f) 'Employee' means a person engaged by the
Company to do any work except those excluded
under para 2 above.
g) 'Regular employee' means an employee appointed
to a postin a regular pay scale and on the regular
rolls of the Company, engaged to do any work and
who has satisfactorily completed his probationary
period of service.
h) 'Temporary/ Ad-hoc Employee' means an employee
who has been engaged on a temporary basis or
against a temporary post for a specific period or
for work which is essentially temporary in nature,
and likely to be completed within a specific period.
i) 'Casual employee' means an employee whose
employment is of occasional or casual nature.
i) 'Daily Rated Employee' means a casual employee
appointed on daily wage rates.
k) 'Part-time employee' means an employee who is
not appointed to work on full-time basis in a
regular time scale.
I) 'Contract Employee' means an employee whose
employment is on contract basis for a specific
period.
m) 'Probationer' means an employee who is
temporarily employed in a regular pay scale of the
Company and placed or probation.
n) 'Apprentice/Trainee' means a learner who is given
a stipend/Pay or a grade as may be decided by the
Management during the period of his training.
This definition does not include the Apprentices
taken under the Apprentices Act, 1961.
LPA 285/2021                                                    Page 10 of 29
The terms and conditions of employment and the
period-of training will be governed by the contract
of Apprenticeship employment and Service bond
and will be subject to the rules or orders framed by
the Management from time to time.
o)     'Employee on deputation/ Foreign Service' means
an employee of some other organisation deputed
for service in the Company at its request or vice-
versa.
p)     'Executive' means an employee holding a post in
the executive cadre of the Company.
q)     'Notice' means any communication given in writing
or affixed on the Notice Board. In case of Notice
relating to an employee, it would be taken as
sufficient if delivered personally to the employee
or any member of his family or affixed on the door
of his residence or sent by registered post on his
last known residential address or permanent home
address.
r)     'Staff'means an employee who is not an Executive.
The employees shall generally be classified as under:-
iii) Casual/Daily-rated/Part-time
v) Apprentice/Trainee under GAIL Schemes.
vi) On Deputation/Foreign Service.
LPA 285/2021                                                         Page 11 of 29
These employees would be further categorised as Executives
and Non-executives.
7.1  Unless otherwise provided in the terms of
appointment or any other agreement or award, the
following rules will govern the probation and
confirmation of employees.
7.2  All employees on first appointment in the service of
the Company including employees appointed to
higher grades consequent upon promotion or on
the basis of open selection shall be placed on
probation for a period of one year during which
period their performance will be watched with a
view to determining their suitability for
confirmation against the regular posts. However,
the employees of the Government and other Public
Sector undertakings initially taken on deputation
and subsequently absorbed in the Company service
in the deputation post are exempted from the above
rules.
7.3  The period of probation may be extended at the
discretion of the competent authority but will not
be extended by more than one year save for
exceptional reasons to be recorded in writing.
7.4  Unless exempted under these Rules, every
employee appointed in the Company service will
be issued a formal order of confirmation on
satisfactory completion of probation period or the
extended period of probation, as the case may be.
The employee will be considered to be continuing
on probation until so confirmed in writing.
7.5  An order relating to confirmation or extension of
probation will normally be indicated within one
LPA 285/2021                                                      Page 12 of 29
month from the date of completion of the
probationary period or extend period of probation.
Non compliance of this stipulation will not,
however, result in automatic confirmation of the
employee.
7.6 If during the probationary period or extended
period of probation in respect of an employee on
his first appointment in the service of the.
Company his performance, progress and general
conduct are not found satisfactory or upto the
standard required for the post, his services are
liable to be terminated at any time without notice
and without assigning any reason therefore.
However, in respect of an employee who is placed
on probation on promotion to higher grade, if his
performance during the probation period or
extended period of probation is not found
satisfactory or upto the standard required for the
post, he/she will be reverted to the pre-promoted
post at any time without notice or without
assigning any reason therefore.
Heads of P&A Deptts. Of all Regional/Field
Offices have been advised to ensure timely
advance action to process the probation clearance
cases so that possible procedural delays can be
avoided. In case any difficulty in encountered in
any probation clearance case, the same may be
brought to the notice of Corporate Personnel
With a view not to prolong the completion of
probation of employees on promotion in respect of
whom preliminary enquiries have been initiated or
LPA 285/2021                                                   Page 13 of 29
against whom disciplinary proceedings are
contemplated or have been initiated the issue was
examined in light of Industry practice, CVC
guidelines & GAIL Rules and the following has
a) Vigilance clearance will be necessary before the
Appointing authority decides to complete the
probation of an employee on promotion.
b) Vigilance clearance will not be withheld if an
employee on probation on promotion has been
proceeded against under CDA Rules/Standing
orders for alleged misconduct and/or acts of
omission & commission related to the period prior
to promotion.
c) Vigilance clearance will be withheld if an
employee on probation on promotion has been
proceeded against under CDA Rules/Standing
Orders for alleged serious misconduct and/or acts
of omission & commission related to the period
during probation on promotion.
d) Vigilance clearance will also be withheld after
sanction for prosecution has been accorded by the
Competent Authority for alleged misconduct and/
or acts of omission & commission whether related
to period or prior to promotion of the employee or
to that during the period of his probation on
promotion.
With a view to streamline case of Executive Trainees who
successfully complete their initial Training period but continue
to be on probation pending verification of C&A/Caste
Certificate, it has been decided as under:
LPA 285/2021                                                        Page 14 of 29
• On successful completion of his/her initial training period,
Executive Trainee shall be designated as Sr. Engineer/Sr.
Officer. However, pending receipt of verification of Character
& Antecedents and Caste Certificate they shall continue to be
on probation.
• They will be eligible for all benefits as applicable to
executives under probation on initial appointment in the grade.
A draft Office Order designating Executive Trainee as Sr.
Engineer/Sr. Officer is placed at Annexure-I.
) on successful completion of initial Training period is
designated as SR ENGINEER/ SR OFFICER w.e.f. __ in GAIL
(India ) Limited in the scale of pay Rs. 24900-50500/-
He / She will continue to be on probation in the above pay
scale and his/ her confirmation in the grade will be subject to
receipt of satisfactory report on verification of C&A and or
Caste Certificate. He/ She will be eligible for other allowances
as per rules of the Company as may be applicable to other
regular employees of GAIL in the E-2 grade only after
completion of probation.
During this probation period, Shri / Ms.                       is
further subject to terms & conditions of his/ her appointment,
Service Bond Agreement executed by him/her on intitial
appointment, and service rules/ conditions, as are applicable to
regular employees from to time.
[No. CO/HR/PoL/P-27 dated 04.08.2014]
8.1   Except, as may be specifically provided in the
contract of service, the Management may at any
time discharge an employee from service by giving
LPA 285/2021                                                        Page 15 of 29
notice for the period mentioned herein or by
payment of wages in lieu of such notice. Similarly,
the employee will be required to give the same
notice in the event of his intention to leave the
service of the Company. Notwithstanding the
above provision, an employee who tenders
resignation will be relieved from his duty only on
his resignation being accepted.
8.1.1 There have been instances in the past where some
of the employees have tendered their resignations
while on leave and have forwarded the same
through e-mail to the concerned OIC/HOD/HR-
Incharge. In such cases, due to absence of
employee(s), settlement of dues gets delayed which
sometimes leads to disputes w.r.t. penal interest
recoveries on Loans/Advances etc. To avoid such
situations, the concerned employee(s) who has
tendered his/her resignation while on leave, should
be directed to joined at the concerned work
centre/office to facilitate the final settlement of
dues and be subsequently relieved from the
services of the Company with the Relieving Order
duly issued by concerned HR Department.
However, if due to some pressing circumstances,
the employee (s) is not able to join back after
leave, submission of a hard copy of the resignation
letter along with the address for further
communication and contact numbers, be insisted
upon from him/her. In no case, resignation
submitted through e-mail/scanned letter through e-
mail be entertained.
The above may strictly be adhered to in all
resignation cases in future.
(No.22/02/53fRESGN/2010, dated 8.7.2010}
LPA 285/2021                                                       Page 16 of 29
8.2   In the case of employees working in the pay scales
upto and including the level of S-7, their services
will be liable to termination with one month's
notice or pay in lieu thereof by either side. In
respect of employees in the level of E-O and the
above, their services will be liable to termination
by 3 month's notice (or the period as may have
been specified in the order of appointment) or pay
in lieu thereof by either side. An employee may be
permitted at the discretion of the Management to
adjust notice and/or shortfall of notice period
against Earned Leave standing to his/her credit on
the date of submission of resignation. However,
the Management may, at its discretion, not accept
the resignation of an employee if the Competent
Authority has decided to initiate disciplinary
proceedings against the employee or if such
proceedings are already pending.
8.2.1 ET will have to give one month's notice or one
month's Basic Pay and Dearness Allowance in lieu
thereof in the event of his/her resigning from
services of the Company during initial training-
cum-probation period, including compliance of the
(CO/HR/Pol/P-27, dated 13.8.2010)
8.2.2 Executive Trainees joining after 6th February 2013
shall not be required to execute 'Service Bond
Agreement' henceforth. However, candidates who
had joined as Executive Trainees prior to 6th
February 2013 and had already signed the 'Service
Bond Agreement' shall continue to be governed by
the terms and conditions of the same.
(.CO/HR/Pol/P-23, dated 6.2.2013)
LPA 285/2021                                                      Page 17 of 29
8.3    The services of an employee may also be
terminated by the Company on the following
grounds, among others:
2) Conviction by a court of law for criminal
offence amounting to moral turpitude;
3) Employee engaging himself in other
employment without the written permission of the
Management or if he is found to have been
working elsewhere during the period of leave or
while off duty.
4) On being declared unfit for further service on
medical grounds. Service of an employee may also
be terminated in case of absence by the employee
on grounds of sickness for a continuous period of
more than 14 months if suffering from
tuberculosis, leprosy, mental or malignant disease
or fracture of lower/upper extremity, and 12
months or more if suffering from any other
27.    The aforesaid statutory provisions governing the field makes it very
clear that there is a distinction between the regular, temporary, daily rated,
probationary, apprentice and employees on deputation, and they are defined
under the definition of Clause.
28.    It is true that the Rules are applicable to all employees of the
Company, however, employees and probationers are also defined under the
Rules under the definition Clause. Rule 8.2, which has been made to be the
basis of payment of three months’ salary in lieu of notice starts with the
words “in case of employees”. Rule 8.2 certainly provides that, in case, an
employee of level E-O and above wishes to resign, he has to give three
LPA 285/2021                                                        Page 18 of 29
months’ notice or three months’ salary in lieu of notice. Thus, Rule 8.2
makes it very clear that, in case, an employer wants to terminate an
employee of E-O Level, he has to give three months’ notice, and in case, an
employee wants to resign, he has to give three months’ notice or pay in lieu
of three months’ notice.
29.    The appointment order and terms and conditions of the appointment
makes it very clear that the Petitioner was appointed as a probationer and the
terms and conditions of the appointment order make it very clear that the
services of the Petitioner could have been terminated on any point of time
without assigning any reason.       Meaning thereby, for putting an end to
service of a probationer, the condition of notice/ notice period under the
rules is not in existence. Therefore, by no stretch of imagination, Rule 8.2
can be made applicable in case of a probationer in the matter of termination.
30.    The Appellant did submit a resignation on 15.01.2020, and requested
the employer to relieve him on or before 22.01.2020, and the Respondent
Employer did sent an E-mail on 21.03.2020 to the Appellant directing him
to serve three months’ notice or three months’ pay in lieu of such notice.
31.    The Appellant who was at the receiving end was left with no other
option, submitted a letter under protest on 03.02.2020, the same is
reproduced as under:
Sub-Representation for Early Relieving
LPA 285/2021                                                        Page 19 of 29
1.      The under-signed joined GAIL(India) Ltd. on 13.12.2019
on the post of Manager(Law). After serving for sometime,
I had submitted resignation on 15.01.2020 and requested
for relieving on or before 22.01.2020. I was informed
vide email dt.23.01.2020 that I am required to serve 3
months' notice or salary in lieu thereof. I further
requested for early relieving vide email dt. I
2.      I request that as per Clause 2(b) terms and
conditions{Annexure-II) of my offer letter states that 3
months' notice period is to be given after completion of
probation period. Therefore, it is requested that
requirement of serving 3 months' notice period during
probation period may kindly be re-considered. However,
in case it still remains that I am required to serve 3
months' notice period during probation, then I am
submitting the humble request for waiver of 2 months
period with a request for relieving on 17.02.2020.
3.      As I have already tendered resignation on 15.01.2020
and one month notice period will complete on
15.02.2020, I request for relieving on 17.02.2020 with a
humble request that:
i) Balance 2 months‟ notice period may kindly be waived;
ii) In case balance 2 months notice period is not waived,
then I am willing to pay 2 months‟ salary (Basic+DA)
in lieu of 2 months‟ notice and my Earned Leave may
be adjusted against 2 months‟ notice period and
balance amount after adjustment shall be paid by me as
per extant policy.
32.    The Appellant categorically mentioned in the aforesaid letter that
requirement of three months’ notice or three month pay in lieu of notice be
waived off as he is a probationer and also made a request that, in case, the
same is not being waived, he is depositing the amount.
33.    The aforesaid letter makes it very clear that the amount was deposited
under protest as the condition was not waived.
34.    The employer did relieve the Appellant, accepting his resignation and
the Appellant was informed accordingly as under:
Subject: Regarding resignation from the service of GAIL.
This is regarding the resignation tendered by you vide letter
dated 15.01,2020. Reference is also drawn to your trailing
email dated 27.01.2020 vide which you extended your relieving
date to 17.02.2020 and also requested for waiver of two months
of notice period out of total 03 months of applicable notice
period.
In this regard, your resignation w.e.f. 17.02.2020 has been
accepted by the Competent Authority subject to clearance of all
outstanding dues. Further, your request for waiving off the
notice period cannot be acceded to, in the backdrop of existing
policy guidelines and extant practice In this regard.
35.    The Appellant did submit a detailed appeal in the matter to the
Chairman & Managing Director, GAIL for refund of the amount paid by
him on 27.05.2020, however, the same was turned down by the General
Manager, means by an authority not competent to do so.
36.    The order passed by Learned Single Judge in Paragraph 40 to 46 is
reproduced as under:
“40. In so far as the judgments with regard to unequal
bargaining power are relied upon by the Petitioner, suffice
would it be to note that the Petitioner had the opportunity to
challenge the Rules that were sought to be invoked and applied
against him by the Respondents at the relevant time. There was
no compulsion on the Petitioner to make a representation
expressing his willingness to tender one month‟s notice and pay
in lieu of two months‟ notice, which action he took voluntarily
and without any force or coercion. It can be safely presumed
that the Petitioner knew his rights as also the fact that he could
approach a Court of law at that stage, a part on which he has
chosen to tread, by filing the present petition, though of no
avail at this belated stage.
41. The judgement in the case of Central Inland Water
Transport Corporation Limited & Ors. (supra) would not help
the Petitioner and is distinguishable for two clear reasons.
Firstly, Rule 9(1), which was the Rule in question, gave power
to the Management to terminate a permanent employee by
giving a three months‟ notice or pay in lieu thereof and
secondly, the Rule had been specifically challenged before the
Court. The Rule was finally struck down by the Court as being
void under Section 23 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, as
being opposed to Public Policy and ultra vires Article 14 of the
Constitution for the reason and to the extent it conferred right
LPA 285/2021                                                          Page 22 of 29
upon the Corporation to terminate a „permanent employee‟ by
giving three months‟ notice.
42. Reliance on the judgment in M/s. Ambience Developers &
Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. (supra) by the counsel for the
Petitioner is completely misplaced. The writ petition in the said
case laid a challenge to a communication whereby the
Petitioner was called upon to remit prepayment charges and
service tax in respect of term loan. The question that the Court
addressed was whether the Respondents had altered the terms
of sanction by waiving the right to recover pre-payment
charges and the same was answered by the Court by holding
that the Bank had not waived its right to receive the pre-
payment charges. There is no semblance either in facts or law
in the two cases.
43. In the case of Medha Moitra (supra), Petitioner had
approached the Court against a demand of the Respondents
asking her to deposit Rs.9,60,891/- in order to accept her
resignation. Petitioner therein was appointed in the Railways in
the Sports quota and at the time of appointment had furnished a
Bond to serve for a period of five years. Since the Petitioner
tendered resignation prior to the completion of the period of
five years, she was asked to pay, what according to the
Respondents therein, was the amount incurred on expenditure
on her salary, training and coaching, etc. The Court held the
Petitioner entitled to refund of the amount on the ground that
the clause to furnish such a Service Bond was akin to a contract
between two unequals. In the present case, the requirement of
three months‟ notice or pay in lieu thereof does not arise out of
any specific contract or a Bond between the parties. The
requirement of serving the notice along with the request for
resignation has its genesis in the GAIL Rules, which governed
the parties and were part of the service condition of the
LPA 285/2021                                                         Page 23 of 29
Petitioner. The said Rules are uniformly applicable to all
employees and at the cost of repetition are not challenged by
the Petitioner. Hence unlike in the case cited by the Petitioner,
in the absence of challenge to the Rule position, this Court
cannot enter into the question of validity or constitutionality of
the Rules.
44. In Nitin Gupta (supra), the question for consideration
before this Court was whether the Petitioner was entitled to
refund of the salary deposited on account of a condition in his
appointment letter which stipulated that if he resigned during
the probation period, he would be liable to refund all the
monies paid to him towards pay and allowances, etc. during the
period of probation. The said case in my opinion is clearly not
applicable to the case of the Petitioner in as much as in the said
case the Petitioner had challenged the said condition and its
legality was under consideration before the Court. Thus, in my
view, none of the judgments relied upon by the counsel for the
Petitioner are of any avail to further the case of the Petitioner.
45. I am fortified by my view taken in the present case, by a
judgment of the Division Bench of this Court in Bhavya Kiran
Arya v. Union of India, 2017 SCC Online Del 12619, wherein
the Petitioner tendered her resignation and also deposited
money in lieu of one month‟s notice. After the resignation was
accepted and the Petitioner was relieved, she approached the
Central Administrative Tribunal seeking refund of the money
paid at the time of tendering the resignation. On being
unsuccessful before the Tribunal, the Petitioner approached the
Division Bench of this Court. The writ petition was dismissed
by the Division Bench with the following observations :
“8. Having heard learned counsel for the
petitioner, we are not persuaded by his argument to the
effect that the petitioner had tendered a simple letter of
LPA 285/2021                                                           Page 24 of 29
resignation without referring to Rule 5(1) of the
CCS(Temporary Services) Rules, 1965 and therefore, the
respondents could not have called upon her to deposit
one month's salary alongwith her letter of resignation.
The terms and conditions of the declaration submitted by
the petitioner at the time of her appointment, leave no
manner of doubt that at that point in time, she had
accepted that she will not resign or quit her employment
except with the prior written consent of the Head of the
Department and in the event of any default, she will
forfeit one month's pay.
9. The facts as noticed above, reveal that the petitioner
was appointed on 01.03.2014 and in less than two
months reckoned therefrom, she had tendered her letter
of resignation. On the date on which she tendered her
resignation, being conscious of the stipulations contained
in the declaration, the petitioner had on her own
deposited one month's notice pay with the respondent No.
2, without raising any objection at that point in time. It
was only after the Department completed all the requisite
formalities and accepted her resignation that the
petitioner first served a legal notice dated 23.05.2014 on
the respondents, demanding refund of one month's salary
deposited by her and then approached the Tribunal, by
filing the Original Application in the month of July, 2014.
10. We are of the opinion that the Tribunal was justified
in rejecting the case of the petitioner by relying on the
declaration submitted by her at the time of her
appointment. The petitioner cannot be permitted to
wriggle out of the said declaration/undertaking after her
resignation was accepted by the respondents on a
specious plea that such a declaration was not required to
LPA 285/2021                                                         Page 25 of 29
be submitted by a Postal Assistant. If that was the case,
then the petitioner should have protested at the time of
her appointment and refused to furnish the declaration.
Having waived any such objection at the relevant time,
the petitioner cannot be permitted to take such a plea
after her resignation letter was accepted by the
competent authority, in accordance with the conditions
stipulated in the undertaking given by her, as referred to
above.”
46. For the aforesaid reasons, there is no merit in the writ
petition and the same is accordingly dismissed with no order as
to costs.”
37.    The Order passed by the learned Single Judge reveals that the learned
Single Judge has not considered the distinction between a “probationer” and
an “employee” serving GAIL India Ltd. The general terms and conditions
of service rules define an “employee” as well as a “probationer”. They are
two distinct categories.     Rule 8.2 of the Rules in respect of E-O level
employees provides for termination of services by 3 month’s notice or pay
in lieu thereof by either side. Meaning thereby, only in case of employees,
the mandatory requirement of serving 3 months notice or pay in lieu thereof
is in existence.     Such a condition is not in existence in respect of
probationer. The services of a probationer as per the terms and conditions of
the appointment order can be terminated at any point of time without any
notice.    Therefore, in the considered opinion of this Court, once the
employer is having a right to terminate the probationer without issuing any
notice or without granting any salary in lieu of notice, the same has to be
made applicable in case the probationer wants to leave the job and,
therefore, to that extent, the learned Single Judge has erred in law and on
LPA 285/2021                                                        Page 26 of 29
facts in treating the probationer and regular employee at par in the matter of
resignation.
38.     In an almost similar circumstance, in the case of Nitin Gupta v. Post
Graduate       Institute    of     Medical       Education     and     Research,
MANU/PH/2775/2006, the Petitioner therein was appointed as an Assistant
Professor on ad hoc basis in the Department of Psychiatry at Post Graduate
Institute of Medical Research, Chandigarh and thereafter he was appointed
as an Assistant Professor in Psychiatry on regular basis vide appointment
order dated 1412.2002 and as per condition No.3 of the said appointment
letter, it was provided that in case the petitioner resigns during probation, he
shall be liable to refund to the Institute all the monies paid to him on account
of pay and allowances, etc and for submitting the resignation during
probation or after one year of probation, he shall be required to give one
month’s notice or deposit with the Institute, pay and allowances in lieu of
the notice period by which it falls short of one month.            Later on, the
Petitioner therein, was selected as Consultant in General Psychiatry at South
Stafford Shire Health Care, NHS Trust and he submitted a resignation on
14.11.2003. The petitioner therein since had not completed two years of
service from the date of his appointed on regular basis, he was permitted to
resign on refund of the entire amount received by him on account of pay and
allowances for the period from 14.12.2002 i.e. the date of his appointment
till the date of resignation and he paid the amount under protest on
19.112003 and thereafter, his resignation was accepted on 01.12.2003. The
petitioner in those circumstances preferred a writ petition. The Division
Bench of Punjab and Haryana High Court has directed refund of the amount.
LPA 285/2021                                                           Page 27 of 29
39.    In the case of Medha Moetra v. Union of India & Ors.,
MANU/WB/2399/2019, W.P.C.T 32 of 2019, a similar view has been taken
by the Calcutta High Court.
40.    Learned counsel for the respondents has placed reliance upon the
judgment delivered in the case of B.L. Sreedhar (supra) on the issue of
estoppel and his contention is that once the Petitioner has deposited the
amount in question, the question of refund does not arise in the facts and
circumstances of the case.
41.    In the considered opinion of this Court, the Petitioner was selected for
some other post and he was required to join the other establishment, he was
left with no other choice but to tender his resignation with the request to
relieve him on 17.02.2020 and he did make a request to waive the notice
period/ payment of salary in lieu of notice period and categorically
mentioned that if his request is not accepted by the Department, he should
be relieved on 17.02.2020 and in those circumstances he is willing to pay 2
month’s salary in lieu of 2 month’s notice period. The Petitioner was forced
to submit such a letter on 03.02.2020 as he was not relieved by the
Department and therefore, the principle of estoppel raised by the
respondents will not help them in any manner.
42.    The present case is an open and shut case of a probationer whose
services could have been terminated at any point of time and the probationer
was well within the right to resign at any point of time as he was not an
employee and he was not covered under Clause 8.1 of the Regulations
governing the field. This Court is of the considered opinion that the order
passed by the learned Single Judge deserves to be set aside and is
accordingly set aside. The Petitioner is entitled for refund of the amount
LPA 285/2021                                                         Page 28 of 29
deposited by him in lieu of notice period and the same be done positively
within a period of 3 months from the receipt of a copy of this Order.
43.    With the aforesaid directions, the LPA stands allowed. No orders as
to costs.