This petition has been filed to quash the F.I.R. in crime No.7
of 2018 registered by the first respondent police for offences under
Sections 468, 471 and 420 of IPC, as against the petitioner.
2. The second respondent lodged complaint alleging that one,
approached the petitioner, a former Unit Secretary of St.John Ambulance
Association (India), Chennai South Centre for getting first-aid certificate
for 39 employees of his concern. For that, the petitioner had collected an
amount of Rs.12,250/- by concealing the facts and misusing the name of
St.Johns Ambulance with a view to secure illegal gain. In order to issue
first aid certificates, the petitioner had illegally created an email ID
without having any authorisation. It was started in the year 1912 having
its headquarters in New Delhi. Its main object is to make each and every
private individual to know about first aid at free of cost. About 110
training centres are functioning as basic units in various districts of
Tamilnadu. It gives minimum period of eight days training by qualified
lecturers based on syllabus which is prescribed by St.John Ambulance
2.1 After training, they have to conduct examination by qualified
Registered Medical Practitioner. Those documents should be sent to the
State Headquarters at Chennai. After verification, it will issue provisional
certificate valid for three months. All the documents will be forwarded to
the Indian Headquarters at New Delhi. Thereafter, provisional certificate
will be issued by the State Headquarters valid for three months after
collecting a sum of Rs.350/- from each applicant and Rs.150/- from the
fee has to be paid to the Headquarters as processing fees for issuance of
certificate. The petitioner was designated as a Secretary of one of the
basic unit of St.John Ambulance institution and he was working till the
year 2012. He was removed from the association due to some
malpractices and even after removal, he continued to use the defacto
complainant's name by illegally creating email ID and also by using bank
account in the name of the association. He approached various
companies, schools, colleges, etc. by using the name of M/s.St.John
Ambulance Association to impart first aid training. The trainer licence
issued to the petitioner also lapsed in the month of February 2018 and
even after expiry of trainer licence, he conducted first-aid training through
his associates.
2.2 Indian Red Cross Society is part of the International Red
Cross and Red Crescent Movement. It uses the Red Cross as an emblem
in common with other international Red Cross Society. It is a voluntary
humanitarian organisation to protect human life and health in India.
St.John Ambulance Association is associated with Indian Red Cross
Society. The said association is conducting first-aid and other
programmes as provided in their regulations. Its primary object is to train
members of civil society in first-aid and allied subjects. The petitioner has
been running a voluntary centre associated with St.John Ambulance
Association in the name and style of 'Madras City South Centre'. He is
holding a Warrant of Constitution in certificate No.662 dated 18.12.1978.
The St.John Ambulance, Wales, United Kingdom has awarded the
petitioner a certificate for successfully passing out the course conducted
by them. He is an authorised lecturer for conducting First-Aid and Home
Nursing Courses with approval of St.John Ambulance. He has been
awarded with the certificate No.2627 and the certificate for conducting
Home Nursing Course in certificate No.510 by the St.John Ambulance
Association. Therefore, the petitioner is very well eligible for organizing
and conducting the said courses.
2.3 There was internal politics between others and one,
D.Vadivel Mugundhan got nominated as Vice President of Indian Red
Cross Society and he continued to cause hindrance to the petitioner. Due
to mismanagement by him, a suit has been filed before this Court in
CS.No.539 of 2017 for injunction against him. The second respondent
has already lodged complaint on 15.12.2015 before the Inspector of
Police, Mambalam Police Station, Chennai and the same was registered
in crime No.3999 of 2015 for the offences under Sections 294(b), 506(i)
IPC r/w 109 of IPC as against the petitioners and others. After completion
of investigation, charge sheet has been laid and the same has been taken
cognizance in CC.No.6099 of 2016 on the file of the XVII Metropolitan
Magistrate, Saidapet, Chennai. Aggrieved by the same, the petitioner filed
petition to quash before this Court in Crl.OP.No.6763 of 2017. Other
accused persons also filed quash petition         before this Court in
Crl.OP.Nos.8715 & 8716 of 2017 before this Court. By common order
dated 13.03.2018, this Court allowed the petitions and quashed the entire
proceedings. In fact, the petitioner has filed complaint before Human
Rights Commission on 02.06.2018 against police personnels. The
petitioner also sent legal notice claiming damages to the tune of
Rs.1,00,00,000/-. Again the second respondent preferred another
complaint with the same set of allegations which was registered in the
present FIR in crime No.7 of 2018.
3. The first respondent filed counter and revealed that the
petitioner had not renewed the lectureship licence with the St.John
Ambulance whereas he intentionally renewed the licence with Indian Red
Cross Society and there was no communication. It is also revealed that
the second respondent already lodged complaint and the same has been
registered in crime No.6 of 2018 for the very same set of allegations.
When it being so, again FIR has been registered on the second complaint
lodged by the second respondent in crime No.7 of 2018. On the third
complaint lodged for the very same set of allegations against the
petitioner and two others, the same has been registered in crime No.2 of
2019. That apart, in the absence of suspension or withdrawal,
cancellation or surrender of such a Warrant of Constitution, Chennai City
South Centre, an autonomous body, independent of the association with
its own arrangements for financial and administrative matters, has a
perpetual legal leg to stand to its identity and administration and
continues to performs its duties.
4. Whereas according to the petitioner, he was not terminated
or removed. In fact, he has been elected as the Honorary Secretary for a
term of three years repeatedly during 1987 to 2023. Therefore, the
offences are same and for the very same occurrence, three FIR's have
been registered as against the same accused persons.
5. An information given under Sub Section (1) of Section 154
of Cr.P.C. is the first information report. It is the earliest information of a
cognizable offence recorded by an officer in charge of a Station House. It
sets the criminal law in motion and marks the commencement of
investigation which ends up with the formation of opinion under Section
169 or 170 of Cr.P.C., as the case may be, and forwarding of a police
report under Section 173 of Cr.P.C. before the concerned jurisdiction
Magistrate. It is quite possible and it happens not frequently that more
informations that one are given to a police officer in charge of a police
station in respect of the same incident involving one or more than one
cognizable offences. In such a case, the investigation officer need not
enter everyone of them in the FIR. Therefore, successive FIR's not being a
counter case, filed in connection with the same or connected cognizable
offence cannot be sustained and not permissible under law.
6. Once FIR has got registered and a person is found to be
prima facie guilty of committing an offence or otherwise, re-examination
by the investigation agency on its own should not be permitted merely by
registering another FIR with regard to the same occurrence. If such
protection is not given to a suspect, then possibility of abuse of
investigating powers by the police cannot be ruled out. It would result
into a multiplicity of proceedings and unnecessary harassment to the
accused and registration of multiple FIR's on the same occurrence would
be hit by the doctrine of sameness and it would have to be obliterated, as
it would amount to violation of fundamental rights of a citizen. Therefore,
the impugned FIR cannot be sustained as against the petitioner and it is
nothing but clear abuse of process of law.
7.    Accordingly, the entire proceedings in crime No.7 of 2018
registered by the first respondent police for offences under Sections 468,
471 and 420 of IPC is quashed as against the petitioner and this criminal
original petition is allowed.        Consequently, connected miscellaneous
petition is closed.