1.    The sole Appellant has been convicted and sentenced to life
imprisonment for committing murder of his wife.
2.    The occurrence took place in the house of the Appellant at village
Ruguditika (Sodhapali) under Atabira Police Station in the district of
Bargarh. The deceased was the second wife of the Appellant and they
married after death of the 1st wife. As per prosecution case, the
occurrence took place on 29th March, 2012 afternoon around 3 pm. The
Appellant in drunken state assaulted the deceased by means of a stick on
her head and left the house after she died, and again returned back during
JCRLA No.64 of 2016                                        Page 1 of 7
evening hour, took the dead body by dragging near the thrashing floor
(Khala) situating at the backside of his house, set fire to it and then
dumped the half burnt charred dead body in the cow-dung pit nearby to
it. P.W.5, the son of the Appellant and deceased, a boy aged about 11
years reading in Class-VI is the eye-witness to the assault as well as the
subsequent events. P.W.6, another son and P.W.11, the daughter are also
projected as eye-witnesses to the occurrence, who are disbelieved as such
by the trial court with regard to the assault part.
3.     The F.I.R. (Ext.1) was lodged by P.W.1, the Gramarakhi on 31st
March, 2012. The inquest was held on 1st April, 2012 in presence of the
Executive Magistrate (P.W.17) and the post mortem examination was
conducted by P.W.18 on the same day, i.e. 1st April, 2012.
4.     The story was initially revealed by P.W.5 to other villagers. Later
it came to the knowledge of P.W.1, who informed the police and lodged
the F.I.R. in Atabira P.S. Case No.59 dated 31st March, 2012.
5.     The charge was under Section 302/201 of the Indian Penal Code.
6.     Prosecution examined 18 witnesses in total and marked 13
documents to prove the charge against the Appellant. No evidence was
adduced on behalf of defense and the Appellant took the plea of false
implication with complete denial of prosecution case.
7.     In addition to the evidence of direct eye-witnesses, prosecution
also proposed to prove the theory of extrajudicial confession and the
disclosure information with regard to recovery of weapon of offence
against the Appellant to prove the charge before the trial court. However,
the theory of extrajudicial confession sought to be proved against the
JCRLA No.64 of 2016                                        Page 2 of 7
appellant was completely discarded by the trial court stating the same as
involuntary and coercive due to presence of police personnel as well as
the circumstances. Further, the evidence sought to be proved by
prosecution under Section 27 of the Indian Evidence Act regarding
discovery of the weapon of offence at the instance of the Appellant was
not sufficiently proved as per the opinion of the learned trial court.
8.     Since it is a case of murder, the foremost requirement is to see the
nature of death of the deceased, if the same is homicidal or otherwise. In
this regard, looking to the evidence of the doctor (P.W.18) and the post
mortem examination report proved under Exhibit-13, it is seen that the
following features were noticed at the time of conducting post mortem
i) Whole body was burnt, looking dark black, singeing of
scalp hairs, charred skin, face and eye burnt and shrunken,
there was pugilistic attitude, there was burst of right side
abdomen, smell of putrefaction was coming, no rigor
mortis.
i) Depressed commutated fracture of temporo parietal bone
of right side of skull of size 3” X 2”, one inch above the
right ear, below the fracture side multiple laceration with
hematoma formation of temporo parietal lobe of brain;
JCRLA No.64 of 2016                                         Page 3 of 7
ii) Depressed fracture of occipital bone of left side of size 2
½” X 2”, one inch left to occiput, below the fracture side,
there was multiple lacerations with haematoma formation of
occipital lobe of brain;
iii) Heart was soft, flabby and both sides of the heart
chamber were empty. Mucosa soften and dark brown in
colour. There was no food material inside the stomach;
iv) There were putrefaction changes of all other internal
organs.
v) The above mentioned burnt injuries were post mortem in
nature and other external injuries were ante-mortem in
nature. No ligature mark was found on the body of the
deceased.
In the opinion of P.W.18, the cause of death was probably due to
injuries to the brain caused by depressed fracture of temporo parietal
bone at the right side of the skull and the occipital bone on the left side
due to blunt trauma. The time since death was within 3 to 5 days prior to
the post mortem examination. As per P.W.18, the possibility of
homicidal death of the deceased cannot be ruled out.
9.     It is submitted on behalf of the Appellant that in absence of
specific opinion with regard to exact time of death and nature of injuries,
homicidal nature of death of the deceased is not proved.
10.    It is to be remembered here that homicidal nature of death need
not always be proved through direct evidence. It has to be inferred from
JCRLA No.64 of 2016                                         Page 4 of 7
the circumstances and the nature of injuries noticed on the dead body.
The instant case is about the death of a wife committed by the husband
within four walls of the house. In absence of any other adult member in
the house except the deceased and Appellant, the commission of murder
revealed late to the villagers. As such, three days passed before
conducting the inquest and the dead body of the deceased which was
recovered from the cow-dung pit had started putrefaction by the time of
holding inquest. In addition to the same, the dead body was burnt
partially. The external features of the dead body as seen during inquest
and post mortem examination speaks of the same. Further, those two
fractures noticed on the skull over temporo parietal bone and occipital
bone support the prosecution case about assault on the head of the
deceased by means of any blunt object. When the assailant is the
husband and he tried best to screen the evidence by attempting to burn
the dead body after committing the offence, it is difficult indeed to get
direct evidence on the nature of injuries. It should not be forgotten here
that, the inquest and post mortem examination were conducted after clear
gap of three days of the occurrence and keeping the same in mind, the
features noticed on the dead body of the deceased, external as well as
internal, are found supportive with the conclusion of homicidal death of
the deceased. It is thus concluded that the deceased died homicidal nature
of death.
11.     Next coming to see the evidence of eye-witnesses, viz., P.Ws.5, 6
and 11, who are none other than the own children of Appellant, they are
all child witnesses. As stated earlier, P.W.5 is a boy aged 12 years
reading in Class-VI, P.W.6 is 11 years old reading in Class-V and
P.W.11 is the girl child aged about 6 years. A close scrutiny of evidence
of these three witnesses reveals that, the evidence of P.Ws.6 and 11 with
JCRLA No.64 of 2016                                        Page 5 of 7
regard to assault part could not be believed since they have admitted to
have heard the same from P.W.5. So far as the evidence of P.W.5 is
concerned, the same is found clear, cogent and trustworthy. He has stated
that his father (the present Appellant) under the influence of liquor
assaulted his mother inside the house by means of a lathi on the backside
of her head causing bleeding injuries. After the assault the Appellant
went to field telling him (P.W.5) that his mother has drunk and slept and
he should not disturb her. The Appellant returned to the house in the
evening, dragged the dead body of his mother to the heap of straw at the
backside of their house, placed it on the heap and torched. Then he
buried the half burnt dead body in the pit of cow-dung. This witness
though being a child witness stood confirmed to his version during his
cross-examination by the defence. The other two children, P.Ws.6 and 11
have though admitted that they have heard about the assault from their
brother (P.W.5) but have categorically stated in their evidence to have
seen their father (the Appellant) dragging the dead body of their mother
(deceased) to the backyard of their house. They corroborate the evidence
of P.W.5 with regard to disposal of the dead body, i.e. second part of the
12.    Admittedly, no allegation of tutoring of those child witnesses is
there. Law is well settled that while appreciating the evidence of a child
witness, the court must be cautious enough to examine any possibility of
tutoring of the child. Section 118 of the Evidence Act speaks that, every
person is a competent witness unless the court considers them
incompetent due to lack of understanding to give rational answers either
by tender years or for any other reason. Whether a child is competent
enough to understand the questions and answer them rationally, depends
on the facts of each case.
13.        Here in the instant case, the evidence of those child witnesses,
more particularly P.W.5, are found corroborated by medical evidence.
The internal fracture of the skull noticed in course of post mortem
examination clearly supports the statement of P.W.5 about the assault by
means of a stick on the backside head of the deceased. The evidence of
other witnesses including the informant (P.W.1) of getting knowledge
from P.W.1 about commission of offence by the appellant, further
strengthens prosecution case in establishing the charge against the
Appellant. The actions and conduct of the Appellant in causing the
assault, dragging her dead body to the backside of the house, burning the
same and dumping it in the cow-dung pit at the end, all speak of his
intention to commit murder of the deceased which are found established
through the evidence of P.Ws.5, 6, 11 and other witnesses.
14.        In view of such direct and cogent evidence with regard to assault
and subsequent conduct to screen the evidence of murder, the charges
under Section 302/201 of the I.P.C. are clearly established against the
Appellant beyond all reasonable doubts.
15.        In the result the conviction and sentence is confirmed and the
appeal is dismissed.