2.      Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment and order dated
09.12.2019 passed by the High Court of Judicature at Patna in Civil Writ Jurisdiction
Case No. 8384/2018, by which, the Division Bench of the High Court has disposed of
the said writ petition by way of public interest litigation, the original writ petitioner has
preferred the present appeal.
3.      That the appellant herein filed the writ petition by way of public interest litigation
before the High Court for the following reliefs: -
“(i) For issuance of necessary direction upon the respondent authorities to not to allow any
person other than a registered Pharmacist to compound, prepare, mix or dispense any
medicine on the prescription of any medical practitioner because in various Govt. Hospitals,
the persons, who are not a registered Pharmacist have been allowed to discharge the
function of a Pharmacist inasmuch as at some places, even the Clerks, ANMs, Staff Nurse
etc. have been assigned with the duty to be performed only by a registered Pharmacist.
(ii)   For holding that by allowing a nonpharmacist to discharge the duty and responsibility
of Pharmacist, the respondent authorities are not only violating the provisions of the
Pharmacy Act, 1948 as well as Pharmacy Practices Regulation, 2015 but they are also
playing with the health of the concerned patients.
(iii)  For issuance of necessary direction upon the respondent authorities to implement the
Pharmacy Practice Regulation, 2015 framed by the Pharmacy Council of India in exercise of
powers conferred under Section-10 & 18 of the Pharmacy Act, 1948, inasmuch as the said
Regulation provides for creation of various types of posts with diverse types of responsibilities
for regulating the profession of Pharmacy so that the quality of health care may improve, the
Pharmacist may maintain high standard in their duty, the cost of health care may reduce and
the criminal abuse of medicines may be stopped.
(iv)   For holding that the Govt. of Bihar has not created an post except for the post of
Pharmacist under the Pharmacy Practice Regulation, 2015 and as such, the respondents
may be directed to create such posts and appoint eligible persons on such posts so that the
objectives of the Pharmacy Practice Regulation, 2015 may be achieved.
(v)    For necessary direction upon the respondent authorities to constitute an Enquiry
Committee in terms of Section-45(5) of the Pharmacy Act, 1948 to enquire into the functioning
of the Bihar State Pharmacy Council because the Bihar State Pharmacy Council is not
functioning in accordance with the provisions of the Pharmacy Act, 1948 and Pharmacy
Practice Regulation, 2015 inasmuch as the Bihar State Pharmacy Council is involved in grant
of fake and illegal registration to the fake Pharmacists.
(vi)   For any other direction, which your Lordships may deem fit and proper in the facts and
circumstances of the case.”
Without going into details of the grievances voiced before the High Court, the
High Court has disposed of the writ petition in a most casual manner by taking note of
the fact that the Bihar State Pharmacy Council has submitted that the fact-finding
committee was constituted and they forwarded its report to the State Government.
The High Court has disposed of the said public interest litigation – writ petition by
observing that the appellant, after verifying each case individually may invite the
attention to such illegality either to the Bihar State Pharmacy Council or the State of
4.     Serious allegations were made against the Bihar State Pharmacy Council and
the State of Bihar for not taking any action with respect to fake pharmacist and/or
running the Government’s hospitals and/or other hospitals without registered
pharmacist and the in-action on the part of the Bihar State Pharmacy Council/State
Government has resulted into the affected health of the citizen, the High Court ought
to have called upon the Bihar State Pharmacy Council to file the status report on the
allegations of fake pharmacist and/or on how many Governments’ hospitals/hospitals
in the State are running without registered pharmacist. Running the
hospitals/dispensaries in absence of any registered pharmacist and/or running such
hospitals by fake pharmacist and even running the medical stores by fake pharmacist
and without even any pharmacist will ultimately affect the health of the citizen. The
State Government and the Bihar State Pharmacy Council cannot be permitted to play
with the health and life of the citizen.
4.1 Under the provisions of the Pharmacy Act, 1948 as well as the Pharmacy Practice
Regulations, 2015, it is the duty cast upon the Pharmacy Council and the State
Government to see that the hospitals/medical stores, etc., are not run by the fake
pharmacist and are run by the registered pharmacist only. The manner in which the
High Court has disposed of the public interest litigation – writ petition ventilating the
very serious grievances touching the health and life of the citizen is disapproved. The
High Court has failed to exercise the powers vested in it under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India. The impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court
disposing of the writ petition is unsustainable.
5.     In view of the above and for the reasons stated above the present appeal is
allowed. The impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court disposing of
the writ petition is hereby quashed and set aside. The matter is remanded to the High
Court to consider the writ petition afresh after calling the detailed report/counter from
the State of Bihar and Bihar State Pharmacy Council on: -
(i)    how many Governments’ hospitals/hospitals/medical stores/private hospitals
are being run either by fake pharmacist or without registered pharmacist;
(ii)   whether any action is taken by the State Government on the fact-finding
committee report submitted by the Bihar State Pharmacy Council which was reported
to be forwarded to the State Government;
(iii)  whether there are any fake pharmacists as alleged in the writ petition;
(iv)   any action is taken by the State Government or by the Bihar State Pharmacy
Council against such fake pharmacist;
(v)    whether the Pharmacy Practice Regulations, 2015 are being followed in the
entire State of Bihar or not.
While considering the writ petition the High Court should bear in mind the public
interest and the health of the citizen. The High Court to take up the writ petition for
hearing on remand within a period of four weeks from today. The Registry is directed
to send the copy of this order to the High Court forthwith. With this, the present appeal
is allowed accordingly. In the facts and circumstances of the case there shall be no
order as to costs.