Affidavit has been filed by the intervenor Ms. Julie
Roy, who is in the care of the minor child Ally Das, a 4½
year old girl. It appears that the minor Ally Das was born
in the house of her mother on 6th August, 2017. Her
mother     committed    suicide   on   7th   March,  2018.
Appellant/father was arrested in connection with the
criminal case registered over the suicide. Subsequently,
he took out an application seeking custody of the minor,
who, at that material time, was in the custody of her
maternal grandmother, Kajal Saha. By the impugned
judgment, the court below, upon considering the facts
and circumstances of the case, directed the minor to
remain in the custody of said Kajal Saha till she attained
15 years of age and was in a position to make a
conscious decision with regard to her own custody.
During the pendency of the appeal, the said Kajal
Saha also committed suicide. Under such circumstances,
we were informed by Mr. Chakroborty, learned counsel,
who was representing the deceased Kajal Saha that the
child was put in the care of the intervenor Julie Roy, a
neighbour and a distant relation of the mother of the
As the paramount duty of the Court is to ensure
safety and well being of the minor, we directed Julie Roy
to file an affidavit disclosing the circumstances in which
the minor was put in her care and the steps taken by her
with regard to the minor’s well being. Pursuant thereto,
the present affidavit has been filed. It is averred in the
affidavit due to in the absence of any responsible member
in the immediate family of the deceased Kajal Saha, Julie
Roy, a family friend and distant relation, has taken over
care and custody of the child. It has been further averred
that the deponent Julie Roy has deep connection with the
child since her birth and the child is comfortable in her
care and custody. We are also informed the said Julie
Roy has filed application for guardianship of the minor
being Misc. Case No. 145 of 2021 before the learned
On the other hand, Mr. Basu, learned senior counsel
appearing for the appellant/father, submits pending the
said application, the custody of the child be handed over
to him as he is the biological father. Julie Roy, the
deponent, is no way related to the child and the
appellant/father is best suited to take care of the child
under the present circumstances. He has also referred to
a decision of the Apex Court in “Tejaswini Gaud and ors.
Vs. Shekhar Jagdish Prasad Tewari and others” [SLP
(Crl.) No. 1675 of 2019] dated 6th May, 2019.
No doubt, the appellant is the father of the minor Ally
Das. However, since the child, who is presently 4½ years
of age, was brought up at the residence of her
matrimonial grandmother and after her death in the
custody of Julie Roy, a close family friend and neighbour
of the grandmother. It is contended on her behalf that
she had day to day association with the growth and
development of the child. Hence, it may be inferred that
the child is accustomed to her company. A co-ordinate
bench     had  earlier  directed  visitation  right  to  the
appellant between 11.00 a.m. to 2.00 p.m. on every
alternate Saturday at the chamber of the learned
advocate-on-record      of  the  deceased     grandmother.
However, due to certain disputes, such visitation order
was withdrawn. Situation has substantially changed as
the grandmother who was in the custody of the child, no
longer alive.
It is strongly contended that the child is well adjusted
with the intervenor Julie Roy and immediate transfer of
her custody to the father would be traumatic for the
child. However, it must also be borne in mind that a
bond between the child and her natural father ought to
be encouraged from tender age. Such bonding is not an
assertion of right of the father but a step towards
wholesome development of a minor vis-a-vis her natural
In order to enable such a situation and ensure a
balance development of the minor, we direct that the
minor be handed over to the appellant at 9.00 a.m. on
two consecutive Saturdays, i.e. 20th November, 2021 and
27th November, 2021 respectively from the residence of
Julie Roy and the appellant shall hand back the minor to
the said Julie Roy at her residence at 9.00 p.m. on those
dates. The handing over and taking back of the child as
aforesaid, shall be in the presence of the learned
advocates-on-record of the appellant as well as the
intervenor Julie Roy. It is expected that the parties shall
act in terms of this order and the best interest of the
The Court further proposes to interview the child on
the next date of hearing. Let the child be produced before
the Court on 29th November, 2021 at 2.00 p.m.
The   appellant  is   at  liberty  to file affidavit-in-
opposition to the affidavit filed by the intervenor Julie
Roy in the meantime.