2.                This appeal challenges the judgment and order dated 29.11.2019
passed by the High Court of Karnataka at Bengaluru in Criminal
Appeal No.2066 of 2016.
3.                The  aforesaid   appeal  had   challenged  the  conviction  and
sentence imposed upon the appellant by the Court of 55 th Additional
City Civil & Sessions Judge (CCH-56), Bangalore City, in Sessions
Case No.1031 of 2008.                 The order of sentence passed by the Trial
“1) The accused No.1 is sentenced to undergo
imprisonment for life and shall pay the fine of
Rs.50,000/- (Rupees fifty thousand only) for the
of IPC and in default of payment of fine amount he
years.
2)   The accused No.1 is sentenced to undergo
simple imprisonment for 10 (ten) years and shall
pay the fine of Rs.25,000/- (Rupees twenty-five
thousand only) for the commission of offence
punishable under section 121-A of IPC and in
default of payment of fine amount he shall further
undergo simple imprisonment for 1 (one) year.
3)   The accused No.1 is sentenced to undergo
simple imprisonment for 10 (ten) years and shall
pay the fine of Rs.25,000/- (Rupees twenty-five
thousand only) for the commission of offence
punishable under Section 122 of IPC and in default
of payment of fine amount he shall further undergo
simple imprisonment for 1 (one) year.
4)   The accused No.1 is sentenced to undergo
rigorous imprisonment for 10 (ten) years and shall
pay the fine of Rs.25,000/- (Rupees twenty-five
thousand only) for the commission of offence
punishable   under   Section   5(b)   of  Explosive
Substances Act, 1908 and in default of payment of
fine amount he shall further undergo simple
imprisonment for 1 (one) year.
5)   The accused No.1 is sentenced to undergo
simple imprisonment for 10 (ten) years and shall
pay the fine of Rs.25,000/- (Rupees twenty-five
thousand only) for the commission of offence
punishable under Section 25(1A) of Arms Act, 1959
and in default of payment of fine amount he shall
further undergo simple imprisonment for 1 (one)
6)   The accused No.1 is sentenced to undergo
simple imprisonment for 10 (ten) years and shall
pay the fine of Rs.25,000/- (Rupees twenty-five
thousand only) for the commission of offence
punishable under Section 26(2) of Arms Act, 1959
and in default of payment of fine amount he shall
further undergo simple imprisonment for 1 (one)
7)   The accused No.1 is sentenced to undergo
imprisonment for life and shall pay the fine of
Rs.50,000/- (Rupees fifty-thousand only) for the
commission of offence punishable under Section 20
of Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 and
in default of payment of fine amount he shall
further undergo the simple imprisonment for 2 (two)
8)    The accused No.1 is sentenced to undergo
imprisonment for life and shall pay the fine of
Rs.50,000/- (Rupees fifty thousand only) for the
commission of offence punishable under Section
23(1) of Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967
and in default of payment of fine amount he shall
further undergo the simple imprisonment for 2 (two)
years.
9)    Except the sentence of imprisonment for the
offence punishable under section 5(b) of Explosive
Substances Act, 1908, which is the rigorous
imprisonment for 10(ten) years, the other sentences
of imprisonments, which are simple in nature, shall
run concurrently. The sentence of imprisonment for
the offence punishable under section 5(b) of
Explosive Substances Act, 1908, which is the
rigorous imprisonment for 10(ten) years, shall
commence at the expiration of other sentences of
imprisonments.
10) The accused No.1 is entitled for set-off,
under section 428 of Cr.P.C., of the period of
detention undergone during the period of trial of
this case.”
4.   The order of conviction and sentence passed by the Trial Court
having been affirmed by the High Court, the present appeal has been
preferred.   The notice in the matter was confined to the nature and
quantum of sentence imposed upon the appellant.
5.   We have heard Mr. Siddhartha Dave, learned Senior Advocate in
support of the appeal and Mr. Shubhranshu Padhi, learned Advocate
for the State.
6.   The only submission advanced by Mr. Siddhartha Dave, learned
Senior Advocate, on nature and quantum of sentence is that the last
part of paragraph 9 of the order of sentence which observed that
the sentence of imprisonment for 10 years awarded in terms of
paragraph   4  of  the  order  of  sentence  would  commence at the
expiration of other sentences of imprisonment is incorrect.
Taking exception to this direction, Mr. Dave submits that this
direction runs counter to the decision of the Constitution Bench of
this Court in Muthuramalingam v. State1. Paragraphs 18 and 35 of
the decision were to the following effect:
“18.    The legal position is, thus, fairly well
settled that imprisonment for life is a sentence
for the remainder of the life of the offender
unless of course the remaining sentence is commuted
or remitted by the competent authority. That being
so, the provisions of Section 31 under CrPC must be
so interpreted as to be consistent with the basic
tenet that a life sentence requires the prisoner to
spend the rest of his life in prison. Any direction
that requires the offender to undergo imprisonment
for life twice over would be anomalous and
irrational for it will disregard the fact that
humans like all other living beings have but one
life to live. So understood Section 31(1) would
permit consecutive running of sentences only if
such sentences do not happen to be life sentences.
That is, in our opinion, the only way one can avoid
an obvious impossibility of a prisoner serving two
consecutive life sentences.
35.     We may, while parting, deal with yet another
dimension of this case argued before us, namely,
whether the court can direct life sentence and term
sentences to run consecutively. That aspect was
argued keeping in view the fact that the appellants
have been sentenced to imprisonment for different
terms apart from being awarded imprisonment for
life. The trial court's direction affirmed by the
High Court is that the said term sentences shall
run consecutively. It was contended on behalf of
the appellants that even this part of the direction
is not legally sound, for once the prisoner is
sentenced to undergo imprisonment for life, the
term sentence awarded to him must run concurrently.
We do not, however, think so. The power of the
court to direct the order in which sentences will
run is unquestionable in view of the language
employed in Section 31 CrPC. The court can,
therefore, legitimately direct that the prisoner
shall first undergo the term sentence before the
commencement of his life sentence. Such a direction
shall be perfectly legitimate and in tune with
Section 31 CrPC. The converse however may not be
true for if the court directs the life sentence to
start first it would necessarily imply that the
term sentence would run concurrently. That is
because once the prisoner spends his life in jail,
there is no question of his undergoing any further
sentence. Whether or not the direction of the court
below calls for any modification or alteration is a
matter with which we are not concerned. The regular
Bench hearing the appeals would be free to deal
with that aspect of the matter having regard to
what we have said in the foregoing paragraphs.”
7.   On the other hand, Mr. Shubhranshu Padhi, learned Advocate for
the State has relied upon paragraph 25 of the decision, which is to
“25.   In O.M. Cherian case [O.M. Cherian v. State
of Kerala, (2015) 2 SCC 501 : (2015) 2 SCC (Cri)
123] the prisoner was convicted and sentenced to
imprisonment for the offences punishable under
Sections 498-A and 306 IPC. The courts below had in
that case awarded to the convicts imprisonment for
two years under Section 498-A IPC and seven years
under Section 306 IPC and directed the same to run
consecutively. Aggrieved by the said direction, the
prisoners appealed to this Court to contend that
the sentences awarded to them ought to run
concurrently and not consecutively. The appeal was
referred [O.M. Cherian v. State of Kerala, (2015) 2
SCC 501, 506-507 (para 5)] to a larger Bench of
three Judges of this Court in the light of the
decision in Mohd. Akhtar Hussain v. Collector of
Customs [Mohd. Akhtar Hussain v. Collector of
Before the larger Bench, the prisoners relied upon
Mohd. Akhtar Hussain case [Mohd. Akhtar Hussain v.
Collector of Customs, (1988) 4 SCC 183 : 1988 SCC
(Cri) 921] and Manoj v. State of Haryana [Manoj v.
State of Haryana, (2014) 2 SCC 153 : (2014) 1 SCC
(Cri) 763] to contend that since the prisoners were
found guilty of more than two offences committed in
the course of one incident, such sentences ought to
run concurrently. This Court upon a review of the
case law on the subject held that Section 31 CrPC
vested the court with the power to order in its
discretion that the sentences awarded shall run
concurrently in case of conviction of two or more
offences. This Court declared that it was difficult
to lay down a straightjacket rule for the exercise
of such discretion by the courts. Whether a
sentence should run concurrently or consecutively
would depend upon the nature of the offence and the
facts and circumstances of the case. All that could
be said was that the discretion has to be exercised
along judicial lines and not mechanically. Having
said that, the Court observed that if two life
sentences are imposed on a convict the court has to
direct the same to run concurrently. That is
because sentence of imprisonment for life means
imprisonment till the normal life of a convict.”
8.   In the instant case, the appellant was awarded life sentence
on three counts and sentence of 10 years each on five counts, out
of  which  it  was   only the  sentence    in  respect  of  the   offence
punishable  under   Section 5(b)   of  the   Explosive  Substances   Act,
1908, which was subject matter of the last part of the directions
in paragraph 9 of the order of sentence.
9.   Paragraph 9 of the order of sentence contemplated commencement
of the sentence awarded under paragraph 4 of the order of sentence,
after the expiration of other sentences of imprisonment.       It would,
therefore, mean that the sentence in paragraph 4 would begin after
the  expiration  of   other sentences    including   sentence   for  life
awarded under three counts.    This stipulation would be against the
law  laid   down   by  this  Court   in   Muthuramalingam1,   especially
paragraph 35 of the decision as quoted above.
10.  Considering the fact situation, in our view, the following
sentence appearing in paragraph 9 of the order of sentence:
“The sentence of imprisonment for the offence
punishable   under   section  5(b)    of   Explosive
Substances Act, 1908, which is the rigorous
imprisonment for 10 (ten) years, shall commence at
the   expiration   of   the  other    sentences   of
imprisonments.”
must stand deleted.  Ordered accordingly.
11.  This appeal, therefore, stands allowed in the aforesaid terms.
(Arising out of impugned final judgment and order dated 29-11-2019 in
CRLA No.2066/2016 passed by the High Court Of Karnataka At Bengaluru)
(IA No.113042/2020 – FOR CONDONATION OF DELAY IN FILING; and, IA
Date : 19-07-2021 This matter was called on for hearing today.
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
Leave ground.
The appeal is allowed, in terms of the Signed Order placed on
the file.
Pending applications, if any, also stand disposed of.