2.          Heard finally by consent of both the parties.
3.          The petitioner raises a challenge to the order dated
07.11.2022 passed by the Deputy Inspector General (Prisons) (East)
Nagpur, whereby the petitioner’s urge for special parole has been
allowed with a rider.    The authority limited the duration of special
parole for four days including the traveling period in Police Escort with
certain amount of cash security and surety. The challenge is to the
limited duration of parole period along with the condition of Police
Escort and the amount of heavy surety.
4.          The petitioner has applied for special parole in terms of
Rule 19(2) of the Maharashtra Prison (Mumbai Furlough and Parole)
Rules 1959 (‘Rules of 1959’) for the marriage of his son Yogesh
proposed to be held on 17.11.2022 at Mumbai. The competent
authority has called the Police Report and upon considering the entire
material has conditionally allowed special parole for the period of four
days including traveling period with Police Escort and Security.
5.           The petitioner is convicted for the offence punishable under
Sections 302, 120-B of the Indian Penal Code read with Section 3(1)(i),
(i)(ii), 3(2), 3(4) of the Maharashtra Control of Organized Crime Act
(‘MCOC’). It is petitioner’s contention that till date, he has undergone
imprisonment for approximately 14 years and whenever he was
released on parole or furlough, on each and every occasion he has
surrendered on due date without delay. Moreover, during his leave
period, he had not committed any anti-social activity nor any offence
has been registered against him. It is submitted that till date, on 12
occasion, petitioner was released on either parole or furlough, and each
time, he has abided by the conditions imposed therein and had not
committed breach of peace.         To substantiate said contention, the
petitioner has produced order of this Court dated 08.04.2021 passed in
Criminal Writ Petition No. 258/2021, wherein a chart indicating the
petitioner’s prior release on furlough or parole has been incorporated
with specific period and dates. The petitioner has referred few other
orders, by which he was released by this Court on parole for the reason
of medical emergency and marriage.
6.           The principal grievance is about grant of parole for only
four days that too in Police Escort with heavy surety. It is straneously
argued that the impugned order does not indicate reasons as to why
the period of special parole has been curtailed from 15 days to 04 days
only. Moreover, there are no reasons to indicate necessity to impose
condition of Police Escort. In this regard, the petitioner relied on the
decision of this Court dated 18.02.2019 in case of Dilip S/o. Sopan
Pawar Vs. The State of Maharashtra and another (Criminal Writ
Petition No. 354/2019 with another connected matter), wherein this
Court has emphasized about the necessity of reasons.
7.           Upon notice of this Court, the respondent-State filed reply
justifying impugned order. It is stated that in view of adverse Police
Report and the petitioner being involved in number of criminal
activities, the conditions imposed by the authority are appropriate.
Moreover, it is submitted that in view of amended Rule 19(2) of the
Rules of 1959, the special parole is for the period of four days including
traveling period with provision of extension of next 4 days.
8.           Moreover, the learned APP has justified the order of special
parole in the Police Escort by pointing towards the report submitted by
the Additional Commissioner of Police.       It is submitted that as per
report, the petitioner has rivalry with other gangs indulging into
criminal activities, therefore, there is threat to his life.     He would
submit that the authority was satisfied about the threat perception of
the petitioner and therefore, the order of Police Escort is justifiable. On
the point of cash security, it has been submitted that in order to vouch
the timely return, the quantum of surety has been fixed which is
9.           We have carefully considered the revival submissions and
impugned order along with amended notification dated 10.02.2022 of
Rule 19(2) of the Rules of 1959 which reads as below:-
“19(2) Special Parole – (A) All convicted prisoners except
foreigner and death sentenced prisoners may be eligible for
special parole of four days, including the traveling time, for
marriage of son/daughter/siblings. All the terms and conditions,
except the period for which it is granted, shall mutatis-mutandis
apply for the grant of such special parole including all the
proviso applicable to the emergency parole, only with the
difference that, instead of Superintendent of Prison, any request
for grant of such special parole will be considered by the Deputy
Inspector General of Prisons.
(B) The initial period of four days of special parole may be
extended by a further additional period of maximum upto four
days, total being not more than maximum eight days, by a
written order containing just, sufficient, cogent and self-
explanatory reasons, passed by the Deputy Inspector General of
Prisons, before expiry of initial period of four days. No extension
shall be granted to such special parole in any case and under any
circumstances beyond the period of total eight days.”
10.          The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has fairly
conceded the legal position about the restricted time span under
amended Rule 19(2) of the Rules of 1959 as per Government
Notification dated 10.02.2022. He has waived his submission claiming
15 days parole by conceding that as per amended Rule 19(2) of the
Rules 1959, special parole for the purpose of marriage would be for
four days only with provision of extension. In short, he has waived the
challenge raised to the period of special parole.
11.          On the point of imposition of condition of Police Escort, it
has been submitted that, in past on all 12 occasions, no such stringent
condition was imposed.      He has submitted that on each and every
occasion, the same reasons were quoted by the reporting authority,
however, the Police Escort was not ordered.          We have given our
thoughtful consideration to the report of concerned Assistant
Commissioner of Police (‘ACP’) along with the order impugned herein.
Though it has been mentioned in the report that total 46 offences have
been registered, however all the offences were prior to the
incarceration.   The reason of life threat has not weighed to the
authority on earlier occasion. No special reasons have been quoted as
to this time what are the compelling circumstances which have weighed
to the authority in anticipating life threat to the petitioner. Moreover,
the impugned order is bereft of reasons as to why the Police Escort is
essential. Concededly, on all earlier occasions, no such condition was
imposed and therefore, we find no justification in imposing the
condition of providing Police Escort which needs to be waived.
12.          As regards to the quantum of security, the authority has
directed the petitioner to deposit cash security of Rs. 5 lakhs along with
surety of equal amount. Similarly, the said order is not backing with
any reason. The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner would
submit that barring isolated instance all the time the security amount
was near about 15,000/- only. The learned APP has pointed out that
once the petitioner was directed to deposit cash surety of Rs. 2 lakhs as
well as security of the equal amount. In our view, imposition of heavy
security would ultimately amounts to deprivation of availing the parole
which if he is otherwise entitled. Generally, we do not interfere into
the discretion of the authority in quantifying the amount of cash
surety/security. However, in view of the quantum of security fixed by
the authority, we feel it necessary to quantify the same so as to avoid
further round of litigation.
13.         In view of above, petition is partly allowed. The impugned
order is modified to the extent of setting aside the condition of
providing Police Escort. The amount of security is altered to the extent
of furnishing cash security of Rs. 1 lakh with surety in the like amount.
14.         Petition is disposed of in above terms.
15.         The petitioner’s learned counsel has submitted that since
the petitioner is required to go to Mumbai, considering journey period,
he requires extension of four days. In this regard he urged to direct the
authority to decide the extension application within stipulated period.
It is for the authority to take call. We hope and trust that the authority
will act in accordance with law in case of filing of extension
application.