Mr Ajinkya Dagaonkar, learned counsel for the petitioner.
Mr Pushyamitra Bhargava, learned Additional Advocate General
for the respondents/State.
01.     Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the order dated
22-11-2021 (Annexure-P-1) is issued without considering the
ground reality of Covid situation.           By placing reliance on the
Newspaper cuttings filed alongwith the petition, learned counsel for
the petitioner submits that Covid cases are on rise and in this grave
situation, the impugned order dated 22-11-2021 is issued whereby
Schools are decided to be opened.                 The "Consent Letter"
(Annexure-A-2) is also criticized by contending that whole burden
is shifted on the shoulders of the parents, which is bad in law. The
S.O.Ps are either not issued or not circulated to the parents, is
another limb of argument. Lastly, learned counsel for the petitioner
submits that there exists no policy for vaccination of children and
adolescents. Shri Dagaonkar, learned counsel placed reliance on
Constitution of India (Second Edition) Volume-1 (by Dr L.M.
Singhvi) page 940 which relates with 'Right to Life'. He urged that
there is a strong link between Article 21 and Right to know
particularly where secret Government decisions may affect health,
life and livelihood. Essar Oil Ltd., Vs. Halar Utkarsh Samiti &
Others (AIR (2004) SC 1834) is relied upon which is mentioned in
the said Article.
02.      Shri Pushyamitra Bhargava, learned Additional Advocate
General submits that Government has taken a policy decision by
taking into account the relevant factual backdrop of Covid situation
prevailing in Madhya Pradesh. The petitioner has filed this petition
by placing reliance on various Newspaper cuttings which are related
to other States. He relied on Annexure-A-3 which is a Newspaper
cutting of Jaipur, whereas other Newspaper cuttings are related to
Bengaluru, Bhubaneshwar and New Delhi. Learned counsel for the
State submits that Government is periodically examining the Covid
situation and on the basis of situation prevailing, issuing S.O.Ps and
directions. This has been the practice in all the Departments. It is
further submitted that Clause-3 of order dated 22-11-2021 shows
that previously, an order was issued for the purpose of vaccination in
all the Schools. In all fairness, the petitioner should have filed the
said order alongwith this petition.
03.      In rejoinder submissions, Shri Dagaonkar, learned counsel
for the petitioner submits that he could not lay his hands on any
Government notification/order/information in the website regarding
vaccination of children and adolescent. He placed reliance on
pleadings about decision of World Health Organization (W.H.O.).
04.    No other point is pressed by learned counsel for the parties.
05.      On a specific query from the Bench, learned counsel for the
petitioner was unable to show any pleadings which may support his
contention that petitioner made effort to get information regarding
vaccination of children and adolescent from Government of Madhya
Pradesh or Government of India website but no such information is
available on the website.
06.      The scope of interference in a case of this nature is very
limited. The Government is best suited to decide the mode and
methods of running administration. As per the Covid situation
prevailing, Government takes decision and also modifies it. The
unprecedented Covid crisis was handled in this manner during the
entire period. This court cannot conduct a roving inquiry or sit as an
appellate authority to examine the decision dated 22-11-2021. The
principle canvassed by Shri Dagaonkar that there is a strong link
between Article 21 and Right to Know particularly where secret
Government decision may affect health cannot be doubted.
However, in this case, it is not argued that the Government has
prepared any secret document which needs to be brought to the
notice. On a specific query Shri Dagaonkar, learned counsel fairly
submitted that he has not brought Essar Oil Ltd., Vs. Halar
Utkarsh Samiti & Others reported in AIR (2004) SC 1834. This
practice is totally unknown to the Courts where a judgment is relied
upon without bringing the journal or judgment in the Court. The
citations are not "Mantras". Unless the factual backdrop and ratio
decidendi of said case is clearly shown, merely citing a judgment
will not serve any purpose.
07.    We find force in the argument of learned A.A.G that policy
decision of the government cannot be interfered with on mere
asking. The petitioner has filed the newspaper cuttings of other
States to show rise of Covid cases.      It is a matter of common
knowledge that number of Covid cases may vary from place to place
and, therefore, the minimum expectation was that petitioner will
demonstrate the gravity of Covid situation prevailing in Madhya
Pradesh. In absence of showing the illegality with accuracy and
precision, policy decision cannot be axed. Lord MacNaughten in
Vacher & Sons Ltd.v. London Society of Compositors [Vacher &
Sons Ltd.v. London Society of Compositors, 1913 AC 107: (1911-13)
All ER Rep 241 (HL)] has stated: (AC p. 118):
‘… Some people may think the policy of the
Act unwise and even dangerous to the
community. … But a judicial tribunal has
nothing to do with the policy of any Act which
it may
be called upon to interpret. That may be
a matter for private judgment. The duty of the
court, and its only duty, is to expound the
language of the Act in accordance with the
settled rules of construction.’
08.    The litmus test laid down by Lord MacNaughten was quoted
with profit by Supreme Court in the matter of Centre for Public
Interest Litigation Vs. Union of India (2016) 6 SCC 408. It is
apposite to take into account the legal journey on the question of
scope of judicial review on a policy decision of the government.
09.    In the matter of State of M.P. Vs. Nandlal Jaiswal (1986) 4
SCC 566, the Apex Court has held as under:-
“34………..The Government, as was said in Permian
Basin Area Rate cases [20 L Ed (2d) 312] is entitled to
make pragmatic adjustments which may be called for by
particular circumstances. The Court cannot strike down a
policy decision taken by the State Government merely
because it feels that another policy decision would have
been fairer or wiser or more scientific or logical. The
Court can interfere only if the policy decision is patently
arbitrary, discriminatory or mala fide. It is against the
background of these observations and keeping them in
mind that we must now proceed to deal with the
contention of the petitioners based on Article 14 of the
10.    The Apex Court in the matter of State of Punjab Vs. Ram
Lubhaya Bagga (1998) 4 SCC 117 has held as under:-
“25……….So far as questioning the validity of
governmental policy is concerned in our view it is not
normally within the domain of any court, to weigh the
pros and cons of the policy or to scrutinize it and test
the degree of its beneficial or equitable disposition for
the purpose of varying, modifying or annulling it, based
on howsoever sound and good reasoning, except where
it is arbitrary or violative of any constitutional, statutory
or any other provision of law. When Government forms
its policy, it is based on a number of circumstances on
facts, law including constraints based on its resources.
It is also based on expert opinion. It would be
dangerous if court is asked to test the utility, beneficial
effect of the policy or its appraisal based on facts set out
on affidavits. The court would dissuade itself from
entering into this realm which belongs to the executive.
It is within this matrix that it is to be seen whether the
new policy violates Article 21 when it restricts
reimbursement on account of its financial constraints.”
(emphasis supplied)
11.   Reference may be made to Ugar Sugar Works Ltd. Vs. Delhi
Admn; (2001) 3 SCC 635 in which the Supreme Court has held as
“18………...It is well settled that the courts, in
exercise of their power of judicial review, do not
ordinarily interfere with the policy decisions of the
executive unless the policy can be faulted on grounds of
mala fide, unreasonableness, arbitrariness or unfairness
etc. Indeed, arbitrariness, irrationality, perversity and
mala fide will render the policy unconstitutional.
However, if the policy cannot be faulted on any of these
grounds, the mere fact that it would hurt business
interests of a party, does not justify invalidating the
policy. In tax and economic regulation cases, there are
good reasons for judicial restraint, if not judicial
deference, to judgment of the executive. The courts are
not expected to express their opinion as to whether at a
particular point of time or in a particular situation any
such policy should have been adopted or not. It is best
left to the discretion of the State.”
12.   Supreme Court in the matter of State of Orissa Vs. Gopinath
Dash (2005) 13 SCC 495 has opined as under:-
“7.     The policy decision must be left to the
Government as it alone can adopt which policy should
be adopted after considering all the points from
different angles. In the matter of policy decisions or
exercise of discretion by the Government so long as
the infringement of fundamental right is not shown the
courts will have no occasion to interfere and the Court
will not and should not substitute its own judgment
for the judgment of the executive in such matters. In
assessing the propriety of a decision of the
Government the Court cannot interfere even if a
second view is possible from that of the Government.”
(emphasis supplied)
13.   In the matter of State of U.P. Vs. Chaudhari Ran Beer Singh
(2008) 5 SCC 550, the Supreme Court held thus:-
“13………...As rightly contended by learned counsel
for the State, in matters of policy decisions, the scope
of interference is extremely limited. The policy
decision must be left to the Government as it alone
can decide which policy should be adopted after
considering all relevant aspects from different angles.
In matter of policy decisions or exercise of discretion
by the Government so long as the infringement of
fundamental right is not shown, courts will have no
occasion to interfere and the court will not and should
not substitute its own judgment for the judgment of
the executive in such matters. In assessing the
propriety of a decision of the Government the court
cannot interfere even if a second view is possible from
that of the Government.”
14.   In the matter of Parisons Agrotech (P) Ltd. Vs. Union of
India (2015) 9 SCC 657, it has been held as under:-
“14……….However, once it is found that there is
sufficient material for taking a particular policy
decision, bringing it within the four corners of Article
14 of the Constitution, power of judicial review
would not extend to determine the correctness of
such a policy decision or to indulge into the exercise
of finding out whether there could be more
appropriate or better alternatives. Once we find that
parameters of Article 14 are satisfied; there was due
application
of mind in arriving at the decision which
is backed by cogent material; the decision is not
arbitrary or irrational and; it is taken in public
interest, the Court has to respect such a decision of
the executive as the policy making is the domain of
the executive and the decision in question has passed
the test of the judicial review.
15.    In the matter of Centre for Public Interest Litigation Vs.
Union of India (2016) 6 SCC 408, the Apex Court has held as
“22. Minimal interference is called for by the courts, in
exercise of judicial review of a government policy when the
said policy is the outcome of deliberations of the technical
experts in the fields inasmuch as courts are not well
equipped to fathom into such domain which is left to the
discretion of the execution. It was beautifully explained by
the Court in Narmada Bachao Andolan v. Union of
India[Narmada Bachao Andolan v. Union of India, (2000)
10 SCC 664] and reiterated in Federation of Railway
Officers Assn. v. Union of India [Federation of Railway
Officers Assn. v. Union of India, (2003) 4 SCC 289] in the
following words: (SCC p. 289, para 12)
“12. In examining a question of this nature where a
policy is evolved by the Government judicial
review thereof is limited. When policy according to
which or the purpose for which discretion is to be
exercised is clearly expressed in the statute, it
cannot be said to be an unrestricted discretion. On
matters affecting policy and requiring technical
expertise the court would leave the matter for
decision of those who are qualified to address the
issues. Unless the policy or action is inconsistent
with the Constitution and the laws or arbitrary or
irrational or abuse of power, the court will not
interfere with such matters.”
16.    As noticed above, the petitioner, an Advocate has filed this
PIL without undertaking proper homework and exercise. The PIL
appears to have
been filed to gain publicity. Thus, admission is
declined.   In S.P. Anand Vs. H.D.Deve Gowda (1996) 6 SCC 734
the Apex Court deprecated the practice of filing half-baked petitions
without proper research. Similarly in Dattaraj Nathuji Thaware
Vs. State of Maharashtra (2005) 1 SCC 519 the Apex Court opined
that such petitions must be dismissed by imposing exemplary costs.
Thus, the petition is dismissed with Rs.5000/- (five thousand only)
as costs. The cost shall be deposited before High Court Legal Aid
Committee within thirty days from today, failing which, the said
Committee shall bring this to the notice of this Court.
Certified copy as per rules.