2.The State Commissioner for the persons with disability
Office of the State Commissionerate for the
3.The Principal Secretary to the Government,
Department of Social Welfare,
4.The Principal Secretary to Government,
Prayer: Writ Petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India
for issuance of Writ of Mandamus directing the third Respondent to hand
over the administration of differently abled pensions scheme to
Respondents 1 & 2 and consequently directing the Respondents to
immediately enhance the maintenance allowance from Rs.1000/- to
Rs.1500/- per month to the visually challenged beneficiaries immediately
on par with other differently abled beneficiaries.
For R1 to R5     : Mr.S.Silambannan
This Petitioner seeks a Writ of Mandamus directing the third
Respondent to handover the administration of Differently Abled Pensions
Scheme to the first and second Respondents and consequently, directing the
Respondents to enhance the maintenance allowance from Rs.1000/-
(Rupees One Thousand only) to Rs.1500/- (Rupees One Thousand Five
Hundred only) per month to the visually challenged beneficiaries on par
with other disabled beneficiaries.
2.The Petitioner is an organization working for the welfare of
Differently Abled Community, which has taken initiatives to provide
quality special education, healthcare and employment opportunities to the
visually impaired communities in the State of Tamil Nadu. Their case is that
the second Respondent provides maintenance allowance of Rs.1500/-
(Rupees One Thousand Five Hundred only) to several Differently Abled
Persons with severely affected locomotor, mentally retarded and suffering
from leprosy and muscular dystrophy. Their grievance is that the Visually
Impaired Persons, who are also severely disabled, are not treated on par
with the other severely disabled persons and only a sum of Rs.1000/-
(Rupees One Thousand only) is paid as monthly pension to the Visually
Impaired Persons. Further, the Differently Abled Persons, who suffer from
visual impairment, are put to extreme hardship because the Scheme is
administered by the Social Welfare Department. They are asked to obtain
Certificates of Approval from Village Administrative Officers, Revenue
Inspectors and Tahsildar to avail the benefits under this Scheme. Whereas,
the other Differently Abled Persons, whose maintenance allowance is
handled by the Differently Abled Department, are not put to such hardship.
Therefore, the Petitioner seeks a direction to the State to transfer the
Monthly Pension Scheme to the Differently Abled Department and also to
treat them on par with other Differently Abled Persons.
3.The Respondents have filed individual Counter Affidavits at
various stages of the proceedings. They have also filed Additional Counter
Affidavit pursuant to certain interim directions passed by this Court calling
for reports as to the steps taken by the Respondents to alleviate the
grievance of the Differently Abled Persons, who are visually impaired.
Broadly the stand of the Respondents is that:-
(a) the Differently Abled Persons, who are visually impaired, are
granted a monthly pension of Rs.1000/- (Rupees One Thousand only). The
Scheme has been promoted by the State Government since the State
Government found the Scheme of the Union Government called the
“Indira Gandhi National Disability Pension Scheme” which provided
Rs.300/- (Rupees Three Hundred only) as monthly pension was inadequate.
The State Government, therefore, sanctioned a sum of Rs.700/- (Rupees
Seven Hundred only) in addition to the amount sanctioned by the Central
Government and increased the pension amount to Rs.1000/- (Rupees One
Thousand only). The number of persons that are covered under the Central
Government Schemes was restricted to 64,045, however, the State
Government covered nearly 3,55,897 beneficiaries.
(b) the Differently Abled Persons, who are now given a monthly
maintenance allowance of Rs.2000/- (Rupees Two Thousand Only) are:
(i) persons with intellectual disability
(ii) severely affected locomotor disabled
(iii) persons affected with muscular dystrophy and
(iv) leprosy cure problems.
These categories of persons are ineligible and incapable of public
employment or any other type of employment, whereas, the Differently
Abled Persons, who are visually impaired are eligible for public and private
employment.
(c) the State has, besides, giving a monthly pension of Rs.1000/-
(Rupees One Thousand only) to the Differently Abled Persons, who are
visually impaired, are also providing other assistance in the form of
establishing Early Intervention Centres, providing Readers Allowance to
visually impaired students, providing Electronic Braille Devices, Smart
Phones with tailor made Apps, Marriage Assistance, Free Travel
Concession in State owned Buses if the distance is less than 100 Kilometres
and 75 per cent Travel Concession in Buses within the State of Tamil Nadu,
Training in book binding and Unemployment Allowance to Differently
Abled Persons, who are enrolled with the Directorate of Employment and
Training and Scribe Assistance also. That apart, the Government also
promoted various Schemes which are common to all the Differently Abled
(iv) Tamil Nadu Welfare Board for Differently Abled.
(d) the State has never discriminated between the different categories
of Differently Abled Persons. The State has always taken steps to make
effective provision for public assistance to the Differently Abled Persons
including visually impaired persons.
(e) since the Pension Scheme and other such similar Schemes are
basically Central Government Schemes wherein, the State Government has
increased the quantum of amount to be distributed to the beneficiaries, the
Social Welfare Department, through the Revenue Department, is
administering those Schemes. The Government took into consideration the
interest of the persons concerned and brought the Pension Scheme under the
Social Welfare Department. The Petitioner’s apprehension is that since it is
under Social Welfare Department, the visually impaired persons are put to
hardship is unfounded.
4. Heard, Mr.A.M.Venkatakrishnan, learned counsel for the
Petitioner and Mr.S.Silambannan, learned Additional Advocate General
representing for Mrs.R.Anitha, learned Special Government Pleader, for
the Respondents.
5. Mr.A.M.Venkatakrishnan, learned counsel for the Petitioner
submitted that the Respondents have violated Article 14 of the Constitution
of India while making discrimination between the Differently Abled
Persons, who are visually impaired and other Differently Abled Persons.
The visually impaired persons are equally incapacitated and suffered from
disability. Most of the visually impaired persons are unskilled, illiterates
and hence unemployed, who are incapable of earning a livelihood. Hence,
they ought to be treated on par with the other Differently Abled Persons,
who are paid a maintenance allowance of Rs.1500/- (Rupees One Thousand
Five Hundred only) per month which has now been increased to Rs.2000/-
(Rupees Two Thousand only) per month. The learned counsel would further
submit that the cost of living for all the persons are one and the same and
the discrimination in the quantum of allowance paid to the different
categories of Disabled Persons is illogical and unfounded.
6.   Mr.S.Silambannan, learned  Additional  Advocate      General
submitted that the Government has taken all steps to alleviate the suffering
of all kinds of Differently Abled Persons. The Differently Abled Persons,
who are now paid a maintenance amount of Rs.2000/- (Rupees Two
Thousand Rupees only) are persons, who are by virtue of their disability,
are incapable and ineligible for public employment or any other kind of
employment. They formed a separate class and they cannot be equated with
the visually impaired Differently Abled Persons, who are eligible for public
employment and other types of employment. The State has provided for
several Schemes which attempts to enhance the living condition of all the
Differently Abled Persons, including the visually impaired persons, which
are enumerated in the Counter Affidavit filed by the third Respondent.
These Schemes are aimed at providing skills, education to the visually
impaired Differently Abled Persons so as to bring them on par with normal
individuals and provide employment and good standard of living.
7.We have considered the submissions of the learned counsel on
either side.
8.The Petitioner has sought for two prayers in the above Writ
Petition. The first prayer seeks for transfer of Pension Scheme from the
Social Welfare Department to the Differently Abled Department. The
Petitioner has alleged that since the Pension Scheme falls under the Social
Welfare Department, which is administered through the Revenue
Department, several hardships are caused to the Differently Abled Persons.
This Court cannot direct the Respondents that the Scheme has to be
administered only by a particular Department. The grievance of the
Petitioner is that the Social Welfare Department is not acting fairly. This is
now sought to be addressed by the Government by designating Revenue
Divisional Officers in all Districts to look into the grievances of the
Differently Abled Persons, who are visually impaired. When the matter was
heard on 06.03.2019, the learned Additional Advocate General had given an
undertaking that the Government will designate Revenue Divisional
Officers in all Districts to look into the individual grievances. The said
undertaking has been taken on record. The order dated 06.03.2019 passed
by this Court is extracted hereunder:
“After hearing the learned Counsels at some length
and  on    perusing  the   Counter  Affidavit  filed   by
Ms.Narmada Sampath, learned Additional Government
Advocate General fairly undertakes that in order to avoid
any administrative inconvenience to any person belonging to
Differently Abled Persons with Blindness Category, the State
Government will designate Revenue Divisional Officers in
all Districts to look into the individual grievances of a such
persons on the Administrative Side, if any.
2.The said Undertaking of the learned Additional
Advocate General is taken on Record.”
9.In view of the same, the Respondents are directed to strictly adhere
to the undertaking given by them before this Court and ensure that no
hardship is caused to the Differently Abled Persons for getting the benefits
under the Monthly Pension Scheme. It is made clear that the Differently
Abled Persons shall not be put to sufferings merely because the Monthly
Pension Scheme is administered by the Social Welfare Department.
Therefore, the Respondents shall ensure that no hardship is caused to the
Differently Abled Persons and unnecessary formalities are not insisted upon
to claim the benefits under the Scheme.
10. The second prayer in the Writ Petition is that the pension must be
enhanced to Rs.1500/- (Rupees One Thousand Five Hundred only) on par
with the maintenance allowance of Rs.1500/- (Rupee One Thousand Five
Hundred only) given to the other Differently Abled Persons. In the Counter
Affidavit filed by the third Respondent dated 07.06.2022, the third
Respondent stated that the benefit of Rs.1000/- (Rupees One Thousand
only) per month is extended under Pension Scheme, jointly by the Union of
India and the State Government. The Union of India provides Rs.300/-
(Rupees Three Hundred only) per month               under the “Indira Gandhi
National Disability Pension Scheme”. The State Government provides
Rs.700/- (Rupees Seven Hundred only) per month in addition to a sum of
Rs.1000/- (Rupees One Thousand only) per month to the Differently Abled
Persons as pension. The total number of persons, who are eligible for
benefit under the Scheme of the Union of India is 64,045 persons, whereas,
the State Government has not only increased the benefit amount by adding
Rs.700/- (Rupees Seven Hundred only), but also increased the number of
persons to 3,55,897 to be covered under this Scheme by providing funds.
The Counter further states that the maintenance allowance, which was
originally Rs.1500/- (Rupees One Thousand Five Hundred only), is now
enhanced to Rs.2000/- (Rupees Two Thousand only) for the persons, who
are incapable of getting public employment or other employment. The first
Respondent filed a counter dated 27.09.2018 stating that the following
persons are the beneficiaries of the Maintenance Allowance Scheme:
Sl.No.      Category of Disability   Criteria –   Income        No. of
Percentage    ceiling   beneficiaries
3      Persons affected with     40% and       No           2,853
muscular dystrophy         above
The Respondents have also stated that Maintenance Allowance Scheme was
extended only to the above categories of persons because they are incapable
of doing any job.
11. The learned counsel for the Petitioner submitted that their
grievance is that all Differently Abled Persons under the visually impaired
category cannot be treated as one category. The Differently Abled Persons,
who are visually impaired in the Rural areas and / or women, aged persons,
or on account of sickness or infirmity incapable of doing any job have to be
treated on par with the other Differently Abled Persons, who are receiving
maintenance allowance.
12. We are conscious of the fact that the Differently Abled Persons,
who are visually impaired are put to hardship and suffering and there cannot
be any doubt on that aspect. At the same time, we cannot ignore the basis on
which the Respondents have extended the benefit of the maintenance
allowance to specific categories of persons stated above. The basis is that
by the very nature of their disability, they are either ineligible or incapable
of either public employment or private employment. It is not in dispute that
the Government has Schemes for enhancing the standard of living of the
Differently Abled Persons, who are visually impaired. The Additional
Counter of the first Respondent dated 10.03.2022 and the Counter Affidavit
of third Respondent dated 07.06.2022 has listed out the various Schemes
which are available for the benefit of the Differently Abled persons. One
such Scheme provides for unemployment allowance to visually Disabled
Persons, who are visually impaired and are enrolled with Directorate of
Employment and unemployed for more than one year are paid allowance.
Rs.600/- (Rupees Six Hundred only) per month is paid for a person who has
completed 10th standard. Rs.750/- (Rupees Seven Hundred and Fifty only)
per month is paid for a person who has completed 12 th standard. Rs.1000/-
(Rupees One Thousand only) is paid for Differently Abled person, who is a
13. It is also not in dispute that the Differently Abled Persons, who
are visually impaired, are entitled to public employment and private
employment as well. Therefore, the Differently Abled Visually Impaired
Persons cannot be equated with Differently Abled Persons who are ineligible
to get any employment on account of the sickness and infirmity suffered by
them. The basis adopted by the Respondents to treat them differently cannot
be faulted.
14.However, in view of the submission of the learned counsel for the
Petitioner that certain persons who are visually impaired are also ineligible for
employment on account of other sickness, infirmity and old age, the
Respondents may consider the request of those persons to treat them on par
with other Differently Abled Persons who are getting the monthly maintenance
allowance, on merits and in accordance with law.
15. Therefore, we are of the view that we cannot direct the
Respondents to treat all the Differently Abled Persons under Visually
Impaired category on par with Differently Abled Persons who are incapable
of any employment.
16.With the above observations, the Writ Petition is disposed of.
No Costs. Consequently, the connected miscellaneous petition is closed.
Welfare of Differently Abled Persons Department,
2.The State Commissioner for the persons with disability
Office of the State Commissionerate for the
3.The Principal Secretary to the Government,
Department of Social Welfare,
4.The Principal Secretary to Government,