1.     By this petition, the petitioner seeks transfer of investigation in case
FIR No. 243/2021 under Sections 302/34 IPC registered at P.S.Hari Nagar
from respondent No.3 to CBI, directions to preserve CCTV footages of the
relevant time and compensation to the petitioner/mother of the deceased.
2.     According to the petitioner, her son was taken into custody in FIR
Nos. 178/2019, 179/2019 and 180/2019 on 13th June 2019 and since then, he
was in judicial custody. On 14th May 2021, son of the petitioner died on
being taken to the hospital and in this regard, FIR No. 243/2021 was
registered at P.S.Hari Nagar under Sections 302/34 IPC. According to the
petitioner, on looking at the photos and videos of the deceased body, deep
cut wounds on his thighs and hands were found which could not be caused
due to the simple cricket bats, as alleged and such wounds would have been
inflicted only by a sharp object. Daughter of the petitioner i.e. sister of the
deceased had received a call from the deceased one day prior to the date of
incident wherein, she claims that her brother told that he would be murdered
by the jail officers. Further, at the time of incident itself, a PCR call was
received from the jail which was not from the officers of the jail wherein,
the caller stated that ‘my brother has been got murdered by R.N.Meena; I am
in jail and R.N.Meena is also in jail, who is D.S. in jail and has assaulted
me yesterday and also assaulted my brother with sticks; my brother has
been moved to DDU Hospital name Shreekant Rama Swami; my brother has
been murdered’.       When Shrikant was admitted in hospital, after some
treatment, he was declared dead. In view of the fact that the deceased died
in custody, judicial enquiry is in process.
3.      According to the learned Standing Counsel for the State, report of
Magisterial enquiry has not been received, however, FIR No. 243/2021
under Sections 302/34 IPC was registered on the same day. The
investigation of the FIR is being conducted by the investigating officer from
P.S.Hari Nagar and based on the investigation conducted, a status report has
been filed which is reproduced here-in-under:-
“Most respectfully it is submitted that on 14/5/21 a PCR call
was received in P.S Hari Nagar vide DD No – 41-A that, “ Tihar Jail
No-2, “Caller is stating that, “My brother has been got murdered by
R.N Meena . I am in the Jail and R. N Meena also in Jail, who is D.S
in jail and has assaulted me yesterday and also assaulted my brother
with sticks. My brother has been moved to DDU hospital Name
Shreekant Rama Swami, My brother has been murdered”. On receipt
of information SI Kavish was informed to take necessary action. In
the meanwhile information was received from Safdarjung hospital
that Srikant @ Appu was admitted in hospital where he was declared
dead during treatment. As per direction of senior officer Insp.
Praveen and SHO sir also reached at the spot and in the meanwhile
SI Kavish also reached there. In Jail No-2 Tihar jail eyewitnesses of
the incident Warder Lalit was enquired and his statement was
recorded. He stated that on 14/5/21 he alongwith warder Praveen
was present on duty on ward No-2 of jail No -2. As per routine the
barracks of inmates were opened at about 6 PM and after opening the
barracks he alongwith warder Praveen were present in the guard
room near main gate of the ward. Suddenly at about 7 AM they heard
hue and cry from side of barrack No-4. On hearing the rush towards
the barrack where inside the barrack inmates Arun @ Mandwa,
Ganpat, Kishan and Akash were found assaulted inmate Srikant @
Appu with cricket bats. Both the warders controlled the assaulters
with help of other inmates. During this, all the assaulters committed
crossing (a common term used for mutual giving injuries to each
other just to create defense) with each other. During this assaulter
Arun also received injuries on his head and started bleeding profusely.
They locked the other assaulters in another barrack and tried to take
both the injured inmates namely Srikant @ Appu & Arun @ Mandwa
for treatment, but Srikant refused for the same and warder Lalit took
injured inmate Arun to jail dispensary for treatment and warder
Praveen remained in ward for duty. Senior jail officials were also
informed by the warders. When after treatment of Arun Jail warders
and other officials were taken round of the ward. Inmate Srikant
complained of pain and he was rushed to jail dispensary, from where
he was referred to Safdarjung hospital, where he was declared dead.
Information in this regard was also conveyed to concerned duty M.M.
Ld. Ms. Anjani Mahajan. The scene of crime was inspected and some
blood stains were noticed on the floor and a bedsheet with blood
stains was also recovered. The jail officials also provided two cricket
bats having blood stainds which were snatched from the accused
persons and wearing blood stained clothes of inmate Arun. On
statement of warder Lalit present FIR was registered and
investigation was started. In the meanwhile PCR calls were also
received from unknown numbers that inmate Srikant has been
assaulted by Jail official R.N.Meena. During investigation of the case
other eyewitnesses were enquired Eye witness Warder Praveen was
also enquired and his statement was recorded in which he
corroborated the statement of Warder Lalit. Other inmates were also
enquired and they also supported the version of complainant and
stated that the deceased used to bully other inmates and also demand
money from them. It was also revealed that just a day prior to this
incident i.e. 13/5/21 the deceased has again harassed accused Arun
@ Mandwa & another inmates Vikas Jain and Arun has also made a
written complaint to Jail authorities in this regard and Arun and
Vikas have requested for change of their barracks and after this they
were shifted to barrack No. 6 from Barrack No. 4. Notice was given to
jail authorities to provide CCTV footage of incident. But they stated
that the CCTVs in Ward No. 2 are not in working condition. The
number from which PCR call with regard to death of Srikant was
made is not reachable since then. Even no brother of deceased
Srikant was found to be lodged in Tihar Jail as alleged in the PCR
call. Post mortem of the deceased was got conducted in Safdarjung
hospital on 15/5/21 and as per post-mortem report cause of death is
given as “Death is due to shock as a result of multiple injuries to head,
both upper limbs and both the lower limbs consequent to blunt force
impact”. After this all the four accused persons were arrested in the
present case after permission of Hon’ble Couret.                 During
interrogation they stated that deceased Srikant used to harass and
bully all other inmates and even demand money from them. Arun
stated that he was a new inmate in barrack No. 4 of Jail No. 2 and
Srikant used to harass and bully him and used to demand money from
him. Due to this constant torture he has also made a complaint to jail
authorities and has requested to change his barrack and due to this
reason on 13/5/21 he was shifted to barrack No. 6 from No. 4. He has
discussed all this with other accused persons, who all were also
having grudge against Srikant due to his constant torture and they all
hatched a conspiracy to kill Srikant. On the day of incident after
opening of barracks, all accused persons entered in barrack of
decease and assaulted him with cricket bats which subsequently
caused his death. Blood sample of all the accused persons have been
obtained and have been sent to FSL alongwith other seized exhibits
for opinion. The registered owner of mobile phone No. 9311898547
(from which PCR call with regard to involvement of Deputy
Superintendent Sh.R.N.Meena in murder of deceased was made) Ms.
Mukundpur Delhi was also enquired and she stated that she has lot
her mobile phone having above sim and due to ignorance she has not
lodged any complaint in this regard and she does not know Srikant
and none of her acquaintance is lodged in Tihar jail.
Sh. R.N.Meena Deputy Superintendent was also enquired and
he stated that deceased Srikant used to bully other inmates and his
conduct in jail was very bad which is evident from the list of several
punishment tickets issued to him in jail and at the time of incident he
was not even on duty and his name is dragged into this offence just
because he is trying to maintain discipline in the jail.
The investigation of the case is in final stage and from the
investigation conducted so far sufficient evidence has come on record
to prove involvement of above mentioned four accused namely Arun,
Ganpat, Kishan & Akash in the present case.
Report may kindly be submitted please”.
4.      No post-mortem report of the deceased has been placed on record
before this Court. When this petition came up before this Court on 8th July
2021, this Court while issuing notice directed the State to submit a status
report, whereafter, the petitioner’s plea for transfer of investigation to CBI
was to be considered.
5.      A report had been received from the Superintendant, Central Jail No.2
indicating that on the day of incident, Sh.Lalit, Warder and Sh.Parveen,
Warder were deployed on duty as Head Warder and Warder respectively in
Ward No. 2 in morning shift. At about 7:00 hours, they heard some hue and
cry in Barrack No. 4 of Ward No. 2. They rushed towards Barrack No. 4 of
Ward No. 2 where four UTPs/inmates namely Arun @ Mandva, Akash @
Hunny, Ganpat @ Niranjan and Kishan s/o Tejman were giving beatings to
inmate Shrikant @ R.Srikant @ Appu with cricket bat. Inmate Arun was
also injured and blood was oozing out of his head when the officials
intervened and separated the UTPs. Immediately, inmate Arun @ Mandav
was taken to jail dispensary where he was given stitches and UTP Shrikant
was asked to come to the jail dispensary however, he refused to go to the jail
dispensary. Thereafter, a team comprising of Assistant Superintendent
visited Ward No. 2 again where they found that UTP Shrikant was taking
bath. When the team enquired from Shrikant, he complained of trepidation
and pain in the body. The team also noted the injury in his body and took
him to jail dispensary from where he was referred to Safdarjung Hospital.
The search team also found one mobile phone and one iron patti from UTP
Shrikant. As claimed in the status report, at around 12.20 pm, a message
was received about the death of Shrikant @ Appu at about 11.50 am.
6.     Vide order dated 8th July 2021, this Court directed the Director
General (Prisons) to file a detailed report indicating as to where and how
many CCTVs are installed in and around Barrack No. 4 of Ward No. 2. It
was also directed that the affidavit would be accompanied by a complete site
plan giving the locations of the said CCTVs and the place of incident and in
case, CCTVs are installed, explanation was also directed to be rendered that
why, immediately on receiving the information of the incident at the said
place, CCTV footages of the entire area were not preserved at that time.
7.     A reply has been filed by the Director General (Prisons) along with
the site plan. As per the reply, most of the old CCTVs installed in Tihar Jail
have become non-functional and thus, a mega plan of installation of the
CCTVs is underway and at most of the places, they have been installed.
Director General (Prisons) who appears in person through video
conferencing states that the project of installation of CCTVs got delayed due
to Covid-19, however, efforts are being made to ensure that the newly
installed CCTVs become functional expedituously. He states that out of
6967 CCTVs to be installed, more than half of the CCTVs installed are
functional and rest would be functional by 15th August 2021.
8.     It is thus evident that no CCTV footage of the incident is available.
However, the prime issue which now concerns this Court besides the
manner in which the death of the inmate has been caused, is, why no proper
investigation could be carried out despite the fact that a PCR call was made
from a phone number from the jail and the said phone number is duly
recorded in the PCR Call.
9.     As noted above, in the status report, it is stated that the registered
owner of the mobile number 9311898547 from which PCR call was made is
one Ms. Hina, wife of Md. Irfan from whom enquiry was made and she
stated that she has lost her mobile phone having the said SIM and due to
ignorance, she had not lodged any complaint in this regard. She stated that
she does not know deceased Srikant and none of her acquaintance was
lodged in Tihar Jail.      From the status report, it is apparent that the
investigation based on the mobile phone number as noted in the PCR still
appears to be incomplete. Claim of the sister of the deceased was that she
received a phone call from the deceased himself a day prior to the incident
from the jail, informing her that he would be murdered, however, there is no
investigation on the said point nor has the mobile of the sister been taken
nor have the call records been analysed which would have revealed
something nor has any investigation been carried out from the call records of
the mobile number 9311898547 from which PCR call was made.                It has
been two months since the FIR in question has been registered.
10.    Considering the fact that as per status report filed by the
Superintendent Jail, there was no apparent injury on the deceased, however,
the case of the petitioner is that there were deep injury marks on the
deceased and an indepth investigation is required to be conducted to find out
the circumstances under which the deceased made a phone call to his sister
expressing his apprehension of death and his subsequent death in the judicial
custody, this Court finds it fit to transfer the investigation of the case FIR in
question to CBI.
11.    Status report will be filed by the concerned S.P., CBI after
investigation into the FIR in question well before the next date of hearing.
12.    List on 29th September 2021.
13.    Order be uploaded on the website of this Court.