For the Opposite Parties       : Mr. Abhra Mukherjee
This is an application under Section 5 of the Limitation Act
filed by the petitioner /intending appellant for condonation of delay
of 302 days in filing the appeal against the impugned judgment and
order of acquittal.
The petitioner has delineated the reasons for delay in filing
the appeal in paragraph 12 of the said application which is
reproduced below:-
“12. That the reasons for the delay in filing is for the reasons
as enumerated herein below:
i)     That   on  14.12.2017     judgment    and    order  was
pronounced.
ii)    That on 14.12.2017 application was submitted for
supply of certified copy of the judgment and order.
iii)   That on 22.12.2017 the certified copy was made
ready and supplied.
iv)    That on 29.12.2017 the file was placed Sr. Public
Prosecutor/CBI for his comments on the available
records.
v)     That on 01.01.2018 the Sr. Public Prosecutor/CBI
submitted his comments.
vi)    That on 18.01.2018 Superintendent of Police/CBI
endorsed his comments and passed on the file.
vii)   That   on  20.06.2018     the   Head   of  the   Branch
submitted his comments.
viii) That on 16.07.2018 the Dy. Legal Advisor presented
his opinion and forwarded the file.
ix)   That on 18.07.2018 the Joint Director & Head of
Zone recommended for filing of appeal.
x)    That      on    18.07.2018      the    file    with    the
recommendations and opinion was forwarded to the
xi)   That      on    25.07.2018      the    file    with    the
recommendation of the Special Director/CBI/New
Delhi     was    forwarded     to   the      Director   of
xii)  That       on    25.07.2018       the       Director    of
Prosecution/CBI/New Delhi forwarded the file to the
Additional Legal Advisor/CBI/New Delhi for opinion.
xiii) That     on    10.08.2018     the     Additional     Legal
Advisor/CBI/New Delhi with his comments forwarded
the file to Director of Prosecution/CBI/New Delhi.
xiv)  That       on    23.08.2018       the       Director    of
Prosecution/CBI/New Delhi with his comments dated
forwarded the file to Special Director/CBI/New Delhi.
xv)    That on 24.08.2018 Special Director/CBI/New Delhi
with  his  comments     forwarded   the   file  to  the
xvi)   That on 27.08.2018 the Director/CBI/New Delhi
approving the proposal recommended for challenging
the impugned judgment and order.
xvii) That     on    30.08.2018      the   file    with    the
recommendation was received at CBI/Kolkata.
xviii) That    on    06.09.2018      the   file    with    the
recommendations was forwarded to the Department
of Personnel & Training/Government of India for
approval of the proposal.
xix)   That on 12.10.2018 the file with the approval of the
Department of Personnel & Training/Government of
India was received by the CBI/ACB/Kolkata.
xx)    That   on  10.12.2018     Sh.   Ranjan   Kumar     Roy,
Advocate was engaged to draw-up and filed the
appeal.
xxi)   That on 16.12.2018 the applications after being
redrafted   was     forwarded    to   the     Head   of
Branch/CBI/ACB/Kolkata for vetting.
xxii) That on 18.12.2018 the draft after being approved
and vetted was returned for filing.
xxiii) That on 08.01.2019 the applications were reprinted
and finalised for filing.
xxiv) That on 10.01.2019 the applications were affirmed
and filed in the Hon’ble Court.”
The opposite parties have filed affidavit-in-opposition against
the aforesaid application under Section 5 of the Limitation Act. It is
specifically stated by the opposite parties that the explanation for
condonation of delay contained in paragraph 12 of the aforesaid
application is vague, misconceived, speculative, baseless and bereft of
better or more particulars. It is further stated by the opposite parties
that official delay in according permission to the petitioner to file
appeal against an order of acquittal cannot be said to be a sufficient
cause for delay in filing the appeal.
At the time of hearing of the instant application it is submitted
by Mr. Amajit De, learned advocate for the CBI that the Regional
Office of the CBI at Kolkata has no authority to decide as to whether
an appeal should be filed against an order of acquittal or not. The
permission comes from Delhi office and only after getting the official
permission, the CBI, Kolkata can file an appeal under Section 378(3)
of the Code of Criminal Procedure against an order of acquittal.
It is further submitted by Mr. Amajit De that the impugned
judgement and the order of acquittal was passed on 14 th December,
2017. The CBI immediately filed an application for certified copy of
the impugned judgment on the very date of the delivery of the
judgment. There is no laches on the part of CBI, Kolkata Office. The
certified copy was supplied on 22 nd December, 2017. Therefore, the
limitation started to begin from 23rd December, 2017. On 1st January,
2018 the senior Public Prosecutor, CBI submitted his comment to the
effect that an appeal should be preferred against the impugned
judgment an order of acquittal. Subsequently, the delay was caused
in the office of the Superintendent of Police and the Head of the
Branch. Thereafter inordinate delay was caused by different offices of
CBI at Delhi in order to give permission to file an appeal. In this
manner there was delay of 302 days in preferring the Memorandum of
Learned advocate for the respondents/opposite parties on the
other hand, submits that under the provision of Section 378,       the
State Government or the Central Government shall have to file an
appeal from an order of acquittal within 90 days from the date of the
impugned judgement and order of acquittal being passed. In support
of his contention, he relied upon a decision of the Hon’ble Supreme
Court   in  the  State    (Delhi    Administration)-vs-Dharam        Pal
reported in AIR 2001 SC 2924.
The learned advocate for the respondents further refers to a
decision of the Division Bench of this Court in the case of State of
West Bengal -Vs- Manowar Ali Khan reported in 2010, (4CHN)
(Cal) 585. It is pointed out by the learned advocate for the opposite
party that in the above mentioned report the Division Bench of this
Court refused to condone the delay of only 10 days and the appeal
was dismissed on the ground of being barred by limitation. The
learned advocate for the opposite party, however, over-looked that in
Manowar Ali Khan (supra), the state of West Bengal being the
appellant did not file any application under Section 5 of the Limitation
Act for condonation of delay. In the absence of any application under
Section 5 of the Limitation Act even single day’s delay cannot be
condoned. Therefore, ratio of this decision is not applicable under the
facts and circumstances of this case. Placing reliance on the case of
Ajit Singh Thakur @ Anr–Vs- State of Gujarat reported in AIR
1981 SC 733 it is submitted by the learned advocate for the opposite
party that the opposite party stands in a better position in the instant
appeal because he was acquitted by the competent court of law. It is
held in the aforesaid decision that where two reasonable conclusions
can be drawn on the evidence on record, the High Court should, as a
matter of judicial caution, refrain from interfering with the order of
acquittal recorded by the court below. In other words, if the main
ground on which the court below has passed its order acquitting the
accused, a reasonable and plausible ground can not be entirely and
effectively dislodged or demolished, the High Court should not disturb
the acquittal.
In my considered view the ratio of this judgment is also not
applicable    at this  stage  because   existence   of two reasonable
conclusions can only be arrived at on appreciation of evidence. At the
stage of hearing of the application under Section 5 of the Limitation
Act the said stage of appreciation of evidence does not come at all.
A pertinent judgment on the point as to whether an application
filed by the appellant being the agency of the State Government or
Central Government should be allowed on the basis of citing certain
dates where the official record was stuck off was considered by the
Hon’ble Supreme Court in Office of the Chief Post Master General
& Ors. V. Living Media India Ltd. & Anr. reported in AIR 2012 SC
1506. Paragraphs 12 and 13 are relevant for the purpose and quoted
12) “It is not in dispute that the person(s) concerned were
well  aware   or  conversant   with  the   issues  involved
including the prescribed period of limitation for taking up
the matter by way of filing a special leave petition in this
Court. They cannot claim that they have a separate period
of limitation when the Department was possessed with
competent persons familiar with court proceedings. In the
absence of plausible and acceptable explanation, we are
posing a question why the delay is to be condoned
mechanically merely because the Government or a wing of
the Government is a party before us. Though we are
conscious of the fact that in a matter of condonation of
delay when there was no gross negligence or deliberate
inaction or lack of bana fide, a liberal concession has to be
adopted to advance substantial justice, we are of the view
that in the facts and circumstances, the Department
cannot take advantage of various earlier decisions. The
claim on account of impersonal machinery and inherited
bureaucratic methodology of making several notes cannot
be accepted in view of the modern technologies being
used and available. The law of limitation undoubtedly
binds everybody including the Government.
13) In our view, it is the right time to inform all the
Government bodies, their agencies and instrumentalities
that   unless   they   have    reasonable    and   acceptable
explanation for the delay and there was bona fide effort,
there is no need to accept the usual explanation that the
file was kept pending for several months/years due to
considerable degree of procedural red-tape in the process.
The   Government    departments     are   under     a special
obligation to ensure that they perform their duties with
diligence and commitment. Condonation of delay is an
exception and should not be used as an anticipated
benefit for Government departments. The law shelters
everyone under the same light and should not be swirled
for the benefit of a few. Considering the fact that there
was no proper explanation offered by the Department for
the delay except mentioning of various dates, according to
us, the Department has miserably failed to give any
acceptable and cogent reasons sufficient to condone such
a huge delay. Accordingly, the appeals are liable to be
dismissed on the ground of delay”.
Close reading of the aforesaid paragraphs suggests that the
Government or a Government agency is not a privileged litigant. The
Government agency is required to explain the delay in the same
manner like that of an ordinary litigant to get the relief of codonation
of delay under Section 5 of the Limitation Act.
Relying on the decision of Chief Post Master General (supra)
the Hon’ble Supreme Court refused to condone the delay in
preferring the special leave in the case of State of Odisha
(Criminal) Diary No(s). 29657/2019 on 2nd September, 2019.
In the instant case, I have already quoted paragraph 12 of the
application under Section 5 of the Limitation Act. The petitioner has
stated in the said paragraph different dates when the file was sent to
different offices of CBI. It has not been stated why the office of
various heads of office of CBI took unusual time to release the record
and finally allowed the appeal to be filed after expiry of 302 days of
I am in agreement with the learned advocate for the opposite
party that the appellant has not been able to come up with
satisfactory explanation in support of its case for condonation of
For the reasons stated above, the application under Section 5 of
the Limitation Act is dismissed on contest, however, without any
cost. Inordinate delay in filing the appeal is not condoned.
With the dismissal of the application under Section 5 of the
Limitation Act, the Special Leave to Appeal is also treated to be