1.     This hearing has been done through hybrid mode.
2.     Vide previous order 17th February, 2022, the Defendant had been
directed to file a list of his restaurants which are operating in the name of
‘KAREEM’S’. Subsequently, no affidavit was filed and none had appeared
for the Defendant. Accordingly, vide order dated 4th April, 2022, the
Defendant was granted a last and final opportunity to plead and appear in
this case.
3.     Today, Mr. Vivek Singh, ld. Counsel, has entered appearance on
behalf of the Defendant. He submits that his client is currently running 41
restaurants, the details of which have been handed over along with the
affidavit of the Defendant - Mr. Kareem Dhanani. The said list of the
restaurants which are being operated by the Defendant and in franchisee in
the Defendant’s name is set out below:
Digitally Signed         CS(COMM) 112/2022                                                     Page 1 of 10
Number of Restaurants
Digitally Signed       CS(COMM) 112/2022                                        Page 2 of 10
Digitally Signed       CS(COMM) 112/2022                       Page 3 of 10
4.     As recorded in the previous order dated 4th April, 2022, the Plaintiff
in the present case, is the proprietor of the well-known trademark
“KARIM/KARIM’S/KAREEM” (word per se / stylized / as a device) as also
of the trading name- M/s Karim Hotel Pvt. Ltd., of which the word/mark
“KARIM” forms a prominent and essential feature.
5.     The founder of the Plaintiff coined and adopted the trade name
“KARIM’S” in the year 1913. The mark was derived from the name of the
original founder Haji Karimuddin. The said mark is being used by the
Plaintiff in respect of restaurants, catering and other related businesses since
more than 100 years. As averred in the plaint, the word “KARIM'S” is
Digitally Signed         CS(COMM) 112/2022                                                      Page 4 of 10
exclusively and uniquely associated with the Plaintiff for high quality
Mughlai food. The Plaintiff has trademark registrations in various classes
including Class 16, 29, 30, 42, 43, both for the mark “KARIM” and
“KAREEM” as also devices, logos and other derivatives thereof. The
Plaintiff also has registrations for the caption “Secret of good mood Taste of
Karim's food” in Classes 16, 30 and 43. The Plaintiff also uses the domain
name www.karimhoteldelhi.com, accessible to customers both in India and
abroad.
6.     The Plaintiff’s case is that the founder hails from a line of ancestors
who were Shahikhansamas (royal cooks) in the Mughal Empire and who
developed a line of cuisine commonly and popularly known as Mughlai
food. Its flagship restaurant is located near the Jama Masjid in Old Delhi and
the same is ranked as one of the top most restaurants in Asia by ‘TIME
Magazine’. Moreover, the Plaintiff has been positively reviewed by world
renowned magazines and media outlets such as the ‘TIME Magazine’, ‘BBC
WORLD GUIDE’, ‘National Geographic’ since the 1980’s itself. The
Plaintiff has also been recognized in many national and internationally
acclaimed books/travelogues, such as ‘Lonely Planet DELHI’, ‘World Food
India’, etc.
7.     As averred in the plaint, the Plaintiff came to know of the Defendant's
use of the identical mark “KAREEM’S” sometime in December, 2014. At
that stage, the Plaintiff initially issued a legal notice on 25th February, 2015
which was replied to by the Defendant on 11th March, 2015. The Plaintiff
also filed a suit being CS (OS) 1885/2015 titled Karim Hotels Pvt. Ltd. v.
Kareem A. Dhanani, against the Defendant. In the said suit, the Defendant
took a plea that it has a registration dated 4th February, 2005 for the device
Digitally Signed         CS(COMM) 112/2022                                                    Page 5 of 10
mark/logo “KAREEM’S” bearing No. 1336349 in Class 42. Considering the
said registration, the Plaintiff had filed a petition seeking cancellation of the
Defendant's mark before the IPAB, Mumbai. In view of the said cancellation
petition having been filed, the infringement suit being CS (OS) 1885/2015
was stayed by this Court, vide order dated 17th February, 2016. The said
order reads as under:
Issue notice. Learned counsel for the plaintiff accepts
notice. This application has been moved by ‘the
defendant under Section 124 of the Trade Marks Act,
1999 with the plea that the plaintiff has disclosed in
paragraph 27 of the plaint that the plaintiff has
already, i.e. prior to the filing of the suit, moved an
application for removal of the defendant's trade mark
"KAREEM'S" (LOGO) registered under- No.1336349
in class 42 in the name of the defendant by moving an
application under Sections 47/57/125 of the Trade
Marks Act before the Intellectual Property Appellate
Board (IPAB), Mumbai. The defence of the defendant in
the suit is premised on Section 30(2)(e) of the Act,
apart from other defences. In view of the aforesaid
position, the suit is liable to be stayed.
Learned counsel for the plaintiff does not oppose the
application.
Accordingly, the suit is stayed and adjourned sine die
to await the decision of the
IPAB in the aforesaid rectification application.
List the application for hearing on 03.08.2016”
8.     Thereafter, the cancellation petition continued to remain pending
before the IPAB, Mumbai, and on 16th November, 2017, the following
order was passed in CS (OS) 1885/2015:
Digitally Signed         CS(COMM) 112/2022                                                     Page 6 of 10
“Present suit has been filed for permanent injunction
to restrain infringement, passing off, delivery up,
damages etc. No injunction order has been passed by
this Court in the present suit.
Admittedly, the plaintiff has filed a proceeding before
the Intellectual Property Appellate Board (for short
‘IPAB’) for cancellation of the defendant's mark.
Present suit is being repeatedly adjourned since 17th
February, 2016 to await the outcome of the IPAB.
This Court is of the opinion that no fruitful purpose
would be served by repeatedly adjourning the present
suit as not only the proceedings before the IPAB are
bound to take time, but any order passed by the IPAB
may be challenged by either of the parties.
Consequently, the present suit and pending
applications are disposed of with liberty to the
plaintiffs to file an appropriate proceeding after the
IPAB has disposed of the proceeding for Cancellation
of the defendant's mark and the said order has
attained finality. The rights and contentions of all
parties are left open.
Registry is also directed to issue to an authorised
representative of the plaintiffs a certificate authorizing
him/her to receive back from the Collector full amount
of the Court fee paid by them in the present suit.”
9.     As per the above order, the suit was disposed of giving liberty to the
Plaintiff to file appropriate proceedings after the decision by the IPAB in the
cancellation petition.
10.    The     present  suit   seeking    permanent     injunction  to   restrain
infringement, passing off, delivery up, damages etc., has now been filed by
the Plaintiff on the ground that, owing to the long delay in the disposal of
the said cancellation petition, the Defendant is continuing to expand their
restaurant business. As per the Plaintiff’s information, the Defendant now
has large number of franchisees in various cities. There is enormous
Digitally Signed         CS(COMM) 112/2022                                                    Page 7 of 10
confusion being caused between the Plaintiff’s and the Defendant's
restaurants. The mark of the Plaintiff is also being diluted.
11.     After hearing ld. counsel for the Plaintiff on the previous date, fresh
notice was issued to the Defendant, reiterating the direction to file a list of
all the restaurants operating under the name “KAREEM’S”.
12.     Today, ld. Counsels for the parties submit that the cancellation
petition which was filed before the IPAB is still pending and no proceedings
have taken place.
13.     This Court notes that this is the second round of litigation between the
parties. A perusal of the record shows that the Plaintiff is the prior owner
and user of the marks “KARIM/KARIM'S/KAREEM” for Mughlai food and
North Indian delicacies, since the year 1913. The admitted adoption of the
impugned mark by the Defendant is since 2003, which is almost 90 years
after the Plaintiff’s adoption. In the first round of litigation, the suit had been
initially adjourned and thereafter, disposed of, permitting the Plaintiff to file
proceedings after the IPD taking a decision in the cancellation petition.
Unfortunately however, the said cancellation petition has continued to
remain pending and has not proceeded further. With the enactment of the
Tribunals Reforms Act, 2021, the IPAB has also been abolished and thus the
case would have to be transferred to the jurisdictional High Court. Ld.
Counsel submits that the matter is yet to be listed and no notice of listing in
a High Court has been received by the Plaintiff.
14.     Considering the fact that the Plaintiff is the prior user, adopter and
owner of the marks “KARIM/KARIM’S/KAREEM”, the continued use of
the said mark by the Defendant would result in passing off and deception.
However, the Defendant having opened 41 restaurants already as per the list
Digitally Signed         CS(COMM) 112/2022                                                        Page 8 of 10
set out above, this Court is of the opinion that a balance would have to be
struck so as to ensure that neither party is prejudiced irreparably. Owing to
the long adoption of the Plaintiff’s marks “KARIM/KARIM’S/KAREEM”
and the goodwill and reputation which the Plaintiff’s restaurants enjoy, not
only in India but internationally, this Court issues the following directions:
(i)     The Defendant shall not open any further restaurants under
the marks “KARIM/KARIM’S/KAREEM/KAREEM’S” or
any other marks which are identical or deceptively similar to
the Plaintiff’s marks “KARIM/KARIM’S/KAREEM” till the
next date of hearing. The said order would extend to the
Defendant      as   also   any     entity    which    may       be
promoted/incorporated by/associated with the Defendant or
his family members.
(iii)   The Defendant shall also ensure that in the restaurants run by
him or by his franchises, no representation is made to the
customers that the Defendant is associated with the Plaintiff -
KARIM/KARIM’S/KAREEM Restaurant from Jama Masjid
or Delhi.
(iv)    In this regard, at least two public notices shall be issued in
prominent newspapers having circulation in Maharashtra and
in North India, that the Defendant’s restaurant KAREEM’S
is not associated with the Plaintiff’s - KARIM HOTEL PVT
LTD or KARIM/KARIM’S/KAREEM Restaurant from Jama
Masjid or Delhi. The said notices shall be published by the
next date.
(v)     All the advertisements and promotional materials, menu
Digitally Signed         CS(COMM) 112/2022                                                    Page 9 of 10
cards, etc. including all promotions on social media and
online platforms, shall carry a prominent disclaimer to the
following effect:
“No connection with KARIM’S Jama Masjid/Delhi”.
(vi)      The above inclusion of disclaimer be effected within two
weeks in respect of all existing and future promotional
materials.
15.    The Defendant shall place on record his written statement/reply by 5th
July, 2022, along with copies of the franchise agreements entered into by
him with his various franchisees. The Defendant shall in the reply, state as to
the monthly franchise fees being earned/collected by him under the said
agreements and the total such fees collected till date. Rejoinder be filed
within two weeks thereafter.
17.    Both parties to remain present on the said date to explore amicable
resolution.
Digitally Signed        CS(COMM) 112/2022                                                  Page 10 of 10