The order of punishment of postponement of increment for 3
years without cumulative effect imposed by the Disciplinary Authority,
which was confirmed by the Appellate Authority, is under challenge in the
present writ petition.
2. The writ petitioner was holding the post of Police Constable
Grade-I and a criminal case was registered against the writ petitioner in
Crime No.765 of 2012 under Sections 294(b), 323, 353, 506(ii) IPC read
with Section 4(1)(j) of the Tamil Nadu Prohibition Act. The criminal
proceedings were initiated on 14.11.2012. Simultaneously departmental
disciplinary proceedings were initiated under Rule 3(b) of Tamil Nadu
Police Subordinate Service (Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1955 and a
charge memo was issued on 15.04.2013. The criminal case ended with an
order of acquittal vide judgment dated 29.01.2014. The petitioner furnished
the copy of the judgment passed by the Criminal Court and made a
representation to drop the departmental disciplinary proceedings. However,
the Disciplinary Authority proceeded with the departmental disciplinary
proceedings and conducted an enquiry and thereafter passed final orders on
05.02.2015 imposing the penalty of postponement of increment for three
years without cumulative effect. The petitioner preferred an appeal, which
was rejected by the DIG of Police, Salem on 20.05.2015. Thus, the
petitioner is constrained to move the present writ petition.
3. The learned counsel for the petitioner contended that the
Disciplinary Authority/second respondent failed to consider the order of
acquittal passed by the Competent Criminal Court of Law and also erred in
holding that the charges are held proved. When the charges both in the
criminal case and in the departmental proceedings are similar, the order of
acquittal made by the competent Criminal Court is to be taken into
consideration for the purpose of exonerating the writ petitioner from the
departmental disciplinary proceedings. In other words, actions under
Criminal Law and departmental disciplinary proceedings are on the same set
of facts. The respondents have failed to consider the nature of allegation and
the facts and circumstances involved in the case. The findings of the
Criminal Court was also not considered. Thus the order impugned is liable
to be set aside.
4. The learned Additional Government Pleader appearing on
behalf of the respondents objected the contentions raised on behalf of the
petitioner by stating that the allegation against the writ petitioner was
serious. The Deputy Commissioner of Police, Law and Order, Salem, City
initiated disciplinary proceedings against the writ petitioner under Rule 3(b)
of the Tamil Nadu Police Subordinate Service (Discipline and Appeal)
Rules, 1955 for the reprehensible conduct of the petitioner that while
attending duty in the Police Control Room on 14.11.2012, he was in a
drunken mood and abused Thiru Raghunathan, Special Sub Inspector of
Police on duty by using unparliamentary words and assaulted him. Though
the colleagues in the Control Room pacified the writ petitioner, the writ
petitioner did not relent and therefore, the writ petitioner was taken to
Government Hospital and drunkenness certificate was obtained and a
criminal case was registered in Crime No.765 of 2012 in Annadhanapatti
Police Station under Sections 294(b), 323, 353, 506(ii) IPC read with
Section 4(1)(j) of the Tamil Nadu Prohibition Act.
5. The learned Additional Government Pleader drew the
attention of this Court with reference to the deposition made by the
witnesses before the Criminal Court. All the witnesses belonged to the
Police Department and they have acted contrary to the prosecution and in
violation of the Conduct Rules in force. Though the witnesses were also
very much present in the Police Control Room when the incident occurred,
they have turned hostile and deposed contrarily before the Criminal Court of
Law which resulted in the order of acquittal.
6. The manner in which the Police Department officials
deposed before the Criminal Court reveals that they acted unbecoming of
the public officials. They have joined together and decided to dilute the
criminal proceedings in order to help the accused persons. Such a conduct
of the public servant under no circumstances be appreciated by this Court.
This Court is of the opinion that the higher officials of the Police
Department has to take the serious view of the matter regarding the manner
in which the responsible public servant deposed before Criminal Court of
Law with reference to the incident occurred very much inside the Police
7. The learned Judicial Magistrate made a serious finding
regarding the reprehensible conduct of the police officials while deposing
before the Court of Law. The findings of the Criminal Court reveals that the
Police Department officials have deposed in superficial manner in respect of
the incident occurred inside the Police Control Room. Therefore, they have
not shown any interest in establishing the prosecution case. They were not
even aware of the mahazer prepared and deposed against the prosecution
when they are very much working in the Police Department. The learned
Judicial Magistrate acquitted the accused persons because of the conduct of
the Police Department witnesses.
8. However, the Disciplinary Authority continued the
departmental     disciplinary   proceedings    and  conducted   an    enquiry
independently under the Discipline and Appeal Rules. The Enquiry Officer
submitted a report holding that the charges against the writ petitioner are
held proved. Accepting the report of the Enquiry Officer, the Disciplinary
Authority imposed punishment of postponement of increment for three
years without cumulative effect. The said punishment was confirmed by the
9. With reference to the contention of the writ petitioner that
the acquittal is a ground for exoneration, the Apex Court as well as the High
Court held in number of judgments that acquittal in a criminal case is not a
bar for the continuance of the departmental disciplinary proceedings. The
acquittal in a criminal case cannot be a ground for seeking exoneration from
the departmental disciplinary proceedings. The standard of proof required to
convict a person under the Criminal Law is strict and no such strict proof is
required for the purpose of punishment of an employee under the Discipline
10. The preponderance of probabilities are expected to punish
an employee and a moral turpitude is sufficient to punish an employee.
Thus, the misconduct under the Conduct Rules and the procedures
contemplated in the disciplinary proceedings, cannot be compared with the
procedures to be followed in criminal proceedings before the Criminal
Court of Law. Both the procedures are distinct and different. Thus the
ground seeking exoneration from the departmental disciplinary proceedings
based on the acquittal order by the Criminal Court of Law is untenable.
11. In the present case, the allegation against the writ petitioner
was grave in nature. The Police Department Officials themselves have
turned indifferently and deposed before the Criminal Court of Law.
Contrary to the mahazer prepared and in violation of the Government
Servants Conduct Rules, making a false or incorrect statement before the
Criminal Court of Law is also the misconduct under the Government
12. Admittedly, the incident occurred very much inside the
Police Control Room and a criminal case was registered. While-so, the
police officials turned indifferently and given contrary statements, which
resulted in acquittal of the accused in the criminal case.
13. The respondents have to consider the manner of functioning
of the Police Department Officials in the Control Room and initiate all
appropriate actions to ensure that the departmental officials maintain good
conduct at all circumstances and even before the Courts of Law while
deposing or giving statements.
14. With reference to the disciplinary proceedings, the
respondents have followed the procedures as contemplated under the
Discipline and Appeal Rules and there is no infirmity as such. Regarding
the quantum of punishment, this Court do not find any excessiveness. The
punishment of postponement of increment for three years without
cumulative effect imposed on the writ petitioner cannot be construed as
disproportionate to the gravity of the charges established against the
petitioner and thus this Court is not inclined to consider the grounds raised
in this writ petition.
15. Accordingly, the writ petition stands dismissed. However,
there shall be no order as to costs. Consequently, connected miscellaneous
petition is also dismissed.
1.The Deputy Inspector General of Police,