1.   This Court vide order dated 31st December 2022 granted Respondent
No. 1 and 2 last and final opportunity of four weeks time for filing
reply and in default it was made clear that the District Magistrate,
Anantnag shall remain present before the court and the matter was
directed to be listed on 4th February 2023.
2.   On 4th February 2023, in pre-lunch session, when the matter was taken
up, neither District Magistrate, Anantnag was present nor the reply
was filed and the matter was directed to be taken up in post lunch
session. In post lunch session, Mr. Abdul Rashid Malik, learned Sr.
AAG appeared and submitted before the court that due to law and
order problem, the District Magistrate could not appear and he assured
the court that the District Magistrate will remain present along-with
the record on the next date of hearing.
3.   Mr. Abdul Rashid Malik, learned Sr. AAG further submitted that he
has prepared the reply and the same will be filed on or before the next
date of hearing, positively and accordingly, a direction was issued to
the Registry to entertain the reply likely to be filed by the respondents.
On the assurance extended by the learned Sr. AAG, the matter was
directed to be adjourned and was also directed to be listed on 6th
WP (C) No. 905/2022                                              Page 1 of 18
February 2023 for personal appearance of District Magistrate,
4.   When the case was taken up on 6th February 2023, Mr. Abdul Rashid
Malik, learned Sr. AAG appeared along-with Mr. Mohd. Ashraf,
Additional Deputy Commissioner, Anantnag in such a manner making
the court to believe as if District Magistrate, Anantnag was making his
appearance before the Court in terms of the earlier order. The said fact
came to the notice of the court only after hearing of the case was over
and a slip was passed on to the concerned stenographer by the learned
counsel disclosing the particulars of the official as Mohd. Ashraf
(JKAS), Additional Deputy Commissioner, Anantnag. The said slip
has been made part of the record. It is worthwhile to mention that the
learned Additional Advocate General or even the officer present did
not deem it proper to disclose before the court during the course of
hearing that instead of District Magistrate, Anantnag, the Additional
Deputy Commissioner, is present before the court, rather both of them
have behaved in such a manner that as if the District Magistrate in
terms of direction of this Court was present before the Court. The
aforesaid act on part of the Additional Deputy Commissioner and Ld.
Additional Advocate General was serious and grave in nature and
amounts not only to misconduct but also tantamount to contempt of
court and perjury, as he deliberately and intentionally mislead the
court by playing fraud.
5.   This court by virtue of order dated 6th February 2023 has also
observed that the District Magistrate, Anantnag despite directions
for personal appearance, has tried to evade his appearance before the
Court and no plausible reason has been pleaded for his non-appearance
and thus, the conduct of the officer of such rank was unbecoming and
contemptuous in nature. Accordingly, this court directed District
Magistrate and Additional Deputy Commissioner, Anantnag, to
remain present before the court on 13th February 2023 to explain their
position and to show cause why the action as warranted under law be
not taken against them.
6.   Mr. Abdul Rashid Malik, learned Sr. AAG was also directed to file his
affidavit explaining as to why he has not brought to the notice of the
court, the fact that the District Magistrate, Anantnag is not appearing
WP (C) No. 905/2022                                            Page 2 of 18
and in his place the Additional Deputy Commissioner, has caused
his appearance. Pursuant thereto, the matter was listed on 13th
February 2023, and on the said date, both Deputy Commissioner and
Additional Deputy Commissioner, were present. The statement of
both the officers has been recorded in open court and made part of the
record. As per the statement of Additional Deputy Commissioner
(ADC), Anantnag, Mohd. Ashraf, it was Mr. Abdul Rashid Malik,
learned Sr. AAG who had told him that he ( L d . A A G ) has
sought permission of court to cause his (ADC) appearance on behalf
of District Magistrate when in fact there was no such permission
sought from the court.
7.   On asking, whether he apprised the court that he is Additional Deputy
Commissioner, the said officer submitted that he never apprised the
court that he is the Additional Deputy Commissioner during the
proceedings when the matter was considered by this court on 6th
February 2023. He further submits that he was conveyed by the
learned Sr. AAG that exemption has been sought from the court and
consequently in his place, Additional Deputy Commissioner, can
appear.
8.   As per the statement of the District Magistrate which was recorded on
13th February 2023, he submits that he was not aware of the court
order passed on 31st December 2022 and he came to know about the
said direction only on 4th February 2023 when the case was taken up.
He further submits that the order passed was conveyed to him by Mr.
Abdul Rashid Malik, learned Sr. AAG on 4th February 2023
telephonically. He further submitted that he could not appear on the
said date in light of the order passed in some public interest litigation
with regard to the encroachment drive. He further submits that he was
not aware about the court order dated 31st December 2022 till 4th
February 2023. He further submits that there was apprehension of law
and order problem, but there was no law and order problem which
could have prevented him to appear before the Court. On asking
whether any exemption was sought for his personal appearance, the
District Magistrate submitted that he had made a submission to his
lawyer to seek an exemption on his behalf and to request the court for
appearance of Additional District Magistrate, Anantnag. On the
WP (C) No. 905/2022                                           Page 3 of 18
asking of the court whether Additional Deputy Commissioner, can
appear in his place, when court has specifically directed his personal
appearance. He replied that on 6th February 2023, he was conveyed by
Mr. Abdul Rashid Malik, learned Sr. AAG, that the Additional
Deputy Commissioner, can appear on his behalf. He further submits
that he has not moved any application for seeking his exemption but
on the assurance extended by Mr. Abdul Rashid Malik, learned Sr.
AAG, that Additional Deputy Commissioner, can appear on his
behalf, he accordingly directed Additional Deputy Commissioner, to
appear on his behalf. The statement of District Magistrate that he was
not aware of the passing of the direction dated 31st December2022
for his personal appearance is factually incorrect in the light of the
note of the Registry, that the order of the court was served to the
concerned advocate and the District Magistrate, Anantnag vide
endorsement No. 885/886 on 09.01.2023.
9.   Mr. Abdul Rashid Malik, learned Sr. AAG has also filed an affidavit
in terms of order dated 6th February 2023 in which the learned Sr.
AAG has submitted that he has made submissions twice in the court
that the Additional Deputy Commissioner, is present in the court in
place of Deputy Commissioner. He further submitted that Additional
Deputy Commissioner, along-with record was present, as the Deputy
Commissioner, was dealing with law and order problem in the anti-
encroachment drive against large scale encroachment of Kahcharaie
land.
10.  Learned counsel has further deposed in the affidavit that he apprised
the court in this regard and the said submission was made in the open
court in presence of Ms. Asifa Padroo, learned AAG and also in
presence of Mr. Shuja-ul-Haq, learned counsel, besides seeking an
unconditional apology from the court for his conduct.
11.  The statement made by the aforesaid two officers is contrary to the
affidavit and stand taken by Mr. Abdul Rashid Malik, learned Sr.
AAG. On being confronted with the said position, Mr. Abdul Rashid
Malik, learned Sr. AAG had accordingly submitted that he may be
given an opportunity to file a better affidavit seeking unconditional
apology from the court. He further submitted that the aforesaid two
officers may also be permitted to file an affidavit seeking an
WP (C) No. 905/2022                                          Page 4 of 18
unconditional apology from the court. Keeping in view the request made by
the Mr. Abdul Rashid Malik, learned Sr. AAG, the permission was granted to
him and Deputy Commissioner, Anantnag and Additional Deputy
Commissioner, Anantnag to file fresh affidavit seeking unconditional apology
within a period of one week and the matter was directed to be listed on 28th
February 2023. Pursuant thereto, fresh affidavit stands filed by Mr. Abdul
Rashid Malik, learned Sr. AAG, Deputy Commissioner, and Additional
Deputy Commissioner, Anantnag seeking unconditional apology.
12.   In L.D. Jaikwal v. State of U.P., AIR 1984 SC 1374, the Hon'ble
Supreme Court noted that it cannot subscribe to the 'slap-say sorry-
and forget' school of thought in administration of contempt
jurisprudence. Saying 'sorry' does not make the slapper poorer. So an
apology should not be “paper apology” and expression of sorrow
should come from the heart and not from the pen; for it is one thing
to 'say' sorry, it is another to 'feel' sorry.
13.   It goes without saying that anyone who takes recourse to fraud,
deflects the course of judicial proceedings; or if anything is done with
oblique motive, the same interferes with the administration of justice.
Such persons are required to be properly dealt with, not only to punish
them for the wrong done, but also to deter others from indulging in
similar acts which shake the faith of people in the system of
administration of justice. The stream of administration of justice has
to remain unpolluted so that purity of court’s atmosphere may give
vitality to all the organs of the State. Polluters of judicial firmament
are, therefore, required to be well taken care of to maintain the
sublimity of court’s environment; so also to enable it to administer
justice fairly and to the satisfaction of all concerned.
14.   It has also been laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Chandra
Shashi v. Anil Kumar Verma (1995) 1 SCC 421 that a person who
makes an attempt to deceive the court, interferes with the
administration of justice and can be held guilty of contempt of court.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in Prashant Bhushan & Anr In Re. (2021)
3 SCC 160 upheld the stand taken in M.Y. Shareef v. Nagpur High
WP (C) No. 905/2022                                             Page 5 of 18
Court [AIR 1955 SC 19], wherein it has been held that “an apology
is not a weapon of defence to purge the guilty of their offence; nor is it
intended to operate as a universal panacea, but it is intended to be
evidence of real contriteness”.
15.  A four Judge Bench of this Court in Mulk Raj v. State of Punjab
[(1972) 3 SCC 839] made the following observations which would
throw considerable light on the present case;
“Apology is an act of contrition. Unless apology is offered
at the earliest opportunity and in good grace apology is
shorn of penitence. If apology is offered at a time when the
contemnor finds that the court is going to impose
punishment it ceases to be an apology and it becomes an act
of a cringing coward. The High Court was right in not
taking any notice of the appellant’s expression of apology
“without any further word‟. The High Court correctly said
that acceptance of apology in the case would amount to
allow the offender to go away with impunity after having
committed gross contempt.”
The Rules of Professional Ethics formed by the Bar Council
for the advocates though couched under statutory power,
are themselves not enough to prescribe or proscribe the
nobility of profession in entirety. The nobility of profession
encompasses, over and above, the Rules of Ethics. Lawyers,
as a class, are looked by the public as intelligentsia, as
observed in R. Muthukrishnan v. The Registrar General of
The High Court of Judicature at Madras, (2019) 16 SCC
407. The relevant portion of the judgment is extracted
“25. The role of a lawyer is indispensable in the system of
delivery of justice. He is bound by the professional ethics
and to maintain the high standard. His duty is to the court,
to his own client, to the opposite side, and to maintain the
respect of opposite party counsel also. What may be proper
to others in the society, may be improper for him to do as he
belongs to a respected intellectual class of the society and a
member of the noble profession, the expectation from him is
higher. Advocates are treated with respect in society.
People repose immense faith in the judiciary and judicial
system and the first person who deals with them is a lawyer.
Litigants repose faith in a lawyer and share with them
privileged information. They put their signatures wherever
asked by a lawyer. An advocate is supposed to protect their
rights and to ensure that untainted justice is delivered to his
cause.
15.       The high values of the noble profession have to be
protected by al l concerned at all costs and in all the
WP (C) No. 905/2022                                            Page 6 of 18
circumstances cannot be forgotten even by the youngsters in
the fight of survival in formative years. The nobility of the
legal profession requires an advocate to remember that he
is not over attached to any case as advocate does not win or
lose a case, real recipient of justice is behind the curtain,
who is at the receiving end. As a matter of fact, we do not
give to a litigant anything except recognizing his rights. A
litigant has a right to be impartially advised by a lawyer.
Advocates are not supposed to be money guzzlers or
ambulance chasers. A lawyer should not expect any favour
from the Judge and should not involve by any means in
influencing the fair decision making process. It is his duty to
master the facts and the law and submit the same precisely
in the court, his duty is not to waste the courts' time.”
16.  Since, the Deputy Commissioner, Additional Deputy Commissioner,
and Mr. Abdul Rashid Malik, learned Sr. AAG have tendered an
absolute and unconditional apology and the language used in the
aforesaid apology reflects regretful acknowledgment. The apology
which has been tendered by the aforesaid persons seems to be
tendered with a sense of genuine remorse and repentance and not a
calculated strategy to avoid punishment. Although, the apology stands
tendered at a belated stage, when the statements were recorded and the
stand taken by Mr. Abdul Rashid Malik, learned Sr. AAG was
dislodged by the aforesaid statements, yet Mr. Abdul Rashid Malik,
learned Sr. AAG and both the officers have shown remorse and
repentance by tendering an unconditional apology, the same is
accepted by this Court being bona fide. Undoubtedly, the apology
cannot be a defense of justification or an appropriate punishment for
an act which tantamounts to contempt of court. The apology can be
accepted in a case where the conduct for such an apology given is
such that it cannot be ignored without compromising the dignity of the
court. Apology cannot be accepted, in case it is hollow; there is no
remorse, no regret, no repentance, or if it is only a device to escape the
rigor of the law. Such an apology can merely be termed as a “paper
apology”. So, an apology should not be “paper apology” and
expression of sorrow should come from the heart and not from the
pen; for it is one thing to 'say' sorry, it is another to 'feel' sorry.
17.  The power to punish for contempt is a rare species of judicial power
which by the very nature calls for exercise with great care and caution.
WP (C) No. 905/2022                                                  Page 7 of 18
Such power ought to be exercised only where “silence is no longer an
option.” Being a member of the Bar, it was a duty of Ld. Sr. AAG,
Mr. Abdul Rashid Malik not to demean and disgrace the majesty of
justice dispensed by a court of law. The judicial process is based on
probity, fairness and impartiality which is unimpeachable.
18.  Since the unconditional apology have been tendered by Mr. Abdul
Rashid Malik, learned Sr. AAG and the two officers although belated,
but same seems to be bona fide and as they have shown remorse and
repentance of their acts, the same is accepted by this Court and the
proceedings which were initiated by this Court in the present petition
as such are closed for the reasons stated hereinabove.
19.  The brief case of the petitioner is that he is the owner in possession of
land measuring 5 marlas and 6 sirsais under Survey No.323 min
situated at Bidder Hayatpora Hangulgund Tehsil Kokernag, District
Anantnag on which the petitioner has already constructed his
shopping complex and the same is functional on spot for the last so
many years and said 5 marlas 6 sirsais of land is beneath and
appurtenant to this shopping complex.
20.  The further stand of the petitioner is that upto year 2010-11, he was
owner in possession of the said land measuring 8 marlas and 1 ½
sirsais under Survey No.323 min. The petitioner became owner of 2 ½
marlas of land by virtue of Section 4 and Section 8 of Agrarian
Reforms Act and also became owner of 5 marlas and 6 sirsais in the
year 2002 by virtue of power of attorney
and agreement to sell executed by the original owner namely Prithvi
Nath Hangloo S/o Shri Mahadev Nath original owner resident of
21.  The further case of the petitioner is that in the year 2010-2011, 2 ½
marlas of land of the petitioner from the aforesaid Khasra number, of
which petitioner became the owner under Section 4 and 8 of Agrarian
Reforms Act came under the Kokernag Sinthan road alignment for
which the petitioner has also received compensation from the
government in the year 2011.
22.  It has been further averred in the writ petition that a complaint was
lodged before the concerned District Magistrate Anantnag by some
migrants namely Soma Devi D/o Late Shri Nand Lal Hangloo W/o
Jawahir Lal Pandita and Chuni Lal Hangloo S/o late Shri Badrinath
Hangloo on 09-12-2019 against the petitioner, wherein, the allegation
was leveled that the petitioner has grabbed their land.
23.  The further case of the petitioner is that he has purchased the land
measuring 5 marlas and 6 sirsais from co-sharer of the complainants
by way of attorney and agreement to sell and with a view to
substantiate his claim, the petitioner has also placed on record the
copy of the Power of Attorney and the agreement to sell in the present
petition.
24.  The impugned order of eviction has been challenged by the petitioner
on the ground that the said order has been passed without holding any
enquiry and without determining the fact as to whether property in
question is a migrant property and the respondent No. 1 has not
followed the provisions of law nor has he determined the question as
to whether the property in question belongs to migrant and whether
the possession of the petitioner over the same is unauthorized in nature
or not.
25.  The petitioner through the medium of present writ petition is calling in
question the impugned order dated 17-12-2021 attested by the
Additional District Magistrate Anantnag and also seeking quashment
of the order passed by the District Magistrate Anantnag bearing
No.DCA/MC/(77/19)/21-22/1892-94 dated 23-03-2022, besides
WP (C) No. 905/2022                                           Page 9 of 18
seeking a writ in the nature of prohibition against the respondents
from dispossessing the petitioner from the land measuring 5 marlas
and 6 sirsais along-with shopping complex situated at Hangulgund
Kokernag under survey no.323 min besides seeking other reliefs.
26.  By virtue of the order impugned dated 17-12-2021, a direction has
been issued to Tehsildar Kokernag to remove the encroachment and
evict the unauthorized occupant (petitioner herein). The said order
dated 17.12.2021 has been passed by the concerned District
Magistrate, Anantnag in exercise of powers conferred under Section 4
and Section 5 of the Jammu & Kashmir Migrant Immovable Property
(Preservation, Protection and Restraint on Distress Sales) Act, 1997.
27.  Learned counsel appearing on behalf of petitioner submitted that the
respondent No.1 while passing the order impugned has wrongly
observed that the petitioner has unauthorizedly occupied the land of
migrants measuring 3 marlas comprising survey No.323 Min in
violation of law applicable, when the complainants have themselves
admitted in their complaint that the petitioner has obtained 5 marlas
and 6 sirsais of land from the Prithvinath who is the co-sharer of the
complainant on the strength of Power of Attorney and Agreement to
Sell. Accordingly, learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the
impugned order cannot sustain the test of law and same is liable to be
set aside. The further stand of the petitioner is that while passing the
order impugned, the respondent No.1-District Magistrate Anantnag
has not taken into consideration the revenue record which clearly
proves that besides 5 marlas and 6 sirsais of land, the petitioner has
also obtained further 2 ½ of land by virtue of Section 4 and Section 8
of Agrarian Reforms Act which came thereafter in 2010-2011 under
road alignment and on the basis of said Agrarian Act, the petitioner
has been compensated for these 2 ½ marlas of land by the concerned
government at that relevant point of time and on this score also, the
order impugned cannot sustain the test of law and liable to set aside.
28.  Lastly, learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that otherwise
also the impugned order is not sustainable on the ground that the
respondent No.1-District Magistrate Anantnag has not himself
constituted any team for the purpose of demarcation and neither any
demarcation was done by any appropriate agency on spot in presence
WP (C) No. 905/2022                                           Page 10 of 18
of the petitioner and in absence of the demarcation, the order
impugned dated 17-12-2021 cannot sustain in the eyes of law.
29.  Reply stands filed on behalf of respondents in which specific
objections has been taken by Mr. Abdul Rashid Malik, learned Sr.
AAG, towards the claim of the petitioner that he is the owner in
possession of land measuring 8 marlas and 2 ½ sirsais falling under
Survey No.323 Min upto the year 2010-11 is totally false in light of
detailed report which has been obtained from the field agency which
reveals that land measuring 03 Kanals 12 ½ Marlas covered under
Survey No.323 Min is recorded in the name of migrants as per
Jamabandi of year 2013-14.
30.  The respondents have further taken a specific stand that there is no
mutation under Section 4 and Section 8 recorded in the name of the
petitioner under Khasra No.323 Min and therefore, the question of the
petitioner being the owner of land measuring 2 ½ Marlas under
Survey No.323 Min by virtue of Section 4 and Section 8 of Agrarian
Reforms Act does not arise, as the land in question is recorded as self
cultivation of the migrant till date.
31.  As per the respondents, the claim of the petitioner is against the
procession of The Jammu and Kashmir Migrant Immovable Property
(Preservation, Protection and Restraint On Distress Sales) Act, 1997.
The further stand of the respondents is that the remaining land
measuring 5 marlas 6 sirsais under Khasra No.323 Min, which the
petitioner claims to be the owner in possession by virtue of some
Power of Attorney is also denied, being misconceived, (as the original
owner Prathvi Nath Hangloo, who the petitioner claims to have
executed the Power of Attorney for land measuring 5 marlas 6 sirsais
under Khasra No. 323 Min). As per the revenue record, 2 ½ marlas
under Khasra No. 323 Min is recorded in the name of petitioner by
virtue of the share of the migrant owner in Khasra No. 323 min, which
came under acquisition for widening of the SKA National Highway,
for which the specific stand of the respondents is that the petitioner
has illegally received the compensation without any permission for
alienation of the migrant property granted by the competent authority.
WP (C) No. 905/2022                                           Page 11 of 18
32.  The respondents have taken a specific stand that the petitioner is an
illegal occupant of the migrant property and as such, the impugned
order has been passed after proper enquiry on spot by field agencies
and after strictly following the mandate of law. Besides the
respondents have taken a specific stand that the petitioner has placed
on record the Power of Attorney and agreement to sell with a view to
substantiate his claim, the same cannot be accepted in light of fact that
the same is attested by a Notary and the petitioner has himself stated
in Para 3 of the writ petition that the executant of the said notarized
Power of Attorney is now deceased which raises the question against
the legality and validity of the said document and petitioner as such is
illegal encroacher of the migrant land.
33.  The respondents have further pleaded that the order impugned has
been issued by the District Magistrate, Anantnag on the basis of a
report obtained by Tehsildar, Kokernag vide No.881/OQ/Kng dated
02.11.2021 revealing land measuring 3kanals 12 ½ marlas recorded in
the name of migrants as per the Jamabandi of year 2013-14 and the
said report has not been called in question nor there is any challenge to
the same by the petitioner. The learned counsel for the respondents
has further submitted that the order impugned has been issued on the
basis of said report by the field agency which till date has not been
called in question and has been accepted by the petitioner without any
demur.
34.  Learned counsel for the respondents has further submitted that the
order impugned has been passed by the concerned District Magistrate,
Anantnag in exercise of powers conferred under Section 4 and Section
5 of the Jammu & Kashmir Migrant Immovable Property
(Preservation, Protection and Restraint on Distress Sales) Act, 1997
and a direction has been issued to Tehsildar Kokernag to evict the
unauthorized occupant i.e., petitioner herein, which is perfectly and
legally justified and strictly in consonance with the rules in vogue.
35.  It is further submitted that the petitioner was given chance to produce
the documents/attorney regarding the land in his possession which he
failed to produce.
36.  Mr. Shuja-ul-Haq, learned counsel appearing on behalf of private
respondent No.3 to 7 has submitted that he has filed an application
bearing CM No.5345/2022 for seeking a direction against the
respondent No.1 and 2 to ensure that the nature of property which is
the subject matter of the writ petition is neither changed nor altered by
the petitioner on spot. The said application has been treated as reply to
the aforesaid writ petition filed by the petitioner by virtue of order
dated 6th February, 2023.
37.  The learned counsel Mr. Shuja-ul-Haq, appearing on behalf of private
respondents has submitted that the petitioner has filed the present writ
on suppression of material facts as the petitioner all along contested
the case before the District Magistrate/DC Anantnag and has been
heard by the respondent No.1 prior to the issuance of order impugned
dated 17.12.2023. Learned counsel has further submitted that the
petitioner has been continuously appearing before the District
Magistrate Anantnag and other revenue authorities which is reflected
in the order dated 17.12.2021. The learned counsel has further
submitted that the demarcation report was submitted by Naib
Tehsildar, Kokernag on 3rd August, 2021 before the Tehsildar
Kokernag which was forwarded to District Magistratre Kokernag in
terms of communication dated 02.11.2021 issued by the Tehsildar
Kokernag. He further submitted that the demarcation of the land
falling under Survey No.323 min was conducted in presence of
petitioner and after conducting demarcation it has come to fore that
the land measuring 2 ½ was vacant while as 3 marlas of land was
under the possession of petitioner. He further submitted that the
petitioner has also received compensation on account of acquisition of
2 ½ marlas of land from the revenue authorities.
38.  Heard learned counsel for the parties at length and perused the record.
40.  Since the petitioner through the medium of present writ petition has
raised grievance that the order impugned has been passed without
providing him an opportunity of being heard and the same is violative
of the principles of natural justice as the petitioner has been
condemned unheard. Besides, the petitioner has taken a specific stand
WP (C) No. 905/2022                                            Page 13 of 18
that the documents on which the petitioner is relying have not been
accorded consideration by the respondent No.1 while passing the
order impugned. Since the order impugned has been passed by the
respondent No.1 on the basis of report obtained from Tehsildar
Kokernag vide No.881/OQ/Kng dated 02.11.2021 which revealed that
the land measuring 3 marlas12 ½ sirsais covered under survey no.323
min is recorded in the name of migrants as per Jamabandi of year
2013-14 and the report further reveals that the petitioner has received
compensation for the road alignment unauthorizedly being an
unauthorized occupant. Although, the petitioner has challenged the
order impugned passed by the District Magistrate Anantnag dated
17.12.2021, but the petitioner has failed to challenge the said report
which is the basis for passing the order impugned.
41.  Counsel for the private respondents has further taken a stand that the
petitioner has failed to challenge the aforesaid report obtained from
the Tehsildar Kokernag vide No.881/OQ/Kng dated 02.11.2021 which
is the basis for passing the order impugned. In absence of any specific
challenge to the aforesaid report issued by the Tehsildar Kokernag, the
challenge of the petitioner to the order impugned fails and cannot be
gone into while exercising writ jurisdiction under Article 226 of
Constitution of India with regard to the disputed questions of fact.
Since the petitioner has failed to challenge the aforesaid report on the
basis of which impugned order has been passed, the instant writ
petition is not maintainable as the same raises disputed questions of
facts which cannot be gone into while exercising writ jurisdiction.
42.  The only grievance which has been projected by the petitioner is that
he has been condemned unheard and the order impugned has been
passed without providing him an opportunity of being heard and the
documents on which the petitioner is relying upon has not been
accorded consideration by the District Magistrate, Anantnag, while
issuing the order impugned and accordingly, he prays that the matter
be referred to District Magistrate, Anantnag to pass orders afresh after
hearing both the parties by providing an opportunity to produce the
revenue records. The respondents are not averse to the              said
proposition put forth by the petitioner.
43.  The question whether respondent No. 1 should have relied upon the
revenue entries which are presumed to be correct unless rebutted by
cogent and convincing evidence or the report of the officials/officers
of the revenue department cannot be gone into while exercising the
writ jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution.
44.  Merely that the respondent No. 1 while passing the impugned order
has relied upon a report obtained from Tehsildar, Kokernag, dated 2 nd
November 2021 by holding that the petitioner has unauthorizedly
occupied the land of the migrants ignoring the revenue extracts
formulated by the revenue agencies wherein as per the petitioner it has
been shown in clear words that the petitioner besides aforesaid 5
marlas and 5 sirsai of land has obtained further 2 ½ marlas of land by
virtue of Section 4 and 8 of the Agrarian Reforms Act, the order
impugned cannot be quashed in the aforesaid proceedings by-passing
the alternative and efficacious remedy of filing an appeal under
Section 7 of the Act of 1997. Thus, the bar of alternative and
efficacious remedy of filing an appeal as provided under Section 7 of
the Act would come into play for the maintainability of the instant
writ petition. Thus, for the reason that the petitioner has an alternative
and efficacious remedy of filing an appeal under Section 7 of the Act
of 1997, the instant petition is held not to be maintainable.
45.  An unauthorized occupant is defined in Section 2 of The Jammu and
Kashmir Migrant Immovable Property (Preservation, Protection and
Restraint On Distress Sales) Act, 1997 as any person who has
encroached upon or taken possession of any immovable property of
the migrant without his written consent and authorities of law.
46.  Sub-Section 5 of the Migrant Act provides that if any unauthorized
occupant of any migrant property refuses or fails to surrender the
possession, the force is to be used for taking over the possession.
47.  In Rajeev Verma and another v. State and others, AIR 2011 J&K
117, it has been held by the Division Bench of this Court that
unauthorized occupant as defined in Clause (i) of Section 2 of the
Migrant Act means a person who has encroached upon or has taken
possession of any immovable property of a migrant without his
written consent and authority of law.
48.  The claim of the petitioner is that he is in possession of property in
question on the basis of a Power Of Attorney and Agreement to Sell
which have been placed on record. Admittedly, the Power of Attorney
and Agreement to Sell which has been placed on record in the present
writ petition is not a registered document but the same is a notarized
document.
49.  Before proceeding further in the matter on the auspices of Migrant
Act, it would be profitable to have a glance of provisions of Section
138 of the J&K Transfer of Property Act, which has a direct bearing
on the case in hand. For ready reference, Section 138 is reproduced
“138. Transfer of immovable property after due
(1) No transfer of immovable property, except in a case
governed by any special law to the contrary, shall be
valid unless and until it is in writing, registered and the
registration thereof has been completed in accordance
with subsection (3) of section 61 of the Registration Act,
(2) No Court shall entertain a suit for pre-emption in
respect of transfer of any such immovable property unless
the transfer complies with the provision of subsection (1).
(3) No person shall take possession of, or commence to
building or building on, any land in the province of
Kashmir which has been transferred or has been
contracted to be transferred to him unless and until such
transfer becomes valid under the provisions of sub-
section (1).
(4) No person who has obtained a transfer of immoveable
property referred to in subsection (1) shall apply for and
obtain from any Revenue or Settlement Officer or Court
any alteration in any existing entry in any Settlement
record or paper, unless such person produces before such
officer or Court a duly executed registered instrument,
the registration whereof has been completed in the
manner prescribed in subsection (1).
And no such officer shall alter or cause to be altered any
such entry except upon the production of an instrument
registered in the aforesaid manner.
Provided that nothing in this section applies to a lease of
agricultural land for one year or to a lease of any other
land for a period not exceeding seven years;
Provided also that nothing in sub section (3) (4) shall be
deemed to apply to transfers by will or by any rule of
intestate succession or by the operation of the law of
survivorship.”
50.  In the present case, there is no valid document, shown to have been
executed in favour of the petitioner, other than the aforesaid document
of irrevocable Power of Attorney and Agreement to Sell by virtue of
which the petitioner claim to have taken possession of the property.
Therefore, the possession of the petitioner if seen within the ambit of
Section 138 cannot be said to be a legal possession but it would be an
unauthorized possession. Reliance is placed on 2004 (II) SLJ 736
titled Gh. Mohammad Matoo Vs. Gh. Rasool Sofi and Ors.
51.  The only grievance which has been projected by the petitioner is that
respondent No. 1 while passing the impugned order by holding the
petitioner as an unauthorised occupant has not provided him an
opportunity of being heard or accorded due consideration to the
revenue extracts formulated by the revenue agencies and thus he prays
that the matter be referred back to the respondent No. 1 for providing
an opportunity of hearing so that justice is done to the petitioner.
52.  In light of the consensus of parties, the writ petition is taken up for
final disposal without commenting upon the merits of the case or with
regard to maintainability of present writ petition. The present petition
in light of consensus made by learned counsel for the parties is
disposed of with the direction to the respondent No.1 to pass fresh
order within four weeks from today with regard to land in question
situate at village Hayatpora Hangulgund Tehsil Kokernag, District
Anantnag, after hearing both the parties i.e., petitioner herein and
private respondent No.3 to 7 who are at liberty to produce the revenue
records    which      are   in   their   possession     before    District
Magistrate/Deputy Commissioner Anantnag, without being influenced
WP (C) No. 905/2022                                             Page 17 of 18
by the observations made by this court in the present petition. The
parties are directed to appear before the concerned authorities i.e.,
District Magistrate Anantnag on 15th March, 2023 and till the fresh
order is passed by the District Magistrate, Anantnag, the status quo as
it exists today shall be maintained. As a necessary corollary, impugned
orders stand quashed.
53.    Petition along-with all connected CMs shall stand disposed of.
Whether approved for Reporting?      Yes