For the reasons stated in the application, the same is allowed. The
needful be done within three weeks from today.
Disposed of accordingly.
1.     The charge sheet stands presented against the applicant-accused Amrit
Pal Singh for commission of offence under Sections 302/380/454 IPC
in FIR No. 21/2020 registered with Police Station, Janipur, Jammu for
an occurrence which is alleged to have taken place on 05.03.2020 in
the house of the victim Surinder Singh situate at Mandlik Nagar,
2.     The application is filed for grant of bail on the ground that a false case
has been set up against the accused which is solely based upon
circumstantial evidence. There is no circumstance which speaks of the
involvement of the applicant in the alleged commission of offence. The
application filed for grant of bail before the learned trial court has been
rejected vide order dated 23.09.2020. Of course, the plea of Covid-19
pandemic has also been taken by the applicant for bail in the
application.
3. The objections to the application have been filed wherein the
application is opposed on the ground that the accused is involved in
gruesome act and cannot be granted bail. The investigation has
established the aforesaid offences against the applicant-accused.
4. Heard learned counsel for the parties. The scanned record of the case is
before the court.
5. Mr. K. S. Johal, learned Senior counsel, appearing on behalf of the
applicant, has strenuously argued that no case whatsoever is made out
against the accused. The argument of the counsel is that there is no eye
witness of the occurrence and the case is based upon the circumstantial
evidence. Recovery of certain articles on the alleged disclosure
statement made by the accused Amrit Pal Singh, the theft alleged to
have been committed by the accused, medical report stating death of
the victim because of asphyxia sustained in manual strangulation and
the time recorded in the postmortem report regarding of death of the
victim do not connect the accused with the commission of offence.
Further, the injury received by the victim as per medical report is not
grievous in nature which shows that at the most some scuffle can be
said to have taken place between the victim and the accused and
nothing more.
appearing on behalf of the respondents has argued that the points
raised on behalf of the accused cannot be finally considered and
commented upon in the bail application as the same are matter of trial.
The court is not required to thrash the evidence that has been gathered
during the course of investigation by the police as it is for the trial
court to appreciate the same. The accused is involved in a heinous
offence and cannot claim the bail as a matter of right. The application
requires outright dismissal at this stage.
7. At the outset, it may be mentioned that it is stated before the court that
the arguments on the charge/discharge could not be addressed due to
one reason or another till date. This court will not assume the
jurisdiction of the trial court on the aspect of the charges that may or
may not be framed against the accused in the challan filed against him.
The court is to deal with the situation where the challan has only been
presented against the accused under Sections 302/380/454 IPC in the
aforesaid challan. The court has been called upon to assess and
appreciate the different angles of the prosecution case set up against
the accused as is evident from the arguments that have been raised on
behalf of the accused. The court is not to record any sort of finding on
the arguments raised by the learned counsel for the applicant-accused
which are based on the factual as well as legal aspects of the case. The
learned Senior counsel has laid much stress on the disclosure statement
allegedly made by the accused and the discovery made of ornaments in
pursuance to the same in order to show that except for this evidence
which itself does not connect the accused with the commission of
offence, there is no evidence on record which links the accused with
the alleged commission of offence. The court cannot record any
observation on this aspect of the case as the other circumstances that
appear in the case also are part of the case set up by the police against
the applicant. The court cannot appreciate the evidence that has been
collected by the prosecution against the accused while deciding the bail
application. It is suffice to mention here that after going through the
challan it cannot be said that the present case is of no evidence against
the accused only for the reason that there is no eye witness of the
occurrence as per the challan nor can it be finally said that the
circumstantial evidence through which the prosecution intends to prove
its case against the accused can have no bearing whatsoever on the
culpability of the accused. The court is not to anticipate the evidence
that is to come on record on behalf of the prosecution.
8.   The learned counsel for the applicant, in support of his contention, has
placed reliance on AIR 1960 SC 1125, AIR 1971 SC 2016 and AIR
2007 SC 1356. There can be no quarrel with what has been observed
and held by the Hon’ble Apex Court in the judgments. However, the
same cannot be of any help to the applicant-accused at this stage.
9.  The gravity of offence, evidence gathered by the police agency and the
stage of the case do not entitle the applicant to bail in the present
application.
10. The learned counsel for the applicant has also urged before the court
that as the trial could not proceed due to COVID-19 pandemic and the
challan is pending disposal for the last more than eight months the
applicant should be bailed out. The extraordinary situation happening
due to pandemic cannot be a ground to grant bail to the accused in the
case which is otherwise at its initial stage. The court is not convinced
with this argument of the applicant so as to grant bail to the accused.
11.     The court finds no good ground to grant the prayer made in the
application which is, accordingly, dismissed. Any expression used in
the disposal of the present application shall have no bearing on the
trial.