Case :- CRIMINAL APPEAL No. - 3603 of 2018
Counsel for Appellant :- Anil Mullick,Dinesh Kumar
Counsel for Respondent :- G.A.
(Oral Judgment by Hon’ble Ajai Tyagi, J.)
1.     This appeal is preferred against the judgment and order
dated 27.6.2018, passed by Additional Sessions Judge, Court
NO.11, Meerut, in Sessions Trial No.553 of 2015 (State vs.
Anurag Sharma) arising out of Case Crime No.64 of 2015
under Section 302 IPC, Police Station-Kotwali, Meerut by
which the accused appellant was convicted under Section
302 IPC and sentenced with life imprisonment and fine of
Rs.25,000/- with one year additional imprisonment in case of
default of fine.
2.     The brief facts of the case as culled out from the record
are that a Written-report (Ex.ka1) was submitted by the
complainant, namely, Shail Kumari Sharma (mother of the
accused and wife of the deceased) to the Police Station-
Kotwali, Meerut on 12.3.2015 with the averments that on
that date at about 12:30 p.m., she had gone to the house of
her brother at Devpuri and from there she went to Nagar
Palika with her nephew, namely, Shivanshu Sharma s/o
Promod Kumar Sharma to deposit the house-tax. She had left
her husband Prem Kishan Sharma aged about 70 years and her
son Anurag Sharma at home. After depositing the house-tax in
Nagar Palika at about 2:30 p.m., she returned to her house
with her nephew and saw there that her husband was lying in
dead condition in the corridor of first-floor of the house and
there was pool of blood in corridor and inside the room and
her son Anurag, who was drug addict and used to demand the
money for it from his father, was absent from the house. It is
also averred that her husband was retired from the post of
clerk in Electricity department in the year 2005. His dead-
body is lying. He has murdered by inflicting injuries on the
3.     On the basis of aforesaid written report, a first
information report (Ex.ka3) was registered at Police Station-
Kotwali under Section 302 IPC and investigation was taken up
by S.I. Mukesh Kumar. During the course of investigation,
Investigating Officer visited the spot and collected the plain
and blood-stained earth from the place of occurrence and
prepared the recovery memo with bed-sheet and towel.
4.     The accused-appellant was arrested on the same day of
the occurrence and I.O. Recovered the hammer on the pointing
out of the accused from inside the box, which was in the room,
adjacent to the kitchen of the house. The hammer was having
blood on it, which was used for the commission of the crime.
Investigating Officer also took the clothes of the accused in
his possession, which were having blood-stains and inquest
report was prepared. The postmortem of the body of the
deceased was conducted and postmortem report was prepared.
Recovered articles from the place of occurrence, clothes of
deceased      including the recovered hammer were sent to
Forensic Science Laboratory, Agra for Chemical examination.
On all above articles, blood-stains were found and on pant and
shirt of the accused and on bed-sheet and towel, human blood
was found. After completion of the investigation, charge-sheet
was submitted against accused-appellant Anurag Sharma.
5.     The case being triable exclusively by the court of
session, it was committed to the Sessions Judge for trial. Trial
court framed charge against the accused under Section 302
IPC. The accused denied the charge and claimed to be tried.
The prosecution so as to bring home the charges, examined 8
witnesses, namely:-
6.     The accused was examined under Section 313 of Cr.P.C.
by putting evidence against him. Accused denied the evidence
against him and stated that his father was murdered in order to
rob his house or committing dacoity and police had falsely
implicated him to suppress the said heinous offence. It is also
stated by the accused that he was handicapped to the tune of
60%, he was never drug addict. He was under depression due
to disability, hence the doctors used to administer him sleeping
medicines. In his defence the accused examined three
witnesses, namely, Rajhans Singh (DW1), Aruna Bhargava
(DW2) and R.M. Gupta (DW3).
7.     In support of the ocular version of the witnesses,
following documents were produced and contents were proved
by leading evidence:-
3. Recovery Memo of 'Ala-katl' 'hathoda' Ext. Ka-9
4. Recovery Memo of accused's clothes         Ext. Ka-13
5. Recovery Memo of plain & blood- Ext. Ka-12
stained concrete, bedsheet and towel
8.     Heard Shri Sunil Vashishta, learned counsel for the
appellant and Shri N.K. Srivastava, learned AGA for the State
as well as perused the record.
9.     Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that first
information report of the occurrence is based on suspicion.
There is no eye witness of the occurrence. Learned counsel
submitted that the complainant is mother of the appellant, but
she had to name the appellant in FIR under the pressure of
police because she and her nephew were picked up by the
police and kept in the lock-up and she was pressurized to sign
the written-report (Ex.ka1), which was written by some
unknown person. Learned counsel invited our attention
towards the statement of complainant (PW1) in which she has
stated that Ex.ka1 has her signature, but she does not know
who has written it. She was pressurized to put her signature on
Ex.ka1 under the threat of putting her and her nephew in the
lock up. Learned counsel preferred the statement of PW1 that
police had kept her at police station whole night and released
thereafter. Learned counsel also submitted that PW3 is nephew
of the complainant, who has also supported the aforesaid facts
in his evidence and deposed in his testimony that they had told
the police that dacoity is committed in the house of complainat
and her house is robbed, but police did not lodge the FIR.
Police kept complainant and accused in the lock up and
released me. On the basis of aforesaid statement of PW1 and
PW3, the learned counsel for the appellant submitted that FIR
of the case was lodged by the complainant in which her son
accused was named under the pressure of the police.
10.    Learned counsel for the appellant further submitted that
as per prosecution case, the clothes of the accused were blood-
stained, but the blood came on the clothes of the accused when
he lifted the body of the deceased-father.
11.    Learned counsel for the appellant next submitted that
recovery of hammer, which is said to be used in the
commission of the crime, is said to be on the pointing out of
the accused, but in fact, the recovery is planted. A fake
recovery memo is prepared by the police. Learned counsel
made submission that no reliance can be placed on such type
of recovery because there is no independent witness of the
recovery. Section 27 of Arms Act cannot be made applicable
because as per the statement of Investigating Officer, the
accused had told him that he had hide out the hammer in the
box, which is lying in the room adjacent to the kitchen of the
house. Learned counsel argued when a particular place is
disclosed by the accused then in that case weapon could be
recovered by I.O. himself. There was no need to take the
accused to that box and make the recovery on his pointing out.
It is further submitted that no finger-prints were taken from the
12.     Learned counsel for the appellant next submitted that as
per prosecution story, the arrest of the case was made at the
platform of the railway station by chauki in-charge of
Government Railway Police and its entry was made in G.D.
But neither the chauki in-charge was examined by the
prosecution nor aforesaid GD was proved. Hence, prosecution
has failed to prove the factum of place of arrest of the accused.
Learned counsel submitted that in fact the accused was not in
his house at the time of occurrence and had gone out, he came
to his house after returning her mother.
13.     Learned counsel for the appellant also submitted that
learned trial court has wrongly invoked the provision of
Section 106 of Indian Evidence Act,1872 because the burden
to prove the case lies on the shoulders of prosecution, this
burden cannot be shifted on the accused.
14.     Lastly, learned counsel for the appellant submitted that
there is no eye-witness of the occurrence of this case and it is a
case of circumstantial evidence and chain of circumstances is
not complete by the evidence led by the prosecution. There
was no motive with the accused-appellant to commit the
murder of his father. Recovery, as alleged, is also not proved
and there was no recovery of any hammer on the pointing out
of the accused rather PW3 has categorically stated in his
evidence that he had seen the hammer near the dead-body.
Place of arrest of the accused is also not proved. Hence, entire
case rests upon suspicion and trial court has wrongly
convicted and sentenced the accused.
15.    Learned AGA submitted that the first information report
was voluntarily lodged by the mother of the accused-appellant
naming him. There was no pressure on complainant because
FIR is very prompt. It was lodged on the same day just after
one and half hour when the murder of her husband came into
her knowledge. Hence, in such a prompt FIR, there was no
occasion or reason with the complainant to falsely implicate
her own son. Learned AGA further submitted that only the
accused and his father were left at home when the complainant
went to Nagar Palika for depositing the house tax. There was
none other at the house, hence the burden shifts on the
appellant to prove his innocence, but he could not discharge
the burden under Section 106 of Indian Evidence Act,1872.
Learned AGA also submitted that there is no cross-
examination from the hostile witnesses that accused was not at
home when his mother went out. Learned AGA next submitted
that the recovery of hammer, which is used for commission of
the crime was made on the pointing out of the accused-
appellant because it was recovered from inside the house of
the appellant and no other could know where the hammer lies.
It is next submitted that the report of FSL also substantiates
the fact that offence is committed by the appellant because
human blood was found on the clothes of the appellant and on
the recovered bed-sheet of the bed on which the body of the
deceased was found.
16.    Per contra, learned counsel for the appellant submitted
that there was no such fact, which was in the special
knowledge of the appellant, hence there is no applicability of
Section 106 of the Indian Evidence Act and learned trial court
had wrongly taken the recourse of said provision of law of
17.    Accused-appellant is named in FIR. Although, the
complainant, mother of the accused, has turned hostile, but the
testimony of hostile witness cannot be appreciated only on the
ground of hostility. That part of testimony of a hostile witness
can be accepted, which supports the prosecution and that part
can be relied upon. The maxim 'falsus in uno falsus in
omnibus' is not applied in criminal law in India. The grain has
be separated from the chaff. Needless to say that the testimony
of hostile witnesses should be scrutinized meticulously and
very cautiously.
18.    Hon’ble     Apex    Court   in   Koli     Lakhmanbhai
Chandabhai vs. State of Gujarat [1999 (8) SCC 624], as
held that evidence of hostile witness can be relied upon to the
extent it supports the version of prosecution and it is not
necessary that it should be relied upon or rejected as a whole.
It is settled law that evidence of hostile witness also can be
relied upon to the extent to which it supports the prosecution
version. Evidence of such witness cannot be treated as washed
off the record. It remains admissible in the trial and there is no
legal bar to base his conviction upon his testimony if
corroborated by other reliable evidence.
19.    In Ramesh Harijan vs. State of U.P. [2012 (5)
SCC 777], the Hon’ble Apex Court has also held that it is
settled legal position that the evidence of a prosecution
witness cannot be rejected in toto merely because the
prosecution chose to treat him as hostile and cross-examined
him. The evidence of such witness cannot be treated as effaced
or washed off the record altogether.
20.    In State of U.P. vs. Ramesh Prasad Misra and
another [1996 AIR (Supreme Court) 2766], the Hon’ble
Apex Court held that evidence of a hostile witnesses would
not be totally rejected if spoken in favour of the prosecution or
the accused but required to be subjected to close scrutiny and
that portion of the evidence which is consistent with the case
of the prosecution or defence can be relied upon. Thus, the law
can be summarized to the effect that evidence of a hostile
witness cannot be discarded as a whole, and relevant part
thereof, which are admissible in law, can be used by
prosecution or the defence.
21.    It is stated by PW1, mother of the accused, that she was
kept by police in police station through out the night and
forcibly took her signature on written-report on the basis of
which FIR was lodged. We are unable to rely on the aforesaid
statement of the complainant because there is no evidence on
record that she had ever made any complaint to higher
authorities of police if her signature was taken forcibly on
written-report. Moreover, there is also no evidence on record
that her house was burgled and it cannot also be believed that
to hide the offence of dacoity, police falsely implicated the
accused through his mother. It is also pertinent to mention that
the first information report was lodged very promptly as it was
lodged just after one and half hour when the complainant first
saw the dead-body of her husband. Hence, there was no
opportunity or any reason with her to falsely implicate her son.
22.    The complainant (PW1) although turned hostile, but in
her examination-in-chief, she has corroborated the version of
FIR to the extent that on the day of occurrence, she had gone
to deposit the house-tax in Municipal Corporation and when
she returned at about 2:50 p.m., the occurrence had already
taken place. It is also admitted by her in cross-examination
when she returned home, the accused was not at home. He
came later on. It also indicates that after committing the
offence, accused fled away. Hence, the version of FIR cannot
be doubted even though the author has turned hostile.
23.    It is admitted case that when the mother of the accused
left home for Municipal Corporation, she left her husband and
accused son at home. In examination-in-chief, the complainant
(PW1) has specifically deposed as under:
In her cross-examination also, she has accepted the suggestion
of the public prosecutor when she was examined by him after
being hostile. The relevant portion of it is quoted as under:
Hence, the mother of the deceased PW1 confirms the version
of FIR that she had left deceased and accused at home and no
one else was present there. It means that when the deceased
was murdered, it was accused only, who was in the house with
the deceased. Hence, Section 106 of the Indian Evidence Act
comes into application.
24.   Section 106 of the Indian Evidence Act,1872 reads as
106. Burden of proving fact especially within knowledge.—
When any fact is especially within the knowledge of any
person, the burden of proving that fact is upon him.
(a) When a person does an act with some intention other than
that which the character and circumstances of the act suggest,
the burden of proving that intention is upon him.
(b) A is charged with travelling on a railway without a ticket.
The burden of proving that he had a ticket is on him.
25.   The Apex Court in Sabitri Samantaray vs. State
of Odisha, AIR 2022 SC 2591 has also observed as
“18. Section 106 of the Evidence Act postulates that the
burden of proving things which are within the special
knowledge of an individual is on that individual. Although the
Section in no way exonerates the prosecution from
discharging its burden of proof beyond reasonable doubt, it
merely prescribes that when an individual has done an act,
with an intention other than that which the circumstances
indicate, the onus of proving that specific intention falls onto
the individual and not on the prosecution. If the accused had a
different intention than the facts are specially within his
knowledge which he must prove.
19. Thus, although Section 106 is in no way aimed at
relieving the prosecution from its burden to establish the guilt
of an accused, it applies to cases where chain of events has
been successfully established by the prosecution, from which
a reasonable inference is made out against the accused.
Moreover, in a case based on circumstantial evidence,
whenever an incriminating question is posed to the accused
and he or she either evades response, or offers a response
which is not true, then such a response in itself becomes an
additional link in the chain of events. [See Trimukh Maroti
Kirkan Vs. State of Maharashtra, (2006) 10 SCC 681]”
26.    The accused has not discharged his burden under
Section 106 of the Indian Evidence Act. In his statement under
Section 313 Cr.P.C., he has taken a stand that his father was
murdered during the robbery or dacoity in his house and
police falsely implicated him to suppress this heinous crime,
but no iota of evidence is on record regarding any robbery and
dacoity in the house hence the appellant has failed to
discharge his burden.
27.    The recovery of hammer used for commission of the
crime is made on the pointing out of the accused-appellant
from a very specific and such place which was only in his
knowledge. Recovery of hammer was made by Investigating
Officer from the box, kept in the adjacent room of kitchen of
the house of the accused. He had told to I.O. that he had hide
out the hammer inside the box, which is kept in the adjacent
room of the kitchen. Learned counsel for the appellant has
submitted that as per prosecution version, the appellant had
already told to the I.O., the specific place where he had hid the
hammer, therefore, in such a situation this discovery cannot be
turned as discovery under Section 27 of Indian Evidence Act.
28.    Recently, while upholding the conviction, the Division
Bench of this Court in Criminal Appeal No.2135 of 2013 has
held in paragraph Nos.16, 17 & 27 as follows:
16. In the present case, the events complete the chain and,
therefore, we are satisfied that the conviction of the
accused-appellant requires to be upheld. Reference to the
decision penned by His Lordship Justice M.R. Shah (as he
then was) in the case of Nayan alias Yogesh
Sevantibhai       Soni    Vs.    State   of   Gujarat    in
Criminal Appeal No.37 of 2010 decided on 1.9.2015
where similar situation had arisen, reliance can be easily
17. Reliance can be placed on the decision of the Apex
Court in Raja @ Rajinder Vs. State of Haryana,
JT 2015 (4) SC 57. Relevant paragraph of the
aforesaid judgment is as under :
statement that relates to the discovery of a
fact in consequence of information received
from him is admissible. The rest part of the
statement has to be treated as inadmissible.
In view of the same, the recovery made at
the instance of the accused-appellant has
been rightly accepted by the trial Court as
well as by the High Court, and we perceive
no flaw in it.
15. Another circumstance which has been
taken note of by the High Court is that the
blood-stained clothes and the weapon, the
knife, were sent to the Forensic Science
Laboratory. The report obtained from the
Laboratory clearly shows that blood stains
were found on the clothes and the knife.
True it is, there has been no matching of the
blood group. However, that would not make
a difference in the facts of the present case.
The accused has not offered any explanation
how the human blood was found on the
"The discovery appears to be credible. It has
been accepted by both the courts below and
we find no reason to discard it. This is apart
[pic]from the fact that this weapon was sent
to the forensic science laboratory (FSL) and
it has been found stained with human blood.
Though the blood group could not be
inconclusive, the accused had to give some
explanation as to how the human blood
discovery would very positively further the
prosecution case."
substantial reason not to accept the recovery
of the weapon used in the crime. It is also
apt to note here that Dr. N.K. Mittal, PW-1,
has clearly opined that the injuries on the
person of the deceased could be caused by
the knife and the said opinion has gone
27. From the depositions of P.W.1, the prosecution is
successful in establishing and proving that it was the
accused who had moved with the deceased and that the
dead body was that of the deceased whose missing report
was filed.
29.   We are unable to accept the submission of appellant
because the place of hiding the hammer was only, only and
only within the knowledge of the accused. It was not known
to any other person. We are giving emphasis on the word 'only'
as we interpret that place is only in the exclusive knowledge of
the accused ruling out the possibility of anyone else
knowledge. If the place of hiding the weapon is exclusively
within the knowledge of accused and that place cannot be or is
not in the knowledge of any other person and the weapon is
recovered from the same place,         such type of recovery is
absolutely reliable and it cannot be doubted or it cannot be
presumed that weapon is planted. In this case at hand, the
hammer was recovered by IO after getting the knowledge
from the appellant and at the time of the recovery IO took the
appellant with him and appellant entrusted the hammer to the
IO after taking out it from the box himself. The Investigating
Officer (PW6) has also proved the factum of recovery in his
testimony before the learned trial court. It is also pertinent to
mention that the hammer was blood-stained. It was sent to
FSL for chemical examination and the report of laboratory
(Ex.ka11) also goes against the appellant because as per
aforesaid report, the blood was found on the hammer.
30.   Accused-appellant has tried to establish the fact that he
was disabled to the tune of 60%. His disability is in one hand
and one leg. This statement is made by appellant in his
statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C. and to substantiate this
fact a defence witness, namely, Dr.R.M. Gupta (DW3) is
examined by accused. This witness was one of the signatories
of disability certificate of the accused, but in his cross-
examination by public prosecutor his testimony also goes
against the accused-appellant, which is quoted as under:
31.   Hence, learned trial court has rightly concluded that the
accused was in a position to use the hammer so forcibly that
the ante-mortem injuries mentioned in postmortem report
could be inflicted.
32.   Perusal of postmortem report shows that following ante-
mortem injuries were found on the body of the deceased:
(i)     A lacerated wound 6.0 cm x 5.0 cm on front of
forehead, bone deep x muscle deep.
(ii)    A lacerated would size 8.0 cm x 3.0 cm on right
side of head 5.0 cm above on right ear
(iii)   A lacerated wound size 4.0 cm x 1.0 cm right side
of head just 9.0 cm above right ear.
(iv)    A lacerated wound 4.0 cm x 1.0 cm on right side of
head back to right ear.
33.   Aforesaid ante-mortem injuries were such, which could
be the result of use of hammer recovered on the pointing out
of the accused. The doctor conducting the postmortem of the
body has examined as PW7 and corroborated the fact that such
kind of injuries could be inflicted with the help of a object like
hammer. Hence, the medical evidence also corroborates the
prosecution case.
34.   The appellant had motive also to commit the crime as it
is on record that the appellant was drug addict. In first
information report, his mother has stated that he was drug
addict and used to quarrel with his father to extract the money
for the purpose. In her testimony, although she has retracted
this statement, but she has admitted the suggestion of
prosecution that for some time he had remained admitted in
de-addiction centre.
35.    Although the witnesses of fact PW1 and PW3 had
turned hostile, their testimony supporting the prosecution case
is there, which is rightly accepted by learned trial court.
Moreover, nature of circumstantial evidence in this case is also
before us.
Himanchal Pradesh, (2020) 10 SCC 166, it was held by
the Supreme Court that in case of circumstantial evidence,
circumstances taken cumulatively, should form a chain so
complete that there is no escape from the conclusion that
within all human probability the cirme was committed by the
accused and by none else and the circumstantial evidence in
order to sustain the conviction must be complete and incapable
of explanation to any other hypothesis than that of a guilt of
the accused and such evidence should not only be consistent
with the guilt of the accused, but should be inconsistent with
his innocence.
37.    Keeping in view the aforesaid position of law in the
case at hand, the appellant had motive to commit the crime.
PW1 and PW3 even after turning hostile has supported the
prosecution version. Accused-appellant has failed to discharge
his burden of proof under Section 106 of Indian Evidence Act,
the weapon, namely, hammer used in the crime is also
recovered on the pointing out of the appellant. Blood-stains on
the hammer are confirmed by the FSL report. Medical
evidence also supports the prosecution version as the ante-
mortem injuries could be inflicted by the hammer recovered
on the pointing out of the accused. No evidence is found with
regard to robbery or dacoity in the house of the appellant.
Appellant was not found in his house when the complainant
returned and firstly saw the dead-body of her husband.
Although the GD of arrest of the accused from the platform of
railway station is not proved by the prosecution, but it may be
laps on the part of the public prosecutor, which cannot shatter
the prosecution case and we have to see the cumulative effect
of entire evidence available on record. The Investigating
Officer has deposed in his testimony that he had taken the
appellant into the custody from the chauki of Government
Railway Police for which entry was made in the GD. GD
number and dates are also deposed by the Investigating
Officer. Accused had also failed to substantiate his version
under Section 313 Cr.P.C. that he was handicapped to the
extent that he could not use the hammer, but his supporting
witness, namely DW3 had also not supported the version
rather deposed affirmatively in cross-examination that the
accused could lift the weight measuring 15-20 kg. while it is
in the evidence that the hammer in question was not more than
1 kg.
38.    Hence, keeping in view the aforesaid circumstances of
this case, the chain of circumstances is so complete and linked
with each other that no doubt is left with regard to the guilt of
the accused-appellant and the completion of chain of
circumstances goes to prove beyond reasonable doubt that the
offence is committed only by the appellant and by none else.
Hence, the learned trial court has rightly convicted and
sentenced the accused and appeal is liable to be dismissed.
39.   Appeal sans merit and is, accordingly, dismissed.