The petitioner is a lawyer.    He is the sole accused in the
case C.C.No.273/2012 pending in the Court of the Chief Judicial
2.   The petitioner was the Deputy Chairman and a Legal
Advisor of the company by name M/s.Cherupushpam Kuries. The
company had engaged him for instituting suits for realisation of
money due from the subscribers to the kuries conducted by it. It
is alleged that the petitioner did not file the suits after receiving
money from the company towards the expenses to be met in that
regard and that he misappropriated the amount.             It is also
alleged that he provided false suit numbers to the company, as if
he had instituted those suits and obtained money from the
company.     Therefore, it is alleged that he has committed the
offences punishable under Sections 406, 409 and 420 of the
3.    The petitioner has filed this application under Section
482 Cr.P.C for quashing Annexure-A final report filed against him
by the police for the offences mentioned above.
4.    Heard learned senior counsel for the petitioner and
also the first respondent and the learned Public Prosecutor.
5.    The   offences  alleged   against   the   petitioner are
punishable under Sections 406, 409 and 420 of the Indian Penal
Code.    Prima facie, the allegations contained in the final report
against the petitioner, supported by the statements of the
witnesses, reveal and constitute the ingredients of the offences of
criminal breach of trust and cheating.
6.    The offence of criminal breach of trust is defined under
Section 405 and it is made punishable under Section 406 of the
7.    Section 405 of the Indian Penal Code states that,
whoever, being in any manner entrusted with property, or with
any dominion over property, dishonestly misappropriates or
converts to his own use that property, or dishonestly uses or
disposes of that property in violation of any direction of law
prescribing the mode in which such trust is to be discharged, or
of any legal contract, express or implied, which he has made
touching the discharge of such trust, or wilfully suffers any other
person so to do, commits “criminal breach of trust”.
8. The offence of criminal breach of trust involves the
following ingredients: (a) a person should have been entrusted
with property, or entrusted with dominion over property; (b) that
person should dishonestly misappropriate or convert to his own
use that property, or dishonestly use or dispose of that property
or wilfully suffer any other person to do so; and (c) that such
misappropriation, conversion, use or disposal should be in
violation of any direction of law prescribing the mode in which
such trust is to be discharged, or of any legal contract which the
person has made, touching the discharge of such trust.
9. Two distinct parts are involved in the commission of the
offence of criminal breach of trust. The first part consists of the
creation of an obligation in relation to the property over which
dominion or control is acquired by the accused. The second part
involves    misappropriation  or    dealing   with  the   property
dishonestly and contrary to the terms of the obligation created.
10. Entrustment of property as envisaged in Section 405 of
the Indian Penal Code need not be in any particular manner. The
entrustment may arise in "any manner'' whatsoever. The words
'in any manner' in the context are significant. The section does
not provide that the entrustment of the property with the
accused shall be made by some person. As long as the accused is
given possession of property for a specific purpose or to deal with
it in a particular manner, the ownership being in some person
other than the accused, he can be said to be entrusted with that
property to be applied in accordance with the terms of
entrustment and for the benefit of the owner.
11. The above principles, reiterated by the Apex Court in a
catena of decisions, have been highlighted by this Court in
Damodara Panicker v. State of Kerala (2019 (3) KHC 514:
12.   In the instant case, there is specific allegation against
the petitioner that the company gave him money for meeting the
expenses in connection with the institution of suits but the
petitioner did not file the suits. The statement of atleast one
witness (CW4 Paul)       shows that the money received by the
petitioner included the court fee to be paid for institution of the
suits. Though the professional fees paid by the company to the
petitioner may have become his own money, the amount paid to
him by the company for payment of court fees still belonged to
the company. Prima facie, the allegations against the petitioner
in this regard attract the ingredients of the offence of criminal
breach of trust.
13. In the administration of law and justice, lawyers have to
play an important part. They are, in a sense, officers of the court
and as such they are given special rights and privileges. The
profession    of  law  enjoys  high   and   respected    status  and
reputation of its own and this status carries with it corresponding
obligations. Naturally they must zealously safeguard the highest
standards of professional morality and integrity (See Manak Lal
v. Dr. Prem Chand : AIR 1957 SC 425). Preservation of
integrity, dignity and honour is the price one pays for the
privilege of belonging to a kind of close and exclusive "club" and
enjoying in it special privileges and immunities (See Mr.'G', a
14. Law is a noble profession. The monopoly conferred on
the legal profession by Parliament is coupled with a responsibility
towards the clients. Nothing should be done by any member of
the legal fraternity which might tend to lessen in any degree the
confidence of the public in the fidelity, honesty and integrity of
the profession (See V.C.Rangadurai v. D.Gopalan : AIR 1979
15. When a lawyer is entrusted with a brief, he is expected
to follow the norms of professional ethics and try to protect the
interests of his clients, in relation to whom he occupies a position
of trust (See Jaipur Vikas Pradhikaran v. Sri Ashok Kumar
16.   Learned senior counsel for the petitioner submitted
that, the petitioner was defrauded by his clerk and when the
petitioner detected the fraud committed by the clerk, he
instituted the suits and no loss was caused to the company.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that there was no
dishonest intention on the part of the petitioner.        However,
learned senior counsel for the first respondent would submit that,
by the time the petitioner instituted the suits, amount of many
instalments of kuri due from the subscribers had become
17.   Whether or not the clerk of the petitioner had
defrauded him is a question of fact. It cannot be decided in this
application under Section 482 Cr.P.C, especially when a criminal
case is pending against the clerk of the petitioner in that matter.
It is a plea which the petitioner has to raise at the time of the
trial of the case.
18.   Of course, dishonest intention is necessary to attract
the offence of criminal breach of trust. But, whether the
petitioner had any dishonest intention or not depends upon the
fact whether or not he was actually defrauded by his clerk. As
noticed above, that fact cannot be decided in this application filed
19.   Moreover, when a person allows another person to
misappropriate     the     property   entrusted  to  him,   that  also
constitutes   the    offence    of  criminal  breach  of  trust  (See
Venkatakrishnan v. CBI : AIR 2010 SC 1812).
20.   Even    if  it   is accepted    that the  petitioner  had
subsequently instituted the suits, it does not undo the offence, if
any, committed by him.          Even temporary misappropriation of
money would attract the offence punishable under Section 406 of
21.   A case involving temporary embezzlement attracts the
offence defined under Section 405 of the Indian Penal Code.
Even a temporary misappropriation comes within the ambit of
that offence (See Venkatakrishnan v. CBI : AIR 2010 SC
22.   The offence of cheating is also alleged against the
petitioner. There is specific allegation against the petitioner that
he provided false suits numbers to the company and obtained
money as if he had instituted those suits.        Dishonest intention
from the very beginning is made out from such allegation and
prima facie, such act of the petitioner attracts the offence
punishable under Section 420 of the Indian Penal Code.
23.    The discussion above leads to the conclusion that the
prayer for quashing Annexure-A final report cannot be allowed by
invoking the power of this Court under Section 482 Cr.P.C. The
petition is liable to be dismissed.
Consequently, the petition is dismissed.