This appeal takes exception to the judgment and order
dated 03.06.2016 passed by the High Court of Karnataka at
Bengaluru in Writ Petition No.40521/2015.
Heard learned counsel for the parties.
The   short   question   involved    in   this   appeal   is:
whether an application for correction of the decree which
has been confirmed by the High Court while deciding the
appeal    filed     thereagainst      on    merits     can     be
corrected/altered by the Trial Court keeping in mind the
purport of Section 153A of the Code of Civil Procedure?
The High Court referred to this contention raised by
the appellant(s), but chose to disregard the same on the
finding  that   some  other   party   to  the   suit  had   filed
application for similar relief insofar as ‘C’ schedule
property,   referred to   in  the   decree,  but  came   to  be
rejected (vide order dated 14.03.2014 in IA No.I of 2013
in RFA No.353/2001 along with Cross Objection No.16/2001)
—  on  the   finding that   ‘C’   schedule  property  was   not
subject   matter  of the   appeal   at  all  before  the   High
In our opinion, the fact that the High Court vide
order dated 14.03.2014 had rejected another application,
does not address the legal issue about the jurisdiction
of the Trial Court to alter the decree passed by the High
That question needs to be answered keeping in mind
the   final   decree  passed    by  the   High  Court   albeit
affirming the decree passed by the Trial Court. The final
decree passed by the High Court while disposing of the
appeal and cross objection filed by the parties, reads
"The appeal is partly.
The partition in respect of "A" schedule
property will be in accordance with the joint memo
filed by the parties on 19.04.12 alongwith six
sketches. The joint memo and sketches shall become
part of the judgment and decree.
The final decree passed by the trial court in
respect of the remaining schedule properties remain
disturbed.
The cross objection is dismissed.
Parties to bear their own costs."
The   appeal   was  filed   in  respect   of  ‘A’   schedule
property, whereas cross objection was filed in respect of
‘C’ schedule property. This fact has been noted by the
High Court while disposing of the first appeal and cross
objection vide judgment and decree dated 19.04.2012.
In light of the operative order passed by the High
Court while disposing of the appeal and cross objection,
it leaves no manner of doubt that the decree passed by
the Trial Court had merged with the judgment and decree
passed by the High Court, referred to above. In such a
case, the application for correction could be maintained
only before the High Court where the decree has been
finally confirmed in terms of decision dated 19.04.2012.
Whereas, an application before the Trial Court for
correction of such a decree could be maintained only if
the appeal was to be decided by the High Court under Rule
11, Order 41 of the Code of Civil Procedure. It is not in
dispute   that   the   High  Court    had  passed   the   stated
judgment   and   decree   after   due   consideration    of  all
aspects on merits and not rejection of appeal under Rule
11, Order 41 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
As a result, we hold that the Trial Court had no
jurisdiction to entertain the application for correction
of decree passed by the High Court in the first appeal
and cross objection. On that count alone, the application
filed before the Trial Court for correction of decree in
respect of ‘B’ schedule property to be corrected as ‘C’
schedule property, is rejected as not maintainable before
The party who had moved such application will be at
liberty to move a fresh application before the High Court
in the first instance for the same relief in terms of
this order.
The application in question stands dismissed as not
maintainable before the Trial Court with liberty to the
applicant   (respondent)  to   move  a  formal   application
within four weeks from today for similar relief before
the High Court in the first instance for correction of
the decree, if so advised.
Accordingly,    the  appeal   succeeds.   The   impugned
judgment and order is set aside.
All contention available to both sides are left open.
We reiterate that we have not dealt with the merits
of the claim in the proposed application.
The appeal is disposed of in the above terms.
Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (C)   No(s).   31174/2016
(Arising out of impugned final judgment and order dated 03-06-2016
in WP No. 40521/2015 passed by the High Court Of Karnataka At
Date : 07-02-2022 These matters were called on for hearing today.
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
Leave granted.
The appeal is disposed of in the above terms.
Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.
[Signed order is placed on the file]