In this writ petition, the petitioner has called in question
a course of action in which the respondent no. 2 Superintendent
of Police Doda entertained an anonymous complaint addressed
against the petitioner and which complaint found its way to reach
the respondent no. 4 SHO Police Station, Doda, who in turn
addressed the impugned letter no. 1363/S-1 dated 01.07.2013 to
the respondent no. 3 i.e., the Executive Engineer PHE Division,
Doda asking for the information concerning the petitioner who is
working under him.
It will not take much deliberation upon facts to make
disposal of the writ petition.
The petitioner is a public servant serving as Junior
Engineer in PHE Division Doda. An anonymous complaint that
too an undated stood addressed to the respondent no. 2 i.e. the
Superintendent of Police Doda which contained allegations of
every description against the petitioner in the context of his
service as Junior Engineer to the extent of even questioning his
posting in the PHE Department.
Though the petitioner in this writ petition has sought to
attribute filing of this anonymous complaint against him to vested
interests operating against him who are having political score to
settle with his father-in-law and also that a complaint was
nothing but a sponsored one which was meant to be provided to
the then official serving as Superintendent of Police Doda, so as to
be used against the petitioner in order to settle score with the
petitioner’s father-in-law. All this stated aspect of the case has no
bearing in the context of the legal aspect, which is the competence
of the respondent nos. 2 & 4 to seize the said anonymous
complaint and use it at their own level without even registering it
as an FIR.
A perusal of the objections filed on behalf of respondent
nos. 1, 2 & 4 would show that it is no where disclosed as to how
respondent no. 2       i.e. the Superintendent of Police Doda
entertained the said complaint instead of referring it to the
petitioner’s Head of the Department that being the Chief Engineer.
So much so, it is not even forthcoming as to how come the
respondent no.4, i.e. the Station House Officer, Police Station
Doda came to have the said anonymous complaint to his end for
the purposes of immediately acting upon it by addressing a letter
to the respondent no. 2 i.e. the Executive Engineer, PHE Division
Doda thereby asking for information about the petitioner.
Examining the position from the legal standpoint in the
face of the nature of the allegations leveled in the said anonymous
complaint, this Court is unable to figure out as to under which
enabling provision of law the respondent no. 4 i.e. the Station
House Officer, Police Station Doda came to address this impugned
communication no. 1363/S-1 dated 01.07.2013 on the pretext of
a complaint against the petitioner to the respondent no. 3 i.e. the
Executive Engineer, PHE Division Doda. The respondent no. 4
had not registered any FIR or even a preliminary inquiry into the
matter so as to make formal and official the alleged exercise so
undertaken       on  his   part    in   addressing    the  impugned
communication to the respondent no. 3 i.e. the Executive
The petitioner is a public servant. In case any public
servant is to be subjected to a surveillance mode by a rank holder
police official on the pretext of a complaint received without first
entertaining the said complaint into a formal process, then surely
the very confidence of the public servant in acting and doing his
duty will be subjected to a paralysis. A Police is not supposed to
act as if super boss of the public administration system. The
impugned communication no. 1363/S-1 dated 01.07.2013 by the
respondent no. 4 i.e. the Station House Officer, Police Station
Doda to respondent no. 3 i.e. the Executive Engineer, PHE
Division Doda fails to answer the question of law as to under
which provision of law, the respondent no. 4, i.e. the Station
House Officer, Police Station Doda ventured to act upon the said
anonymous       complaint   and   make    the  petitioner suffer   an
apprehension as if he is under a surveillance. Thus, the said
impugned communication no. 1363/S-1 dated 01.07.2013 of the
respondent no. 4 to respondent no. 3 is held misconceived and
liable to be quashed. It is strange that the author of the
anonymous complaint in the complaint has no where mentioned
the fact as to why he/she has chosen to address the complaint
directly to the Superintendent of Police, Doda and not to the Chief
Engineer concerned and there is also no reference in the
complaint that the complainant had in fact first apprised the
Chief Engineer concerned or the superior officers of the petitioner
about the alleged acts of omission and commission on the part of
the petitioner related to his official status and position.    This
aspect does show that the said anonymous complaint was nothing
but a set up aimed to harass a public servant.
In the light of this the writ petition is allowed. The impugned
communication no. 1363/S-1 dated 01.07.2013 issued by the
respondent no. 4 i.e. the Station House officer, Police Station
Doda to the respondent no. 3 i.e. the Executive Engineer, PHE
Division Doda is quashed.
Whether the order is reportable :    Yes/ No
Whether the order is speaking :      Yes/ No