The proceedings in the matter have been conducted through
video conferencing.
Exemption allowed, subject to all just exceptions.
The application is disposed of.
1.     By way of this petition under Article 227 of the Constitution,
the petitioner seeks to challenge an order dated 18.11.2021, passed by
the learned Principal District and Sessions Judge, Rent Control
Tribunal”] in RCT No. 11/2019.
2.     By the impugned judgment, the Tribunal has affirmed an order
dated 16.04.2019 passed by the Senior Civil Judge-cum-Rent
Controller”], dismissing the petitioner’s objection to execution of an
eviction decree dated 16.08.2016, which was in favour of the
respondent herein.
3.      The respondent filed an eviction petition on 05.02.2015 against
the petitioner’s husband, Mohd. Miraj Khan [hereinafter, “Khan”], in
respect of a property described as “One room on G.F. in Premises No.
Plot No. 30, Pal Colony, Rithala, Delhi”. Eviction was sought under
Section 14(1)(e) of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 [hereinafter, “the
Act”]. Khan contested the proceedings by filing an application for
leave to defend, which was dismissed vide the order of the Rent
Controller dated 16.08.2016. Consequently, the eviction petition was
allowed.
4.      The aforesaid order dated 16.08.2016 was not challenged by
Khan or by any other party. In the order dated 16.08.2016, Khan’s
contention is noted to the effect that his wife [the petitioner herein]
was the tenant of the premises in question, which is described as “Plot
No. 17, Khasra No. 59/13, Pal Colony, Near Rithala Village”, and
that she subsequently purchased the property. It was averred that the
eviction petitioner [respondent herein] was not the owner of the suit
property, but that Khan’s wife [petitioner herein], was the owner. The
relationship of landlord and tenant between the eviction petitioner and
Khan was therefore denied.
5.      The matter was considered by the Rent Controller and it was
recorded in the eviction order as follows:
“8. Present eviction petition is with respect to one
room in plot no. 30, Part Khasra no. 59/13, Village
Rithala, Delhi. The documents filed by the respondent are
of plot no. 17, Khasra no. 59/13, Pal Colony, Near
Rithala Village, Delhi. As per the documents filed by
respondent, the description of the property is entirely
different as compared to the suit property. The
respondent in the entire application has not disputed the
description of the tenanted premises as disclosed by the
petitioner in the petition. Thus as such petitioner has not
raised any triable issue with respect to the
ownership/status of landlord of petitioner in the present
matter. He is claiming that his wife is the owner of the
suit property, however, as per the documents filed by him,
his wife is the owner of some plot no. 17, while petitioner
is seeking eviction of plot no. 30.”1
6.      The respondent herein thereafter sought execution of the
aforesaid eviction order dated 16.08.2016. In the execution
proceedings, Khan filed objections. The objections were dismissed by
an order dated 05.10.2018, with the following observations:
“23. In view of above mentioned position of law now,
we come back to the facts of present case. In this case
first of all the case of the JD/objector is not that he has a
independent title in the suit property or that he is covered
U/s 18 of the DRC Act. In fact all what the JD is stating
is that the description of suit property i.e. Juggi No.30 is
different from his Jhuggi No.17. But on a perusal of the
main order on leave to defend application dated
16.08.2016 read with site plan filed along with such
petition, it is noted that such difference between Jhuggi
Emphasis supplied.
No. 30 and 17 was dealt at that time also. The present
JD/ respondent during such argument in main petition
stated that her wife is owner of plot No. 17. But same
was held to be a separate property. Further, on the basis
of site plan filed there is no difficulty in identifying the
suit property bearing No. 30 in question. Further, no
reason is given by the JD/ respondent why such matter
was not agitated further during the main petition and why
any revision is not preferred against such judgment dated
16.08.2016 so far.
Further it is pertinent to note that even in such
objections filed by JD now, he has not denied his tenant
landlord relationship with the DH. Infact as rightly
pointed out by the DH side, in view of Section 116 of
Evidence Act, such JD is estopped from denying the
same. Further, interestingly the wife of JD has not filed
any objection so far, although it is claimed by JD during
main petition proceedings that she is the owner of the suit
property in question. Further, being an executing court
this court cannot go beyond the decree/judgment in
question and the platform/remedy, if so at all, is
elsewhere. This executing cannot sit as the appellant
court on the judgment in question. Further, it is pertinent
to note that in any case such original eviction order is not
7.      Approximately one month after the dismissal of the objections
filed by Khan, the petitioner herself filed objections to the execution
of the eviction order dated 16.08.2016.
8.      The said objections were dismissed by the order of the Rent
Controller dated 16.04.2019. The Rent Controller held that the
Emphasis supplied.
objections raised by the petitioner were similar to those raised by
Khan, who is her husband. The Rent Controller accepted the
contention of learned counsel for the decree holder that the documents
pertaining to the petitioner’s possession were obtained after the filing
of the eviction petition by the decree holder and that the decree holder,
in fact, possessed the registered title documents to the property in
question. The dispute with regard to the identity of the suit property
was raised during the eviction proceedings and considered in the order
dated 16.08.2016. The Rent Controller came to the conclusion that the
objections raised by the petitioner herein, being similar to those raised
by Khan and rejected, also deserved to be dismissed.
9.      Against the aforesaid order dated 16.04.2019, the petitioner
filed the appeal before the Tribunal, which was dismissed by the
impugned order dated 18.11.2021. The Tribunal held against the
petitioner on the finding that she had not filed any revenue record to
show that plot Nos. 17 and 30 were the same plot as alleged by her,
and also observed that she should have had the plots demarcated by
the revenue authorities in respect of her contention. The Tribunal also
found that the objections of Khan, having already been dismissed, the
objections of the petitioner were really an attempt to delay the
execution of the decree and that no triable issue has arisen which
requires adjudication by leading evidence.
10.     Having heard Mr. Pradeep Kumar, learned counsel for the
petitioner, I do not find any ground to interfere with the impugned
order under Article 227 of the Constitution. The supervisory
jurisdiction of this Court is exercised only to ensure that the courts and
tribunals remain confined to their respective jurisdictions and exercise
the same in accordance with the fundamental principles of law and
justice. The High Court is generally not called upon, under Article
227, to reappraise evidence or correct every error of law or fact.
Several judgments of the Supreme Court, including inter alia in
Estralla Rubber vs. Dass Estate (P) Ltd.3 and Garment Craft vs.
Prakash Chand Goel4 make this position clear.
11.         The jurisdiction is to be exercised even more sparingly when
challenge is to orders of the Rent Controller and the Tribunal under
the Act. In Koyilerian Janaki and Others vs. Rent Controller
(Munsiff), Cannanore and Others5, in the context of the Kerala
Buildings (Lease and Rent Control) Act, 1965, the Supreme Court
“4. Further we are in agreement with the argument of
learned counsel for the appellant that it was not
appropriate for the High Court to have interfered with
the order passed by the District Judge in exercise of its
power under Article 227 of the Constitution. The
proceedings in the present case arose under a special
Act governing the landlord and tenant relationship and
disputes. The Act does not provide any second appeal or
revision to the High Court. The purpose behind for not
providing such remedy is to give finality to the order
passed under the Act. The power under Article 227 is
exercisable where it is found by the High Court that due
to a certain grave error an injustice has been caused to
2022 SCC OnLine SC 29 [judgment dated 11.01.2022 in Civil Appeal No. 314 of 2022, arising
out of S.L.P.(C) No. 13941 of 2021] [paragraph 18]
a party. For this reason also, the judgment of the High
The same principle would apply to the present case. Three judgments
of this Court are also relevant in this context. In Nawal Kishore vs.
Mohd. Yakub7, this Court noticed an earlier decision in Jasbir Singh
vs. Manjit Kaur8 and held as follows:
“8. I have at the outset enquired from the counsel for the
petitioner as to the scope of the petition under Article 227
of the Constitution of India; though the Act as it was in
existence prior to the amendment with effect from 1st
December, 1988, besides providing for first appeal under
Section 38 of the Act against the order of the Rent
Controller to the RCT, also provided for a second appeal
under Section 39 thereof to the High Court albeit on a
question of law only, by amendment of the Rent Act with
effect from 1st December, 1988, Section 39 has been
deleted and the appeal to the RCT under Section 38 has
been made only on a question of law. It has thus been
enquired that once the legislative intent is to do away
with a second appeal, to what extent in exercise of
jurisdiction under Article 227 of the Constitution of India,
this Court can continue to interfere. It cannot certainly be
within the same parameters as was permitted under
Section 39 of the Act which has been deleted and if it
were to be held so, it would amount to rendering
nugatory the deletion of Section 39.
9. The counsel for the petitioner agrees that the scope of
challenge under Article 227 of the Constitution thus has
Emphasis supplied.
2017 SCC OnLine Del 12778 [CM(M) 1256/2012 decided on 03.10.2017]
2013 SCC OnLine Del 4647 [CM(M) 1041/2011 decided on 20.11.2013]
to be narrower than the scope under the erstwhile Section
39 of the Rent Act. However, the counsel for the
petitioner, on enquiry, states that to his knowledge, there
is no judgment of this Court considering the said aspect
or laying down the parameters of the jurisdiction under
Article 227 of the Constitution against the orders of the
RCT. The counsel for the respondent also has not cited
any judgment in this respect.
10. I however find the High Court of Andhra Pradesh in
Shaik Abdul Haq v. Aiswarya Nilaya Chit Fund Pvt. Ltd.,
2005 SCC OnLine AP 33 to have in the context of Section
102 of the Civil Code of Procedure, 1908, amended with
effect from 2002, taking away the remedy of second
appeal against a judgment and decree when the subject
matter of the original suit is for recovery of money not
exceeding Rs. 25,000/-, to have held that if petitions
under Article 227 of the Constitution are entertained
against the judgment and decree of the first Appellate
Court, it will amount to exercising the appellate
jurisdiction which has been prohibited by the legislature
and by the Supreme Court in Yeshwant Sakhalkar v.
Raichand Oswal v. Laxmibai R. Tarta AIR (1975) 1 SCC
858 and in Ranjeet Singh v. Ravi Prakash, (2004) 3 SCC
682. I also find the High Court of Rajasthan to have in
Municipal Council, Sawai Madhopur v. Civil Judge
expressed a similar doubt. As far as this Court is
concerned, I however find a Co-ordinate Bench in Jasbir
Singh v. Manjit Kaur 2013 SCC OnLine Del 4647 to have
held that a petition under Article 227 to be maintainable
but without this Court in the garb thereof acting as a
Court of appeal. It was held that interference there under
is only to keep authorities and the Courts in the
supervisory jurisdiction of this Court within their bounds
and where it results into manifest miscarriage of justice
and not in all cases, to correct mere errors. It was yet
further held that the powers under Article 227 of the
Constitution are discretionary in nature, to be exercised
where the lower court ignores material piece of evidence
or considers some evidence which should not be
considered and resulting into injustice. It was held that
where there are two views possible and the view adopted
by the lower court is reasonable and a plausible one, this
Court would not be justified in interfering in such cases
merely to arrive at different view in the matter.”
Nawal Kishore, in turn, has very recently been cited in Dev Raj vs.
Saroj Singhal (Deceased), through Her Lrs. and Others9.
12.      In light of the aforesaid judgments, it is clear that such
interference would be justified only in the event the view taken by the
Rent Controller and the Tribunal is entirely arbitrary and perverse or
in excess of jurisdiction. Where orders have been passed on
consideration of the materials placed before the Rent Controller and
the Tribunal, this Court would not be justified in exercising
jurisdiction under Article 227 of the Constitution
13.      In the present case, the facts show that the dispute as to the
identity of the property was considered by the Rent Controller while
passing the eviction order dated 16.08.2016 against Khan. The
question, as decided in the said order, was not carried in appeal. In
execution proceedings also, Khan’s objections were first considered
2021 SCC OnLine Del 5492 [CM(M) 1132/2921 decided on 22.12.2021] [paragraph 16]
and dismissed, after which the petitioner filed independent objections
raising substantially similar grounds. The matter has been considered
on the materials placed before the Rent Controller and the Tribunal
and there is no jurisdictional error or perversity in that consideration
so as to invite interference of this Court in its supervisory jurisdiction.
14.    The petition, alongwith the pending application, is therefore
dismissed.
22:43:46              CM(M) 144/2022                                                   Page 10 of 10