I.A. 10297/2022 (on behalf of Defendant No. 1 under Order VII R. 11 of the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 [“CPC”] seeking rejection of Plaint)
Elbakyan”] invokes Order VII Rule 11 of CPC for rejection of the Plaint
contending that it does not disclose cause of action and is barred by law. The
above grounds are premised on the assertion that assignment agreements
relied upon by Plaintiffs do not confer ownership of copyrights on the
impugned works as they are void under the Indian Contract Act, 1872
[hereinafter “Contract Act”]. Reliance is placed upon Section 16 and 19 of
the Copyright Act, 1957 [hereinafter “Copyright Act”], to argue that
agreements relating to copyrights must specify royalty or some other form of
consideration, failing which, they cannot affect the assignment of copyright.
Section 25 of the Contract Act is relied upon to contend an agreement
without consideration is void. Even Section 23 of the Contract Act is
referred to argue that the agreements being opposed to public policy are
unconscionable and void.
2.     Mr. Gopal Sankaranarayan, Senior Counsel representing Ms.
Elbakyan, submits that under law, Plaintiffs were required to pay royalty and
other consideration to the authors in exchange for “exclusive right to publish
and distribute the articles”. In absence thereof, he argues that agreements
Digitally Signed        CS(COMM) 572/2020                                                     Page 2 of 6
are invalid. A cursory examination of the agreements demonstrates that
Plaintiffs have not compensated the authors with any royalty or any form of
consideration and yet, they assert to have acquired exclusive rights of
publication and distribution. The economic component, which is mandatory
requirement as per the provisions mentioned above, is absent from the
agreements. He further argues that assignment agreements relied upon by
Plaintiffs are irrelevant as they pertain to publication of books and not
articles, for which the suit is filed against Ms. Elbakyan.
3.     Before dealing with the aforenoted contentions, it must be noted that
Ms. Elbakyan, in her written statement, has categorically admitted that
Plaintiffs are owners of copyright in subject works. This admission was
attempted to be withdrawn by way of an application [being – I.A.
8355/2022] under Order XVI Rule 17 of CPC, which was dismissed by this
Court by way of a detailed order dated 03rd November, 2022. The effect of
rejection necessarily means that admissions on record continue to bind Ms.
4.     Order VII Rule 11 of CPC helps in streamlining the judicial process
by reducing burden on the courts, as it permits weeding out of cases that are
not worthy of its attention. It is an important tool for the court to maintain
efficiency and prevent abuse of its process, as it enables rejection of plaints
which are frivolous, vexatious, improper, and are bound to prove abortive.
It is well-settled legal proposition that while deciding the application under
Order VII Rule 11 of CPC, only averments made in the plaint are germane
and contrary pleas taken by Defendant(s) on merits are immaterial. [See:
Digitally Signed        CS(COMM) 572/2020                                                     Page 3 of 6
Srihari Hanumandas Totala v. Hemant Vithal Kamat and Ors.1]. The case as
set out in the plaint is, inter alia, as follows: Plaintiffs comprise of global
publishing houses in the field of scientific and academic publication. They
have exclusive right to communicate to the public their literary work and no
other entity can, without authorisation from the Plaintiffs, proceed to host,
store, reproduce, distribute, issue copies, make available to, or communicate
to the public, Plaintiffs’ original literary works. Ms. Elbakyan is owner of
‘SciHub’ website which indulges in online piracy by communicating and
providing access to Plaintiffs’ literary works to the public for use and
download. Defendant No. 2, operator of ‘Lib-Gen’ or ‘Library Genesis’
website, provides access to works in scientific and medical fields as well as
non-scientific works by unauthorized means, circumventing technological
measures put in place by Plaintiffs to protect copyright in their literary
works. Plaintiffs have asserted copyright ownership on the basis of
assignment agreements and narrate facts to prove copyright infringement by
Defendants. The plaint has to be read in a meaningful manner and only if the
same ex-facie does not disclose a cause of action, can it be rejected. From
the above, it is clear that the cause of action is disclosed and to that extent
the ground for seeking rejection of the plaint has no merit.
5.       Now, coming to legal ground. There is, as discussed above, a
categorical admission of Ms. Elbakyan qua copyright in favour of Plaintiffs.
Therefore, the legal question urged in application, founded on the
construction of the agreements, is no longer a pure question of law. Further,
the dispute relating to validity of such agreements regarding adequacy or
Digitally Signed        CS(COMM) 572/2020                                                      Page 4 of 6
sufficiency of economic/ monetary consideration itself is a question of fact
and plea advanced in the instant application, founded on provisions of
Copyright Act, which would require adjudication on facts. Plaintiffs, by way
of illustration, have relied upon assignment agreements mentioned at page
Nos. 177-340 (particularly page Nos. 299 and 301 to demonstrate the aspect
of consideration envisaged in the said agreements). This Court takes note
that fifteen (15) assignment agreements have been submitted, sealed, and
filed, which serve as an exemplar of the substantial number of agreements
executed between Plaintiffs and authors, vesting Plaintiffs with exclusive
rights over the literary works. The legality, veracity and relevancy of such
agreements cannot be undertaken at this stage. The Plaintiffs have thus
discharged the initial burden under Section 55(2) of the Copyright Act to
claim ownership towards the work, which are the subject matter of the
present suit. The relevant facts to claim ownership have been clearly
disclosed. As regards the contention that the assignment agreements are not
relevant to Plaintiffs’ case against Ms. Elbakyan, it must be noted that the
Plaintiffs’ case against her, is for making available infringing copies of
Plaintiffs’ literary works including journals, journal articles, books, and
books’ chapters. Plaintiffs have clearly alleged that Defendant No. 1 is also
responsible for uploading infringing works on Defendant No. 2’s website.
As per Plaintiffs, there is a close link between Ms. Elbakyan and Defendant
No. 2 and Ms. Elbakyan has uploaded infringing content/ work on
Defendant No. 2’s website.
6.     Therefore, in view of the above discussion, in the opinion of the
Court, the application is not maintainable and the same is accordingly,
Digitally Signed        CS(COMM) 572/2020                                                   Page 5 of 6
7.     Defendant No. 2 has not filed written statement or appeared before
this Court despite issuance of summons. Accordingly, Defendant No. 2 is
proceeded ex-parte.
I.A. 12668/2020 (u/ Order XXXIX Rule 1 & 2 of r/w Sec. 151 of CPC
seeking restraining infringement of copyright),
I.A. 11755/2021 (u/ Order XXXIX Rule 2A r/w Sec. 151 of CPC seeking
I.A. 197/2021 (u/ Order I Rule 10(2) and Rule 8A r/w Sec. 151 of CPC on
behalf of Society of Delhi Science Forum and Society for Knowledge
Commons seeking impleadment),
I.A. 590/2021 (u/ Order I Rule 10 r/w Sec. 151 of CPC on behalf of Ram
Ramaswamy, Medico Friends Circle and Ors. Seeking impleadment),
I.A. 8366/2021 (u/ Order I Rule 10 r/w Sec. 151 of CPC on behalf of Forum
for Medical ethics Society seeking impleadment), and
I.A. 14908/2021 (u/ Order I Rule 10 r/w Sec. 151 of CPC on behalf of group
of scholars studying/ working in the Universities across NCT of Delhi
seeking impleadment)
Digitally Signed        CS(COMM) 572/2020                                                 Page 6 of 6