Case :- GOVERNMENT APPEAL No. - 316 of 2019
Appellant :- State of U.P.
Counsel for Appellant :- G.A.
Counsel for Respondent :- Sadaful Islam
1.     The present appeal purports to be under Section
378(3) of Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 (in short 'Cr.P.C.'),
seeking to challenge the judgment and order dated 2.4.2019
passed by IVth Additional District & Sessions Judge/Special
Judge, E.C. Act, Pilibhit in S.T. No.297 of 2014, (State of
U.P. Vs. Mahfooz Ansari and 4 others), S.T. No.16 of 2015
(State of U.P. Vs. Irshad) and S.T. No.96 of 2015, (State of
U.P. Vs. Kalloo Mewati), in Case Crime No.801 of 2014,
P.S. Sungarhi, District Pilibhit under Sections 148, 364, 342,
302 read with Sections 149, 201 IPC acquitting the accused
respondents, who are 7 in number.
2.     Essence of the fact which lies in narrow compass as
wrapped in prosecution story are that one Jai Prakash s/o
Shri Ram Charan Lal r/o Village Gauneri Dan, P.S.
Jahanabad, District Pilibhit submitted a written report before
Deputy Inspector General of Police Bareilly on 19.5.2004 at
16.30 a.m. with an allegation that he solemnized marriage
with     Smt. Tabbasum @ Munni d/o Mahmood, r/o
Chiriyadeh, P.S. Sungarhi, District Pilibhit on 18.12.2013, as
the same was interfaith marriage thus, the accused fraction
got furrated as their daughter married the informant, who
happens to be of different religion.
3.       Occasioning     threats   to   the   life, the   first
informant/complainant claims that he had no option but to
prefer proceedings before this Court on writ side being W.P.
No.20156 of 2004, Smt. Tabbasum @ Munni and others Vs.
State of U.P. seeking police protection.
4.     As per the first informant on 16.4.2014 a positive
order was passed in their favour granting civil protection.
Prosecution further asserts that Jaiprakash being the
informant and the deceased being Smt. Tabbasum @ Munni
were living together, however, on the fateful day i.e.
25.4.2014 when the informant was travelling from Bareilly
to Pilibhit then at 5.00 in the evening at a place being
Laveda, Police Station Hafizganj Bareilly, the accused
respondents Mahfooz, Abdul Mazid, Mustkeem, Ayub and
Irshad who happened to be the relatives of Smt. Tabbasum
@ Munni while exerting pressure forcibly abducted his wife
5.     According to first informant, he proceeded to police
station Hafizganj in order to submit written report but
neither the same was taken note of nor any proceedings were
conducted in that regard. In fact he tried his level best to
search the whereabouts of his missing wife Smt. Tabbasum
@ Munni but she could not be traced. Thus, he apprehends
that the life of his wife is in danger.
6.     It was further alleged that on 17.5.2014, he received a
phone call from his wife            Smt. Tabbasum @ Munni
apprising him that she has been illegally confined in the
house of his maternal uncle Irshad Master and he along with
others had committed bad act with her and they are planning
to murder her. The said call is stated to have been made from
the mobile phone no.8273025296.
7.     On the basis of the written complaint so lodged by the
first informant before the Deputy Inspector General of
Police, Agra region Agra on 19.5.2014 at 4.30           in the
morning, a first information report was lodged. Accordingly,
the Circle Officer city by virtue of the order dated 19.5.2014
directed for conduction of investigation in the said matter
against the accused herein. The FIR was registered as Case
Crime No.801 of 2014 under Sections 364, 342 IPC.
8.     Records further reveal that on 20.5.2014 one Tilakram
s/o Sunder Lal, r/o Gram Gauhania, P.S. Sungarhi, District
Pilibhit lodged a written complaint before the Station House
Officer, Sungarhi, District Pilibhit reporting that near the
drain in Village Gauhania a dead-body of woman was found
and adjacent to her the accessories being slipper, dupatta etc.
was also noticed and the resident of village in question
identified the girl to be the sister of Mahfooz Ansari being
9.     Accordingly, Sections 302 and 201 IPC were also
added in the Case Crime No.801 of 2014 which was
proceeded to be investigated pursuant to the nomination of
10.    As    per   the   prosecution    Investigating Officer
conducted the investigation prepared site plan, Panchnama
sent the body for postmortem followed by recording the
statement of      the prosecution witnesses. Eventually, a
charge-sheet was submitted under Sections 342, 364, 302,
148, 149, 201 IPC against the accused herein being Mahfooz
Ansari, Mustakeem, Ayub, Abdul Mazid and Riyasat @
Mama Irshad and Kallu Mewati @ Daroga Khan.
11.    Case was committed to trial to sessions by virtue of
order dated 17.3.2005, 23.8.2014, 9.10.2014, 12.2.2015,
1.7.2015 and 12.11.2018. Charges were read over to the
accused herein. Accused claimed to be tried and they
pleaded innocence.
12.    Learned Trial Court by virtue of the judgment and
order under challenge has acquitted the accused herein.
13.    Challenging the judgment and order of acquittal now
the present appeal has been instituted at the behest of the
14.    Before pondering into the niceties of the judgment of
acquittal under challenge in the proceedings under Section
378(3) Cr.P.C. at the instance of the State, this Court has to
re-memoirse itself the fact that the present proceedings are in
a form of appellate jurisdiction occasioning scrutiny of a
judgment of acquittal wherein there are certain limitations so
provided therein which needs to be recognised before the
delving in the issue.
15.    Broadly speaking until and unless the judgment under
challenge is perverse and there are substantial and
compelling reasons followed by miscarriage of justice to be
meted by the parties, this Court should not in routine manner
interfere with the judgment of acquittal as the accused is
possessed with double presumption of innocence.
16.    To put it otherwise as a matter of right, this Court
cannot at the instance of the appellant, who happens to be
State exercise the jurisdiction while converting the judgment
of acquittal into conviction.
17.    The aforesaid principle of law has already been
crystallized by Hon’ble Apex Court in plethora of decisions
and just for the sake of illustration reference may be made
to the judgment of Rajesh         Prasad Vs. State of Bihar
(2022) 3 SCC (471) wherein the Hon’ble Apex Court in
paragraphs no.21, 22, 23, 24, 25 and 31.1.
21. Before proceeding further, it would be useful to
review the approach to be adopted while deciding an
appeal against acquittal by the trial court as well as
by the High Court. Section 378 CrPC deals with
appeals in case of acquittal. In one of the earliest
cases on the powers of the High Court in dealing with
an appeal against an order of acquittal the Judicial
Committee of the Privy Council in Sheo Swarup v.
King Emperor² considered the provisions relating to
the power of an appellate court in dealing with an
appeal against an order of a acquittal and observed
as under: (SCC OnLine PC)
"16. It cannot, however, be forgotten that in
case of acquittal, there is a double presumption
in favour of the accused. Firstly, the
presumption of innocence is available to him
under the fundamental principle of criminal
jurisprudence that every person should be
presumed to be innocent unless he is proved to
be guilty by a competent court of law. Secondly,
the accused having secured an acquittal, the
presumption of his innocence is certainly not
weakened but reinforced, reaffirmed and
strengthened by the trial court.
“….. But in exercising the power conferred by
the Code and before reaching its conclusions
upon fact, the High Court should and will
always give proper weight and consideration to
such matters as: (1) the views of the trial Judge
as to the credibility of the witnesses; (2) the
presumption of innocence in favour of the
accused, a presumption certainly not weakened
by the fact that he has been acquitted at his
trial; (3) the right of the accused to the benefit
of any doubt; and (4) the slowness of an
appellate court in disturbing a finding of fact
arrived at by a Judge who had the advantage of
seeing the witnesses. To state this, however, is
only to say that the High Court in its conduct of
the appeal should and will act in accordance
with rules and principles well known and
recognised in the administration of justice."
It was stated that the appellate court has full powers
to review and to reverse the acquittal.
22. In Atley v. State of U.P.3, the approach of the
appellate court while considering a judgment of
acquittal was discussed and it was observed that
unless the appellate court comes to the conclusion
that the judgment of the acquittal was perverse, it
could not set aside the same. To a similar effect are
the following observations of this Court speaking
through Subba Rao, J. (as his Lordship then was) in
Sanwat Singh v. State of Rajasthant: (Sanwat Singh
case4, AIR pp. 719-20, para 9)
"9. The foregoing discussion yields the
following results: (1) an appellate court has full
power to review the evidence upon which the
order of acquittal is founded; (2) the principles
laid down in Sheo Swarup² afford a correct
guide for the appellate court's approach to a
case in disposing of such an appeal; and (3) the
different phraseology used in the judgments of
this Court, such as, (i) "substantial and
compelling reasons", (ii) "good and sufficiently
cogent reasons", and (iii) "strong reasons" are
not intended to curtail the undoubted power of
an appellate court in an appeal against
acquittal to review the entire evidence and to
come to its own conclusion; but in doing so it
should not only consider every matter on record
having a bearing on the questions of fact and
the reasons given by the court below in support
of its order of acquittal in its arriving at a
conclusion on those facts, but should also
express those reasons in its judgment, which
lead it to hold that the acquittal was not
justified."
The need for the aforesaid observations arose on
account of observations of the majority in Aher Raja
Khima v. State of Saurashtra5 which stated that for
the High Court to take a different view on the
evidence "there must also be substantial and
compelling reasons for holding that the trial court
was wrong".
23. M.G. Agarwal v. State of Maharashtra is the
judgment of the Constitution Bench of this Court,
speaking through Gajendragadkar, J. (as his Lordship
then was). This Court observed that the approach of
the High Court (appellate court) in dealing with an
appeal against acquittal ought to be cautious because
the presumption of innocence in favour of the accused
"is not certainly weakened by the fact that he has been
acquitted at his trial".
24. In Shivaji Sahabrao Bobade v. State of
Maharashtra, Krishna Iyer, J., observed as follows:
(SCC p. 799, para 6).
"6. ... In short, our jurisprudential enthusiasm for
presumed innocence must be moderated by the
pragmatic need to make criminal justice potent and
realistic. A balance has to be struck between chasing
chance possibilities as good enough to set the
delinquent free and chopping the logic of
preponderant probability to punish marginal
25. This Court in Ramesh Babulal Doshi v. State of
Gujarats, spoke about the approach of the appellate
court while considering an appeal against an order
acquitting the accused and stated as follows: (SCC p.
"7. ... While sitting in judgment over an acquittal the
appellate court is first required to seek an answer to
the question whether the findings of the trial court are
palpably      wrong,      manifestly   erroneous      or
demonstrably unsustainable. If the appellate court
answers the above question in the negative the order
of acquittal is not to be disturbed. Conversely, if the
appellate court holds, for reasons to be recorded, that
the order of acquittal cannot at all be sustained in
view of any of the above infirmities it can and then
only reappraise the evidence to arrive at its own
conclusions."
The object and the purpose of the aforesaid approach
is to ensure that there is no miscarriage of justice. In
another words, there should not be an acquittal of the
guilty or a conviction of an innocent person.
31.1. Ordinarily, this Court is cautious in interfering
with an order of acquittal, especially when the order
of acquittal has been confirmed up to the High Court.
It is only in rarest of rare cases, where the High
Court, on an absolutely wrong process of reasoning
and a legally erroneous and perverse approach to the
facts of the case, ignoring some of the most vital facts,
has acquitted the accused, that the same may be
reversed by this Court, exercising jurisdiction under
Article 136 of the Constitution. [State of U.P. v.
Sahai¹³] d Such fetters on the right to entertain an
appeal are prompted by the reluctance to expose a
person, who has been acquitted by a competent court
of a criminal charge, to the anxiety and tension of a
further examination of the case, even though it is held
by a superior court. [Arunachalam v. P.S.R.
Sadhanantham¹4] An appeal cannot be entertained
against an order of acquittal which has, after
recording valid and weighty reasons, has arrived at
an unassailable, logical conclusion which justifies
acquittal.”
18.    Bearing in mind the principles of law so laid down by
the Hon’ble Apex Court as referred to above the present case
is to be proceeded with while giving it a logical end.
19.    Heard Ms. Nand Prabha Shukla learned AGA and Sri
N.I. Jafri, learned Senior Counsel assisted by Ms. Ambreen
Masroor, learned counsel for the accused-respondents.
20.    Ms. Nand Prabha Shukla learned AGA has made the
manifold submissions namely:-
(a) The accused herein have committed offence which
stood proved beyond doubt as the chain and sequence
of events consistently points towards the commission
of the offence beyond reasonable doubt.
(b)    The accused was seen with the deceased lastly
wherefrom she disappeared thus the last seen theory
comes into play.
(c)    The call details (CDR) itself points out that the
deceased was with the accused which stood proved
beyond doubt.
(d)    There was a strong motive for commission of
crime by the accused as the present case occasioned
interfaith marriage.
(e)    Mere contradictions in the statement of the PW4
Jai Prakash (first informant husband) coupled with
other prosecution witnesses turning hostile will not be
a factor to hold the accused non-guilty of commission
of crime particularly when there was not only a strong
motive but also the fact that circumstantial evidences
consistently form the link of commission of crime by
accused.
21.   Sri N.I. Jafri, learned Senior Counsel assisted by
Amreen     Masroor,   learned    counsel   for   the   accused
respondents have made following submissions:-
A.    The judgment of the learned trial court is well
reasoned taking into account each and every aspect of
the matter and does not warrant any interference by
this Court while exercising appellate jurisdiction.
B.    Once there the major contradictions and
inconsistency and improvement have been made in the
testimony of the PW4 (first informant) coupled with
other prosecution witnesses turning hostile then this
Court should not interfere in the present proceedings
as view taken by the learned trial court is possible
view.
C.    The circumstantial evidence do not support the
prosecution theory as the complete chain itself is
missing while linking the accused to have committed
crime.
D.    In view of huge time gap of 24 days between
the accused alleged to be lastly seen with the deceased
and the date of death the last seen theory does not
stand applied.
E.    The entire prosecution case stands on suspicion
which cannot be a ground to hold the accused guilty of
commission of crime.
22.   At this stage, the court finds proper to give brief
description and details of the prosecution witnesses namely:
23.  Besides ocular testimony following documents were
adduced to support the prosecution:-
66   Photograph of Jai Prakash Ex.ka66
67   Photograph of Tabbasum        Ex.ka67
24.    So far as the prosecution witnesses are concerned as
PW1 Qadir Ahmad appeared in the witness box and deposed
that he knows accused Irshad son of Nisar, however he does
not know the deceased Smt. Tabbasum @ Munni and he is
not aware as to whether the deceased visited the house of
accused Irshad. He has further deposed that he is not
conversant with the fact as to whether before 25.4.2014 the
deceased has visited the house of Irshad. In fact according
to him he does not know the relatives of the deceased.
25.    Rafi Ahmad appeared as PW2 and in his cross-
examination, deposed that he knows Irshad but he showed
his ignorance regarding deceased and he is not aware of the
fact as to whether the deceased had visited the house of
Irshad or not and he is not knowing the relatives of the
26.    As PW3 Tilak Ram entered into the witness box and
in his examination-in-chief, he came up with a stand that he
neither knows deceased nor Jaiprakash the first informant.
He also showed his ignorance regarding the fact that the
deceased was with Jai Prakash, however according to him he
found the dead-body of woman and when he went near then
he could not recognise or identify the dead-body and he
specifically stated that he had not submitted application in
police station and the dead-body of the deceased was not
sealed in his presence and no photograph of the same was
27.    As PW4 Jai Prakash entered into the witness box
claiming himself to be the first informant and the husband of
the deceased wife casting allegations upon the accused that
on the date of the occurrence, the accused who are 7 in
number were present. He has stated that he got married with
the deceased and due to the marriage being interfaith
marriage the accused bore-grudge against him. According to
PW4, Kallu and Riyasat are not related to the deceased but
other five accused are related and he further deposed that in
connection with their safety of life and they preferred
appropriate proceedings before the High Court seeking
interim protection and he on 25.4.2014 had gone from
Bareilly to Pilibhit and at about 5.00 in the evening in Gram
Labeda the accused Mahfooz, Abdul Mazid, Mustkeem,
Ayub, Irshad and others while loaded with unauthorised
weapons forcibly abducted his wife and he had proceeded to
police station Hafizganj for lodging written complaint but no
action was taken and after searching the whereabouts of the
deceased, he could not locate her and he received a phone
call on 17.5.2014 from his wife and she apprised that she
was under death threat and she was forcibly detained in a
maternal uncle Irshad master place in Barkheda and she was
also subjected to bad act and threatened to be murdered.
According to PW4 the said information was received
through mobile no.8273025296. He accordingly contacted
the D.I.G. of Police while submitting written complaint on
17.5.2014 under a signature and then on 19.5.2014, first
information report had been lodged. According to him his
statements had been received by the Investigating Officer
and on 20.5.2014 he received information that his wife has
been murdered and he also received a phone call from the
accused Mahfooz from mobile no.9720493938 wherein he
was apprised that they have killed his wife. PW4 has further
stated that he was running coaching in the house of Mahfooz
wherein there are about 70 students whereat the deceased
was also student and after being in close relationship they
solemnized marriage on 18.12.2013.
28.    PW5 Omkar also appeared as a prosecution witness.
He claims to have witness the body of the deceased but he is
ignorant about the name of the deceased. He further stated
that he signed the Panchayatnama.
29.    PW6 Ravi Sharma has stated on 20.5.2014 near the
drain the body of the deceased was found along with slipper
and Dupatta and the villagers identified her to be Smt.
30.    Dr. Mahavir Singh appeared as PW7 and according to
him he is Senior Consultant District Hospital, Pilibhit and he
conducted postmortem of the deceased on 20.5.2014.
According to him the deceased was possessed with certain
marks with suggested that she had died on account of
strangulation. According to PW7 the death occurred two
days prior to conducting postmortem i.e. on18.5.2014.
31.    As PW8 Roshan Lal retired HCP appeared as
prosecution witness and he claims to have been posted in the
police station concerned and he on the directions of SHO
Sungarhi registered the FIR.
32.    PW9 Bhuvenesh Kumar Gautam appeared as a
witness and proved the Panchayatnama etc.
appeared as PW10 according to him he was posted as
Incharge Inspector and he conducted investigation prepared
site plan and executed necessary proceedings.
34.    Mohd. Rizwan appeared as PW11, he in his
examination-in-chief has stated that he knows Irshad Ahmad
son of Nisar Ahmad and the deceased also and she used to
the come to the house of Irshad. He pleaded ignorance
regarding the marriage of the first informant with the
35.    PW12 Zakir Hussain has stated that he does not know
the deceased and he is not aware as to whether the deceased
had visited the house of Irshad between 25.4.2014 and
36.    PW13 retired S.I. Phool Singh stated that he was
present when the deceased was found in a drain in village
Gauhania and he had witnessed the Panchyatnama.
37.    PW14 Subeg Singh Siddhu stated that he was at that
point of time Circle Officer, police station Pilibhit on the
written report dated 17.5.2014 so received on 19.5.2014 for
lodging FIR and directed for conducting investigation.
38.    PW15 Ramesh Saxena claimed himself to be the Clerk
in the police station, he proved the lodging of the first
information report.
39.    PW16     Inspector     Brijesh   Singh    appeared   as
prosecution witness, he claims himself to prove call details
40.    PW17 Udai Shankar Singh claims to have being the
successor to conduct investigation as according to him he
took the investigation from the stage which was left by his
41.    PW18 S.I. Dalbir Singh in his statement claimed that
he had gone to the house of Irshad to trace the deceased.
42.    PW19 Siyaram in his cross-examination has stated
that he is not aware about the parentage of deceased and in
his presence no recovery was made and no statement has
been taken by the police.
43.    PW20 Babu Baksh claim to be doing masonry work
and in his examination has stated that he is not remembering
as to whether he had visited the place of Riyasat @ Mama
for laying down linter. He does not know the deceased and
he is not aware about the same. He also denied giving any
statement under Section 161 Cr.P.C.
44.    PW21 Nasir Ahmad in his cross-examination has
stated that he does not know Riyasat and he is not aware
whether plastering was done in his house. He does not know
the description of the girl and he denies giving any statement
45.    PW22 Nanhe Baksh appeared in the prosecution box
and according to him he did not lay down linter with Babu
Baksh in the house of Riyasat @ Mama.
46.    One Gopal Chandra Gupta PW23 appeared as a
prosecution witness and he stated that on 18.12.2013 the
deceased got married with the first informant, thus he proved
the marriage.
47.    Mohd. Fahim PW24 also deposed as a prosecution
witness that he does not know the deceased and he is not
aware whether she had eloped or not. He pleaded ignorance
regarding the recovery of the dead-body of the deceased as
he was in his house at that point of time and further he stated
that he has not given any statement as stated by the
48.    Sanjiv  Kumar     Saxena     PW25     appeared    as   a
prosecution witness and he also proved the marriage of the
deceased with the PW4 Jai Prakash.
49.    PW26 Triloki Nath Mishra appeared as prosecution
witness and according to him he is the Manager of the Arya
Samaz situate at Subhash Nagar and he proved the marriage
of the PW4 Jai Prakash with the deceased.
50.      PW27 Manoj Kumar appeared as a prosecution
witness and according to him he is brother-in-law of the first
informant and he has deposed that on 25.4.2014 Jai Prakash
received call from Nand Gopal wherein the person who
called Jai Prakash had uttered that Jai Prakash had taken a
wrong decision to marry with Tabbasum @ Munni. Thus, he
has supported the prosecution case.
51.    Smt. Babli PW28 appeared as prosecution witness and
she stated that four years ago i.e. the date of the incident
Rajpal and Meena Devi who happens to be their relative had
come at 6-7 in the evening along with the first informant
and she had cooked food but they did not eat and as they
were in tension. However, she was not told about Tabbasum
52.    As PW29 Surendra Pratap Singh appeared as a
prosecution witness claiming to be the Investigating Officer
and according to him he after conducting the investigation
submitted the charge sheet.
53.    Undisputedly, the entire genesis of the present case
revolves around the fact that the deceased, who happens to
the wife of the first informant, had gone with the first
informant on 25.4.2014 from Bareilly to Pilibhit and about 5
p.m. in village Laboda, Police Station Hafizganj, the accused
who were armed with unauthorised weapons while exerting
pressure abducted his wife. According to the first informant
he had reported the said matter before the police station
Hafizganj, however no action whatsoever have been taken
and he continuously kept on searching his wife and when his
wife was not traceable, he approached the D.I.G. Police
Bareilly region, Bareilly while lodging its complaint and
then first information report has been lodged on 19.5.2014 at
16.30 hours. The said events find place in the first
information report which had been lodged by the first
informant who claims to be eye-witness of the said incident.
54.    Notably, in the first information report it has been
further narrated that PW4 Jai Prakash received a phone call
on 17.5.2014 from his wife that she was suspecting danger
to her life and she was further subjected to bad act and the
deceased maternal uncle Irshad Master had kept her in
illegal confinement and the other accused Mahfooz,
Mustkeem, Abdul Mazid, Ayub Mohammad and Irshad
committed bad act and specifically details of mobile number
being 8273025296 was mentioned. So much so on 20.5.2014
the dead-body of the deceased was found and accordingly a
written complaint was lodged by one Sri Tilak Ram as
alleged by the prosecution wherein the nearby villagers
identified the deceased to be Tabbasum @ Munni.
55.    Record reveals that on 22.5.2014 the Investigating
Officer recorded the statement of the first informant wherein
the first informant deposed that on 25.4.2014, the first
informant received a phone call from Nand Lal Gautam,
District President of a political party in his mobile phone at
about 11.00 in the morning saying that the phone caller
belongs to the same community and he wants to extend help
to the first informant. According to the statement of the PW4
Jai Prakash the girl fraction and the community to which she
belonged were quiet angry and lots of pressure was being
mounted upon and the Ex. M.L.A. Arshad Khan, wanted to
get the matter pacified so as to eliminate the chances of
bloodshed in village Gauneri Dan.
56.    According to PW4 he on the proposal of Nand Gopal
Gautam agreed however he is not aware mobile phone
number of Nand Gopal Gautam as the sim card is not with
him and he does not remember the number. As per PW4 the
day was a Friday and after (the religious prayer of the other
community) he went to the Satelite Bus Stand at 3.00 p.m.
and at that point of time Nand Gopal Gautam came in white
Marshal (four wheeler) in which both Nand Gopal Gautam
and Ex. M.L.A. was sitting.
57.    Further as per PW4 behind the said four-wheeler,
there was another four-wheeler being a white Maruti Car in
which the accused Kallu Mewati and the brother of the
deceased being Mahfooz, Kallu and 2-3 persons was sitting.
Even according to PW4 behind the said four-wheeler, there
was another four-wheeler of green colour (Scorpio) in which
the brother of the deceased Mustakim, Ayub and Abdul
Mazid was sitting along with Irshad and Riyasat @ Mama.
58.    PW4 has also deposed that on the Bareilly road while
coming from Pilibhit after crossing village Labeda in the
four wheeler of Nand Gopal Gupta, wherein the first
informant and the deceased were sitting the accused
Mahfooz and Kallu had overtaken the four-wheeler and
stationed it in front of the four-wheeler in which the first
informant was sitting and then they came out and forcibly
took away the deceased and put her in the their vehcile.
Thereafter Nand Gopal Gautam along with the first
informant came to Satelite crossing. According to PW4 in
the night of the fateful day at 8-9 p.m. he proceeded to
police station Hafizganj for lodging FIR, some constables
were standing for over there however no heed was made for
lodging FIR. PW4 Jai Prakash has further stated that the
accused did possess any weapon with them but normally
they keep it in a concealed manner.
59.    The Investigating Officer on 5.6.2014 again took the
statement of the PW4 Jai Prakash wherein PW4 deposed that
though he came to Satellite but before that he went along
with Nand Gopal Gautam near Fun-city near one hospital
where his brother-in-law Manoj Kumar s/o Ram Das r/o
Nakatia, Police Station Cantt. Bareilly was present.
60.    As per PW4 he did not meet his brother-in-law Manoj
Kumar at an earlier point of time while coming to Pilibhit as
he was accompanied with Nand Gopal Gautam and his wife.
PW4 further stated that he had conversation with his brother-
in-law for an half an hour and thereafter his brother Rajpal
also came and subsequently he again went to Labeda along
with his brother Rajpal who was riding motorcycle and in
Labeda he left his brother-in-law and along with his brother
Rajpal in a motorcycle proceeded to his in-laws place being
Sri Baburam and stayed there for 3-4 days. However in his
inner heart, he was missing his wife and that is why he did
not give any statement earlier.
61.    The aforesaid statement so made by the first informant
if put to conjoint reading will show that the narration of facts
so made in the deposition so sought to be made by the first
informant on 22.5.2014 and 5.6.2014 does not find place in
the first information report which was lodged on 19.5.2004.
It is not a case wherein the first informant is not an eye-
witness as according to the first informant PW4 he claims to
be the eye-witness and thus the things which had happened
on 25.4.2014 ought to have been not only immediately
reported before police station but also narrated in the first
information report.
62.    So    much     so   the    inconsistency  and   major
contradictions so sought to be made in the deposition by the
PW4 being star witness itself gets further highlighted from
the fact that a different story had been narrated in the first
information report so lodged on 19.5.2014 wherein there
was no recital about the fact regarding receiving of
telephonic call by Nand Gopal Gautam and with respect to
role of Ex. MLA.
63.    Even in a subsequent statement dated 5.6.2014
another story is being sought to be build up while coming up
with a stand that he met his brother-in-law Manoj Kumar
and Rajpal and further proceeded to the in-laws place of his
brother whereat he stayed for 3-4 days.
64.    The story so build up by the prosecution upon the base
so erected by PW4 itself demolishes the entire prosecution
case particularly when there are major contradictions and
improvement sought to be made in this regard.
65.    The inconsistency in the statement of PW4 Jai Prakash
also marks its presence every where as on one hand, he in
his statement so recorded under Section 161 of the Cr.P.C. as
well as in the first information report in question had come
up with a stand that he had received only once a call from
the deceased in his phone number on 17.5.2014 regarding
the atrocities which she was occasioning as she was put in
illegal confinement by his maternal uncle Ishan Master and
the accused had committed rape with her and the said fact is
stated to be communicated and apprised to the first
informant PW4 Jai Prakash through mobile number
8273025296. However, PW4 Jai Prakash in his statement
under Section 161 of the Cr.P.C. had deposed that he had
spoken with the deceased for 4-5 times and the deceased
used to call her often after getting an opportunity behind the
back of the accused when she was in-confinement and
further uttered that PW4 Jai Prakash if he truly loved the
deceased then he should change his religion and return the
66.    It is also come on record that in the statement so
recorded of PW4 Jai Prakash, he has deposed that he on
1.5.2014 and 15.5.2014 had returned belongings of the
deceased and Rs.60,000/- to the accused Kallu Mewati and
Mustakeem in a market place being Buttler Plaza and near
the Mosque at Aala Hazrat in Bareilly. He had further
deposed that he even wanted to convert himself while
changing the religion so as to live with the deceased.
67.    The aforesaid inconsistency in the statement of the
PW4 Jai Prakash, who claims to be the eye-witness of the
incident also assumes significance particularly when the
entire prosecution theory has been laid down on the
foundation of the deposition of PW4.
68.   In the case of Padam Singh Vs. State of U.P. (2000)
1 SCC 621 the Hon’ble Apex Court in paragraph 6 had
occasioned to deal with the aspect relating to omissions and
contradictions in the statements made under Section 161 of
the Cr.P.C. and before the Court under Sections 164 of the
6. Even, if we examine the intrinsic oath of the
prosecution witnesses, who are admittedly inimical,
the omissions and contradictions between the
statement made under Section 161 and the statement
made in Court, as brought out in the cross-
examination, makes the witnesses unreliable and the
two learned Judges, without noticing the same have
just brushed aside on the ground that the omissions
and contradictions are not material. The said
conclusion in our opinion cannot be sustained. After
going through the cross-examination of the aforesaid
witnesses, in our opinion, the witnesses do not stand
the test of stricter scrutiny, they being admittedly
inimical towards the d accused persons. In this view
of the matter, no reliance could have been placed on
their testimony and as such the conviction of the
appellant cannot be sustained.
69.   Another additional aspect of the matter needs to be
considered at this stage is with regard to delay in lodging of
the FIR. It has come on record that on 25.4.2014 the incident
of abducting the deceased by the accused has been alleged
that too    in the back ground of the fact that the first
informant being the husband of the deceased was the eye-
witness of the same. However, the first information report in
question has been lodged on 19.5.2014 before the concerned
police station at 16.30 hours. An explanation has been
sought to be offered by the first informant that prior to it he
had approached the police station Hafizganj reporting the
occurrence of the incident on 25.4.2014 at 5.00 in the
evening. Meaning thereby that the first informant was
possessed with the information of forcefully taking away of
his wife by the accused as he claimed to be eye-witness of
the occurence dated 25.4.2014. The first informant at that
stage did not lodge the first information report, however,
according to him on 17.5.2014, he received phone call from
his wife that she was kept in illegal confinement by the
accused and she was subjected to outrage of modesty by the
accused. Thereafter, the first informant claims to have
possessed alertness and he on 19.5.2004 wrote a written
complaint before the D.I.G. of Police, Bareilly region
Bareilly and thereafter first information report was lodged
on 19.5.2014 at 16.30 hours.
70.   As per PW4 Jai Prakash he in his statement under
Section 161 of the Cr.P.C. on 22.5.2014 came up with a story
that he was contacted by one Nand Lal Gautam at 11.00 on
25.4.2014 and he on his assurance came in contact with
Ex.MLA and proceeded to Pilibhit.
71.   PW4 Jai Prakash in his subsequent statement dated
5.6.2014 further narrated the tale that he met his brother-in-
law Manoj Kumar just before Fun-city at Satellite Bareilly
near a hospital and at that point of time incidentally his
brother Rajpal also came and he as a pillion rider sat in the
motorcycle of his brother Rajpal and thereafter he went to
the in-laws of his younger brother. Essentially the incident
according to the PW4 Jai Prakash took place on 25.4.2014
however addition and subtraction were made in the
deposition regarding the development in the incidents and it
was not disputed and rather accepted by PW4 Jai Prakash
that his wife was abducted on 25.4.2014.
72.    Obviously, there is a delay of more than 24 days in
lodging of the FIR that too in a case wherein the first
informant is an eye-witness and husband, who even in fact
had done interfaith marriage. The reasons of the delay have
been thoroughly unexplained being unbelievable and
inconceivable in the light of the fact that normally where a
loving husband is witnessed with the situation whereat the
wife gets abducted coupled with the fact that in-laws of the
husband are not happy with the marriage then no prudent
person would wait for 24 days in lodging the first
information report. So much so in the statement of the PW4
Jai Prakash (Husband) it has also come on record that he on
25.4.2014 proceeded to his younger brother’s in-laws place
and stayed thereat for 3-4 days and did not discuss the said
fact with the wife of the younger brother. The explanation so
offered by PW4 Jai Prakash that he inner heart wanted his
wife to be safe is not an explanation worth consideration
particularly when it is not a case where Jai Prakash PW4 is
not conversant with law and law enforcing authorities as it is
an admitted case that PW4 Jai Prakash himself had
approached the Hon’ble High Court while seeking civil
protection in connection with this marriage with the
deceased anticipating threat of his life.
73.    Hon’ble Apex Court on the question of delay in
lodging the FIR and its impact upon the prosecution theory
has observed in the case of Apren Joseph Alias Current
Kunjukunju and others Vs. The State of Kerala (1973) 3
SCC 114 wherein para 11 following was mandated:
11. Now first information report is a report
relating to the commission of an offence
given to the police and recorded by it
under Section 154, Cr. P. C. As observed
by the Privy Council in K. E. v. Khwaja,
the receipt and recording of information
report by the police is not a condition
precedent to the setting in motion of a
criminal investigation. Nor does the
statute provide that such information
report can only be made by an eye witness.
First information report under Section 154
is not even considered a substantive piece
of evidence. It can only be used to
corroborate or contradict the informant's
evidence in court. But this information
when recorded is the basis of the case set
up by the informant. It is very useful if
recorded before there is time and
opportunity to embellish or before the
informant's     memory      fades.     Undue
unreasonable delay in lodging the F. I. R.,
therefore, inevitably gives rise to suspicion
which puts the court on guard to look for
the possible motive and the explanation for
the delay and consider its effect on the
trustworthiness or otherwise of the
prosecution version. In our opinion, no
duration of time in the abstract can be
fixed as reasonable for giving information
of a crime to the police, the question of
reasonable time being a matter for
determination by the court in each case.
Mere delay in lodging the first information
report with the police is, therefore, not
necessarily, as a matter of law, fatal to the
prosecution. The effect of delay in doing so
in the light of the plausibility of the
explanation forthcoming for such delay
accordingly must fall for consideration on
all the facts and circumstances of a given
case.
74.   In the case of Tara Singh and others Vs. State of
Punjab 1991 Supp (1) SCC 536, the Hon’ble Apex Court in
paragraph 4 has observed as under:-
4. It is well settled that the delay in giving
the FIR by itself cannot be a ground to
doubt the prosecution case. Knowing the
Indian conditions as they are we cannot
expect these villagers to rush to the police
station immediately after the occurrence.
Human nature as it is, the kith and kin who
have witnessed the occurrence cannot be
expected to act mechanically with all the
promptitude in giving the report to the
police. At times being grief-stricken because
of the calamity it may not immediately occur
to them that they should give a report. After
all it is but natural in these circumstances
for them to take some time to go to the
police station for giving the report. Of
course the Supreme Court as well as the
High Courts have pointed out that in cases
arising out of acute factions there is a
tendency to implicate persons belonging to
the opposite faction falsely. In order to avert
the danger of convicting such innocent
persons the courts are cautioned to
scrutinise the evidence of such interested
witnesses with greater care and caution and
separate grain from the chaff after
subjecting the evidence to a closer scrutiny
and in doing so the contents of the FIR also
will have to be scrutinised carefully.
However, unless there are indications of
fabrication, the court cannot reject the
prosecution version as given in the FIR and
later substantiated by the evidence merely
on the ground of delay. These are all matters
for appreciation and much depends on the
facts and circumstances of each case.
75.    Yet, in the case of P. Rajagopal and others Vs. State
of Tamil Nadu (2019) 5 SCC 403, the Hon’ble Apex Court
in paragraph 12 has held as under:-
12. Normally, the Court may reject the case
of the prosecution in case of inordinate
delay in lodging the first information report
because of the possibility of concoction of
evidence by the prosecution. However, if the
delay is satisfactorily explained, the Court
will decide the matter on merits without
giving much importance to such delay. The
Court is duty-bound to determine whether
the explanation afforded is plausible enough
given the facts and circumstances of the
case. The delay may be condoned if the
complainant appears to be reliable and
without any motive for implicating the
accused falsely.
76.    Now another question arises as to whether the theory
of last seen is to be applied and pressed into service against
the accused. Notably the prosecution has sticked to its case
that the deceased was abducted and abducted by the accused
herein on 25.4.2014. More so the dead-body of the deceased
was found on 20.5.2014 that means after a period of about
24 days.
77.    The postmortem of the deceased was conducted by
PW7 20.5.2014 at about 1.45 p.m. from 20.5.2014 at 11.45
p.m. to 21.5.2014 at 12.45 a.m. As per PW7 Dr. Mahavir
Singh the deceased died two days prior to the conduction of
postmortem       while    strangulating   her  and   in   cross-
examination he deposed that there might be difference of 6
to 8 hours. Meaning thereby that the death of the deceased
occurred around 11.45 p.m. on 18.5.2014 and if the
difference of 6 to 8 hours is accounted for then time of the
death would be 5.00 p.m. on 18.5.2014 to 7.00 a.m. on
19.5.2014. Co-relating the date of abduction being 25.4.2014
it has been stated by the prosecution that the accused had
forcibly taken her away and the date of the recovery of the
dead-body of the deceased on 20.5.2014 coupled with the
opinion so tendered by PW7, who conducted the postmortem
itself shows that there is enormous time gap between the
point of time when the accused and the deceased were last
seen alive and when the deceased is found death.
78.    In Dharam Deo Yadav Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh
(2014) 5 SCC 509, the Hon’ble Apex Court in paragraph 19
has observed as under:-
19. It is trite law that a conviction cannot be recorded
against the accused merely on the ground that the
accused was last seen with the deceased. In other
words, a conviction cannot be based on the only
circumstance of last seen together. The conduct of the
accused and the fact of last seen together plus other
circumstances have to be looked into. Normally, last
seen theory comes into play when the time gap,
between the point of time when the accused and the
deceased were seen last alive and when the deceased
is found dead, is so small that the possibility of any
person other than the accused being the perpetrator
of the crime becomes impossible. It will be difficult in
some cases to positively establish that the deceased
was last seen with the accused when there is a long
gap and possibility of other persons coming in
between exists. However, if the prosecution, on the
basis of reliable evidence, establishes that the missing
person was seen in the company of the accused and
was never seen thereafter, it is obligatory on the part
of the accused to explain the circumstances in which
the missing person and the accused parted company.
In such a situation, the proximity of time between the
event of last seen together and the recovery of the
dead body or the skeleton, as the case may be, may
not be of much consequence. PWs 1, 2, 3, 5, 9 and 10
have all deposed that the accused was last seen with
Diana. But, as already indicated, to record a
conviction, that itself would not be sufficient and the
prosecution has to complete the chain of
circumstances to h bring home the guilt of the
accused.
79.   In Dhan Raj @ Dhand Vs. State of Haryana (2014)
6 SCC 745, the Hon’ble Apex Court in paragraphs 15, 16 &
17 have observed as under:-
15. The above mentioned circumstantial evidence was
supported with the statement of Raj Singh (PW 15),
that when he was visiting his brother the deceased on
24-1-1997 after the deceased had left, the three
accused came to the deceased's house and enquired
about him after disclosing their names. Before
discussing the admissibility of the said statement, we
would refer to the landmark decision of this Court in
Sharad Birdhichand Sarda v. State of Maharashtra
regarding circumstantial evidence, where this Court
held regarding the question of the accused last seen
with the deceased, that where it is natural for the
deceased to be with the accused at the material time,
other possibilities must be excluded before an adverse
inference can be drawn. It is evident from the above
that this Court refrains from drawing adverse
inferences in a factual matrix which points towards
the guilt of the accused. Thus, we will consider the
statement of Raj Singh also in the same light.
16. As per the statement of Raj Singh, the three
accused had come asking for the deceased but in the
absence of other corroborating evidence and
independent evidence, it is not established that the
appellant-accused had abetted the co-accused Sanjay
in the commission of the crime. Also it can be the
defence case that the said statement has been added
as an afterthought to strengthen the case of the
prosecution. We have found no material on record
which corroborated the statement of Raj Singh who is
an interested witness. Furthermore, there is no other
evidence which indicates or establishes the presence
of the appellant-accused near the place of commission
of crime. Also, as noted by the trial court in the trial
of Badal, no footprints were found in the surrounding
kutcha area where the body of the deceased was
found.
17. We have noticed in Madhu v. State of Kerala, facts
of which were discussed earlier, that this Court in
spite of the factum that the accused were sighted close
to the place of occurrence at around the time of
occurrence reversed the conviction as guilt was not
established. In the present factual matrix, it is only an
interested witness stating that the accused had come
asking for the deceased. This factum alone does not
establish guilt as no other evidence is found that they
were near the Bizdipur area where the crime was
committed or had visited the house of the deceased.
80.   In Ashok Vs. State of Haryana (2015) 4 SCC 393,
the Hon’ble Apex Court in paragraphs 8, 9, 10 & 11 have
observed as under:-
“8. The "last seen together" theory has been elucidated by
this Court in 9 Trimukh Maroti Kirkan v. State of
Maharashtra², in the following words:
"22. Where an accused is alleged to have
committed the murder of his wife and the
prosecution succeeds in leading evidence to
show that shortly before the commission of
crime they were seen together or the offence
takes place in the dwelling home where the
husband also normally resided, it has been
consistently held that if the accused does not
offer any explanation how the wife received
injuries or offers an explanation which is found
to be false, it is a strong circumstance which
indicates that he is responsible for commission
of the crime. Thus, the doctrine of last seen
together shifts the burden of proof onto the
accused, requiring him to explain how the
incident had occurred. Failure on the part of
the accused to furnish any explanation in this
regard, would give rise to a very strong
presumption against him.
9. In Ram Gulam Chaudhary v. State of Bihar³, the
accused after brutally assaulting a boy carried him
away and thereafter the boy was not seen alive nor
was his body found. The accused, however, offered no
explanation as to what they did after they took away
the boy. It was held that for absence of any
explanation from the side of the accused about the
boy, there was every c justification for drawing an
inference that they had murdered the boy.
10. In Nika Ram v. State of H.P.4, it was observed that
the fact that the accused alone was with his wife in the
house when she was murdered with a "khukhri" and
the fact that the relations of the accused with her were
strained would, in the absence of any cogent
explanation by him, point to his guilt.
11. The latest judgment on the point is Kanhaiya Lal v.
State of d Rajasthan5. In this case this Court has held
that the circumstance of last seen together does not by
itself and necessarily lead to the inference that it was
the accused who committed the crime. There must be
something more establishing the connectivity between
the accused and the crime. Mere non-explanation on
the part of the accused by itself cannot lead to the
proof of guilt against the accused.
81.   In Chandrapal Vs. State of Chhattisgarh AIR 2022
S.C. 2542, the Hon’ble Apex Court in paragraphs 14, 15, 16
& 17 have observed as under:-
“14. In this regard it would be also relevant to
regurgitate the law laid down by this court with
regard to the theory of "Last seen together".
15. In case of Bodhraj and Ors. v. State of Jammu and
Kashmir', this court held in para 31 that:
"31. The last-seen theory comes into play where
the time-gap between the point of time when the
accused and the deceased were last seen alive
and when the deceased is found dead is so
small that possibility of any person other than
the accused being the author of the crime
becomes impossible...."
16. In Jaswant Gir v. State of Punjab', this court held
that in absence of any other links in the chain of
circumstantial evidence, the accused cannot be
convicted solely on the basis of "Last seen together",
even if version of the prosecution witness in this
regard is believed.
17. In Arjun Marik and Ors. v. State of Bihar ¹0, It
was observed that the only circumstance of last seen
will not complete the chain of circumstances to record
the finding that it is consistent only with the
hypothesis of the guilt of the accused, and therefore
no conviction on that basis alone can be founded.”
82.   There is also a big question mark regarding the
presence of the deceased along with the accused herein from
the point of angle that the deceased called the first informant
through the mobile phone bearing number 8273025296.
83.   PW16, who claims to be Brijesh Singh L.O. Cell
incharge District Lucknow came forward as a prosecution
witness to prove the call details (CDR). According to him
the mobile number of the accused Mahfooz being
93963971920 is stated to be owned by the accused, he is
being shown to be with the deceased for the period from
16.5.2014 to 20.5.2014. PW16 produced            Ex.ka13 and
Ex.ka63 being the call details. The prosecution has further
come up with a stand that the call detail list was submitted
by PW16 to the Investigating Officer being Udai Shankar
84.    On cross-examination the Investigating Officer Sri
Udai Shankar Singh PW17 when asked about the call
details, he deposed that the same may be available in is
office but it has not been annexed. A specific statement has
been made by PW17 that the mobile phone so sought to be
recovered of the accused was not sealed and he had only
taken the EMI number. He further deposed that he had not
taken the EMI number of the other also.
85.    The learned Trial Court has further gone into details
and has recorded a finding that the call details with respect
to the accused herein at the place of the occurrence was not
86.    CDR is also one of the important factors which along
with the other factors if pressed into service can surface the
position of the accused into order to determine as to whether
he had committed crime or not. However, there is a complete
procedure envisaged under Section 65-B(4) of the Indian
Evidence Act wherein the production of the certificate has
been held to be mandatory with certain exceptions.
87.     Hon’ble Apex Court in the case of Arjun Panditrao
Khotkar Vs. Kailash Kushanrao Gorantyal and others
(2020) 7 SCC 1        paragraphs no. 47, 51, 52 & 61 have
observed as under:-
47. However, caveat must be entered here. The facts of
the present case show that despite all efforts made by
the respondents, both through the High Court and
otherwise, to get the requisite certificate under
Section 65-B(4) of the Evidence Act from the
authorities concerned, yet the authorities concerned
wilfully refused, on some pretext or the other, to give
such certificate. In a fact-circumstance where the
requisite certificate has been applied for from the
person or the authority concerned, and the person or
authority either refuses to give such certificate, or
does not reply to such demand, the party asking for
such certificate can apply to the court for its
production under the provisions aforementioned of the
Evidence Act, CPC or CrPC. Once such application
is made to the court, and the court then orders or
directs that the requisite certificate be produced by a
person to whom it sends a summons to produce such
certificate, the party asking for the certificate has
done all that he can possibly do to obtain the requisite
certificate. Two Latin maxims become important at
this stage. The first is lex non cogit ad impossibilia
i.e. the law does not demand the impossible, and
impotentia excusat legem i.e. when there is a
disability that makes it impossible to obey the law, the
alleged disobedience of the law is excused.This was
well put by this Court in Presidential Poll, In re, (1974) 2
SCC 33, as follows: (SCC pp. 49-50, paras 14-15).
"14. If the completion of election before the
expiration of the term is not possible because of
the death of the prospective candidate it is
apparent that the election has commenced before
the expiration of the term but completion before
the expiration of the term is rendered impossible
by an act beyond the control of human agency. The
necessity for completing the election before the
expiration of the term is enjoined by the
Constitution in public and State interest to see that
the governance of the country is not paralysed by
non-compliance with the provision that there shall
be a President of India.
15. The impossibility of the completion of the
election to fill the vacancy in the office of the
President before the expiration of the term of office
in the case of death of a candidate as may appear
from Section 7 of the 1952 Act does not rob Article
62(1) of its mandatory character. The maxim of
law impotentia excusat legem is intimately
connected with another maxim of law lex non cogit
ad impossibilia. Impotentia excusat legem is that
when there is a necessary or invincible disability
to perform the mandatory part of the law that
impotentia excuses. The law does not compel one
to do that which one cannot possibly perform.
'Where the law creates a duty or charge, and the
party is disabled to perform it, without any default
in him, and has no remedy over it, there the law
will in general excuse him.' Therefore, when it
appears that the performance of the formalities
prescribed by a statute has been rendered
impossible by circumstances over which the
persons interested had no control, like the act of
God, the circumstances will be taken as a valid
excuse. Where the act of God prevents the
compliance with the words of a statute, the
statutory provision is not denuded of its mandatory
character because of supervening impossibility
caused by the act of God. (See Broom's Legal
Maxims, 10th Edn. at pp. 162-63 and Craies on
Statute Law, 6th Edn. at p. 268.)"
It is important to note that the provision in question in
Presidential Poll, In re24 was also mandatory, which
could not be satisfied owing to an act of God, in the
facts of that case.
51. On an application of the aforesaid maxims to the present
case, it a is clear that though Section 65-B(4) is mandatory,
yet, on the facts of this case, the respondents, having done
everything possible to obtain the necessary certificate,
which was to be given by a third party over whom the
respondents had no control, must be relieved of the
mandatory obligation contained in the said sub-section.
52. We may hasten to add that Section 65-B does not speak
of the stage at which such certificate must be furnished to
the Court. In Anvar P.V.2, this Court did observe that such
certificate must accompany the electronic record when the
same is produced in evidence. We may only add that this is
so in cases where such certificate could be procured by the
person seeking to rely upon an electronic record. However,
in cases where either a defective certificate is given, or in
cases where such certificate has been demanded and is not
given by the person concerned, the Judge conducting the
trial must summon the person/ persons referred to in Section
65-B(4) of the Evidence Act, and require that such
certificate be given by such person/persons. This, the trial
Judge ought to do when the electronic record is produced in
evidence before him without the requisite certificate in the
circumstances aforementioned. This is, of course, subject to
discretion being exercised in civil cases in accordance with
law, and in accordance with the requirements of justice on
the facts of each case. When it comes to criminal trials, it is
important to keep in mind the general principle that the
accused must be supplied all documents that the prosecution
seeks to rely upon before commencement of the trial, under
the relevant sections of the CrPC.
61. We may reiterate, therefore, that the certificate required
under Section 65-B(4) is a condition precedent to the
admissibility of evidence by way of electronic record, as
correctly held in Anvar P.V.2, and incorrectly "clarified" a in
Shafhi Mohammad³. Oral evidence in the place of such
certificate cannot possibly suffice as Section 65-B(4) is a
mandatory requirement of the law. Indeed, the hallowed
principle in Taylor v. Taylor40, which has been followed in a
number of the judgments of this Court, can also be applied.
Section 65-B(4) of the Evidence Act clearly states that
secondary evidence is admissible only if led in the manner
stated and not otherwise. To hold otherwise would render
Section 65-B(4) otiose.
88.   Recently Hon’ble Apex Court in Criminal Appeal
No.1307 of 2019 Ravinder Singh @ Kaku Vs. State of
Punjab decided on 4.5.2022 had followed the judgement in
the case of      Arjun Panditrao Khotkar (Supra) and
paragraph 21 has held as under:-
“21. In light of the above, the electronic evidence
produced before the High Court should have been in
accordance with the statute and should have
complied with the certification requirement, for it to
be admissible in the court of law. As rightly stated
above, Oral evidence in the place of such
certificate, as is the case in the present matter,
cannot possibly suffice as Section 65B(4) is a
mandatory requirement of the law”.
89.   The learned Trial Court has further observed that the
mandatory procedure so envisaged under Section 65-B (4) of
the Evidence Act has not been followed and even in fact
nobody appeared on behalf of the telecom company so as to
prove the CDR.
90.   The prosecution in order to prove its case beyond
doubt had relied upon and refered to the statement of PW1
Zakir Hussain, PW20 Babu Baksh, PW21 Nasir Ahmad and
91.   The aforesaid prosecution witnesses claimed to be the
resident of Village Badkheda. However, PW1 Qadir Khan,
Hussain have though deposed that they are resident of
Badkheda but showed their ignorance that they had seen
deceased in the house of Irshad and accordingly, they were
declared to be hostile. Similarly, so far as      PW20 Babu
Baksh, PW21 Nasir Ahmad and PW22 Nanhe Baksh are
stated to be the prosecution witnesses who while doing
masonry work in the maternal uncle’s place of the deceased
saw the deceased. However, the aforesaid witnesses have
denied witnessing the deceased in her maternal uncle’s
house and they were also turned hostile.
92.    Though merely because prosecution witnesses turned
hostile may not ipso facto be a abstract principle of law that
the prosecution theory stands disbelieved but the such
situation is to be seen along with other factors.
93.    Notably in the present case this Court finds that there
are material contradictions and inconsistency in the
statement of PW Jai Prakash, who happens to be an eye-
witness, delay in lodging of the FIR, huge time gap between
the deceased being last seen with the accused and with the
deceased, followed by the fact that CDR details do not
match or mark the presence of accused with the deceased
and also the fact that the postmortem report though stands
proved by PW7 discloses the fact that the death occurred
between the intervening night of 18/19. 5. 2014.
94.    Though it might be a strong case as per the
prosecution that motive was behind the commission of the
crime due to the interfaith marriage so solemnized herein but
the same is not a necessary element in deciding culpability.
Baring PW4 Jai Prakash none of the prosecution witnesses
have supported the version of the prosecution though might
be that the statements so recorded in a gap of one to two
years. This Court might have ignored or kept aside the
statement of the prosecution witnesses who had turned
hostile due to lapse of time relating to recording of statement
of prosecution witnesses but neither the medical evidence in
the form of postmortem report supports the case of the
prosecution nor the statement of PW4 Jai Prakash the star
eye-witness inspire confidence as there are not only material
contradictions which go into the root of the matter but the
statements itself shown that they have been tailored so as to
put the prosecution case in such position for holding the
accused guilty of commission of crime.
95.    No doubt suspicion as it becomes pointing towards the
commission of offence by the accused but it cannot be
partake the character of the accused committing the crime
until and unless there is chain or link between the accused
and the commission of crime specifically pointing the
accused nobody else. The said fact also is quiet relevant as
the PW4 first informant in his cross-examination so
conducted on 18.8.2017 has come up with a stand that he did
not recognise the accused as they were wearing cloth on
their face and he suspects that the same be accused Mahfooz
and their brother.
96.    In Nathiya Vs. State represented by Inspector of
298, the Hon’ble Apex Court in paragraph 25 has observed
“25. On an analysis of the overall fact situation, we
are of the considered opinion that the chain of
circumstantial evidence relied upon by the
prosecution to prove the charge is visibly incomplete
and incoherent to permit conviction of the appellants
on the basis thereof without any trace of doubt.
Though the materials on record do raise a needle of
suspicion towards them, the prosecution has failed to
elevate its case from the realm of "may be true" to the
plane of "must be true" as is indispensably required in
law for conviction on a criminal charge. It is trite to
state that in a criminal trial, suspicion, howsoever
grave, cannot substitute proof.”
97.   In Khekh Ram Vs. State of Himachal Pradesh
(2018) 1 SCC 202, the Hon’ble Apex Court in paragraph 33
has observed as under:
33. It is a common place proposition that in a
criminal trial, suspicion however grave, cannot take
the place of proof and the prosecution to succeed has
to prove its case and establish the charge by adducing
convincing evidence to ward off any reasonable doubt
about the complicity of the accused. For this. the
prosecution case has to be in the category of "must be
true" and not "may be true". This Court while
dwelling on this postulation, in Rajiv Singh v. State of
Bihar dilated thereon as hereunder: (Rajiv Singh
case, SCC pp. 392-93. paras 66-69)
"66. It is well-entrenched principle of criminal
jurisprudence that a charge can be said to be
proved only when there is certain and explicit
evidence to warrant legal conviction and that
no person can be held guilty on pure moral
conviction. Howsoever grave the alleged
offence may be. otherwise stirring the
conscience of any court, suspicion alone cannot
take the place of legal proof. The well-
established cannon of criminal justice is “fouler
the crime higher the proof". In unmistakable
terms, it is the mandate of law that the
prosecution in order to succeed in a criminal
trial, has to prove the charge(s) beyond all
reasonable doubt.
67. The above enunciations resonated umpteen
times to be reiterated in Raj Kumar Singh v.
State of Rajasthan ¹0 as succinctly summarised
in para 21 as hereunder: (SCC pp. 731-32)
21. Suspicion, however grave it may be, cannot
take the place of proof, and there is a large
difference between something that "may be"
proved and "will be proved". In a criminal trial,
suspicion no matter how strong, cannot and
must not be permitted to take place of proof.
This is for the reason that the mental distance
between “may be` and "must be" is quite large
and divides vague conjectures from sure
conclusions. In a criminal case, the court has a
duty to ensure that mere conjectures or
suspicion do not take the place of legal proof.
The large distance between "may be" true and
"must be" true, must be covered by way of clear,
cogent and unimpeachable evidence produced
by the prosecution, before an accused is
condemned as a convict, and the basic and
golden rule must be applied. In such cases,
while keeping in mind the distance between
"may be" true and "must be" true, the court
must maintain the vital distance between
conjectures and sure conclusions to be arrived
at, on the touchstone of dispassionate judicial
scrutiny based upon a complete and
comprehensive appreciation of all features of
the case, as well as the quality and credibility of
the evidence brought on record. The court must
ensure that miscarriage of justice is avoided
and if the facts and circumstances of a case so
demand, then the benefit of doubt must be given
to the accused, keeping in mind that a
reasonable doubt is not an imaginary, trivial or
a merely probable doubt, but a fair doubt that is
based upon reason and common sense.'
68. In supplementation, it was held in
affirmation of the view taken in Kali Ram v.
State of H.P.11 that if two views are possible on
the evidence adduced in the case, one pointing
to the guilt of the accused and the other to his
innocence, the view which is favourable to the
accused should be adopted.
69. In terms of this judgment, suspicion,
howsoever grave cannot take the place of proof
and the prosecution case to succeed has to be in
the category of "must be" and not "may be": a
distance to be covered by way of clear, cogent
and unimpeachable evidence to rule out any
possibility of wrongful conviction of the
accused and resultant miscarriage of justice.
For this, the Court has to essentially undertake
an exhaustive and analytical appraisal of the
evidence on record and register findings as
warranted by the same. The above proposition
is so well established that it does not call for
multiple citations to further consolidate the
same."
98.     So far as the recovery of the dead-body of the
deceased is concerned it has come on record that a written
complaint was lodged by one Tilak Ram PW3 on 20.5.2014
as though he did not identify the deceased but the resident
villagers identified the same being the sister of Mahfooz
Ansari. PW3 in his statement has come up with a stand that
he does not recognise the deceased. However, according to
him he has stated that the FIR was written in the writing of
one Ravi Sharma and he signed the same. He denied to have
given any statement under Section 161 Cr.P.C. Eventually
PW4 Tilak Ram got hostile. As PW6 Ravi Sharma deposed,
that he wrote the complaint on the directions of his father
Tilak Ram Sharma, who narrated the facts but he does not
recognise the deceased. PW5 happens to be one Onkar, who
is stated to have witnessed the Panchayatnama, he though
deposed that he signed the Panchayatnama but he did not
recognise the dead-body itself. PW19 Siyaram also deposed
that he did not recognise the body of the deceased and he
also turned hostile. PW24 Mohd. Fahim completely denied
in his deposition that any dead-body was found on
20.5.2014, thus he also became hostile.
99.    Though it has been alleged by the prosecution that the
deceased was subjected to an occasion whereby her modesty
was to be outraged by the accused while committing bad act
but neither the same could be surfaced in the postmortem
nor there has been any evidence led by the prosecution so as
to corroborate the same. The said aspect is also important as
the same along with the other factors shows that the ocular
testimony of PW4 also does not inspire confidence of the
Court so as to support the prosecution case.
100. Net analysis of the background so painted by the
prosecution goes to show that barring PW4 Jai Prakash
nobody has supported the prosecution case entailing
demolition of the entire prosecution theory.
101. Though learned AGA has sought to argue that the
prosecution theory is erected upon solid foundation but we
find that the case of the prosecution proceeds on weak
102. Cumulatively giving anxious consideration to the
judgment and the order passed by the learned trial court
acquitting the accused, this Court finds that the learned trial
court has not committed any palpable illegality or perversity
as the learned trial court has appreciated each and every
aspect of the matter from the four-corners of law while
acquitting the accused. The view taken by the learned trial
court is a possible and plausible view based upon not only
the appreciation of the testimony of the prosecution
witnesses and the documents so adduced therein but also
upon the cardial principles of law which govern the subject
in question.
103. Thus, this Court has no option but to concur that the
judgement of the learned trial court whereby the accused
herein has been acquitted.
104. Resultantly no ground is made so as to accord leave to
appeal and accordingly the same is rejected.
105. As the leave to appeal stands rejected thus the present
Government Appeal so instituted by the State-appellant
under Section 378(3) of the Cr.P.C. stands dismissed.
106. The record and proceedings be sent back to the court-
below.
Location: High Court of Judicature