1.      Present appeals have been filed seeking setting aside the common
judgment dated 17.02.2021 passed by the learned Single Judge in W.P.(C)
Nos.5987/2020 and 6528/2020.
2.      Appellants appeared for the National Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test
(NEET) PG 2020 on 05.01.2020. The result was declared on 31.01.2020. On
16.05.2020, Appellants were conveyed that ex-post facto approval i.e. No
Objection had been granted for appearing in the NEET examination and that
the request for grant of study leave will be processed after selection in the
NEET PG 2020. On 10.06.2020, a Notification was issued by Respondent
No.2 for Centralised-merit-based counselling and the Notification
highlighted the eligibility criteria for admission to the sponsored DNB seats
as also the last date for submission of NOCs and undertakings, which was
3.      The Appellants were working as Medical Officers on regular basis in
different hospitals under the aegis of Respondent No.3, being Aruna Asaf
Ali Hospital and Baba Saheb Ambedkar Hospital, respectively. Accordingly,
the Appellants requested their Departments to provide NOCs and
undertakings in the prescribed format. Subsequently the date for submission
of the NOCs was extended till 10.07.2020. On 08.07.2020, the Appellants
received their respective NOCs / undertakings and the same were forwarded
by email to Respondent No.2 / NBE on 09.07.2020. On 14.08.2020,
Respondent No.2 notified the dates of counselling from 18.08.2020 to
20.08.2020 and the process of allotment was scheduled on 21.08.2020.
4.      Thereafter the Appellants were selected by Respondent No.2 and were
allotted the sponsored DNB seats in different specialities at different
Hospitals and were asked to join. The Appellants, consequently, applied to
the respective Departments for grant of study leave for a period of three
years and also for issuance of a relieving order and submitted the requisite
5.      However, no action was taken by the concerned Hospitals, which
constrained the Appellants to approach this Court and file writ petitions
before the learned Single Judge which were dismissed by the impugned
judgment.
6.      The prime grievance of the Appellants is that the Appellants had
appeared for the NEET PG Examination against sponsored DNB seats, as
the concerned Hospitals had no objection to their undertaking the PG Course
and this is evident from the issuance of ‘No Objection Certificates’. The
Appellants have cleared the examination and have been allocated respective
seats for the PG Courses and it is incumbent upon the Hospitals to grant
them study leave to enable them to pursue the course. Learned counsel for
the Appellants vehemently argues that the Appellants were assured that
upon their clearing the examination, they shall be granted study leave and
relieved from the respective hospitals and in this context, attention of the
Court is specifically drawn to page 81, which is the ‘No Objection
Certificate’ and more particularly, the following para in the NOC, which is
“....No objection Certificate to participate in the counselling for
Sponsored DNB (Post MBBS and Post Diploma) seats has been
issued to him / her by the parent organization. The undersigned
is fully aware that he / she will be relieved from his / her parent
office to join DNB training, in case of his / her selection for
DNB training. He / she continues to get the salary from the
parent department (Sponsoring Government organization) for
the entire period of DNB training.
It is further certified that he / she shall be paid the due salary
and necessary allowances as per rules, from Sponsoring
Government organization, for the entire period of DNB
training.
(Signature of the Head of the Office)”
7.      Ms. Ahlawat, Standing Counsel and Ms. Pushkarna, Advocate
appearing on behalf of Respondents No.1 and 3 submit that in normal course
when the No Objection Certificates are granted, study leave is granted to the
Doctors to pursue the courses they desire to enrol in. However, study leave
was not granted to the Appellants herein on account of the Pandemic
COVID-19, as the services of the Doctors were required at the Hospitals
and on account of surge in the number of cases, Government could not spare
the Doctors for pursuing the PG Courses. It is, however, submitted, on
instructions, that the matter was reconsidered and re-examined by the
Hon’ble Lieutenant Governor and sanction / approval has now been
accorded for grant of study leave to the Appellants herein. It is further
submitted that the approval has been duly conveyed to the respective
Hospitals where the Appellants are working and it is for the concerned
Departments to grant the study leave and relieve the Doctors.
8.      Mr. Kirtiman Singh, learned counsel appearing on behalf of
Respondent No.2, on the other hand, submits that the last date for admission
to the PG Courses in question is 30.09.2021 i.e. tomorrow. He submits that
the Appellants would be required to join before the cut-off date, failing
which their admissions would be cancelled.
9.      We have heard the learned counsels appearing for the parties.
10.     We find merit in the contention of the Appellants that the concerned
Hospitals where the Appellants are working as Doctors had granted NOCs to
them and therefore, there was approval and sanction for taking admission in
the PG Course. In any case, the seats against which the Appellants have
been admitted are sponsored seats and the Appellants could only have
applied with the approval of the concerned Departments. Having secured
admission in the PG Course, the Appellants are unable to join only because
the concerned Hospitals have not so far taken action to grant study leave.
While we may agree with the submission of Ms. Ahlawat that for a short
period the Appellants could not have been relieved on account of COVID-
19, but we do not find any justification in the inaction of the Hospitals in
granting study leave at this stage, when concededly the Hon’ble Lieutenant
Governor has sanctioned the study leave. The last date for admission is
30.09.2021 and if the Appellants are not granted study leave during the
course of the day, they will be unable to join the PG Course. If the
Appellants join the courses, it shall only inure to the advantage of the
Hospitals as the Appellants would be acquiring higher education and
qualifications. We see no reason why the concerned Hospitals should
further delay the grant of study leave to the Appellants.
11.     Learned counsels appearing for Respondents No.1 and 3 have assured
the Court that necessary directions shall be issued to the concerned Hospitals
wherein the Appellants are working, during the course of the day to grant
study leave to the Appellants.
12.     We, accordingly, direct Respondent No.3 to ensure that the concerned
Hospitals i.e. Aruna Asaf Ali Hospital and Baba Saheb Ambedkar Hospital
issue the requisite orders for grant of study leave to the Appellants
alongwith the relieving / movement orders, during the course of the day,
without any further delay. Needless to state that once the said orders are
made available to Respondent No.2, the said Respondent shall take
necessary steps to secure admission to the Appellants, in the concerned PG
courses.
13.     The above order shall be brought to the notice of the Medical
Superintendents of the concerned Hospitals, by the counsels appearing for
Respondent No.3 for immediate action.
14.     List on 30.09.2021 for reporting compliance.