The original petition is filed assailing the order passed in E.P
No.926/2020 by the Commercial Court, Ernakulam. The petitioner is
the judgment debtor, and the respondent is the decree holder.
2.      The relevant facts leading to the impugned order, in a
(i). A sole Arbitrator passed an award directing the petitioner to
pay the respondent an amount of Rs.2,46,23,101/- with interest. The
interest quotient of the award was modified by a Division Bench of
the Delhi High Court in FAO (OS) COMM. 317/2019.
(ii). The respondent laid the award to execution by filing
EP No.387/2020 before the Court of the District Judge, Ernakulam,
(iii). By an administrative order dated 25.9.2020, the learned
District Judge transferred the execution petition to the Commercial
Court, Ernakulam, and the execution petition was renumbered as
(iv).  The   petitioner   questioned    the  jurisdiction of the
Commercial Court to entertain the execution petition in view of
Section 15(2) of the Commercial Courts Act, 2015 (in short, ‘C.C.
Act’) and Sections 36 and 42 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act,
1996 (in short, ‘A&C. Act’).
(v). The Commercial Court, by the impugned order, has held
that it has the jurisdiction to entertain the execution petition.
(vi). The impugned order is illegal, irregular and improper.
Hence, the original petition.
3. The respondent has filed a statement through its Counsel,
refuting the contentions in the original petition and defending the
impugned order.
4. Heard; Sri.P.B Krishnan, the learned Counsel appearing for
the petitioner and Sri. K.T Bosco, the learned Counsel appearing for
the respondent.
5. The question is whether the Commercial Court has the
jurisdiction to entertain the execution petition.
6. The respondent has laid the award passed by the Sole
Arbitrator to execution by filing EP No.387/2020 before the Court of
the District Judge, Ernakulam, on 23.6.2020.
7.    By   G.O.(Ms).     No.51/20202/Home           dated     24.02.2020,
fourteen Commercial Courts were established in the State of Kerala
by designating one Court of the Subordinate Judge in each District as
a Commercial Court. Subsequently, this Court by O.M No.A1-
22133/2015/D1/D7(B)(1)          dated 12.3.2020 directed the District
Judges to take necessary steps to transfer the cases falling within the
purview of the C.C. Act from the Civil Courts to the Commercial
Courts. Later, by notification dated 18.03.2022, all the Courts of the
Subordinate Judges in the State were notified as                     Commercial
8. The learned District Judge, Ernakulam, on the strength of the
official memorandum issued by this Court and invoking the power
under Section 15 of the C.C. Act, transferred the execution petition
in question from its file to the Commercial Court, Ernakulam.
9. It is apposite to extract Sub-Sections (1) to (3) of Section 15
of the Commercial Courts Act, which reads as follows:
“15. Transfer of pending cases. — (1) All suits and applications, including
applications under the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (26 of 1996),
relating to a commercial dispute of a Specified Value pending in a High Court
where a Commercial Division has been constituted, shall be transferred to the
(2) All suits and applications, including applications under the Arbitration
and Conciliation Act, 1996 (26 of 1996), relating to a commercial dispute of a
Specified Value pending in any civil court in any district or area in respect of
which a Commercial Court has been constituted, shall be transferred to such
Provided that no suit or application where the final judgment has been
reserved by the Court prior to the constitution of the Commercial Division or the
Commercial Court shall be transferred either under sub-section (1) or sub-
(3) Where any suit or application, including an application under the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (26 of 1996), relating to a commercial
dispute of Specified Value shall stand transferred to the Commercial Division or
Commercial Court under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), the provisions of this
Act shall apply to those procedures that were not complete at the time of
10. The above provision mandates that on the establishment of
the Commercial          Courts,    all   suits   and    applications,    including
applications under the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, relating
to a commercial dispute of a specified value, pending in the Civil
Courts be transferred to the Commercial Courts. However, those
suits and applications reserved for final judgment by the Civil Court
prior to the establishment of the Commercial Courts are excluded
from the purview of transfer.
11. To put it pithily, other than those suits and applications
which are reserved for judgment by the Civil Courts, falling within the
sweep of the C.C. Act, have to be mandatorily transferred to the
Commercial Courts. In such matters, the provisions of the C.C. Act
would apply to those procedures that were not complete at the time
of transfer.
12. In the case on hand, EP No.387/2020 was filed on
23.06.2020        before    the    District   Court,    Ernakulam,      after   the
establishment of the Commercial Courts in the State. Therefore, the
execution petition was not a pending matter to attract Section 15 of
the C.C. Act.        Instead, it was a freshly filed         execution petition.
Therefore, undoubtedly, the transfer of EP No.387/2020 by the
District Court, on the administrative side, invoking Section 15 of the
C.C. Act, is in egregious violation of the provisions of the C.C. Act.
13. In an illuminating judgment rendered in Shaji Augustine v.
Online Ker. 9840] this Court has held as follows:
“27. As observed earlier, the procedure for execution is not
mentioned anywhere in the Commercial Courts Act and there is nothing to
indicate that the jurisdiction of other courts with respect to pending
execution matters stands excluded. The absence of provision regarding
execution or specific exclusion of jurisdiction of other courts with respect to
execution procedures and the conscious omission to amend Order XXI
CPC for hastening the process of execution can only lead to the conclusion
that the word “application” in Section 15(1) does not include an 'execution
application/petition' and the words, 'those procedures that are not complete
at the time of transfer' in Section 15(3) of the Commercial Courts Act does
not take in procedure relating to execution of decrees/awards. For the
aforementioned reasons, I respectfully disagree with the dictum laid down
by the Gujarat High Court in Jagmohan Bel (supra), insofar as it holds that
the commercial court at the District level constituted under sub section (1) of
Section 3 of the Commercial Courts Act would be the court competent to
execute awards declared under Section 34 of the Arbitration Act. “
14. Going by the scheme of the C.C. Act, the express
exclusion of suits and applications reserved for judgment from
the purview of transfer and the conscious omission of the
provisions relating to execution proceedings under the Code
of Civil Procedure in the schedule to the C.C. Act, urges me to
agree and endorse the ratio decidendi in Shaji Augustine
(supra), that applications mentioned in Section 15 of the C.C. Act
do not include execution applications.
15. I disagree with the observations of the Commercial
Court and the learned Counsel for the respondents that the
decree holder has a vested right to execute an award passed
under the A & C. Act before the Commercial Court in view of the
law laid down in OCI             Corporation v. Kandla Export
Corporation [2016 SCC Online Guj.5981] because that was a
case wherein an international award passed by a Commercial
Court was laid to execution before the Commercial Court, which
is inapplicable to the facts of the case on hand.
16. I reminisce the observations of the Honourable
Supreme Court in Ambalal Sarabhai Enterprises Ltd. v. K.S.
Infraspace LLP [(2020) 15 SCC 585], while dealing with the
C.C Act, wherein it held thus:
“36. A perusal of the Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Commercial
Courts Act, 2015 and the various amendments to the Civil Procedure Code and
insertion of new rules to the Code applicable to suits of commercial disputes
show that it has been enacted for the purpose of providing an early disposal of
high value commercial disputes. A purposive interpretation of the Statement of
Objects and Reasons and various amendments to the Civil Procedure Code
leaves no room for doubt that the provisions of the Act require to be strictly
construed. If the provisions are given a liberal interpretation, the object behind
constitution of Commercial Division of Courts viz. putting the matter on fast track
and speedy resolution of commercial disputes, will be defeated. If we take a
closer look at the Statement of Objects and Reasons, words such as “early” and
“speedy” have been incorporated and reiterated. The object shall be fulfilled
only if the provisions of the Act are interpreted in a narrow sense and not
hampered by the usual procedural delays plaguing our traditional legal system”.
17. Thus, if a more expansive interpretation is given to the
word application falling under Section 15 of the C.C. Act, to include
execution petitions also, then necessarily all the execution petitions
pending before all the civil courts falling within the ken of the C.C. Act
will have to be transferred to the Commercial Courts, which in turn
will clog the special courts with such matters. Moreover, no practical
purpose will be served by such transfer because the Special Courts
are not conferred with any additional power than that of the Civil
Courts, to     speed     track   execution     proceedings,       as   execution
proceedings have been omitted in the schedule attached to the C.C.
Act. Without a faster timeline provided under the C.C.Act, to enforce
an award, it is immaterial whether the award is executed by the Civil
Court or the Commercial Court.
18. Be that as it may, the A & C Act also envisages the speedy
disposal of arbitration matters. The principal Civil Court of original
jurisdiction, which is the District Court, is conferred with the
jurisdiction to execute a domestic award.
19. In Sundaram Finance Ltd v. Abdul Samad and others
[2018 (3) SCC 622], the Honourable Supreme Court has held that an
arbitration award can be executed anywhere in India.
20. Therefore, the Court of the District Judge Ernakulam, had
gone wrong in transferring the execution petition which was not a
pending matter at the time of notifying the C.C. Act. Furthermore, the
District Court has the jurisdiction to entertain the execution petition
because the petitioner resides within the jurisdiction of the said Court
and is a Court superior to the Commercial Court. Hence, no prejudice
is caused to the respondent in the execution petition being decided
by the District Court.
21. It would be contextually relevant to extract the observations
of the Honourable Supreme Court in Kandla Export Corpn. v. OCI
Corporation [(2018) 14 SCC 715], which reads as follows:
“27. The matter can be looked at from a slightly different angle. Given the
objects of both the statutes, it is clear that arbitration itself is meant to be a
speedy resolution of disputes between parties. Equally, enforcement of foreign
awards should take place as soon as possible if India is to remain as an equal
partner, commercially speaking, in the international community. In point of fact,
the raison d'être for the enactment of the Commercial Courts Act is that
commercial disputes involving high amounts of money should be speedily
decided. Given the objects of both the enactments, if we were to provide an
additional appeal, when Section 50 does away with an appeal so as to speedily
enforce foreign awards, we would be turning the Arbitration Act and the
Commercial Courts Act on their heads. Admittedly, if the amount contained in a
foreign award to be enforced in India were less than Rs 1 crore, and a Single
Judge of a High Court were to enforce such award, no appeal would lie, in
keeping with the object of speedy enforcement of foreign awards. However, if, in
the same fact circumstance, a foreign award were to be for Rs 1 crore or more,
if the appellants are correct, enforcement of such award would be further
delayed by providing an appeal under Section 13(1) of the Commercial Courts
Act. Any such interpretation would lead to absurdity, and would be directly
contrary to the object sought to be achieved by the Commercial Courts Act viz.
speedy resolution of disputes of a commercial nature involving a sum of Rs 1
crore and over. For this reason also, we feel that Section 13(1) of the
Commercial Courts Act must be construed in accordance with the object sought
to be achieved by the Act. Any construction of Section 13 of the Commercial
Courts Act, which would lead to further delay, instead of an expeditious
enforcement of a foreign award must, therefore, be eschewed. Even on
applying the doctrine of harmonious construction of both statutes, it is
clear that they are best harmonised by giving effect to the special statute
i.e. the Arbitration Act, vis-à vis the more general statute, namely, the
Commercial Courts Act, being left to operate in spheres other than
22. On a conspectus of the pleadings and materials on record,
the law on the point and the findings rendered above, this Court is of
the definite view that the impugned order is erroneous and is liable to
be interfered with by this Court under Article 227 of the Constitution
of India, which I do.
Resultantly, I allow the original petition as follows:
(i) Ext P7 order passed in EP No.926/2020 by the Commercial
Court, Ernakulam, is set aside.
(ii) E.P No.926/2020 of the Commercial Court, Ernakulam, is
transferred back to the District Court, Ernakulam.
(iii) The parties are directed to appear before the District Court,
Ernakulam on 21.03.2023.
(iv) The District Court, Ernakulam, is directed to consider
and dispose of the execution petition in accordance with law and
as expeditiously as possible.