Prayer in this petition is for setting aside the order dated
8.1.2019 passed by the District Judge, Additional Family Court, Karnal
vide which an application filed by the petitioner-wife under Order 7
Rule 11 C.P.C. to dismiss the petition filed by the respondent-husband
under Section 25 of the Guardianship and Wards Act, 1890 read with
Section 6 of the Hindu Minority and Guardian Act, 1956 for claiming the
custody of ‘A’ (name not disclosed) was declined.
Brief facts of the case are that the marriage of the petitioner
with the respondent was solemnized on 31.10.2010 and out of this
wedlock, a male child ‘A’ was borne on 1.7.2015. Since the marriage
between the parties could not pull on, both of them decided to file a
petition under Section 28 of the Special Marriage Act, 1954 for granting
a decree of divorce by mutual consent.       The said petition was filed
before the Family Court at Sonepat on 17.10.2017, i.e. just three
months after the birth of the male child. In para 5 of this petition, both
the parties made a joint declaration that they are living separately from
each other since September, 2015 and they are unable to live together
as husband and wife any more.
Para 7 of this petition reads as under :-
“7.     That the parties have now mutually settled
and agreed that the little male baby (namely ‘A’
shall remain in the custody of her mother
petitioner No.1, who shall be responsible to look
after him in all respect so that he may become a
very good citizen of his life. The parties have also
settled all their claims, assets and liabilities. The parties
have no other further claim whatsoever against each
other. The petitioner No.1 undertakes not to claim any
kind of istri dhan. The articles and gifts etc. have already
been taken back and received by the petitioner No.2
from petitioner No.1.”
Thereafter, at the stage of first motion, on the same day,
i.e. 17.10.2017, a joint statement of the parties was recorded, in which
the following averments were made with regard to the custody of the
“It has been agreed between the parties that
custody of minor child, namely, ‘A’ shall remain
with petitioner No.1.
litigation in future pertaining to this marriage and
the matters connected therewith.
Our consent for divorce is free and voluntary. The
same has not been given under any force, pressure,
fraud, coercion, misrepresentation of undue influence.
There is no collusion between us in filling the present
petition for divorce by mutual consent.
We have signed the petition for divorce after
having been read over and understanding the contents
of the same. We undertake to abide by the terms and
conditions of settlement, in letter and spirit.”
Thereafter, on 6.11.2017, at the stage of second motion, the
following statement was recorded :-
“Our marriage was solemnized under Section 13 of the
Special Marriage Act, 1954 before the Marriage Officer,
Delhi on 31.10.2012.           After the marriage, we lived
together as husband and wife and a male child ‘A’ was
born out from this wedlock. We are residing separately
even after filing this petition. There has not been any
co-habitation between us since September, 2015.          We
cannot reside together and our marriage be dissolved as
there is no chance of re-union.         Everything has been
settled between the parties and now nothing shall
remain due towards either side and no claim of future
maintenance, alimony or any right in property would be
raised in either of the parties. We both are bound by
our earlier statement dated 17.10.2017.
The marriage may be dissolved today as the
mutual consent has not been obtained by force, fraud,
undue influence, threat to anyone and this petition has
not been presented in collusion with each other.”
This was followed by a judgment and decree of granting
divorce by mutual consent between the parties. In the judgment, it is
specifically observed that the male child ‘A’ is residing with petitioner
No.1, i.e. the petitioner herein, and the parties are living separately
since September, 2015. The operative part of the judgment dated
6.11.2017 reads as under :-
“In view of the joint statement of the parties, the petition
is allowed. Both the parties shall be bound by their
statements.        A decree of divorce dissolving the
marriage between the parties by way of mutual consent
is hereby passed leaving the parties to bear their own
cost.    Decree sheet be drawn.        A copy of the decree
sheet be supplied to each party free of costs. File be
consigned to record room.”
Counsel for the petitioner submits that now the respondent
has filed aforesaid petition under Section 25 of the Guardian and Wards
Act read with Section 6 of the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act,
1956, claiming the custody of the minor child on the ground that there
was an agreement between the parties dated 13.10.2017, which was
notorised at Delhi and in the agreement it was agreed that respondent
will have meeting and visiting rights of Master ‘A’ once a week, secondly
that he has a right to meet and spent time on the festivals, school
functions; etc. and thirdly that in the event of marriage of the mother,
the custody will be handed over to the father, if the father so desires.
The petitioner, herein, appeared before the Court and filed the written
statement pleading that the petition is based on forged and fabricated
documents, i.e. the agreement dated 13.10.2017, which has been
fabricated by the respondent as signatures or this agreement of the
petitioner-mother is a result of impersonation and forgery. It was also
explained in the written statement that on various earlier occasions,
when the divorce petition was filed; when the first motion joint
statement was recorded; when the second motion joint statement was
recorded as well as when the decree of divorce was granted, the
respondent-father never relied upon the said agreement dated
17.10.2017, though the aforesaid proceedings happened subsequently.
Therefore, the petition is filed by fabricating the agreement dated
13.10.2017 just to harass the petitioner-mother.           The counsel with
reference to para 2 of the written statement submits that there are
some handwritten insertions made in this alleged agreement dated
13.10.2017 with regard to the custody of the minor.
Counsel for the petitioner has referred to Section 38 of the
Special Marriage Act, 1954 which reads as under :-
“38. Custody of Children – In any proceeding under
Chapter V or Chapter VI the district Court may,
from time to time, pas such interim orders and
make such provisions in the decree as it may seem
to it to be just and proper with respect to the
custody, maintenance and education of minor
children, consistently with their wishes wherever
possible,  and       may, after  the  decree,  upon
application by petition for the purpose, make,
revoke, suspend or vary, from time to time, all such
orders and provisions with respect to the custody,
maintenance and education of such children as
might have been made by such decree or interim
orders in case the proceedings for obtaining such
decree were still pending.”
Counsel for the petitioner further submits that since the
decree of divorce was granted under Section 28 of the Act by way of
mutual consent falling in Chapter VI, therefore, respondent-husband
had a remedy to approach the same Court in terms of Section 38 of the
Special Marriage Act, 1956 and no independent suit is maintainable.
Counsel for the petitioner has next argued that the trial
Court when dismissing the application under Order XII Rule 11 by not
rejecting the petition has failed to appreciate the legal preposition. The
counsel for the petitioner has relied upon a Division Bench judgment of
this Court in 1981 HLR 417, Rakesh Dua Vs. Mrs. Shoba Dua,
wherein similar facts and circumstances, it was held petition that under
Section 25 of the Guardians and Wards Act is not maintainable. The
relevant part of the said judgment is extracted as under :-
“3.     The learned counsel for the appellant, was unable
to show as to how the application filed by the appellant
in the trial Court, was maintainable in view of the
agreement, Exhibit R.1 entered into between the parties
on the basis of which the decree of divorce was passed.
Section 26 of the Hindu Marriage Act (hereinafter called
the ‘Act’), reads as follows :-
“In any proceeding under this Act, the Court may,
from time to time, pass such interim orders and
make such provisions in the decree as it may deem
just and proper with respect to the custody,
maintenance and education of minor children,
consistent with their wishes, whenever possible,
and may, after the decree, upon application by
petition for the purpose, make, from time to time,
all such orders and provisions with respect to the
custody, maintenance and education of such
children or interim orders in case the proceedings
for obtaining such decree were still pending, and
the Court may also, from time to time, revoke,
suspend or vary any such orders and provisions
previously made.”
In view of this provision, no application under Section 25
of the Guardians and Wards Act, could be maintainable.
In case there was any breach of this agreement, the only
course open to the parties was to approach the Court
which passed the decree for divorce, as contemplated
under i.e. above said provision. Moreover, the custody of
the minor children is with the respondent mother under
the agreement between the parties.            Even the said
agreement could be made a part of the decree granting
the divorce, but in any case, it has the common case of
the parties that the divorce was granted on the basis of
the agreement, Exhibit R.1.”
Counsel for the petitioner has then relied upon another
judgment of a Division       Bench of the Calcutta High Court 1990 AIR
wherein the Court observed as under :-
3.      If the respondent is aggrieved because of the ap-
pellant's failure to comply with that portion of the Order
forming part of the decree for divorce requiring the ap-
pellant to make the child available to the respondent ev-
ery Sunday for 2 hours at the agreed place, he has his
remedy under S.39A of the Special Marriage Act, where-
under all decrees and orders made by the Court in any
proceeding under Chaps. V and VI of the Act shall be en-
forced in like manner as the decrees and orders of the
Court made in the exercise of its Original Civil Jurisdiction
for the time being are enforced. No remedy, there-
fore,     can    obviously     lie   under S.    25 of   the
Guardians and Wards Act, which can be invoked
only for the return of a child who has left or is re-
moved from the custody of a guardian of his per-
4.       Here the custody of the child was given to the
appellant-mother under the order of the Court. True the
order was passed on the basis of mutual agreement
between the parties, but the same having been made
part of the decree, no longer rests on agreement alone.
It is true that if a guardian by voluntary agreement vests
another person with the custody of his child, he may
revoke such an agreement. This is settled law since the
leading decision of the Privy Council in Annie Besant v.
Narayaniah AIR       1914     PC   41   where  it was   also
nevertheless ruled that if and when such delegated au-
thority relating to custody has been acted upon in such
a way as to create associations or give rise to
expectations on the part of the child, which it would be
undesirable in its interest to disturb and to disappoint the
child thereby, the Court may interfere to prevent its
revocation. The reason is that in this jurisdiction, what
governs the Courts more is not the law or legal rights
flowing therefrom, but the welfare and interest of the
minor. But once such a custody has been decreed or
ordered by the Court, and, therefore, does not rest on
the guardian's extra-cural agreement alone, the latter
cannot alter or revoke such custody unilaterally and
extra-judicially, but can only move the Court, which
passed the decree or the order, for revocation, variation
or suspension of the order, as provided under S. 38 itself.
A guardian cannot invoke the provisions of
S. 25 of the Guardians and Wards Act solely for
the purpose of alteration or revocation of an order
of custody made by a competent Court, even if
such revocation or alteration is proved to be nec-
essary for the welfare of the minor.
5.      For invocation of S. 25 of the Guardians and Wards
Act, the sine qua non is a ward leaving or being removed
from the custody of his guardian. And even then, an
order for return of the child is not a matter of course, but
may be made by the Court only when it is further
satisfied that such return would be conducive to the
welfare of the ward. It is true that detention of a ward by
one against the wish of its guardian may in law amount
to removal of the ward from the custody of the guardian
within the meaning of S. 25 of the Guardians and Wards
Act. But where, as here, the appellant-mother has
been entrusted with the custody of the child by
and under an order of the competent Court and
the child is all along, since such order, in her
custody, retention of the ward in such custody
granted by the Court cannot, so long the order
remains in force, amount to any removal of the
child, even if such retention is now against the
will of the legal guardian. As already indicated, if
the respondent-father feels that there have been
such developments of subsequent events which
might warrant an alternation or revocation of the
earlier     order    of       custody  in    favour of  the
appellant-mother, he may, if so advised, move for
the same in the Court which made the order. But
an     application      under      S.25 of    the Guardians
and Wards Act was entirely misconceived and the
trial Court also went entirely wrong in invoking
and applying the provisions thereof.”
The counsel for the petitioner nor has then referred to
another judgment of Delhi High Court, 2016 AIR (Delhi) 156, Anamika
Khurana Vs. Rajiv Khurana, wherein, again, it was held that if one of
the parties pleads breaches of an memorandum of understanding
settled between the parties, a suit was not held maintainable under the
Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act and it was held that the right of
the plaintiff-wife, as per the law, will only be by enforcing the rights on
account of the breaches of memorandum of understanding and liberty
was granted to the plaintiff seek enforcement of the terms and
conditions of the mutual understanding. The counsel, thus, argued that
the respondent had no independent right to file the petition under
Section 25 of the Guardians and Wards Act and can move an application
before the family Court, Sonepat, where the consent decree was passed
under Section 28 of the Special Marriage Act and in case there is any
default of the joint statement or the joint petition, he can seek his
redressal of grievances before the same Court and not by filing
independent suit under Section 25 of the Guardians and Wards Act and
on the basis of an agreement dated 13.10.2017, which has never seen
the day of light settle till the time a decree of divorce by mutual consent
on the basis of a joint petition and joined first and second motion
statement was passed.
In reply, the learned counsel for the respondent has placed
reliance upon mutual agreement dated 13.10.2017 to submit that it was
signed by the parties and was executed at New Delhi regarding visiting
rights of the father with minor child “A’ and under Clause 7 and further
clause was inserted by writing in hand ‘that in the event of post-
marriage of Priyanka, ‘A’ will be in custody of his father, if he likes.’
Counsel for the respondent has submitted that in view of this
agreement, once it has come on record that mother Priyanka had
remarried, father Manish Raj has a right to recovery the custody of the
minor. Counsel for the respondent has also argued that the jurisdiction
of the Court exercising the petition under Section 25 of the Guardians
and Wards Act read with Section 6 of the Hindu Adoptions and
Maintenance Act, 1956 is maintainable, independently.
Counsel for the respondent has further submitted that the
father has not been permitted to meet the child and even visiting rights
have not been provided.
On a Court query, about the place of working of father
Manish Raj, the counsel for the respondent fairly concedes that
presently he is working in Dubai as an Orthopaedic Surgeon, though he
visits India periodically.
To the contrary, on Court query, counsel for the petitioner
submits that the petitioner is permanently residing in Karnal, where she
is working in a hospital and since birth, the child is in the custody of the
mother and he has been admitted in school at Karnal and it is the
mother who is taking care of the child in all respect and is financially
capable to do so.
On reappraisal of pleadings and impugned order, this Court
finds that the trial Court has observed that under Section VII Rule 11
(d) CPC, a duty is cast upon the Court to reject a plaint if it is barred
under the provision of law, however, further observed that since the
respondent father is seeking the custody of the minor child not only on
the basis of the agreement dated 13.10.2017, but also on the basis,
being the biological father of the child and, therefore, the plaint cannot
be rejected.
It is also worth noticing that since this petition is pending
since 2019 and on 10.10.2019, the co-ordinate Bench arranged a
meeting of the respondent father with the child for about 01 hour in the
chamber and found that the child did not recognize the respondent-
father and on the request of the respondent-father, to think over the
matter the case was adjourned and, thereafter it remains pending for a
considerable long time and proceedings before trial Court remained
As on today, the age of the child is about 07 years and since
his birth, the child is residing in the custody of the petitioner-mother
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and on going
through the record, I find merit in this petition.
Though it is well settled principle of law that for the purpose
of deciding an application under Section VII Rule 11 CPC, the contents
of the plaint/petition is to be seen, however, in the previous divorce
petition filed by both the parents on the basis of the mutual consent
under Section 28 of the Special Marriage Act (as there was marriage
was performed under the said Act) needs to be scrutinized carefully
regarding their voluntarily statement of father for giving the custody of
the child to the mother and not pleading the agreement dated
13.10.2017 till the time the decree was passed. Moreover, it is a case of
not deciding the rights of the parents but the custody of minor child,
therefore, the Court cannot ignore the paramount consideration as held
by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in a number of judgments that the
welfare of the child should be the paramount consideration, while
dealing with the custody of a minor child and, therefore, the
circumstances from the date of birth of the child till date needs to be
Thus, the following undisputed facts emerges on the basis
of which this petition deserves to be allowed :-
(a)   The respondent No.1, who is a highly educated person,
being Orthopaedic Surgeon filed a joint petition with
petitioner, who is also a doctor for dissolution of the
marriage by way of a decree of divorce with mutual
consent and in which in para 7 of the same, it is
specifically stated that the male baby ‘A’ shall remain in
custody of his mother.
(b)  In the first motion statement recorded on 17.10.2017,
i.e the date when the petition was filed, again father
made the statement that it is agreed between the
parties that the custody of the minor child namely ‘A’
shall remains with the mother and an undertaking was
given by him that no litigation in future will be initiated
in all the connected matters.
(c)  Again, when the second motion was recorded on
6.11.2017,      respondent-father acknowledges all the
facts, including the date of marriage; birth of minor
child ‘A’; separation since September, 2015 and specific
averment was made that the parties are bound with the
earlier statement dated 17.10.2017.
(d)  The alleged agreement dated 13.10.2017 came in
existence before filing of petition, before the first
motion and the second motion statements, but the
respondent-father         never   relied   upon the    said
agreement or brought it to the notice of the Family
Court even when his second motion statement was
recorded on 6.11.2017.
(e)  Even in the judgment and decree passed by the Family
Court, Sonepat, a condition was laid that in view of the
joint statement of the parties, the petition is allowed
and both the parties shall be bound by their statement
i.e. to say that the respondent-father, never relied upon
the said agreement in those proceedings where both
the parents, i.e. petitioner and respondent have settled
the custody right of minor son ‘A’.
(f)  Though it is also well settled principle of law that once
a party has denied the existence of an agreement, the
same may require evidence to prove whether it is a
genuine or a forged document, however, in the instant
case, once this agreement was never relied upon in the
proceedings before the Family Court which calminated
into the decree of divorce between the parties by way
of mutual consent on the basis of the statement and
this agreement was never brought to the notice of the
said Court, the trial Court ought to have rejected the
same by allowing the application under Order VII Rule
(g)  Even otherwise in view of the judgment of a Division
Bench, this Court in Rakesh Kumar’s case (supra) as
well as the Division Bench judgment of the Calcullta
High Court in Sibani Banerjee’s case (supra), in terms
of Section 38 of the Special Marriage Act, the
respondent-husband has remedy to approach the said
Court, which has passed the decree of divorce if any
terms and condition were violated and, therefore, in
view of the above mentioned two judgments, the
petition filed by the respondent-father in terms of
under Section 25 of the Guardianship and Wards Act is
mis-conceived and is liable to be rejected, being barred
by the provisions of Section 38 of the Special Marriage
(h)  It is not case of father that child was forcibly removed
from his custody rather it is his own case that as per
decree, the custody was mutually given to mother,
therefore, in view of above judgments, petition under
Section 25 of the Guardian and Wards Act is not
maintainable.
(i)  As the competent Court under the Special Marriage Act,
1956 even after passing the decree of divorce has
jurisdiction under Section 38 of the Act to pass just
and proper order with respect to the custody,
maintenance and education of a minor child.
Accordingly, this petition is allowed, the impugned order
dated 8.1.2019 passed by the District Judge, Additional Family Court,
Karnal, is set aside and the application filed by the petitioner-mother
under Order VII Rule 11 C.P.C. is allowed and the petition filed by the
respondent under Section 25 read with Guardianship and Wards Act,
1890 is rejected, leaving the respondent-husband to avail alternative
remedy, in accordance with law.