Shri Sunil Gupta, learned counsel for respondent. No.6.
This petition under Article 226 of the Constitution seeks
issuance of writ of habeas corpus for releasing the corpus from
the alleged unlawful confinement at Nari Niketan.
The factual matrix reveals that the petitioner and the corpus
knew each other since number of years and developed fondness
for each other and are presently inclined to get married. However,
it is alleged that the parents of the corpus are unable to approve of
the marriage between corpus and the petitioner primarily because
the petitioner belongs to a different religion and also that the
corpus is of an impressionable age i.e. 19 years when she should
prioratise completing her academic career over marriage. The
corpus on earlier three occasions i.e. 14.2.2022, 17.2.2022 and
21.2.2022 appeared before this Court through video conferencing
from District Court, Betul. On the last occasion i.e. on 21.2.2022,
this Court looking to the urgency of the matter directed
functionaries of the State to physically produce the corpus before
The corpus has been physically produced before this Court
and is heard in camera.
The father and the brother of corpus were also heard in
camera. The petitioner has also been heard in camera.
During in-camera proceedings, the corpus was adamant
upon marrying petitioner. The corpus reveals that the petitioner
has assured the corpus of physical and financial assistance for
completing her education (presently corpus is pursuing the
Nursing Course at undergraduate level).
The corpus has expressed certain apprehensions before this
Court that petitioner may solemnize another marriage after
marrying the corpus. As such this Court asked the petitioner to file
an affidavit so that apprehension of corpus may be to some extent
assuaged. The petitioner filed an affidavit on 18.2.2022 vide
I.A.No.112/2022 which reveals thus:
¼le{k is’k djus ckcr~ ekuuh; mPPk U;k;ky; tcyiqj½
eSa] Qsly [kku firk Jh lxhj [kku mez 23 o"kZ] fuoklh & okMZ ua- 9]
bdcky xat] rg- bVkjlh ftyk gks’kaxkckn] e-iz- fuEufyf[kr djrk gwa %&
1-      ;g fd] esjs }kjk ekuuh; mPp U;k;ky; tcyiqj ds le{k ,d canh
izR;{khdj.k ;kfpdk Øekad 3423@2022 izLrqr dh xbZ gSA
2-      ;g fd] mDr ;kfpdk esa fnukad 17-02-2022 dks gqbZ lquokbZ esa ekuuh;
mPp U;k;ky; ds }kjk ;kfpdkdrkZ dks viuh f’k{kk] ukSdjh] vk; ,oa /keZ ds laca/k
'kiFki= izLrqr djus gsrq vknsf’kr fd;k x;kA
3-      ;g fd] eSa orZeku esa dyk Lukrd ds vafre o"kZ esa 'kkldh; egkRek xk¡/kh
Le`fr LukrdksRrj egkfo|ky; bVkjlh e-iz- esa v/;;ujr~ gw¡A
4-      ;g fd] eSa vkj- ds- fMªfyax lfoZlsl bVkjlh ftyk gks’kaxkckn esa vkWfQl
ds in ij dk;Zjr~ gw¡ ,oa esjk osru 10]000@& izfrekg gSA
5-      ;g fd] vkSj nh{kk meax vk;Z firk Jh ;ksxs’k vk;Z ds lkFk fo’ks"k fookg
vf/kfu;e 1984 ds varxZr fookg djds ,d lkFk jgsaxs ,oa fookg ds i’pkr~ eSa
mldh i<+kbZ vko’;d :i ls djokm¡xk ,oa mldk cgqr vPNs ls [;ky j[kwaxk ,oa
mldks ftl pht dh Hkh t:jr gkasxh og eSa viuh leFkZrk ds vuqlkj iwjk
6-       ;g fd] eSus nh{kk meax vk;Z dks Hkh /keZ ifjorZu ds fy, ugh dgk gS og
ckfyx gS vkSj mldks dkSu lk /keZ viukuk gS ;g mldh bPNk ij fuHkZj djrk gS
,oa eSa fdl /keZ dk ikyu d:¡ ;g esjh bPNk ij fuHkZj djrk gSA
eSa Qsly [kku] mijksDr 'kiFkdrkZ vkt fnukad dks tcyiqj esa gLrk{kj
dj lR;kfir djrk gwa fd 'kiFki= dh dafMdk Øekad 1 ls var of.kZr dFku esjh
Lo;a dh tkudkjh esa lR; ,oa lgh gSA
Copy of the aforesaid affidavit has been supplied to corpus
and she was asked as to whether the said assurance in the affidavit
given by petitioner satisfies her apprehension or not.
The corpus was though a little apprehensive since the issue
of petitioner solemnizing multiple marriages remain unanswered
by the petitioner but still insists that she would like to marry the
petitioner and also pursue her academic career.
The father and brother of corpus raised apprehension about
the safety and security of corpus and also revealed that their
interest is in corpus completing her academic career so that she
attains self-reliance and is not dependent on the petitioner who has
meager source of income.
The corpus is more than 19 years of age (D.O.B.
19.10.2002) and therefore, as per law is entitled to take a decision
on the choice of marriage. However, parents of corpus are equally
concerned with the safety and security of their daughter and their
cause of concern cannot be belittled when compared with the
desire of corpus to get married to the petitioner.
In petition seeking habeas corpus, this Court has limited
jurisdiction. The corpus has already attained the age of majority
and, therefore, cannot be kept confined in Nari Niketan where she
was lodged since last few days awaiting resolution of the dispute
that arose between the petitioner, corpus and parents of corpus.
This Court therefore issues a writ of habeas corpus directing
Nari Niketan at Pathar Khera District Betul (M.P.) to release the
corpus forthwith and allow her to exercise right to personal liberty.
Before parting, this Court would like to add that role of the father
of the corpus does not come to an end if the corpus gets married
(to anyone). The father continues to be father even after marriage
of his daughter and, therefore, is equally entitled to ensure the
safety and security of the daughter. Thus, this Court expects that
the father of the corpus shall continue to keep in touch with the
corpus and provide her with the financial and emotional
assistance which she requires to the extent such assistance falls
short and is unable to be provided by her spouse.
The corpus is also advised by this Court to understand the
priorities in life. Academics has very important role to play in the
early formative years of a human being. Thus, the corpus should
first concentrate on completing her education to such extent which
assures her with source of livelihood to take care of her necessities
and comforts without being dependent upon anyone including her
Marriage is a concept which is though important in life but
can very well be postponed and takes a backseat when pitched
against the all important concept of education. The corpus is
expected to pay heed to the aforesaid advice to gain sufficient
maturity in life for understanding difference between right and
Accordingly, Nari Niketan by way of writ of habeas corpus
is directed to release the corpus to enable her to exercise right to
personal liberty enshrined under Article 21 of the Constitution of
To ensure the safety and security of the corpus at the place
of her choice of residence, the councillor under the J.J. Act
having territorial jurisdiction over the area where the corpus shall
henceforth resides, shall submit a fortnightly report about well
being of the corpus especially as to whether the corpus is pursuing
academic career uninterruptedly or not.
This case is kept pending awaiting a fortnightly report of
the councillor about the well being of the corpus from the place of
her choice of residence.
Copy of this order be sent to the Juvenile Justice Board of
The escort comprising of Shri Sanjay Raghuvanshi, A.S.I.
and Ms. Poonam Choudhary, Lady Constable No.784 of Police
Station Itarsi, District Narmadapuram, who have brought corpus
to the Court are directed escort corpus to the place where the
corpus wants to reside and submit the compliance report with the
Registry of this Court within a week.
Registry is directed to list this matter in the week
commencing 14/03/2022 for perusal of the fortnightly report.