1. The appellant, through the medium of this composite application, seeks
suspension of sentence and grant of bail pending appeal filed by him as
well as Criminal Reference received from the court of learned Principal
Sessions Judge Pulwama, having been aggrieved of his conviction for
the commission of offences punishable under Section 302 and 392 RPC
vide impugned judgment dated 04.02.2022 in a case No. 25/Session,
titled U.T of J&K Vs. Sameer Ahmad Sheikh & Ors. arising out of
FIR No. 72/2011 registered at Police Station Pulwama.
2. The appellant herein was awarded life imprisonment under Section 302
RPC and one year rigorous imprisonment under Section 392 RPC vide
order dated 04.02.2022. Both the sentences of imprisonment were
ordered to run concurrently.
3. The appellant has assailed the judgment of his conviction and sentence
on many grounds. Alongside appeal, application for suspension of
sentence and grant of bail has also been moved by the appellant-convict,
asserting therein that the appellant since his arrest on 11.04.2011 has
been in continuous custody and has completed 10 years and 10 months
in jail, though he is a man of clean antecedents with history of not
involved in any criminal matter or case; that he has preferred an appeal
against his conviction and sentence and is sure that he will succeed in
the appeal; that the entire case rests on circumstantial evidence and
there is no eye witness to the alleged incident; that no independent
witness has been examined by the prosecution and all the witnesses
were either relatives or close friends of the complainant except PW-18
Feroz Ahmad Sheikh, who had been declared as hostile; that there was
unexplained delay in lodging FIR; that the trial court has failed to
consider whether the approver was a reliable witness and a portion of
his statement was conveniently ignored resulting in failure of justice;
that there was inconsistencies in the statement of PW-19 regarding ‘last
seen together’ theory; that the trial court has rejected the plea of defense
with regard to identification parade, on the wrong premise, that the
accused was known to all the witnesses; that there was a long time gap
between the date of last seen together and date of death which renders
the theory of ‘last seen together’ irrelevant; that the provisions of
Section 342 of J&K Cr.PC pari materia to Section 313 of Cr.P.C were
observed in breach by the trial court rendering the conviction liable to
be set aside. It was, therefore, prayed that having regard to the points
raised by the appellant-convict, the sentence of imprisonment is
required to be suspended pending disposal of the appeal and the
appellant be granted bail.
4. Pursuant to notice, respondent filed objections resisting the plea of
suspension of sentence and grant of bail in favour of the appellant,
asserting therein that the appellant has been convicted after the full
dressed trial under Section 302 RPC and sentenced to imprisonment for
life and one year rigorous imprisonment for the commission of offence
of robbery under Section 392 RPC; that the application deserves to be
dismissed as the presumption of innocence cannot be taken after
recording of conviction by the court; that the appellant in connivance
with other accused killed a young boy who was undergoing his studies
in 2nd year of Graduation. It was further submitted that the murder of an
innocent young boy was committed for robbery by Sameer Ahmad
Sheikh, Javid Ahmad Shah (appellant herein) and Ab. Rashid Dar (who
later on turned as approver). That the complainant had suspected the
accused in his missing complaint and on the detailed and scientific
investigation, the Investigating Agency concluded that the accused
including the appellant herein had committed aforesaid offences. The
trail court examined 37 out of 38 listed witnesses and after just trial the
appellant had been held guilty for serious offences of murder and
robbery. It was, thus, prayed that the application seeking suspension of
sentence and grant of bail pending appeal, be rejected in the interest of
justice.
6. Learned counsel for the appellant-convict, while reiterating the grounds
pleaded, vehemently, that the conviction, recorded by the trial court,
cannot be maintained for the reason that the impugned judgment has
been passed on unwarranted presumptions without appreciating the
evidence in its right perspective. He has further argued that in a case,
based on circumstantial evidence, evidence has to be appreciated with
great circumspection, since such evidence has weak evidentiary value.
He further submits that the appellant-convict has all chances to be
acquitted by this Court at the time of final hearing of Appeal, and that
the appellant-convict having been in custody for more than a decade
shall be suffering the punishment even if his conviction is set aside by
this Court while hearing the appeal finally. Learned counsel, while
relying upon the latest judgment of Hon’ble Apex Court passed in a
case titled Satender Kumar Antil Vs. Central Bureau of
Investigation & Anr., reported as AIR 2022 SC 3386, argued that in
view of unexplained, avoidable and prolonged delay in concluding the
trial, Appeal or Revision would be the factor for consideration of bail.
He further argued that the appellant has been in continuous
incarceration for the last more than a decade. Learned counsel for the
appellant submitted that since the appeal is a continuation of trial under
legal fiction, therefore, inordinate delay in disposal of the case entitles
the appellant to suspension of sentence and grant of bail. He, therefore,
prayed that the sentence be suspended, and as a consequence the
appellant-convict be admitted to bail till disposal of appeal.
7. Mr. Chashoo, learned AAG, on the other-hand, resisted the plea of
suspension of sentence and the bail, raised by the appellant-convict,
asserting that the appellant-applicant has been convicted for heinous
offences including that of murder, and that the trial court, after passing
lucid judgment, has recorded conviction of the appellant-convict, and in
such a situation when the conviction has already been recorded by the
trial court, the appellant-convict cannot ask for concession of
suspension of sentence and grant of bail for ‘no pressing’ reason. Mere
detention of the convict, in a case where he has been awarded life
imprisonment, for more than a decade, will not entitle him to such a
relief. Learned AAG finally prayed that the application moved in this
behalf may be rejected.
8. Shorn of minute details the factual background of the case is that the
dead body of a person was found lying under the heap of cow dung at
Muran Pulwama on 02.04.2011, who was later on identified as
that on the same day, a complaint was also lodged by one Ghulam
Ahmad Wani, stating therein that his grandson namely Khursheed
Ahmad Wani had left his home on 25.03.2011 along-with an amount of
Rs.25000/- for paying his school fee, but did not return thereafter. A
case was registered vide FIR No. 72/2011 at Police Station Pulwama
under Section 302 RPC. During investigation one of the suspects
namely Feroz Ahmad Sheikh stated that during the intervening night of
30/31 March 2011, he came out of his house to meet his friend and in
the process reached near a tin shed of one Abdul Rashid Dar and heard
lot of noise and screaming coming from inside the shed; that, when he
peeped through one of the holes of the shed he found three persons
namely Sameer Ahmad Sheikh, Javid Ahmad Shah and Abdul Rashid
Dar were fighting with a person and were demanding money from him;
that, after a huge scream, all of a sudden, calm prevailed in the shed and
after some time Sameer Ahmad Sheikh came out of the shed with a
dead body on his shoulder along-with Javid Ahmad Shah (appellant
herein) holding the legs of dead body, whereas the third person namely
Abdul Rashid Dar was seen carrying shoes of the dead body. All the
accused were arrested on 11.04.2011. One of the accused namely Abdul
Rashid Dar moved an application before the Chief Judicial Magistrate
Pulwama on 08.06.2011 to declare him as approver, which was
accepted and his statement was recorded under Section 337 of Cr.PC.
On conclusion of the investigation, charge-sheet was laid against all the
accused and vide order dated 19.10.2011 they were charge- sheeted for
the commission of offences punishable under Sections 302, 392, 201
read with Section 34 RPC by the Sessions Court Pulwama. The
accused, on their examination, denied the charge claiming trial.
9. The trial court, after full dressed trial and examining 37 out of 38 listed
witnesses and the approver, recorded conviction of Sameer Ahmad
Sheikh and Javid Ahmad Shah (appellant herein) for the commission of
offence punishable under Section 302 read with Section 34 RPC and
Section 392 RPC and sentenced him for life imprisonment for the
commission of murder and one year rigorous imprisonment for the
commission of robbery.
10. The trial court vide impugned judgment, on consideration of the
circumstantial evidence, direct evidence and the medical evidence,
came to the conclusion that all the accused had common intention of
grabbing money from the deceased by means whatsoever. The accused
No.2 (appellant herein) had been found consistently with the deceased
immediately before his death and the deceased was killed in the tin shed
of accused No.3, who later on had turned as approver. The offences
were thus, committed not only with the common intention but all the
accused had also participated in the commission of offence in
furtherance of the common intention, as such, they were held liable for
the commission of offences punishable under Section 302 read with 34
RPC, vide impugned judgment.
11. Since the accused Abdul Rashid Dar had been granted pardon by the
court, the other accused Sameer Ahmad Sheikh was sentenced to life
imprisonment under Section 302 RPC whileas Javid Ahmad Shah
(appellant herein) was sentenced to life imprisonment under Section
302 RPC besides one year rigorous imprisonment under Section 392
RPC, and a reference was made to this Court for confirmation of the
sentence so imposed by the trial court.
12.While considering the application for suspension of sentence and grant
of bail, the appellate court is not required to consider the evidence on
record meticulously lest it should affect the merits of the case while
considering the main appeal. The appellate court has to consider the
case just to find out whether there is prima facie case to hold that there
has been some miscarriage of justice which may be apparent on the face
of the record and in such situation the suspension of sentence can be
ordered and as a consequence the appellant can be released on bail.
13. Hon’ble Apex Court in a case titled Ramji Prasad Vs. Rattan Kumar
Jaiswal & Ors., reported as (2002) 9 SCC 366, held that where an
accused was found guilty by the trial court under Section 302 IPC, the
normal practice in such cases is not to suspend the sentence and it is
only in exceptional cases that the benefit of suspension of sentence can
be granted. In another case titled Kishori Lal Vs. Rupa & Ors.,
reported as 2004 (7) SCC 638, it has been held that in cases involving
conviction under Section 302 IPC, it is only in exceptional cases that
the benefit of suspension of sentence can be granted, after taking into
consideration relevant factors like nature of accusation, manner in
which the crime is alleged to have been committed, gravity of the
offence and the desirability of releasing the accused on bail after they
have been convicted for committing the serious offence of murder.
14. Section 426 of the J&K Cr.PC which is pari materia to Section 389
Cr.PC of 1973 deals with suspension of execution of sentence pending
appeal and release of appellant on bail. There is distinction between bail
and suspension of sentence. One of the essential ingredients of Section
389 is the requirement for the appellant court to record reasons in
writing for ordering suspension of execution of the sentence or order
appealed. The requirement of recording reasons in writing clearly
indicates that there has to be careful consideration of the relevant
aspects and the order directing suspension of sentence and grant of bail
should not be passed as a matter of routine.
15. So far as contention of learned counsel for the appellant that there is
inordinate delay in disposal of the case finally and that this Court was
taking longer time to decide the appeal is concerned, Hon’ble Apex
Court in a case titled Satender Kumar Antil Vs. Central Bureau of
Investigation & Anr., reported as AIR 2022 SC 3386, cited and relied
upon by the learned counsel for the appellant, held that in a case where
a person has been found guilty of offence punishable under Section 302
IPC and sentenced for life imprisonment, the Code of Criminal
Procedure affords right of appeal to such a convict, however, a
difficulty arises when the appeal preferred by such convict cannot be
disposed of within a reasonable time. It has been further held that in
rationale, the practice of not suspending the sentence and granting bail
have no application, where court is not in a position to dispose of the
appeal for 5/6 years and it would indeed be a travesty of justice to keep a
person in jail for a period of 5/6 years for an offence which is ultimately
found not to have been committed by him. The observation of the Apex
Court, thus, suggests that it has only to be after 5/6 years in case the appeal is
not disposed of, that suspension of sentence and grant of bail be considered,
in a heinous case like murder.
16. In this backdrop and for limited purpose as discussed hereinabove, we are of
the opinion that the appeal which was filed on 04.02.2022 cannot be said to
be pending for the last 4/5 years as required by the Hon’ble Apex Court. We
are also of the opinion that the Criminal Appeals of under-trials (life
convicts) or the persons who are in custody for longer duration, will not take
much of the time to be heard finally. There is no difficulty in hearing this
appeal after ministerial formalities of preparing and furnishing of paper-book
to the concerned parties are completed. Since there is a positive finding of the
trial court that the case has been proved by the prosecution based on
formidable, circumstantial as well as oral evidence supported by medical and
forensic evidence, therefore, appellant on his conviction cannot raise a plea of
being innocent as the presumption of innocence in the appeal is not available
to the appellant as is available to an accused before the trial court.
17. For the foregoing reasons and discussions made hereinabove, we are of the
considered opinion that the appellant has failed to make out a prima facie
case for suspension of sentence and grant of bail in his favour.
18. CrlM No. 348/2022 is, accordingly, rejected.
19. List the main Appeal along-with Criminal Reference on 13.10.2022.