The Delhi High Court has directed the University of Delhi to fill up all the available vacant seats across all the categories in its LLB course, with a period of two weeks, notwithstanding the cut-off date for admission.Justice Rekha Palli observed that young students should not be denied the opportunity to pursue LLB degree who have shown their grit and determination in clearing...
The Delhi High Court has directed the University of Delhi to fill up all the available vacant seats across all the categories in its LLB course, with a period of two weeks, notwithstanding the cut-off date for admission.
Justice Rekha Palli observed that young students should not be denied the opportunity to pursue LLB degree who have shown their grit and determination in clearing the entrance examination.
The Court was dealing with the pleas moved by three students aggrieved of not being granted admission in LLB course of Delhi University despite availability of vacant seats. The Court directed that the University must consider all eligible candidates for filling up the vacancies including the petitioners.
It was the petitioner's case that there was a number of vacant seats across all categories and therefore, it was prayed that the University be directed to fill up all the 3,320 seats as notified in the Admission Bulletin by conducting further counselling sessions. 
The petitions were primarily opposed on the ground that, despite availability of vacant seats, no admissions can be granted after the cut-off date of December 31, 2021.
"I am also of the considered view that the petitioners, who are young students, and have showed their grit and determination in clearing the entrance examination, should not be denied the opportunity to pursue the LLB degree, especially keeping in view the devastating impact of the Covid-19 pandemic which has painted a rather gloomy picture for many students, as their studies have faced constant disruption," the Court said. 
Taking note of the fact that the aim of counselling in any institution is to fill up the maximum available seats by granting opportunity to deserving and eligible candidates to gain education and knowledge, the Court said:
"Unarguably, Delhi University is one of premier institutes in imparting education across the country, and it is a dream for many students to get their education from a university of this repute. It would be unfair to the candidates if seats in such a prestigious institute are allowed to go to waste, despite there being candidates with merit to fill the same."
The Court was of the view that the unwillingness on the part of the Delhi University in considering filling the vacant seats on the ground of strict adherence to the last cut-off date cannot be accepted, specially when the University itself had neither followed the cut-off date mentioned in the Information Bulletin nor the guidelines which mandated that admissions of students who do not provide the relevant documents should be cancelled.
"For the aforesaid reasons, the writ petitions deserve to be allowed, and are accordingly, allowed, by directing the respondent to fill up within two weeks all the available vacant seats in LLB course across all the categories, by considering all eligible candidates, including the petitioners, as per their merit," the Court directed. 
It added that in case there is any requirement for the students to attend additional classes, the University will ensure the same is conducted well within time. 
The plea was accordingly disposed of.
The petition was filed through Advocates Lakshya Gupta, Shreya Jad and Aman Ashesh for Satya: Pro Bono Law  
Case Title: DEEPANSHU KHANNA & ANR. v. UNIVERSITY OF DELHI



