In the matter of application under Section 482 of the
State of Orissa and another     …..          Opp. Parties
Date of hearing: 13.10.2022: Date of judgment: 29.11.2022
G.SATAPATHY, J.          The Petitioner by way of this application
under Section 482 Cr.P.C seeks to quash the order passed
on 20.03.2014 by learned S.D.J.M., Nabarangpur in G.R.
Case No. 1174 of 2013 by which cognizance of offences
was taken and process was issued against the Petitioner.
2.    Facts as projected in this case in precise are one
Aruna Sarabu of village Pilka lodged an FIR on 26.11.2013
before IIC Nabarangpur alleging therein that she had
married to the Petitioner Jaga Sarabu of village Makia
around three months ago and he kept her in his village
Makia for three months. During her such stay for eighty
days period, she was subjected to torture physically and
mentally as well as she was not provided with food by her
husband     (Petitioner)   and   mother-in-law  who     also
assaulted her. On 19.11.2013, her husband (Petitioner)
went to police to lodge a false case against her and her
husband (Petitioner) was asking to bring Rs.50,000/- from
her father, otherwise he would kill her. The above fact was
within the knowledge of villagers Makia and she had come
to her mother by concealing herself to inform about these
2.1.       On the basis of the above F.I.R., Nabarangpur
P.S. Case No. 323      dated 26.11.2013 was registered for
commission     of   offences   punishable   under   sections
498(A)/323/506/34 IPC r/w 4 of D.P. Act which was
investigated into resulting in submission of charge-sheet
against Petitioner and two others. Consequently upon
conspectus of materials and documents produced by the
I.O. and finding prima facie case, learned S.D.J.M.,
Nabarnagpur by the impugned order took cognizance of
offences under Sections 498(A)/323/506/34 IPC r/w 4 of
D.P. Act and issued process against the Petitioner and
others. Feeling aggrieved with the impugned order, the
Petitioner has approached this Court in this CRLMC to
quash the order taking cognizance of offences.
3.           In the course of hearing of the CRLMC, Mr.
Anirudha Das, learned counsel for the Petitioner by placing
the   judgment    passed   by  the   Judge,   Family  Court,
Nabarangpur in Cr.P. No. 64 of 2016 submits that the
learned Judge, Family Court has come to a finding that the
O.P. No.2 is not the wife of the Petitioner and thereby, she
cannot maintain a criminal proceeding for offence under
Section 498(A) of IPC. It is also submitted by him that
when O.P. No.2 is not the legally married wife of the
Petitioner which is already established by the judgment of
learned Judge, Family Court, Nabarangpur, the impugned
order in this case has no sanctity under law and to attract
an offence under Section 498(A) of IPC, there must be a
legal relationship of husband and wife between the
Petitioner and O.P. No.2, but that not being so in this
case, the criminal proceeding against the Petitioner is
otherwise bad in the eye of law. In order to buttress his
contention, learned counsel for the Petitioner places
reliance  upon   the  decision    in  the case   of  Reema
Aggrawal Vrs. Anupam and another; (2004) 3 SCC
199 and Unnikrishnan @ Chandu Vrs. State of Kerala;
(2017) SCC online KER 12064 and prays to quash the
impugned order.
3.1.     On the contrary, Mr. S.N. Das, learned counsel for
the State by relying upon the decision in the case of
A.Subash Babu Vrs. State of Andhra Pradesh and
another; (2011) 7 SCC 616 submits that the law
declared in Reema Aggrawal (supra) is binding on all
Courts and the Petitioner being the husband of O.P. No.2
cannot take the plea that the marriage was invalid and
thereby the criminal proceeding for offence under section
498(A) is misdirected. It is further submitted that husband
contracting second marriage during the subsistence of
earlier marriage can be charged for offence under section
498(A) of IPC and merely because a judgment is rendered
by learned Judge, Family Court in proceeding under
section 125 of Cr.P.C. by itself cannot declare the status of
O.P.No.2 as concubine or not the wife of Petitioner and
whatever observation passed by the learned Judge, Family
Court is on the basis of a proceeding under section 125
Cr.P.C. which is not binding upon this Court and the
impugned order taking cognizance of offence having
passed with sound judicial application of mind does not
require any interference by this Court. It is, accordingly,
prayed by him to dismiss the CRLMC.
4.          After having considered the rival submissions
of   the  parties,  the  moot     question   crops   up   for
consideration in this CRLMC is whether the impugned
order is bad in the eye of law for taking cognizance of
offence under section 498-A of the IPC on account of
finding of learned Judge, Family Court, Nabarangpur in a
proceeding under section 125 of Cr.P.C concluding that
the informant (O.P.No.2) is not the wife of Petitioner
herein and thereby, the criminal trial arising out of such
impugned order pursuant to the F.I.R. at the instance of
the informant is otherwise then an abuse of process of the
Court and the same needs to be set aside/quashed to
secure the ends of justice. Adverting to the contention of
the Petitioner and examining the same on the principle of
well settled law, it appears that the Petitioner has relied
upon the decision in Unnikrishnan (supra), but the
same having rendered on appreciation of evidence on
record by the Appellate Court is not applicable to the
present case at hand since evidence is yet to be recorded
in this case and the facts under which the present criminal
case runs is on the claim of the informant who claims
herself to be the wife of the Petitioner through a marriage
in the F.I.R. which facts can be considered independently
in the course of trial. More so, in the relied on case, on the
basis   of  admitted    statement    of  the   deceased   wife
revealing some acts of cruelty said to have undergone
during her live in relationship with the accused, the High
Court of Kerala considering the same to be a ground has
observed the accused to be entitled for acquittal for
offence under section 498-A of IPC by allowing the appeal.
The case at hand is at the stage of taking cognizance of
offence and issuance of process to the accused, but trial is
yet to be conducted. However, on conspectus of FIR and
statement of witnesses would go to disclose about
marriage between the Petitioner and O.P. No.2 which need
to be established during the trial and since there appears
some materials for taking cognizance of offence under
section 498-A of IPC, it would not be proper to come to a
conclusion that the O.P No. 2 is not the wife of the
Petitioner merely on the basis of finding of the Family
Court which is also rendered in a proceeding under section
125 of Cr.P.C. which is by nature a proceeding for grant of
maintenance to wife, children and parents, but strict proof
of marriage between the parties in a proceeding under
section 125 of Cr.P.C. normally should not be insisted
upon as a condition precedent for grant of maintenance to
the wife.
5.     It is true that  learned Judge, Family Court has
concluded by his judgment in Cr.P. No. 64 of 2016 which
is admittedly a proceeding U/S 125 of Cr.P.C. that the
O.P. No.2 (Petitioner therein) cannot be treated as the
wife of Petitioner (O.P. therein) but such conclusion can be
arrived at in a civil proceeding to declare the status of a
woman as such, if the person claiming for such declaration
makes out a case for the relief on assessment of evidence
and pleadings on record, but the learned Judge, Family
Court herein at best could have concluded while refusing
to grant maintenance by his judgment that the Petitioner
could not establish her relationship with O.P. as husband
and wife.
6.    Be that as it may, both the parties in this case rely
upon the decision in Reema Aggrawal (Supra) wherein
the Apex Court at Paragraph-18 of the judgment has
observed as follows.
“The concept of “dowry” is intermittently linked
with a marriage and the provisions of the Dowry
Act apply in relation to marriages. If the legality of
the marriage itself is an issue, further legalistic
problems do arise. If the validity of the marriage
itself is under legal scrutiny, the demand of dowry
in respect of an invalid marriage would be legally
not recognizable. Even then the purpose of which
Sections 498-A and 304-B IPC and Section 113-B
of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (for short “the
Evidence Act”) were introduced, cannot be lost
sight of. Legislation enacted with some policy to
curb and alleviate some public evil rampant in
society and effectuate a definite public purpose or
benefit positively requires to be interpreted with a
certain element of realism too and not merely
pedantically or hyper technically. The obvious
objective was to prevent harassment to a woman
who enters into a marital relationship with a
person and later on, becomes a victim of the greed
for money. Can a person who enters into a
marital    arrangement       be   allowed     to  take
shelter behind a smokescreen to contend that
since    there   was    no    valid   marriage,    the
question of dowry does not arise? Such
legalistic niceties would destroy the purpose
of the provisions. Such hairsplitting legalistic
approach would encourage harassment to a
woman       over    demand        of    money.     The
nomenclature “dowry” does not have any magic
charm written over it. It is just a label given to
demand     of   money      in   relation   to   marital
relationship. The legislative intent is clear from the
fact that it is not only the husband but also his
relations who are covered by Section-498-A. The
legislature has taken care of children born from
invalid   marriages.  Section-    16    of  the  Hindu
Marriage Act deals with legitimacy of children of
void and voidable marriages. Can it be said that
the legislature which was conscious of the social
stigma attached to children of void and voidable
marriages closed its eyes to the plight of a woman
who unknowingly or unconscious of the legal
consequences        entered    into     the   marital
relationship? If such restricted meaning is given, it
would not further the legislative intent. On the
contrary, it would be against the concern shown by
the   legislature   for avoiding   harassment   to  a
woman over demand of money in relation to
marriages. The first exception to Section 494 has
also some relevance. According to it, the offence of
bigamy will not apply to “any person whose
marriage with such husband or wife has been
declared void by a court of competent jurisdiction”.
It would be appropriate to construe the expression
“husband” to cover a person who enters into
marital relationship and under the color of such
proclaimed or feigned status of husband subjects
the woman concerned to cruelty or coerces her in
any manner or for any of the purposes enumerated
in the relevant provisions __ Sections 304-B/498-
A, whatever be the legitimacy of the marriage itself
for the limited purpose of Sections 498-A and 304-
B   IPC.    Such    an  interpretation,   known   and
recognized as purposive construction has to come
into play in a case of this nature. The absence of a
definition of “husband” to specifically include such
persons who contract marriages ostensibly and
cohabit    with   such  woman,    in   the  purported
exercise of their role and status as “husband” is no
ground to exclude them from the purview of
Section 304-B or 498-A IPC, viewed in the context
of the very object and aim of the legislations
introducing those provisions.
7.    The plea of no marriage was canvassed for the
Petitioner in the course of hearing of this CRLMC, but in a
proceeding under section 482 of Cr.P.C., this Court is not
sitting over a case in exercise of original jurisdiction to
decide the status of the parties by way of declaration
which can be done by a Civil Court in exercise of power
under section 34 of the Specific Relief Act, 1963 after
undertaking a full-fledged trial. It is no doubt advanced
for the Petitioner that a criminal proceeding under section
498-A of the IPC is not maintainable against the Petitioner
for want of valid marriage, but after going through the
uncontroverted allegations appearing in the FIR and
statement of witnesses under section 161 Cr.P.C., this
Court does not find any substance to conclude that a
proceeding under section 498-A of IPC is not maintainable
against the petitioner. Law is well settled that a criminal
proceeding can be quashed where the basic ingredients of
the offences are not constituted/disclosed from a bare
reading of the uncontroverted allegations appearing FIR
and other materials so collected by the Investigating
Agency. It is also extremely unfair and harsh to a woman
who claims herself to be wife of a person by entering into
a marital relationship and later on become a victim of
desertion by the said person taking plea of absence of a
valid marriage. The obvious objective of enacting offence
under section 498-A of IPC is to secure the prevention of
harassment to a woman from cruelty meted out to her by
husband or his relatives. The aforesaid being the sacred
object of offence under section 498-A of IPC, whether a
person who enters into a marital relationship be allowed
to take the refuge behind a smokescreen to take the plea
that since there was no valid marriage, the proceeding
under    section  498-A   of  IPC   against   him  is  not
maintainable, but such plea having deleterious effect on
the morality of the women entering into a kind of
relationship of marriage with that person, it would not be
proper for a Court to undertake hair splitting scrutiny of
materials on record in a proceeding under section 482 of
Cr.P.C. to conclude that the proceeding under section
498-A of IPC is not maintainable for want of valid
marriage which would not only encourage harassment of
women but also demoralizes them.
8.   In Subash Babu (Supra), the Apex Court at
paragraph-55 and 57 has observed as follows.
55.       “In view of the firm and clear law laid
down on the subject, this Court is of the
confirmed view that the High Court was not
justified at all in quashing the proceedings
initiated against the appellant under section 498-
A of the Penal Code on the ground that
Respondent No. 2 was not the “wife” within
the meaning of Section 498-A IPC and was
not entitled to maintain a complaint under
the said provision. The question therefore
which arises for consideration of the Court is
whether the said finding recorded by the High
Court can and should be set aside in the present
appeal which is filed by the husband.” (Emphasis
supplied by bold letters)
57.       “This Court does not find any substance
in the abovementioned argument of the learned
counsel for the appellant. The law declared by
this Court in Reema Aggrawal (supra) was
binding on all courts including the learned Single
Judge of the High Court of Andhra Pradesh who
decided the present case in view of the salutary
provisions of Article 141 of the Constitution. The
learned single Judge of the High Court could not
have afforded to ignore the law declared by this
Court in Reema Aggrawal while considering the
question   whether     proceedings   initiated by
Respondent No.2 for commission of the offence
punishable under Section 198-A IPC should be
quashed or not. The High Court has completely
misdirected itself in quashing the proceedings for
the offence punishable under section 498-A IPC.
There is no manner of doubt that the finding
recorded by the High Court that Respondent No.
2 is not the wife within the meaning of Section
498-A of the Penal Code runs contrary to the law
declared by this Court in Reema Aggrawal.”
9.         In view of the analysis of facts stated above
and discussions of law laid down by the Apex Court in
Reema Aggrawal (supra) and A. Subash Babu
(supra) and taking into consideration the uncontroverted
allegation appearing in the FIR and statement of witnesses
together with other documents collected in the course of
investigation, this Court does not find any substance on
the submissions advanced for the Petitioner which merits
consideration for the proceeding under section 498-A of
IPC to be not maintainable against the Petitioner, rather
there appears prima facie materials for proceeding against
the Petitioner for offences alleged against him and
thereby, the learned Court of S.D.J.M., Nabarangpur has
not committed any illegality in taking cognizance of
offences    by  the  impugned    order  which    cannot be
interfered by this Court in exercise of power of inherent
jurisdiction as the same has been passed on proper legal
scrutiny of materials on record. Hence, it is ordered.
10.         In the result, this CRLMC is dismissed on
contest but in the circumstance without any cost.