The present appeal is directed against the order dated 06.05.2022
passed by the learned Single Judge in W.P.(C) No. 7067/ 2022. The learned
Single Judge has dismissed the said writ petition preferred by the petitioners
by placing reliance upon the earlier decision dated 04.05.2022 in W.P.(C)
6834/2022, titled Saloni Yadav & Ors. vs. Union of India & Ors.
The challenge in the writ petition raised by the petitioners/ appellants
was to the introduction of the condition that the candidates desirous of
pursuing B.Sc. (Nursing) course should clear the NEET UG-2022
Examination to be eligible for admission in the said course for the academic
session 2022-23.
The submission of the appellants was that the course on which the
NEET UG-2022 Examination was premised was different from the course
on which the competitive examination for B.Sc. (Nursing) has been held
over the years. The submission was that for the NEET UG Examination, the
weightage is not given as much to English language and General
Intelligence, as it is to Science subjects. The appellants claimed that the
appellants had been preparing for a year for the B.Sc. (Nursing)
Examination on the basis of the syllabus prescribed in the said course, and
suddenly was visited with the advertisement issued by the respondents
laying the condition that the candidate had to clear the NEET UG
Examination, 2022. The advertisement was issued on 26.04.2022 laying
down the aforesaid condition.
The learned Single Judge, has followed her own earlier decision in
Saloni Yadav (supra) dated 04.05.2022. In that case, the petitioner had
assailed the same stipulation in relation to the MNS for the same academic
session 2022-23 on similar grounds. The writ petition preferred by Saloni
Yadav was dismissed after noticing that the candidates had been given
sufficient notice to prepare for the NEET UG Examination, since the same
has been fixed for 17.07.2022, whereas, the stipulation laid down for
appearance and clearance of NEET UG Examination was laid down in
advertisement dated 26.04.2022. The learned Single Judge also noticed that
the overall merit for the said examination was to be drawn not only on the
basis of NEET UG Examination but also on the basis of the combined
performance of the candidates in the NEET examination, the CBT and the
interview subject to medical fitness. The discussion found in the judgment
in Saloni Yadav (supra) reads as follows:
“7. Having considered the submissions of learned counsel for
the parties and perused the record, I am of the view that at the
first blush, the grievance of the petitioners appears to be
merited as the respondents have admittedly changed the pattern
for selection of candidates for admission to B.Sc. (Nursing)
only on 22.04.2022. However, what emerges is that on account
of the extension granted by the NTA to apply for the NEET-UG
exam and taking into account the fact that the NEET-UG exam
is scheduled to be held on 17.07.2022, the petitioners and all
other candidates will still get more than two months’ time to
prepare and appear in the NEET-UG, 2022. In these
circumstances, the petitioners’ plea that they will not have
sufficient time to apply and prepare for NEETUG is without
any merit and therefore no prejudice will be caused to the
interested students to prepare for the NEET-UG exam, which is
now a mandatory condition for seeking admission to B.Sc
(Nursing) course.
8. In so far as the petitioners’ grievance that the syllabus for
the entrance test has been radically changed, I am of the
considered view that once the experts in the field have taken a
considered decision regarding the eligibility conditions and the
subjects on which the prospective candidates for admission to
the B. Sc (Nursing) course should be tested, this Court ought
not to interfere with the same unless it is found to be totally
perverse or arbitrary. Moreover, since it is an admitted position
that most of the universities including the Delhi University and
those in the state of Maharashtra, with which the nursing
institutes run by the respondents are affiliated, have already
issued guidelines directing that the admissions to B.Sc
(Nursing) should be based only on NEET-UG examination, the
respondents were fully justified in prescribing the same
eligibility criteria as prescribed for the NEET-UG, for
admission to the B.Sc (Nursing) in their institutes as well. It is
not the petitioners’ case that the syllabus for NEETUG exam,
2022 is different from syllabus of Class XII and therefore,
merely because the students will now be tested in more detail in
the science subjects cannot be a reason to interfere with the
well-considered decision of the experts.
9. The petitioners’ plea that since they have been preparing
General English and General Intelligence for the last many
months as per the earlier syllabus for the entrance examination,
the respondents ought to follow the earlier pattern for this year
as well, is also without any merit. It has been categorically
stated by the respondents that the final selection for admission
to B.Sc (Nursing) will be based not only on the results of the
NEET-UG 2022 but on the combined merit of performance of a
candidate in NEET UG, the CBT and interview subject to the
medical fitness and therefore, it is not as if the preparation in
General English and General Intelligence, which the
petitioners claim to have been made for the entrance exam will
go waste.
10.I therefore find no infirmity in the decision of the
respondents to include a mandatory eligibility condition of
qualifying the NEETUG as per the criteria fixed by the NTA, as
a pre-condition for admission to the B.Sc (nursing) in their
institutes. The writ petition is accordingly dismissed without no
orders as to costs.”
The submission of learned counsel for the appellants is that there is a
difference in the courses that the appellants are desirous of pursuing which
is B.Sc. (Nursing), and not the MNS. The appellants have sought to bring
out those differences in the present appeal.
Learned counsel for the respondent, who appears on advance notice
points out that the subjects on which the candidates are tested for the NEET
UG Examination is the same as the subjects on which the candidates were
earlier been tested for the B.Sc. (Nursing) Course.
We have heard learned counsel for the appellants, and perused the
impugned judgment, including the judgment in Saloni Yadav (supra) and we
find no merit in the present petition. In our view, the case of the appellants
are no different from the case of Saloni Yadav and merely because the
appellants are desirous of competing for B.Sc. (Nursing) as opposed to the
MNS which was dealt with in Saloni Yadav (supra), it makes no difference.
The distinctions sought to be drawn by the appellants in paragraph 6 of the
appeal are wholly irrelevant. The appellants have been given sufficient
notice to prepare for the NEET UG Examination which is slated to be held
on 17.07.2022.      Admittedly, the advertisement for the B.Sc. (Nursing)
Course was issued on 26.04.2022. The appellants are similarly situated as
other candidates who would be appearing for the examination in question.
For the aforesaid reasons, we find no merit in this appeal and the same
is, accordingly, dismissed.