Mr. M.S.Mohite, Sr. Advocate i/by Ms. Saili Dhuru          for
the Appellants.
Mr. A.R.Patil , APP for the Respondent-State.
Mr. Arvind D. Aswani appointed advocate for the
present.
In this appeal under Section 14A of the Scheduled
Caste and Scheduled Tribe (Prevention of Atrocities) Act,
1989 (“Act of 1989” for short), appellants are seeking pre-
arrest protection in connection with the Crime No.391 of
2021 registered with Islampur Police Station, District: Sangli
for the offences punishable under Sections 406, 420, 188,
297 read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860
and Sections 3(1)(r), 3(1)(s) of the Act of 1989.
2         Appellants are employees of Prakash Hospital
situated at Islampur, District: Sangli. This hospital was
dedicated to Covid facilities having treated more than 1500
covid patients. Appellants are front-line workers, who were
working round the clock, for providing medical treatment to
the Covid patients.   The Appellant No.1 was in-charge of
Oxygen management in the hospital; Appellant No.2 was
supervising medical treatment and facilities to covid
patients;  Appellant   No.3    was   clerk   working    in    the
administration of the hospital and Appellant No.4 was social
worker, extending help to the patients and their relatives.
3         Prosecution’s case is that, maternal uncle of the
complainant, was suffering from Covid-19 and was shifted
to the Prakash Hospital on 2nd May, 2021 from Manav Covid
Centre at Kolhapur, against advance, deposit of Rs.50,000/-
and Rs.3,00,000/- for booking bed with ventilator facility.
Complainant claims, although he deposited Rs.3,50,000/-,
he did not receive receipt from the hospital administration.
On 18th May, 2021, complainant’s uncle succumbed to the
disease in early hours at 3.25 a.m. Complainant was asked
to complete formalities and clear the pending bills in order
to take away the dead-body of his uncle. Complainant
would allege that although he had deposited Rs.3,50,000/-,
the appellants further demanded, amount of Rs.2,17,512/-
and refused to hand over the dead-body unless payment
was made . Thereafter complainant and his brothers
approached Tehsildar of Taluka: Walwa, who, sent his
persons alongwith the complainant to the hospital. It is
further alleged that heated arguments took place between
the appellants and the complainant, wherein the appellants
abused and humiliated the complainant, knowing well that
the complainant belonged to scheduled caste. It is further
alleged that the appellants declined to give dead-body in
the custody of the complainant unless additional amount
was paid. It is further alleged that upon intervention by
Tehsildar himself, dead-body was handed over in the
evening at 3 p.m. and thereafter last rites were performed
in      the crematorium   of  Islampur.  According     to    the
complainant, undue demand of additional fees by the
appellants and detaining the dead-body without first paying
additional fees/charges, the appellants caused humiliation
to the complainant and his family. According to the
complainant, appellants intentionally insulted them, as they
were, members of scheduled caste. On             this set of
allegations, First Information Report was filed on 25 th May,
2021 against the appellants and another person, Mr.
Vishwajeet Suresh Giri Gosavi, employee of the hospital.
4           Apprehending the arrest, the appellants sought
pre-arrest bail, however, the Special Judge (Atrocity Act)
declined to grant relief. Whereafter they have approached
5           On 4th June, 2021, this Court by reasoned order,
and by relying on the judgment of the Apex Court
Prathaviraj Chauhan v. Union of India, AIR 2020 SC
2036 granted interim protection to the appellants and
directed notice to the complainant.
6           Heard Mr. Mohite, learned Senior Counsel for the
appellants, Mr. A.D.Aswani for the complainant and Mr.
A.R.Patil, the learned prosecutor for the State.
7           Mr. Mohite, the learned Senior Counsel for the
appellants     vehemently   submitted     that   the    primary
evaluation of the allegations do not constitute an offence
under the Act of 1989. Mr. Mohite submitted that the
hospital administration was unaware about the patient
belonging to scheduled caste. It is submitted that only
when differences arose in respect of the cost of the
treatment, complainant disclosed that he belongs to
scheduled caste. It is submitted, essentially the dispute that
arose    between     the  complainant     and    the    hospital
administration, was concerning the hospital bill and for the
reason that family members were insisting to take the
dead-body to Kolhapur against the protocol and the SOP
issued by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. Mr.
Mohite    relied  on   Covid-19  guide-lines    on  dead-body
management. Mr. Mohite, submitted that the complaint
itself shows that the appellants were unaware and/or had
knowledge      that  the  complainant    was     belonging     to
scheduled caste. Mr. Mohite submitted that even assuming
but without admitting that the dead-body was detained by
the hospital administration, the material on record does not
lead to belief, it was, detained only because deceased
belonged to scheduled caste. It is argued that neither the
complaint nor the attendant circumstances imply that the
dead-body of the complainant was intentionally detained to
cause humiliation to the complainant and his family
members only because they belonged to the scheduled
caste. Reliance has been placed on the judgment of the
Apex Court in Hitesh Verma v. State of Uttarakhand &
Anr. (2020) 10 SCC 710. In the cited judgment, the First
Information Report was lodged for the offences punishable
under Sections 452, 504, 506 of the Indian Penal Code,
1860 and Section 3(1)(x) and 3(1)(e) of the Act of 1989.
Therein, there was dispute relating to the property pending
before the Civil Court. The appellants therein were not
permitting the respondents to cultivate the land. In the
context of these facts, in paragraph 16, it was observed
that ‘since the matter is regarding possession of the
property pending before the Civil Court, any dispute arising
on account of possession of the said property would not
disclose offence under the Act unless the victim is abused,
intimidated or harassed only for the reason that she
belongs to scheduled caste or scheduled tribe’. Relying on
these observations, Mr. Mohite submitted that dispute and
differences arose between the hospital administration and
the complainant on alleged over charging of hospital bill
and, therefore, the alleged abuses or intimidation was not
only for the reason that the complainant belonged to
scheduled caste or scheduled tribe. It is, therefore, argued
allegations do not disclose commission of offence under
Section 3(1)(r) or 3(1)(s) of the Act of 1989. On these
grounds, pre-arrest protection is sought.
8         Per contra, learned counsel for the complainant
and the learned Prosecutor for the State, argued that
complainant’s uncle expired at 3 a.m. in the morning and
the dead-body was handed over nearly after ten hours, that
too, after intervention of the revenue officer. It is argued
that detaining the body for not settling undue, hospital bill,
itself was, insult and intimidation to the complainant and
his helpless family members, who were waiting nearly for
ten hours to receive dead-body. It is argued, hospital
administration, although had received Rs.3,50,000/- in
advance, demand of additional amount of Rs.2,17,512/-
without furnishing details/particulars, had added to the
insult of the complainant and his relatives. The learned
counsel for the complainant would      submit that detaining
dead-body itself caused humiliation and insult not only to
the complainant but also to the deceased. He would rely on
the judgment of this Court in the case of Pradeep Gandhy
& Ors. v. State of Maharashtra & Ors. in LD-VC- 46 of
2020 wherein the Division Bench of this Court in paragraph
38 has observed that right to dignity and fair treatment
under Article 21 of the Constitution of India is not only
available to a living man but also to his body after his
death. Right to a decent burial, commensurate with the
dignity of the individual is recognised as a facet of the right
to life guaranteed by Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
It is argued, the appellants were aware, that deceased and
relatives, were belonging to ‘Scheduled Caste’. Thus,
argued, plain reading of First Information Report, in no
uncertain terms, discloses commission of offence under the
Act of 1989 and Section 18 of the Act bars, remedy, of pre-
arrest protection.
9          In the case in hand, even assuming that the
hospital   administration   had   detained    the   body      for
unreasonable     period,  which   caused    insult   and     the
humiliation to the complainant and his family members, the
fact remains that detention of the body itself would not
constitute offence under the Act of 1989 unless it is shown
or borne out from the First Information Report that firstly,
the appellants knew that the complainant belonged to
scheduled caste and secondly, body was detained only
because      deceased    belonged   to   scheduled       caste.
Apparently, these two important ingredients of offence
alleged were are absent in the complaint or in the material
produced by the prosecution for my perusal. The offence
under Section 3(1)(r) of the Act of 1989 would signify that,
all insults and intimidations to a person will not be an
offence under the Act, unless such insult or intimidation is
on account or referable to caste or tribe of a person, who
was insulted. In the case in hand, the dispute arose
between the hospital administration and the complainant
over the hospital bill.   From the material, it cannot be
inferred that dead-body was detained by the hospital
administration only because complainant belonged to
scheduled caste. Besides, First Information Report, does not
imply that appellants or hospital administration knew, that
deceased     was    belonging     to     ‘Scheduled      Caste’.
Undoubtedly, facts of the case reveal that dead-body was
handed over to the relatives of the deceased only after
intervention   of  the   revenue    officer   and    from     the
circumstances, it can be reasonably inferred that body was
not handed owing to the fact that, the hospital bill was not
settled. Although the circumstances caused humiliation to
the complainant and his family members but by that itself
would not constitute an offence either under clause (r) or
(s) of the Act of 1989.
10         In consideration of the facts, and for the reason
stated above, in my view, complaint does not disclose
commission      of    offence    under   the    Act    of    1989.
Consequently,     appellants    are   granted   pre-arrest    bail.
(i)       In the event of arrest of the appellants in Crime
No.391 of 2021 registered with Islampur Police Station,
District: Sangli, they     shall be released on executing PR
bond for the sum of Rs.25,000/- each with one or more
sureties in like sum.
(ii)          The appellants shall not tamper with the
evidence     or   attempt    to   influence   or   contact      the
complainant, witnesses or any person concerned with the
11        The appeal is accordingly allowed and disposed
12        It is made clear that observations made here-in-
above be construed as expression of opinion for the
purpose of    bail only and the same shall not in any way
influence the trial in other proceedings.