The District Collector who was the 1st respondent in the Writ Petition has filed this
Review Application and sought for setting aside the Order passed by this Court on
21.09.2021 in W.P.No.15507 of 2021.
2. For easy understanding, the parties will be referred as per their rank assigned in
3.The petitioners claimed absolute ownership over the property situated at Survey
No.138/2, Kolathur Village, Chennai, measuring an extent of 1.05 acres, by virtue of a
registered sale deed, dated 6.1.1990 executed by one, S. Rathinavelu. The petitioners
filed a suit in O.S.No.528 of 2000 on the file of the XIV th Assistant City Civil Court,
Chennai, seeking for the relief of declaration of title and permanent injunction. In the said
suit, the Special Commissioner and Commissioner for land administration, the Secretary to
Government, Agriculture Department and the Collector, Chennai district were made as the
defendants. The suit came to be dismissed by a judgment and decree dated 6.1.2010.
Aggrieved by the same,the petitioners filed an Appeal in A.S.No.122 of 2011 before the
XVIII Additional Judge, City Civil Court, Chennai and the appeal was allowed through a
judgment and decree dated 3.1.2013 and thereby the suit was decreed in favour of the
petitioners. This decree became final and it was not put to challenge by the defendants in
the suit.
4.The petitioners made several representations seeking for granting patta in their
favour. That apart, the Corporation of Chennai had also put up a shed in the property and
was taking steps to construct compost yards. Hence, the petitioners filed W.P.No.15507 of
2021. The said Writ Petition was disposed of by an Order dated 21.9.2021 and the
relevant portions in the Order are extracted hereunder:
“7.The facts that have been discussed Supra makes it clear
that the title of the petitioners have been declared by a competent
civil court and it binds the respondents/defendants. The 2nd
respondent seems to be utilising the property based on the entry
found in the Revenue Records as if the subject property is classified
as "Anadhennam". However the fact remains that the subject
property was found to be the absolute property of the petitioners
and this judgment and decree was passed in the appeal after it was
contested by the official defendants. It is also seen from the
counter affidavit that the 2nd respondent has addressed a letter to
the 1st respondent seeking for a permission to enter upon the
property for setting up a Micro Compost Centre in the property.
8.In the considered view of this Court, the 1st respondent
cannot grant any such permission in view of the fact that the
District Collector is bound by the judgment and decree of the
competent civil court. Till this judgment and decree is reversed in
the manner known to law, there is no question of anyone denying
the title of the petitioners. Even the 2nd respondent is attempting
to put up a Micro Compost Centre in the property based on the
entries made in the Revenue Records. The moment a Civil Court
renders a decree by declaring the title to the property, the entry in
the Revenue Records will become irrelevant.
forward and construct any Micro Composting Centre in the property
and the 1st respondent cannot grant any such permission. That
apart,   the  2nd respondent     has to necessarily      consider   the
representations made by the petitioners on 23.02.2018 and
17.07.2020 and necessary steps must be taken to remove the
shed, equipments and the solid waste that is lying in the property.
The 2nd respondent cannot straight away get into the property
belonging to the petitioners without following the due process of
law and such an interference will violate the constitutional right
guaranteed under Article 300A of the Constitution of India.
10.The decision shall be taken by the 2nd respondent, within
a period of four weeks from the date of receipt of copy of this order
and effective steps shall be taken to remove the equipments and
the solid waste lying in the property.”
5. Pursuant to the above Order, the 1st respondent has filed this Review Application
mainly on the ground that the petitioners had relied upon an Order passed by the
Assistant Settlement Officer, dated 15.4.1976 and this Order formed the basis for the suit
to be decreed in favour of the petitioners and that this Order is a forged and fabricated
document and hence, the petitioners have played a fraud on the Court and the decree
itself is non-est in the eye of law.
6. Heard Mr.Edwin Prabakar, learned Special Government Pleader for the
petitioners and Mr.Vijay Narayan, learned Senior Counsel for R1 and R2.
7.This Court has carefully considered the submissions made on either side and the
materials available on record.
8.The following issues arises for consideration in this Review Application:
a) Where a competent Civil Court has granted a decree in favour of
the petitioners and there was no finding to the effect that the Order dated
15.4.1976 is a fabricated and forged document and this decree has
become final, whether this Court can go into the issue of genuineness of
the Order dated 15.4.1976 in collateral proceedings under Article 226 of
b) Whether this Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 226
of the Constitution of India can nullify the judgment and decree passed by
9. Before rendering findings to the issues formulated in this Review Application,
this Court wants to remind itself on the scope of the Review Application. That apart, this
Court must also bear in mind the extent to which fraud can vitiate proceedings.
10. Rule 29(1)of The Madras High Court Writ Rules, 2021 specifically provides that
the Court may review its orders but no petition for review will be entertained except on
the grounds mentioned in Order XLVII, Rule 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. One
of the ground that is provided under Order XLVII is “for any other sufficient reason”. The
words “any other sufficient reason” has been interpreted to mean a reason sufficient on
grounds atleast analogous to those specified immediately previously, i.e. excusable failure
to bring to the notice of the Court new and important matters or error apparent on the
face of the record. In other words, if the fact had been brought to the notice of the Court,
a different view would have been taken by the Court. One ground which can easily fit in
the words “any other sufficient reason” is fraud on the Court.
11.Insofar as the effect of fraud is concerned, useful reliance can be made to the
judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in A.V. Papayya Sastry v. Govt. of A.P.,
reported in (2007) 4 SCC 221. The relevant portions are extracted hereunder:
“21. Now, it is well-settled principle of law that if any judgment or order is
obtained by fraud, it cannot be said to be a judgment or order in law. Before
three centuries, Chief Justice Edward Coke proclaimed:
“Fraud avoids all judicial acts, ecclesiastical or temporal.”
22. It is thus settled proposition of law that a judgment, decree or order
obtained by playing fraud on the court, tribunal or authority is a nullity and non
est in the eye of the law. Such a judgment, decree or order—by the first court or
by the final court—has to be treated as nullity by every court, superior or
inferior. It can be challenged in any court, at any time, in appeal, revision, writ or
even in collateral proceedings.”
12.It is clear from the above judgment that where a judgment or decree or order is
obtained by playing fraud, it can be interfered even in collateral proceedings including
Writ proceedings.
13. Having discussed the scope of the Review jurisdiction and the effect of fraud
committed during judicial proceedings, this Court will now deal with the grounds raised in
14.The specific case of the petitioners in the suit is that their vendor,      S.
Rathinavelu was granted patta and to substantiate the same, the land register record
dated 18.05.1972 was relied upon and marked as Exhibit A3 in the suit. The original land
register record that was furnished before this court is extracted hereunder:
The land register record that was marked by the petitioners as Exhibit A3 is
15. On a cursory glance, it can be seen that Survey No.138/2 has been recorded as
an Anadheenam in the original record and whereas the name of S. Rathinavelu has been
hand written and inserted in Column 11 and parallelly the categorisation of the land is
also mentioned as Anadheenam, in the document that was marked as Exhibit A3.
16. The next document to be taken into consideration is the order of the Assistant
Settlement officer, dated 15.4.1976. This order was the basis for the vendor of the
petitioners to claim a right over the subject property. The original order that has been
furnished before this Court has been passed in proceedings S.R.No.1/75/Sec.11(a)/XXVI/48-
SDT, dated 15.4.1976. This order has been passed in the name of Tmt. Hussani Begam and
4 others and they have been granted ryotwari patta as follows:
17.The order that was marked in the suit also carried the same proceedings
number and date and the body of the order was also the same. The change was made
only in the schedule to the order as under:
18.It can be seen that the name of the parties and the survey numbers were
changed and it gives an impression as if S. Rathinavelu was given a ryotwari patta for
Survey No. 138/2 measuring an extent of 1.05 acres.
19. On going through the contents of the order, there is reference to two other
orders dated 25.4.1975 and 17.7.1975. This Court wanted to ascertain the names of the
persons involved in these two orders. On going through the original file, it is seen that
these proceedings pertained to Hussani Begam and 4 others. Therefore, a reference to
these orders perfectly syncs with the original order that was produced before this Court in
the name of Hussani Begam and 4 others, while granting them ryotwari patta. The order
also confined itself to Survey Nos. 13/1, 13/2 and 14. Whereas the order that was marked
before the Civil Court shows as if it was passed in favour of Prabhakaran and 4 others and
the survey numbers covered in Exhibit A4 are 6/8, 60/4, 88/5, 89/1 and 138/2 part. The
order dated 15.4.1976 is not relatable to these survey numbers at all and the same is
evident from the contents of the order which refers to the earlier orders passed in the
matter of Hussani Begam and 4 others covering Survey Nos.13/1, 13/2 and 14.
20.The learned Senior Counsel took this Court through the proceedings of the
Collector dated 3.5.1993, pleadings in O.S.No.528/2020, deposition of witnesses, issues
framed in the suit and also the judgment of the Trial court. The judgment that was
passed in the appeal in A.S.No.122 of 2011 was also brought to the notice of this Court.
By pointing out to all these documents, it was submitted that, at no point of time, the 1st
respondent took steps to establish about the availability of the so called genuine order
and the Civil Court also did not hold Exhibit A4 to be a fraudulent document and
therefore, the exercise of finding out the genuineness of Exhibit A4 cannot be undertaken
in this Review Application. The learned Senior Counsel also brought to the notice of this
Court,the encumbrance certificates to demonstrate the fact that 4 other persons whose
names are found in Exhibit A4 are merrily dealing with the properties and several
transactions had taken place and no action has been taken against them by the
respondents, if really Exhibit A4 is a forged document.
21.On carefully going through the proceedings of the Collector dated 3.5.1993,
which was the spark for filing the suit in O.S.No.528 of 2020, it is seen that Exhibit A4
that was relied upon by the petitioners was held to be a fraudulent document and hence,
a direction was given to cancel the patta and restore the original position by showing the
concerned lands as Anadheenam. Even in the written statement, the 1st respondent has
taken the same stand to the effect that Exhibit A4 is a fictitious and a fraudulent
document. Similarly, DW1 in the evidence has also taken this stand. Unfortunately, both
the Trial Court as well as the Appellate Court focused only on the power and jurisdiction
of the Collector to pass the order of cancellation and both the Courts did not go into the
genuineness of Exhibit A4. If both the Courts had turned their attention to Exhibit A4
based on the stand taken by the defendants, it could have been easily found that Exhibit
A4, on the face of it, is a fraudulent document. If this issue had been considered, there
was no occasion to go into any other issue and to test the power and jurisdiction of the
22. This Court will now deal with the issues that were formulated. This Court
cannot shut its eyes in a case where the document, on the face of it, is found to be
fabricated and fraudulent only on the ground that the Civil Court has not rendered any
findings on the genuineness of the document and had relied upon it and decreed the suit
in favour of the petitioners. The entire concept of Writ jurisdiction exercised is founded on
equity and fairness. This Court can never allow perpetration of an illegality merely on
technicalities. This is not a case where there is a private dispute between the parties and
the genuineness of a document relied upon by the parties is put to scrutiny in the Writ
proceedings. This is a case where the property belonging to the Government and which
was categorised as Anadheenam, is sought to be knocked off by producing a fabricated
order as if it was passed by the Assistant Settlement Officer, through proceedings dated
15.4.1976. This Court has already dealt with the original (genuine) order and the order
that was marked as Exhibit A4 and found Exhibit A4 to be a forged and fabricated
document. This document was the basis for the vendor of the petitioners to claim a right
over the subject property as if ryotwari patta was granted in his favour. In the absence of
this order, no right will enure in favour of the vendor of the petitioners. In fact, it was
cancelled by the Collector only on the ground that it was found to be a fraudulent and
fictitious document. Instead of focusing on this important issue,unfortunately, the Civil
Courts misdirected themselves and focused on the power and jurisdiction of the Collector
to cancel the patta. The Civil Courts did not appreciate the fact that the cancellation was
done not on considering the right of the parties but on the only ground that the document
relied upon was a fraudulent one.
23.The judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Papayya Shastry, referred supra,
makes it abundantly clear that a decree obtained by playing fraud on the Court is a nullity
and non-est in the eye of law and it can be questioned even in collateral proceedings. In
the present case, Exhibit A3 and Exhibit A4 are fraudulent documents and a decree that
was obtained based on these documents will be rendered to be a nullity and non-est in
the eye of law. Such jurisdiction can be exercised even in Writ proceedings under Article
226 of the Constitution of India.
24.The learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioners submitted
that they came into the scene much later, only in the year 1990 and they honestly
believed the land register record and the order of the Assistant Settlement Officerto be
genuine and hence, they should not be victimised for the alleged fraud committed by their
vendor. This submission is untenable since the petitioners cannot get a better right than
what their vendor had on the principle of nemo dat quod non habet. The concept of bona
fide purchaser does not have any role to play in the present case since the property that
was dealt with belongs to the Government and it was attempted to be knocked off by
means of fraudulent documents.
25.The other submission made by the learned Senior Counsel to the effect that the
others who got the ryotwari patta along with the vendor of the petitioners are still dealing
with those properties, is equally untenable since there cannot be equality in illegality.
Infact, the District Collector must take immediate steps to take over those lands also.
26. In view of the above, this Court holds that even where a competent Civil Court
has granted a decree in favour of the petitioners and there was no finding to the effect
that the order dated 15.4.1976 is a fabricated and forged document and this decree has
become final, this Court can go into the issue of genuineness of the order dated
15.4.1976 in collateral proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, since it
was a fraud played on the Court by using a forged order. This Court also holds that this
Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India can nullify
the judgment and decree passed by a competent Civil Court if it has been obtained by
playing fraud on the Court and such a decree is a nullity and non-est in the eye of law.
27. In the result, the Order passed in W.P.No.15507 of 2021, dated 21.9.2021 is
hereby set aside. The judgment and decree passed in A.S.No.122 of 2011, dated 3.1.2013
is declared to be a nullity and non-est in the eye of law. There shall also be a further
direction to the District Collector to immediately initiate proceedings against 4 other
persons who had utilised the forged and fabricated order dated 15.4.1976 and dealt with
the properties in Survey Nos: 6/8, 60/4, 88/5 and 89/1. This Review Petition is
accordingly allowed. There shall be no order as to costs.