Case :- PUBLIC INTEREST LITIGATION (PIL) No. - 487 of
Counsel for Petitioner :- Birendra Kumar Yadav,Amit
Counsel for Respondent :- A.S.G.I.,C.S.C.
1.     Heard Shri Birendra Kumar Yadav, Advocate for the
petitioner, Shri S. B. Pandey, learned Assistant Solicitor General
of India, who appeared for Union of India and learned State
Counsel representing the State-respondents.
2.     This petition as a Public Interest Litigation has been filed
by the petitioner, which is a society, with the prayer that the
respondents may be directed to enhance the age of retirement
from 60 to 62 years in respect of the employees of the State
Government who are differently-abled. The prayer clause of the
writ petition is reproduced hereunder:-
"1.   To issue a writ, order or directions in the
nature of Mandamus commanding and directing the
opposite parties to issue equal policy in terms of
section 3, 13, 20 and 21 of the Right of Persons with
Disabilities Act, 2016 for extension of benefits of the
disabled employees in respect to enhancing the
retirement age from 60 to 62 years as the same
benefits were provided to the disable employees of
2.     To issue any order or direction as the Hon'ble
Court deems just and proper in circumstances of the
case."
3.    Strenuously arguing on behalf of the petitioner-society, it
has been submitted by the learned counsel for the petitioner that
in the State of Punjab as also in the State of Haryana the age of
retirement of differently abled government employees is 62 years
and hence State of Uttar Pradesh may also be directed to enhance
the age of retirement of differently-abled government employees
working in the State of U.P. from 60 to 62 years. Submission of
the learned counsel for the petitioner is that by not extending the
age of superannuation from 60 to 62 years the Government of
U.P. is subjecting its differently-abled government employees to
hostile discrimination and in terms of the provisions contained in
Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 the differently-
abled persons in the State of U.P. are entitled to be given the
same treatment as is being given to their counterparts in the State
of Haryana and in the State of Punjab by providing their age of
superannuation to be 62 years.
4.    Learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon a
judgment of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigar
rendered in the case of Bhupinder Singh vs. State of Punjab
and others, CWP No.7233 of 2010 decided on 25.05.2011,
against which Civil Appeal No.8855 of 2014 preferred by the
State of Punjab before the Hon'ble Supreme Court has also
been dismissed by means of the judgment and order dated
16.09.2014. Another judgment relied upon by the learned counsel
for the petitioner is in the case of Jagjiwan Singh vs. State of
Punjab and others, CWP No.25972 of 2015, decided on
5.     On the other hand, learned Assistant Solicitor General of
India appearing for the Union of India and learned State Counsel
opposing this Public Interest Litigation have unanimously
submitted that the prayer made in this Public Interest Litigation
essentially pertains to service matter and as such as per the settled
position of law, no Public Interest Litigation can be entertained in
relation to service related matters and accordingly the writ
petition is liable to be dismissed on this score alone.
6.     We have considered the submissions made by the learned
counsel appearing for the respective parties and have also
perused the judgments cited by the learned counsel for the
petitioner as also the provisions contained in Rights of Persons
7.     There is no doubt in our mind that the relief claimed by the
petitioner in this petition lies in the realm of service matter for the
reason that the prayer made is in relation to enhancement of age
of superannuation of differently-abled government employees in
the State of U.P. Fixation of age of superannuation or retirement
is a condition of service which does not, in any manner, concern
either the petitioner-society or its members.
8.     In the case of Girjesh Shrivastava and others vs. State of
Madhya Pradesh, reported in (2010) 10 SCC 707, the Hon'ble
Supreme Court reiterated the legal principle that in service
matters no Public Interest Litigation can be entertained.
Reference, at this juncture, may also be had to several other
judgments of Hon'ble Supreme Court in this regard, namely, Dr.
Duryodhan Sahoo and others vs. Jitendra Kumar Mishra and
others, (1998) 7 SCC 273, B. Srinivasa Reddy v. Karnataka
Association and another, (2006) 11 SCC 731 and Dattaraj
Nathuji Thaware v. State of Maharashtra and others, (2005) 1
SCC 590. In these judgments, Hon'ble Supreme Court has
categorically held that PIL in service matters should not be
entertained. It is equally well settled that except where a writ of
Quo Warranto is prayed for, Public Interest Litigation in service
related matters ought not to be entertained. So far as the present
case is concerned, we do not find that it raises any issue of Quo
Warranto and accordingly in our considered opinion, this Public
Interest Litigation is not maintainable. We may, however, also
reflect upon the merit of issue raised by the petitioner.
9.    The basis of the prayers made in this petition is that since
the differently-abled government employees working in the State
of Haryana and the State of Punjab have been given the benefit of
age of superannuation of 62 years whereas in the State of U.P.,
the age of superannuation of differently-abled employees is 60
years hence such employees in the State of U.P. have been
discriminated against. Learned counsel for the petitioner, apart
from pleading discrimination on the basis of the principles
enunciated by Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India, has
also submitted that the scheme of Rights of Persons with
Disabilities Act, 2016 clearly mandates that the differently-abled
persons cannot be subjected to any kind of discrimination
including in the matter of public employment as such this Court
ought to issue a direction to the State of U.P. for enhancing the
age of superannuation of its differentaly-abled employees from
60 to 62 years.
10.   No doubt that Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016
has been framed by the Parliament for empowerment of the
persons with disabilities and the said Act clearly mandates that
differently-abled persons cannot be discriminated against.
However, such non-discrimination which runs across the Act,
2016 has to be read in the context. The Act 2016 was framed to
make a law prohibiting all kinds of discrimination of differently-
abled persons in the society and also for ensuring their effective
participation and inclusion in the society as also for creating an
environment where there will be respect for the difference such
differently-abled persons bear and also to create equality of
opportunity etc. It is not a case where the petitioner is pointing
out any discrimination of the differently-abled government
servants in the State of U.P. in any respect vis-a-vis their
counterparts who are not differently-abled. The petitioner has
pleaded discrimination of the differently-abled government
employees in the matter of their age of retirement in the State of
U.P. vis-a-vis their counterparts in the State of Haryana and State
11.   Apart from the provisions contained in Rights of Persons
with Disabilities Act, 2016, at this juncture, we may also refer to
the broad principles enunciated under Articles 14 and 16 of the
Constitution of India which prohibit discrimination of any kind
and provide for equal protection of laws. Article 16 operates in
the field of public employment which mandates equality of
opportunity for all citizens in the matter relating to employment
or appointment to any office under the State. It further prohibits
any discrimination of any citizen on grounds only of religion,
race, caste, sex, descent, place of birth or residence. However,
Article 14 of the Constitution of India cannot be read to mean
that all laws have to be uniformly applicable to all people.
Differential treatment, in our considered opinion, does not per se
violate Article 14 of the Constitution of India. Such differential
treatment may amount to denial of equal protection under Article
14 only when there is no reasonable basis for differential
treatment. It is equally settled that Article 14 permits
classification, however, such classification has to have some
reasonable basis. Reasonable classification thus, is not barred.
Equal protection is available to all persons belonging to a well
defined class. For permissible classification amongst the citizens
there has to be a reasonable basis.
12.   The age of superannuation as determined by the State of
Haryana and State of Punjab for its differently-abled employees
cannot be applied so far as the differently-abled employees of the
State of U.P. are concerned as a matter of right either flowing
from Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India or from the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016. Differently-abled
employees in the State of U.P. forming well defined class distinct
from another well defined class of differently-abled employees
serving the State of Punjab and State of Haryana.
13.   In the aforesaid view of the mater as well, plea of
differential treatment to the differently-abled employees in the
State of U.P., in the facts of the present case, so far as their age of
superannuation is concerned, in our considered opinion, is not
tenable.
14.   For all the aforesaid reasons, we are not inclined to
interfere in the Public Interest Litigation, which is hereby
dismissed.