This petition under Section 482 of CrPC has been filed to quash FIR at
Crime No.418 of 2019 registered by Police Station Kotwali, Ashok Nagar for
offence u/Ss.498-A, 506, 34 of IPC and other subsequent proceedings initiated
(2)    Factual matrix of the case, in short, are that on 01/08/2019 at around
07:23 pm, the complainant (herein respondent No.2) along with her brother
Santosh Lodhi, made a written complaint at Police Station Kotwali, District
Ashok Nagar stating therein, that her marriage was performed on 12-12-2016
with one Alok, resident of Indore and her father had given sufficient dowry
including spent of Rs.15 lac for her marriage and had given cash of Rs.15 lac
at the time of ''Tika''. After some days of her marriage, her in-laws started
demanding dowry and also, committed ''marpeet'' with heron 30-01-2018 and
thereafter, turn out of her in-laws house. It is further alleged that the
complainant made a report at PS Tilak Nagar, Indore. In February, 2019,
although her father had called her husband and in-laws many times, but they
avoided and she had also made a complaint before the Conciliation Centre but
no fruitful purpose could be served. It is further alleged that her husband
(petitioner No.1), brother-in-law/Devar (petitioner No.2), father-in-law
(petitioner No.3) and sister-in-law/Nanand (petitioner No.4),           who are
Residents of 309, Block -B, Subhlabh Beli Scheme No.140, Tilak Nagar,
Tahsil & District Indore, are demanding Rs. 15 lac for purchase of a flat and if
she did not fulfill the same, they could not keep her in house and would kill
her. On that basis, aforesaid FIR has been lodged.
(3)     Learned counsel appearing for the petitioners submitted that the entire
allegations are completely false and FIR itself lodged with clear motive to
harass and pressurize the petitioners. The complainant is a quarrelsome lady
and used to quarrel with her in-laws as she has no interest to live peacefully
with them and even she does not want to live with her husband. The attitude as
well as conduct of complainant towards her in-laws is not good since the date
of marriage. In this regard, a complaint to the SP as well as DM, Ashok Nagar
has been made vide Annexure P2 & P3. On account of conduct and behaviour
of complainant, her husband (herein petitioner No.1) filed a petition under
Section 13 of the Hindu Marriage Act for dissolution of marriage before
Principal Judge, Family Court Aligarh (UP) on 13/08/2018. The petitioner
No.3 who is the father-in-law of complainant, has also filed a complaint before
the Court of AJCM, Aligarh on 27-07-2019 under Sections 406, 504 of IPC
against the complainant and her family vide Annexure A5. On the basis of
counter-blast, the complainant has falsely lodged the present FIR against the
petitioners. It is further submitted that the marriage of petitioner no.4, who is
sister-in-law of complainant is living separately at Bhopal whose marriage was
performed prior to the date of marriage of complainant. There is no specific
allegation either in regard to demand of dowry or harassment against the
petitioners and only omnibus and vague allegations have been made against
them in order to harass and pressurize them to attract offence under Section
498A of IPC. Therefore, the impugned FIR itself is nothing but a clear abuse
of process of law and it has been made with a revengeful intent and only with
an intention to wreck vengeance as against the petitioners, a false FIR has been
lodged, therefore, the same deserves to be quashed. In support of contention,
counsel for the petitioners has relied upon the recent judgment of Hon'ble
Apex Court in the matter of Kahkashan Kausar alias Sonam & Others vs.
State of Bihar & Others, delivered on 8th February, 2022 in Criminal Appeal
No.195 of 2022 (arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 6545 of 2020.
(4)     Per contra, the State Counsel as well as Counsel for complainant
respondent No.2, submitted that other proceedings pending before petitioners
and respondent No.2 are not impediment for her to lodge present FIR for the
alleged offences committed by petitioners herein. Offence under Section 498-
A of IPC is a continuous offence and cause of action arose even after her
marriage and her in-laws harassed her by demanding huge sum of dowry.
There is specific allegation against the petitioners for demand of huge sum of
dowry and allegation of committing ''marpeet'' with complainant. Hence,
prayed for dismissal of this petition.
(5)   Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused documents available
on record.
(6)    The main controversy involved in the present matter is as to whether
impugned FIR has been lodged by complainant with a revengeful intent or
only to wreck vengeance as against the petitioners or not ?
(7)   It is relevant to rely upon the judgment of State of Haryana v. Ch.
Bhajan Lal (1992 Supp (1) 335), wherein it has been held by the Hon'ble
Apex Court that where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with mala
fide and/or where the proceedings is maliciously instituted with an ulterior
motive for wrecking vengeance on the accused and with a view to spite him
due to private and personal grudge, then criminal proceeding can be quashed
exercising the inherent jurisdiction of the High Court under Section 482 of the
Code. Similarly, in the matter of Social Action Forum for Manav Adhikar
and Another vs. Union of India, Ministry of Law And Justice and Others,
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 73 of 2015 decided on 14th September, 2018, the
Hon'ble Apex Court has held as under:-
''3. Regarding the constitutionality of Section 498-A
IPC, in Sushil Kumar Sharma v. Union of India and others,
it was held by the Supreme Court:-
unconstitutional and ultra vires. Mere possibility of
abuse of a provision of law does not per se invalidate a
legislation. Hence plea that S. 498A has no legal or
constitutional foundation is not tenable. The object of
the provisions is prevention of the dowry menace. But
many instances have come to light where the
complaints are not bona fide and have been filed with
oblique motive. In such cases acquittal of the accused
does not in all cases wipe out the ignominy suffered
coverage adds to the misery. The question, therefore, is
what remedial measures can be taken to prevent abuse
of the well-intentioned provision. Merely because the
provision is constitutional and intra vires, does not give
a licence to unscrupulous persons to wreck personal
vendetta or unleash harassment. It may, therefore,
become necessary for the legislature to find out ways
how the makers of frivolous complaints or allegations
can be appropriately dealt with. Till then the Courts
have to take care of the situation within the existing
frame-work."
(8)    On perusal of the impugned FIR as well as the documents available on
record and in the light of the judgments passed by Hon'ble Apex Court, it
appears that the allegations made against petitioners are general and omnibus,
therefore, they cannot be prosecuted u/S 498A of IPC. In the present matter,
earlier husband of the complainant (herein petitioner No.1) filed a petition
under Section 13 of the Hindu Marriage Act for dissolution of marriage before
Principal Judge, Family Court, Aligarh on 13/08/2018 and thereafter, petitioner
No.3 who is the father-in-law of complainant, has also filed a complaint before
the Court of AJCM, Aligarh on 27-07-2019 for commission of offences under
Sections 406, 504 of IPC against the complainant and her family members
vide Annexure A5. Afterwards, the rival parties have filed one consent letter
(annexed with this petition at Page 50), which reflects that some compromise
took place between the parties but on 31/01/2018 the complainant filed an
application (at page 52) before Principal Judge, Family Court, Ashok Nagar
stating therein that they do not get mutual thoughts, therefore, the complainant
decided to go to Bhopal and live with her father. In the case at hand, earlier a
petition under Section 13 of Hindu Marriage Act was filed on 13/03/2018 by
husband of complainant and on 27/09/2019, a complaint was also filed by
father-in-law of complainant where-after, the conciliation proceedings could
not be succeeded due to difference of thoughts whatsoever between
complainant and her husband. Present FIR has been lodged on 01/08/2019 by
complainant is nothing, but only to wreck vengeance so also with a revengeful
intent in order to pressurize and harass the petitioners.
(9)              Upon consideration of entire facts and circumstances of the case
coupled with the fact that respondent No.2 has left her matrimonial home
voluntarily without any rhyme and it is a fault on the part of the complainant to
live separately prior to filing of the impugned FIR and in absence of specific
allegation of demand of dowry or harassment, the impugned FIR deserves to
be quashed. Accordingly, FIR at Crime No.418 of 2019 registered against the
petitioners by Police Station Kotwali, Ashok Nagar for offence u/Ss 498-A,
506, 34 of IPC & other subsequent proceedings initiated therefrom stand
quashed.