Petition for Special Leave to Appeal (C) No. 1110/2017
(Arising out of impugned final judgment and order dated 07-10-2015
in CR No. 49/2015 passed by the High Court Of Judicature at
Date : 05-10-2021 These matters were called on for hearing today.
contd..
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
I.A. No.24664/2020 stands allowed and the applicant in
the I.A. is permitted to intervene in the matter.           In view of
allowing the I.A. No.24664/2020, I.A. Diary No.128255/2021 stands
disposed of as having become infructuous.
A request is made on behalf of Shri Praveen Agrawal,
learned counsel, who is representing the Bar Council of U.P. to
discharge him as he is not getting       any instructions from the Bar
Council of U.P. It is very unfortunate that in such a serious
matter, where the allegations are of filing of fake claim petitions
in which the advocates are also alleged to have been involved, the
Bar Council of U.P. is not giving instructions to their advocate.
It shows the callousness and insensitiveness on the part of the Bar
Council of U.P.     Shri Manan Kumar Mishra, learned senior counsel
and Chairman Bar Council of India to look into the same.
A supplementary affidavit dated 30.09.2021 has been filed
on behalf of the State of U.P.     The affidavit is filed bringing on
record the S.I.T. Report.    The S.I.T. was constituted in compliance
of the order dated 07.10.2015 passed by the Allahabad High Court,
Lucknow Bench in Civil Revision Petition No.49 of 2015.          It has
been  stated   that  the  ICICI   Lombard   General  Insurance  Company
Limited forwarded cases of suspicious claims related to various
insurance    companies   forwarded    by  the  learned District Judge,
contd..
Raebareli, cases referred to the S.I.T. by various courts and the
High Court of Allahabad, Lucknow Bench, cases of suspicious claims
of  Motor   Accident  Claims  Tribunal   and  Workmen  Compensation   Act
referred to by various Insurance Companies. The S.I.T. has received
total 1376 complaints/cases of suspicious claims.          It is stated
that   out of total 1376 cases of suspicious claims received by the
Special Investigation Team, U.P, Lucknow, enquiry of 246 cases of
suspicious claims has been completed till date and after having
found prima facie offence of cognizable offence in nature against
total 166 accused persons which includes petitioners/applicants,
advocates, police personnel, doctors, insurance employees, vehicle
owners, drivers etc. and total 83 criminal complaints have been
registered in various districts.      It is stated that the enquiry of
remaining cases of suspicious claims is underway.            It is also
stated that out of total criminal complaints registered so far,
investigation of 33 criminal cases has been completed and legal
process of submitting charge sheet against the accused persons is
underway.   It  is  further  stated  that   investigation   of  remaining
cases is in progress by the S.I.T., which will be completed as soon
as possible.
It is required to be noted that S.I.T was constituted under
Special Enquiry Headquarters, U.P. Lucknow pursuant to the order
passed   by  the  Allahabad  High  Court   for  conducting   enquiry  and
investigation of the cases related to causing loss in crores of
rupees to the insurance companies by way of submitting fake claims
under   Motor Accident Claims Tribunal and     Workmen Compensation Act
contd..
as back from 2015 and despite the same, the          investigation/enquiry
has not been completed till date and out of total 1376 cases of
suspicious claims received by the Special Investigation Team, U.P,
Lucknow, the enquiry has been completed only with respect to 246
cases of suspicious claims and only 83 criminal complaints have
have been registered in major districts.           Even the investigation
has been completed with respect to only 33 criminal cases and even
the Charge Sheet has not been filed till date and it is stated that
the legal process of submitting charge sheet against the accused
person is underway. It is very unfortunate that even the Special
Investigation Team has not taken the prompt action and has not
completed investigation/enquiry.       The manner and the speed in which
the enquiry is going on and is underway is deprecated.
The State of U.P./S.I.T. is hereby directed to file a better
affidavit    in   a   sealed    cover     with   respect    to   complaints
filed/enquiry   completed,    the   names   of  the    accused,  where   the
criminal   complaints  are   filed    and  in  which   criminal   cases  the
charge sheets have been filed.        On a separate sheet, the names of
the  advocates   against  whom    the   prima  face   cases  of  cognizable
offences have been found to be disclosed in a sealed cover so that
the list can be sent to the Bar Council of India for further
action.   As such it is the duty of the Bar Council of the State to
take  action   against  the   advocates    who  are   found  to   have  been
indulged in such unethical manner by filing the fake claims under
the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal and Workmen Compensation Act.
As observed herein above, it appears that Bar Council of State
contd..
is not interested in taking action and, therefore, now the Bar
Council of India has to step in and take appropriate action against
the erring advocates, who are found to have indulged into filing of
such fake claims.   Such Report shall be filed by the S.I.T in a
sealed cover before this Court on or before 15.11.2021.
Put up on  16.11.2021.