341/302    of  the  Indian  Penal  Code  and  sentence   of rigorous
imprisonment for life and fine of Rs.5,000/-, in default, to suffer
rigorous imprisonment for 30 days more for the offence punishable
under Section 302 IPC and simple imprisonment for one month for the
offence punishable under Section 341 IPC has appealed before this
The prosecution case as alleged against the appellant is to the
effect that on 19th January, 2012 around 11:00 A.M., there was an
altercation between the appellant and one Manik Hembram (PW 1) over
drawing water for irrigation through a pump. Quarrel ensued between
them. Thereafter, PW 1 left for his residence. Subsequently, on the
fateful day i.e., 21st January, 2021 at 2:00 P.M. the appellant again
threatened PW 1. In the evening around 05:45 P.M. while the deceased
namely, Gangaram Hembram, father of PW 1 was going on a bicycle to
Sangrampur market, appellant dragged him down from his bicycle near
Kasundipara Adibasi Aleka Gaota club. Thereafter, the appellant and
others mercilessly beat Gangaram with a hasuli. He expired at the spot.
FIR was lodged by PW1 resulting in registration of Polba Police Station
Case No.09 of 2012 dated 21.01.2012 under Sections 341/302/34 IPC
against the appellant and unknown others. In course of investigation,
the appellant was arrested and on his leading statement the weapon of
assault namely, hasuli was recovered. In conclusion of investigation,
charge-sheet was filed against the appellant and eleven others. Charges
were framed under Sections 341/302/34 of the Indian Penal Code. In
the course of trial, prosecution examined 15 witnesses and exhibited a
number of documents. The defence of the accused persons was one of
innocence and false implication. In conclusion of trial, the trial Judge
by the impugned judgment and order dated 26th August, 2019/28th
August, 2019 while convicting and sentencing the appellant, as
aforesaid, acquitted other accused persons of the charges levelled
against them.
Mr. Dipayan Kundu, learned counsel appearing for the appellant
argues the genesis of the prosecution case has been substantially
altered by the so-called eye witness PW 5 in court. While the witness
stated that the appellant and other acquitted persons had assaulted
the deceased conjointly, in court PW 5 attributed the assault with
hasuli to the appellant only. Post-mortem doctor (PW 7) noted single
penetrating    wound    on  the   stomach   which    improbabilises  the
prosecution case of conjoint assault. It is also argued that the seizure
of hasuli is doubtful and the length of the weapon does not match the
dimension of the injury as noted by the post-mortem doctor. Relying on
the almanac (Exhibit-A) which was produced during trial, it is
contended that the sun had set at 05:15 P.M. and therefore, light was
insufficient for PW 5 to witness the incident. He accordingly, prayed for
Ms. Shreyashee Biswas, learned advocate, appearing for the
State, submits that the name of the appellant had featured in the FIR
which was promptly lodged on the date of the incident, whereas names
of the acquitted persons did not appear in the FIR. PW 5 who witnessed
the incident and gave out the specific role played by the appellant who
assaulted the deceased on the chest with a hasuli. Her version
corroborates the injury found by the post-mortem doctor. Weapon of
offence was seized in the presence of witnesses on the leading
statement of the appellant. Hence, the prosecution case is proved
beyond reasonable doubt.
PW 5, Smt. Padma Hembram is the eyewitness to the incident.
She stated that on the relevant date and time she saw Gangaram
passing Kasundipara Adibasi Alek Gauta club riding a bicycle.
Appellant and others were sitting by the roadside. Suddenly they pulled
down Gangaram from his bicycle. She saw the appellant continuously
assault Gangaram with the help of a hasuli. As a result Gangaram
died. Other accused persons also assaulted. Two/three of them dragged
the body of Gangaram and left him by the side of the road. On hearing
hue and cry, others came to the spot and PW 5 narrated the incident to
them. On the next date, she narrated the incident to police.
Subsequently, on 22.01.2012, complaint was reduced into writing by
Rabilal Hansda, PW 10, as per her version wherein she put her LTI.
She made her statement before the Magistrate. She identified the seized
hasuli in Court as the weapon of offence.
PW 1 is the son of the deceased. He along with PW 2, PW 3 and
PW 4 rushed to the spot immediately after the incident. PW 5 had
narrated the incident to them. On 21.01.2012 PW 1 lodged the First
Information Report which was scribed by PW 15. PW 1 also narrated
the prior incident of altercation between him and the appellant in the
morning of 19th January, 2021 with regard to pumping of water from
the pond for irrigation. He also spoke about a quarrel in the afternoon
on the fateful day near Moinarani pond. He further deposed that police
came to the spot at 8.30 P.M. He signed on the inquest report. He also
deposed with regard to recovery of the hasuli on the showing of the
appellant from his residence. He is a signatory to the seizure list
(Exhibit-3). He deposed that on 24.01.2012 police seized the bicycle of
his father. In cross-examination, he admitted that there was a dispute
between the accused persons and his family as they had converted to
PW 4 corroborated the evidence of PW 1 with regard to dispute
between the latter and the appellant at 11.00 A.M. over drawing of
irrigation  water    from   Moinarani   pond    on   19th  January   and
subsequently at 2.00 P.M on the fateful day. He is also a witness to the
recovery of the hasuli on the showing of the appellant and had signed
on the seizure list (Exhibit-3/1).
Pw 6 is another reported witness who reached the place of
occurrence and PW 5, Padma Hembram narrated the incident to him.
He went to Polba Police Station and lodged a general diary. Thereafter,
police arrived at the spot and collected blood stained earth. He was also
present at the time when the weapon of offence was recovered from the
house of the appellant.
PW 9 is a reported witness. PW 9 reached the spot after the
occurrence and heard about the incident from Padma. He was witness
to the seizure of the bicycle from the house of the deceased and a
signatory to the seizure list.
PW 7 is the post mortem doctor. He noted the following injuries
transversely measuring 2 X ½” in length found in
the centre of the wound in the right upper side of
with the gaping in the corner of the wound. Depth
backward and medially. On examination of track
below skin were cut, multiple cut injuries of liver,
gut (intestine) were found. Abdomen was full of
blood.
left side of jaw was also found.”
He opined death was due to the effect of aforesaid injuries which
are ante-mortem and homicidal in nature. He proved the postmortem
report in Court (Exhibit-6). He identified the seized hasuli as a weapon
which may cause the aforesaid injuries resulting in death.
PW 11 is the Block Land and Land Reforms Officer, who replied
to the queries from the Investigating Officer with regard to the
possession and ownership of Moinarani pond.
PW 13 and PW 14 are the Investigating Officers in the instant
case. PW 14 proceeded to the spot and held inquest over the body of
the deceased (Exhibit – 2/3). He sent the dead body for post mortem
examination. On 21.01.2012 Manik Hembram lodged written complaint
before the Polba Police Station. Upon registration of criminal case,
investigation was assigned to him. He prepared rough sketch map of
the place of occurrence with index. He collected blood stained earth
from the place of occurrence. He recorded the statement of witnesses.
Statement of PW-5 was recorded under Section 164 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure before      the Magistrate. On the        confessional
statement of the appellant, hasuli was recovered under seizure list
(Exhibit – 3/3). He also seized wearing and apparels of the deceased.
On 24.02.2012, he seized the bicycle of the deceased. Subsequently,
investigation was handed over to PW 13 who finally submitted charge
Prosecution case principally rests on the evidence of the sole eye
witness, PW 5. It is argued genesis of the incident as narrated in Court
is at variance with PW 5’s earlier statement before the Magistrate. She
could not have witnessed the incident after sunset. It is also argued the
complaint dated 22.03.2012 purportedly authored under instruction of
PW 5, is a manufacture document.
I have analyzed the evidence of the eye witnesses in the light of
the aforesaid contentions. PW 5 in her deposition has explained the
circumstances in which she witnessed the incident. She stated she had
seen the deceased passing Kasundipara club in a bicycle. At that time
the appellant and others accosted the deceased and appellant had
assaulted the deceased with the help of hasuli. She also claimed other
persons had also assaulted. In her statement before Magistrate, the
witness stated that the appellant had dragged the deceased down and
thereafter he and others had assaulted him to death.
However, her evidence with regard to the role of the other
accused persons is not corroborated by PW 1 in his First Information
Report (Exhibit – 1-3). In the First Information Report, it is alleged
appellant along with unnamed others assaulted the victim with a
hasuli. The identity of the so-called unnamed assailants was unknown
at the time of registration of the First Information Report though the
document was registered after consultation with PW 5. Even in the
inquest report, prepared by PW 14, immediately after the incident, it is
alleged the appellant along with unknown others had assaulted the
deceased with a sharp weapon. PM doctor, PW 7 shows presence of two
injuries on the deceased. Fatal wound is a penetrating injury
measuring 2”x ½” in length in the right upper side of the abdomen. An
abrasion on the left side of the Jaw was also noticed. Assessing the
evidence of PW 5 in the light of the aforesaid pieces of evidence,
namely, First Information Report, inquest report and the medical
evidence, I find sufficient corroboration with regard to the role played
by the appellant in assaulting the deceased with a hasuli but not with
regard to the role of other accused persons in the assault.
In India, the principal ‘falsus in uno, falsus in omnibus’ does not
apply in the matter of appreciation of evidence. When the Court is
called upon to assess the evidence of a witness, it becomes its bounden
duty to assess the evidence of the witness on the anvil of probability
and separate the kernel of truth from the chaff of embellishment. The
trial court has rightly assessed the evidence of PW 5 and upon ignoring
her embellished effort to implicate other associates of the appellant in
the crime, correctly relied on the role of the appellant as the sole
assailant of the deceased. I wholly concur with the line of reasoning of
the trial Judge as the role of the appellant in the assault of the
deceased not only transpires at the earliest opportunity in the inquest
report/FIR but is also supported by the medical evidence at hand.
The incident occurred in the course of a melee where though
other persons were present along with the appellant, they do not
appear to have participated in the assault. Effort of PW 5 to implicate
other accused persons appears to be over enthusiastic and was rightly
mixed by the trial Judge due to lack of corroboration. However, her
version vis-à-vis role of the appellant in the murder resonates with
truth and finds corroboration from other sources. It would be wrong to
ignore her evidence qua the appellant while discarding her embellished
version with regard to other accused persons. Hence, the acquittal of
the other accused persons does not affect the truthfulness of the
prosecution case, vis-à-vis the appellant.
With regard to sufficiency of light at the place of occurrence, I
find incident occurred around 5:30 P.M. in the evening. Though, the
sun set on 5:15 P.M. on that day, it is common knowledge that it does
not become pitch dark as soon as the sun sets. On the other hand,
there is an intervening period during which light slowly fades which
would give sufficient opportunity to PW 5 to identify a known person as
the appellant shortly after the sun set. Moreover, on the leading
statement of the appellant, weapon of offence was recovered on the date
of incident from his residence. It is contended that the purported
confessional statement leading to recovery was recorded prior to his
arrest. I do not find any inconsistency in this regard. Upon lodging of
FIR, police promptly arrived at the spot and apprehended the appellant.
Soon, thereafter, he was interrogated and on his leading statement,
weapon of offence was recovered from the residence. Aforesaid events
make it clear that the apprehension of the appellant and recording of
the statement leading to recovery of the weapon of offence were almost
simultaneous and soon after the incident. Therefore, neither the
leading statement recorded by PW 14 in the instant case cannot be said
to be an after-though nor the weapon of offence can be said to have
been planted in his residence. Finally, the plea that the fatal injury on
the stomach could not be caused by the seized hasuli is wholly refuted
by the opinion of Post Mortem doctor (PW 7) who opined the seized
weapon could have caused the said injury resulting in death.
In the light of the aforesaid discussion, I am of the opinion that it
was the appellant who dealt the fatal blow on the deceased with a
hasuli resulting in his death. The manner in which he had attacked the
victim and the injury caused on the vital organ of the body, leaves no
doubt in my mind that he intended to murder him. Thus, I am inclined
to confirm the conviction and sentence of the appellant.
The appeal being C.R.A. 597 of 2019 is, accordingly, dismissed.
The period of detention, if any, undergone by the appellant during
investigation, enquiry and trial shall be set off against the substantive
sentences imposed upon him in terms of section 428 Cr.P.C.
Lower court records along with a copy of this judgment be sent
down at once to the learned trial Court for necessary action.
Photostat certified copy of this order, if applied for, be given to the
parties on priority basis on compliance of all formalities.
I agree.