1.      The plight of a benighted widowed mother, a senior citizen, to gain a
roof over her head in a tenement of 300 sq.feet owned by her and the hard
struggle faced by her from one of her sons, is the subject matter of the
present unfortunate proceedings.
2.     This is a writ petition arising out of the Maintenance and Welfare of
Parents and Senior Citizens Act,2007. An order dated 3 February 2018
passed by the Presiding Officer of the Parents and Senior Citizens
Subsistence Tribunal, Mumbai City, is challenged in the present petition, by
the petitioner, who is the son of respondent No.2 – Smt.Kusum Kisan Pawar
who is a senior citizen (for short ‘the mother’). The mother approached the
tribunal as constituted under Section 7 of the the Maintenance and Welfare
of Parents and Senior Citizens Act,2007 (for short ‘the Senior Citizens Act’)
invoking its jurisdiction under Sections 4 and 5 read with Section 23 of the
Act against the petitioner, inasmuch as, the mother was dis-housed from her
only abode being a small tenement admeasuring 300 sq. ft. being No.209
(for short ‘the said tenement’).
3.     The facts are quite peculiar and to some extent which would shock
the conscience of the Court. There was an original tenement which was
possessed by the petitioner’s father and respondent no.2’s (the mother’s)
husband- Kisan Rangu Pawar. The building in which such tenement existed
was taken up for redevelopment and on completion of the redevelopment,
Kisan Rangu Pawar would have become entitled to be housed in the
redeveloped premises, that is the tenement in question. However, as Kisan
expired, the landlord, namely, the Mumbai Municipal Corporation
incorporated the mother’s name to be the tenant and permitted allotment of
the redeveloped tenement in favour of the mother.             The developer
accordingly issued an allotment letter of the said tenement in favour of the
mother, who was also put in possession of the said 300 sq. ft. tenement. At
an old age, the said tenement is the only roof over the mother’s head. It is
not in dispute that the mother all along was residing in the said tenement.
She has four children, two sons (one of them being the petitioner) and two
daughters. It appears that all the children are married.
4.     It is matter of common knowledge that the tenement in question is
located in a prime locality at Mumbai, namely, at Prabhadevi. This being
the position, it appears that the petitioner to the exclusion of other siblings
started asserting a right of residence on the said tenement belonging to the
mother.     The petitioner in such pursuit, along with his family members
foisted himself on the mother, who was occupying the said tenement and
appears to have entered the tenement on a specious ground that his
children are taking education in a nearby school.
5.     It is quite evident from the record that the petitioner at all material
times was aware that the tenement exclusively belonged to the mother. The
petitioner appeared to be aware that at least during the lifetime of the
mother, the petitioner and other siblings would not have any right to seek
occupation or possession of the tenement. On this backdrop, the petitioner
thought of a novel method to dis-house the mother of the tenement. This,
by taking advantage of her old age, her lack of education and that she
being not literate and benighted, by entering into a rent agreement with the
mother. The rent agreement was part of the record before the Tribunal as is
also before this Court. The rent agreement in fact militates against the
position taken by the petitioner in purportedly asserting independent rights
qua the tenement, which would be discussed little later.
6.     Under the rent agreement, the petitioner agreed to pay the mother a
monthly rent of Rs.5000/-, which he never paid. The rent agreement was
executed on 18 June 2016 for a period from 1 July 2016 to 31 May 2017,
being a period of 11 months. During such period, the petitioner was to pay
Rs.5,000/- p.m. as rent to the mother. However, what is significant about
the rent agreement is that in the recital clause of the rent agreement, which
is also under the petitioner’s signature, he agrees that the tenement is
owned by the mother. He further agrees that he is availing the tenement for
a period of eleven months, on payment of such rent. He also agrees that he
would vacate the tenement after the agreement period is over.            The
petitioner despite the agreement period having expired continued to enjoy
the tenement to the exclusion of the mother, who was required to take
shelter along with other extended family members in her village. What is
glaring to be noted, is that as far as the petitioner was concerned, the rent
agreement was only a piece of paper and was never to be acted upon, either
by making payment of rent as agreed and/or vacating the tenement. The
petitioner also conveniently choose to forget that in such agreement he had
recognized the mother to be the absolute owner of the tenement. It cannot
be disputed that the mother had decided to receive income for her survival
from the petitioner/her own son, under the rent agreement which was only
for a period of 11 months.
7.     It is the mother’s case that the petitioner did not make payment of the
rent which was also a source of her livelihood. She made complaints to
different authorities including the police that she has been ousted from her
residence as also she was not paid by her son/petitioner.
8.     In these circumstances, the mother approached the Senior Citizens
Tribunal invoking provisions of the Senior Citizens Act by filing the
complaint in question. However, prior thereto, as noted above, she also
made complaints to the police against the petitioner.           On the mother
making such complaints, one day prior to the mother filing her application
before the Senior Citizens Tribunal, the petitioner deposited in the mother’s
bank account an amount of Rs.30,000/- and thereafter, took a position that
he is willing to regularly make monthly payments to the mother.
9.     The petitioner appeared before the tribunal having received notice of
the said proceedings.       The reply filed by the petitioner to the mother’s
application speaks volumes about the petitioner’s approach and his feelings
about his own mother. It is difficult to believe that a son can make reckless
allegations against the mother only for paper’s sake and that too, merely
with an intention to assert rights on the tenement and opposed to the
mother possessing and occupying the same. The primary contention of the
petitioner before the Senior Citizens Tribunal was to the effect that as the
original tenement belonged to his father, the petitioner had become a co-
sharer in the tenement and thus, he would have an exclusive right to
occupy the tenement. The petitioner, thus contended that the mother was
not the exclusive owner of the tenement. The petitioner purportedly urged
that he was always willing to maintain his mother and therefore, he ought
not to be asked to vacate the premises.
10.    The tribunal after considering the rival contentions, by a well
reasoned order dated 3 February, 2018, as impugned, has directed the
petitioner to vacate the premises by the following directions issued under
Section 4(2), Section 4(3) read with Section 23 of the Senior Citizens Act:-
1.       From the view point that the Senior Citizen may lead normal
life, in pursuance of the Sections 4 (2) 4 (3) and Section 23 of the
Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act 2007 and
Maharashtra Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens
Rules 2010, opponent Shri. Suryakant Kisan Pawar should leave the
possession of the house viz. 209, Swapna-Satalya, Building, New
400025 with family within 30 days from the date of issuance of this
order and should handover the possession to the Applicant and Senior
2.      In pursuance of Sections 5, 5(7) and 9, Shri. Suryakant Kisan
Pawar shall pay the subsistence allowance at the rate of Rs. 5000/- per
month to Smt. Kusum Kisan Pawar from the date of receipt of
application to the Tribunal i.e. from May, 2017 till February, 2018,
within 30 days from the date of issuance of this order.
3.      After receiving possession of the said house, Smt. Kusum Kisan
Pawar shall meet expenses towards her maintenance therefrom.
If the senior citizen intends to prefer an appeal against the
aforesaid order, the same may be filed to the Hon’ble Appellate
Authority, Appellate Tribunal, Mumbai City and the Collector, Mumbai
within 60 days.
11.    Learned Counsel for the petitioner in assailing the impugned order
has limited submissions. Firstly, he would submit that the approach of the
tribunal is perverse as the tribunal has overlooked that the petitioner had
equal rights over the tenement, along with the mother and being a co-
sharer, the petitioner had an exclusive right to occupy the premises. It is his
submission that this was the categorical stand of the petitioner before the
tribunal which has not been considered in its proper perspective. He
submits that the mother can stay in the village, as the petitioner is willing to
maintain her by paying an amount of Rs.5000/- per month. Thus, the
petitioner ought not to be called upon to vacate the tenement. Learned
Counsel for the petitioner has vehemently argued that the case of the
mother that the petitioner is causing harassment to the mother, was not
correct. Learned counsel for the petitioner lastly has relied on the interim
order dated 13 March, 2018 passed by this Court (S.C. Gupte, J. as His
Lordship then was) on this petition, to contend that the tribunal would not
be correct to direct the petitioner to vacate the tenement.
12.     In support of the contentions as urged on behalf of the petitioner,
learned counsel for the petitioner has placed reliance on the decision of the
Supreme Court in “S.Vanitha Vs. Dy. Commissioner,            Bengaluru    Urban
District and Others”1 and the decision of the Division Bench of this Court
13.     On the other hand, learned Counsel for the mother would submit that
the mother was pressurized to enter into the rent agreement and which she
had placed on record, as recorded by the tribunal in the impugned order.
2 Writ Petition no.2631 of 2021 decided on 13 August 2021
The relevant extract of the impugned order needs to be noted, which read
(Official translation of a copy of the marked portion, typewritten in Marathi pg.92 of the paper book)
“ The complaint application of the senior citizen – Applicant Smt.
Kusum Kisan Pawar, is as under.
“I, the aforesaid Applicant Smt. Kusum Kisan Pawar,
The room at 209, Swapnasaphalya Building, New
025 stands in my name and my elder son Shri. Suryankant
Kisan Pawar resides at the said place alongwith his family. I
am an aged woman of the age of 70 years and the said person
and his family members cause me mental harassment. In
order to get money in the form of help for my maintenance, I
had given the room at the aforementioned address to my elder
son on rental basis and an Agreement to that effect was also
entered into. However, after the Agreement was executed, he
has not given me even a single money. When he was asked to
vacate the room, he does not vacate the said room.
I am suffering from high blood pressure and I cannot
see by one eye properly. Therefore, in such situation, a
question arises before me as to where I should go.
Therefore, considering my age and situation, I request
you to render me help for meting out appropriate justice to me
and for leading remaining life happily and contentedly.”
The Complaint – application dated 10/08/2017 of the Senior
Citizen – Applicant Smt. Kusum Kisan Pawar is as under :-
“I, the abovementioned Applicant Smt. Kusum Kisan Pawar,
residing at Prabhadevi, Mumbai, state that you are aware
about the dispute between me and my elder son. As I
approached Your Court for seeking justice, my son is causing
harassment to me and indirectly pressurizing me time and
again to withdraw my complaint. At present, I do not have any
support from anyone else. My other children live somewhere
else outside. I say that in the same manner, even this son
should leave the house and should let me to live peacefully.
After my death, the possession of the land and house should be
taken by children by way of heir-ship right. I may be allowed
to enjoy my house and Order may be given to my said son to
leave the said house.”
(emphasis supplied)”
14.     Learned Counsel for the mother would next submit that the petitioner
cannot take a stand contrary to what the petitioner agreed in the rent
agreement, wherein the petitioner in terms agreed that the mother was the
owner of the premises. It is his submission that the petitioner hence cannot
assert that the petitioner being a co-sharer would have a right to be in
occupation and possession of the premises, to the exclusion of the mother
and the other legal heirs. Learned Counsel for the mother would submit
that the petitioner has not placed any material to show that the petitioner
on any document acceptable in law, was asserting rights on the tenement.
It is submitted that the petitioner also could not show that the mother had
any other place of residence and in fact, the petitioner attempted to
misguide the tribunal by -pointing out the ancestral land of four acres out of
which even assuming that one acre belonged to the mother, she did not
have any income whatsoever, as the said land was barren land not capable
of being used for any agricultural activities. He would submit that in any
case such land would not satisfy the mother’s residential requirements in
Mumbai derived from the tenement, where she has spent her entire life. He
would submit that the petitioner’s false assertions has been rightly dealt by
the tribunal in the impugned order and are held to be of no relevance,
insofar as the mother’s case being ousted from the own tenement was
concerned. Learned Counsel for the mother has drawn my attention to a
letter dated 5 June 2015 addressed by the mother to the Secretary of the
society to the effect that she had the sole entitlement to the tenement in
question, in which she also recorded that she had taken a decision that she
would not permit both her sons to reside in the said premises and that
without her permission, both the sons should not be permitted to enter the
premises. The said letter is required to be noted which reads thus:
(Official translation of a copy of an Application, typewritten in Marathi.)
I, Smt. Kusum Kisan Pawar, age-68 years, am a resident of
I had given you the information about the dispute in my family
and now, the said dispute has been totally aggravated. I am an
absolute right holder of my flat and therefore, I have taken a decision
that I will not keep my both the sons in my flat and that I am putting a
lock to the said flat. Therefore, I humbly request that my both the
sons should not be allowed to enter in the said flat without my
permission. However, if my sons act to the extreme level, then, they
shall be personally responsible for the consequences to be arrived
therefrom. Hence, it is requested to the Committee to render me full
co-operation.
15.     Learned Counsel for the respondent-mother has also drawn the
Court’s attention to several letters addressed by the mother to the different
authorities including to the police, complaining about the conduct of the
petitioner. Learned Counsel for the mother has contended that the mother
being the lawful owner of the premises is clear from the allotment letter
dated 26 February 2018 issued by the developer in favour of the mother
wherein in the first paragraph itself, it was recorded that the Mumbai
Municipal Corporation had accepted the mother to be the tenant of the
Municipal Corporation after the death of her husband Kisan Rangu Pawar.
Learned counsel for the mother has also referred to the letter dated 1
February 2018 issued by the Assistant Engineer, (Town Planning), G/South
Ward of the Mumbai Municipal Corporation addressed to the mother, which
was so referred by the developer in the said allotment letter dated 26
February, 2018.            Learned Counsel for the respondent-mother has placed
reliance on the decision of this Court in Ashish Vinod Dalal & Ors. vs.
Vinod Ramanlal Dalal & Ors. 3 and the decision of the Division Bench of
this Court in Shweta Shetty Vs. State of Maharashtra & Ors. 4, on the
interpretation of Sections 4 and 23 of the Senior Citizens Act so as to
contend that it is a settled principle of law that when the tenement in
question was not an ancestral property and when in the present case the
4   Writ Petition (l) no.9374 of 2020, decided on 25/11/2021
tenement was the property belonging to the deceased husband of
respondent no.2 (mother), the petitioner could not assert any legal right to
contend that he is entitled to be in exclusive possession and occupation of
the said tenement to the exclusion of the mother who is the rightful owner.
16.    Having heard learned Counsel for the parties and having perused the
record, it appears to be not in dispute that after the death of the petitioner’s
father and the husband of respondent no.2 (the mother), the Mumbai
Municipal Corporation had recognized the mother as the person lawfully
entitled to possess the tenement in question. The mother accordingly was
issued an allotment of the tenement by the developers, as noted above.
Thus, the petitioner as a son certainly could not have asserted any legal
right of occupation or possession of the tenement when such documents
showed that the mother was exclusively entitled to the tenement. In these
circumstances, it is difficult to conceive that the petitioner could take any
steps to oust the mother from the said premises. As asserted by the mother,
the petitioner who is 48 years of age although claims to be truck driver, he
is in the business of letting out the trucks. He appears to be married and
well settled. As also the other son namely Chandrakant, the petitioner’s
younger brother is 39 years of age is also staying in independent premises.
He is not asserting that the mother should not possess and occupy the
tenement so as to oust the mother from the tenement.              Two daughters
Ranjana and Kalpana who are aged 45 and 42 respectively, are married and
they are also not opposed to the mother possessing and occupying the
17.    It however appears that the petitioner has not spared any effort and
has taken every possible step to retain the possession of the tenement and
for that matter, he also tried to enter into such rent agreement, with the
mother, however, in doing so he completely overlooked that such a rent
agreement was a temporary relief to him, inasmuch as, in the rent
agreement in the recital clause, he accepted the mother to be the exclusive
owner of the tenement oblivious of the consequence of such recital. The
petitioner cannot set up a defence which is contrary to such document, to
which he is himself a party.
18.    The question in the aforesaid circumstances is as to whether the
mother was justified in invoking the provisions of the Senior Citizens Act to
safeguard her rights as a senior citizen as ordained under Section 4, Section
5 read with Section 23 of the Act, so as to be entitled for an order to be
passed by the tribunal, to evict the petitioner. In my opinion, the mother
was justifiably entitled to the relief as granted by the tribunal. The following
discussion would aid such conclusion.
19.    The Senior Citizens Act as seen from its preamble is a legislation to
provide for more effective provisions for the maintenance and welfare of
parents and senior citizens guaranteed and recognized under the
Constitution and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. It is
also evident from the statement of objects and reasons that the intention
behind the Senior Citizens Act is to provide for institutionalization of a
suitable mechanism for protection of life and property of older persons. In
the light of such object and intention, the legislature has framed Section 4,
5 and 23 of the Senior Citizens Act. Section 4 provides for maintenance of
parents and senior citizens. Section 5 provides for remedy for an application
for maintenance to be filed under Section 4 interalia by a senior citizen or a
parent as also by any other person or organization authorised by him, or the
tribunal may take suo motu cognizance. Section 23 provides for transfer of
property to be void in certain circumstances.
20.    In my opinion, the present case clearly attracts the said provisions.
The mother was entitled to invoke the provisions of Section 4 to make an
application under Section 5 when she was unable to maintain herself from
her property and when her right to lead “her normal life” was being
deprived by the petitioner, as recognized by sub-sections (2) and (3) of
Section 4. In this context, it would be useful to refer to the decision of this
Court in Ashish Vinod Dalal & Ors. vs. Vinod Ramanlal Dalal & Ors.
(supra). In such decision, this Court considered the scope and ambit of the
provisions of Sections 4 and 5 of the Senior Citizens Act to hold that the
intention of the legislature in making such provisions in the interest of
senior citizens, covers a wide spectrum of the senior citizen’s rights, which
are fundamental to the their very survival and/or livelihood at their old age.
It was observed that in dealing with the grievances of the senior citizens
falling under Section 4, the Court’s approach cannot be narrow and
pedantic in applying the provisions of the Senior Citizens Act. It was held
that a protection from harassment, exploitation, neglect, psychological
disturbances, psychological needs, and all possible facets to safeguard the
senior citizen’s physical and mental health are required to be recognized
under sub-section (2) and sub-section (3) of section 4 as it categorically
provided that the obligation of the children or relatives was to cater to the
needs of the senior citizens, so that they ‘live a normal life’. It was held that
the words “normal life” as used in these provisions would possess a far
deeper and wider concept, deriving its meaning and having a bearing on the
fundamental rights of livelihood as guaranteed and enjoyed by senior
citizens under Article 21 of the Constitution.
21.    In so far as Section 23 is concerned, it caters to a situation where any
senior citizen, after the commencement of the Act, had transferred by way
of “gift” or “otherwise”, his property, subject to the condition that the
transferee shall provide the basic amenities and basic physical needs to the
transferor and such transferee having refused or failing to provide such
amenities and physical needs, the transfer of property in such case, shall be
deemed to have been made by fraud or coercion or under undue influence
and shall at the option of the transferor be declared void by the Tribunal.
Sub-section (2) of Section 23 provides where any senior citizen has a right
to receive maintenance out of an estate and such estate or part thereof is
transferred, the right to receive maintenance may be enforced against the
transferee if the transferee has notice of the right, or if the transfer is
gratuitous; but not against the transferee for consideration and without
notice of right.
22.    In my opinion, in the facts of the present case, the tribunal has rightly
recognized the applicability of Section 4, Section 5 read with Section 23 of
the Act. The tenement in question was undoubtedly allotted to the mother.
This was informed by the Mumbai Municipal Corporation to the mother
vide letter dated 1 February 2018. The developer has also allotted the
tenement to the mother recognizing the mother’s right to receive the same
as approved by the Mumbai Municipal Corporation, by issuing an allotment
letter dated 26 February 2018 in her favour.          There is no material
whatsoever on record which would show that the petitioner has any
independent right in respect of the tenement in question. Neither there is
any allotment letter issued by the Mumbai Municipal Corporation in his
favour nor there is an allotment letter of the developer to allow the said
redeveloped premises in favour of the petitioner. This apart, there is nothing
on record to show as to how and in what manner, except for the rent
agreement, the petitioner came into possession of the premises. Even in the
rent agreement, the petitioner categorically admits that the mother is the
owner of the said tenement.       It is, however, quite astonishing that the
petitioner invented such a novel method namely to enter into a rent
agreement with the mother and only to be breached, as it is seen that only
when the mother made a police complaint, the petitioner paid the amounts
to the mother.
23.    This appears to be another clear case where the petitioner has no
other intention but to enjoy the tenement exclusively, ousting the roof over
his mother’s head, taking advantage of her incapacity at such an old age.
There appears to be no justification whatsoever, for the petitioner to take
possession of the mother’s premises even if the petitioner claimed that he is
the co-sharer on the ground that the tenement had devolved on the mother
from his father and she had limited rights as a co-sharer.
24.    The petitioner could not have abused the law by ousting the mother
claiming an exclusive entitlement to remain in possession of the premises.
The law in this regard is well settled. The only remedy for the petitioner
was to file appropriate proceedings before the Civil Court and establish his
rights. This apart, it is also clear that the tenement in question is not an
ancestral property and it was held by the deceased father of the petitioner
as a tenant and the tenancy came to be transferred in the name of the
mother by the municipal corporation and the mother in her own right was
entitled to possess the said tenement. If such plea as urged on behalf of the
petitioner is accepted, it would nullify the very allotment permitted by the
Municipal Corporation to be made in favour of the mother which also
recognized her independent right in respect of the tenement to the
exclusion of all others.
25.    Learned Counsel for the petitioner has made submissions referring to
the interim order dated 13 March, 2018. In my opinion, learned counsel for
the petitioner is not correct in his contention for two fold reasons – firstly,
the interim order dated 13 March, 2018 records only a prima facie
observation.    An interim order cannot be elevated to the status of any
binding decision and/or to lay down any conclusive position in law.
Secondly and most importantly, in the period after such interim order was
passed, the position in law as laid down in several decisions interpreting the
provisions of Senior Citizens Act has brought about new dimensions, to
make the provisions of the Senior Citizens Act more meaningful in catering
to the interest of the senior citizens, in fulflling the legislative intent and
obejct behind the said legislation. Some of the decisions in that regard can
be noted, namely the decision of the Supreme Court in S.Vanitha Vs. Dy.
Commissioner, Bengaluru Urban District and Others (supra) as also the
decision of the Division Bench of this Court in Shweta Shetty Vs. State of
Maharashtra & Ors. (supra). The decision of the Single Judge of this Court
in Dattatrey Shivaji Mane Vs. Lilabai Shivaji Mane & Ors. 5 as also the
decision of this Court in Ashish Vinod Dalal & Ors. (supra) are relevant and
which cannot support the petitioner’s contention passed on the interim
order. The legal position can be discussed hereunder.
26.     In S.Vanitha Vs. Dy. Commissioner, Bengaluru Urban District and
Others (supra), the Supreme Court has clearly recognized that the tribunal
under the Senior Citizens Act would have the authority to order an eviction.
The relevant observations of the Supreme Court can be noted, which reads
“20. The substance of sub-Section (2) of section 23, as submitted
by the Second and Third respondents, is that the Tribunal had the
jurisdiction to pass an order directing the eviction of the appellant
who is their daughter-in-law. According to the submission, the power
to order eviction is implicit in the provision guaranteeing a „right to
receive maintenance out of an estate‟ and the enforcement of that and the enforcement of that
right. In supporting the submission, they have referred to the view
which has been taken by several High Courts, indicating that the
Tribunal may order the eviction of a child or a relative from the
property of a senior citizen, where there has been a breach of the
obligation to maintain the senior citizen. The Tribunal under the
Senior Citizens Act 2007 may have the authority to order an eviction,
if it is necessary and expedient to ensure the maintenance and
protection of the senior citizen or parent. Eviction, in other words
would be an incident of the enforcement of the right to maintenance
and protection. However, this remedy can be granted only after
adverting to the competing claims in the dispute. … … … … ”
27.    In Shweta Shetty vs. State of Maharashtra & Ors. (supra), the
Division Bench observed that removal of a person with no right in the
premises is not eviction so as to attract any such prohibition. Referring to
the decision of the Division Bench in Ritika Prashant Jasani (supra), as cited
on behalf of the petitioner, the Court observed thus:
“12. In Jasani, therefore, the claim of the appellant was that
the house was a ‘shared household’, i.e. that she had a legally
definable right in the property itself. That is not the case
before us at all, where Shweta accepts that she has no right in
the flat in question.The mere use of the word ‘eviction’ is not
by itself determinative. To constitute eviction, or to invoke any
prohibition against eviction, it must be shown that some
legally enforceable civil right of the appellant in the property
itself has been determined and that the appellant has been
denied that right. Removal of a person with no right in the
premises is not eviction so as to attract any such prohibition.
After all, as Jasani notes, the statutory intent is to protect
senior citizens. It is not to foist on senior citizens an imaginary
claim over their own property where the claimant has no such
right to begin with. The statutory intent is not to limit the
rights of senior citizens, but exactly the reverse.”
28.    It would be useful to refer to the decision of the learned Single Judge
of this Court (R.D. Dhanuka, J.) in Dattatrey Shivaji Mane (supra) wherein
“31. In my view, Section 4 cannot be read in isolation but has
to be read with Section 23 and also Sections 2(b), 2(d) and
2(f) of the said Act. The respondent no.1 mother cannot be
restrained from recovering exclusive possession from her son
or his other family members for the purpose of generating
income from the said premises or to lead a normal life. In my
view, if the respondent no.1 mother who is 73 years old and is
a senior citizen, in this situation, is asked to file a civil suit for
recovery of possession of the property from her son and his
other family members who are not maintaining her but are
creating nuisance and causing physical hurt to her, the whole
purpose and objects of the said Act would be frustrated.”
29.    It also needs to be noted that in Shweta Shetty’s case (supra), the
Division Bench approving the view taken by this Court in Ashish Vinod
Dalal & Ors. (supra) in interpreting the provision of Section 4 of the Act has
“13. There is also a recent decision of learned Single Judge of this
Court (GS Kulkarni J) in Ashish Vinod Dalal and Ors. vs. Vinod
Ramanlal Dalal and Ors. which observes in paragraphs 14 and 15:
“14. Before parting and having noticed that this is a case
where the old parents are suffering at the hands of
petitioner no.1 the only son and petitioner no.2 – daughter-
in-law, it appears that there is certainly some element of
truth in the popular saying that “Daughters are daughters
forever and sons are sons till they are married” albeit there
would surely be exemplary exceptions. Be that as it may, the
present case is a sad story of desperate parents who intend
to be in peace at such advanced stage in life. Whether such
bare minimum expectations and requirement should also be
deprived to them by an affluent son, is a thought which the
petitioners need to ponder on. Petitioner no.1 appears to be
totally blinded in discharging his obligations to cater to his
old and needy parents and on the contrary has dragged
them into litigation. The vehemence with which arguments
were advanced by the learned Counsel for the petitioners
also bears testimony to the approach of the petitioners. It is
painful to conceive that whatever are the relations between
the son and the parents, should the son disown his old aged
parents for material gains? This has become more clear from
what Mr. Khandeparkar has said, that recently father was
required to be hospitalized. In the entire vehemence of the
submissions advanced on the flat, not a whisper was uttered
on behalf of the petitioners on any attention the petitioners
would like to provide to the father’s medical need. I am
certainly wrong in presuming such expectations from
petitioner nos. 1 and 2 considering their relations with the
parents.
15. Lastly, the contention as urged on behalf of the
petitioners relying on the decision in Ritika Prashant Jasani’s
case needs to be out rightly rejected, inasmuch as, the
question which fell for consideration of the Court in such
case was as to whether the tribunal under the Senior
Citizens Act could evict a person from the tenement in
which he has ownership rights. In the said case the
property/ flat in question was the ancestral property having
joint rights and it is in such context the right to reside in a
shared household under the D.V. Act was examined by the
Court. In the present case admittedly the property/flat in
question is not an ancestral property on which the petitioner
no.1 can lay any claim. It was the property of the father
(respondent no.1) who had gifted it to his daughters within
his own legal rights. Moreover, paragraph 23 of the decision
in Ritika Prashant Jasani’s case goes completely contrary to
the contention as urged on behalf of the petitioners,
wherein the Division Bench has observed thus:
granted only after adverting to the competing
claims in the dispute.”
15.    We note, in particular, the anguish expressed by Kulkarni J in
Ashish Vinod Dalal. That is also our view. Indeed, it is our experience
that in this city, and particularly or most especially amongst the
wealthy of this city, senior citizens and elderly parents are being
subjected to all kinds of harassment and deprivation in their twilight
years. In case after case, we have complaints from senior citizens that
their own sons and daughters are harassing them. In every case, the
harassment is an attempt to somehow grab the senior citizen’s
property in his or her lifetime without thought spared to the mental
or physical health well-being or happiness of these seniors. The
present case is no different. Mr Shetty says Shweta demands ‘her
share’. What is her ‘share’ while he is alive? She has none. He may
indeed give his flat and all wealth away inter vivos. That is his choice.
She cannot prevent him from doing so. So long as he is alive, Shweta
has no ‘share’ in his property.
16.     We are of the considered view that this is not an isolated
experience at all. It is, in fact, a widely noticed trend and it is to
address this evil — we will not even call it mischief — that the 2007
Act was brought into force. The statement of objects and reasons says
“1.      Traditional norms and values of the Indian society
laid stress on providing care for the elderly. However, due
to withering of the joint family system, a large number of
elderly are not being looked after by their family.
Consequently, many older persons, particularly widowed
women are now forced to spend their twilight years all
alone and are exposed to emotional neglect and to lack of
physical and financial support. This clearly reveals that
ageing has become a major social challenge and there is a
need to give more attention to the care and protection for
the older persons. Though the parents can claim
maintenance under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,
the procedure is both time consuming as well as
expensive. Hence, there is a need to have simple,
inexpensive and speedy provisions to claim maintenance
for parents.
2.       The Bill proposes to cast an obligation on the
persons who inherit the property of their aged relatives to
maintain such aged relatives and also proposes to make
provisions for setting up old age homes for providing
maintenance to the indigent older persons.
The Bill further proposes to provide better medical
facilities to the senior citizen and provisions for protection
of their life and property.
3.       The Bill, therefore, proposes to provide for :-
provide need-based maintenance to the parents and
(b)      providing better medical facilities to senior
mechanism for protection of life and property of
(d)      setting-up of old age homes in every district.
4.    The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.”
30.    In the facts of the present case, the rent agreement is required to be
clearly looked at only as an attempt and a struggle on the mother’s part to
receive benefits from the tenement, so as to avail such small money from
the petitioner for her survival/livelihood. Even to make such payment to
the mother, the petitioner defaulted, for no justifiable reason.                  The
petitioner in fact deprived the mother of her right to “live a normal life”
apart from the fact that he has failed to maintain and support her
31.    In so far as reliance on behalf of the petitioner on the decision of the
Division Bench of this Court in Ritika Prashant Jasani (supra) is concerned,
it would not assist the petitioner in any manner in as much as in the said
case the property was an ancestral property and an issue of a shared
household under the Domestic Violence Act was raised. The legal position
as arising from the said decision is considered by this Court in Ashish Vinod
Dalal’s case (supra), wherein referring to the decision of the Division Bench
in Ritika Prashant Jasani (supra), the Court made the following
“15. Lastly, the contention as urged on behalf of the petitioners
relying on the decision in Ritika Prashant Jasani’s case needs to be
outrightly rejected, inasmuch as, the question which fell for
consideration of the Court in such case was as to whether the tribunal
under the Senior Citizens Act could evict a person from the tenement
in which he has ownership rights. In the said case the property/ flat in
question was the ancestral property having joint rights and it is in
such context the right to reside in a shared household under the
D.V.Act was examined by the Court. In the present case admittedly the
property/flat in question is not an ancestral property on which the
petitioner no.1 can lay any claim. It was the property of the father
(respondent no.1) who had gifted it to his daughters within his own
legal rights. Moreover, paragraph 23 of the decision in Ritika Prashant
Jasani’s case goes completely contrary to the contention as urged on
behalf of the petitioners, wherein the Division Bench has observed
“23. At this stage, we may mention that in Smt.S.Vanitha
(supra), Supreme Court has taken the view that the
Tribunal under the 2007 Act may have the authority to
order an eviction if it is necessary and expedient to ensure
maintenance and protection of the senior citizen or parent.
Eviction, in other words, would be an incident of the
enforcement of the right to maintenance and protection.
However, this remedy can be granted only after adverting
to the competing claims in the dispute.”
32.    From the above discussion looked from any angle and with certainty
it is evident, that the petitioner has no legal right whatsoever in the
tenement in question so as to sustain a claim, that he can dis-house the
mother and exclusively enjoy the tenement.                 The tribunal has recorded
findings which are based on record and are in accordance with law. There
is no perversity whatsoever in the findings as recorded by the tribunal
requiring interference of this Court in its jurisdiction under Articles 226 and
227 of the Constitution.          The petition is wholly misconceived.               It is
accordingly, dismissed. Rule discharged. No costs.
33.    As the mother has substantially suffered for a long period, it is
imminently in the interest of justice that the petitioner expeditiously vacates
the premises. The petitioner is directed to hand over the vacant possession
of the premises to the mother within a period of fifteen days from today.
34.    At this stage, learned Counsel for the petitioner prays for
continuation of the interim relief for a longer period. In the facts of the
case, the request is rejected.