Heard Sri Prabha Shankar Mishra, learned counsel for the
applicant as well as Sri Manish Goyal, learned Additional Advocate
General assisted by Sri Rajesh Mishra learned A.G.A. and Sri Abhijit
Mukharji, learned Brief Holder for the State and perused the record.
This application has been filed by the applicant with a prayer to
quash the entire proceedings including the charge sheet and
cognizance/summoning order dated 18.2.2021, arising out of Case
No.0323 of 2021 under Section 419, 420 IPC, P.S. Chaubeypur
District Kanpur Nagar, pending in the court of Special Judge
Learned counsel for the applicant submits that as per the
allegation in the FIR, the applicant and 8 other co-accused were using
Sim in mobile phones which was registered on some other person’s
identity. The applicant was using mobile Sim card no.7317771173
wherein the sim card of Mahesh, son of Bharat Prasad, resident of
Nigoha, Mau, was inserted. He further submits that the applicant has
been falsely implicated in the present case. The mobile used by the
applicant is of her servant and there is no allegation against the
applicant that any misuse of the aforesaid number or any crime was
committed by use of the aforesaid customer I.d. number of Mahesh
son of Bharat Prasad.
Learned counsel for the applicant further submits that the
applicant had no mobile phone of her own, so she used the mobile
phone Sim card No.7317771173 of her servant Mahesh whenever she
needed and Mahesh had no problem with this. It was further submitted
that on 3.7.2020 in Bikru village, Police Station Chaubeypur, District
Kanpur Nagar, an incident of shoot-out (Bikru incident) had taken
place in which husband of the applicant namely Vikas Dubey was
made accused and after the shoot-out, Mahesh was afraid so he left
applicant’s house and went to Sitapur and left his mobile phone Sim
card bearing No.7317771173 at the applicant house as she had no
mobile phone and Sim card of her own.
Learned counsel for the applicant further submits that Mahesh
stayed in his village almost about 3 months and during this period on
the permission of Mahesh, the applicant transferred mobile Sim card
No. 7317771173 on her own identity. The applicant never misused the
mobile Sim card No. 7317771173 and presently the same is registered
on her own identity and Mahesh has no problem with this even he is
staying in her house which is located in Lucknow. Mahesh has given a
notarial affidavit before the concerned authority in this regard. The
applicant has never misused mobile Sim card No. 7317771173 for
any illegal purpose or any criminal activity. From perusal of the entire
case diary there is not a single whisper about the misuse of mobile
phone Sim card No.7317771173 for any criminal purpose as well as
the owner of sim card Mahesh has not made any complaint to the any
police officer or telecommunication officer for misuse of his mobile
and sim card by the applicant. In absence of the complaint the whole
proceeding so initiated by the concerned police as well as
Investigating Officer is abuse of process of law.
Learned counsel for the applicant further submits that
Investigating Officer without considering the legal proposition as
established by the law, in a mechanical manner has submitted the
charge sheet against the applicant and the learned Magistrate has also
taken cognizance in a routine manner.
Per contra, learned AGA has filed short counter affidavit and
has submitted that the mobile SIM card was on the name of Mahesh
having mobile Sim card No. 7317771173. This person Mahesh was
the servant of Vikas Dubey, husband of the applicant. It is clear from
the statement of Mahesh under Section 161 CrPC that his mobile Sim
card No.7317771173 was used by the applicant since 2017 and for
this he had not given any ‘no objection’ to the applicant.
It was further stated in the short counter affidavit that the FIR
which was lodged on 19.11.2020 under Section 419, 420 IPC is based
upon the detailed report of S.I.T. who has come to the conclusion that
there has been gross violation of the guidelines of Telecom Regulatory
Authority by the accused applicant and other co-accused persons,
which is incriminating in nature, therefore, the ingredients of the
offence under Section 419, 420 IPC is being made out. In this regard,
the instructions and guidelines dated 9.8.2012 of the Government of
India,    Ministry      of    Communication,        Information      Technology,
Department of Tele-communication, New Delhi was placed which is
for the purpose of verification of mobile subscribers and Clause-7 of
the guidelines is directly applicable in the case of the applicant. The
The change of name of subscriber is not permitted as the SIM card in user
terminal is not transferable. The change in name between the blood
relatives/legal heirs is permitted provided new CAF and all the procedure
as for registering a new subscriber is followed and new SIM card is
issued. However, after the change in name the connection shall be treated
as new connection. In such case, change in address is not permitted.
Further, No Objection Certificate from the original user shall also be
taken. In case of death of the original user, death certificate will suffice
instead of No Objection Certificate.”
A bare perusal of the aforesaid provision makes it clear that
apart from blood relation the name of SIM card holder cannot be
changed or used by any other person without any “No Objection
Certificate”. This use shall entail and presumption of act, which has
been done to cause the cheating as dishonest inducement or fraudulent
method by another person to use SIM card without the consent of
Apart from this, Clause-10 of the guidelines also provides that
FIR may be lodged by the concerned police official or any law
enforcement agency for such fraudulent activities. Clause-10 of the
(i)     TERM Cell shall indicate the apparently forged cases as per their
observation in the CAF Audit giving reasons for prima facie observation
to the Licensee and marking them as a failed case for CAF Audit. The
Licensee shall investigate such cases at their level and take necessary
action as detailed below.
(ii)    In order to deal with the use of forged documents for obtaining
mobile connections, complaint/FIR may be lodged with the law
enforcement agencies under the law of land, The complaint should clearly
mention the information about the mobile number, type of document
forged along with the details about the issuing authority, date of issue,
Reason for suspicion as forged document, name of the person suspected
(e.g. name of subscriber/ PoS/Franchisee/Licensee)
(iii) In cases where forged documents are submitted by the subscriber
and originals are also forged, police complaint/ FIR shall be lodged by the
PoS/Franchisee against the subscriber within fifteen days of bringing it to
the notice of the Licensee.
(iv) In case PoS/Franchisee fails to lodge complaint/FIC as above,
Licensee shall lodge FIR/ Complaint against the subscriber and
Franchisee/POS within further three days.
(v)     In case where it is found that the forgery has been done by point or
sale, the Licensee shall lodge the compliant / FIR against the franchisee/
point or sale within one week and financial penalty shall be imposed.
(vi) In case no action is taken by the Licensee as above or the Licensee
itself is involved in forgery, TERM Cell shall lodge Complaint/ FIR
against Licensee. Penalty shall be imposed on all such forged cases also.
(vii) In cases where it is found that the act of issuing connections were
done by point of sale using the document of some other subscriber or any
person without the knowledge of the subscriber or the person, or the
documents were forged by the franchisee/PoS of Licensee, the concerned
PoS/franchisee may be terminated by the Licensee under intimation to the
Licensor (concerned TbRM cell of DoT) and the designated security
agencies, in addition to the actions mentioned above. The same may be
intimated to all other Licensee(s) in that Service Area by TERM Cell. The
other Licensees after getting any such intimation shall terminate/ not
appoint any such point of sale.
(viii) No penalty shall be imposed on the Licensee, if the laid down
process of activation/verification applicable at the time of activation has
been followed and the forgery is done by the subscriber. In case where
activation/verification process is not followed by the Licensee, the penalty
shall be imposed even if the documents are found to be forged.”
Learned Additional Advocate General Sri Manish Goyal further
argued that the charge sheet and cognizance order was rightly
submitted against the applicants in accordance with law, therefore,
prima facie offence is made out against the applicant.
In reply thereto learned counsel for the applicant has filed
rejoinder affidavit and reiterated the same version made in the
application under Section 482 CrPC. He further submits that
submitted that though it is an admitted fact that there was an
unfortunate incident in which several police officials were killed but
the applicant has been roped falsely in the present case only for the
reason that she is the wife of main accused.
After considering the arguments as advanced by the learned
counsel for the parties and from the perusal of the charge sheet as well
as cognizance order and the F.I.R., this Court is of the view that the
SIM card was on the name of Mahesh having mobile Sim card No.
7317771173, who was the servant of Vikas Dubey (Bikru incident)
and his wife i.e. present applicant. It is clear from the statement of
Mahesh under Section 161 CrPC that his mobile Sim card No.
7317771173 was used by the wife of his master since 2017 and for
this he had not given any ‘no objection certificate’. His master who
was also a gangster could also take away his life if he would not
comply. Therefore, the accused being in a dominating position could
easily enable Mahesh to provide her the Sim and use the same for her
benefit. The Sim card, therefore, may be read in the instant case
within the purview of the word ‘property’ under Section 415 IPC.
Apart from the above, the acts and omissions of the applicant
have otherwise tainted the reputation of the servant, which is part of
his right to life under Article 21 of the Constitution of India and it was
owing to the fear psychosis that the servant could not muster the
courage to lodge an FIR against the master, who was a known
gangster for using his Sim card against his own will. It is only after
the incident of Bikru in Police Station Chaubeypur that the servant
rather could muster courage to make the statement under Section 161
CrPC. So far as mobile Sim card No. 7317771173 is concerned, as per
the record it reveals that during investigation it was found that the
short convas under which the offences being made out are only on
impersonation and deceiving, her servant and inducing him to deliver
property (SIM Card) without his consent. Therefore, the ingredients
for the offence under Section 419, 420 IPC are completely made out
against the applicant. In doing so there is a clear mens rea of the
applicant which is prima facie apparent on face of the record and also
as per Clause-7 and 10 of the guidelines issued by the Government of
India, Ministry of Communications and IT Department of
Telecommunications, dated 9.8.2012, offence is prima facie made out
against the applicant. Accordingly, the contention of the learned
counsel for the applicant that no offence against the applicant is
disclosed and the present prosecution has been instituted with a
malafide intention for the purposes of harassment has no force.
At the stage of issuing process the court below is not expected
to examine and assess in detail the material placed on record, only this
has to be seen whether prima facie cognizable offence is disclosed or
not. The Apex Court has also laid down the guidelines where the
criminal proceedings could be interfered and quashed in exercise of its
power by the High Court in the following cases:-(i) R.P. Kapoor Vs.
State of Punjab, AIR 1960 S.C. 866, (ii) State of Haryana Vs.
Bhajanlal, 1992 SCC (Crl.)426, (iii) State of Bihar Vs. P.P. Sharma,
Mohd. Saraful Haq & Anr.;, (Para-10) 2005 SCC (Cri.) 283 and (iv)
M/s Neeharika Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. vs. State of Maharashtra, AIR
From the aforesaid decisions the Apex Court has settled the
legal position for quashing of the proceedings at the initial stage. The
test to be applied by the court is whether uncontroverted allegation as
made prima facie establishes the offence and whether chances of
ultimate conviction are bleak and no useful purpose is likely to be
served by allowing criminal proceedings to be continue. In S.W.
Palankattkar & others Vs. State of Bihar, 2002 (44) ACC 168, it has
been held by the Hon'ble Apex Court that quashing of the criminal
proceedings is an exception than a rule. The inherent powers of the
High Court under Section 482 Cr.P.C itself envisages three
circumstances under which the inherent jurisdiction may be
exercised:-(i) to give effect an order under the Code, (ii) to prevent
abuse of the process of the court ; (iii) to otherwise secure the ends of
justice. The power of High Court is very wide but should be exercised
very cautiously to do real and substantial justice for which the court
alone exists.
The High Court would not embark upon an inquiry as it is the
function of the Trial Judge/Court. The interference at the threshold of
quashing of the criminal proceedings in case in hand cannot be said to
be exceptional as it discloses prima facie commission of an offence. In
the result, the prayer for quashing of impugned charge sheet,
cognizance order and the entire proceedings of the case is refused.
There is no merit in this application filed by the applicant under
In view of the aforesaid submissions made by learned counsel
for the parties, this Court finds that prima facie no case is made out
for interference by this Court exercising power under Section 482
Accordingly, this application under Section 482 Cr.P.C. filed by
the applicant is dismissed.