1.  That following are the       details which    Petitioner is
required to disclose in the Writ Petition as per Order
XXXVII Rule 12(2) of Supreme Court Rules, 2013:-
a) The Petitioner is citizen o f India and an advocate
on record practicing in Supreme Court o f India.
The petitioner is also an elected representative in
b) That   cause  o f action   for  filing present Writ
Petition under Article 32 o f Constitution o f India
is that in the wake o f the widespread of COVID-
19. The lockdown due to the COVID             19, was
declared by 21 of March 2020 by the government
o f India and due to the said lockdown none o f the
professionals      especially lawyers are able to
practice   their profession.   Since  there   is   no
financial protection given to lawyers and other
professionals by   the  government    of  India, the
present petition has been filed to urge grievances
and     hardship    caused to    the lawyers     and
professionals in this country due to the COVID 19
and unavoidable     lockdown    pursuant    to    the
epidemic situation in India.
c) It is submitted that Government of India, without
any consultation with any o f the professional
associations declare a lockdown on 21st of May
2020 pursuant there too no specific steps were
taken by the government o f India to extend any
d) All the professionals except a privileged few in
this   country,  especially   lawyers  earn     their
livelihood on   a day-to-day    basis  and   are  left
hardly with any savings. Most of the advocate
office/  professional office are there in city or
premises close to the Court. Due to the close
down, most/majority o f the Advocates were able
to work or earn any amount of money during all
this locked period. It is pertinent to mention here
that most of the Courts were also not functioning
during this period. As it is stated above, unlike a
common      person,  especially   a   professional he
won't    be    able  to    earn anything    for   his
livelihood. Hence, in the circumstances it will not
be proper in the part o f any professional to pay
the respective rent for the tenancy period when
the lockdown was continuing.
e) It is submitted that the Government o f India and
different state governments now formulated many
beneficial schemes for labourers students and
other sections of people. But the Government has
not   considered       hardship    and    losses    which
occurred/ caused to the Professionals due to the
immediate lock down.
f) It is submitted that m ost o f the professionals
including advocates have paid their respective
clerks and     office   staff during   this  lock   down
period to support the families and to avoid any
kind o f insecurity. It is apparently evident that
many     of   the   professionals    are   using   rented
premises            for        their        professional
activities. Maintaining such premises without any
income for months together would be a Herculean
task     for    all    the    professionals     in    this
country. Advocates are forced to loan money to
maintain such premises and unless there is some
support or government assistance. Even though
different    state    governments     have    formulated
schemes for with the benefits were extended to
different sects/ class of people in the country no
specific scheme was not formulated for advocates
or any professionals in this country.
g) The Petitioner herein has no vested interest or
ulterior motive in filing the present Petition, and
the same has only been filed to secure larger
public interest. The Petitioner is not guided by
self-gain      or     for    gain    of   any    other
person/institution/body. Further, the Petitioner
is approaching this Hon’ble Court with clean
hands and sole intention of addressing the larger
public concern to secure the fundamental rights
which include right to life and practice profession
o f the citizens o f India.
h) That the Petitioner is not involved in any criminal,
civil, revenue, or any other litigation that has any
legal nexus       with   the  issues  involved in  the
present public interest litigation.
2. The instant Petition has been filed under Article 32 of
the Constitution o f India to enforce fundamental rights
secured to the citizens o f India, particularly those
enshrined under Article 21 of the Constitution o f India.
3. The instant Petition in the nature o f Public Interest
Litigation is filed under Article 32 o f the Constitution of
India by the Petitioner seeking, inter alia, a writ of
mandamus         directing  the    respondent    formulate
appropriate scheme to support the advocates and
other professionals of the country for paying their rent
exclusively for the professional premises which is used
for practice or profess.
4. That the Petitioner herein has the requisite           locus
standi to file the present public interest litigation. The
state and central government machinery has utterly
failed in formulating any scheme to support the cause
o f the advocate and other professionals the therefore,
the Petitioner is preferring Writ Petition Before this
Hon’ble court for appropriate direction .
(i)  The Petitioner is citizen o f India and an advocate on
record practicing in Supreme Court of India. The
petitioner is also an elected representative in SUPEME
(ii) The Respondent No. 1 is the Union of India, through
the law and justice, represented by its Secretary,
which is the appropriate ministry responsible for the
making laws and policies in general specifically for
Advocates in the country.
5.   The Respondent referred to hereinabove are “State”
within the meaning of Article 12 o f the Constitution of
India and hence amenable to writ jurisdiction of this
Hon’ble Court under Article 32 of the Constitution of
6.  The facts and circumstances leading to the filing of
6.1 On 31.12.2019, Chinese Health officials informed the
World   Health    Organization  (shortly WHO) about   a
cluster of 41 patients with a mysterious pneumonia.
Shortly after, Chinese authorities identified the virus
that caused the pneumonia-like illness as a new type
o f coronavirus. And in about 2 months, the death
caused by novel corona virus in China surpassed 774.
6.2 Subsequently, global outbreak o f COVID-19 began and
cases appeared in Europe, Iran, South Korea and other
regions o f the around the world. On 11.03.2020, WHO
declared COVID-19 outbreak a pandemic.
6.3 That, the entire world is facing the problem of Novel
Coronavirus     (COVID-19),    and   as   many   as    196
countries,    about    20,83,607   people  affected    and
1,34,632    deaths took place till    16.04.2020    (04:51
GMT) as per the information available on the official
website o f World Health Organization (WHO). In India
also the situation of Novel Coronavirus (COVID-19) is
alarming and till 20.04.2020       there about      18000
confirmed    case   in  India reported   and  500    death
happened.
6.4 It is submitted that Government of India due to the
pandemic without any consultation with any of the
professional associations declare a lockdown on 21st of
May 2020 pursuant to that no specific steps were
taken by the government o f India to extend any help to
support to any of the professionals in this country,
especially lawyers. Most of the lawyers in this country
earn   their livelihood on a day-to-day basis and they
are left hardly with any savings except a few. Most of
the advocate office/ professional office are there in city
or premises close to the court. Due to the close down
none of the advocates were able to work or earn any
amount of money during all this locked on period. It is
pertinent to mention here that most o f the courts
where also not functioning during this period. As it is
stated above unless a person was especially carryout
professional   activity  he  won't   be   able  to  earn
anything   For his livelihood. As stated in part     III of
constitution o f India right to life and practice any
profession is a fundamental right And such a situation
if it arose due to the pandemic and continuing lock
down if the professionals are forced to vacate the
professional premises and or pay the rent during this
pandemic continuing lock down,       it would also affect
the constitutional guarantee under part III of the
constitution o f India.
6.5   It is submitted that the government of India and
different  state   governments     now   formulated    many
beneficial schemes for labourers students and other
sects of people. But the government has not considered
hardship and losses Which occurred/ caused due to
the immediate lock down especially for lawyers and
professionals.    It  is  submitted    that   most   of   the
professionals    including    advocates   have   paid   their
respective clerks and office staff during this lock down
period to support the families and to avoid any kind of
insecurity. It is apparently evident that many of the
professionals    are   using   rented  premises    for  their
professional    activities. Maintaining     such   premises
without any income for months together would be
a Herculean task for       all the professionals in this
country. When forced to lend money to maintain such
premises and less there is some support or government
assistance is given to the professionals to          survive
during such a difficult situation, would caused a great
hardship.   Even though different state governments
have formulated schemes for with the benefits were
extended to different sects/ class      of people in the
country no specific scheme was not formulated for
advocates or any professionals in this country.
6.6 It is submitted that the Government of India (GOI)
ministry   of   Home   (MHA)    vide   its  order    dated
29.03.2020. Directed to all the Landlords not to collect
any rent from the labours and students for one month.
It is submitted that the GOI passed many directions
and declared moratorium     and financial assistance to
different sectors and class o f people.   But till date no
policy was formulated by the GOI to support the
hardship to the professionals and especially lawyers.
6.7 It is submitted that the In light of the nationwide
lockdown which has rendered many advocates without
work, the Bar Council o f Delhi has written a letter to
the Hon’ble Judges o f the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi
requesting for the waver of the rent for premises which
is used for professional purpose by the advocates, but
till date no such action is taken.
6.8  It is further submitted that m any state government
also   discussed   about    the   waver   o f rent   for   the
professional premises of the lawyers but as o f now no
decision was taken by the respective government till
date.
6.9 It is submitted that In the absence of any relief or
clarity by the Government the petitioner and other
similarly placed advocates and other professionals are
left with no other option but to perform the obligation
to    pay   lease   rentals   under     commercial       lease
agreements, even when they don’t work at all. In
additions    to  payments     of   employee    (office   staff)
payment obligations and are vigorously evaluating the
‘Force    Majeure’    clause     under   their     respective
agreements during the present COVID-19 crises.
6.10 It is submitted that ‘Force Majeure’ event can only be
availed if such a relief is explicitly provided under the
lease agreement. Generally, lease agreements excuse
the lessees from payment o f rent during a Force
Majeure event if there is a damage or destruction of the
property leading to its unavailability for use by the
lessee and they do not provide blanket waiver from
payment o f lease rentals on occurrence of every Force
Majeure event.
6.11 It is further submitted that, as a matter of right, invoke
non-payment due to a Force Majeure event in the
absence o f a supporting clause and/or a specific rent
waiver agreed under the contract is not possible. If the
lease agreement does provide for stoppage of rent or
suspension of all obligations during a Force Majeure
period without any qualifications or riders, then the
lessee should immediately exercise its right by issuing
a letter to the lessor invoking Force Majeure event and
intimating cessation o f its obligation to pay lease rental
during the period the Force Majeure event continues.
In the present situation the lessee was not in a
position to issue any letter to the lessor nor was in a
position to pay the payment to the Landlord.
6.12 It is submitted that in the absence o f such a clause in
the lease agreement all the professionals and lawyers
were forced to pay the rent which will create huge
hardship to the majority o f advocates in the country as
well as to other professionals.       in the  view o f the
foregoing, in the absence of a Force Majeure clause
under the lease agreement, it is unlikely that a lessee
can claim frustration of contract (which eventually
leads   to  termination    of  the   contract   and  may,
therefore, not assist the lessee in the long run) and
seek waiver o f lease rental as consequence of a Force
Majeure event. Which ultimately affect the right to life
and earn a livelihood, (even after the lockdown period)
and also affect practice o f each professionals.
6.13 It is submitted that unless the Government issues any
relaxation from payment or a law declared by this
Hon’ble court either for waiver or suspension o f lease
rentals during this period would be the only solution.
Non payment of rent or invocation Force Majeure
provisions in their lease agreements or any Unilateral
decision    may    lead  to termination   of  the   lease
agreement by the lessor for breach o f the agreement.
6.14 The Petitioner herein has no vested interest or ulterior
motive in filing the present Petition, and the same has
only been filed to secure larger public interest. The
Petitioner is not guided by self-gain or for gain o f any
other person/institution/body. Further, the Petitioner
is approaching this Hon’ble Court with clean hands
and sole intention o f addressing the larger public
concern    to  secure   the fundamental    rights which
include right to life and practice profession of the
citizens of India.
The Petitioner herein is approaching this Hon’ble Court
under Article 32 o f the Constitution o f India, on the
A. Because, Article 21 of Constitution o f India guaranteed
the Right to Life to every citizen and it is the duty of
the State to ensure the same.
B. Because, the Government o f India due to the pandemic
without any consultation with any of the professional
associations declare a lockdown on 21st o f May 2020.
C. Because,    no  specific  steps   were    taken  by  the
government of India to extend any help to support to
any o f the professionals in this country, especially
lawyers. Most o f the lawyers in this country earn their
livelihood on a day-to-day basis and they are left
hardly with any savings except a few.
D. Because Most of the advocate office/ professional office
are there in city or premises close to the court. Due to
the close down, none o f the advocates were able to
work or earn any amount of money during all this
locked on period.
E. Because,    a  person    who was         especially carryout
professional activity    won't be able to earn anything
For his livelihood unless he works. As stated in part III
o f Constitution O f India right to life and practice any
profession is a fundamental right And such a situation
if it arose due to the pandemic and continuing lock
down, if the professionals are forced to vacate the
professional/office premises and          or pay the rent
during    continuing    lock   down     period,     it violates
constitutional    guarantee    under    part    III    of   the
constitution o f India.
F. Because,    Government     o f India and   different   state
governments have formulated many beneficial schemes
for labourers students and other sects of people. But
the government has not considered hardship            and
losses Which occurred/ caused due to the immediate
lock down especially for lawyers and professionals.
G. Because, most o f the professionals including advocates
have    paid    their  respective     clerks   and  office
staff during this lock down period to support the
families and to avoid any kind o f insecurity.
H. Because,     Maintaining   such    premises   without any
income for months together would be a Herculean task
for all the professionals in this country. They will be
forced to lend money to maintain such premises.
J. Because, Different state governments have formulated
schemes     for  with the    benefits   were extended   to
different sects/ class    o f people in the country no
specific scheme was not formulated for advocates or
any professionals in this country.
K. Because Government of India (GOI) ministry of Home
(MHA) vide its order dated 29.03.2020 directed to all
the Landlords not to collect any rent from the labours
and students for one month. It is submitted that the
GOI passed many directions and declared moratorium
and financial assistance to different sectors and class
o f people. But till date no policy was formulated by the
GOI to support the hardship to the professionals and
especially lawyers.
L.  Because, Nationwide lockdown which has rendered
many advocates without work, the Bar Council of Delhi
has written a letter to the Hon’ble Judges o f the
Hon'ble High Court of Delhi requesting for the waver of
the rent for premises which is used for professional
purpose by the advocates.
M.  Because    the petitioner and     other  similarly placed
advocates and other professionals are left with no
other option but to perform the obligation to pay lease
rentals under commercial lease agreements, even when
they don’t work at all. In additions to that payments of
employee (office staff) payment obligations and are
vigorously evaluating the ‘Force Majeure’ clause under
their respective agreements during the present COVID-
19 crises.
N. Because the ‘Force Majeure’ event can only be availed
if such a relief is explicitly provided under the lease
agreement.
O. Because, the lease agreements excuse the lessees from
payment o f rent during a Force Majeure event if there
is a damage or destruction o f the property leading to
its unavailability for use by the lessee and they do not
provide blanket waiver from payment o f lease rentals
on occurrence of every Force Majeure event.
P. Because,   if the lease    agreement does provide     for
stoppage of rent or suspension of all obligations during
a Force Majeure period without any qualifications or
riders, then the lessee should immediately exercise its
right by issuing a letter to the lessor invoking Force
Majeure    event    and   intimating   cessation  of  its
obligation to pay lease rental during the period the
Force Majeure event continues.     The present situation
the lessee is as such neither to issue any letter to the
lessor nor was in a position to delay the payment to
the land load.
Q. Because,        unless   the   Government   issues    any
relaxation from payment or a law declared by supreme
court either for waiver or suspension of lease rentals
during    this period would be the only solution. Non
payment o f rent or invocation Force Majeure provisions
in their lease agreements or any Unilateral decision
may lead to termination of the lease agreement by the
lessor for breach o f the agreement.
8. That   this   Hon’ble   Court   has  the jurisdiction  to
entertain and try this Petition.
9. That the Petitioner craves leave to alter, amend or add
to this Petition.
10. That the Petitioner seeks leave to rely on documents, a
list o f which, along with true typed copies has been
annexed to this Petition.
11. That this Petition has been made bona fide and in the
interest o f justice.
12. That the Petitioner has not filed any other Petition
before this Hon’ble Court or before any other Court
seeking the same relief.
13. The petitioner seeks permission to exempt the attested
/ affirmed affidavit, hard / photocopies o f paper books
(3+1) of Writ Petition and deficit court fee (if any ) in
the prevailing circumstances as the matter is urgent
and need urgent hearing. The petitioner is also agree
for hearing of the present writ petition through video
conferencing.
In the facts and circumstances stated above, it is most
humbly prayed that this Hon’ble Court may be pleased to
issue appropriate writs, orders and directions as set out
a)   Issue a writ of mandamus, or any appropriate writ,
order or direction to the Respondents to formulate
appropriate scheme to support the Advocates and
other professionals of the country for paying their rent
exclusively for the professional premises which is used
for practice or office purpose; and
b)   Issue a writ of mandamus, or any appropriate writ,
order or direction or delectation that, the national lock
down period will be treated as ‘Force Majeure’ period
hence forth all the advocates are exempted from paying
c)   Issue a writ of mandamus, or any appropriate writ,
order or direction or delectation, that the advocates
and other   professionals are exempted from making
monthly   rental  for the   premises     leased   out  for
professional purpose   or office purpose      during the
d)  Pass any other order or relief as this Hon’ble Court
may deem fit and proper under the circumstances of
the present case in the interest o f justice, equity, and
good conscience.
1.   That I am the Petitioner in the present matter and well
conversant with the facts and circumstances of the
present matter. I am competent to sear this affidavit.
2.   That the contents of the accompanying Writ Petition
(PIL) have been drafted on my instructions and I have
gone through the same, I say that the contents of the
WP(PIL) are true and correct and nothing material is
concealed therefrom.
3.   That the annexures filed alongwith the writ petition are
correct copies from their originals.
4.    The petitioner is unable to file attested / affirmed
affidavit, hard / photocopies of paper books (3+1) of
Writ   Petition  in the   present    circumstances  and
undertake to deposit deficit court fee (if any ).
Verified at Indore on this 20th day of April 2020 that the
contents of this affidavit are true and correct and that
nothing material is concealed therefrom.