1)      The petitioners have invoked the jurisdiction of this Court under
Section 482 of the Cr. P. C thereby challenging the proceedings
initiated by Chief Judicial Magistrate, Srinagar, in a challan arising out
of FIR No.RC1232019A0003 for offences under Section 120-B read
with 420 of RPC and Sections 4-H, 5(1)(d) read with Section 5(2) of
the J&K Prevention of Corruption Act (hereinafter referred to as the
J&K PC Act). Challenge has also been thrown to order dated
27.11.2020 and order dated 25.09.2021 passed by Chief Judicial
Magistrate, Srinagar, in the challan emanating out of the aforesaid FIR.
2)     The facts leading to the filing of the instant petition are that the
aforesaid FIR came to be registered by CBI/Anticorruption Bureau
(ACB), Srinagar, on the basis of source information alleging therein
that the petitioners, who happen to be the officers/officials of Srinagar
Central Sub Division, Central Public Works Department, Srinagar, in
connivance with accused Ghulam Mohi-ud-din Bhat of M/S Ghulam
Mohi-ud-din Bhat & Sons (Govt. Contractor) and other unknown
officials/private persons were involved in alleged irregularities i.e. use
of sub-standard material resulting in poor workmanship in the
construction of helibase and chain link fencing, adjoining Airbase with
provision of cabin/helicopter Hangar at BSF Campus, Humhama,
Srinagar, during the year 2014-2015. It was further alleged that the
aforesaid accused/public servants in connivance with each other and
accused contractor managed to submit fake invoices of cement and
TMT steel and also used sub-standard material in the execution of
aforesaid contract. It was alleged that no technical staff on behalf of the
contractor was deployed and no batch mix plant was utilized in the
work. It was further alleged that the payments on extra cement to the
tune of Rs.28.00 lacs, in addition to the basic quantity of cement has
been released by the accused public servants to the contractor thereby
providing undue benefit to the said contractor and causing wrongful
loss to the Government exchequer.
3)     Investigation of the case was set into motion and after
investigation, the allegations regarding submission of fake invoices of
steel TMT bars and cement were established. It was also established
that sub-standard material was used during the execution of the contract
work, batch mix plant was not used in execution of the concrete work
and that no technical staff was deployed by the contractor at the site.
After completion of investigation, offences under Section 4-H, 5(1)(d)
r/w 5(2) of J&K PC Act and Section 120-B r/w Section 420 RPC were
found established against the petitioner and the co-accused.           The
respondent approached the competent authority for sanction of
prosecution in terms of Section 6 of the J&K PC Act against the
petitioner who are public servants but the same was denied by the
competent authority of CPWD. After denial of sanction for prosecution,
the respondent filed the challan against the petitioners and the co-
accused to the extent of commission offences under Section 120-B, 420
RPC only and dropped the offence under J&K PC Act.
4)     After the charge sheet was laid before the Court of learned Chief
Judicial Magistrate, Srinagar, an order came to be passed by the said
Court on 27.11.2020, whereby the learned Magistrate accepted the
contention of Assistant Public Prosecutor, appearing on behalf of the
respondent herein that the acts alleged to have been committed by the
petitioners fall beyond the scope of their official duty and, as such, no
previous sanction under Section 197 of Cr. P. C is required in the case.
Accordingly, the learned Magistrate took cognizance of the offences
and issued process against the accused including the petitioners herein.
This order came to be challenged by petitioner No.1 herein by way of a
petition under Section 482 of the Cr. P. C (CRM (M) No.135/2021)
before this Court. The aforesaid petition came to be disposed of by this
Court in terms of order dated 22.04.2021, leaving it open to the
petitioner therein to approach the trial court by way of an application
seeking his discharge on the pleas raised in the said petition.
Accordingly, the petitioners filed an application for their discharge
before the learned trial Magistrate. However, the learned Magistrate,
after hearing the parties, passed a detailed order dated 25.09.2021,
whereby application of the petitioners was dismissed and charge for
offences under Section 120-B read with 420 RPC was framed against
the petitioners and the co-accused. Both these orders i.e. order dated
27.11.2020 and order dated 25.09.2021 have been impugned by the
petitioners by way of instant petition.
5)     I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the
grounds of petition as well as the response filed by the respondent.
6)     Learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioners has raised
two contentions, one that once sanction for prosecution in terms of
Section 6 of the J&K PC Act was declined by the competent authority,
it was not open to the respondent to file challan against the petitioners
by dropping the offences under the provisions of the J&K PC Act and
confining the challan only to offences under RPC. According to learned
senior counsel, the offences under the J&K PC Act and the RPC are
interconnected and if sanction for prosecution was declined by the
competent authority, after considering the material collected by the
investigating agency, the petitioners could not have been subjected to
prosecution for the offences under RPC by circumventing the order of
the competent authority. In the alternative, the learned senior counsel
has argued that even if it is assumed that the respondent was justified in
dropping the offences under the provisions of the J&K PC Act and
launching prosecution against the petitioners only in respect of the
offences under RPC, still then, because the acts alleged to have been
committed by the petitioners have been done by them in exercise of
their official functions, therefore, without there being previous sanction
for prosecution of the petitioners under Section 197 of the Cr. P. C, the
learned trial Magistrate was not justified in taking cognizance of the
offences and framing charge against the petitioners.
7)     Per contra, learned ASGI, appearing for the respondent, has
vehemently argued that it was open to the respondent to confine the
challan against the petitioners to the offences under Section 120-B read
with Section 420 RPC only, which are independent offences. He has
further contended that the previous sanction of the Government for
launching prosecution for offences under Section 120-B and 420 RPC
is not required in this case because the acts alleged to have been
committed by the petitioners do not come within the purview of their
official acts/functions. Learned ASGI has submitted that fabrication of
records and entering into criminal conspiracy can never be termed as
acts done in discharge of official functions.
8)     Before dealing with the rival contentions of the learned counsel
for the parties, it would be apt to notice certain facts which have
emerged from the record. The FIR, which is subject matter of the
instant case, was registered in respect of offences under the J&K PC
Act as well as the offences under Ranbir Panel Code. After
investigation of the case, offences under both the aforesaid provisions
were established against the accused including petitioners herein on the
basis of same set of facts. The record further reveals that the respondent
approached the competent authority for grant of sanction for
prosecution against the petitioners in terms of Section 6 of the J&K PC
Act because the petitioners happen to be the public servants. The matter
was considered by the Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) and vide
office memorandum dated 21st September, 2020, it was conveyed to the
competent authority i.e. CPWD, that after examining the record of the
case, sanction for prosecution against petitioners Laxman Singh
Adhikari, Sanjay Kumar Srivastava, Prabhat Singh and Sharawan
Kumar has been denied. The Commission further advised initiation of
departmental action against petitioners Sanjay Kumar Srivastava and
9)     Vide communication dated 29th October, 2020, CPWD informed
the respondent that disciplinary authority of the CPWD has decided for
denial of sanction for prosecution against the petitioners and that it has
decided to initiate necessary departmental action against petitioners
Sanjay Kumar Srivastava and Sharawan Kumar. Upon receipt of this
communication, the respondent decided to launch prosecution against
the petitioners in respect of the offences under Section 120-B read with
Section 420 RPC and omitted offences under the J&K PC Act from the
challan, though the facts and the evidence have remained the same.
10)     Central Vigilance Commission is a statutory authority created
under Central Vigilance Act, 2003. Section 8 of the said Act deals with
functions and powers of the Vigilance Commission. Sub-Section (1)(a)
of the said provision is relevant to the context and the same is
8. Functions and powers of Central Vigilance
(a) exercise superintendence over the functioning of the
Delhi Special Police Establishment in so far as it relates
to the investigation of offences alleged to have been
committed under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988
or an offence with which a public servant specified in
sub-section (2) may, under the Code of Criminal
11)     From a perusal of the aforesaid provision, it is clear that
superintendence over the functioning of the Delhi Special Police
Establishment Act relates to not only investigation of offences under
PC Act but it also relates to any other offence which a public servant is
alleged to have committed and for which he can be charged at the same
trial along with the offences under the PC Act. Thus, it cannot be stated
that opinion of Central Vigilance Commission where the case has been
referred to in terms of Section 6 of the J&K PC Act, which is in pari
materia with Section 19 of the PC Act of 1988, is confined only to the
offences under the provisions of the PC Act. The same definitely
covers all other offences for which a public servant may be charged at
the same trial along with the offences under the provisions of the PC
12)    A perusal of the Manual of the Central Bureau of Investigation
as also the Vigilance Manual, which is applicable to Central Vigilance
Commission, would show that if there is a difference of opinion
between advices of Central Vigilance Commission and the concerned
department as regards the grant of sanction for prosecution against a
public servant, inasmuch if Central Vigilance Commission advises
grant of sanction for prosecution but the concerned department
proposes not to accept the said advice, the issue has to be resolved by
referring the matter to the Department of Personnel and Training for a
final decision. Neither the Manual of CBI nor the Vigilance Manual,
2017, provides for a situation where there is a difference between the
opinion of the CBI and the advice given by the Central Vigilance
Commission, as accepted by the concerned department. Thus, the only
option available to CBI, in such a situation, is to make a request to the
Central Vigilance Commission or the concerned department to
reconsider the matter either by providing further material or otherwise.
The CBI cannot conveniently ignore the advice of the Central
Vigilance Commission as accepted by the concerned department and
prosecute the public servants by mischievously dropping the offences
under the provisions of the PC Act, thereby circumventing the
protection granted to a public servant under the said legislation. Such
an approach would render the protection granted to a public servant
against frivolous prosecutions in terms of Section 6 of the J&K PC Act,
which is in pari materia with Section 19 of the PC Act of 1988,
nugatory and redundant, which can never be the intention of the
13)    A Division Bench of the High Court of Bombay in the case of
Atchut Mucund Alornekar and others vs. Central Bureau of
1256, has, in somewhat similar circumstances where the CBI, after its
proposal for grant of sanction of prosecution against public servants
was declined by the competent authority on the advice of the Central
Vigilance Commission, filed a charge sheet against the accused public
servants for offences under Section 120-B read with Section 420 of
IPC, observed as under:
“33. Admittedly, the F.I.R was registered under sections
120-B r/w 420 of I.P.C and sections 13(2) r/w 13(1)(d) of
the P. C. Act. All the petitioners are public servants.
Under section 19 of the P. C. Act., prior sanction of the
appropriate authority was required to prosecute the
petitioners. In the present case, the prior sanction had to
be obtained from the C.V.C, New Delhi. The allegations
are the same for offences under I.P.C and under P. C. Act.
As already stated earlier, the C.V.C had declined sanction
stating that the matter was not fit for launching of
prosecution. As has been argued by the learned Senior
Counsel appearing for the petitioners, the offences
punishable under sections 120-B r/w 420 of I.P.C are
inter-linked with the offences punishable under sections
13(2) r/w 13(1)(d) of the P. C. Act. The offences
under Section 120-B r/w 420 of I.P.C, are not separate or
independent accusations. Therefore once the sanction
under section 19 of the P. C. Act was refused by the
competent authority and the said competent authority
found that the matter was not fit for launching
prosecution, the respondent could not have laid charge-
sheet against the petitioners under Section 120-B r/w
420 of I.P.C, by conveniently dropping section 13(2) and
13(1)(d) of P. C. Act. Again, the petitioners No. 15 and 16
are the public servants removable by the Central
Government, though others are removable by the
department. The allegation against them is that they
abused their official position as public servants. The act
or omission alleged to have been performed by the said
petitioners is in the course of their service and as part of
their duty and is official in nature. In the case of “Sheetla
Sahai” (supra), the Apex Court has held that for the
purpose of attracting section 197 of Cr.P.C, it is not
necessary that the public servants must act in their
official capacity but even where the public servants
purport to act in their official capacity, the same would
attract the provisions of section 197. Therefore, prior
sanction under section 197 of Cr.P.C was required to be
obtained insofar as the petitioners No. 15 and 16 are
concerned.
34. In our considered opinion, this is a fit case where in
order to meet the ends of justice and to prevent the
miscarriage of justice, the F.I.R and the proceedings in
Criminal Case No. 2.S/2012.B pending in the Court of
J.M.F.C at Vasco-da-Gama as against the petitioners are
liable to be quashed and set aside. No other view is
possible.”
14)    In Ashoo Surendranath Tewari vs. Deputy Superintendent of
police and another, 2014 SCC Online Bom 5042, a Division Bench of
the Bombay High Court was dealing with a case where the competent
authority, on the basis of advice of Central Vigilance Commission, had
declined sanction for prosecution against accused public servants for
offences under Section 120-B of IPC read with Sections 420, 406, 467,
468 and 471 of IPC and Section 13(2) read with Section 13(1)(d) of
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, and the Special Court discharged
the accused public servants for offences under Section 13(2) read with
Section 13(1)(d) of Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 but proceeded
to frame charges against them for offences under Section 120-B of IPC
read with Sections 420, 406, 467, 468 and 471 of IPC. The High Court
upheld the aforesaid order of the Special Court. However, in an appeal
filed against the aforesaid order of the Bombay High Court, the
Supreme Court in the case of Ashoo Surendranath Tewari vs. Deputy
Superintendent of Police, EOW, CBI another, (2020) 9 SCC 636, set
aside the order of the High Court and after applying the ratio laid down
by it in the case of Radheshyam Kejriwal vs. State of West Bengal,
(2011) 3 SCC 581, observed that when the matter has been examined
by the Central Vigilance Commission and its opinion has been accepted
by the competent authority, chances of conviction in a criminal case
involving the same facts appear to be bleak. Accordingly, the Supreme
Court set aside the order of the High Court as well as that of the Special
Court and discharged the petitioner/accused.
15)    From the forgoing enunciation of law on the subject, it is clear
that once a particular set of facts is examined by Central Vigilance
Commission whereafter it reaches the conclusion that on the basis of
material put up before it, no criminal offence is made out against the
accused public servant and the said opinion is accepted by the
competent authority, it is not open to the investigating agency to file a
challan on the same set of facts against the accused public servant by
dropping the offences under the provisions of Prevention of Corruption
Act and confining the challan only to the offences under other penal
16)    The Central Vigilance Commission, as per the provisions
contained in Clauses 6.7.2, 6.7.3 and 6.7.4 of the Vigilance Manual,
2017, is required to apply its mind to the material collected by the
investigating agency that has been produced before it, whereafter it has
to come to a conclusion as to whether on the basis of the said material a
case for grant of sanction for prosecution against the public servant is
made out. Clause 6.7.4 of the Manual is relevant in this context and the
6.7.4 The guidelines issued vide Commission’s Circular No.
005/VGL/11 dated 25.05.2015 are hereunder: -
(a) The prosecution must send the entire relevant record to the
sanctioning authority including the FIR disclosure statements,
statements of witnesses, recovery memos, draft charge-sheet
and all other relevant material. The record so sent should also
contain the material / document, if any, which may tilt the
balance in favour of the accused and on the basis of which, the
competent authority may refuse sanction.
(b) The authority itself has to do complete and conscious scrutiny
of the whole record so produced by the prosecution
independently applying its mind and taking into consideration
all the relevant facts before grant of sanction while discharging
its duty to give or withhold the sanction.
(c) The power to grant sanction is to be exercised strictly keeping
in mind the public interest and the protection available to the
accused against whom the sanction is sought.
(d) The order of sanction should make it evident that the authority
had been aware of all relevant facts / materials and had
applied its mind to all the relevant material.
(e) In every individual case, the prosecution has to establish and
satisfy the court by leading evidence that the entire relevant
facts had been placed before the sanctioning authority and the
authority had applied its mind on the same and that the
sanction had been granted in accordance with law.
17)    From a perusal of the aforesaid Clause, it is clear that Central
Vigilance Commission has to do complete scrutiny of the record
produced by the prosecution and it has to apply its independent mind to
this material. The Commission has also to keep in mind the public
interest and the protection available to the accused against whom the
sanction is sought. It is only thereafter that the Commission takes a
decision as to whether or not sanction for prosecution against the public
servant is to be granted.
18)    In the instant case, the Commission has undertaken the aforesaid
exercise whereafter it has come to a conclusion that sanction for
prosecution against the petitioners is required to be declined, meaning
thereby that the material collected by the investigating agency has not
been sufficient enough to persuade the Commission to make out a case
for grant of sanction for launching prosecution against the petitioners. It
has to be borne in mind that the opinion rendered by the Commission in
this case is relating to the same set of facts as has been made the basis
for launching prosecution against the petitioners for the offences under
RPC, which are definitely interlinked to the allegations so far as the
same relate to the offences under the J&K PC Act.
19)    The protection granted to a public servant against the prosecution
under Section 6 of the J&K PC Act, which is in pari materia with
Section 19 of the PC Act of 1988, has been provided under the statute
in order to safeguard the public servants from frivolous complaints and
un-necessary harassment, while they are discharging their official
duties. It is to give them freedom to perform their duties without fear or
favour. The power to grant or refuse sanction for prosecution in the
hands of the sanctioning authority is to safeguard the honest public
servants from vexatious prosecutions. Grant of sanction for prosecution
of a public servant is not an idle formality but the same is a mandatory
requirement of law. This protection given to a public servant cannot be
circumvented by defeating the provisions relating to grant of sanction
as contained in the Prevention of Corruption Act by dropping the
offences under the said Act and launching prosecution in respect of the
offences under other statutes in a case where same set of facts gives rise
to offences under different statutes.
20)     If we have a look at the impugned orders passed by the learned
Chief Judicial Magistrate, Srinagar, the aforesaid aspect of the matter
has been completely overlooked by the learned Magistrate. What has
weighed with the learned Magistrate while passing the impugned orders
is that the offences under Section 120-B read with Section 420 RPC do
not require previous sanction for prosecution as the said offences
cannot be stated to have been committed by the petitioners in discharge
of their official duties. The learned Magistrate, even after noticing the
issue as to whether in a case where sanction for prosecution for
offences under the PC Act has been declined, the prosecuting agency is
justified to drop these offences and launch prosecution against the
accused public servants in respect of the offences under RPC on the
same set of facts, has not addressed this issue at all in the impugned
orders. The learned Magistrate, it seems, has concentrated more on the
issue as to whether previous sanction for prosecution under Section 197
of the Cr. P. C is required in the case, without addressing the basic
issue relating to effect of denial of sanction for prosecution in terms of
Section 6 of the J&K PC Act. Thus, the impugned orders passed by the
learned Magistrate have been rendered unsustainable in law.
21)    For the facts emanating from the record, it is clear that it is a
case where the respondent has, in order to circumvent and defeat the
protection granted to the petitioners as public servants against their
prosecution without sanction by the competent authority, in terms of
the provisions contained in Section 6 of the J&K PC Act, launched the
prosecution against them by conveniently dropping the offences under
the J&K PC Act and filing the challan against them for offences under
RPC only on the same set of facts.
22)    The Supreme Court in the case of Chittaranjan Das vs. State of
Orissa, (2011) 7 SCC 167, has, while dealing with a situation where
the prosecuting agency had launched prosecution against the public
servants after their retirement even though sanction for prosecution
against them was declined while they were in service, observed as
“14. We are of the opinion that in a case in which
authority, while the public servant is in service, he
cannot be prosecuted later after retirement,
prosecution under the Prevention of Corruption Act is
necessary after the retirement of Public
Servant. Any other view will render the protection
illusory. Situation may be different when sanction is
refused by the competent authority after the
sanction is not at all necessary and any exercise in this
regard would be action in futility.
23)     The analogy of the aforesaid ratio is certainly applicable to the
facts of the instant case also because allowing the prosecution against
the petitioners for the offences under RPC when the sanction for
prosecution against them has been declined under Section 6 of the J&K
PC Act on the same set of facts, will render the protection available to
the petitioners illusory.
24)     For the foregoing reasons, the petition is allowed and the
impugned proceedings as well as the impugned orders passed by the
learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Srinagar, are quashed.
25)     A copy of this order be sent to learned trial court for information.
Whether the order is speaking:            Yes/No