Heard    the  learned   counsel   appearing   for the
petitioners   and   the  learned  High   Court   Government
Pleader appearing for the first respondent-State.
2.   This petition is filed under Section 482 of
Cr.P.C., seeking to quash the criminal proceedings in
Special Case POCSO No.43/2019 pending on the file of II-
Additional Sessions Judge/Special Judge, Vijayapur, for the
offences punishable under Sections 366 and 376 of IPC
and Sections 12, 5(L), 5(J)(II) and 6 of the Protection of
Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 (for short
3.   Factual matrix of the case is that petitioner
No.1/accused committed rape on the minor girl-petitioner
No.2 herein in the guise of loving her. As a result, she
became pregnant and thereafter, he kidnapped the victim
and took her to Kolhapur. Hence, the complainant lodged
complaint against accused/petitioner No.1.       The police
after conducting investigation has filed charge sheet for
the above offences.
4.   The   learned   counsel    appearing   for  the
petitioners  submits   that petitioner   No.1/accused  and
petitioner No.2/victim have married and they have child.
He has also produced document viz., birth certificate of
child born out of their cohabitation.  Petitioner No.1 is in
custody.    The victim who has been examined before the
Court has not supported the case of the prosecution and
she has turned hostile.    No purpose would be served in
continuing the proceedings against the accused when the
victim herself has turned hostile.    Hence, he prays for
quashing the proceedings initiated against the accused.
5.    The learned counsel for the petitioners in
support of his arguments has relied upon the judgment of
this Court in the case of Vijaya Kumar vs. State by
Madanayakanahally P.S., and another reported in
2020(3) KCCR 2419, wherein this Court held that though
the offences are punishable under Section 376 of IPC and
the provisions of POCSO Act, since the parties have settled
the dispute and accused and victim are living together, the
petition filed under Section 482 of Cr.P.C., needs to be
allowed and the proceedings has to be quashed.
6.    Per contra, the learned High Court Government
Pleader appearing for the first respondent-State would
submit that the offences committed by the accused are
heinous offences and the charges levelled against the
accused are serious in nature.     The accused committed
rape on victim/petitioner No.2 and as a result, she became
pregnant.   Thereafter, child was born to her.     Since the
offences committed by the accused are heinous offences,
the Court cannot exercise power under Section 482 of
7.    I have heard the learned counsel appearing for
the petitioners and the learned High Court Government
Pleader appearing for the first respondent-State and
perused the material on record. Petitioner No.2 herein was
minor at the time of incident. No doubt, the petition is filed
by   the  accused    and  victim  seeking   to   quash     the
proceedings and the defacto complainant is arrayed as
respondent No.2. This Court while passing an order in the
order referred to supra has taken note of the principles laid
down in the case of Gian Singh vs. State of Punjab and
another reported in (2012) 10 SCC 303 and came to
conclusion that since the victim and the accused have
married and they are having good family and the parties
have compromised the matter, proceedings has to be
quashed.    But this consideration is against the principles
laid down in the judgment in Gian Singh’s case supra
and the same cannot be a basis for exercising the
discretion to invoke Section 482 of Cr.P.C. The Hon'ble
Apex Court in Gian Singh’s case has held that in serious
offences like murder, rape, dacoity etc., or other offences
of mental depravity under IPC or offences of moral
turpitude under special statutes, like the Prevention of
Corruption Act or the offences committed by public
servants while working in that capacity, the proceedings
cannot be quashed, even though the victim or victim’s
family and the offender have settled the dispute, since it
will have serious impact on the society.      This Court in
Vijaya Kumar’s case though referred to the judgment of
the Hon'ble Apex Court in Gian Singh’s case, but lost
sight of the principles laid down in the said judgment.
Hence, this Court based on the order passed in Vijaya
Kumar’s case supra, cannot exercise power under Section
482 of Cr.P.C.
8.   No    doubt,   the   learned   counsel   for  the
petitioners submitted that the victim girl and the accused
have filed this petition seeking relief of quashing the
proceedings. When the accused has committed offence
under Section 376 of IPC against a minor girl who is below
the age of 18 years, even if the victim has given consent,
the same is not considered as consent at all. Though the
learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that the
victim who was examined before the trial Court has
deposed before the Court that she was aged 19 years at
the time of incident, whether she was minor or major has
to be adjudicated before the trial Court and this Court
cannot appreciate the said fact. The matter requires to be
tried before the trial Court. In a case of heinous offence of
rape, even if the parties have settled the dispute, the
same cannot be accepted and the proceedings cannot be
quashed since it will have serious impact on the society.
The Hon'ble Apex Court in Gian Singh’s case supra has
held that the power of the High Court in quashing a
criminal proceeding or FIR or a complaint in exercise of its
inherent jurisdiction is distinct and different from the
power given to a criminal Court for compounding the
offences under Section 320 of Cr.P.C.,   The power under
Section 320 of Cr.P.C., may be exercised only where the
parties have settled their dispute and the same also
depends upon the facts of each case. It is also held that
before exercising power under Section 482 of Cr.P.C., the
High Court must have due regard to the nature and gravity
of the crime and social impact. In the present case, the
accused has committed offence of rape against a minor girl
which attracts the provisions of IPC and also POCSO Act.
The Hon'ble Apex Court has specifically held that in case of
serious offence of rape, the Court cannot exercise power
under Section 482 of Cr.P.C., and the same will have impact
on the society. The Court has to look into the statute