The petitioner is before the Court against an order
dated 20.12.2021 passed by the Secretary, Department
of Industry, Commerce and Enterprises, Government of
West Bengal. The order was passed in compliance with
the directions of the Court in earlier writ petition which
related to the petitioner’s claim for disbursal of
incentive   under   “West    Bengal    State   Support    for
Industries Scheme, 2008 as amended up to 2010. The
Scheme relates to Industrial Promotion Assistance to
industrial units falling under two groups and in the
scales mentioned in Clause 10.1 of the Scheme.           The
incentive, in similar clause, is for refund of a percentage
of VAT paid by the industrial units.         The petitioner
claims to fall under group-B and Scale-2 of Clause 10.1.
The Scheme was notified on 22nd February, 2011 and
under Clause 19 provides for application of the Scheme
mutatis mutandis in the event the Scheme is replaced
by any other Act.
The GST regime came into force on 1st July, 2017.
The petitioner prays for making the Scheme compliant
with the GST regime which subsequently came into
The Report filed by the respondent No. 4 being
the     Department     of  Industry,   Commerce       and
Enterprises, states that in the absence of the definite
policy regarding adjustment of the Scheme with the
changed taxation regime, grant of RC-II is not feasible.
The grant of RC-II was a step in the direction of
securing the incentive under the later Scheme notified
on 12th September, 2014 but having same scope of an
application under the Scheme of 2008. The petitioner
claims to fulfill the relevant criteria for grant of
incentive under both the Schemes. The petitioner also
prays for the required inspection to be undertaken by
the State respondents before grant of RC-II.
The stand of the respondent No. 4, being the
Department of Industry, Commerce and Enterprises is
not comprehensible to the Court since reluctance is
based on the change of tax regime from VAT to GST.
The position taken is unreasonable since Clause 19 of
the 2008 Scheme, as stated above clearly contemplates
subsequent changes in the law and provides for the
Scheme to apply irrespective of such changes.         The
similar Clause was also inserted in the later Scheme of
2014, being Clause 15.2.
Upon considering the Scheme and the fact that
the GST regime has come into place since 2017, the
respondents should take expeditious steps to make the
Scheme GST-compliant for the benefit of industrial
units which fall under the Scheme. The industrial units
like the petitioner cannot be kept in a limbo and denied
the incentives, which were specifically promised to these
units at the time of introduction of the Scheme from
2008 onwards.      There is a definite case of legitimate
expectation in the present case and the petitioners are
entitled to be provided with clarity in that regard.
WPA 4916 of 2022 is accordingly disposed of with
the direction on the Department of Industry, Commerce
and Enterprises and the Finance Department to take
requisite steps to make the Scheme GST-compliant
within a period of sixteen weeks from date.
Needless to say, the eligibility of the petitioner
shall be evaluated by the concerned department before
undertaking the requisite steps under the Scheme for
grant of incentives to the petitioner.     It is also made
clear that after making the Scheme GST-compliant, the
petitioner shall be at liberty of praying for the RC-II
certificate which is the prayer in the present writ