Dated this the 10th day of October, 2022
This Report filed by the Special Commissioner, Sabarimala, regarding
the functioning of Safe Zone Project, Sabarimala, by the Motor Vehicles
Department was disposed of by the order dated 10.01.2022 [2022 SCC
OnLine Ker 1105 : CDJ 2022 Ker HC 203] with the directions contained
in paragraph 120 of the said order. The 2nd respondent Transport
Commissioner and the 3rd respondent State Police Chief were directed to
file action taken reports before this Court on or before 01.07.2022, which
was directed to be placed before the Bench on 11.07.2022. Registrar
General was directed to forward a copy of the order dated 10.01.2022 to
the Secretary, Supreme Court Committee on Road Safety, for information.
2.     In the order dated 26.05.2022 [2022 SCC OnLine Ker 2906
: 2022 (4) KLT 934] this Court noticed that, despite the directions
contained in the order dated 10.01.2022, the Enforcement Officers under
the 2nd respondent Transport Commissioner and the Police Officers under
the 3rd respondent State Police Chief are not taking earnest efforts to
ensure strict enforcement of the provisions under the Motor Vehicles Act,
1988, the Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989, the Kerala Motor Vehicles
Rules, 1989 and the Motor Vehicles (Driving) Regulations, 2017, taking
note of the law laid down in the decisions referred to in the said order dated
10.01.2022. After the order of this Court dated 10.01.2022, in motor
accidents involving contract carriages, the passengers in those vehicles and
other road users sustained serious/fatal injuries. Since the use of contract
carriages on public place, flouting the safety standards prescribed in AIS-
008 and AIS-052 (Rev.1) 2008, etc. is posing potential threat to the safety
of the passengers and other road users, the learned Assistant Solicitor
General of India was requested on 26.05.2022, to address arguments on
behalf of the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways.
3.    Though, by the order dated 30.08.2022, this Report was
ordered to be listed on 07.10.2022 at 4:00 p.m. for further consideration,
we have directed the Registry to list this matter before the Bench on
06.10.2022 at 11:00 a.m., in view of a motor accident which occurred on
05.10.2022 at 23.30 hrs. at Anchumoorthy Mangalam in Palakkad District,
involving a contract carriage bearing registration No.KL-05/AU-8890
carrying students from Mar Baselios School, Mulanthuruthy, who were on a
study tour to Ooty. At the place of the accident, the said contract carriage
hit the rear of a KSRTC bus bearing registration No.KL-15/A-1313. In that
accident, 9 persons (5 students and 1 teacher in the contract carriage and
3 passengers in the KSRTC bus) sustained fatal injuries. The video taken at
the time of the commencement of the journey at Mar Baselios School,
Mulanthuruthy, is shown in the news item that appeared in Mathrubhumi
news (online). Two screenshots taken from that video clipping, of contract
carriage    bearing   registration   No.KL-05/AU-8890      are   reproduced
4.   By the order dated 06.10.2022, the 2nd respondent Transport
Commissioner, through the Enforcement Officers in the Motor Vehicles
Department, was directed to take colour photographs and video clippings
of the exterior body, driver cabin and passenger cabin of the contract
carriage and also the KSRTC bus involved in the accident, which shall be
made available for the perusal of this Court on 10.10.2022, along with the
accident report of both the vehicles. Registrar General was directed to
obtain a copy of the video clipping that appeared in Mathrubhumi news
(online), taken at the time of the commencement of the journey by the
students of Mar Baselios School, Mulanthuruthy, in the contract carriage in
question. By the said order, the 2nd respondent Transport Commissioner,
through the Enforcement Officers in the Motor Vehicles Department and the
3rd respondent State Police Chief, through the District Police Chief of the
concerned Districts, were directed to prohibit the use of contract carriages
and other transport vehicles on public place, flouting the safety standards,
in strict compliance of the directions contained in paragraph 46 of the order
dated 26.05.2022 [2022 (4) KLT 934]. The 2nd respondent Transport
Commissioner, through the concerned Enforcement Officers in the Motor
Vehicles Department, was directed to initiate proceedings against the
contract carriages in the screenshots of the promotional videos/posts
reproduced at paragraphs 7 and 8 of the order dated 06.10.2022. The 2 nd
respondent was also directed to obtain the details of the vloggers who
posted such promotional videos/posts of contract carriages on ‘YouTube’
and other online platforms.
5.    Today, when this matter is taken up for consideration, in terms
of the direction contained in the order of this Court dated 06.10.2022, the
learned Special Government Pleader has made available for the perusal of
this Court the Accident Inspection Report dated 08.10.2022 of the Regional
Transport Officer (Enforcement), Palakkad, in respect of the accident, which
occurred on 05.10.2022, involving contract carriage bearing registration
No.KL-05/AU-8890 and KSRTC bus bearing registration No.KL-15/A-1313.
The learned Senior Government Pleader has made available for the perusal
of this Court the report dated 09.10.2022 of the Deputy Superintendent of
Police, Alathur, submitted before the District Police Chief, Palakkad, in
respect of the said accident. The Deputy Superintendent of Police, Alathur
and the Deputy Transport Commissioner, Central Zone-I, Thrissur, who are
personally present in Court, have explained the facts disclosed in the
investigation conducted by the Police and the Motor Vehicles Department.
We do not propose to deal with those aspects in this order, since the
investigation by the Police and the Motor Vehicle Department is going on.
6.     The Accident Investigation Report dated 08.10.2022 of the
Motor Vehicles Department and the photographs of contract carriage
bearing registration No.KL-05/AU-8890, which form part of that report,
would make it explicitly clear that the said vehicle used for carrying
students from Mar Baselios School, Vettikkal, Mulanthuruthy, was fitted
with unauthorised multi-coloured LED lights, rotating flash lights, DJ lights,
laser lights, fog machine, high wattage speakers and woofers, spot lights
and window curtain, etc. Retro-reflective tapes were not affixed properly
on the exterior body of the vehicle. The driver cabin was fitted with
continuously blinking DJ rotating LED lights, multi-coloured LED/laser/neon
lights   in   the  passenger   compartment,    converting    the   passenger
compartment into a dancing floor, causing distraction to the driver of that
vehicle and also to other road users. Various objects were placed or hanged
in front of the windscreen and the name of the bus was written in the middle
of the windscreen, above the level of the dashboard, causing obstruction to
the clear vision of the driver, which is evident from the screenshot of the
CCTV footage at the Toll Booth. The said screenshot and also a photograph
of the contract carriage taken after the accident are reproduced hereunder;
7.     In view of the directions contained in the order dated
10.01.2022 [2022 SCC OnLine Ker 1105], which is reiterated in the
order     dated    26.05.2022       [2022      SCC     OnLine     Ker   2906],  the
2nd respondent Transport Commissioner, through the Enforcement Officers
in the Motor Vehicles Department and the 3rd respondent State Police Chief,
through the District Police Chief of the concerned Districts are duty bound
to take necessary steps to prevent the use of contract carriages and other
transport vehicles on public place
(i)    flouting the safety standards prescribed in AIS-008 and AIS-
052 (Rev.1) 2008, after replacing the prototype approved
lights, light-signalling devices and reflectors with after-market
multi-coloured LED/laser/neon lights, flash lights, etc.;
(ii)   without maintaining lighting and light-signalling devices and
also retro-reflectors as per the individual specifications,
namely, number, position, width, height, length, geometric
visibility, orientation, etc. specified in AIS-008;
(iii)  with high-power audio systems producing loud sound with
rating of several thousand watts PMPO, impairing the hearing
of the driver and the passengers and causing distraction to
(iv)   with continuously blinking DJ rotating LED lights, multi-
coloured LED/laser/neon lights in the passenger compartment,
by converting the passenger compartment as a dancing floor,
causing distraction to the driver of that vehicle and also to
(v)    with multi-coloured LED/laser/neon lights and also booster
amplifiers, equalizer, DJ mixer, etc., with illuminated control
panels in the driver cabin, causing glare and reflection of light
on the windscreen of the vehicle, endangering the safety of
the passengers and other road users;
(vi)   mixing up of AC and DC power supply for high-power audio
systems with DJ mixer, DJ dancing lights, laser lights, etc.,
violating safety standards, posing a potential fire hazard to the
passengers of such vehicles;
(vii)  tampering with the percentage of visual transmission of light
of the safety glass of the windscreen, rear window and side
windows, by pasting stickers, tint films, etc. upon the safety
glass, fixing sliding cloth cutrains, etc., in violation of sub-rule
(2) of Rule 100 of the Central Motor Vehicles Rules;
(viii) placing/hanging various objects in front of the windscreen and
writing the name of the bus in the middle of the windscreen,
above the level of the dashboard, causing obstruction to the
clear vision of the driver, in violation of Rule 278 of the Kerala
(ix)   exhibiting writings, advertisements, graphics, figures, etc.
with the sole object to invite public attention and to promote
the contract carriage service, causing distraction to the drivers
of other vehicles and also cyclists and pedestrians on public
road; since use of such vehicles in public place, flouting the
standards in relation to road safety, is likely to endanger the
safety of the passengers of such vehicles and also other road
(x)   with multi-toned horn giving a succession of different notes or
horn giving unduly harsh, shrill, loud or alarming noise, in
violation of sub-rule (2) of Rule 119 of the Central Motor
8.    As per sub-rule (1) of Rule 92 of the Central Motor Vehicles
Rules, no person shall use or cause or allow to be used in any public place
any motor vehicle which does not comply with the provisions of Chapter V,
which deals with construction, equipment and maintenance of motor
vehicles. Similarly, as per sub-rule (1) of Rule 249 of the Kerala Motor
Vehicles Rules, no person shall use and no person shall cause or allow to
be used or to be in any public place any motor vehicle which does not
comply with the rules contained in Chapter VII or with any order thereunder
made by the competent authority. Part III of Chapter VII of the said Rules
deals with special rules applicable to every public service vehicle other than
an autorickshaw.
9.    As per Rule 286 of the Kerala Motor Vehicles Rules, which deals
with internal lighting, every vehicle shall be furnished with one or more
electric lights adequate to give reasonable illumination throughout the
passenger compartment or compartments but of such power or so screened
as not to impair the forward vision of the driver. As per the proviso to Rule
286, inserted with effect from 08.01.2018, the internal lighting in buses
that are registered on or after the 1st day of October, 2017 shall be in
accordance with AIS-052 (Rev.1) 2008, as amended from time to time.
10.    In the order dated 10.01.2022 [2022 SCC OnLine Ker 1105],
we have reiterated the law laid down in Jijith and others v. State of
Kerala and others [2019 (1) KHC 463] that the internal lighting in a
contract carriage, which is a public service vehicle, is for the purpose of
providing reasonable illumination throughout the passenger compartment.
As provided under Rule 286 of the Kerala Motor Vehicles Rules, the
passenger compartment of a public service vehicle shall be furnished with
electric lights adequate to give reasonable illumination throughout the
passenger compartment. Therefore, the passenger compartment of a
contract carriage cannot be fitted with continuously blinking multi-coloured
LED lights, laser lights, etc., in order to convert it as a dancing floor. Plying
vehicles fitted with DJ rotating LED lights, continuously blinking multi-
coloured LED lights, laser lights, etc. for internal lighting will certainly cause
distraction to other drivers and also to road users. Moreover, the
continuously blinking multi-coloured LED lights, laser lights, etc. used for
internal lighting in the passenger compartment pose a potential health
hazard to the passengers. Contract carriages, which are fitted with DJ
rotating LED lights, continuously blinking multi-coloured LED lights, laser
lights, etc. for internal lighting cannot be treated as vehicles which comply
with the provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act and the Rules made
thereunder, for the purpose of grant of Certificate of Fitness.
11.    In the order dated 10.01.2022 [2022 SCC OnLine Ker 1105]
we have noticed that, as per Para.4.1.2. of AIS-052 (Rev.1) 2008 - Code
of Practice for Bus Body Design and Approval – applicable to the testing
and approval for body building of new models of buses with seating capacity
of 13 or more passengers excluding driver - internal lighting and light
signalling devices shall provide adequate illumination inside the bus for the
safe operation by the driver and the passengers, during darkness and other
conditions of reduced visibility. As per Para.4.1.2.2.1, cab lamp or courtesy
lamp and passenger area lamps are to be placed on the roof of the bus,
above the head of the observer. As per Para.4.1.2.4.1.1.2, the lighting
devices used for dash board shall be discreet and shall not disturb the driver
when driving in the dark. Para.4.1.2.4.1.2. deals with driver cabin lighting.
As per Para.4.1.2.4.1.2.1., cab lamp or courtesy lamp, locker lamp and
electrical distribution lamp fall in this category. As per Para.4.1.2.4.1.2.2,
the lighting devices used for cabin interior should be sufficient enough for
clearly distinguishing each component part of the cabin. The driver should
be in a position to read signages written on the walls, door of the cabin. He
should also be in position to read any instructions printed on paper. As per
Para.4.1.2.4.1.2.3, the luminous flux of all the lamps provided for cabin
lighting to light up the equipment, components and to read, shall not be
less than 30 lux and shall not be more than 150 lux, when measured at
500 mm above the driver seat base. Para.4.1.2.4.1.3. deals with passenger
compartment lighting. As per Para.4.1.2. 4.1.3.1., exit lamps and
passenger area lamps fall in this category. As per Para.4.1.2.4.1.3.2., the
lighting devices used for passenger area should ensure reading of signages
inside the passenger area and other important signs like emergency signs.
The illumination should light up handles, latches, knobs, rods, hand-holds,
etc. facilitating easy access to passenger. The illumination should be
adequate     for   reading   printed  matter  by   the   passenger.   As   per
Para.4.1.2.4.1.3.3., the illumination of these lamps shall not be less than
50 lux, when measured at any seating location of the bus and at 500 mm
above the seat base. As per Para.4.1.2.4.1.3.4., at least two night lights
shall be provided in the passenger compartment of all buses except Type I
buses. The interior lighting shall be designed such that the glare and
reflections caused does not affect the driver.
12.    In the order dated 10.01.2022 [2022 SCC OnLine Ker 1105]
we have noticed that, the provisions in Chapter 4 of AIS-052 (Rev.1) 2008
deal with every minute details lighting of driver cabin and passenger cabin
of buses with seating capacity of 13 or more passengers excluding driver.
Use of DJ rotating LED lights, continuously blinking multi-coloured LED
lights, laser lights, etc. inside the driver cabin or the passenger cabin is
legally impermissible. The installation of booster amplifiers, equalizer, DJ
mixer, etc. inside the driver cabin, with illuminated control panel, causing
glare and reflection of light on the windscreen of the vehicle, is also legally
impermissible.     Since   use   of  vehicles without   complying    with  the
requirements of lighting of driver cabin and passenger cabin under Chapter
4 of AIS-052 (Rev.1) 2008 is likely to endanger the safety of the passengers
and other road users, such vehicles shall not be permitted to be used in
any public place.
13.    Regulation 5 of the Motor Vehicles (Driving) Regulations, 2017
deals with duties of drivers and riders. As per sub-regulation (3) of
Regulation 5, the driver shall at all times maintain a good lookout and
concentrate on the road and traffic and avoid any activity which distract or
is likely to distract his attention. As per sub-regulation (6) of Regulation 5,
the driver shall ensure that his view is not obstructed and his hearing is not
impaired by passengers, animals, load, equipment in the vehicle or by the
conditions of the vehicle. Sub-regulation (10) of Regulation 5 mandates
that the driver shall ensure that loud music is not played in the vehicle.
Sub-regulation (11) of Regulation 5 mandates that the driver shall not
watch digital motion pictures or videos while driving, except were required
for route navigation.
14.    In the order dated 10.01.2022 [2022 SCC OnLine Ker 1105],
we have reiterated the law laid down in Jijith [2019 (1) KHC 463] that,
neither the provisions of Rule 289 of the Kerala Motor Vehicles Rules nor
the provisions under AIS-052 (Rev.1) 2008 enable installation of high-
power audio system with multiple power amplifiers, speakers and sub-
woofers in a contract carriage. Loud music from such high-power audio
systems will certainly endanger the safety of other road users and will cause
inconvenience to them; will distract the attention of the driver of the vehicle
and impair his hearing; thereby violating the provisions under Regulations
3 and also sub-regulations (3) and (6) of Regulation 5 of the Motor Vehicle
(Driving) Regulations. Loud music from such high-power audio systems will
also violate the provisions of sub-regulation (10) of Regulation 5, which
provides that the driver shall ensure that loud music is not played in the
vehicle. Therefore, no motor vehicle can be fitted with high-power speakers
or subwoofers with multiple booster/power amplifiers. Fixing high-power
speakers or sub-woofers, with enclosures made of wood or other materials,
inside the passenger compartment of a motor vehicle cannot be permitted.
Similarly, installation of DJ (Disc Jockey) sound system with DJ mixer, DJ
rotating LED lights, laser lights, Karaoke systems, etc., which are typically
meant for dance party, cannot be permitted in the passenger compartment
of a transport vehicle. The continuously blinking DJ rotating LED lights,
multi-coloured LED/laser lights fitted in the passenger compartment, in
order to convert it as a dancing floor for the passengers, will certainly cause
distraction to other drivers and also to road users. Moreover, mixing up of
AC and DC power supply for such high-power audio systems with DJ mixer,
DJ dancing lights, laser lights, etc., violating safety standards, poses a
potential fire hazard to the passengers. Contract carriages, which are fitted
with high-power audio system having multiple booster/power amplifiers,
speakers and sub-woofers producing loud noise, and also DJ rotating LED
lights, continuously blinking multi-coloured LED lights, laser lights, etc.
cannot be treated as vehicles which comply with the provisions of the Motor
Vehicles Act and the rules made thereunder, for the purpose of grant of
Certificate of Fitness.
15.   In the order dated 10.01.2022 [2022 SCC OnLine Ker 1105],
we have reiterated the law laid down in Jijith [2019 (1) KHC 463] that,
the paintwork or varnish of every transport vehicle shall be maintained in
a clean and sound condition, which is the mandate of Rule 264 of the Kerala
Motor Vehicles Rules. If the State or Regional Transport Authority has laid
down any specifications like uniform colour scheme, the paintwork of the
transport vehicle shall be in accordance with those specifications. Any figure
or writing exhibited on the transport vehicle with an object to invite public
attention and to promote the contract or stage carriage service of the
operator will attract the provisions of Rule 191 of the Kerala Motor Vehicles
Rules. Driver distraction is one of the major causes of road accidents, which
is a situation where the attention of the driver is diverted to any other forms
of activities, which may affect the concentration of driving activity as well
as the safety of the passengers and others on public road. Earning of
revenue by the State by the levy of fee under Rule 191 of the Kerala Motor
Vehicles Rules or generation of some additional income by the operator of
the transport vehicle should not be at the cost of public safety. Therefore,
the exhibition of writings or figures with the sole object to invite public
attention and to promote the contract or stage carriage service should not
be permitted by levying fee under Rule 191 of the Kerala Motor Vehicles
Rules. While approving the matter intended to be exhibited on the vehicle,
in exercise of the powers under subrule (2) of Rule 191 of the Kerala Motor
Vehicles Rules, the State or the Regional Transport Authority shall ensure
that it does not cause distraction to the drivers of other vehicles and also
cyclists and pedestrians on public road. In view of the provisions under Rule
100 of the Central Motor Vehicles Rules and the law laid down by the Apex
Court in Avishek Goenka [2012 (5) SCC 321], tampering with the
percentage of visual transmission of light of the safety glass of the
windscreen, rear window and side windows of a motor vehicle, either by
pasting any material upon the safety glass or by fixing sliding ‘cloth
curtains’, etc. are legally impermissible. No approval under sub-rule (2) of
Rule 191, shall be granted for exhibition of any advertisements, writings,
figures, graphics, etc. on the safety glasses of a transport vehicle, which
shall always be maintained in such a condition that the visual transmission
of light is not less than that prescribed under sub-rule (2) of Rule 100.
16.    Rule 278 of the Kerala Motor Vehicles Rules provides that,
every vehicle shall be so constructed that save for the front pillars of the
body, the driver shall have a clear vision both to the front and through an
angle of ninety degrees to his right or left-hand side, as the case may be.
The front pillars of the body shall be so constructed as to cause the least
possible obstruction to the vision of the driver.
17.    In the order dated 10.01.2022 [2022 SCC OnLine Ker 1105],
we have reiterated the law laid down in Jijith [2019 (1) KHC 463] that,
in order to use the vehicles as contract carriages, the operators will have
to remove all writings, figures, etc. and maintain the safety glass in such a
condition that the visual transmission of light is not less than that
prescribed under sub-rule (2) of Rule 100 of the Central Motor Vehicles
Rules, and with a clear vision to the driver, both to the front and through
an angle of ninety degrees to his right or left-hand side, as the case may
be, as prescribed under Rule 278 of the Kerala Motor Vehicles Rules. In
Principal, Sabari PTB Smaraka H.S.S. v. Additional Registering
Authority, Ottapalam and others [2020 (2) KLJ 662] this Court
noticed that, in violation of Rule 278 of the Kerala Motor Vehicles Rules, the
safety glasses of the windscreen of public service vehicles are being pasted
with stickers, graphics, etc. Various objects are being placed/hanged in
front of the windscreen of such vehicles, causing obstruction to the clear
vision of the driver, both to the front and through an angle of ninety degrees
to his right or left hand side. Therefore, this Court directed the Transport
Commissioner, Kerala to take necessary steps to ensure through the
concerned officers in the Motor Vehicles Department that no public service
vehicle is permitted to be used in any public place after placing/hanging
various objects in front of the windscreen, causing obstruction to the clear
vision of the driver, both to the front and through an angle of ninety degrees
to his right or left hand side, in violation of Rule 278 of the Kerala Motor
18.    A few screenshots taken from the news item that appeared in
visual media after the motor accident which occurred on 05.10.2022 are
Screenshots 1 to 3 are from a news item that appeared in Mathrubhumi
news (online) regarding the use of a contract carriage by the name ‘Xplod’
by the students in MES College of Engineering, Marampally, Aluva, after
the motor accident which occurred on 05.10.2022. We have viewed that
news item in open Court. The said vehicle is fitted with high-power audio
system with multiple booster/power amplifiers, speakers and sub-woofers
with rating of several thousand watts PMPO, after-market multi-coloured
LED/laser/neon lights, flash lights, etc. The Enforcement Officers of the
Motor Vehicles Department intercepted the said vehicle and initiated
proceedings against its use in public place, flouting the safety standards.
Screenshot 4 is from a news item that appeared in Mathrubhumi news
(online) regarding use of contract carriages with unauthorized fittings,
including a separate diesel engine (of Balero Jeep) inside the luggage
compartment on the left side, to generate power for the A/C unit.
19.   A photograph that appeared in the Hindu daily dated
08.10.2022 of the employees giving final touches to a KSRTC bus for jungle
safari from KSRTC Bus Depot at Sulthan Bathery to Ponkuzhy on the Kerala-
Karnataka boarder through Kozhikode-Kollengal NH-766, which passes
through the Wayanad Wildlife Sanctuary, is reproduced hereunder;
20.    In Saji K.M. v. Deputy Transport Commissioner [2019
SCC OnLine Ker 2047 : 2019 (3) KHC 836] this Court noticed that the
provisions under ‘Policy on Roadside Advertisements’ formulated by the
Indian Road Congress, vide IRC:46-1972 was introduced when it was
noticed that advertisement can often distract the attention of drivers of
motor vehicles and in that case a public hazard or nuisance. They may also
obstruct the view of the drivers of fast moving vehicles and are then a
public danger. Para.2 of IRC:46-1972 deals with advertisement control;
Para.3 deals with principles on advertisement control; etc. The Ministry of
Road     Transport      and    Highways     vide    Circular    No.RW/NH-
33044/35/2001/S&R(R) dated 16.05.2002 has made it clear that no
advertisement hoardings are permitted on National Highways within the
Right of Way (ROW) except informatory signs of public interest such as
hospitals, bus stations, etc. or advertisement of temporary nature
announcing local events such as Mela, Flower Show, etc. Besides, IRC:46-
1972 titled ‘A Policy on Roadside Advertisements’ published in 1972 should
also be referred for comprehensive guidelines on advertisement control on
21.    In Saji K.M. [2019 (3) KHC 836] this Court noticed that the
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways in its letter No.F.No.RW/NH-
33044/18/ 2016/S&R(R) dated 07.09.2016 noticed that despite the
Ministry's policy of not allowing roadside advertisements, hoardings on
National Highways, which cause distraction and is also one of the causes of
accidents on National Highways, advertisement hoardings have generally
been noticed along the National Highways. Therefore, it was decided that
the Regional Officers/Engineering Liasoning Officers within their jurisdiction
shall inspect the National Highways by prioritising heavily traffic National
Highways and other National Highways in stages and submit inspection
reports to the Ministry for further necessary action, along with their monthly
reports. However, reports from the Regional Officers/Engineering Laisoning
Officers are not being received by the Ministry and therefore, the Ministry
vide letter dated 07.09.2016 directed all the implementing agencies and
Regional Officers/Engineering Liasoning Officers to do joint inspection of all
National Highways within their jurisdiction and sent a consolidated report
regarding advertisement hoardings to the Ministry for further necessary
action. A copy of the said letter is addressed to all Engineers-in-Chief and
Chief Engineers of Public Works Departments of State/Union Territories
dealing with National Highways and other Centrally Sponsored Schemes.
22.   In Saji K.M. [2019 (3) KHC 836], after taking note of the
provisions under ‘Policy on Roadside Advertisements’ formulated by the
Indian Road Congress, vide IRC:46-1972, the circular and letter issued by
the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways and also the provisions under
the Motor Vehicles Act and the Rules made thereunder, this Court held that,
since transport vehicles owned/operated by KSRTC and KURTC are
regularly plying on National Highways, such vehicles shall not be permitted
to exhibit any advertisements which are likely to distract the attention of
other drivers. Earning of additional income by KSRTC or KURTC by the
display of advertisements on their transport vehicles, under Rule 191 of the
Kerala Motor Vehicles Rules, should not be at the cost of public safety.
23.   In Avishek Goenka v. Union of India [2012 (5) SCC 321],
after referring to the provisions under Rules 100, 104, 104A, 106, 119 and
120 of the Central Motor Vehicles Rules, the Apex Court held that the said
Rules deal with every minute detail of construction and maintenance of a
vehicle. In other words, the standards, sizes and specifications which the
manufacturer of a vehicle is required to adhere to while manufacturing the
vehicle are exhaustively dealt with under the Rules. What is permitted has
been specifically provided for and what has not been specifically stated
would obviously be deemed to have been excluded from these Rules. It
would neither be permissible nor possible for the Court to read into these
statutory provisions, what is not specifically provided for. The provisions of
the Central Motor Vehicles Rules demonstrate the extent of minuteness in
the Rules and the efforts of the framers to ensure, not only the appropriate
manner of construction and maintenance of vehicles, but also the safety of
other users of the road. In the said decision, the Apex Court held further
that, the legislative intent attaching due significance to 'public safety' is
evident from the object and reasons of the Motor Vehicles Act, the
provisions of the said Act and more particularly, the rules framed
24.   In view of the provisions under Section 190 of the Motor
Vehicles Act, as amended by Section 72(i) (a) to (c) of the Motor Vehicles
(Amendment) Act, 2019, with effect from 01.09.2019, any person, who
drives or causes or allows to be driven in any public place a contract
carriage or other transport vehicle, violating the standards prescribed in
AIS-008 and AIS-052 (Rev.1) 2008,
(i)   without maintaining lighting and light-signalling devices and
also retro-reflectors as per the individual specifications,
namely, number, position, width, height, length, geometric
visibility, orientation, etc. specified in AIS-008; or
(ii)  after replacing the prototype approved lights, light-signalling
devices     and   reflectors  with   after-market  multi-coloured
LED/laser/neon lights, flash lights, etc.; or
violating the standards prescribed in relation to control of noise using multi-
toned horn giving a succession of different notes or horn giving unduly
harsh, shrill, loud or alarming noise or with high-power audio systems
producing loud sound with rating of several thousand watts PMPO; shall be
proceeded against under sub-section (2) of Section 190 of the said Act, for
an offence punishable with the imprisonment and fine specified in that sub-
section and he shall be disqualified for holding licence for a period of three
months and for any subsequent offence with imprisonment and fine as
specified in that sub-section.
25.   In view of the provisions under sub-section (4) of Section 206
of the Motor Vehicles Act, as inserted by Section 88 of the Motor Vehicles
(Amendment) Act, 2019, with effect from 01.10.2020, a police officer or
other person authorised in this behalf by the State Government shall seize
the driving licence held by the driver of a motor vehicle who has committed
an offence under Section 190 and forward it to the licensing authority for
disqualification or revocation proceedings under Section 19.
26.   The Certificate of Fitness granted to a transport vehicle
governed by AIS-008, which is not installed with lighting and light-
signalling devices and also retro-reflectors referred to in Para.6.0,
conforming to the individual specifications for such lighting and light-
signalling devices and also for retro-reflectors prescribed in Paras.6.1 to
6.20, or a transport vehicle governed by AIS-008, which is installed with
lighting and light-signalling devices or retro-reflectors other than those
referred to in Para.6.0, which cannot be treated as a vehicle that complies
with the provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act and the Rules made
thereunder, for the purpose of grant of Certificate of Fitness, shall be
cancelled by the prescribed authority, in accordance with the provisions
under sub-section (4) of Section 56 of the Motor Vehicles Act. In
appropriate cases, the registering authority shall initiate proceedings to
suspend or cancel the letter of authority granted or renewed under sub-
rule (5) of Rule 63 of the Central Motor Vehicles Rules or forfeit security
deposit, after affording the holder of letter of authority an opportunity of
being heard.
27.   In view of the law laid down in Jijith [2019 (1) KHC 463] and
reiterated in the order dated 10.01.2022 [2022 SCC OnLine Ker 1105]
if the State or Regional Transport Authority has laid down any specifications
like uniform colour scheme, the paintwork of the transport vehicle shall be
in accordance with those specifications. Any figure or writing exhibited on
the transport vehicle with an object to invite public attention and to
promote the contract or stage carriage service of the operator will attract
the provisions of Rule 191 of the Kerala Motor Vehicles Rules. Driver
distraction is one of the major causes of road accidents, which is a situation
where the attention of the driver is diverted to any other forms of activities,
which may affect the concentration of driving activity as well as the safety
of the passengers and others on public road. Earning of revenue by the
State by the levy of fee under Rule 191 of the Kerala Motor Vehicles Rules
or generation of some additional income by the operator of the transport
vehicle should not be at the cost of public safety. As held by this Court, the
exhibition of writings or figures with the sole object to invite public attention
and to promote the contract or stage carriage service should not be
permitted by levying fee under Rule 191 of the Kerala Motor Vehicles Rules.
While approving the matter intended to be exhibited on the vehicle, in
exercise of the powers under subrule (2) of Rule 191 of the Kerala Motor
Vehicles Rules, the State or the Regional Transport Authority shall ensure
that it does not cause distraction to the drivers of other vehicles and also
cyclists and pedestrians on public road. In view of the provisions under Rule
100 of the Central Motor Vehicles Rules and the law laid down by the Apex
Court in Avishek Goenka [2012 (5) SCC 321], no approval under sub-
rule (2) of Rule 191, shall be granted for exhibition of any advertisements,
writings, figures, graphics, etc. on the safety glasses of a transport vehicle,
which shall always be maintained in such a condition that the visual
transmission of light is not less than that prescribed under sub-rule (2) of
Rule 100. As held by this Court in Saji K.M. [2019 (3) KHC 836], since
transport vehicles owned/operated by KSRTC and KURTC are regularly
plying on National Highways, such vehicles shall not be permitted to exhibit
any advertisements which are likely to distract the attention of other
drivers. Earning of additional income by KSRTC or KURTC by the display of
advertisements on their transport vehicles, under Rule 191 of the Kerala
Motor Vehicles Rules, should not be at the cost of public safety.
28.   In the order dated 26.05.2022 [2022 (4) KLT 934] this Court
noticed that video contents of use of contract carriages and stage carriages
in public place, which are fitted with multi-toned horn giving a succession
of different notes and horn giving unduly harsh, shrill, loud or alarming
noise, unauthorised fittings, graphics, etc. are being uploaded on online
video platforms like ‘YouTube’, by registered owners of such vehicles or by
vloggers, who are permitted to record such videos inside the driver cabin,
even while the vehicle is moving in a higher speed, disturbing the
concentration of the driver while driving, posing potential threat to the
safety of the passengers and other road users.
29.   As already noticed hereinbefore, in view of the provisions under
Section 190 of the Motor Vehicles Act, any person, who drives or causes or
allows to be driven in any public place a contract carriage or other transport
vehicle, violating the standards prescribed in AIS-008 and AIS-052 (Rev.1)
2008, or the standards prescribed in relation to control of noise using multi-
toned horn giving a succession of different notes or horn giving unduly
harsh, shrill, loud or alarming noise or with high-power audio systems
producing loud sound with rating of several thousand watts PMPO; shall be
proceeded against under sub-section (2) of Section 190 of the said Act, for
an offence punishable with the imprisonment and fine specified in that sub-
section and he shall be disqualified for holding licence for a period of three
months and for any subsequent offence with imprisonment and fine as
specified in that sub-section. In view of the provisions under sub-section
(4) of Section 206 of the Motor Vehicles Act, a police officer or other person
authorised in this behalf by the State Government shall seize the driving
licence held by the driver of a motor vehicle who has committed an offence
under    Section   190 and forward    it   to  the  licensing   authority   for
disqualification or revocation proceedings under Section 19. The Certificate
of Fitness granted to a transport vehicle governed by AIS-008, which is not
installed with lighting and light-signalling devices and also retro-reflectors
referred to in Para.6.0, conforming to the individual specifications for such
lighting and light-signalling devices and also for retro-reflectors prescribed
in Paras.6.1 to 6.20, or a transport vehicle governed by AIS-008, which is
installed with lighting and light-signalling devices or retro-reflectors other
than those referred to in Para.6.0, which cannot be treated as a vehicle
that complies with the provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act and the Rules
made thereunder, for the purpose of grant of Certificate of Fitness, shall be
cancelled by the prescribed authority, in accordance with the provisions
under sub-section (4) of Section 56 of the Motor Vehicles Act. In
appropriate cases, the registering authority shall initiate proceedings to
suspend or cancel the letter of authority granted or renewed under sub-
rule (5) of Rule 63 of the Central Motor Vehicles Rules or forfeit security
deposit, after affording the holder of letter of authority an opportunity of
being heard.
30.    As held by the Apex Court in Avishek Goenka [2012 (5) SCC
321] the Central Motor Vehicles Rules deal with every minute detail of
construction and maintenance of a vehicle. What is permitted has been
specifically provided for and what has not been specifically stated would
obviously be deemed to have been excluded from these Rules. The
provisions of the Central Motor Vehicles Rules demonstrate the extent of
minuteness in the Rules and the efforts of the framers to ensure, not only
the appropriate manner of construction and maintenance of vehicles, but
also the safety of other users of the road. The legislative intent attaching
due significance to 'public safety' is evident from the object and reasons of
the Motor Vehicles Act, the provisions of the said Act and more particularly,
the rules framed thereunder.
31.    Keeping in mind the legislative intent attaching due significance
to ‘public safety’ in the provision in the Motor Vehicles Act and also the
Rules   and   Regulations   made     thereunder,   the  amended     provisions
incorporated by the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2019 and also the
consequential amendments in the Rules and regulation made thereunder
require compliance in letter and spirit. The State Government cannot dilute
the stringent provisions and penal consequences contained in the amended
provisions, since those provisions have been incorporated to ensure not
only the appropriate manner of construction and maintenance of motor
vehicles, but also safety of other users of the road. Therefore, the
provisions under the Motor Vehicles Act and the Rules and Regulations
made thereunder require strict enforcement by the State Government
through the Enforcement Officers in the Motor Vehicles Department and
also the Police, in respect of all class of motor vehicles used in public place,
namely, contract carriages, stage carriages, goods vehicles and also motor
cars. The said provisions require strict enforcement in the case of motor
cars as well, irrespective of whether it is a private vehicle or Government
vehicle or a vehicle carrying constitutional dignitary.
32.   Despite the law laid down by this Court in Kerala Bus
Transport Association and others v. Government of Kerala and
another [2018 (4) KLT 947] stage carriages, including those operating
as town and city services, which are fitted with door shutters as per the
mandate of sub-rule (2) of Rule 280 of the Kerala Motor Vehicles Rules, are
being used in public place with door shutters open. Even the contract
carriages which are fitted with high-power music system, unauthorised
lights, etc., are being used in public place with door shutters open. Despite
repeated accidents, the Enforcement Officers in the Motor Vehicles
Department and also the Police are not in a position to enforce in letter and
spirit the statutory provisions regarding door shutters in transport vehicles.
33.   As evident from the photographs which form part of the
accident investigation report dated 08.10.2022 of the Motor Vehicles
Department, large scale alterations are made in the contract carriage
bearing Registration No.KL-05/AU-8890 involved in the accident which
occurred on 05.10.2022. The owner of the said contract carriage, who
caused or allowed to be driven such a vehicle in public place, violating the
safety standards referred to hereinbefore and also the driver of the said
vehicle, who had driven such a vehicle in public place, have to face penal
consequences provided under sub-section (2) of Section 190 of the Motor
Vehicles Act and also the penal provisions under the Indian Penal Code. A
vlogger posting promotion videos/posts of such a vehicle and those who
made alterations in that vehicle violating the safety standards referred to
hereinbefore, by fitting after-market multi-coloured LED/laser/neon lights,
flash lights, etc., or violating the standards prescribed in relation to control
of noise by fitting multi-toned horn or high-power audio system, thereby
enabling the owner and driver of such a vehicle to use it in public place
posing threat to the safety of the passengers and other road users, also
have to face the penal consequences under the provisions of the Motor
Vehicles Act and also the penal provisions under the Indian Penal Code,
once the use of such a vehicle in public place has resulted in a motor
accident, causing injury or death to any passenger in that vehicle or other
road users.
34.    It is submitted by the learned Deputy Solicitor General of India
that despite the directions contained in various orders of this Court and the
efforts taken by the Enforcement Officers in the Motor Vehicles Department
and also the Police, contract carriages with unauthorised lights, high-power
audio systems, etc., are being used by the students in schools and colleges,
for their study tour. The provisions under the Motor Vehicles Act and the
Rules and Regulations made thereunder require strict enforcement by the
State Government, since several accidents had occurred involving contract
carriages, in which the passengers in those vehicles and other road users
sustained serious injuries, including fatal injuries.
35.    The learned Special Government Pleader and also the learned
Senior Government Pleader would submit that the Enforcement Wing of the
Motor Vehicles Department and also the Police are taking earnest efforts to
prevent such accidents by ensuring strict compliance of the safety
requirements under the Motor Vehicles Act and the Rules and Regulations
made thereunder and also the directions contained in the judgment of this
Court referred to hereinbefore. They would submit that, in the wake of the
accident, which occurred on 05.10.2022, a meeting has already been
convened today by the State to discuss various issues on road safety.
36.    Having considered the materials on record and also the
submissions made by the learned Deputy Solicitor General of India, the
learned Special Government Pleader and also the learned Senior
Government Pleader, we find that a total prohibition on the use of contract
carriages violating the safety standards prescribed in AIS-008/AIS-
052(Rev.1) 2008 and also the standards prescribed in relation to control of
noise, is highly essential since plying of such vehicles on public place is
posing threat to the safety of the passengers in those vehicles, and also
other road users. The procedure now being adopted by the Enforcement
Wing of the Motor Vehicles Department and also the Police, in permitting
the use of such vehicles in public place after interception, with a direction
to produce such vehicles for inspection within a period of one week after
removing such unauthorised fittings, etc., cannot be permitted to continue,
since such a procedure is in flagrant violation of the statutory provisions
referred to hereinbefore and also the law laid down in the decisions referred
to supra.
37.    A mere removal of unauthorised fittings in a contract carriage,
without completely removing the additional wiring and other alterations
made in the bus body, passenger compartment and driver cabin cannot
make that vehicle as one, which complies with the provisions under the
Motor Vehicles Act and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder for the
purpose of grant of Certificate of Fitness. The bus body, the passenger
compartment and the driver cabin of that contract carriage will have to be
maintained in the appropriate manner of its construction and maintenance,
as per the statutory requirements in the Central Motor Vehicles
Rules/Kerala Motor Vehicles Rules/AIS-008/AIS-052 (Rev.1) 2008, etc.,
and then only that vehicle can be treated as one which complies with the
provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act and the Rules and Regulations made
thereunder, for the purpose of grant of Certificate of Fitness, which is the
statutory mandate of sub-rule (1) of Rule 92 of the Central Motor Vehicles
Rule and sub-rule (1) of Rule 249 of the Kerala Motor Vehicles Rules.
Therefore, the Fitness Certificate of such a contract carriage has to be
suspended with immediate effect, for a period of three months, within
which time the owner of that vehicle can be directed to make that vehicle
as one which complies with the requirements of the Motor Vehicles Act and
the Rules and Regulations made thereunder, in all respects. After proper
inspection, on being satisfied that the vehicle complies with the aforesaid
requirements, in all respects, the competent authority can grant Certificate
of Fitness to that vehicle. The driving licence of the driver who had driven
such a contract carriage in public place has to be suspended for a period of
three months, as per the statutory mandate of sub-section (2) of Section
190, which shall be forwarded to the licensing authority for disqualification
or revocation proceedings, under Section 19 of the Act. Stringent action
has to be taken against the owner and driver of contract carriages or other
transport vehicles, which are used in public place after tampering with
speed governor installed as provided under Rule 118 of the Central Motor
Vehicles Rules. Stringent action has also to be taken under Section 185 of
the Motor Vehicles Act, once it is found that the contract carriages or other
transport vehicles were driven by a drunken person or by a person under
the influence of drugs.
38.   The Enforcement Officers in the Motor Vehicles Department and
also the Police shall conduct periodical inspection during day time and also
night hours to ensure that no contract carriages or other transport vehicles
are being used in public place flouting the safety standards and also the
standards    prescribed   in  relation  to  control  of  noise,  referred   to
hereinbefore. If there is any obstruction to the discharge of duties by the
Enforcement Officers in the Motor Vehicles Department, while conducting
inspection in contract carriages and other transport vehicles, the Police shall
render necessary assistance. The 2nd respondent Transport Commissioner
shall place on record a report on deployment of officers in 86 Regional
Transport Offices in the State, for conducting periodical inspection of motor
vehicles during daytime and also night hours. Any contract carriages or
other transport vehicles, which are used in public place flouting the safety
standards and also the standards prescribed in relation to control of noise,
shall be dealt with appropriately by initiating prosecution, and such vehicles
shall be produced before the jurisdictional Magistrate Court along with
colour photographs and video of the bus body, passenger compartment,
driver cabin and also luggage compartment (in case luggage compartment
is fitted with diesel engine for power generation or inverters with batteries
or sound boxes) and further proceedings regarding custody of that vehicle
shall be taken based on the orders of that court.
39.   In case any contract carriage, which does not meet the safety
standards and the standards prescribed in relation to control of noise is
used in any public place for carrying students from any educational
institutions, the head of that educational institution and also the teacher or
teachers, who are in charge of that trip, who are least bothered about the
safety of the students, shall also be proceeded against, in accordance with
law. Entry of any contract carriages or other motor vehicles violating the
safety standards or the standards prescribed in relation to control of noise
or vehicles with unauthorised alterations, shall not be permitted in the
premises of any educational institutions in the State, for any purpose
whatsoever, including exhibition, auto show, etc. Any such activity shall be
prevented by the head of that educational institution, which shall also be
reported to the concerned Station House Officer and also the Enforcement
Officer in the Motor Vehicles Department, so as to enable them to proceed
against the owner and driver of such vehicles.
40.    By the order dated 06.10.2022 the 2nd respondent Transport
Commissioner was directed to obtain the details of the vloggers, who post
videos in 'YouTube' and other online platforms promoting the use of motor
vehicles on public place, flouting the safety standards, posing potential
threat to the safety of passengers and other road users. The learned
Special Government Pleader would submit that he is awaiting
instructions from the 2nd respondent on the above aspect. In the
meantime, the 2nd respondent and also the Ministry of Road Transport
and Highways shall take necessary steps to ensure that such videos
promoting the use of motor vehicles in public place, flouting the safety
standards, posing potential threat to the safety of passengers and other
road users, are not being uploaded in ‘YouTube’ and other online
platforms.
List this matter for further consideration on 14.10.2022 at 02:00 p.m.