(c) Be pleased Your Lordships to pass any other and further
order considering the facts and circumstances of the case in
the interest of justice.”
2.    On issuance of notice by this Court on
23.03.2022 today the corpus is presented
before us, she has expressed her clear wish
to join respondent No.4. They both belong
to different faith and have expressed that
neither of them is desirous of changing the
faith of other.
3.    Noticing the fact that the couple of
interfaith            marriage             would   require               the
registration            of     the         marriage     under            the
Special            Marriage        Act,       1954,      they            are
determined to move an application for the
said purpose.
3.1     We had attempted to reconcile as the
petitioner            and      her         husband     are          quite
disappointed and angry with the daughter.
They      have       also   stated         before   this          Court
that the family of the respondent No.4 is
known to them for the past more than 16
years as his family resided in the vicinity
of the petitioner’s residence. They also
shared good and friendly terms, however,
marriage of both the corpus and respondent
No.4      is       unacceptable.           Today,   the        couple
since is quite firm in their decision and
the girl is not willing to go to the Women
Shelter Home though we tried quite much to
pursuade           her,   she   is       being   permitted                to
join the respondent No.4.
appears for respondent No.4. According to
him, he is also undertaking the proceeding
of moving an application before the office
of the Sub Registrar. The couple will also
be    entitled           to  the        Legal   Aid.         Learned
advocate, Mr.Soni is appointed in Legal Aid
to perform this task. Wherever necessary,
Committee shall provide him the logistic
request shall be made that couple shall be
escorted and both of them and the family of
the     respondent          No.4         shall    be      provided
protection initially for a period of four
months. After once, whichever place they
attempt           to    settle,       the    SP/ACP         of         the
concerned Zone shall look into the matter.
6.    We      are     given   to      understand         that          the
application for police protection to the
Commissioner of Police, Ahmedabad City has
been moved. Once this order if passed and
if the couple continues to be at Ahmedabad,
Commissioner             of    Police,          Ahmedabad              City
shall take a call after four months whether
to continue such protection or not.
7.    Noticing the decision of the Apex Court
rendered in case of Laxmibai Chandaragi B.
and Anr. vs. State of Karnataka and others,
reported in (2021) 3 SCC 360, where the
Court       had      equated      the        right    to      marry            a
person of one’s choice being an integral to
Article 21 of the Constitution of India,
Some         of       the     relevant           findings                 and
observation            of    the       Apex     Court        deserves
reproduction which are as follow:
“10.        Educated younger boys and girls are choosing
their life partners which, in turn is a departure from the
earlier norms of society where caste and community play a
major role. Possibly, this is the way forward where caste
and community tension will reduce by such inter-marriage
but in the meantime these youngsters face threats from the
elders and the courts have been coming to the aid of these
youngsters.
11.         We are fortified in our view by earlier judicial
pronouncements of this Court clearly elucidating that the
consent of the family or the community or the clan is not
necessary once the two adult individuals agree to enter
into a wedlock and that their consent has to be piously
given primacy. It is in that context it was further observed
that the choice of an individual is an inextricable part of
dignity, for dignity cannot be thought of where there is
erosion of choice. Such a right or choice is not expected
to succumb to the concept of “class honour” or “group
thinking”.
12.         In Shafin Jahan vs. Asokan K.M. this Court
noticed that the society was emerging through a crucial
transformational period. Intimacies of marriage lie within a
core zone of privacy, which is inviolable and even matters
of faith held to be integral to Article 21 of the
Constitution of India. In this behalf, the judgment of the
nine-Judge Bench in K.S.Puttaswamy (Privacy-9 J.) v.
Union of India may also be referred to where the
autonomy of an individual inter alia in relation to family
and marriage were held to be integral to the dignity of the
individual.”
5.    We chose to dispose of this petition
with      a      direction        that        the  copy        of        the
notice for the marriage and that of the
registration              of        the        marriage             (once
received)            shall     be       produced      before             the
6.    In the event of any difficulties because
of the         interfaith       marriage        bearing       in mind
the decision of Laxmibai Chandaragi B. and
Anr. (supra) as well as the decision of the
Shakti Vahini vs. Union of India, reported in
(2018) 7 SCC 192 where the Apex Court has
observed and held as under:
“51. We may note with profit that honour killings are
condemned as a serious human rights violation and are
addressed by certain international instruments. The Council
of Europe Convention on Preventing and Combating
Violence Against Women and Domestic Violence addresses
this issue. Article 42 reads thus:-
“Article 42 – Unacceptable justifications for crimes,
including crimes committed in the name of so-called
(1) Parties shall take the necessary legislative or other
measures to ensure that, in criminal proceedings
initiated following the commission of any of the acts
of violence covered by the scope of this Convention,
culture, custom, religion, tradition or so-called
“honour” shall not be regarded as justification for
such acts. This covers, in particular, claims that the
victim has transgressed cultural, religious, social or
traditional norms or customs of appropriate
behaviour.
(2) Parties shall take the necessary legislative or other
measures to ensure that incitement by any person of
a child to commit any of the acts referred to in
paragraph 1 shall not diminish the criminal liability of
that person for the acts committed.”
52. Once the fundamental right is inherent in a person, the
intolerant groups who subscribe to the view of superiority
class complex or higher clan cannot scuttle the right of a
person by leaning on any kind of philosophy, moral or social,
or self-proclaimed elevation. Therefore, for the sustenance of
the legitimate rights of young couples or anyone associated
with them and keeping in view the role of this Court as the
guardian and protector of the constitutional rights of the
citizens and further to usher in an atmosphere where the
fear to get into wedlock because of the threat of the
collective is dispelled, it is necessary to issue directives and
we do so on the foundation of the principle stated in
Lakshmi Kant Pandey v. Union of India15, Vishaka and others
v. State of Rajasthan and others 16 and Prakash Singh and
others v. Union of India and others17.
53. It is worthy to note that certain legislations have come
into existence to do away with social menaces like “Sati” and
“Dowry”. It is because such legislations are in accord with
our Constitution. Similarly, protection of human rights is the
élan vital of our Constitution that epitomizes humanness and
the said conceptual epitome of humanity completely
ostracizes any idea or prohibition or edict that creates a
hollowness in the inalienable rights of the citizens who enjoy
their rights on the foundation of freedom and on the fulcrum
of justice that is fair, equitable and proportionate. There
cannot be any assault on human dignity as it has the
potentiality to choke the majesty of law. Therefore, we would
recommend to the legislature to bring law appositely
covering the field of honour killing.
54.In this regard, we may usefully refer to the authority
wherein this 15 (1984) 2 SCC 244 16 (1997) 6 SCC 241 17
(2006) 8 SCC 1 46 Court has made such recommendation. In
Samrendra Beura v. Union of India and others18, this Court
“16. Though such amendments have been made by
Parliament under the 1950 Act and the 1957 Act, yet
no such amendment has been incorporated in the Air
Force Act, 1950. The aforesaid provisions, as we
perceive, have been incorporated in both the
statutes to avoid hardship to persons convicted by
the Court Martial. Similar hardship is suffered by the
persons who are sentenced to imprisonment under
various provisions of the Act. Keeping in view the
aforesaid amendment in the other two enactments
and regard being had to the purpose of the
amendment and the totality of the circumstances,
we think it apt to recommend the Union of India to
seriously consider to bring an amendment in the Act
so that the hardships faced by the persons convicted
by the Court Martial are avoided.”
55. Mr. Raju Ramachandran, learned senior counsel being
assisted by Mr. Gaurav Agarwal, has filed certain suggestions
for issuing guidelines. The Union of India has also given
certain suggestions to be taken into account till the legislation
is made. To meet the challenges of the agonising effect of
honour crime, we think that there has to be preventive,
remedial and punitive measures and, accordingly, we state
the broad contours and the modalities with liberty to the
executive and the police administration of 18 (2013) 14 SCC
672 the concerned States to add further measures to evolve a
robust mechanism for the stated purposes.
55.1.1. The State Governments should forthwith identify
Districts, Sub-Divisions and/or Villages where instances of
honour killing or assembly of Khap Panchayats have been
reported in the recent past, e.g., in the last five years.
55.1.2. The Secretary, Home Department of the concerned
States shall issue directives/advisories to the Superintendent
of Police of the concerned Districts for ensuring that the Officer
Incharge of the Police Stations of the identified areas are extra
cautious if any instance of inter-caste or inter- religious
marriage within their jurisdiction comes to their notice.
55.1.3. If information about any proposed gathering of a Khap
Panchayat comes to the knowledge of any police officer or any
officer of the District Administration, he shall forthwith inform
his immediate superior officer and also simultaneously
intimate the jurisdictional Deputy Superintendent of Police and
Superintendent of Police.
55.1.4. On receiving such information, the Deputy
Superintendent of Police (or such senior police officer as
identified by the State Governments with respect to the
area/district) shall immediately interact with the members of
the Khap Panchayat and impress upon them that convening of
such meeting/gathering is not permissible in law and to
eschew from going ahead with such a meeting. Additionally, he
should issue appropriate directions to the Officer Incharge of
the jurisdictional Police Station to be vigilant and, if necessary,
to deploy adequate police force for prevention of assembly of
the proposed gathering.
55.1.5. Despite taking such measures, if the meeting is
conducted, the Deputy Superintendent of Police shall
personally remain present during the meeting and impress
upon the assembly that no decision can be taken to cause any
harm to the couple or the family members of the couple, failing
which each one participating in the meeting besides the
organisers would be personally liable for criminal prosecution.
He shall also ensure that video recording of the discussion and
participation of the members of the assembly is done on the
basis of which the law enforcing machinery can resort to
suitable action.
55.1.6. If the Deputy Superintendent of Police, after interaction
with the members of the Khap Panchayat, has reason to
believe that the gathering cannot be prevented and/or is likely
to cause harm to the couple or members of their family, he
shall forthwith      submit a proposal to the District
Magistrate/Sub-Divisional Magistrate of the District/ Competent
Authority of the concerned area for issuing orders to take
preventive steps under the Cr.P.C., including by invoking
prohibitory orders under Section 144 Cr.P.C. and also by
causing arrest of the participants in the assembly under
55.1.7. The Home Department of the Government of India
must take initiative and work in coordination with the State
Governments for sensitising the law enforcement agencies and
by involving all the stake holders to identify the measures for
prevention of such violence and to implement the
constitutional goal of social justice and the rule of law.
55.1.8. There should be an institutional machinery with the
necessary coordination of all the stakeholders. The different
State Governments and the Centre ought to work on
sensitization of the law enforcement agencies to mandate
social initiatives and awareness to curb such violence.
55.2.1 Despite the preventive measures taken by the State
Police, if it comes to the notice of the local police that the Khap
Panchayat has taken place and it has passed any diktat to take
action against a couple/family of an inter-caste or inter-
religious marriage (or any other marriage which does not meet
their acceptance), the jurisdictional police official shall cause
to immediately lodge an F.I.R. under the appropriate provisions
of the Indian Penal Code including Sections 141, 143, 503 read
with 506 of IPC.
55.2.2 Upon registration of F.I.R., intimation shall be
simultaneously given to the Superintendent of Police/ Deputy
Superintendent of Police who, in turn, shall ensure that
effective investigation of the crime is done and taken to its
logical end with promptitude.
55.2.3 Additionally, immediate steps should be taken to
provide security to the couple/family and, if necessary, to
remove them to a safe house within the same district or
elsewhere keeping in mind their safety and threat perception.
The State Government may consider of establishing a safe
house at each District Headquarter for that purpose. Such safe
houses can cater to accommodate               (i) young bachelor-
bachelorette couples whose relationship is being opposed by
their families /local community/Khaps and (ii) young married
couples (of an inter-caste or inter-religious or any other
marriage         being  opposed        by their         families/local
community/Khaps). Such safe houses may be placed under the
supervision of the jurisdictional District Magistrate and
Superintendent of Police.
55.2.4 The District Magistrate/Superintendent of Police must
deal with the complaint regarding threat administered to such
couple/family with utmost sensitivity. It should be first
ascertained whether the bachelor-bachelorette are capable
adults. Thereafter, if necessary, they may be provided
logistical support for solemnising their marriage and/or for
being duly registered under police protection, if they so desire.
After the marriage, if the couple so desire, they can be
provided accommodation on payment of nominal charges in
the safe house initially for a period of one month to be
extended on monthly basis but not exceeding one year in
aggregate, depending on their threat assessment on case to
case basis.
55.2.5 The initial inquiry regarding the complaint received
from the couple (bachelor-bachelorette or a young married
couple) or upon receiving information from an independent
source that the relationship/marriage of such couple is
opposed by their family members/local community/Khaps shall
be entrusted by the District Magistrate/ Superintendent of
Police to an officer of the rank of Additional Superintendent of
Police. He shall conduct a preliminary inquiry and ascertain the
authenticity, nature and gravity of threat perception. On being
satisfied as to the authenticity of such threats, he shall
immediately submit a report to the Superintendent of Police in
not later than one week.
55.2.6 The District Superintendent of Police, upon receipt of
such report, shall direct the Deputy Superintendent of Police
incharge of the concerned sub-division to cause to register an
F.I.R. against the persons threatening the couple(s) and, if
necessary, invoke Section 151 of Cr.P.C. Additionally, the
Deputy Superintendent of Police shall personally supervise the
progress of investigation and ensure that the same is
completed and taken to its logical end with promptitude. In the
course of investigation, the concerned persons shall be booked
without any exception including the members who have
participated in the assembly. If the involvement of the
members of Khap Panchayat comes to the fore, they shall also
be charged for the offence of conspiracy or abetment, as the
case may be.
55.3.1. Any failure by either the police or district
officer/officials to comply with the aforesaid directions shall be
considered as an act of deliberate negligence and/or
misconduct for which departmental action must be taken
under the service rules. The departmental action shall be
initiated and taken to its logical end, preferably not exceeding
six months, by the authority of the first instance.
55.3.2 In terms of the ruling of this Court in Arumugam Servai
(supra), the States are directed to take disciplinary action
against the concerned officials if it is found that (i) such
official(s) did not prevent the incident, despite having prior
knowledge of it, or (ii) where the incident had already
occurred, such official(s) did not promptly apprehend and
institute criminal proceedings against the culprits.
55.3.3. The State Governments shall create Special Cells in
every District comprising of the Superintendent of Police, the
District Social Welfare Officer and District Adi-Dravidar Welfare
Officer to receive petitions/complaints of harassment of and
threat to couples of inter-caste marriage.
55.3.4. These Special Cells shall create a 24 hour helpline to
receive and register such complaints and to provide necessary
assistance/advice and protection to the couple.
55.3.5. The criminal cases pertaining to honour killing or
violence to the couple(s) shall be tried before the designated
Court/Fast Track Court earmarked for that purpose. The trial
must proceed on day to day basis to be concluded preferably
within six months from the date of taking cognizance of the
offence. We may hasten to add that this direction shall apply
even to pending cases. The concerned District Judge shall
assign those cases, as far as possible, to one jurisdictional
court so as to ensure expeditious disposal thereof.”
7.      With           the   above          direction,            present