The instant intra court appeals involve common question of
law and hence, the same are heard and decided together by this
order.
The question to be adjudicated upon is whether an applicant
who has taken customary divorce is entitled to apply in the
category of ‘Divorcee Female’, without presenting decree of
divorce granted by competent civil court before the cutoff date, as
stipulated in the terms and conditions governing the recruitment
process.
It is pleaded that respondent Nos.1 in the appeals belong to
Scheduled Tribe/Tribal Sub Plan Area and had applied against
advertised posts indicating their categories as ‘Divorcee’. The
respondents however, at the time of document verification were
disqualified on the count that they did not possess a decree of
divorce as on the last date of filing application forms. Being
aggrieved by the non-inclusion of the names in the final select list,
the respondents approached the learned Single Bench seeking a
direction upon the appellants for appointment under ‘Divorcee’
category.
Learned Single Bench allowed the writ petitions holding that
the respondents belong to Scheduled Tribe community and
(3 of 8)                  [SAW-72/2022]
therefore, the provisions of Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 are not
applicable upon them in light of Section 2(2) of Hindu Marriage
Act, 1955 thus, the condition of submitting divorce decree, issued
by a competent court cannot be fastened upon them. The
appellant-respondents were directed to include the name of the
respondents in the select list on the basis of customary dissolution
of marriage and provide them appointment from the date
candidates lower in merit were granted appointment, if they are
otherwise eligible.
Learned   counsel    for     the     appellants         submitted   that  a
candidate who applies for a particular post under ‘Divorcee’
category must be possessed of a decree of divorcee on the last
date of submission of application form so as to make the
candidate eligible for consideration against the post reserved for
candidate belonging to said category. Learned counsel submitted
that the customary practices for divorce may be prevalent in tribal
communities but that would be confined to social purposes only.
However,    in  order   to   claim       appointment           under  questioned
selection process, a candidate would be governed by the terms
and conditions set out for the selection process. Learned counsel
further submitted that the general instructions issued to the
candidates clearly stipulate a condition that a decree of divorce is
essential for consideration of candidature for appointment against
quota of divorcees. To fortify the aforesaid contention, reliance
was placed on the judgment rendered by co-ordinate Bench of this
Court in the case of Rajasthan State Public Service Commission &
Anr. vs. Reetu Kalasua & Anr.: D.B. S.A.W. No.1193/2014 decided
(4 of 8)               [SAW-72/2022]
Per contra, learned counsel for the respondents submitted
that   the   respondent-writ         petitioners          belong to   Scheduled
Tribe/Tribal Sub Plan Area where customary divorce is prevalent
since time immemorial which is accepted as a valid process of
marriage dissolution in Hindu Laws. Learned counsel further
submitted that Section 2(2) of Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 makes it
evident that the said Act does not apply to Scheduled Tribes who
are governed by the customs prevalent in their respective
communities. Therefore, once it is established that divorce has
been obtained as per customs, the denial of appointment for want
of decree of divorce by a competent court is not sustainable in the
eyes of law. Reliance was placed on the judgments rendered by
this Court in the cases of Sunita Meena vs. State of Rajsthan &
Ors: S.B. C.W. No.3991/2015 and Rajasthan Public Service
Commission vs. Sunita Meena & Ors.: D.B. S.A.W. No.829/2017.
Heard submissions advanced at Bar and perused the material
available on record.
Hon’ble the Supreme Court of India in the case of Ashok
Kumar Sonkar vs. Union of India, reported in (2007) 4 SCC
“Possession of requisite educational qualification is
mandatory. The same should not be uncertain. If an
uncertainty is allowed to prevail, the employer would be
flooded with applications of ineligible candidates. A cut-
off date for the purpose of determining the eligibility of
the candidates concerned must, therefore, be fixed. In
absence of any rule or any specific date having been
fixed in the advertisement, the law, therefore, as held
by this Court would be the last date for filing the
application.”
(5 of 8)                 [SAW-72/2022]
Hon’ble the Supreme Court of India in case of Dr. M.V. Nair
vs. Union of India & Ors. reported in (1993) 2 SCC 429,
“It is well settled that suitability and eligibility has to be
considered with reference to the last date for receiving
the applications, unless, of course, the notification
calling for applications itself specifies such a date.”
A co-ordinate Bench of this Court in the case of Rajasthan
State Public Service Commission & Anr. vs. Reetu Kalasua &
Anr.: D.B. S.A.W. No.1193/2014 while dealing with a similar
controversy held that a female candidate without having a decree
of divorce cannot represent herself as divorced woman. No
presumption could be drawn about grant of decree of divorce and
a candidate cannot be treated as divorced without there being a
declaration of dissolution of marriage by the competent court.
Similar view has been reiterated by co-ordinate Bench in the case
of State of Rajasthan & Ors. vs. Jagdish Prased & Anr: D.B.
S.A.W. No.611/2016 and Parul Khurana vs. High Court of
Judicature      for     Rajasthan            at       Jodhpur:      D.B.    C.W.
A co-ordinate Bench of this Court in the case of Rajasthan
Public Service Commission vs. Sunita Meena & Ors.: D.B.
S.A.W. No.829/2017 keeping in view the peculiar facts and
circumstances of that case upheld the direction passed by learned
Single Judge in favour of the candidate-petitioner belonging to
Meena community (Scheduled Tribe) directing the recruiting
agency to consider the candidate a ‘Divorcee’ as per the
customary    laws    while    affording        the      petitioner-candidate   an
(6 of 8)                [SAW-72/2022]
opportunity to obtain a declaration of dissolution of marriage from
competent court.
It would be apposite to note here that Family Courts
established under the Family Court Act, 1984 by virtue of Section
7 of the said Act have exclusive jurisdiction to deal with all issues
of marriage and divorce without exception irrespective of the
community, the parties belong to.
“7. Jurisdiction.- (1) Subject to the other provisions of
this Act, a Family Court shall
(a) have and exercise all the jurisdiction exercisable by
any district court or any subordinate civil court under
any law for the time being in force in respect of suits
and proceedings of the nature referred to in the
(b) be deemed, for the purposes of exercising such
jurisdiction under such law, to be a district court or, as
the case may be, such subordinate civil court for the
area to which the jurisdiction of the Family Court
extends.
Explanation.-The suits and proceedings referred to in
this sub-section are suits and proceedings of the
following nature, namely:-
(a) a suit or proceeding between the parties to a
marriage for a decree of nullity of marriage
(declaring the marriage to be null and void or, as
the case may be, annulling the marriage) or
restitution      of     conjugal           rights        or judicial
separation or dissolution of marriage;
(b) a suit or proceeding for a declaration as to the
validity of a marriage or as to the matrimonial status of
(c) a suit or proceeding between the parties to a
marriage with respect to the property of the parties or
(d) a suit or proceeding for an order or injunction in
circumstances arising out of a marital relationship;
(e) a suit or proceeding for a declaration as to the
legitimacy of any person;
(f) a suit or proceeding for maintenance;
(g) a suit or proceeding in relation to the guardianship
of the person or the custody of, or access to, any
minor.”
(7 of 8)                  [SAW-72/2022]
Admittedly, the respondents submitted application seeking
appointment on advertised posts against the seats reserved for
divorcee candidates. The decree of divorce issued by competent
court was not possessed by the petitioners on the cut off date.
The appointment in the divorcee category has been claimed on the
ground of having obtained customary divorce and non application
of Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 upon marriages and divorce amongst
the members of Scheduled Tribe/Tribal Sub Plan communities.
We are of the considered opinion that the requirement of a
decree of divorce for a female candidate to claim reservation
against the reserved quota for divorcee women on the cut off
date/on the last date of submitting application form is sine qua
non and the candidature cannot be considered against said
category in the absence of decree of divorce issued by the
competent court. A custom cannot be allowed to supersede the
terms and conditions governing the recruitment process. The
terms and conditions of recruitment are framed to adhere to the
mandate enshrined under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of
India which guarantee equal opportunities to all citizens for their
advancement in the matter of employment.
Candidates belonging to Scheduled Tribe/Tribal Sub Plan are
not  precluded   from    obtaining         decree        of   divorce  from   the
competent court having jurisdiction to decide the matrimonial
disputes. Exemption from presenting decree of divorce, issued by
competent court cannot be sought on the ground of customs
prevalent in their communities. The customs/practices prevailing
in a particular community cannot be allowed to supplement the
terms and conditions of a recruitment process involving large
(8 of 8)            [SAW-72/2022]
number of candidates belonging to various caste, religion, faith
and communities.
In view of aforesaid discussion, the judgment passed in the
case of Sunita Meena (supra) is held per incuriam since, the
judgment was rendered in ignorance of previous decisions of
Hon’ble the Apex Court and co-ordinate Bench of this Court on the
controversy dealing with the cut off date by reference to which
eligibility requirements must be satisfied by a candidate seeking
public employment.
In the result, the intra court appeals succeed and are hereby
allowed. The order/judgment dated 12.09.2019 and 30.03.2021
under present appeals are set aside.