1.      The Petitioners before this Court have filed this Writ Petition as a
Public Interest Litigation (PIL) under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India, aggrieved by the commercialization of education and corrosion of
standards of education management, especially with reference to
Respondent No. 5 herein, the Delhi Public School Society (“DPSS”).
Accordingly, the Petitioners have sought, inter-alia, directions to
Respondent No. 1, the Central Board of Secondary Education (“CBSE”), to
W.P.(C.) No. 10442/2015                                                  Page 1 of 12
inquire into and regulate the transactions between Education Societies and
Franchise Schools and, more specifically, inspect the affairs of the schools
operated by DPSS.
2.             The Petitioners’ contention is that the Respondent No. 5, Delhi Public
School Society is a Society registered under the Societies Registration Act,
1860, and the Society through its Chairman i.e. Respondent No.6 Mr. V. K.
Shunglu has executed various joint venture agreements with several schools
(franchisees agreements) for permitting certain other schools to use the
name of Delhi Public School (DPS), its logo and motto.
3.             It has been stated that large number of agreements have been executed
between the Respondent Society and certain schools, and the Petitioners
have given examples of certain schools. The Petitioners have stated that one
such agreement has been executed with M/s Rachna Educational Society,
Warangal, Andhra Pradesh, for setting up of a school at Warangal. The M/s
Rachna Educational Society as per the agreement has to pay sum of Rs. 12
lakhs to the DPSS.
4.             Similar agreement has been executed in respect of Delhi Public
School, Kashipur, Uttarakhand for sum of Rs. 27,57,500/, and other
agreements have been executed in favour of DPS, Pinjore, Haryana and DPS
Allahabad, Uttar Pradesh as well.
5.             The Petitioners have given examples of various franchisee agreements
executed from time to time and have alleged a large number of irregularities
in respect of management of DPS Society.
6.             The Petitioner has prayed for the following reliefs in the Writ
W.P.(C.) No. 10442/2015                                                     Page 2 of 12
“a. Issue a writ of Mandamus directing Respondent No. 1to
inquire into the nature of agreements and transactions between
Education Societies and Franchisee schools and take,
appropriate action against them, and
b. Issue a writ of Mandamus directing Respondent No. 1 to 3 to.
conduct an inquiry into the affairs of Respondent No. 5 and'
other Societies and Trust, to take appropriate action against the
erring members and office bearers, and
c. Issue a writ of Mandamus directing Respondent No. 2 to
inspect the affairs of the schools run by Respondent No. 5 as
per Rule 170 of the Delhi School Education Rules, 1973, and
d. Quash and set aside the illegal Joint Venture Agreements
and Memorandum of Understandings such as entered into by
Respondent No. 5 and other similarly placed Societies
pertaining to granting of/operation of franchisee schools.
Pass any such further orders or directions as this Hon‟ble High
Court may deem fit and proper in the facts and circumstances
of the case.”
7.       The Petitioners have impleaded the State Government, the Central
Board of Secondary Education as well as other authorities as Respondents.
8.      By filing interlocutory applications, the Petitioners have brought on
record various other agreements executed by the Respondent Society as well
as their balance sheets. The CBSE has filed a detailed and exhaustive reply
and it has been stated that the Board, in accordance with the Affiliation By-
laws, grants affiliation to the schools subject to fulfilment of the norms, and
By-law 21 provides for power and functions of the School Management
Committee. Affiliation By-law 21 under Chapter VI of the By-laws, reads
“21. Powers and Functions of the School Management
W.P.(C.) No. 10442/2015                                                Page 3 of 12
Subject to overall control of the Society/Trust/ Company
Registered under Section 25 of the Companies Act, 1956 the
School Managing Committee shall have the following
powers/functions:
i. It shall have the power to supervise the activities of the
school for its smooth functioning.
ii. It will work according to the specific directions given by
the Society regarding admission policy. However,
admissions will be made as per merit without discretion
of caste/ creed/religion and region.
iii. It shall look into the welfare of the teachers and
employees of the school.
iv. It shall evolve both short-term and long-term
programmes for the improvement of the school.
v. It shall have the powers for making appointment of
teachers and non teaching staff.
vi. It shall exercise financial powers beyond those delegated
to the Principal within the budgetary provision of the
school.
vii. It shall have the power to take stock of academic
programmes and progress of the school without
jeopardising the academic freedom of Principal.
viii. It shall guide the Principal to maintain tone and
discipline in the school.
ix. It shall ensure that the norms given In the Act of the State
and by the CBSE regarding terms and conditions of
service and other rules governing recognition/affiliation
of the school are strictly adhered to,
x. It should ensure that the school gets Furniture, Science
equipment. Library books and other teaching aids and
the requisite sports material in adequate quantity and on
time.
xi. It shall exercise powers to take disciplinary action
against staff.
xii. It shall have powers to sanction leave to the Head of the
Institution including casual leave.
xiii. It shall ensure that no financial irregularity is committed
or any irregular procedure with regard to
admission/examination is adopted.
xiv. It shall have the power to propose to the Society rates of
tuition fees and other annual charges and also review the
budget of the school presented by the Principal for
forwarding the same to Society for approval.
xv. The Managing Committee will meet at least twice in an
academic session.
9. Affiliation By-law 7 under Chapter II of the By-laws reads as under:
1. The school must have sufficient financial resources to
guarantee its continued existence. It should have permanent
source of income to meet the running expenses of the school
so as to maintain it at a reasonable standard of efficiency, to
pay salaries to teachers and other categories of staff
regularly at least at par with the corresponding categories
in the State Government Schools and to undertake
improvement/development of school facilities. In case of
institutions which are in the receipt of grant-in-aid from the
State Government/ U.T. the permanent Source of income
shall include the amount of grant-in-aid also.
2. No part of income from the institution shall be diverted to
any individual in the Trust/ Society/# Company registered
under section 25 of the companies act, 1956 School
Management Committee or to any other person. The
savings, if any, after meeting the recurring and non-
recurring expenditure and contributions and developmental,
depreciation and contingency funds may be further utilized
for promoting the school. The accounts should be audited
and certified by a Chartered Accountant and proper
accounts statements should be prepared as per rules. A
W.P.(C.) No. 10442/2015                                                  Page 5 of 12
copy each of the Statement of Accounts should be sent to the
Board every year.
3. The channeling of funds by the management to person (s) or
enterprise other than for furthering education in the school
will contravene the rules governing affiliation and call for
appropriate action by the Board, which may lead to dis-
affiliation of the concerned institutions.”
10.            The Central Board of Secondary Education, vide its Counter Affidavit
dated 11.07.2016, has stated, that as per the applicable By-laws, various
Delhi Public Schools have been established under different trusts and
societies having affiliation with the CBSE, and, their name, per se, is not
DPS but they have added names like DPS Ghaziabad and DPS Madhubani
Pvt. Ltd. with a different logo.
11.            The Respondent CBSE has further stated that in respect of violation
of affiliation By-laws, action was initiated in respect of DPS, Kashipur,
Uttarakhand. However, no further action has been taken on account of
interim order passed by the High Court of Uttarakhand at Nainital in that
matter.
12.            The Respondents have categorically stated that as and when a
complaint is received, action has been initiated by them, and they shall be
taking appropriate action in accordance with law, strictly in consonance with
the Affiliation By-laws.
13.            The CBSE has subsequently filed an affidavit dated 11.07.2017
pursuant to an Order passed by this Court dated 30.01.2017, to further
inform this Court about the action taken in the matter. Relevant excerpts of
the affidavit are reproduced hereunder: -
2. That in furtherance to the contention that Respondent No.5 is
charging Franchisee fees, the Petitioner has referred the names
of following schools in the present Petition:
i) Delhi Public School, Kashipur;
iii) M/s Rachna Educational Society, Warangal and
iv) Delhi Public School, Allahabad.
3. That it is pertinent to mention here that so far as
allegations with regard to Delhi Public School, Kashipur
is concerned the same has been dealt with in para 11 of
the counter affidavit dated 11-07-2016 filed by CBSE,
which is not being repeated here for the sake of brevity
and in order to avoid repetition of the details of facts and
circumstances set out therein.
4. That as regards the allegations against the remaining 3
aforesaid schools, it is submitted that CBSE has written
letters/email and asked the said schools to submit their
response to the following queries: -
i) Whether the school has made any payments to DPS
Society for using its name, logo, motto.
ii) If yes, then the school is violating rule no.19.1(ii) and
(ii) (a) which states that "any franchise school making
payment on account of use of name, motto and logo
franchiser institution or any other non-academic
activities would be termed as commercialization of
institution". Hence, the school is required to furnish
details of franchisee fee paid to DPS Society.
iii) If no, then the school is required to submit an
affidavit duly notarized to the effect that the school is not
paying any charges towards using name, motto, logo or
any other non-academic activities to any other
institution, organisation or body organisation.”
In furtherance of the responses received from the schools, appropriate action
has been initiated against schools which have been found to be in violation
W.P.(C.) No. 10442/2015                                                    Page 7 of 12
of extant bye-laws by the CBSE. The following has been stated by the
CBSE in the affidavit dated 11.07.2017 in this regard: -
5. That pursuant to this, it is submitted that the schools have
filed their responses with CBSE. The details of the information
and documents furnished by the schools are mentioned below: -
The school, in response, vide its email dated 05-05-2017,
submitted an affidavit that they have not paid any franchise fees
to Delhi Public School Society with effect from 1 st April, 2016
till date. Therefore, the Board, vide letter dated 16-05-2017
again directed the school to inform whether they have made
any payment to Delhi Public School Society for using its name,
logo, motto before 1 st April,2016. Copy of the letter dated 16-
05-2017 of CBSE is annexed as Annexure R-1.
It is submitted that the school vide its mail letter dated
17.05.2017 submitted an affidavit stating the following:
(a) Delhi Public School Pinjore is working under the aegis of
(b) Information regarding No Objection certificate from CBSE,
New Delhi and copy of new agreement was sought from DPS
society, New Delhi which was never received.
(c) The school has not paid any fee to DPS Society, New Delhi
since 1 st April and before that fee was paid to DPS Society,
New Delhi as per the agreement.
(d) The school will not pay any fee to DPS society, New Delhi
in future for the use of their name, motto and logo.
From the above facts it is apparent that the School has indulged
in violation of Affiliation Bye-laws of the Board
wilfully/intentionally and the aforesaid omission and
commissions of the school are in violation of Rule-19.l(ii) and
Rule-19.1(ii)(a) of Affiliation Bye Laws and Circulars issued by
the Board. Therefore, in view of above violations and as per
orders of Competent Authority of the Board, a Show Cause
W.P.(C.) No. 10442/2015                                                      Page 8 of 12
Notice (SCN)dated 30-06-2017 has been issued to the school.
Copy of the SCN dated 30-06- 2017 is annexed as Annexure R-
The school management vide their email dated 05.05.2017 has
forwarded an affidavit duly notarized stating that the Rachna
Educational Society or Delhi Public School, Warangal is not
paying any charges towards using name, motto, logo or any
other non-academic activities to any other institution,
organization or body organization. Copy of the said affidavit is
annexed as Annexure R-3.
The school management vide their letter dated 08.05.2017 has
forwarded an affidavit duly notarized stating that school is not
paying any charges towards using name, motto, logo or any
other non-academic activities to DPS Society, New Delhi. Copy
of the Affidavit is annexed as Annexure R-4.”
14.     Thereafter, CBSE filed an affidavit on 09.08.2019 pursuant to the
Order dated 29.10.2018 passed by this Court wherein the Deputy Secretary
furnished details of subsequent developments in respect of the action taken
by CBSE in the matter. This Court was informed as under: -
“1. That the Petitioner has filed the present petition alleging
commercialization persisting in the system of school education
mainly in the form of „Franchisees‟. It is the case of the
Petitioner that Respondent No.5, Society, in the name of
education are extracting huge royalties from the so-called
franchisee schools for licensing out its brand name, logos etc.
2.      That the present affidavit is being filed specifically in
respect of two schools namely, a)Delhi Public School, Pinjore,
Kalka (Haryana); and b) Delhi Public School, ONGC, Nazira
(Assam), as directed by this Hon‟ble Court vide order dated 29-
3.     That in respect of Delhi Public School, Pinjore, Kalka
(Haryana), it is submitted that a Show Cause Notice (SCN)
dated 30-06-2018 was issued to the School by CBSE. In
compliance of the said Show Cause Notice, the Pro Vice
Chairman DPS, Pinjore, vide their letter dated 29.07.2017 had
informed that they have already sent an affidavit to CBSE on
17.05.2017 intimating that they have not paid any money to
DPS Society after 01.04.2016. It was further informed that an
email has been sent to DPS Society for the refund of franchisee
fee amounting to Rs. 22,28,943/- paid for the sessions – 2013-
14 2014-15 and 2015-16. Copy of the reply to SCN is annexed
as Annexure R-1.
4.     That in view of the above, CBSE vide letter dated
22.08/09.2017, followed by reminder dated 07.02.2018,
directed the school to intimate the details of franchisee fee/any
other fee paid to Delhi Public School Society on or after
21.08.2013; showing the date of payment, amount paid in
rupees purpose of payment etc. Copy of the letter dated 22-
08/09-2017 is annexed as Annexure R-2.
5.     That in response, the school vide letter dated 22.02.2018,
had informed the details of money paid as Franchisee Fee to
DPS Society on or after 21.08.2013, and it also submitted a
copy of the letter dated 17th May, 2017 addressed to the
Chairman, Delhi Public School Society, East of Kailash, New
Delhi requesting for refund of the maintenance/ Franchisee
amount paid by the School to the DPS Society.
6.     That since, it was not clear whether the said School had
received any refund or not, CBSE had vide its letter dated
08.08.2018 directed the DPS, Pinjore, to submit a documentary
proof i.e. copy of Bank account/ pass book showing the refund
of above amount, if any, made by the DPS Society. The school
vide its letter dated 24.08.2018, had responded that the School
has not yet received any refund from chairman Delhi Public
School Society New Delhi. The School ensured that it will
submit the documentary proof as and when it receives the
refund amount.
W.P.(C.) No. 10442/2015                                                      Page 10 of 12
7.      That is further pertinent to mention here that the school
has, meanwhile, vide its letter dated 18.07.2018 applied for
change of name from Delhi Public School Pinjore to Shemform
Futuristic School, Pinjore alongwith all the required
documents. The said request was considered by the competent
authority of the Board with a penalty of Rs. 1,00,000/- on the
school for violation of norms of affiliation bye-laws and the
school was required to remit the same within a month. It is
submitted that the School has paid the aid penalty amount.
8.      That as regards the allegations against Delhi Public
School, ONGC, Nazira (Assam), it is submitted that on query
from CBSE, the school has vide its letter dated 01.04.2019 and
a duly notarized affidavit dated 03.04.2019, stated that the
Delhi Public School, ONGC, Nazira is not paying the DPS
Society any charges towards using name, motto, logo or any
other non-academic activities to any other institution,
organization or body organization. Copy of the letter dated
01.04.2019 is annexed as Annexure R-3. Copy of the affidavit
dated 03.04.2019 is annexed as Annexure R-4.”
15.     In the considered opinion of this Court, the affidavits submitted by the
CBSE reveal that it has taken stern action from time to time which includes
imposition of penalty upon defaulting schools which have violated the
extant affiliation bye-laws. In view of the same, no further orders are
required to be passed in the present PIL.
16.     The Petitioners have alleged various irregularities in respect of the
DPSS, and the Petitioners shall be free to take recourse to the other remedies
available under the law keeping in view the Societies Registration Act, 1860
and other statutory provisions governing the field.
17.     However, CBSE is directed to conclude all proceedings which have
been initiated in respect of various schools mentioned in the PIL as well as
in respect of other schools which have been mentioned in the affidavits filed
W.P.(C.) No. 10442/2015                                               Page 11 of 12
by the CBSE positively within a period of six months from the date of
receipt of certified copy of this order.
18.            With the aforesaid, the present PIL stands disposed of.
W.P.(C.) No. 10442/2015                                                Page 12 of 12