The lis on hand has been instituted questioning the validity of the penalty of
compulsory retirement imposed on the petitioner.
2.     The petitioner was appointed as Grade-II Woman Police Constable on
14.04.1981. She was upgraded as Grade-I Police Constable and further promoted as
Head Constable in June 1996 and as Sub-Inspector of Police on 19.01.2004. A charge
memo was issued to the writ petitioner on 07.03.2012 under Rule 3(b) of the Tamil
Nadu Police Subordinate Services (Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1955 in PR No.40
of 2012. The charge against the writ petitioner was that while she was working as
Station In-charge at Kallikudi Police Station, she was instructed to hand over the gold
jewelleries to the Magistrate Court in Crime No.163 of 2011 registered under Sections
147, 148, 353, 307 IPC read with Section 25 Clause 1 of the Arms Act. The petitioner
received the gold jewelleries with the approval under Form 91 from the Inspector of
Police. She had not made entries in the Case Property Registers, General Notes and
Para Book and committed an act of delay in handing over the jewelleries before the
Magistrate Court, which resulted in missing of 107.094 grams of gold jewelleries.
3.     With reference to the charges, the petitioner submitted her explanation denying
the charges. Not satisfied with the explanation, the Disciplinary Authority appointed
an Enquiry Officer, who in turn conducted an enquiry by affording an opportunity to
the writ petitioner. The Enquiry Officer submitted his report holding that the charges
against the writ petitioner are held proved and the writ petitioner was held solely
responsible for the case properties, gold jewelleries, which were entrusted to her.
4.     The Disciplinary Authority accepted the findings of the Enquiry Officer and after
providing an opportunity to the charged official to submit her further objections passed
final orders imposing the penalty of compulsory retirement in order dated 05.04.2013.
The petitioner preferred a Statutory Appeal to the Director General of Police, Chennai-
4. But the said appeal was decided by the Additional Director General of Police (Law
and Order), Chennai-4 and the appeal was rejected in proceedings dated 10.08.2014.
Thereafter, the petitioner submitted a mercy petition/review petition to the Director
General of Police on 19.11.2014 through proper channel and the said mercy petition
was forwarded by the Superintendent of Police, Madurai. However, the third
respondent-Director General of Police rejected the mercy petition submitted by the
writ petitioner on the ground that the Additional Director General of Police (Law and
Order) who had decided the appeal filed by the petitioner became the Director General
of Police on promotion and therefore, he cannot decide the issues. The order of
rejection dated 20.12.2016 was passed by the Director General of Police, pursuant to
the directions issued by this Court in WP No.36644 of 2016 dated 20.10.2016. Thus,
the petitioner is constrained to move the present writ petition.
5.      The learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner mainly
contended that the allegations are baseless and the petitioner, who was In-charge of
the Station, handed over the gold jewelleries to the Writer, who in turn kept the
properties in the locker available in the Police Station. That apart, the right of the
petitioner under the Rules for adjudication of issues on merits before the Revisional
Authority was also denied. The third respondent, who is also an Authority empowered
to review the order, rejected the mercy petition/review petition filed by the petitioner
merely on the ground that the appeal was decided by the Additional Director General
of Police (Law and Order).
6.      The learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner contended that the order imposing
the punishment of compulsory retirement by the first respondent is a non-speaking
order. The first respondent-Disciplinary Authority has not taken into consideration the
averments made by the petitioner in her further representation/objections submitted
on the findings of the enquiry report.
7.      The Disciplinary Authority, while passing final orders, has bound to consider the
further representation made by the charged official in the manner known to law and
meet all the points raised therein. However, perusal of the order impugned reveals
that none of the grounds raised by the petitioner has been considered by the
Disciplinary Authority while imposing the major penalty of compulsory retirement. The
Appellate Authority has also equally committed a mistake by passing a non-speaking
order. As per Rule 6(1)(3) of the Tamil Nadu Police Subordinate Services (Discipline
and Appeal) Rules, 1955, the Appellate Authority has to take into consideration
whether the facts narrated in the charge memo has been established through
evidence and whether the evidence can be accepted for the proof of the charges and
also decide where the punishment imposed is adequate or inadequate and pass
orders. However, none of the points raised in this regard by the petitioner in her appeal
grounds were considered by the Appellate Authority. There is no discussion with
reference to the adequacy or inadequacy of the punishment of compulsory retirement
imposed on the petitioner. Thus, the appellate order passed by the second respondent
is in violation of Rule 6 of the Tamil Nadu Police Subordinate Services (Discipline and
8.      The learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner drawing the attention of this Court
with reference to the grounds raised by the petitioner before the Authorities that the
petitioner entrusted the jewels to the Station Writer PW-2, who was directed to keep
it safe in the Locker Box of the Police Station and when it was produced on 29.10.2011
before the Magistrate, it was found that some of the items were missing. The petitioner
cannot be fixed with the responsibility of missing of the jewels except he failed to
properly account the jewels. The petitioner cannot be held responsible for the reason
that the jewels were kept only in the locker available in the Police Station and if at all
anybody is to be found fault, it is only the police personnel, who was in-charge of the
locker of the Police Station, namely, the Station Writer and Para Constables. Thus the
Authorities have not properly appreciated the evidence and the documents available
on record and therefore, the punishment of compulsory retirement is to be set aside.
9.     The learned Additional Government Pleader appearing on behalf of the
respondents objected the contentions raised on behalf the learned counsel for the
petitioner by stating that on 10.09.2011 at about 02.30 a.m., on the complaint given
by one Inspector Rajendran, a case was registered in Kallikudi PS Crime No.163/11
under Sections 147, 148, 353, 307 and 25(1) Arms Act by WSI Kallikudi. Since it was
a grave case, first investigation was taken up by Inspector of Police, Thirumangalam
Town Police Station, Thiru.Venugopal and he visited the S.O.C., prepared sketch,
observation mahazar and observed all legal formalities. After that, he recorded the
confession of all the three accused. On the basis of the confession, he recovered 16
items of gold jewels, all weighing about 163.344 grams in total from various places
under proper athatchi. After that, he returned to the Police Station along with the
jewels, prepared five numbers of Form-95 papers as E2808302-2808306 and handed
over to WSI Tmt.Prasanna Gunasundari for remanding to judicial custody. On
26.09.2011, the WSI went to the Court and produced all the Form 95 along with
athatchi before the Judicial Magistrate Court, Thirumangalam. But, the learned
Judicial Magistrate, Thirumangalam returned all the documents with an endorsement
that “To submit the properties along with the appraiser”. Again on 29.11.2011, WSI
Kallikudi went to the Judicial Magistrate Court, Thirumangalam for remanding the
properties. Due to the non-availability of appraiser, the properties were not remanded.
At that time, when she checked all the properties in the Court premises, she found
that the 6 items weighing about 107.094 grams mentioned in the Form-95 E 2803802
were missing. The same was not informed properly to the Higher Officers i.e., missing
of the gold jewels weighing about 107.094 grams immediately. On 30.11.2011, the
petitioner sent the report to the Inspector of Police, Thirumangalam Town Police
Station after the Deputy Superintendent of Police, Thirumangalam inspected the
Station and verified all the documents including Case Property Register. The Deputy
Superintendent of Police, Usilampatti conducted preliminary enquiry on the above
allegations and fixed responsibility on the petitioner for the case property gold jewels
because the property was entrusted to the petitioner by the Inspector of Police,
Thirumangalam Town Police Station. Further, the Additional Superintendent of Police
(Crime), Madurai District, who was nominated as Enquiry Officer, conducted a
detailed enquiry by verifying all the connected documents of General Diary, Case
Property Register, Sentry Relief Book etc., and marked as Exhibits 1 to 7. Also, he
examined 4 witnesses, namely, Thiru.Ravichandran, Deputy Superintendent of
Police, Thirumangalam as PW-1, Station Writer PC 238 Thiru.Vadivel as PW-2,
Thiru.Venugopal Inspector of Police, Thirumangalam as PW-3, Thiru.Kumar, Deputy
Superintendent of Police, Usilampatti as PW-4. All the witnesses clearly and
categorically explained about the facts of the case and said that the petitioner was
wholly responsible for the jewels, which were entrusted to her by the Inspector of
10.    PW-1 Thiru.Ravichandran, Deputy Superintendent of Police, Thirumangalam
has stated that “The lethargic and irresponsible attitude of the WSI Prasanna
Gunasundari amounts to either misappropriation or theft”. PW-2 Thiru.Vadivelu PC
238 Kallikudi Police Station has stated that the petitioner has not given gold jewels to
him and no entry was made in the Case Property Register. He was on medical leave
from 11.11.2011 to 05.12.2011 due to his illness. PW-3 Thiru.Venugopal, Inspector of
Police, Thirumangalam Town Police Station has stated that a criminal case may be
registered against the petitioner either under Sections 409, 420 or 380 IPC. PW-4
Thiru.Kumar, Deputy Superintendent of Police, Usilampatti also stated that valuable
properties should be kept only in the Police Station safety locker and the key should
be with the Station House Officer. He stated that the Station House Officer is
responsible for the jewels entrusted to her and it is clearly mentioned in the Police
Standing Order under Section 196. In the instant case, petitioner Tmt.Prasanna
Gunasundari is the Station House Officer of Kallikudi Police Station.
11.    Based on the above evidences, the Enquiry Officer has stated that the petitioner
was solely responsible for the case property gold jewels, which were entrusted to her
and drawn proved minutes. Based on this, the petitioner was awarded the punishment
of 'Compulsory Retirement from Service' by the Deputy Inspector General of Police,
Madurai Range, Madurai on 05.04.2013. On 08.04.2013 after receiving the order, the
petitioner filed an appeal on 02.05.2013 before the Additional Director General of
Police (Law and Order) and on 10.08.2014, the Additional Director General of Police
passed orders rejecting the appeal.
12.    Considering the arguments, the issues regarding the mercy petition/review
petition filed by the petitioner before the third respondent and the further procedures
as contemplated were followed or not is also to be considered.
13.    The charges framed against the writ petitioner are grave in nature. The
petitioner was afforded with an opportunity to defend her case before the Authorities
Competent. An enquiry was conducted by the Enquiry Officer by providing sufficient
opportunities to the writ petitioner, who in turn defended her case.
14.    This Court do not find any infirmity in respect of the procedures followed by the
Disciplinary Authority in conducting the departmental disciplinary proceedings against
the writ petitioner. Thus the principles of natural justice has been complied with.
Admittedly, the petitioner preferred an appeal before the Appellate Authority and the
said appeal was decided by the Additional Director General of Police (Law and Order),
who in turn rejected the appeal on 10.08.2014. Thereafter, the petitioner filed the
mercy petition/review petition before the third respondent-Director General of Police.
The question at this juncture arises whether such a mercy petition/review petition is
entertainable under the Rules by the Director General of Police, more specifically
when the Statutory Appeal was decided by the Additional Director General of Police.
Thus the Rules in this regard are to be examined, since such mercy petitions/review
petitions are filed by the employees in violation of the Rules and on many
circumstances such mercy petitions/review petitions are entertained by the Authorities
having no jurisdiction to entertain such petitions under the Rules. An Incompetent
Authority having no jurisdiction exercising the power of review or entertaining a review
petition would result in an administrative indiscipline and would pave way for
favouritism, nepotism, and corrupt practices or deciding the issues on extraneous
considerations. It cannot be in dispute that an Authority, who has no jurisdiction to
entertain a review petition or mercy petition can be allowed to decide such petitions in
violation of the Statutory Rules and in the event of allowing such Authorities to exceed
their jurisdiction, it will result in colourable exercise of power leading to
15.    The learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner mainly contended that under Rule
15-A of the Tamil Nadu Police Subordinate Services (Discipline and Appeal) Rules,
1955, the third respondent ought to have decided the review petition/mercy petition
on merits and in accordance with law and thus the said order is to be set aside.
16.    The learned Additional Government Pleader appearing on behalf of the
respondents objected the said contention raised on behalf of the petitioner by stating
that in order to clarify the Rule position, this Court suo motu impleaded the fourth
respondent-Principal Secretary to Government, Home (Police) Department and
directed to file an affidavit, who in turn has filed an additional counter-affidavit on
behalf of the fourth respondent, clarifying the Rule position.
17.    It is not in dispute that against the Award of punishment of compulsory
retirement by the Disciplinary Authority, the petitioner preferred an appeal and the
said appeal was rejected by the Additional Director General of Police (Law and Order),
Chennai-4 in proceedings dated 10.08.2014. On rejection of the appeal, the writ
petitioner filed a mercy petition/review petition before the Director General of Police,
Tamil Nadu, Chennai, challenging the penalty of compulsory retirement. However, the
said petition was not entertained on the ground that the Additional Director General of
Police, who decided the appeal, became the Director General of Police and therefore,
the same Officer cannot decide the appeal and the mercy petition/review petition.
18.    Thus the writ petitioner, without exhausting the chance of preferring revision
petition before the Government as envisaged under Rule 15-A of the Tamil Nadu
Police Subordinate Services (Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1955, had filed the writ
petition before this Court for quashing the order of punishment.
19.    With reference to the hierarchy of Authorities, namely, Punishing Authority,
Appellate Authority / suo motu Review Authority under Rule (6), Revisional Authority
under Rule 15-A and Review Authority under Rule 15-AA are concerned, the third
respondent filed an additional counter-affidavit extracting the Rule position, which
Authority Suomotu            Authority Authority u/r
20.     In respect of state level officer i.e DSP to SP, the Government are the
Disciplinary Authority regarding major punishment. In the case of minor punishment,
the Head of the Department i.e. the Director General of Police is the Punishing
Authority and in such case, the Government are the Appellate Authority. In all cases,
the Government are the Reviewing Authority.
21.     Let us consider Rule 15-A of the Tamil Nadu Police Subordinate Services
(Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1955 and relates to revisional power of the Authorities,
“15-A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules:
(ii)    the Head of the Department directly under the State Government, in the case of Government
Servant serving in a Department or Office under the control of such Head of Department; or
(iii)   the Appellate Authority, other than the State Government, within six months of the date of the
order proposed to be revised; or
(iv)    any other authority specified in this behalf by the State Government by general or special
order, and within such time as may be prescribed in such general or special order; may at any time,
either on their or its own motion or otherwise call for the records of any inquiry and review any order
made under these rules, after consultation with the Tamil Nadu Public Service Commission where
such consultation if necessary and may
(b)     confirm, reduce, enhance or set aside the penalty imposed by the order, or impose any penalty
where no penalty has been imposed; or
(c)     remit the case to the authority which made the order or to any other authority, directing such
authority to make such further inquiry, as it may consider proper in the circumstances of the case; or
(d)     pass such other orders as it may deem fit.
Provided that no order imposing or enhancing any penalty shall be made by any revising authority
unless the Government Servant concerned has been given a reasonable opportunity of making
representation. Where it is proposed to impose any of the penalties specified in clauses (d), (e), (h),
(i) and (j) of rule 2(i) or to enhance the penalty imposed by the order sought to be revised to any of
the penalties specified in those clauses, no such penalty shall be imposed except after an inquiry in
the manner laid down in sub-rule (b) of rule 3 and after giving a reasonable opportunity to the
Government Servant concerned of showing cause on the evidence adduced during the inquiry and
except after consultation with the Tamil Nadu Public Service Commission, where such consultation
is necessary.
Provided further that no power or revision shall be exercised by the Head of the Department, unless:-
(i)      the authority which made the order in appeal or
(ii)     the authority to which an appeal would lie where no appeal has been preferred, is
subordinate to him.
(i)      where no appeal has been preferred before the expiry of the period of limitation for an appeal
(ii)     where an appeal has been preferred before the disposal of such appeal
(iii)    an application for revision shall be dealt within the same manner as if it were an appeal under
these rules.
Provided that members of the constabulary (Police Constables and Head Constables) shall be eligible
to make one representation to the Government against orders of dismissal or removal from service
after exhausting the right of appeal.
Provided further that no application for review shall be entertained if it has not been made within a
period of six months from the date of receipt of the order on which such application for review is
22.      As per Rule 6, the Appellate Authority has to exercise his appellate power only
if the delinquent has made any appeal as per the said Rule. Otherwise, if no such
appeal has been made by the delinquent within the stipulated period of one month,
the Appellate Authority, within six months, can suo motu exercise his revisional power
under Rule 15-A of the said Rules against the order made by the Disciplinary
23.      The power provided to the authorities under Rule 15-A of the said Rules is
purely a revisional power only. Instead of the expression 'Revise', the expression
'Review' has been used in the said Rules. Whereas, in the provisos to sub-rule (1)
and in sub-rule (2) of Rule 15-A, the expressions 'Revising Authority' and 'Revision'
have been used. Except the Government, no other Authority has any power to
review its own order.
24.      Rule 15-AA of the Tamil Nadu Police Subordinate Services (Discipline and
Appeal) Rules, 1955 relates to review power of the Government, which is as follows:-
“The State Government may, at any time, either on their own motion or otherwise, review any order
passed by them under these Rules, where any new material or evidence could not be produced or
was not available at the time of passing the order under review and which has the effect of changing
the nature of the case, has come or has been brought to their notice. Provided that no order imposing
or enhancing any penalty shall be made by the State Government, unless the Government Servant
concerned has been given a reasonable opportunity of making a representation against penalty
proposed or where it is proposed to impose any of the major penalties specified in Rule 2 or to
enhance the minor penalty imposed by the order sought to be reviewed to any of the major penalties.
If an inquiry under sub-rule (b) of Rule 3 has not already been held in the case, no such penalty shall
be imposed except after and inquiry in the manner laid down in the said subrule (b) of Rule 3, which
shall be subject to the provisions of sub-rule (c) thereof.”
25.      This Rule do not prohibit that the revisional power can only be used by any one
of the Authorities. The revisional power exercised by any Revisional Authority can
further be revised by Higher Revisional Authority. Such revisional power is subject to
further revision by Higher Revisional Authority. As per the said Rule 15-A, any order
made under the said Rules can be revised at any time by the Revisional Authorities.
But, the Subordinate Revisional Authority cannot have power to revise the revisional
order passed by the Higher Revisional Authorities.
26.      Rule 15-B of the Tamil Nadu Police Subordinate Services (Discipline and
Appeal) Rules, 1955, which contains a non-obstante clause, prescribes that nothing
contained in these Rules shall be deemed to preclude the State Government from
reviewing its own order previously passed. As per this Rule, the Government have
power to review its own order passed under the said Rules, which includes the orders
passed under Rules 15-A and 15-AA of the said Rules. A comparative analysis of
Rule 15-AA and 15-B exemplify that the power of review can be exercised only by the
Government on limited grounds to review its own order.
27.      The Division Bench of this Court has considered the said Rule 15-A of the Tamil
Nadu Police Subordinate Services (Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1955 in its order,
dated 16.02.2005 in WP No.17263 of 2004 filed by Thiru.R.Krishnasamy, in
paragraphs 8 and 9, this Court observed as under:-
“8. An analysis of the aforesaid provision makes it clear that the power of review has been given to
the State Government under Rule 15(1)(i) or the Head of the Department or the Appellate Authority
or any other authority specified in this behalf by the State Government. So far as the appellate
authority is concerned, as contemplated under Rule 15A(1)(iii) such power is to be exercised within
six months from the date of order proposed to be reviewed. So far as any other specified authority
contemplated under Rule 15-A(1)(iv) is concerned, such power is to be exercised within time as may
be prescribed, and so far as the State Government or Head of the Department is concerned, such
power can be exercised at any time. This power of review can be exercised by the concerned authority
on its own motion, i.e., suo motu or otherwise. In other words, such power of review can also be
exercised on the basis of an application, which is contemplated in Rule 15-A(3). If the power is
exercised obviously suo motu, there is no filing of any application. Under Rule 15-A(4), no application
for review shall be preferred more than once in respect of the same order. Review can be made in
respect of any order made under these Rules. So far as the Head of the Department is concerned, it
is contemplated that he shall not have the power of review unless the appellate authority is
subordinate to him. A careful analysis makes it clear that so far as suo motu power is concerned,
there is no prohibition for the higher authority to issue suo motu review proceedings. The only
embargo is that if the review is based on any application, such applicant cannot have a further right
of filing further application for review.
9. For clarification, we may refer to the provisions contained in Sections 397 and 401 Cr.P.C. giving
the power of revision to the Sessions Judge as well as the High Court. There is a specific prohibition
in Section 397 (3) indicating that if a power of revision is exercised by a particular revisional authority
and the order is confirmed, no further revision would be maintainable. However, there is no such
indication in the present Rule 15. On the other hand, a careful reading of Rule 15 indicates that if
power of review is exercised by an authority, the higher authority is not precluded from exercising suo
motu power of review. If the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner would be accepted,
the jurisdiction of the higher authorities would be unduly circumscribed and any inferior authority
contemplated under Rule 15-A may foreclose the discretionary power of review of a higher authority
by exercising such review power himself. We are therefore unable to accept such contention.”
28.      The Full Bench of this Court has also considered the validity of Rule 15-A of the
said Rules in WA (MD) No.686 of 2015 in its order dated 14.02.2020 and in
paragraphs 18 to 22, 36, 39 and 44, the Full Bench of this Court has observed as
“18.    When scope of Rule 15A of the Rules is not analogous to Order 47 Rule 1 CPC, the general
expression of law by the Division Bench in P.Selvaraju&#45;s case may not be appropriate. The
power conferred on the Appellate Authority or Head of the Department or State Government to review
any order passed by the Authority subordinate to it, is subject to the limitations within Rule 15A and
no limitation can be inferred beyond the Rule. The power of review under Rule 15A of the Rules is
also a power, which is different from the power of an appellate Authority. Rule 15A(2) of the Rules
makes the position clear that the power of review is not available to any authority, till the expiry of
period of limitation for an appeal or the disposal of the appeal, where an appeal has been preferred.
Reading of the Rule 15A in its entirety, makes it explicit that the power of suo motu review is
independent of the power as an appellate authority and that such power can be exercised by the
State Government or Head of the Department or Appellate Authority either on their or its own motion
or otherwise, to confirm or modify or set aside the order of punishment or remit the case to the
authority, which made the order or to any other authority. Proviso to Rule 15A(1)(iv) of the Rules,
though provides for a reasonable opportunity to the Government Servant against the penalty
proposed, no corresponding requirement to provide opportunity or notice to disciplinary authority is
contemplated, even when the power of review, either suo motu or on application is exercised and
order is passed setting aside the order of Disciplinary Authority imposing penalty.
19.     When Rule 15A of the Rules is incorporated, the object appears to be to give the power of
suo motu review to the Appellate Authority or to the Head of the Department or to the State
Government to review any order passed by any subordinate authority. The power of review under
Rule 15A of the Rules is a special power and is not limited by any other rule. The non obstante clause
indicates that Rule 15A of the Rules is not controlled by any other Rule. As it is pointed out earlier,
Rule 15A of the Rules empowers the State Government or Head of the Department or Appellate
Authority to review any order made under the Rules. By express language, the power is wide enough
to include every order that may be passed in exercise of the power conferred under Rules. It is well
settled that the normal Rule of interpretation is to read the words of Statute as per language employed.
In case of ambiguity, rational meaning has to be given. Only when there is apparent conflict,
harmonious meaning to advance the object and intention of the legislature need be given.
20.     In the present case, going by plain language, the power is given to the appellate authority or
Head of the Department or the State Government to suo motu review the order of any subordinate
authority subject to certain limitations prescribed in the Rule and this power is not limited by any other
Rule. The only limitation under Rule 15A(4) of the Rules is that an application for review cannot be
maintained successively before different authorities against the same order. In other words, a second
application for review is not maintainable once review application filed under Rule 15A of the Rules
is considered and disposed of earlier. Sub Rule (4) of Rule 15A of the Rules cannot be interpreted to
apply, when power is exercised suo motu to review the order of a subordinate authority.
21.     The contention of the learned Senior Counsel for the respondent that the word 'or' used in
Rule 15A(1) of the Rules instead of 'and' would suggest that suo motu power of review cannot be
exercised by all the authorities under Rule 15A(1) of the Rules one after another cannot be
countenanced in the context. First of all, Rule 15A of the Rules deals with the independent power of
different authorities specified. In the context, using of the word 'and' in Rule 15A(1) is ruled out. No
one can imagine of using the word 'and' instead of 'or', while interpreting Rule 15A(1) of the Rules.
22.     The contention of the learned Senior Counsel for the respondent that there cannot be a review
of review, by relying upon the judgment of Division Bench in P.Selvaraju's case, cannot be applied,
as we pointed out earlier that expression of the Division Bench appears to be by borrowing the
principles of law reiterated by Courts on the interpretation of Order 47 Rule 1 or Order 47 Rule 9 CPC.
36. By relying upon any of the precedents, Rule 15A of the Rules cannot be interpreted to conclude
that under Rule 15A of the Rules, the Head of the Department has no authority to exercise his suo
motu power of review, after an order has been passed by the authority subordinate to him in exercise
of suo motu power of review.
39. In the light of discussions and conclusions reached above, we have no hesitation to answer both
questions referred to us in the affirmative. In other words, the view taken in the case of
R.Krishnaswamy vs. The Director General of Police and another, reported in 2005(2) MLJ 353, is in
direct conflict with subsequent judgment in the case of The Secretary to Government vs.
N.Karunanithi, in W.A.Nos.604 and 720 of 2016, which has not noticed the earlier judgment. Further
in the light of provisions of Rule 15A of the Tamil Nadu Police Subordinate Service (Discipline and
Appeal) Rules, 1955, the Head of the Department has the authority to exercise his suo motu power
of review, after an order passed by the authority subordinate to it, exercising the power of suo motu
We make it clear that the Head of Department or the State Government can either enhance or remit
the punishment awarded by the Disciplinary Authority, while reviewing the order of the Appellate
Authority or the Head of the Department, as the case may be, since the order of Disciplinary Authority
merges with that of the Appellate Authority / Head of Department. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...”
29.       It is once again reiterated that Rule 15-A confers revisional powers to the State
Government or the Head of the Department or other Authorities mentioned therein.
The power of revision adumbrated under the Rule is intended to decide all questions
as to the correctness, legality or propriety of any finding, penalty or order, recorded
by the Disciplinary Authority and Appellate Authority. Sub-rule (4) of Rule 15-A
contemplates that no application for review shall be preferred more than once in
respect of the same order. The aforesaid Rule abundantly makes it clear that the
multiple revision petitions at the instance of the delinquent are not maintainable under
the Service Rules. The power of revision conferred to various Authorities under the
Rule shall not be overlapped under any circumstances. Revisional powers conferred
to different Authorities are to be exercised only upon subject to fulfilment of
requirements prescribed thereunder. As a corollary a delinquent does not have any
right to prefer multiple revision petitions repeatedly to the Authorities concerned. Rule
15-AA of the Rule confers extraordinary power of review to the State Government at
any time either on their own motion or otherwise to review any order on the ground of
new material or evidence, which could not be produced or was not available at the
time of passing of order. This provision enables the Government to review its own
order in any case of any error or mistake made with regard to decision rendered to
rectify the same. In other words, the power of review conferred under the Rule to the
Government to rectify its error on the decision making on limited grounds. The Rule
explicitly makes it clear that the power of review can be exercised only in case of
discovery of new and important matter or evidence, which after the exercise of due
diligence was not within the knowledge or could not be produced by the delinquent at
the time when order was made by the State Government. Therefore, the power of
review is not akin to right of remedy of appeal provided to the delinquent. The power
of review has to be exercised sparingly only upon fulfilment of material grounds
envisaged thereunder. Moreover, the power of review cannot be exercised in a routine
manner at the instance of delinquents' applications.
30.       It is brought to the notice of this Court that the Office of the Director General of
Police is entertaining mercy petitions/review petitions indiscriminately from many
police personnel and the employees. Entertaining mercy petition is illegal and directly
in violation of the Tamil Nadu Police Subordinate Services (Discipline and Appeal)
Rules, 1955 in force. Any of the Authority under the Rules has power to entertain
mercy petition and grant the discretionary relief, which amounts to colourable and
improper exercise of power resulting in unconstitutionality. The power of entertaining
the mercy petition is conferred only on the Constitutional Authority, namely, the
'Governor of the State' under Article 161 of the Constitution of India. Accordingly, the
Governor of a State shall have the power to grant pardons, reprieves, respites or
remissions of punishment or to suspend, remit or commute the sentence of any
person convicted of any offence against any law relating to a matter to which the
executive power of the State extends. Such a power conferred to the Governor of a
State under Article 161 of the Constitution of India, cannot be exercised by any other
Executive Authority in the State. Therefore, entertaining a mercy petition by the Office
of the Director General of Police is in violation of the Indian Constitution and no such
power has been conferred on any of the Authority of the Police Department under the
Tamil Nadu Police Subordinate Services (Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1955 or under
any other Rules in force. Neither the Office of the Director General of Police nor any
other Authority subordinate to him are empowered to entertain any mercy petition for
the purpose of exercise of their discretionary powers in any matters.
31.     In the context of the above rule position, it is not in dispute that the Specified
Authority under the Rule alone is empowered to exercise the jurisdiction. The excess
exercise or improper exercise of powers would lead to colourable exercise of power,
resulting in unconstitutionality. No Authority shall exercise excess powers or any
power, which is otherwise not conferred under the Statute or the Rules in force. Such
an exercise may cause anomalous situation in administrative affairs and further cause
illeffect to the administrative discipline, which is constitutional mandate. The
administrative discipline in the matter of deciding the issues either as a Punishing
Authority, Appellate Authority or Review Authority is to be maintained scrupulously by
all the Authorities concerned in accordance with the Rules.
32.     Public Administration exercises large volume of power to meet the citizens need
in modern democratic welfare State. Due to this, there is number of chances of them
becoming arbitrary. So it is necessary to control them. The underlying object of judicial
control is to ensure that the Authority does not abuse (misuse) its power and the
individual receives just and fair treatment.
33.     The general principles laid down is that the power conferred on the Executives
should not be left entirely to the discretion of any Authority to do anything it likes
without any check or control by any Higher Authority.
34.     In the context of irrelevant consideration if a Statute confers power for one
purpose, its use for a different purpose is not regarded as a valid exercise of power
and is likely to be quashed by the Courts. The discretionary power is required to be
used for the purpose for which it has been given. If it is given for one purpose and
used for another purpose, it will amount to abuse of power. Where the discretionary
power is exercised by the Authority on which it has been conferred ostensibly for the
purpose for which it has been given but in reality for some other purpose, it is taken
as a colourable exercise of discretionary power and it is declared invalid.
35.     Importantly, in the matter of exceeding jurisdictional Authority is required to
exercise the power within the limits or the Statute. Consequently, if the Authority
exceeds this limit, its action will be held to be ultra vires and therefore, void. Improper
exercise of discretion is also impermissible. Where the discretionary power is
exercised inconsistent with the spirit and the purpose of the Statute, then also it
amounts to erroneous exercise.
36.     The general rule is that the Courts will not interfere with the exercise of
discretion by Administrative Authorities. However, they do interfere in public interest,
if there is public abuse or lack of jurisdiction. According to the Courts, the 'discretion'
should be fair, honest, based on reason and justice and should not be arbitrary, or
unjust fanciful or exercised with mala fides or without jurisdiction. 'Judicial Review' is
also the basic structure of the Constitution.
37.     It is essential that the Authority should exercise its powers within the limits of
the Statute or the Rules, otherwise it would be ultra vires on the ground of abuse or
excess of jurisdiction. When the power is exercised under 'colour' or guise of legality,
but, in reality the purpose of Statute is different, it amounts to 'colourable' exercise of
38.     In the context of the above principles and with reference to the Rules
elaborately considered in the aforementioned paragraphs, this Court is of the humble
opinion that the Authorities in the Police Department are not empowered to exercise
excessive jurisdiction or pass orders without jurisdiction under the Statute or the Rules
and if at all such exercise is made then further scrutiny regarding the other aspects
are to be enquired into.
39.     The excess exercise of jurisdiction are happening either intentionally or
unintentionally. The Authorities are erroneously exercising the powers either fancifully
or with some motivation. On many occasions, the Authorities assume powers
erroneously and decide the issues on various considerations. The motive behind such
assumption of powers are to be enquired into as such exercise if permitted, it would
result in not only administrative indiscipline, but would pave way for illegality,
irregularity, favouritism, nepotism, corrupt practices and exercise of power on
extraneous considerations. Therefore, all these important factors are to be taken note
of, when an Authority is exercising excessive jurisdiction in violation of the Statutes or
under the Rules in force.
40.     During the course of arguments, the learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner
and the learned Additional Government Pleader appearing on behalf of the
respondents, brought several instances to the notice of this Court that the Higher
Officials in the Police Department are exercising excess jurisdiction by entertaining
mercy petitions/review petitions and setting aside, modifying or reviewing the
punishments imposed by the Competent Authorities and such an exercise is not only
colourable exercise, but undermining the importance of the Statute and the Rules in
force. The exercise of power, which is not made available under the Statute or the
Rules, amounts to lapses, negligence, which all are misconducts under the
Government Servants Conduct Rules, including the All India Service Officials Conduct
Rules. The powers, which all are not contemplated, if allowed to be exercised, it will
lead to maladministration and the discipline of the Force will be derailed. The discipline
in Police Force, being an important factor, regulating the administrative affairs
regarding exercise of powers are one of the important criteria for the purpose of
maintaining high discipline in Police Forces. The trust and confidence amongst the
members of the Force would be of vital factor, which would guide the Department in
falling with line in the matter of maintenance of high discipline in Uniformed Services.
Thus the Higher Authorities, while exercising the powers of the Punishing Authority,
Appellate Authority, Revisional Authority or the Reviewing Authority are expected to
verify the Rules in force and accordingly exercise the powers in a judicious manner
and by applying the mind. In the event of any such abuse or excessive exercise, the
Government is bound to exercise its powers of judicial review not only to correct the
order, but also to initiate appropriate actions against the Authorities, who had
excessively or improperly exercised the powers or otherwise.
41.    The Government-fourth respondent is not expected to stop with the correction
of erroneous orders passed in exercise of excessive powers or otherwise. The
Government-fourth respondent hereinafter shall issue notices to the Authorities, who
have excessively or improperly exercised the powers or in violation of the Statute or
the Rules and initiate all appropriate actions if any such Authority exercised the
powers without any jurisdiction. The nature of improper or excessive exercise of
powers by the Authorities must be enquired into and accordingly appropriate actions
are to be initiated against them.
42.    In respect of the present writ petition on hand, the petitioner lost her opportunity
to avail the remedy of revision under the Rules. The remedy of revision is an important
remedy and an aggrieved employee need not be denied the benefit of revision under
43.    The fourth respondent-Government is directed to issue appropriate Circular to
all the Competent Authorities to exercise the powers in accordance with the Act and
the Rules in force. In the event of excess exercise of powers, such Authorities must
be liable for prosecution under the Discipline and Appeal Rules and such excessive
exercise is to be construed as an administrative indiscipline or lapses or negligence
as the case may be. The fourth respondent shall ensure that the Authorities exercise
their powers within the ambit of Statues and Rules in force at all circumstances, for
efficient public administration, which is the mandate under the Constitution of India.
44.    The petitioner had already exhausted the appellate remedy and therefore, she
is entitled to exhaust the revisional remedy, which is contemplated under Rule 15-A
of the Tamil Nadu Police Subordinate Services (Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1955.
Thus, the petitioner is at liberty to approach the Revisional Authority in the prescribed
format in accordance with the Rules in force. In the event of submitting any such
revision, the Authority Competent shall decide the same on merits and in accordance
with law independently.
45.    With the abovesaid liberty, the writ petition stands disposed of. However, there
shall be no order as to costs.