Heard Ms. G. Goswami, learned counsel assisted by Ms. B. Choudhury,
learned counsel appearing for the writ petitioner. Also heard Mr. D. Saikia,
learned Advocate General, Assam assisted by Mr. D. Nath, learned Senior
Government Advocate, Assam appearing for the sole respondent.
The notification dated 18.08.2022 (Annexure-1) issued by the Principal
Secretary to the Government of Assam, Home and Political Department,
temporarily suspending mobile internet connectivity during the examination
hours in connection with the recruitment drive undertaken by the State, is under
challenge in the present writ petition.
By the impugned notification dated 18.08.2022 issued invoking the power
conferred under the Temporary Suspension of Telecom Services (Public
Emergency or Public Safety) Rules, 2017 read with Section 5(2) of the Indian
Telegraph Act, 1885 mobile internet (mobile data) in respect of the 24 districts
which have centers of written examination for filling up 30000 posts (approx.) for
Grade-III and Grade-IV services in different departments in the State shall
remain suspended during the exam hours on two specified dates i.e. on
21.08.2022 between 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon and between 2:00 p.m. to 4:00
p.m.; on 28.08.2022 between 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon and thereafter, between
2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. meaning thereby that on 21.08.2022 and 28.08.2022
mobile internet shall remain suspended for a total period of four hours in those
24 districts so as to facilitate free, fair and transparent conduct of the written
examination. A bare reading of the impugned notification further goes to show
that in order to curb the malpractice of cheating in the examination hall by use
of mobile phone and internet technology, the aforesaid measure has been
Assailing the impugned notification, Ms. Goswami has strenuously argued
that the notification puts a fretter in the exercise of fundamental rights
guaranteed to her client under Article 19(1) of the Constitution of India
inasmuch as under the provisions of Section 5(2) of the Indian Telegraph Act,
1885, internet services cannot be suspended so as to prevent cheating in
examination hall. Ms. Goswami has further argued that the only recourse in such
matter of suspension of internet was in accordance with the procedure laid
down in Article 19(2) of the Constitution which has evidently not been followed
in this case.
By placing heavy reliance on the decision of the Supreme Court
rendered in the case of Anuradha Bhasin Vs. Union of India reported in (2020)3
SCC 637 as well as in the case of People’s Union for Civil Liberties (PUCL) vs.
Union of India and another reported in (1997)1 SCC 301 Ms. Goswami has
argued that since temporary suspension of internet services directly infringes
upon the fundamental right of her client, this is a fit case where this Court should
not only interfere with the impugned notification but an interim order
suspending the operation of the notification with immediate effect be also
issued as otherwise, it would lead to miscarriage of justice.
Responding to the submissions made by the petitioner’s counsel, Mr.
Saikia, learned Advocate General, Assam, has placed the relevant documents
for perusal of this Court so as to demonstrate that having regard to the enormity
of the exercise and in order to instill public faith and confidence and also to
ensure a free, fair and malpractice-free recruitment process, the State has
come up with elaborate arrangements on the basis of Standard Operative
Procedure and temporary suspension of the mobile data services during the
examination hours was adopted as the last option. According to Mr. Saikia,
such a measure had to be adopted by the State after putting in place all other
measures, which will go hand in hand to ensure a free and fair selection
process. Mr. Saikia submits that having faced the onslaught of question paper
leakages by use of mobile phone and mobile internet in the few recruitment
processes held in the State of Assam over the past several years leading to
cancellation of the process, the State Government took a very serious view in
the matter and to preserve the sanctity of the process came up with such
stringent measure since it was not technically feasible to selectively suspend
mobile data services only in those areas where examination centers were
located. It is also the submission of Mr. Saikia that the internet services through
broadband and cable internet all over the State would remain uninterrupted
even during the examination time and it is only the mobile data services which
will be suspended temporarily, that too, for a specified period, on a Sunday
afternoon which is a holiday for the other institutions.
In support of his above argument the learned Advocate General has
also referred to the decision of Anuradha Bhasin (supra) to submit that the
recourse adopted by the State is both permissible and justified in the facts and
circumstances of the case.
Questioning the bona fide of the writ petitioner Mr. Saikia has further
argued that there is nothing on record to indicate as to whether the petitioner
has a mobile phone and if so is he using mobile data services and therefore, the
writ petition is liable to be dismissed on such count alone.
In reply, Ms. Goswami submits that the petitioner is personally aggrieved
since his mobile services is not working due to suspension of the data card.
I have considered the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for
both the sides and have also gone through the materials available on record.
The question as to whether, mobile data services can be temporarily
suspended so as to avoid cheating in examination centers is a serious issue
which may call for deeper examination by this Court. But the same would not
be possible unless the State files affidavit bringing its stand on record along with
the supporting documents.
As such, issue notice of motion returnable in four weeks.
Since Mr. D. Nath, learned Sr. Govt. Advocate, Assam has entered
appearance and accepted notice on behalf of the respondent, no formal
notice is required to be sent in this case. However, extra copies of the writ
petition, requisite in numbers, be furnished to the learned Government
Advocate so as to enable him to obtain instruction and file affidavit.
Heard on the prayer for interim relief.
Since the next examination is scheduled on 28.08.2022, which is just two
days away and considering the submission made by the learned Advocate
General that the suspension of data services will not be extended to the
examination scheduled to be held on 11.09.2022 and also keeping in mind that
the disruption that may be caused in the holding of the examination fixed on
28.08.2022, if an interim order is passed at this stage suspending the impugned
notification, I am not inclined to pass any interim order. This Court is also of the
view that the petitioner has failed to make out a case on facts in support of his
prayer for interim relief.
Therefore, the prayer for the interim order stands rejected.