Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 59616 of 2022
Opposite Party :- State of U.P.
Counsel for Applicant :- Saksham Srivastava,Veerendra Singh
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
By means of the the bail application the applicant has
prayed to be enlarged on bail in Case Crime No.144 of
2018 at Police Station-Asmoli, District-Sambhal, under
Sections 363 and 366 IPC. The applicant is in jail since
The bail application of the applicant was rejected by the
learned District & Sessions Judge, Sambhal on
The following arguments made by Shri Veerendra
Singh, learned counsel on behalf of the applicant, which
could not be satisfactorily refuted by Shri Sunil Kumar
Srivastava learned AGA from the record, entitle the
applicant for grant of bail:
(1). The applicant and the victim were intimate.
(2). The FIR is a result of opposition of the victim's
family members to the said relationship.
(3). The victim in her statement under Section 164
Cr.P.C. has asserted that she had left the house because
of domestic discord.
(4). No allegation of abduction or inappropriate
behaviour by the victim in her statement under Section
(5). Explaining the criminal history of the applicant it is
contended that the applicant belongs to poor economic
strata of the society and is a convenient scapegoat for
the police authorities. The applicant has been falsely
nominated in the said cases only to burnish the
credentials of the police authorities. The said cases do
not depict commission of any heinous offence and have
no bearing on the instant bail application.
(6). The applicant is not a flight risk. The applicant
being a law abiding citizen has always cooperated with
the investigation and undertakes to cooperate with the
court proceedings. There is no possibility of his
influencing witnesses, tampering with the evidence or
In the light of the preceding discussion and without
making any observations on the merits of the case, the
bail application is allowed.
Let the applicant- Manjeet Alias Pintoo be released on
bail in the aforesaid case crime number, on furnishing a
personal bond and two sureties each in the like amount
to the satisfaction of the court below. The following
conditions be imposed in the interest of justice:-
(i) The applicant will not tamper with the evidence or
influence any witness during the trial.
(ii) The applicant will appear before the trial court on
the date fixed, unless personal presence is exempted.
Before parting it will be appropriate to notice the
submission of Shri Veerendra Singh, learned counsel
for the applicant which was made at the start of the
Shri Veerendra Singh, learned counsel for the applicant
contends that the applicant belongs to the economically
poor strata of the society. It is submitted that the
applicant is in jail for more than three years as he did
not have access to legal aid & he is financially destitute.
This Court noticed that a large number of under trial
prisoners are not able to file timely bail applications as
they are poor or abandoned by their family members.
Directions have already been issued in this regard by
this Court in Criminal Misc. Bail Application No.
16961 of 2022 (Anil Gaur @ Sonu @ Sonu Tomar Vs.
State of U.P).
In this case it is evident from the case of the prosecution
that there was no incriminating evidence against the
applicant since the victim had not made any allegation
of abduction or inappropriate behaviour against the
applicant. However the applicant was confined in jail
for more than three years due to his destitute
circumstances and lack of access to legal aid.
shall enquire into the matter and see if there was any
non compliance of orders passed by this Court in Anil
Gaur (supra) in the failure to provide legal aid. The
shall also take appropriate measures to ensure
compliance of the order of this Court in Anil Gaur
A copy of this order shall be communicated to
by the learned Government Advocate.
High Court of Judicature at Allahabad