1.    A co-ordinate Bench of this Court (cor. Dipankar Datta,
CJ. and M. S. Karnik, J.) disposed of Writ Petition (L)
No.19001 of 2022, Writ Petition (L) No. 19171 of 2022 and
Writ Petition (L) No.20338 of 2022 by a common judgment
and order dated 25th August 2022, the operative part whereof
reads as follows: -
“48. Regard being had to the ensuing Ganesh
Chaturthi festival, which is so passionately
celebrated by the people of this State with
ritualistic devotion, requiring the members of
the petitioners to vacate now would be too
harsh. Therefore, we direct as follows:
a) Till 24th September, 2022 but not beyond,
the members of the petitioners are permitted to
occupy their respective allotted accommodation.
b) If any employee continues to occupy his
allotted accommodation till that date, no
coercive/adverse action as threatened by the
impugned letters/notices be taken against him.
c) Upon expiry of 24th September, 2022, action
in terms of the 1971 Act may be taken together
with such other action as is available to the
respondents in law against those employees
who choose not to vacate their respective
allotted accommodation.
d) Government of India may make a reference
under section 10 of the ID Act by 15th
September, 2022 and if reference is not
considered expedient for any valid reason, the
consequential order may be passed within the
same date.
e) Depending on the nature of decision taken by
the Government of India, the parties will be at
liberty to adopt such course of action in future
as permitted by law.
f) Should a reference under section 10 of the ID
Act be made by the Government of India to the
appropriate Tribunal for adjudication, such
Tribunal will be free to decide the rival claims
and grant such relief, if at all, in accordance
with law.
g) If the Government of India does not make
the reference on the premise that there exists
no industrial dispute for reference or otherwise,
it will be open to the members of the petitioners
to work out their remedy in accordance with
49. The writ petitions stand disposed of on the
aforesaid terms.
50. Except to the extent decided by this
judgment, all other contentions are kept open.
51. All interim applications, including Interim
Application (L) No.22361 of 2022 seeking
intervention, stand disposed of.”
2.    In compliance with the direction contained in sub-
paragraph (d) of paragraph 48 of the aforesaid order, the
Government of India in the Ministry of Labour considered the
question of referring the industrial dispute between the
management of Air India Limited and the Joint Action
Committee     of   Air  India  Unions   (hereafter   “the    Joint
Committee”, for short) “over the issue of vacation the
Residential Quarters and deduction of” Productivity Linked
Incentive (“PLI”) amounts. The decision of the Ministry, which
was sought to be communicated inter alia to the President of
the Joint Committee by letter dated 15th September 2022,
declined reference in the following words: -
“I am directed to refer to the Failure of
Conciliation      Report      No.FOC        report
Id No.300015623 dated 31/12/2020) from the
RLC (C) Mumbai received in this Ministry on
18/08/2022 on the above mentioned subject
and to say that, prima facie, this Ministry does
not consider this dispute fit for adjudication for
the following reasons:
‘Joint Action Committee of Air India Unions
has raised a demand vide their letter dated
13.10.2021 against the management of Air
India Ltd, in respect of continuation of
residence of the staff, in their respective
quarters, till their retirement. Since this
demand is not connected to employment or
non-employment        or   the    terms      of
employment or with conditions of labour,
this demand of extraneous nature cannot
be construed as an Industrial Dispute as
defined under section 2(k) of the ID Act,
1947. Therefore, this case is not deemed fit
to be referred to the Tribunal for
adjudication, hence, declined. Further, the
principles of res-judicata are also applicable
in the instant matter by virtue of Hon’ble
High Court of Bombay’s order dated
25.08.2022 in WP No.19001 of 2022 read
along with decision in WP No.20338 of
3.    This   communication      dated   15th   September      2022,
containing the decision of the Central Government not to refer
the industrial dispute, forms the subject matter of challenge in
these three writ petitions.
4.    Since common questions of facts and law are involved,
these three writ petitions have been heard together over the
past few days. We propose to dispose of the same by this
common judgment and order.
5.    The facts leading to the judgment and order dated 25 th
August 2022 would be evident from a reading thereof. We do
not wish to add to the length of this order by repeating each
and every factual incident. Suffice it to note, some of the
members of the petitioning Association, Union and Guild are
in occupation of residential accommodation provided to them
by Air India Limited and that such occupants raised an
industrial dispute claiming a right to continue to remain in
occupation thereof till their respective dates of retirement.
Conciliation    proceedings     having    failed,    the     Labour
Commissioner being the Conciliation Officer forwarded the
failure report to the Central Government whereupon the
impugned decision was arrived at.
6.    Several contentions have been advanced on behalf of
the petitioning Association, Union and Guild by Shri. Sanjay
Singhvi, learned senior counsel, Mr. Mihir Desai, learned
senior counsel and Mr. Shetty, learned counsel, respectively.
According to them, the Joint Committee had raised a dispute
connected with employment/terms of employment/conditions
of labour, which answers the definition of an industrial dispute
in section 2 (k) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereafter
“the ID Act”, for short) and, therefore, the decision declining
reference which is wholly unreasoned, is perverse. Since such
decision is clearly in the teeth of the provisions contained in
section 10(1) of the of the ID Act read with section 12(5)
thereof, they have prayed in unison for it to be set aside.
Various other contentions have been advanced and several
precedents cited by Mr. Singhvi to drive home the point that
the decision declining reference is unsustainable in law.
7.    Per contra, Mr. Anil Singh, learned Additional Solicitor
General appearing for the Union of India, Mr. Kevic Setalvad,
learned senior counsel appearing for Air India Assets Holding
Limited and Mr. Vijay Purohit, learned counsel appearing for
the Air India Limited have opposed the prayers in the writ
petitions by contending that the decision declining reference is
perfectly justified having regard to the antecedent facts and
circumstances.     Reliance  has    been   placed   on   multiple
authoritative decisions of the Supreme Court to enlighten us
on the approach to be adopted by the Court when an order
declining reference is assailed under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India. We need not refer in detail to any of
such contentions that have been raised nor the decisions
which    have   been   cited  because,    in  our   opinion,    the
controversy in issue can be resolved on first principles of law.
8.     We have no hesitation to conclude that there has been
clear non-compliance with statutory provisions as well as a
judicial order, coupled with failure to consider such judicial
order in the proper perspective and non-application of mind to
the facts and circumstances, for which the writ petitions ought
to succeed.
9.     There are more reasons than one for our aforesaid
conclusion, which we propose to assign hereafter.
10. First, is the basic ground of the decision to decline
reference containing no reason(s) for the conclusion reached.
It is the statutory mandate in section 12(5) of the ID Act that
if a reference under section 10(1) thereof is declined, the
appropriate Government shall record and communicate to the
parties concerned its reasons therefor.
11. Law, over the years, has developed to such an extent
that not only judicial and quasi-judicial orders must have the
support of reasons, even administrative orders could be
rendered vulnerable without the backing of reasons. The
requirement to record reasons is, at times, read into a statute
even when there is no such express requirement. However,
we are dealing with a statute which expressly requires the
appropriate Government to record reasons should it refuse a
reference    on  any   ground.   That   apart,  the   appropriate
Government (in this case the Central Government) in terms of
the directions contained in paragraph 48(d) of the judgment
and order dated 25th August 2022 was also under an
obligation to record reasons if a reference were declined.
12. Bearing all the facts and circumstances in mind, we are
inclined to a view that the decision declining reference ought
to have satisfied the test of “why” [i.e., ‘the reasons’] for the
“what” [i.e., the conclusion] to stand on. Bare perusal of the
order declining reference would reveal that the Central
Government referred to the terms of section 2(k) of the ID
Act while holding that the demand of the Joint Committee was
extraneous and, therefore, could not be construed as an
industrial dispute. By what process the finding had been
arrived at that the demand of the Joint Committee was
extraneous, is conspicuous by its absence. We do not expect
detailed    reasons     to  be  assigned  but   some    degree    of
application of mind should have been apparent from the
decision which, unfortunately, is absent. Mr. Singh and Mr.
Setavad have attempted to supply the “why”, but then the
“why” should have been there in the decision itself. It cannot
be provided during oral arguments. This is the first ground on
which we find the decision declining reference to be patently
13. Secondly, it appears from the impugned decision that
the Ministry “prima facie” did “not consider this dispute fit for
adjudication …”. Now, law is well settled that when the
appropriate Government refers an industrial dispute for
adjudication, it is wise and proper to record a prima facie
satisfaction of both parts of section 2(k) of the ID Act being
satisfied, i.e., (i) the dispute is between the parties referred to
in the first part of the statutory provision; and (ii) that the
dispute pertains to any of the subjects referred to in the
second part of such provision. Reference to a prima facie
satisfaction of the appropriate Government in relation to
existence of an industrial dispute or an apprehended industrial
dispute is required to be made so that the Tribunal, to which
the reference of an industrial dispute is ultimately made, may
proceed for adjudication uninfluenced by any opinion of the
appropriate Government. It would, in an appropriate case, be
open to the Tribunal to disagree with the prima facie
satisfaction recorded by the appropriate Government and to
say conclusively, on consideration of all relevant and material
facts, that an industrial dispute as defined in section 2(k) does
not exist and, therefore, no relief can be granted.
14. However, the situation would be different when the
appropriate Government declines a reference. In such a case,
a decision has to be arrived at to the effect that either no
industrial dispute exists or is apprehended, or that there are
sufficient reasons for not making the reference to the
Tribunal. However, such decision ought to bear the final
conclusion arrived at by the appropriate Government and not
a tentative conclusion. When a reference is declined, there is
no question of the Tribunal considering the legality and
validity of the relevant decision. But when the writ court is
approached challenging the decision, it would be open to the
court to closely scrutinize the order/decision declining the
reference to ascertain whether all relevant and material facts
were considered while such an order was made or the decision
was taken. The very fact that the Central Government has
reached    only  a  prima    facie  satisfaction,   on  facts   and
circumstances, leaves room for doubt as to whether there are
certain other material and relevant facts which the Central
Government had left out of consideration for which it
restrained   itself from   expressing   a  decision,   final  and
conclusive. We have been left guessing why “prima facie” was
referred to in the decision.
15. Thirdly, the decision declining reference also refers to
the principles of res judicata barring re-agitation of the same
issue for adjudication. We have read the judgment and order
dated 25th August 2022 in between the lines. What was barred
by res judicata and against whom that principle would apply
has clearly been delineated therein. The question of reference,
which could be made under section 10(1) read with section
12(5) of the ID Act, was never a matter for consideration
before the coordinate Bench when the writ petitions were
instituted. In fact, once the failure report was submitted by
the Conciliation Officer during the pendency of the earlier
round of litigation, the need for a reference or the lack of it
did arise. Over and above that, except to the extent decided
by the said judgment and order dated 25th August 2022, all
contentions were kept open. Thus, while the Court required
the Central Government to exercise the power to make a
reference to the Tribunal for adjudication, if at all, it is
axiomatic that it had not expressed any opinion on the aspect
of a reference that was required to be made. Mr. Singh fairly
conceded that the point of res judicata has not been well
taken but sought to rely on the doctrine of severability to
sustain the first part of the impugned decision. We do not
think that the doctrine would have any application here. The
ultimate object would play a significant role. The Central
Government was not in favour of making a reference, as is
clear from the decision. It intended to reinforce its decision by
assigning the additional reason of res judicata. Assuming that
the first part of the decision was valid and the second part
invalid, it needs ascertainment whether the valid part and the
invalid part are so inextricably mixed up that the same form
part of a single scheme which is intended to be operative as a
whole; if that is so, then the whole must go and there is no
question of severability. We hold on a reading of the impugned
decision that the Central Government did not intend to make
the reference by its decision, which being composite in
character, must go as a whole.
16. The fourth and final reason for which the decision
declining reference is liable to be interdicted is that the
Central Government does not appear to have considered the
dispute/demand raised by the Joint Committee touching
deductions of PLI amounts effected by the management. This
part of the demand of the Joint Committee appears to have
been completely overlooked by the Central Government. Non-
application of mind is, thus, writ large.
17. For the reasons aforesaid, we are of the clear opinion
that the decision declining reference is indefensible. Such
decision,    contained   in  the   communication     dated    15th
September 2022 is quashed and set aside. The matter is
remitted to the Central Government for a fresh decision to be
taken in accordance with law as early as possible, preferably
18. On the verge of conclusion of hearing, we have been
shown a document by Mr. Shetty. It appears to have been
issued by the Chief Human Resources Officer of Air India
Engineering Services Limited whereby the requirement to
advise     the    employees    “to    vacate    the     Company
Accommodation” by 28th October 2022 has been stressed
upon. The said document is taken on record and marked ‘X’
for identification.
19. In view of such communication, the prayer for protection
from dispossession till a decision is taken in terms of this
order does not survive for consideration. We would expect the
respondent companies to abide by the same.
20. We make it abundantly clear that beyond 28th October
2022, action may be taken in accordance with law against
those employees who fail to vacate the accommodation
provided to them by Air India Ltd. in terms of the Housing
21. The writ petitions are disposed of with no order as to
costs. All contentions on merits are left open.