This is a petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India seeking issuance of a writ of certiorari quashing the impugned order
dated 10.04.2018 (Annexure P-8) and order/communication dated
17.10.2018 (Annexure P-10), whereby offer of appointment issued to the
petitioner for the post of Probationary Officer has been cancelled; along with
certain other prayers.
The facts, as pleaded in the petition, are that the petitioner had
applied for the post of Probationary Officer in the respondent-Bank. The
petitioner participated in the process of selection and was ultimately selected
as per her merit. Thereafter, the petitioner was issued the appointment letter
by the respondent-Bank. Accordingly, the petitioner was deputed to the
induction training at Gurugram. When the petitioner joined the training, she
informed the respondent-Bank that during the period of the process of
selection, a criminal case, i.e. FIR No.83 dated 20.02.2017, under Sections
147, 149, 323, 452 and 506 of the Indian Panel Code at Police Station
Thanesar Sadar, District Kurukshetra, was registered; involving the name of
the petitioner as well, along with other family members.             Then the
respondent-Bank had informed the petitioner that the petitioner should get
clearance in the said criminal case. Later on, the petitioner was asked to
report for training at Lucknow. However, the petitioner could not join
because earlier the respondent-Bank had told her to get clearance in the
criminal case, but the criminal case was still pending at that time. However,
the same has now been quashed by this Court, vide order dated 20.07.2022
passed in CRM-M-27571-2022 (Bali Ram Hari and others Vs. State of
Haryana and others). In the meantime, the petitioner had filed CWP-
28038-2017 which was disposed of by directing the respondents to take a
decision on the representation of the petitioner. Vide the impugned order
dated 17.10.2018 (Annexure P-10), the respondents have denied the
appointment to the petitioner on the ground that the criminal case against the
petitioner has not attained finality and also relying upon Clause 9 of the
appointment letter issued to the petitioner; which stipulated that the
appointment was subject to satisfactory report regarding her character and
antecedents from the Police Authorities and non-pendency of any criminal
case/prosecution against her.       The said clause also provided that her
conviction, though released on probation and the compounding of offence
shall also be treated as report adverse to her. Therefore, in essence, the
petitioner has been denied to joining on the post; on the ground of pendency
of the criminal case without recognizing the fact that the case against the
petitioner already stands quashed.
Arguing the case, the learned Senior counsel for the petitioner
has submitted that the action of the respondent-Bank is totally baseless.
When the petitioner applied for the job, there was no criminal case registered
or pending against her. It was during the period of the process that a false
case had come into being involving the name of the petitioner as well, along
with her entire family.     Even that case stands quashed by this Court.
Therefore, there was no basis left for the respondents to deny the
appointment to the petitioner. Learned Senior counsel for the petitioner has
relied upon a judgment rendered by Hon'ble the Supreme Court in the case
of Avtar Singh Vs. Union of India and others, 2016(3) S.C.T. 672.
Hence, it is submitted that the petitioner is entitled to the appointment to the
post of Probationary Officer along with all consequential benefits. The writ
petition deserves to be allowed.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents has
submitted that the petitioner, undisputedly, was involved in a criminal case.
The appointment letter issued to the petitioner specifically contained a
stipulation that any pendency of the criminal case or conviction or
compounding of the offence would be taken as adverse to the petitioner; and
she will not be entitled to be appointed to the post of Probationary Officer.
Therefore, the respondents have rightly denied appointment to the petitioner
in view of the above-said clause in the appointment letter. Learned counsel
has further submitted that mere selection does not confer any right upon a
candidate to be appointed. In any case, the selection was subject to the
satisfactory report regarding character and antecedents on the part of the
petitioner. Hence, the respondents have rightly declined the appointment to
the petitioner. The petition deserves to be dismissed.
Having heard the learned counsel for the parties, this Court
finds substance in the arguments raised by the learned Senior counsel for the
petitioner. Undisputedly, there was no FIR or criminal case registered or
pending against the petitioner when she applied for the post of Probationary
Officer and when she participated in the process. It is only during the
process of the selection that an FIR came into being. The registration of the
FIR was also disclosed by the petitioner to the respondents on the first
available opportunity. Therefore, it is not even the case of the respondents
that the petitioner had concealed the registration of pendency of a criminal
case against her. Moreover, the case already stands quashed by the order of
this Court. Hence, there is absolutely no criminal case pending against the
petitioner as on the date when the appointment is declined to the petitioner.
So far as the mere registration or pendency of a criminal case
against the petitioner, is concerned, needless to say that FIR is merely a
report regarding an alleged incident which may or may not involve
commission of some offence. Therefore, mere factum of the receipt of first
information by the police cannot be raised to the level of a fact rendering a
candidate ineligible for the public appointment. A person is to be presumed
to be innocent till proved otherwise upon a trial conducted as per the law.
This presumption of innocence cannot be eclipsed in any other collateral
process or for any other purpose. Reading anything adverse to a person only
for registration of an FIR is nothing but a systemic bias based upon a
negativism arising from the frustration due to the facts that the criminal
cases remain pending for years together and the courts are not in a position
to take the trial to a logical end within reasonable time. Hence, a convenient
method has been devised to deny benefits to citizen by putting factum of
registration of FIR against him in the forefront. In this way, an irrelevant
fact is made a ground to deny to the citizen right to equality guaranteed by
Article 14 and Article 16 of the Constitution of India. This approach is
sworn enemy of the rule of law, and thus has to be disapproved. Therefore,
mere registration of a criminal case against the candidate can never be a
ground for denying the rights of such a candidate to participate in the
process and to secure a public appointment in his/her favour. Moreover,
even the said FIR now stands quashed. Therefore, the very basis on which
the action of the respondents was based, has been extinguished by the due
process of law. Therefore, the eclipse cast upon the rights of the petitioner,
even if so perceived by the respondents, though without any basis, already
stands removed. The reliance of the learned counsel for the respondents
upon the terms of appointment letter is totally irrelevant and non-
sustainable.    It is not even in dispute that there is no rule/regulation
applicable to the respondents which prohibits the appointment of a candidate
merely on registration of the criminal case. Therefore, induction of a term in
the appointment letter; to the effect that if a criminal case is registered then
the appointment would be denied, would be totally without any legal
sanction. The respondents cannot introduce a condition in terms of the
appointment which is not supported by any statutory provision; and it also
goes against the right to equality of the candidate to participate in the
process of selection and to secure a public appointment as per his/her merit.
Such a condition is an artificial device created by the respondents; which
militates against the fundamental rights of the petitioner and against more
than one jurisprudential principles. Therefore, the same deserves to be
deprecated with the contempt it deserves.
In view of the above, the impugned order/action of the
respondents is quashed and the writ petition is allowed. The respondents are
directed to issue appointment letter to the petitioner, effective from the date
the candidate immediately lower to her in the merit of selection was
appointed. The petitioner shall also be, accordingly, entitled to all service
benefits including seniority and pay fixation on notional basis. However,
she will not be entitled to arrears of salary upto the date she actually joins.
However, this denial of arrears shall not be taken as adverse to the petitioner
for any other purpose whatsoever; or for the purpose of grant of any other
benefits, including the pensionary benefits at the end of her tenure. The
respondents are directed to issue the necessary appointment letter to the
petitioner within a period of two months from the date of receipt of the
certified copy of this order.