This is second bail application filed on behalf of applicant/Bablesh
Patel under Section 439 of CrPC in connection with Crime No.28/2021 under
Sections 376, 376(2)(N), 506 of IPC and section 3,4,5J(ii), 5L POCSO Act and
section 3(1)(w)(II), 3(1)(w)(II), 3(II)(V) of SC/ST Act registered at police
station Mahila Thana, District Sagar and applicant is in custody since
03/11/2021. Earlier bail application (M.Cr.C No. 58753/2021) was dismissed
as withdrawn with liberty to file application after prosecutrix is examined and
FSL/DNA report is brought on record vide order dated 01/02/2022.
Shri Vivek Lakhera, learned G.A submits that though sample was sent
on 15/12/2021 for DNA sampling but same is not available.
Learned counsel for the applicant submits that prosecutrix was
examined before the trial court on 23/03/2022. She has turned hostile. She
has not supported the prosecution story. So also maternal grand mother and
maternal uncle have turned hostile. They have not supported the prosecution
story. There is no chance of prosecutrix being influenced and material
prosecution witnesses have already been examined. Applicant is in custody
since 03/11/2021. Trial will take time to conclude. Therefore, applicant be
enlarged on bail.
Learned G.A for the State opposes the prayer made by learned counsel
for the applicant.
Taking into consideration submissions of learned counsel for the parties
and the fact that prosecutrix is already examined, she has not supported the
prosecution story and applicant is in custody since 03/11/2021. Hence without
commenting anything on merits of the case, this bail application is allowed. It
is directed that applicant Bablesh Patel be released on bail on his
furnishing a personal bond to the tune of Rs.50,000/- with two solvent
sureties in the like amount to the satisfaction of the learned Trial Court. It is
further directed that the applicants shall comply with the provisions of
Section 437(3) of the Cr.P.C.
vkjksih ccys’k ls geyksxks dh dke dks ysdj yMkbZ >xMk gks x;k Fkk A esjs lkFk esa
ogkW ij vU; yksx Hkh Fks tks dke djrs Fks mudks eS ugah tkurh vkSj muyksxksa us
vkosnu cuokdj eq>ls vkosnu iqfyl dks fnyok;k Fkk A esjs lkFk blds vykok
vkSj dqN ugha gqvk Fkk A
Trial court will consider issuance of a direction against the prosecutrix
to refund the amount received by her because she admitted in her
examination in chief that she has lodged false report on account of some oral
dispute between the parties. Therefore, alleged false report is lodged,
therefore she is not entitled to keep the amount of compensation paid by the
State government collected from the tax payer of the country. Thus, trial court
will consider to direct the prosecutrix to refund that amount in the
appropriate head of the treasury account.
In view of the outbreak of new mutant Omicron of Covid-19, the jail
authorities and the State Government are directed to follow the guidelines
issued by the Health Ministry in the wake of Novel Corona Virus before and
after releasing the applicant.
In above term, this bail application is disposed of.
Certified copy as per rules