1. Case :- CRIMINAL APPEAL No. - 6192 of 2011
Appellant :- Lal Jeet and Tej Bahadur
Counsel for Appellant :- Suresh Singh Yadav, Kuldeep
Counsel for Respondent :- Govt. Advocate
2. Case :- CRIMINAL APPEAL No. - 5681 of 2011
Counsel for Appellant :- Ajay Kumar Srivastava, Ajay
Counsel for Respondent :- Govt. Advocate
1.    These appeals have been preferred by the convicted
accused appellants against the order of conviction and
sentencing   passed   by ASJ,   Court No.4,    Pilibhit on
25.08.2011 in Crime No.1051 of 2010, under Section
376(2)(g) IPC, PS Newriya, District Pilibhit, whereby the
accused appellants were convicted under Section 376(2)
(g)   IPC  and  were   awarded   life imprisonment     and
Rs.10,000/- fine each and in case of non-payment of fine
they had to undergo for one year's additional rigorous
2.    Heard Sri Kuldeep Johri and Sri Ankur Singh
Kushwaha, learned amicus curiae appearing for the
appellants, learned AGA for the State and perused the
3.    At the outset as per CJM report dated 11.05.2022
and the office report dated 17.11.2022 the accused-
appellant, Lal Jeet has died, therefore, the appeal so far
as Lal Jeet is concerned, stands abated.
4.    In brief, facts of the case are that informant Tej Ram,
father of the victim aged about 7 years lodged FIR in PS
Newriya, District Pilibhit, alleging that on 30.09.2010 his
daughter,    student    of  class-three  in   primary  school,
Tandola, was playing outside the house at around 7 p.m.
when Lal Jeet, son of Budh Sen, Tej Bahadur, son of Hori
Lal, and Chintu, son of Kali Charan, residents of
neighbouring Village Himmat Nagar @ Chiraindapur, on
the pretext of bringing gutkha carried her to a drain
situated in the east of the village and forcibly raped her.
The victim did not return for a long time, her parents
along with other villagers went to search with torches,
and heard the victim's scream coming from the side of the
drain, then the informant, his wife Tarawati, his elder
brother Ram Pal, younger brother Prem Pal and many
other villagers reached there, and saw that Lal Jeet and
Chintu were catching hold his daughter and Tej Bahadur
was doing bad things with her. Seeing them all the three
accused persons ran away leaving the victim covered in
blood. In the morning all three were again seen in the
village. The villagers were very angry and agitated, they
caught them. The victim was taken to Kusum Hospital,
Pilibhit, for treatment at night. They could not go to the
police station due to lack of facilities and thereafter
brought the girl and the accused to the police station.
Informant requested to register the report and take
necessary action.
5.   On the basis of the written complaint the case was
registered against all the three accused persons being
Crime No.1051 of 2010, under Section 376 IPC. The
Investigating Officer (I.O.) started investigation, recorded
the statement of the witnesses. The victim was medically
examined, X-Ray was done and supplementary medical
report was prepared. Visiting the spot along with the
complainant a map was drawn and the shirts and
underwears of the accused were taken into possession
and sent to FSL by the I.O. On finding sufficient evidence
against all the three appellants a charge sheet under
Section 376 IPC was submitted to the court. The case was
committed to the court of sessions wherefrom the file was
transferred to the concerned court.
6.   On 31.01.2011 accused persons were charged under
Section 376(2)(g) IPC. They denied the charge and
claimed trial.
7.   The prosecution examined following witnesses to
prove the charges:-
(i) PW-1, informant, Tej Ram; (ii) PW-2, victim; (iii) PW-3,
8.    The     prosecution     produced       the    following
documentary evidence to prove the prosecution case:-
(i) Ex.Ka-1, written complaint; (ii) Ex.Ka-2, X-Ray report;
(iii) Ex.Ka-3, chik FIR; (iv) Ex.Ka-4, photocopy GD; (v)
Ex.Ka-5, report of the vaginal slide; (vi) Ex.Ka-6, map; (vii)
Ex.Ka-7, recovery memo of underwear and shirt of the
victim and upper cloth of the pocket of the shirt of the
accused, Tej Bahadur; (viii) Ex.Ka-8, recovery memo of the
blood stained underwear of the accused persons upon
which as per investigating officer there was blood of the
victim; (ix) Ex.Ka-9, charge sheet; (x) Ex.Ka-10, medical
report of the victim; and (xi) Ex.Ka-11, supplementary
medical report of the victim.
9.    Following material exhibits were produced during
(i) Material Ex.1, X-Ray plate and underwear of the victim;
(ii) Material Ex.2, shirt of the victim; (iii) Material Ex.3,
underwears of the accused persons.
10. After closer of the prosecution evidence statement of
the accused persons were recorded u/s 313 CrPC. All the
accused persons denied the case and the allegations. In
addition to that accused Lal Jeet stated that before this
incident Salig Ram and Bhimsen of his village had
contested the election of Gram Pradhan. Bhimsen had
won the election. The complainant and Bhimsen felt bad.
The injury to the daughter of the informant was caused at
some other place or in some other manner, but due to
electoral rivalry he has been falsely implicated.
11. Accused Chintu had also denied the prosecution
version of the case and in addition to that has given the
same explanation. Tej Bahadur has also given similar
explanation. Accused appellants have not produced any
evidence in their defence.
12. It would be proper to produce a brief narration of the
evidence of the witnesses.
13. According to PW-1, informant, Tej Ram, accused
persons are the residents of the neighbouring village
Charaindapur. At the time of incident his daughter aged
about 7 years, student of class-three, was playing outside
of the house at about 7 p.m. On the pretext of bringing
gutkha, accused took her outside the village to a dirty
drain. All the three accused raped the victim. When she
was not seen, PW-1 and others went out to search her. On
hearing her cry, he reached near the drain along with
Ram Pal, Prem Pal and his wife. They saw that Tej
Bahadur and Lal Jeet were holding her while Lal Jeet was
raping her. She was covered in blood. Seeing them, all the
three accused ran away. PW-1 took the victim to the
hospital. Next day in the morning all three accused
persons were again seen in the village. He caught them
with the help of the villagers. Thereafter, they went to the
police station. The report was written by Amarjeet outside
the police station. The witness has proved the written
complaint Ex.A-1. He had given the complaint to diwanji
who wrote a report on that basis. Investigating Officer
had taken his statement at the police station.
14. During cross-examination the witness recognized all
the accused persons and in reply to the questions
repeated the version of the examination-in-chief and
admitted that before him the accused persons did not take
his daughter for taking gutkha. When the girl did not
come for an hour, he went out to search her with 10-15
villagers with torches, but without sticks. When she was
taken away, she was wearing black shirt and blue jeans.
When he reached near the drain, the sound of her crying
was heard. Her bloodied pant and shirt were lying there.
The girl was in an injured condition. She was conscious
for a while and then fainted. When he reached the spot,
all the three accused were also there. They tried to catch
them but they ran away. His daughter was about 300
yards away when he flashed the light. They were to the
west of the girl. When the torch was lit first, these
accused persons were near the girl and had caught hold
her but later on fled after seeing the light. Their faces
were visible. The pant of accused Lal Jeet and Tej Bahadur
had come off and the underwear was sliding down. They
were trying to take the girl away. The accused had run
away with their pants. After reaching there they took the
girl to the hospital where he was advised to take her to
the government hospital. Thereafter, the girl was taken to
the police station and therefrom to the Government
Hospital, Newriya, where they were referred to the
District Hospital, Pilibhit. His three shirts were stained
with the girl’s blood. Munshi had said to write whatever
you want to give. Two sarees of his wife were stained with
blood. Amar Deep had taken his signature. He had
narrated the complaint to Amar Deep and none else. He
did not give blood stained shirt and wife’s sarees to the
Investigating Officer but the blood stained clothes of the
girl were given to him. He went to the government
hospital where doctor seeing the deteriorating condition
of the girl referred her to Government Hospital, Pilibhit,
where she was admitted for 13 days. For two days the girl
remained     unconscious,  then   she   started   regaining
consciousness. Accused were caught together in the
morning and taken along with them. After admitting the
girl he did not go to the village and stayed together. His
daughter was found in an empty place and there was a
ditch before it. West of it is the garden of Ganga Ram.
North is a road which goes to Sanjana. There is a drain in
the south which would be 1.5 meter wide and 1 meter
deep and is flooded during the rainy season. Paddy was
harvested at that time. The witness denied that due to the
enmity of Gram Pradhan election he felt bad and has
falsely implicated the accused persons. He also denied
that his daughter had sustained injuries elsewhere and in
any other manner. He had stated to the Investigating
Officer that he was carrying the torch, if he did not write,
he cannot tell the reason. If it is not written in the
complaint, he cannot tell the reason. He replied that it is
wrong to say that today for the first time in the court he
was telling about seeing the incident in the light of torch.
Two torches were shown to the Inspector but he neither
took it in possession, nor, did he write it.
15. PW-2, victim was firstly tested under Section 118 of
the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (in short ‘the Act, 1872’),
and when the court found that she understands the
meaning of affidavit and is capable to be testified, she was
testified on oath, she deposed that she knows the accused
persons but does not know them by name. They are the
residents of Chiraindapur. At the time of incident she was
playing outside her house. These three accused persons
came to her, asked her to bring gutkha and took her
outside the village. There was farm land on both sides
where these three did dirty work with her. They removed
her underwear and licked her legs. Pointing towards
accused Tej Bahadur, the witness said that earlier he did
bad things with her. Then pointing towards Lal Jeet she
told that he had done bad things with her, then pointing
towards the third accused Chintu she said that he did bad
things with her. She was playing. Chintu had given her
some medicine. Pointing towards Chintu she told that he
had pressed her neck. After doing bad things with her all
the three accused ran away. Her father, uncle and elder
uncle came from her house and had seen these people on
the spot. Her mummy dressed her at home. Her father
took her to the doctor at night.
16. In cross-examination she replied that when she was
playing outside the house, accused persons carried her in
their arms in the dark night. At that time her father and
uncle were not there, brother was there. She cried and
shouted then these accused persons gave her medicine.
Her brother did not cry. When she cried, villagers did not
reach the place where she was taken. Her elder brother
had called his parents. Father, uncle and elder uncle had
come later. The accused persons had taken her outside
the village and pushed her, she fell on the ground. Her
head collided on the ground and hurt her back. The injury
was severe. She was conscious when her father came
there. She regained conscious after some time. Therefrom
she had come with her parents near the government tap
which is away from her house and is installed in front of
the field. She had informed her parents, uncle and elder
uncle that three persons had taken her away. The
villagers had caught these three and brought them. It is
wrong to say that she was giving false testimony at the
behest of her parents and other people. It is wrong to say
that the accused persons had not taken her. It is wrong to
say that she suffered injury in some other manner or in
any other place.
17. PW-3, Dr. R.K. Maheshwari, radiologist deposed that
he had prepared X-Ray report of the victim and found: (i)
right knee joint epiphysis around knee joint were not
fused (ii) about right wrist joint, he found that epiphysis
around wrist were not fused. He proved X-Ray report
Ex.Ka-2 and X-Ray plate Material Ex.1. He denied the
suggestion that he had done X-Ray of any other person in
place of the victim. He also denied that forged X-Ray
report was prepared by him.
18. PW-4, Constable Moharrir, Netra Pal Singh, has
proved chik FIR Ex.Ka-3 and kaymi GD Ex.Ka-4 and
deposed that on 30.09.2010, at 10:20 a.m, he had
prepared chik FIR and had entered the case in original
G.D. In cross-examination he admitted that no date is
mentioned regarding presentation of chik FIR before the
concerned C.O. He further replied that this chik FIR was
presented before C.J.M. on 04.10.2010. He admits that
special report is not available in the file. He also admits
that name of the persons who came to lodge the FIR has
not been mentioned in G.D. Ex.Ka-4. It is also not
mentioned that how the accused were tied and from
which vehicle they were carried to the police station. He
admits that injuries of the accused persons are not
mentioned in Ex.Ka-4, but he denied the suggestion that
Ex.Ka-3 and Ex.Ka-4 were forged and ante-timed.
Hospital, Pilibhit, deposed that on 01.10.2010, he had
examined vaginal smear slide of the victim sent by Dr.
Vijay Laxmi of PHC, Newriya. He deposed that in
examination he did not find spermatozoa but he found red
blood cells in large quantity. He proved his report Ex.Ka-
5. He denied that he was falsely deposing.
20. PW-6,    S.O,   Tapeshwar   Sagar,   deposed   that on
30.09.2010, the case was lodged in his presence. He
started investigation, copied chik FIR, recorded the
statement of the informant, FIR writer-Netra Pal Singh
and the statement of the accused persons. He copied the
medical report, inspected the place of occurrence and
prepared the map Ex.Ka-6. He took the lining of the
pocket of the accused Tej Bahadur and underwear and
shirt worn by the victim, sealed it and prepared specimen
seal. He prepared recovery memo Ex.Ka-7 in his hand
writing. He also took blood stained underwear of all three
accused and kept in polythene, did chitbandi and put in
cloth sealed, prepared specimen seal and recovery memo
Ex.Ka-8 in his own hand writing, copied both the recovery
memo in C.D, recorded the statement of witnesses of
recovery, witness Prem Pal, victim and Tarawati, copied
the pathology report and X-Ray report, recorded the
statement of S.I, Rajendra Babu, Constable Netrapal
Singh, Home Guard Daulat Ram and complaint writer
Amar Deep. On 27.10.2010 he sent the clothes to FSL,
Lucknow, through Constable, Subedar Singh. He proved
the docket Ex.Ka-8. He copied the supplementary report
and submitted charge sheet Ex.Ka-9 to the court. During
the testimony he proved the underwear and black shirt of
the victim as Material Exs.1 and 2, underwears of the
accused-persons as Material Exs.3, 4 and 5 respectively.
21. In   cross-examination    this   witness  replied   that
witness Tej Ram or the villagers had not produced the
torch used by them. Tej Ram had informed the names of
some witnesses, such as, Prem Pal, Ram Pal and Tarawati
and had not informed the names of 10-15 persons. He
admits that till the time of submission of charge sheet,
FSL report was not obtained. He has admitted that
concerned G.D. is not referred in case diary, its copies are
also not available on the file. He admits that he has not
entered time of closer of investigation in C.D. According
to him he did not find blood on the spot but had found
blood on the shirt of the victim which is not written in
Ex.Ka-7. According to him there was blood on the
underwears of the accused persons which is written in
recovery memo. It was prepared at police station.
Recovery    memo      (Ex.Ka-7)    of   victim’s   clothes  was
prepared on spot. He admits that in Exs.Ka-6, 7 and 8
names of the accused persons are not mentioned. On
asking the colour of the underwears of the accused
persons, he replied that one underwear is brown and the
second is green in colour and another is light almond
colour. He further deposed that underwear of the victim is
brown in colour. One shirt is black. He further deposed
that Tej Ram and his wife neither showed their blood
stained clothes, nor, those were taken into possession. He
denied    the  suggestion     that    he   had   done   all the
investigation   sitting  at   the   police    station  and  has
submitted false charge sheet on the basis of fake
investigation. He denied that Exs.Ka-6, 7 and 8 were
prepared ante-time.
22. PW-7, Dr. Vijay Laxmi deposed that on 30.09.2010,
during her posting she had examined the victim, at 11:30
a.m. brought by Constable Durga Prasad, Police Station
Newriya, with injury letter.
23. During the internal examination she found that the
outer part of the victim’s vagina was swollen and red in
colour. It was very difficult to do the internal examination.
The victim was fainting repeatedly due to pain and
swelling. The vagina was cut from both sides and fresh
blood was oozing. There were deep wounds up and down
inside the vagina opening from which blood was oozing.
The lower wound was up to the anus. The lower part of
the inside vagina was coming up to the anus. There was
deep wound inside the vagina that its examination was
difficult. In the said situation the victim was immediately
referred     to  the   surgery    department   for advance
treatment. X-Ray was advised to determine her age,
hence, referred to the radiologist. Two samples of the
victim's vaginal discharge were prepared. It was sent to
the pathology for examination. She had prepared the
medical report Ex.Ka-10 and supplementary medical
report Ex.Ka-11 on 20.10.2010, in her own writing. The
injury of the victim was of serious nature and fatal for her
life due to which she could have died.
24. In cross-examination this witness admitted that she
had not given any opinion about rape. On asking by the
court the witness replied that the condition of the child
was so serious that she did not think about the opinion of
rape. The girl was fainting and there was heavy bleeding
which could prove fatal. Further, she was questioned why
was the girl sent to you. She answered that the victim was
sent for testing, if she had died during examination its
responsibility would fall on her. On asking whether she
read injury letter. She answered that she had read it,
wherein, it was requested to inform about the medical
result and report whether the victim had been raped. On
asking whether the victim was raped or not, she replied
that there was no clear narrative about rape, that is why
she did not give clear report. When there is no possibility
of someone dying, the victim gives a clear opinion
regarding rape, the girl’s condition was so bad that is why
she could not think about it. On asking when a woman is
in very serious condition, one gets emotional and forgets
everything. She replied not on emotion, she wanted to
refer the victim for proper treatment. A question was
again put, whether in the circumstances would suggest
that the victim was raped. She replied that if there is
fresh injury in the internal organs then I would give an
opinion, I am sure that she has been raped. A question
was again asked that the victim of this case had suffered
injuries on her internal organs then in that case why did
she not give an opinion regarding rape. She replied that
she made a mistake at that time, did not pay attention. On
being questioned whether she did it intentionally. She
replied that it is impossible.
25. After that learned counsel for the accused persons
started cross-examination, to which she replied that in
injury report, pathology report, supplementary medical
report and X-Ray report she had not mentioned about the
opinion of rape. She further replied that the victim was
raped, she is saying not on the basis of memory but after
seeing the report. She admits that in her report she did
not give any opinion regarding rape of the victim. Life of
the victim would have been lost, is not in her report. The
hymen gets torn when the victim was raped. In her report
it is written that it is difficult to identify the hymen
separately. PW-7 further replied that in internal organs of
the victim, semen was not found anywhere. If a girl falls
or collided on a cut sugarcane or cut structure or cut
round stick and the bite goes towards the anus, it is not
possible to get such inquiries. On falling the injury would
come at one place. The nature of injury suffered by the
victim cannot come from sliding and falling. It is correct
to say that the victim must have been raped. But PW-7
admits that she has told this for the first time in the court
today and had not mentioned it in any report. She denied
the suggestion that she was not telling the right things
and she was lying in the court and is not giving correct
statement based on the medical examination report.
26. After closure of the prosecution evidence statement
of all the three accused persons were recorded u/s 313
CrPC as already mentioned at page-4 wherein they denied
the allegations and had not produced any evidence in
27. The appeal is being decided in the backdrop of above
noted evidence as under:-
I.   In this case, according to prosecution the occurrence
took place on 29.09.2010, at about 07:00 p.m. in the
evening, FIR was lodged on 30.09.2010, being Crime
No.1051 of 2011, under Section 376 IPC against the
named accused-appellants at 10:20 a.m. The distance of
police station from the concerned village is 9 kms, after
the incident, the victim was first admitted in Kusum
Hospital, Pilibhit, in the night and thereafter, she was
referred to the Government Hospital, Newriya, Pilibhit,
from there victim was referred to the District Hospital,
Pilibhit, for further treatment.
II.  Next day on 30.09.2010 the accused persons were
caught by the informant and the villagers. Thus, it cannot
be said that any undue delay was caused in lodging the
III. In Bable Vs. State of Chhattisgarh, AIR 2012 SC
2621, it is held that FIR is not a substantive piece of
evidence and it is not an encyclopedia. In Jarnail Singh
Vs. State of Punjab, (2009) 9 SCC 719 and Bhagwan
Jagannath Markad Vs. State of Maharashtra, (2016)
10 SCC 537, it is also held that the only requirement is
that at the time of lodging the FIR, the informant should
state all those facts which normally strike to mind and
help in assessing gravity of the crime or identity of the
culprit briefly.
IV.  In State of UP Vs. Manoj Kumar Pandey, AIR
2009 SC 711, (three-Judge-Bench) and in Santosh
Moolya Vs. State of Karnataka, (2010) 5 SCC 445, it
is held that normally the prosecution has to explain delay
and lack of prudence does not apply per se to rape
V.   In Mukesh Vs. State NCT of Delhi and others,
Prasad Vs. State of Bihar, 2002 (1) JIC 186 (SC) and
in several other cases it has been held that if causes are
not attributable to any effort to concoct a version and the
delay   is  satisfactorily explained   by   prosecution, no
consequence shall be attached to mere delay in lodging
the FIR and the delay would not adversely affect the case
of the prosecution. Delay caused in sending copy of FIR to
Magistrate would also be immaterial if the prosecution
has been able to prove its case by reliable evidence. Thus,
it is concluded that there is no delay in lodging the FIR in
this case.
VI.   The present case is based on direct evidence and on
the evidence of the victim. Hence, there is no need to
prove the motive behind the commission of crime. From
the evidence the mens rea to commit the alleged offence
has been proved beyond reasonable doubt. It is also
proved from the evidence of the prosecution witness that
there was no enmity or false implication of the accused
persons. In the said crime though the accused persons
have suggested the witnesses of fact that due to enmity of
Gram Pradhan election the accused persons have been
falsely implicated, but it is not proved that either the
accused persons or any family member of their family or
any friend was the candidate in Gram Pradhan election.
VII. Burden of proof rests on the shoulder of the
prosecution. As per section 134 of the Act, 1872, no
particular number of witnesses is required to prove any
fact. Plurality of witnesses in a criminal trial is not the
legislative intent. If the testimony of a sole witness is
found reliable on the touchstone of credibility, accused
can be convicted on the basis of such sole testimony as
held in Sudip Kumar Sen Vs. State of West Bengal,
(2016) 3 SCC 26, Jarnail Singh Vs. State of Punjab,
2009 (1) Supreme 224, Syed Ibrahim Vs. State of
State of Haryana, AIR 2013 SC 286.
VIII.   In this case only informant, father of the victim and
the victim were examined as eye-witness.
IX.   In Sucha Singh Vs. State of Punjab, (2003) 7
SCC 643, Bhagwan Singh Vs. State of Madhya
of West Bengal, AIR 2012 SC 3539, Amit Vs. State of
UP, AIR 2012 SC 1433 and in so many other cases it is
held that the testimony of a witness in criminal trial
cannot be discarded merely because the witness is a
relative or family member of the victim of the offence, in
such situation the court has to adopt careful approach in
analysing the evidence of such witness and if the
testimony of the related witness is otherwise found
credible, the accused can be convicted on the basis of
testimony of such related witness.
X.    In Hukum Singh Vs. State of Rajasthan, 2000
(41) ACC 662 (SC), Sadhu Saran Singh Vs. State of
State of Bihar, 2008 (61) ACC 972 (SC) and in
Bhagwan Jagannath Markad (supra), it is held that
non-examination of the material evidence is not a
mathematical formula for discarding the weight of the
testimony    available   on     record   however    natural,
trustworthy and convincing it may be. It is settled law that
non-examination of eye-witness cannot be pressed into
service like a ritualistic formula for discarding the
prosecution case with stroke of pen. Court can convict an
accused on statement of a sole witness even if he is
relative  of   the   deceased     and   non-examination   of
independent witness would not be fatal to the case of
XI.   In Nand Kumar Vs. State of Chhatisgarh, (2015)
1 SCC 776, Rohtash Kumar Vs. State of Haryana,
(2013) 14 SCC 434 and Bhagwan Jagannath Markad
(supra), it is held that prosecution need not examine its
all witnesses. Discretion lies with the prosecution whether
to tender or not, witness to prove its case. Adverse
inference against prosecution can be drawn only if
withholding of witness was with oblique motive.
XII. Generally now-a-days people avoid to be witness and
appear in witness-boxes specially in criminal cases due to
the fear of enmity, therefore, independent witnesses do
not come forward to be testified on oath in a court of law.
XIII. In Sandeep Vs. State of UP, (2012) 6 SCC 107,
Hukum Singh and others Vs. State of Rajasthan,
2001 CrLJ 511 (SC), sections 226 and 231 CrPC has
been examined and it is held that it is expected from the
public prosecutor to produce evidence in support of the
prosecution and not in derogation of the prosecution case.
If he knew at this stage itself certain witnesses might not
support the prosecution case, he is at liberty to state
before the court that fact. It would be unreasonable to
insist on the public prosecutor to examine those persons
as witnesses for prosecution.
XIV. In Chhotanney Vs. State of UP, AIR 2009 SC
2013, Gangadhar Behera Vs. State of Orissa, (2002)
8 SCC 381 and in Bhagwan Jagannath Markad
(supra) it is held that doubt should be reasonable only
then benefit of doubt can be given to the accused persons.
Doubts would be called reasonable if they are free from a
zest for abstract speculation. Law cannot afford any
favourite other than truth. To constitute a reasonable
doubt, it must be free from an over-emotional response.
Doubts     must   be  actual  and    substantial doubts.    A
reasonable doubt is not an imaginary, trivial or a merely
possible doubt; but a fair doubt based upon reason and
common sense. It must be grow out of the evidence in the
case. Exaggeration of the rule of benefit of doubt can
result in miscarriage of justice. Letting the guilty escape
is not doing justice. A Judge presides over the trial not
only to ensure that no innocent is punished but also to see
that guilty does not escape.
XV. In Raja Vs. State of Karnataka, (2016) 10 SCC
506, State of UP Vs. Chhoteylal, AIR 2011 SC 697
and Santosh Moolya (supra) and in so may other cases
the Apex Court held that in a case of rape testimony of
prosecutrix stands at par with that of an injured witness.
It is really not necessary to insist for corroboration if the
evidence of the prosecutrix inspires confidence and
appears to be credible. The accused can be convicted on
the basis of sole testimony of the prosecutrix without any
further corroboration provided      the evidence of the
prosecutrix inspires confidence and appears to be natural
and trivial. Woman or girl raped is not an accomplish and
to insist for corroboration of the testimony amounts to
insult to womanhood. The evidence of a victim of a sex
offence   is   entitled  to   great  weight    absence    of
corroboration notwithstanding. Corroboration in the form
of eye-witness account of an independent witness may
often be forthcoming in physical assault cases but such
evidence cannot be expected in sex offences having
regard to the very nature of the offence. It would
therefore be adding insult to the victim to insist of
corroboration drawing inspiration from rules devised by
the courts in the western world. As a general rule, there is
no reason to insist of corroboration except from the
medical     evidence    where   having    regard    to  the
circumstances of the case, medical evidence can be
expected to be forthcoming subject to disqualification that
corroboration can be insisted upon when a woman having
attained majority is found in a compromising position and
there is likelihood of her having levelled such an
acquisition on account of the instinct of self-preservation
or when probability factor is found to be out of tune.
XVI. In the present case the victim was only 7 years old at
the time of incident and from the medical report and the
evidence, her testimony has been corroborated. In Ganga
Singh Vs. State of MP, AIR 2013 SC 3008, it is held
that where a girl child is the victim of offence of rape
punishable under Section 376 IPC, she has to be given
some weight as is given to an injured witness and her
evidence needs no corroboration.
XVII.        In State of Tamil Nadu Vs. Ravi @ Nehru,
2006 (55) ACC 1005 (SC), a girl of five years old was
raped and the opinion of the doctor was that penis would
not have gone inside the girl’s vagina, the Supreme Court
held that the opinion of the doctor was irrational when
hymen was found torn. Even a slight penetration of penis
into vagina without rupturing the hymen would constitute
rape. Evidence of victim of sexual assault stands at par
with the evidence of an injured witness. Conviction of her
sole testimony without corroboration is justifiable.
XVIII.     In this case an argument has been advanced by
the counsel for the appellants that the statement of the
victim has not been recorded by the Magistrate under
Section 164 CrPC. In Baijnath Sigh Vs. State of Bihar,
2010 (70) ACC 11 (SC), Utpal Das Vs. State of West
Bengal, AIR 2010 SC 1894, it is held that statement
recorded under Section 164 CrPC cannot be used as
substantive evidence. It can be used only to corroborate
or   contradict   the  witness  in  accordance    with the
provisions under Sections 145 and 157 of the Evidence
Act. It appears that considering the tender age of the
victim, the IO did not produce her before the Magistrate
for recording her statement under Section 164 CrPC.
XIX.     For the fault of the Investigating Officer the
prosecution would not suffer.
28. In the case at hand informant PW-1 has proved the
facts of the case, the only contradiction is that according
to FIR version when the informant and other persons
reached on the spot, they found that Lal Jeet and Chintu
were catching hold the victim and Tej Bahadur was raping
her. Contrary to that PW-1 has deposed in the court that
when he alongwith other persons reached on the spot
they saw that Tej Bahadur and Lal Jeet were holding the
victim while Lal Jeet was raping her. It might be a writing
mistake. The evidence has to be considered as a whole.
29. So far as the victim is concerned, she has deposed
that all three accused persons did bad things with her.
They removed her underwear and licked her legs.
Pointing towards the accused Tej Bahadur, Lal Jeet and
Chintu, she deposed that they did bad things with her. All
the three accused persons had taken her out side the
village and pushed her on the ground, thereafter, they
raped her. Thus, the argument has no force and is
accordingly rejected.
30. Earlier the medical evidence has been discussed in
detail.  From   the   evidence   of  the   PW-3    Dr. R.K.
Maheshwari, Radiologist, it is proved that knee and wrist
joints were not fused and the victim was of a very tender
31. PW-5 Dr. Mahavir Singh had examined vaginal smear
slide of the victim though he did not find spermatozoa but
he found red blood cells in large amount.
32. The victim was medically examined by PW-7, Dr.
Vijay Laxmi, her evidence has been discussed at page
nos.12-14, wherein, she has finally admitted and deposed
that the victim was raped.
33. As per Section 45 of the Evidence Act, a doctor is a
medical expert and the medical evidence is only an
evidence of opinion and is not conclusive. In Vishnu @
Undrya Vs. State of Maharashtra, (2006) 15 SCC
283, Apex Court held that the opinion of medical officer is
to assist the court, he is not the witness of fact, and the
evidence given by medical officer is of an advisory
character and is not binding on the witnesses of fact. In
Solanki Chimanbhai Ukabhai Vs. State of Gujarat,
AIR 1983 SC 484, Supreme Court observed that
ordinarily,  the   value  of   medical   evidence   is only
corroborative. It proves that the injuries could have been
caused in the manner alleged and nothing more. The use
which the defence makes of the medical evidence, is to
prove that the injuries could not possibly have been
caused in the manner alleged and thereby discredit the
34. In the present case the injury report and the
evidence of PW-7 is not contrary to the prosecution
evidence and it can be said that both corroborate each
other. It has not been proved that the injuries to the
victim had been caused at any other place and in any
other manner.
35. Pointing to the evidence of the witnesses it has been
argued by the learned counsel for the appellants that the
place   of  occurrence    has  not  been    proved  beyond
reasonable doubt. In this respect the evidence may be re-
36. According to the FIR version on the pretext of
bringing gutkha the victim was carried to a drain situated
in the east of the village, where she was forcibly raped.
During the course of search, the witnesses and the
villagers heard the victim’s scream from the side of drain,
they reached there and found that Lal Jeet and Chintu
were catching hold the victim and Tej Bahadur was raping
her. PW-1, in his evidence has deposed the same fact. In
cross-examination also this witness has deposed that
where his daughter was found, it is an vacant place and a
ditch before that. In the west, there is garden of
Gangaram, a road in the north which goes to Sanjana.
There is a drain in the south.
37. Map Ex.Ka-6 has been proved by the I.O, PW-6. The
place of occurrence is shown by letter ‘X’ which is
somewhat south to the alleged drain. Just adjacent to the
place ‘X’ at place ‘A’, the upper part of the pocket of the
shirt of accused Tej Bahadur (which was torn by the
victim) had been found. Hence, it is concluded that there
is no variation about the place of occurrence between the
facts of the FIR and the evidence of the informant PW-1.
PW-2, the victim has also deposed that these persons took
her outside of the village, there was farm land on both
sides where these three did dirty things with her. Though
in cross-examination this witness has deposed that there
from she had come with her parents to the government
tap which is away from her house and is installed in front
of the field. On the basis of this evidence counsel for the
appellants argued that there is no government tap near
the place of occurrence.
38. The victim is not saying that she was raped at, or
near the government tap. It appears that there is
government pipe under the drain some steps away from
the place of occurrence about which this witness was
deposing or there might be tap near the place of
occurrence not shown by the I.O. in the map Ex.Ka-6. The
Court is of the opinion that on the basis of this evidence it
cannot be said that there is contradiction or variation
between the evidence of PW-1 and PW-2 about the place
of occurrence as narrated in the complaint.
39. It would be proper to examine the status of section
376 IPC at the time of the alleged occurrence. Section
376 IPC was amended by Act No.13 of 2013 w.e.f.
03.02.2013. Earlier section 376 was substituted by Act 43
of   1983,     (w.e.f.  25.12.1983)      section   376    before
substitution by Act of 13 of 2013, stood as under:-
“1. Subs. by Act 13 of 2013, sec. 9, for section 376
(w.r.e.f. 3-2-2013). Earlier section 376 was substituted by
Act 43 of 1983, sec. 3 (w.e.f. 25-12-1983). Section 376(1)
and explanation, before substitution by At 13 of 2013,
“376. Punishment for rape.—(1) Whoever, except in
the cases provided for by sub-section (2), commits
rape shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which shall not be less than
seven years but which may be for life or for a term
which may extend to ten years and shall also be
liable to fine unless the women raped is his own
wife and is not under twelve years of age, in which
cases, he shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to
two years or with fine or with both:
Provided that the court may, for adequate and
special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment,
impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of
less than seven years.
Explanation 1.—Where a woman is raped by one or
more in a group of persons acting in furtherance of
their common intention, each of the persons shall
be deemed to have committed gang rape within the
meaning of this sub-section.”
40. It    has   been    established   that   at the   time    of
commission of crime the victim was aged about 7 years
and below 12 years of age. Hence, in case of rape with
girl of a tender age, if the charges are proved beyond
reasonable doubt, the accused shall be punished with
imprisonment of either description for a term which shall
not be less than 7 years, but which may be for life or for a
term which may extend to 10 years and shall also be liable
to fine. Though as per the proviso the court may, for
adequate      and   special    reasons    mentioned    in   the
judgement, imposed sentence of imprisonment for a term
of less than 7 years. As per Explanation-1 where a woman
is raped by one or more persons in a group acting in
furtherance of the common intention, each of the persons
shall be deemed to have committed gang rape within the
meaning of this sub-section. It has been proved that it is a
case of gang rape by all the accused persons with the
41. In Gopal Krishan Vs. State of Punjab, (2003)
SCC OnLine 280 (P&H), the accused raped a minor girl
of 6 years. The evidence of the prosecutrix, her mother
and the medical and medico-legal report showed that
libiya minora and hymen of the victim was ruptured to the
extent of nearly one inch and was bleeding profusely. The
accused in his defence pleaded that no semen was found
at his clothes and the clothes of the victim. Rejecting the
plea, Court held that emission of semen was not an
essential requirement for conviction in a rape case as the
explanation attached to Section 375 clearly specifies that
mere penetration is sufficient to constitute an offence of
rape. The conviction and sentence of the accused was
therefore, proper.
42. In Krishna Lal Vs. State of Haryana, AIR 1980
SC 1252, the Apex Court observed that a socially
sensitised Judge is better statutory armour against gender
outrage than long clauses of a complex section with all
the protections writ into it. The Court cannot cling to a
fossil formula and insist on corroborative testimony.
Judicial response to human rights cannot be blunted by
legal bigotry.
43. In State of Himachal Pradesh Vs. Asharam, AIR
2006 SC 381, Apex Court reiterated that the evidence of
a victim of rape is entitled to great weight, absence of
corroboration notwithstanding. The Court identified the
following factors as rationale for the rule to be followed in
(1) A woman/girl in the tradition bound non-permissive
society of India would be extremely reluctant even to
admit that any incident which is likely to reflect on her
chastity had ever occurred.
(2) She would be conscious of the danger of being
ostracized by the Society or being looked down by the
society including by her own family members, relatives,
friends, and neighbours. She would have to face the whole
(3) She would face the risk of losing the love and respect
of her own husband and near relatives, and of her
matrimonial home and happiness being shattered.
(4) If she is unmarried, she would apprehend that it would
be difficult to secure an alliance with a suitable match
from a respectable family.
(5) It would almost inevitably result in great mental
torture and suffering to herself.
(6) The fear of being taunted by others will always haunt
(7) She would naturally like avoidance of publicity to the
incident and so also her husband, family members etc.
would avoid publicity due to fear of social stigma.
(8) The fear of the victim being herself considered to be
promiscuous    would    haunt   her    regardless   of her
(9) The fear of facing interrogation by investigating
agency, Court and to face stiff cross-examination by
counsel for the defence (accused) and risk of being
disbelieved may act as a deterrent to the victim.
44. In State of Punjab Vs. Gurmit Singh, (1996) 2
SCC 384, the Apex Court observed that rape is not
merely a physical assault, it is often destructive of the
whole personality of the victim. A murderer destroys the
physical body of the victim, a rapist degrades the very
soul of the helpless female. The Court should, therefore,
shoulder greater responsibility while trying an accused on
charges of rape and sexual molestations.
45. In State of Punjab Vs. Ramdev Singh, AIR 2004
SC 1290, the Apex Court advised the subordinate courts
to display a greater sense of responsibility and be more
sensitive while dealing with the cases involving sexual
assaults on women particularly of girls of tender age.
Such cases should be dealt with sternly and severely. The
Court reiterated its earlier stand that was taken in
46. Having regard to the above noted precedents and
discussion, this Court is of the considered view that the
accused appellants committed gang rape with the victim,
a girl of a tender age, not understanding any one
characteristics of sex and pleasure related to it. Even her
sexual organs were not developed properly. The victim
was of the age of a girl child of the accused persons, even
then they committed such cruel, merciless, illegal and
uncivilized act with her.
47. In view of the above discussion, it is concluded that
the learned trial court committed no illegality in holding
the accused persons guilty of committing gang rape.
48. Alternatively, it has been argued by the counsel for
the accused appellants that the accused appellants are in
jail since 2010. Considering the age and future life of the
accused, if this Court finds that the charges are proved
beyond reasonable doubt, a lenient view may be adopted
so far as sentencing is concerned. In this regard learned
counsel for the appellants relied on the following judicial
49.(1)     In Bhura Vs. State of UP, (2022) SCC
OnLine     (All)  151,    wherein    the  sentence  of  life
imprisonment was modified to RI for 13 years with a fine
of Rs.3,000 under section 376(2)(g) IPC for committing
the rape of a 14 year old girl. In the case one of accused
was held juvenile.
50.(2)     In  Thongam    Tarun    Singh   Vs.   State  of
Manipur, (2019) 18 SCC 77, section 376(2)(g) IPC, the
sentence of imprisonment of 15 years and 10 years were
reduced to 8 years and 2 years. In the case the victim was
about 16 years old.
51.(3)     In Manoj Mishra @ Chhotkau Vs. State of
UP (Criminal Appeal No.1167 of 2021 (arising out of
SLP (Cri) No.7828 of 2019) as per FIR, the victim was
aged about 14 years (as per doctor, she was 16 years of
age) the appellant had undergone sentence for more than
8 years. The Apex Court directed that the appellant be
released on payment of fine. The Apex Court accepted the
period spent in jail as full sentence and directed to
release the accused.
52. Learned AGA argued that having regard to the
difference in age of the victims, facts and circumstances
of the cited cases and the present case, the sentence of
life imprisonment cannot be commuted.
State of Gujarat, (2012) 2 SCC 684, the victim was
aged about 7 years. The trial court convicted the
appellant under section 376(2)(f) IPC and sentenced him
to undergo imprisonment for life. The High Court
conformed the conviction and sentence. The incident
occurred nearly 10 years ago, at the time of incident the
accused was about 18/19 years of age. He had already
served nearly 10 years of rigorous imprisonment. The
Apex Court held that award of life imprisonment is not
warranted in this case. It was modified to RI for 10 years.
54. Learned AGA argued that in the facts of the present
case, it is a case of gang rape by three responsible
persons who committed the brutal sexual offence with a 7
year old girl child, hence, the principles laid down in the
said case cannot be applied to the present case. The
appellants were mature and family persons, therefore,
they cannot be treated at par to the accused of 18/19
years of age.
55.(5)     In Rajendra Datta Zarekar Vs. State of Goa,
(2007) 14 SCC 560, the victim was aged about 6 years.
It was a rape by single young man of 20 years, wherein
only fine was reduced from Rs.10,000/- to Rs.1,000/- but
the sentence of 10 years RI was maintained by the Apex
Court. Hence, the appellants cannot claim parity with the
case at hand.
56. The prosecution relied on the citation Dinesh @
Buddha Vs. State of Rajasthan, (2006) 3 SCC 771,
wherein, the victim was below the age of 12 years. It was
a case under section 376(2) proviso and 376(2)(f) IPC, the
sentence was imposed below 10 years RI. The Apex Court
held that normally sentence in such a case be not less
than 10 years.      Courts are obliged to respect the
legislative mandate in this regard. Recourse to the
aforesaid proviso can be had only for special and
adequate reasons and not in a casual manner which would
depend    upon    variety  of  factors  and    the  peculiar
circumstances of each case. In paragraph-12, Apex Court
held that sentence must depend upon the conduct of the
accused, the state and age of the victim and the gravity of
the criminal act, the socio-economic status, religion, race,
caste or creed of the accused or the victim are irrelevant
considerations. Crimes of violence upon women need to
be severely dealt with, object of law is to protect the
society and deter the criminal to be achieved by imposing
an appropriate sentence. The courts should impose proper
sentence   commensurate      with  gravity  of   crime.   In
paragraph-6 the Apex Court held that the courts should
deal with cases of sexual crime against women sternly
and severely.
57. In rebuttal the prosecution relied on the judgement
State of UP Vs. Naushad, AIR 2014 SC 384, in which
the sentence of life imprisonment was upheld.
58. In Shyam Narayan Vs. State NCT of Delhi, AIR
2013 SC 2209, a girl aged about 8 years was brutally
raped by the accused. The trial court and the High Court
confirmed the charge of rape and sentenced the accused
to imprisonment for life. On appeal, Supreme Court
upheld the sentence of life imprisonment for the act of the
accused    and     dismissed   the   plea  of    mitigating
circumstances put forth for reduction of sentence to
mandatory 10 years. The court observed that punishment
ought to be commensurate to gravity of crime and the
accused must get to “just desert” apart from the
deterrence aspect of sentencing.
59. The Court observed “rape is a monstrous burial of
girl’s dignity in the darkness. Her dignity and purity of
physical frame is shattered and she may not be able to
assert the honour of a woman for no fault of her”.
60. It is not a case of rape by juvenile, a single accused
with a mature lady or with a girl who is on the verge of
attaining the age of puberty or majority. The victim was
not knowing even the nature of the offence. Therefore,
considering the nature of injuries, age of the victim, age
of the accused persons and that it is a case of gang rape
with a little girl, this Court is of the view that the trial
court    has   rightly   imposed   the   sentence   of  life
imprisonment and fine of Rs.10,000/- each. This Court
does not find any sufficient and cogent ground to reduce
the sentence. It is informed by the learned AGA that
presently the victim is a young-unmarried-girl. At present
she is about 19 years of age. The accused are the
residents of the neighbouring village. If the sentence is
reduced and they are released, social and personal safety
problems may cause serious prejudice to the victim.
61. On the basis of aforenoted discussion, this Court is of
the view that there are no mitigating circumstances
present to reduce the sentence already imposed by the
trial court. Accordingly, the order of punishment and
sentence by the trial court is found to be appropriate and
no interference is warranted.
62. The appeals being devoid of merit are liable to be
63. The appeals are dismissed. The order of punishment
and sentence passed by the trial court is affirmed. The
appellants, Tej Bahadur and Chintu @ Tej Prakash are
already serving the sentence in jail.
64. The ASJ-IV, Pilibhit, to ensure compliance.
65. Let a copy of this order alongwith record of the trial
court be sent back to the ASJ-IV, Pilibhit, for taking
necessary steps and for the consignment of the records.
66. Sri Kuldeep Johri and Sri Ankur Singh Kushwaha,
learned amicus curiae appearing for the appellants shall
be paid Rs.7,500/- each as fee.
Digitally signed by :-
High Court of Judicature at Allahabad