This petition has been filed under Section 14 of the Arbitration
and Conciliation Act (for short ‘Arbitration Act’) read with Section 151 CPC
seeking termination of the mandate of the Sole Arbitrator.
It is submitted that the petitioner is a proprietorship firm
engaged in manufacturing of corrugated boxes, packaging material and other
material which is used in logistic industry for safe transportation of goods.
Respondent is stated to be a supplier of plywood and other wooden material
used in the manufacturing of corrugated boxes and other packaging material
by the petitioner. Respondent claimed an outstanding amount qua the
petitioner in respect of goods supplied by it to the petitioner in the year
2016. Claim was filed by the respondent before the Haryana Micro and
Small Enterprises Facilitation Council (for short ‘HMSEFC’) claiming an
amount of Rs. 14,01,505/-.
It is contended that the matter was referred for arbitration
without any valid order being passed on conciliation proceedings under the
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006 (for short
‘MSMED Act’) Petitioner is stated to have received notice dated 08.06.2020
from the office of Sh. Satish Ahlawat, the Sole Arbitrator, asking the parties
to appear before the Arbitrator on 20.06.2020 as he had been appointed
Arbitrator by the HMSEFC. It is stated that the petitioner filed an application
under Section 12 of the Arbitration Act seeking valid disclosure from the
learned Arbitrator, copy of which is attached as Annexure P-2 and a specific
objection was raised in the said application that there exists no clause for
arbitration, therefore HMSEFC could not have referred the matter to the
Arbitrator. Moreover, declaration in terms of Section 12 of the Arbitration
Act, should be made by the Arbitrator. Said application was dismissed by
the learned Arbitrator on 20.06.2020, Annexure P-3.
Present petition has thus been filed on the grounds that conduct
of the Arbitrator is arbitrary and disclosure regarding independence and
impartiality of the Arbitrator is imperative as per Section 12 of the
Arbitration Act. It is further submitted that claim filed by the respondent-
claimant is time barred as invoices are of the year 2016. Learned counsel for
the petitioner also argued that Section18 (3) MSMED Act, provides for
referral of the dispute to any institution or centre or arbitration, therefore
referral to the Sole Arbitrator is illegal. Furthermore, it is contended that
learned Arbitrator was moving with the arbitration proceedings at a very fast
pace, thus mandate of the Arbitrator should stand terminated.
This petition has been vehemently opposed by the respondent
while submitting that petitioner is guilty of concealment of material facts. It
is contended that respondent-claimant being duly registered under the
MSMED Act had approached the HMSEFC for redressal of its grievances.
Intimation of the same was duly conveyed vide order dated 25.09.2019
wherein petitioner was advised to pay the amount in question and to settle
the dispute. It is thereafter that the HMSEFC on 26.02.2020 decided to refer
the matter to the empanelled Arbitrator i.e., Sh. Satish Ahlawat, retired
District and Sessions Judge. The said order, at no point of time has been
challenged by the petitioner.
Learned counsel for the respondent further submits that after
dismissal of petitioner’s application under Section 12 and 13 of the
Arbitration Act on 20.06.2020, present petition was filed on 13.07.2020.
Petitioner’s defence was struck off by the learned Arbitrator on 18.07.2020.
Petitioner filed ARB No. 113 of 2020 under Section 37 of the Arbitration
Act before the learned Additional District Judge, Gurugram, challenging
order dated 18.07.2020 striking off petitioner’s defence. Notice was issued
in ARB No. 113 of 2020 for 31.07.2020, but no interim order was passed in
petitioner’s favour.
Petitioner, it is stated filed ARB No. 114 of 2020 i.e., another
petition under Section 37 of the Arbitration Act before the learned District
Judge, Gurugram, challenging striking off his defence along with an
application for stay of arbitral proceedings, which was taken up on
24.07.2020. It is submitted that due to concealment of facts and false
averments of petitioner, order dated 24.07.2020 was passed by the learned
Additional District Judge, Gurugram in ARB No. 114 of 2020 to the effect
that pronouncement of the award by the Sole Arbitrator, shall remain stayed.
In an utterly devious manner, petitioner it is stated withdrew the previous
arbitration case i.e., ARB No. 113 of 2020 on 31.07.2020.
It is submitted by learned counsel for the respondent that the
present petition i.e., ARB No. 86 of 2020, which had been filed earlier, was
taken up for hearing on 27.07.2020 but the petitioner actively concealed the
pendency of ARB No. 114 of 2020 filed by it before the learned Additional
District Judge, Gurugram as well as the interim order dated 24.07.2020
passed therein, due to which ex parte interim order dated 27.07.2020 was
passed in the present petition to the effect that Arbitrator shall not pass the
final award. Answering respondent, it is stated filed an application for
vacation of ex parte stay dated 24.07.2020 as is reflected in order dated
31.07.2020 of learned Additional District Judge, Gurugram. ARB No. 114 of
2020 was ultimately dismissed on 10.08.2020.
Learned counsel for the respondent submits that apart from the
fact that petitioner has never challenged the order referring the matter to the
learned Arbitrator, proceedings are very well maintainable under the
MSMED Act. Existence of an arbitral clause between the parties is not a
sine qua non for the respondent-claimant to approach the HMSEFC under
the MSMED Act in terms of Section 18 thereof. Petitioner’s application
under Section 12 of the Arbitration Act, has been rightly dismissed by the
learned Arbitrator. Moreover, present petition, it is urged is not maintainable
and if at all, the petitioner would have his remedy available after passing of
the award. Petitioner, it is submitted is merely trying its level best to delay
the proceedings in one way or the other and defeat the very purpose of the
MSMED Act. It is thus prayed that this petition be dismissed.
Heard learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the
file with their assistance.
Notice of motion was issued in this petition by a Coordinate
Bench while noting contentions on behalf of the petitioner to the effect that
there is no agreement between the parties, therefore, an Arbitrator could not
have been appointed by invoking Section 18 of the MSMED Act and
furthermore even if Section 18 of the MSMED Act had to be invoked,
appropriate procedure of conciliation etc., was not adopted.
At the outset, it is relevant to note that the petitioner did not
challenge appointment of the Arbitrator by the HMSEFC, vide order dated
26.02.2020 which has incidently not even been placed on record. Having
noted this fact, it is useful to refer to the provisions of Section 15, 16, 17 and
“15. Liability of buyer to make payment.—Where any
supplier supplies any goods or renders any services to any
buyer, the buyer shall make payment therefore on or
before the date agreed upon between him and the supplier
in writing or, where there is no agreement in this behalf,
before the appointed day: Provided that in no case the
period agreed upon between the supplier and the buyer in
writing shall exceed forty-five days from the day of
acceptance or the day of deemed acceptance.
16. Date from which and rate at which interest is
payable.—Where any buyer fails to make payment of the
amount to the supplier, as required under section 15, the
buyer shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any
agreement between the buyer and the supplier or in any
law for the time being in force, be liable to pay compound
interest with monthly rests to the supplier on that amount
from the appointed day or, as the case may be, from the
date immediately following the date agreed upon, at three
times of the bank rate notified by the Reserve Bank.
17. Recovery of amount due.—For any goods supplied or
services rendered by the supplier, the buyer shall be liable
to pay the amount with interest thereon as provided under
section 16.
18. Reference to Micro and Small Enterprises Facilitation
Council.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any
other law for the time being in force, any party to a
dispute may, with regard to any amount due under section
17, make a reference to the Micro and Small Enterprises
(2) On receipt of a reference under sub-section (1), the
Council shall either itself conduct conciliation in the
matter or seek the assistance of any institution or centre
providing alternate dispute resolution services by making
a reference to such an institution or centre, for conducting
conciliation and the provisions of sections 65 to 81 of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (26 of 1996) shall
apply to such a dispute as if the conciliation was initiated
under Part III of that Act.
(3) Where the conciliation initiated under sub-section (2)
is not successful and stands terminated without any
settlement between the parties, the Council shall either
itself take up the dispute for arbitration or refer it to any
institution or centre providing alternate dispute resolution
services for such arbitration and the provisions of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (26 of 1996) shall
then apply to the dispute as if the arbitration was in
pursuance of an arbitration agreement referred to in sub-
section (1) of section 7 of that Act.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for
the time being in force, the Micro and Small Enterprises
Facilitation Council or the centre providing alternate
dispute resolution services shall have jurisdiction to act as
an Arbitrator or Conciliator under this section in a dispute
between the supplier located within its jurisdiction and a
buyer located anywhere in India.
(5)   Every reference made under this section shall be decided
within a period of ninety days from the date of making
such a reference.”
A bare perusal of these provisions clearly indicate that the
respondent who was registered under the MSMED Act, at the relevant time
was entitled to approach the HMSEFC under the MSMED Act for redressal
of its grievance. Hon’ble Supreme Court in M/s Silpi industries etc., Vs.
Kerela State Road Transport Corporation and another etc., Civil
Appeal Nos. 1570-1578 of 2021, d/d 29.06.2021, held as under:-
“23. The obligations of the buyer to make payment, and award
of interest at three times of the bank rate notified by Reserve
Bank in the event of delay by the buyer and the mechanism for
recovery and reference to Micro and Small Enterprises
Facilitation Council and further remedies under the 2006 Act
for the party aggrieved by the awards, are covered by Chapter
V of the 2006 Act. The provisions of Section 15 to 23 of the
Act are given overriding effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time
being in force. From the Statement of Objects and Reasons also
it is clear that it is a beneficial legislation to the small, medium
and micro sector. The Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 is
a general law whereas the Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprises Development Act, 2006 is a special beneficial
legislation which is intended to benefit micro, small and
medium enterprises covered by the said Act.”
It is specifically held that provisions of the MSMED Act being
a Special Act shall prevail and have overriding effect vis-a-vis the
Arbitration Act. Even in a case where exists an agreement between the
parties for resolution of disputes by Arbitration, if a seller is covered under
the MSMED Act, the seller is at liberty to approach the competent authority
to make its claim and agreement, if any, between the parties is to be ignored
in view of the statutory obligations and mechanism provided under the
MSMED Act. The counter claim was also held to be permissible by the
buyer. Section 18 of the MSMED Act starts with a non obstante clause,
therefore, argument that proceedings are not maintainable in the absence of
an arbitral clause is devoid of any merit, hence rejected.
In respect to the argument that no conciliation etc., was carried
out, it is to be reiterated that order dated 26.02.2020 whereby the Sole
Arbitrator was appointed has never been subjected to challenge by the
It is relevant to note at this stage that conduct of the petitioner
does reflect active concealment of facts. It is a matter of record that the
present petition was filed on 13.07.2020. ARB No. 113 of 2020 was filed by
the petitioner on 18.07.2020 challenging order dated 18.07.2020 passed by
the Arbitrator whereby petitioner’s defence was struck off. Admittedly,
notice was issued therein by the learned Additional District Judge,
Gurugram on 23.07.2020 without any interim order being passed. ARB No.
114 of 2020 under Section 37 of the Arbitration Act was again filed by the
petitioner which was taken up on 24.07.2020 by another Additional District
Judge, Gurugram on the same cause of action. Order dated 24.07.2020
passed by the said Additional District Judge, Gurugram, reads as under:-
“Petition u/s 37 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act,
1996 received by way of assignment. It be checked and registered.
Ld. Counsel for the petitioner has maintained that the
arbitrator has fixed the date of 25.07.2020 for pronouncement of
the award after striking out the defence of the appellant on account
of non payment of fee of arbitrator. Ld. Counsel for the petitioner
has maintained that in case pronouncement of award is not stayed
then very purpose of filing the present petition shall be frustrated
as the arbitrator has shown undue anxiety to dispose of the matter.
In view of the request made by ld counsel pronouncement of
the award is stayed.
Notice be given to the respondents on filing of PF & copy
etc. for 31.07.2020. Dasti copy be given.”
ARB No. 113 of 2020 was simply withdrawn from before the
other learned Additional District Judge, Gurugram by the petitioner on
31.07.2020. Further, without disclosing passing of order dated 24.07.2020,
the matter was argued before the Coordinate Bench on 27.07.2020, wherein
notice of motion was issued and it was directed that learned Arbitrator shall
not pass the final award in the meanwhile.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has sought to explain the
abovesaid by stating that due to outbreak of the pandemic COVID-19, there
was miscommunication and there is no question of any concealment on the
part of the petitioner. However, such a simplistic explanation does not pass
muster in the given factual matrix.
Learned Additional District Judge, Gurugram, while dismissing
ARB No. 114 of 2020 on 10.08.2020 has specifically observed that there has
been concealment of material facts on the part of the petitioner which
disentitles it from any discretionary relief. Though, this petition can be
dismissed solely on account of the conduct of the petitioner, however even
on the merits of the matter, there is no justifiable ground for interference by
this Court. It is useful to refer to Section 12 and 14 of the Arbitration Act,
(1)   When a person is approached in connection with
his possible appointment as an arbitrator, he shall
disclose in writing any circumstances likely to give rise
to justifiable doubts as to his independence or
impartiality.
(2)   An arbitrator, from the time of his appointment and
throughout the arbitral proceedings, shall, without delay,
disclose to the parties in writing any circumstances
referred to in sub-section (1) unless they have already
been informed of them by him.
(3)    An arbitrator may be challenged only if—
(a) circumstances exist that give rise to justifiable
doubts as to his independence or impartiality, or
(b) he does not possess the qualifications agreed to
by the parties.
(4)    A party may challenge an arbitrator appointed by
him, or in whose appointment he has participated, only
for reasons of which he becomes aware after the
appointment has been made.
(1)    The mandate of an arbitrator shall terminate
perform his functions or for other reasons fails to
(b) he withdraws from his office or the parties
agree to the termination of his mandate.
(2)    If a controversy remains concerning any of the
grounds referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (1), a
party may, unless otherwise agreed by the parties, apply
to the Court to decide on the termination of the mandate.
(3)    If, under this section or sub-section (3) of section
13, an arbitrator withdraws from his office or a party
agrees to the termination of the mandate of an arbitrator,
it shall not imply acceptance of the validity of any
ground referred to in this section or sub-section (3) of
section 12.”
The Hon’ble Supreme Court in HRD Corporation Vs. GAIL
(India) Ltd., (2018) 12 SCC 471, has observed as under:-
“After the 2016 Amendment Act, a dichotomy is made by the
Act between persons who become “ineligible” to be appointed
as arbitrators, and persons about whom justifiable doubts exist
as to their independence or impartiality. Since ineligibility goes
to the root of the appointment, Section 12(5) read with the
Seventh Schedule makes it clear that if the arbitrator falls in any
one of the categories specified in the Seventh Schedule, he
becomes “ineligible” to act as arbitrator. Once he becomes
ineligible, it is clear that, under Section 14(1)(a), he then
becomes de jure unable to perform his functions inasmuch as, in
law, he is regarded as “ineligible”. In order to determine
whether an arbitrator is de jure unable to perform his functions,
it is not necessary to go to the Arbitral Tribunal under Section
13. Since such a person would lack inherent jurisdiction to
proceed any further, an application may be filed under Section
14(2) to the Court to decide on the termination of his/her
mandate on this ground. As opposed to this, in a challenge
where grounds stated in the Fifth Schedule are disclosed, which
give rise to justifiable doubts as to the arbitrator’s independence
or impartiality, such doubts as to independence or impartiality
have to be determined as a matter of fact in the facts of the
particular challenge by the Arbitral Tribunal under Section 13.
If a challenge is not successful, and the Arbitral Tribunal
decides that there are no justifiable doubts as to the
independence or impartiality of the arbitrator/arbitrators, the
Tribunal     must    then    continue   the   arbitral   proceedings
under Section 13(4) and make an award. It is only after such
award is made, that the party challenging the arbitrator’s
appointment on grounds contained in the Fifth Schedule may
make an application for setting aside the arbitral award in
accordance with Section 34 on the aforesaid grounds. It is clear,
therefore, that any challenge contained in the Fifth Schedule
against the appointment of Justice Doabia and Justice Lahoti
cannot be gone into at this stage, but will be gone into only after
the Arbitral Tribunal has given an award. Therefore, we express
no opinion on items contained in the Fifth Schedule under
which the appellant may challenge the appointment of either
arbitrator. They will be free to do so only after an award is
rendered by the Tribunal.”
The Hon’ble Supreme Court in Bharat Broadband Network
Limited Vs. United Telecoms Limited, 2019 AIR (SC) 2434, has observed
“17. The scheme of Sections 12, 13, and 14, therefore, is that
where an arbitrator makes a disclosure in writing which is likely
to give justifiable doubts as to his independence or impartiality,
the appointment of such arbitrator may be challenged
under Sections 12(1) to 12(4) read with Section 13. However,
where such person becomes “ineligible” to be appointed as an
arbitrator, there is no question of challenge to such arbitrator,
before such arbitrator. In such a case, i.e., a case which falls
under Section 12(5), Section 14(1)(a) of the Act gets attracted
inasmuch as the arbitrator becomes, as a matter of law (i.e., de
jure), unable to perform his functions under Section 12(5),
being ineligible to be appointed as an arbitrator. This being so,
his mandate automatically terminates, and he shall then be
substituted by another arbitrator under Section 14(1) itself. It is
only if a controversy occurs concerning whether he has become
de jure unable to perform his functions as such, that a party has
to apply to the Court to decide on the termination of the
mandate, unless otherwise agreed by the parties. Thus, in
all Section 12(5) cases, there is no challenge procedure to be
availed of. If an arbitrator continues as such, being de jure
unable to perform his functions, as he falls within any of
the categories mentioned in Section 12(5), read with the
Seventh Schedule, a party may apply to the Court, which will
then decide on whether his mandate has terminated. Questions
which may typically arise under Section 14 may be as to
whether such person falls within any of the categories
mentioned in the Seventh Schedule, or whether there is a waiver
as provided in the proviso to Section 12(5) of the Act. As a
matter of law, it is important to note that the proviso to Section
12(5) must be contrasted with Section 4 of the Act. Section
4 deals with cases of deemed waiver by conduct; whereas the
proviso to Section 12(5) deals with waiver by express
agreement in writing between the parties only if made
subsequent to disputes having arisen between them.”
Therefore, in the instant case, remedy of the petitioner is to
clearly wait for the award and avail its remedies thereafter, which it is at
liberty to do so. Reference in this respect can gainfully be made to decision
of the Delhi High Court in G.S. Developers and Contractors Private
Limited vs. Alpha Corp. Development Private Limited and others, 2019
(261) DLT 533. Learned counsel for the petitioner is unable to point out any
ground which calls for interference in this petition.
No other argument has been raised.
This petition being devoid of any merit, is dismissed with no
order as to costs.
Whether speaking/reasoned :       Yes/No.
Whether reportable          :     Yes/No.