In this petition, petitioner has sought for the following
“ (a)   Issue writ of Certiorari or any other
appropriate writ, order of direction while calling for
records pertaining to the public Notice No. 15/2015-
20 dated:14.06.2022 and quash / set aside ‘ condition
x’ mentioned in pare 2 of the said Public Notice No.
15/2015-20 dated: 14.06.2022 vide Annexure-J.
(b) Issue a Writ of Mandamus or any other
appropriate writ, order or direction while directing
Respondent No.2 to delete Condition No. 3 in the
condition sheet of the Tariff Rate Quota dated
05.07.2022 vide Annexure – M issued / allotted to
the Petitioner.
(c) Issue a Writ of Mandamus or any other
appropriate writ, order or direction while directing the
Respondents to permit clearance of balance quantity
of the subject goods i.e., 1973.04 MTs. after
clearance     from the customs bonded warehouse in
terms of Section 68 of the Customs Act, 1962 on
production of Tariff Rate Quota dated: 05.07.2022
vide Annexure-M by the petitioner and also extended
the benefit of Notification No. 30/2022-Cus dated:
24.05.2022 on such clearance.
(d) Issue a writ of Mandamus or any other
appropriate writ, order or direction while directing the
Respondents to account for the clearance of 4000
MT’s of of the subject goods, as stated above, against
the Tariff Rate Quota dated: 05.07.2022 vide
Annexure-M issued to the petitioner while also
extending the benefit of Notification No. 30/2022- Cus
dated:    24.05.2022    vide   Annexure-F     on   such
clearance and refund excess duty of Rs.3,79,33,896/-
paid on clearance of the said 400 MTs of the subject
goods with interest @ 12 % p.a.
(e) Pass any other appropriate Order(s) as this
Hon’ble Court may deem fit and proper in the facts
and circumstances of the instant case and in the
interest of justice.
2. The brief facts giving rise to the present petition
as contended by the petitioner in its amended petition are
Petitioner Company is engaged in the business of
solvent extraction, refining of oils, manufacture of soya food
products,    import,  export    and    trading   of agricultural
commodities. Petitioner Company was earlier known as
M/s. Ruchi Soya Industries Ltd. and the name of the
Petitioner Company has changed from M/s. Ruchi Soya
Industries Ltd. to M/s. Patanjali Foods Limited w.e.f.
24.06.2022. Petitioner had entered into a contract with its
foreign supplier viz. Aston Agro Industrial SA, Switzerland
for import of the subject goods, Crude Sunflower Seed Oil
of Edible Grade in Bulk. The said foreign supplier had
supplied 6000 MTs of the subject goods vide its Invoice
dated 10.06.2022. The subject goods were shipped vide
vessel ‘MT Loyal’ with port of discharge being Mangalore
Port, India. The subject goods were dispatched against
Eight Bills of Lading dated 04.06.2022 and four Bills of
Lading dated 07.06.2022. The aforesaid vessel carrying the
subject goods arrived at Mangalore port and was granted
Entry   Inward    on    30.06.2022.      Petitioner had    filed
Warehouse Bill of Entry No. 9296578 dated 27.06.2022
under Section 46 of the Customs Act, 1962 and the subject
goods were warehoused accordingly.
2.1 The Respondent No.2 is the Director General of
Foreign Trade (DGFT). In exercise of his powers under
paragraphs 1.03 and 2.04 of the Foreign Trade Policy
(FTP),    the  DGFT     issued   a   Public  Notice   bearing
No.10/2015-20 dated 24.05.2022, whereby Tariff Rate
Quota (TRQ) was allocated for the financial years 2022-23
and 2023-24 by amending paragraphs 2.60 and 2.61 of the
Handbook of Procedures, thereby laying down procedural
conditions for Crude Soya-bean oil, whether or not
degummed and Crude Sunflower seed oil. The Duty
structure in regard to the aforesaid goods is Basic Customs
Duty    @     0%    plus    Agriculture  Infrastructure  and
Development Cess (AIDC) @ 5% plus Social Welfare
Surcharge (SWS) @10% plus IGST @ 5%. It is stated that
import of the above mentioned goods is exempted from
levy of whole of Basic Customs Duty and from whole of
Agriculture Infrastructure and Development Cess as per
Notification No. 30/2022-Cus dated 24.05.2022. It is also
contended that the aforesaid goods are freely importable as
per the ITC (HS) Schedule 1 - Import Policy, 2022. Further
in regard to the aforesaid goods, there is no restriction for
trading thereof by State Trading Corporations.
2.2   Petitioner contends that as per the aforesaid
Public Notice No. 10/2015-20 dated 24.05.2022, fresh
applications for allocation of TRQ Authorisation/License
were called for by the respondents. Petitioner was eligible
for all the conditions mentioned therein and the Petitioner
accordingly applied online to the office of Respondent No.2
for allocation of TRQ Authorisation/ License for import of
Crude Soya-bean oil and Crude Sunflower seed oil by
means of Application dated 17.06.2022 and the said
application was duly acknowledged by the office of
Respondent No.2 vide its email dated 17.06.2022.
2.3    Petitioner    submits     that   subsequently,
Respondent No.2-DGFT, in exercise of his powers under
Para1.03 and 2.04 of FTP, issued another Public Notice
No.15/2015-20 dated 14.06.2022 amending para-2 of the
aforesaid Public Notice No.10/2015-20 dated 24.05.2022 in
addition to imposing/inserting certain further conditions.
Amongst others, an additional condition was imposed as
per ‘condition x’ whereby import consignments landing at
Indian Ports after the date of issuance of TRQ license shall
only be considered for clearance under TRQ. The said
‘condition x’ also stipulates that any quantities lying at the
Indian ports (under warehousing etc) before the date of
issuance of the TRQ license shall not be considered for
import clearance under TRQ.
2.4 It is contended that after the aforesaid vessel
carrying the subject goods secured berth, discharge of the
subject goods in the custom bonded tanks commenced and
the cargo stood discharged on 02.07.2022. On discharge of
the subject goods in the bonded tanks, there was short
quantity receipt of 26.96 MTs and the total quantity of the
subject goods that was discharged in the bonded tanks was
5973.04 MTs. Petitioner needed the subject goods urgently
to keep its manufacturing unit functioning and to avoid
losses, so awaiting issuance of TRQ license, Petitioner had
filed Ex-bond Bill of Entry No.9407307 dated 04.07.2022
under Section 68 of the Customs Act, 1962 seeking
clearance of 500 MTs of the subject goods for home
consumption. The said Bill of Entry was processed by the
revenue and on payment of applicable duty out of charge
was given on 05.07.2022.
2.5      Petitioner had applied to the office of
Respondent No.2 for allocation of TRQ licenses for import
of Crude Soya-bean oil and Crude Sunflower seed oil. The
said application of the Petitioner was duly scrutinized by the
Office of Respondent No.2 and Petitioner was given TRQ
dated 05.07.2022, being the Authorisation/License/Scrip,
for import of Crude Soya-bean oil and Crude Sunflower
seed oil, as so stated therein. It is contended that the
aforesaid ‘condition x’ is forming part of the Condition Sheet
of the aforesaid TRQ license dated 05.07.2022 as
Condition No. 3. Petitioner wanted to clear the subject
goods against the aforesaid TRQ authorization/license and
had   approached      the    Department     accordingly,  who,
however it was pointed out that the said request cannot be
entertained since the goods stood warehoused before
issuance of TRQ license. Though the petitioner objected, it
was told that the same was a legal issue and till the same
was resolved, goods will not clear against the aforesaid
TRQ license. Since the goods were urgently needed,
Petitioner had no option but to clear the goods without
tendering TRQ license for such clearance. Petitioner had
accordingly filed Ex-Bond Bills of Entry dated 07.07.2022
and 12.07.2022 seeking clearance of 500 MTs and 1000
MTs     respectively  of the   subject   goods   for   home
consumption. The said Bills of Entry were processed by the
revenue and on payment of applicable duty out of charge
were given.
2.6 Petitioner had written letters dated 11.07.2022
and 13.07.2022 to the office of Respondent No.3 while
stating therein, amongst others, that the Petitioner had
cleared the aforesaid subject goods (2000 MTs) on account
of compelling circumstances and without prejudice to
Petitioner’s rights and contentions in law to challenge
‘condition x’ imposed by Public Notice No. 15/2015-20
dated 14.06.2022. Petitioner had taken clearance of 2000
MTs of the subject goods on payment of applicable duty
and on such clearance, Petitioner had paid excess duty
amount of Rs.1,89,66,948/-, without prejudice its rights and
contentions in law.
2.7 It is contended that subsequent to filing of the
present petition on 20.07.2022, petitioner urgently needed
the subject goods to keep its manufacturing unit functioning
and to avoid losses. Petitioner wanted to clear the goods
against the aforesaid TRQ license and had approached the
Department accordingly, who pointed out that the said
request cannot be entertained since the goods stood
warehoused before issuance of TRQ license. Since the
goods were urgently needed, Petitioner had no option but
to clear 2000 MTs out of the balance quantity of 3973.04
MTs of the subject goods without tendering TRQ license for
such clearance. Petitioner had accordingly filed Ex-Bond
Bills of Entry dated 22.07.2022 and 28.07.2022 seeking
clearance of 2000 MTs for home consumption. The said
Bills of Entry were processed by the revenue and on
payment of applicable duty.
2.8 Petitioner had written letters dated 25.07.2022
and 29.07.2022 to the office of Respondent No.3 while
stating therein, amongst others, that the Petitioner had
cleared the aforesaid subject goods (2000 MTs) on account
of   aforesaid   compelling    circumstances  and    without
prejudice to Petitioner’s rights and contentions in law to
challenge “condition x” imposed by Public Notice No.
15/2015-20      dated  14.06.2022.    Petitioner   had  taken
clearance of aforesaid 2000 MTs of the subject goods on
payment of applicable duty and on such clearance,
Petitioner had paid excess duty amount of Rs.1,89,66,948/-
without prejudice to its rights and contentions in law. In
total,   Petitioner   has    made     excess     payment     of
Rs.3,79,33,896/- for clearance of 4000 MTs of the subject
goods, without prejudice to its rights and contentions in law.
2.9 It is contended that the instant writ petition was
listed before this Court on 01.08.2022 and after hearing
both sides, this Court had permitted clearance of the
balance quantity of the subject goods viz. 1973.04 MTs on
furnishing of Bank Guarantee by the Petitioner to the tune
of Rs.1,89,66,948/-. The said interim order was passed
without prejudice to the rights and contentions of the parties
and subject to the final outcome of the writ petition. In
pursuance to the aforesaid order, Petitioner had furnished
Bank     Guarantee      No.     0963222BG0000172        dated
05.08.2022      of  State   Bank     of  India,   Indore    for
Rs.1,89,66,948/- and the aforesaid quantity of 1973.04 MTs
was cleared accordingly. Under these circumstances,
petitioner is before this Court by way of the present petition
seeking the aforesaid reliefs.
3.   The respondents have filed their statement of
objections opposing the petition and have sought for its
dismissal. While admitting the facts leading to the present
petition, respondents deny the various contentions of the
petitioner as regards the legality and validity of the
impugned notifications and contend that there is no merit in
the petition and the same is liable to be dismissed.
4. Heard learned counsel for the petitioner and
learned counsel for the respondents-revenue and perused
the material on record.
5. In addition to reiterating the various contentions
urged in the petition and referring to the material on record,
learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the
impugned      ‘condition  x’  in  the   Public  notice   dated
14.06.2022 issued by the DGFT is illegal, arbitrary and
without jurisdiction or authority of law, inasmuch as the
same is contrary to Clause 2.13 of the FTP and has the
effect of altering and amending the FTP which is
impermissible in law, since the same lies within the
exclusive domain of the Central Government and not the
DGFT. The FTP is framed by the Central Government
under the Foreign Trade(Regulation and Development Act),
1992 (for short, ‘the FTDR Act’) and the same provides for
the DGFT to issue a Handbook of Procedure by way of a
Public Notice and also amend/vary/alter the Handbook of
Procedure by way of a Public Notice. The DGFT is
empowered or authorized only to issue a public notice as
aforesaid     to    regulate     the   procedure    and  not
change/alter/modify the FTP which can be done only by the
Central Government. In the instant case, the impugned
‘condition x’ in the Public Notice is issued by the DGFT and
not by the Central Government and the same being
contrary to the FTP and having the effect of altering and
modifying clause No.2.13 of the FTP is clearly illegal and
without jurisdiction.    It is therefore contended that the
impugned ‘condition x’ in the Public Notice dated
14.06.2022 and the consequential condition No.3 in the
Condition sheet of the TRQ dated 05.07.2022 issued /
allotted to the petitioner are illegal and arbitrary and
deserve to be quashed and consequential directions have
to be issued to the respondents.
In support of his contentions, learned counsel for the
petitioner  has      placed   reliance   upon   the    following
(i) Director General of Foreign Trade vs.
(ii) M.D.Overseas Ltd., vs. Union of India –
6. Per contra, learned counsel for the respondents –
revenue submits that the DGFT functions not only as the
Director General of Foreign Trade but he is also the Ex-
Officio Additional Secretary to the Government of India and
consequently, both the Public Notice dated 24.05.2022 and
the impugned Public Notice dated 14.06.2022 having been
issued after due approval from the Ministry of Commerce
and Industry are deemed to have been issued by the
Central Government only. It is submitted that the DGFT is
an authority constituted under the FTDR Act and entitled to
issue the public notices prescribing the procedure including
the impugned ‘condition x’ in the Public Notice dated
6.1 It is also submitted that as per Authentication
(Orders and Other Instruments) Rules, 2002, the DGFT is
the Authenticating Officer, who is entitled to sign the
Notification on behalf of the Central Government. It is
therefore submitted that the DGFT was perfectly justified in
inserting the impugned conditions in the Public Notice
dated 14.06.2022 and the TRQ dated 05.07.2022 issued in
favour of the petitioner, which do not warrant interference
by this Court in the present petition.
In support of his contentions, learned counsel for the
respondents has placed reliance upon the following
(i) Union of India & others vs. AGRICAS
LLP & others – 2020 SCC Online SC 675.
(ii) Chowgule & Company Limited vs.
Assistant Director General of Foreign Trade &
(iii) SCA No.14959/2019 by the Gujarath
(iv) W.P.No.15921 to 15924/2018 etc., by
the High Court of Madras;
(v) W.P.No.552 & connected cases/2019 by
the High Court of Andhra Pradesh;
Anr.- W.A.No.480/2011 dated 02.11.2020 – High
Court of Kerala at Ernakulam.
7. The only question that arises for consideration in
the present petition is with regard to the legality and validity
of ‘condition x’ mentioned in para-2 of the Public Notice at
Annexure-J dated 14.06.2022 and consequential condition
No.3 in the Condition sheet of the TRQ dated 05.07.2022
(Annexure-M) issued / allotted to the petitioner, whereby
the subject goods of the petitioner lying at Indian Ports
(under warehousing etc.,) before the date of issuance of
TRQ licence are directed by the respondents not to be
considered for import clearance under TRQ.
8.   Before adverting to the rival contentions, it is
necessary to refer to certain provisions of the Foreign
Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 1992 (for short
‘the FTDR Act) and the Foreign Trade Policy 2015-2020
•  As per Section 5 of the FTDR Act, the Central Government
may, from time to time, formulate and announce, by
notification in the Official Gazette, the foreign trade policy and
may also, in like manner, amend that policy.
•  As per Section 6(3) of FTDR Act, the Central Government
may, by Order published in the Official Gazette, direct that
any power exercisable by it under this Act (other than the
powers under Section 3, 5, 15, 16 and 19) may also be
exercised, in such cases and subject to such conditions, by
the DGFT or such other officer subordinate to the DGFT, as
may be specified in the Order.
•  As per Section 3(2) of FTDR Act, the Central Government
may also, by Order published in the Official Gazette, make
provision for prohibiting, restricting or otherwise regulating, in
all cases or in specified classes of cases and subject to such
exceptions, if any, as may be made by or under the Order, the
import or export of goods or services or technology.
8.1 A conjoint and cumulative reading of the
aforesaid provisions of FTDR Act makes is clear that only
the Central Government can formulate and announce the
Foreign Trade Policy by ‘Notification’ in the Official Gazette
and may also, in like manner, amend that policy; further the
power of the Central Government to formulate and amend
the Foreign Trade Policy cannot be exercised by DGFT; so
also, as per Section 3(2) of FTDR Act, only the Central
Government can by Order published in the Official Gazette
make provision for prohibiting, restricting or otherwise
regulating import or export of goods or services or
technology and this power of the Central Government
cannot be exercised by the DGFT.
•   As per Para1.00 of the FTP, the Central Government notifies
the FTP in exercise of powers conferred under Section 5 of
•   As per Para1.02 of the FTP, the Central Government can
amend the FTP by means of ‘Notification’, in public interest.
Para1.02 of the FTP is reproduced below for ready
1.02     Amendment to FTP -- Central Government,
in exercise of power conferred by Section 5 of FT
(D&R) Act, 1992, as amended from time to time,
reserves the right to make any amendment to the
FTP, by means of notification, in public interest.
•       As per Para1.03 of FTP, DGFT by means of ‘Public
Notice’ notifies Hand Book of Procedure (HBP), amongst
others, for laying down the procedure to be followed by an
exporter or importer for the purpose of implementation of the
•      Para1.03 of FTP is reproduced below for ready
1.03       Hand     Book     of    Procedure   (HBP)     and
Appendices &AayatNiryat Forms (AANF) - Director General of
Foreign Trade (DGFT) may, by means of Public Notice, notify
Hand    Book    of   Procedure,     including Appendices    and
Aayat/Niryat Forms or amendment thereto, if any, laying down
the procedure to be followed by an exporter or importer or by
any Licensing/Regional Authority or by any other authority for
purposes of implementing provisions of FT (D&R) Act, the Rules
and the Orders made there under and provisions of FTP.
As per Para2.04 of FTP, DGFT may by means of ‘Public Notice’
specify procedures, amongst others, to be followed by an
exporter or importer or by any Licensing / Regional Authority or
by any other authority for purpose of implementing provisions of
FT (D&R) Act, the Rules and the Orders made there under and
provisions of FTP.
Para2.04 of FTP is reproduced below for ready reference:
Para2.04 Authority to specify Procedure - DGFT
may, specify Procedures to be followed by an exporter or
importer or by any Licensing/Regional Authority (RA) or by
any other authority for purpose of implementing provisions
of FT (D&R) Act, the Rules and the Orders made there
under and provisions of FTP. Such procedures, or
amendments if any, shall be published by means of a
8.2  A perusal of the aforesaid provisions of FTP, it
is apparent that DGFT by means of ‘Public Notice’ may
notify Hand Book of Procedure or amendment thereto, if
any, laying down the procedure to be followed by an
exporter or importer or by any Licensing/Regional Authority
or by any other authority for purposes of implementing
provisions of FTDR Act, the Rules and the Orders made
there under and provisions of FTP.
Para2.13 of FTP permits clearance of warehoused imported
goods for home consumption against Authorisation issued
Para2.13 of FTP is reproduced below for ready reference:
2.13   Clearance of Goods from Customs against
Authorisation - Goods already imported / shipped / arrived,
in advance, but not cleared from Customs may also be
cleared against an Authorisation issued subsequently.
However, such goods already imported/shipped/arrived, in
advance are first warehoused against Bill of Entry for
Warehousing and then cleared for home consumption
against an Authorisation issued subsequently. This facility
will however be not available to “restricted” items or items
traded through STEs.
As per Para9.07 of FTP “Authorisation” means permission as
included in Section 2(g) of the Act to import or export as per
provisions of FTP
As per Section 2(g) of FTDR Act, “licence” means a licence to
import or export and includes a customs clearance permit and
any other permission issued or granted under this Act.
8.3 A perusal of the aforesaid provisions of the FTP
will clearly indicate that the impugned condition i.e.
‘condition x’ is clearly diametrically opposite, violative and
contrary to the provisions of Para2.13 of the Foreign Trade
Policy, inasmuch as, while Para2.13 of the FTP permits
clearance of goods shipped/imported prior to issuance of
TRQ licence, the impugned ‘condition x’ in the Public
Notice dated 14.06.2022 stipulates that only import
consignments landing at Indian Ports after the date of
issuance of TRQ license shall only be considered for
clearance under TRQ and any quantities lying at the Indian
ports (under warehousing etc) before the date of issuance
of the TRQ license shall not be considered for import
clearance under TRQ and consequently, the subject
‘condition x’ is contrary to Para2.13 of FTP and the same
cannot be sustained in law, particularly when the Hand
Book of Procedure is meant to lay down the procedure for
implementation of the FTP and the same cannot override
the provisions of the FTP which is formulated and framed
by the Central Government and not by the DGFT.
9. It is significant to note that as per Para 1.02 of the
FTP, only the Central Government can amend the FTP by
means of Notification, in public interest; further, as per
Para1.03 and Para2.04 of the FTP, the DGFT by means of
Public Notice can notify and amend only the Hand Book of
Procedure, amongst others, for laying down the procedure
to be followed by an exporter or importer for the purpose of
implementation of the FTP. In other words, while the power
to amend the FTP vests solely and exclusively with the
Central Government, the DGFT has the power to issue a
Public    Notice    prescribing    and    amending    only   the
procedure; in this context, a perusal of the Public Notice
dated 24.05.2022 issued by the DGFT will clearly indicate
that he traces his power to Para1.03 and Para 2.04 of the
FTP for the purpose of issuing the Public notice; similarly,
even in the Public Notice dated 14.06.22 containing the
impugned ‘condition x’, the DGFT traces his power only to
Para 1.03 and Para 2.04 of FTP and in both the aforesaid
Public notices, he does trace his power to the FTDR Act.
10. It follows there from that the power and
jurisdiction to issue Public Notice stipulating the procedure
and amending the same by the DGFT is circumscribed and
traceable only to the FTP and consequently, the DGFT
does not have jurisdiction or authority of law to stipulate
any condition contrary to the FTP and which has the effect
of amending, modifying or altering the FTP, thereby
establishing that ‘condition x’ in the Public Notice dated
14.06.22 being contrary to Para 2.13 of FTP, the same
clearly tantamounts to amending the provisions of the FTP,
which power cannot be exercised by the DGFT, especially
when the power to amend the FTP is within the sole
domain of the Central Government and not by the DGFT
and on this ground also, the impugned ‘condition x’ and
consequential condition in the TRQ issued in favour of the
petitioner deserve to be quashed.
11. The contention of the Respondents that DGFT /
Respondent No.2 had issued Public Notice No.15/2015-20
dated 14.06.2022 in his capacity as Ex-officio Additional
Secretary     to  the    Government    of  India   and   had
authenticated the same cannot be accepted; in the instant
case, the DGFT has issued aforesaid Public Notice dated
14.06.2022 which makes it evident that the decision was
taken by DGFT while amending Para 2 of Public Notice
dated 24.05.2022 while incorporating amongst others
‘condition x’ therein, in terms of Para1.03 and 2.04 of FTP,
whereby DGFT can only amend the Handbook of
Procedure. However while doing so, the DGFT has
purported to amend the provisions of FTP, which power is
not in the domain of DGFT and hence, the impugned
‘condition x’ cannot be sustained in law.
12.    As per Section 3(2) of FTDR Act, only the
Central Government can make provision for prohibiting,
restricting or otherwise regulating the import or export of
goods or services or technology. The contention of the
Respondents that in terms of Section 9 of the FTDR Act,
the DGFT can impose conditions and restrictions in license
cannot be accepted, as only the Central Government can
make provision for prohibiting, restricting or otherwise
regulating import or export of goods. Issuance of license is
only procedural aspect and in any case, the DGFT cannot
impose conditions and restrictions in license which are
contrary to FTP and FTDR Act and any such condition
cannot be sustained in law. On this score also, the
impugned ‘condition x’ is not sustainable in law.
13. Under similar circumstances in Kanak Export’s
case supra, the Apex Court held as under:
2. Vide Notification No. 28 dated 28-1-2004,
the Central Government sought to amend certain
provisions of the EXIM Policy by inserting Notes 1 to
5, which was unpalatable to the exporters of the
goods mentioned therein as, according to them,
under the guise of the said Notes, some benefits
which had already accrued to these exporters under
the EXIM Policy were taken away. Vide Public
Notice     dated    28-1-2004,    the    Government
announced exclusion of export performance in
relation to four classes of goods mentioned in Para
2 thereof from computation of the entitlement under
the Scheme and, at the same time, sought to
disallow the import of agricultural products falling
under Chapters I to XXIV of ITC (HS) under the said
Scheme. Thereafter, Notification No. 38 dated 21-4-
2004 was published under Section 5 of the Act on
the same lines on which Public Notice dated 28-1-
2004 was issued. The exporters of these goods,
naturally, felt aggrieved thereby. There was an
innocuous amendment to Notification No. 38 dated
21-4-2004 wherein in addition to the Director
General of Foreign Trade (for short “DGFT”) as an
officer to enforce these notifications, ex officio
Additional Secretary to the Government of India was
also added. All such exporters who were affected
thereby filed writ petitions in various High Courts,
particulars   whereof     shall  be    taken   note    of
hereinafter at the appropriate stage.
6.   In   order   to   achieve    the   aforesaid
objectives,    power    is   given   to    the   Central
Government under Section 3 of the Act to make
provisions relating to imports and exports with
primary focus on the development and regulation of
foreign   trade.   Further,    Section   5   specifically
empowers the Central Government to formulate and
announce the EXIM Policy. It reads as under:
“5. Export and import policy.—The Central
Government may, from time to time, formulate and
announce, by notification in the Official Gazette, the
export and import policy and may also, in the like
manner, amend that policy.”
7. In order to carry out the purposes of this
Act, DGFT is to be appointed by the Central
Government as per the provisions of Section 6 of
the Act. In addition to carrying out the purposes of
this Act, DGFT is also supposed to advise the
Central Government in formulation of the EXIM
Policy. He is also made responsible for carrying out
that Policy. However, sub-section (3) of Section 6
empowers the Central Government to give the
aforesaid functions of DGFT even to other officers
subordinate to DGFT, except for powers conferred
under Sections 3, 5, 15, 16 and 19 of the Act.
8. As already noted above, Sections 3 and 5
give certain powers to the Central Government and,
therefore, these powers have to be exercised by the
Central Government only and cannot be delegated
to DGFT or an officer subordinate to him. Sections
15 and 16 relate to appeal and revision which can
be    filed  against   the    orders   passed by  the
adjudicating      authority    against    any  person
committing contravention of the provisions of the
Act, the Rules, the Orders and the EXIM Policy. The
appeal lies to DGFT if the adjudicating authority,
who passes the order, is an officer subordinate to
DGFT. In those cases, where the adjudicating
officer is DGFT himself, appeal lies to the Central
Government. Under Section 16, revisionary powers
are conferred upon the Central Government. These
powers of appeal and revision also cannot be
delegated by virtue of Section 6(3) of the Act.
Section 19 again confers power upon the Central
Government to make rules for carrying out the
provisions of the Act generally and in respect of
various matters specifically enumerated in sub-
section (2) of Section 19. This power of the Central
Government also cannot be delegated.
9. It may be noted that under Section 5 of the
Act, the Central Government has been formulating
EXIM policies from time to time. The Policy with
which we are concerned is the EXIM Policy for the
period 2002-2007, which was substituted by EXIM
10. The EXIM Policy of 2002-2007 was
announced and came into force from 1-4-2002.
Amendment to this Policy was notified on 31-3-2003
and the revised edition of the Policy was to come
into force from 1-4-2003. Even though the Central
Government is generally entitled and empowered to
carry out amendments in this Policy from time to
time, in the EXIM Policy 2002-2007, such a right
was specifically reserved stating that “however, the
Central Government reserves the right in public
interest to make any amendments to this Policy in
exercise of powers conferred by Section 5 of the
Act”. It was also mentioned that such amendments
would be made by means of a notification published
in the Gazette of India.
11. Chapter I of the Policy, which gives
“Introduction”, had made transitional arrangements
vide Para 1.2 thereof clarifying that any notifications
made or public notices issued or anything done
under the provisions of the EXIM Policy and in force
immediately before the commencement of the said
Policy shall continue to be in force, insofar as those
notifications, etc. are not inconsistent with the
provisions of the instant Policy. It was also clarified
that licences/certificates/permissions issued under
the earlier Policy would continue to be followed for
the         purpose         for      which         such
licences/certificates/permissions     were      issued,
unless otherwise stipulated. Para 1.4 enshrines the
objectives which led to formulation of such a policy
and reads as under:
“1.4. The principal objectives of this Policy are:
(i) To facilitate sustained growth in exports to attain
a share of at least 1% of global merchandise trade.
(ii) To stimulate sustained economic growth by
providing access to essential raw materials,
intermediates, components, consumables and
capital goods required for augmenting production
and providing services.
(iii) To enhance the technological strength and
efficiency of Indian agriculture, industry and
services, thereby improving their competitive
strength while generating new employment
opportunities, and to encourage the attainment of
internationally accepted standards of quality.
(iv) To provide consumers with good quality goods
and services at internationally competitive prices
while at the same time creating a level playing field
for the domestic producers.”
12. Keeping in mind the aforesaid principal
objectives, Para 2.1 made it clear that exports and
imports shall be free, except in cases where they
are regulated by the provisions of the said Policy or
any other law for the time being in force. As per
Para 2.4, DGFT was authorised to specify the
procedure which needs to be followed by an
exporter or importer or by any licensee or other
competent      authority    for  the    purposes     of
implementing the provisions of the Act, the Rules
and the Orders made therein and this Policy. Such a
procedure was to be stipulated and included in the
Handbook (Vols. I & II), Schedule of DEPB and in
ITC (HS) and published by means of a public notice.
It was permissible to amend this procedure from
time to time.
86. The next issue relates to the validity of
the Public Notice dated 28-1-2004. The question
that is posed for determination on this issue is as to:
III. Whether Public Notice dated 28-1-2004,
issued by DGFT, which sought to exclude the export
performance related to class of goods, is without
87. The main submission of the petitioners,
which was before the High Courts as well and
reiterated before us, was that the Public Notice
dated 28-1-2004 seeks to amend the EXIM Policy
and DGFT does not have any such power inasmuch
as this EXIM Policy is statutory which is issued
under Section 5 of the Act by the Central
Government and, therefore, it is only the Central
Government      which   has    the   power    to make
amendments to the EXIM Policy. Therefore, the
Public Notice issued by DGFT dated 28-1-2004 was
without   jurisdiction.  An    additional   ground    of
retrospectivity was also taken to challenge the
public notice. It was also argued that DGFT by the
said public notice was seeking to impose additional
conditions, not forming part of the original policy
which was again impermissible.
88.    Mr Adhyaru, learned Senior Counsel
appearing for the Union of India, on the other hand,
submitted that the paramount consideration in
issuing the public notice was to check unscrupulous
exporters including the writ petitioners from inflating
their export turnover by adopting dubious methods.
He emphasised the rational for inclusion of four
items by this public notice which has already been
taken note of. His endeavour was to demonstrate
that issuance of the public notice in question
became      paramount      to    cluck    unscrupulous
methodology adopted by certain exporters with the
objective to wrongfully acquire the benefits of the
Schemes that could not be countenanced and had
to be checked. We are not delving with those
alleged malpractices and hold back the same at this
juncture. They will be spelled out while discussing
the validity of the Notification dated 21-4-2004 as
the subject-matter thereof is same. Here, we are
concerned with the powers of DGFT to issue such a
public notice.
89. In order to answer this question, we have
to first determine as to whether this Public Notice
dated    28-1-2004      is   only an  amendment     to
Handbook of Procedures or it tinkers with the EXIM
Policy. To answer this question, we may first go into
the scheme of the Act. For this purpose, Section 5
as well as Section 6 of the Act are to be taken note
of in the first instance and read as under:
Government may, from time to time, formulate and
announce, by notification in the Official Gazette, the
Foreign Trade Policy and may also, in like manner,
amend that Policy:
Provided that the Central Government may
direct that, in respect of the Special Economic
Zones, the Foreign Trade Policy shall apply to the
goods, services and technology with such
exceptions, modifications and adaptations, as may
be specified by it by notification in the Official
6. Appointment of Director General and
his functions.—(1) The Central Government may
appoint any person to be the Director General of
Foreign Trade for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The Director General shall advise the
Central Government in the formulation of the
Foreign Trade Policy and shall be responsible for
carrying out that Policy.
(3) The Central Government may, by Order
published in the Official Gazette, direct that any
power exercisable by it under this Act (other than
the powers under Sections 3, 5, 15, 16 and 19) may
also be exercised, in such cases and subject to
such conditions, by the Director General or such
other officer subordinate to the Director General, as
may be specified in the Order.”
90.    From the aforesaid, it is clear that
Section 5 provides that the Central Government
may, from time to time, formulate and announce, the
EXIM      Policy.   This     has   to    be     done    by
issuing/announcing this Policy by way of notification
in the Official Gazette. The Central Government also
has the power to amend the Policy so announced by
adopting the same procedure i.e. by issuing
notification in the Official Gazette. It is not in dispute
that the EXIM Policy in question was issued by
notification in exercise of powers conferred under
Section 5 of the Act. This Policy, thus, is infested
with statutory flavour.
91. For the purpose of carrying out the
objectives of the Act which includes implementation
of the Policy, the Central Government is authorised
to appoint DGFT as per Section 6 of the Act. The
main functions of DGFT are advising the Central
Government in formulation of the Policy and he is
also responsible for carrying out the said Policy.
Sub-section (3) of Section 6 provides that the
Central    Government       may  delegate      its  power
exercisable under the Act. However, powers under
Sections 3, 5, 15, 16 and 19 are specifically
excluded which means these powers cannot be
delegated. Thus, power to announce the Policy and
to amend the same remains with the Central
Government. Likewise, power to make rules under
Section     19   which     vests  with   the  Central
Government, cannot be delegated.
92. Keeping in mind the aforesaid legal position, we
reproduce certain portion of the EXIM Policy
announced vide Notification No. 1 dated 31-3-2003
which have bearing on the issue at hand. These are:
Para 1.1 of the Export and Import Policy provided
In exercise of the powers conferred under
Section 5 of the Foreign Trade (Development and
Regulation) Act, 1992 (22 of 1992), the Central
Government hereby notifies the Export and Import
Policy for the period 2002-2007. This Policy shall
come into force with effect from 1-4-2002 and shall
remain in force up to 31-3-2007 and will be co-
terminus with the Tenth Five Year Plan (2002-2007).
However, the Central Government reserves
the right in public interest to make any amendments
to this Policy in exercise of the powers conferred by
Section 5 of the Act. Such amendment shall be
made by means of a Notification published in the
Gazette of India.”
Para 1.2 of the said Policy provides that:
Any Notifications made or Public Notices issued or
anything done under the previous Export/Import
Policies, and in force immediately before the
commencement of this Policy shall, insofar as they
are not inconsistent with the provisions of this
Policy, continue to be in force and shall be deemed
to have been made, issued or done under this
Policy. Licence/certificate/permissions issued before
the commencement of this Policy shall continue to
be valid for the purpose for which such
licence/certificate/permission was issued unless
otherwise stipulated.”
Para 2.4 of the Import and Export Policy dealing
with the procedure provides that:
“The Director General of Foreign Trade may, in any
case or class of cases, specify the procedure to be
followed by an exporter or importer or by any
licensing or any other competent authority for the
purpose of implementing the provisions of the Act,
the Rules and the Orders made thereunder and this
Policy. Such procedures shall be included in the
Handbook (Vol. 1), Handbook (Vol. 2), Schedule of
DEPB Rate and in ITC (HS) and published by
means of a public notice. Such procedures may, in
like manner, be amended from time to time.
The Handbook (Vol. 1) is a supplement to the EXIM
Policy and contains relevant procedures and other
details. The procedure of availing benefits under
various schemes of the Policy are given in the
93. It is explained by the learned counsel for the
Union of India that a notification issued under
Section 5 of the Act or any change brought about by
DGFT in exercise of the powers under Para 2.4 of
the Import and Export Policy in the Handbook
Procedure, by way of a public notice the same are
gazetted and notified in the Gazette of India. It is
also pointed out that the notification/public notices
issued relating to non-statutory rules, regulations,
order and resolutions issued by the Ministries of
Government of India (other than the Defence
Ministry), and by the Supreme Court of India are
published under Part 1 Section 1 of the Gazette of
India. On the other hand, notifications issued by the
Ministries of Government of India (other than the
Defence Ministry) are published under Part II
Section 3(ii) of the Gazette of India. On that basis,
justification is sought to be given that Notification
No.     28/(RE-2003)/2002-2007       dated   28-1-2004,
Notification No. 38/(RE-2003)/2002-2007 dated 21-
4-2004 were published in the Gazette of India under
Part II, Section 3 sub-section (ii), while Public Notice
No. 40 dated 28-1-2004 was published in the
Gazette of India under Part I Section 1 of the
Gazette of India and as such, as both the
notifications as well as the public notices are
officially gazetted in the Gazette of India. Thus,
there is no distinction between the two as the same
carry the same impact and effect.
94. From the aforesaid explanation, we take it that
the Public Notice dated 28-1-2004 was published in
the Gazette of India in accordance with the
requirement of law. The question, however, is as to
whether by this public notice, DGFT was only
carrying out the EXIM Policy or this public notice
amounted to change in the said EXIM Policy. It is
crystal clear that the public notice alters the
provisions of the EXIM Policy. It would, therefore,
amount to amending the EXIM Policy, whether
clarificatory or otherwise. There may be a valid
justification and rational for exclusion of four items
contained therein, as pleaded by the Union.
However, it had to be done in accordance with law.
When DGFT had no power in this behalf, he could
not have excluded such items from the purview of
the EXIM Policy by means of public notice. The
power of DGFT is only to be exercised for
procedural purposes and both the High Courts have
rightly remarked that Para 3.2.6 inserted by the
public     notice  goes    beyond     the   procedural
conditions.
95. In fact, the Government itself realized the same,
namely, the DGFT had no such power, it is for this
reason that what was sought to be achieved by the
said Public Notice, was formalized by the Central
Government by issuing Notifications dated April 21
and 23, 2004 in exercise of powers conferred on the
Central Government by Section 5 of the Act and the
same four items were excluded.
96. Therefore, we hold that public notice dated
January 28, 2004 issued by DGFT, so far it
excludes the aforesaid four items, is ultra vires.
14. The aforesaid judgment of the Apex Court has
been followed by the Delhi High Court in M.D.Overseas’s
case supra.
15. Insofar as the judgment of the Apex Court in
AGRICAS      LLP’s    case     supra  relied  upon   by   the
respondents is concerned, a perusal of para-15 of the said
judgment will indicate that the same were issued by the
Central Government and that the DGFT had performed
only the ministerial act of publication and that the decision
to amend and issue the Notification was that of the Central
Government. The said judgment is inapplicable to the facts
of the instant case, since, as stated supra, the power to
amend the FTP is vested solely and exclusively with the
Central Government in terms of Para 1.02 of the FTP. In
this context, as is clear from the Public Notice dated
14.06.2022 containing the impugned ‘condition x’, the said
Public Notice is traceable to Para 1.03 and Para 2.04 of the
FTP and not to Para 1.02 of the FTP. To put it differently,
amendment to the FTP can be done only by the Central
Government under Para 1.02 of the FTP, whereas
amendment to the procedure can be done by the DGFT
under Para 1.03 and Para 2.04 of the FTP.
16. Under these circumstances, in the light of the
undisputed fact that the Public Notice dated 14.06.2022
containing the impugned ‘condition x’ has been issued by
the DGFT by tracing his powers to Para 1.03 and Para 2.04
and not to Para 1.02, it is clear that the said Public Notice
has been issued only by the DGFT alone and not by the
Central Government and consequently, in the facts of the
present case, the said judgment has no application and
cannot be relied upon by the respondents.
17. Insofar as the judgment of the Kerala High Court
in Mustafa Traders case (supra) is concerned, apart from
the fact that the facts obtaining in the said case were
entirely different; no ratio has been laid down by the
Division Bench and the matter has been remitted back to
the learned Single Judge and as such, the said judgment is
not applicable to the facts of the instant case.
18. Insofar as the judgment of the Apex Court in
Chowgule & Company’s case (supra) is concerned, no
ratio, much less any finding with regard to the power of the
DGFT to amend the FTP or the issue in relation to Para
1.02, 1.03 and 2.04 of the FTP was returned or laid down
by the Apex Court and consequently, mere reference to the
DGFT in the said judgment cannot be made the basis to
come to the conclusion that the DGFT has power and
jurisdiction to amend the FTP as contended by the
19.   Insofar as the other judgments of the High
Courts of Gujarath, Madras       and Andhra Pradesh relied
upon by the respondents are concerned, apart from the fact
that the facts obtaining in the said cases were different;
Notifications were issued by the Central Government and
not by the DGFT as is evident in the instant case and
consequently, even these judgments are inapplicable to the
case on hand.
20. In view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances,
I am of the considered opinion that the impugned ‘condition
x’ mentioned in Para 2 of the Public Notice at Annexure-J
dated 14.06.2022 and the consequential Condition No.3 in
the Condition sheet of the TRQ dated 05.07.2022 vide
Annexure-M issued / allotted to the petitioner deserve to
be quashed and necessary directions are to be issued to
the respondents to refund the excess duty paid by the
petitioner back to him, in addition to returning the Bank
Guarantee dated 05.08.2022 furnished by the petitioner
pursuant to the orders of this Court.
21. In the result, I pass the following:-
(i) Petition is hereby allowed.
(ii) The impugned ‘condition x’ mentioned in Para 2 of
the Public Notice No.15/2015-20 dated 14.06.2022 issued
by the 2nd respondent is hereby quashed insofar as the
petitioner is concerned.
(iii) The impugned condition No.3 in the Condition
sheet of the Tariff Rate Quota vide Annexure-M dated
05.07.2022 issued / allotted to the petitioner is also hereby
(iv) Respondents are hereby directed to refund the
entire excess duty paid by the petitioner as expeditiously as
possible back to the petitioner and at any rate, within a
period of one month from the date of receipt of a copy of
this order.
(v) Respondents are also directed to return the Bank
Guarantee dated 05.08.2022 furnished by the petitioner
pursuant to the interim order dated 01.08.2022 passed by
this Court in the present petition.