Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 12245 of
1. The case is called out through video conferencing in virtual hearing.
2. Heard learned counsel for the applicant Ms. Neeta Singh Chandel,
Advocate, learned A.G.A. for the State Sri Raveesh Chandra Mishra,
Advocate through video conferencing and perused the record.
3. The present bail application is moved on behalf of the accused-
applicant involved in Case Crime No. 308 of 2013, under Sections
498-A, 304-B, 201 I.P.C. and Section 3/4 D.P. Act, Police Station-
4. Briefly stating, it is argued by the defence that in the prosecution
case there is some ambiguity and anomaly in between the version of
the First Information Report as to the manner of causing death of the
deceased by her in-laws. But this is not so, as the same is amply
elucidated from the statement recorded in the proceeding under
investigation. Initially the aggrieved father of the deceased "Pinky"
(wife of the present accused-applicant, Bablu) reported on 28.12.2013
in Police Station- Itaunja, Lucknow that he came to know about her
daughter Pinky was done to death cruelly in connection with demand
of dowry which remained unfulfilled and her body was secretly burnt
in collusion with Gram Pradhan, Bhagwati.
5. A criminal case was lodged on the aforesaid information bearing
First Information Report No.308 of 2013 in Police Station- Itaunja,
Lucknow under Sections 498-A, 304-B, 201 I.P.C. and Section 3/4
D.P. Act. The Investigating Officer found out that the victim namely
"Pinky", daughter of complainant, Babulal was burnt and her dead
body was buried at a secret place by the accused-applicant and his
family members for vanishing of the evidences. On information to the
above effect brought by the Senior Superintendent of Police before the
District Magistrate Lucknow on 01.01.2014, the office of the District
Magistrate Lucknow issued a letter dated 04.01.2014 for permission
to excavate the place of burrial and exhume the dead body of the
deceased, Pinky. The dead body was exhumed from the place of burial
and inquest proceeding was done before the witnesses. The dead body
was observed with peeled off skin at several places, teeth and nails
were loosened from their sockets in easily detachable condition. Soil
and mud was present on clothes and person of the dead body at
several places.
Antemortem Injuries reported in the course of post-mortem are
(i) Contusion 9.00 cm x 6.00 cm present on right side head just
above and behind right ear, on opening ecchymosis present
underneath the injuries menining congested, brain liquefied and
mixed with clotted blood.
(ii) Post mortem injuries soft to deep burn present on all over body
except top of head, skin is blackened and peeled of at places, burn
area yellowish in colour when skin is peeled of. No redline of
demarcation seen at junction of burned and unburned area. No
Int.part on the body.
6. The accused-applicant and other in-laws were not present at the
time of inquest whereas father of the victims "Pinky" is mentioned as
witnesses, the body was sent for the post-mortem as the witnesses
could not ascertained the actual cause of death, dead body was in
rotten condition. The post-mortem was done on 7.1.2014, doctors
opined death about one month ago due to coma as a result of anti-
mortem head injuries, however, viscera was preserved and sent to
Forensic Science Laboratory for chemical examination.
7. In the aforesaid facts and substances on record, reading over the
first information report and the statement of the complainant recorded
by Investigating Officer under Section 161 Cr.P.C., it comes out that
the deceased, Pinky was married about three years ago from the date
of incident with the present accused-applicant, resident of village
Soraon situated under Police Station- Itaunja, District Lucknow. Just
after the marriage was solemnized, the in-laws of the deceased, Pinky
began to insist for additional dowry and to transfer a considerable
amount of money from the deposits of father. Since the demand could
not be fulfilled by reason of poverty and indigency of father, they
severally used to beat his daughter, Pinky. On information as to the
excessive cruelty committed with his daughter, complainant Babulal
went to the in-laws' house of daughter in village Soraon and prayed
them not to commit such cruelty as it is beyond his capacity to pay
additional dowry by
about the poverty and incapacity of the father to give additional
dowry, they all collusively killed her and secretly cremate her body.
8. Learned counsel submitted that the First Information Report which
is foundation of the entire prosecution case is false and fabricated due
to which no independent witnesses could be obtained by it during the
proceeding of recovery and preparation of recovery memo. Apart of
this technical challenge against the prosecution case entire affidavit
filed in support of the bail application has no explanation as to the
circumstance of death why and under which the death of the deceased
Pinky was occurred. Secondly, why without informing the father,
body of the deceased Pinky was secretly burnt. Thirdly, no
explanation as to the ante-mortem injuries found on the body of
deceased Pinky which was recovered by exhuming the same from
place of burial. The post-mortem report has also reported about the
rotten condition of dead body exhumed from the place of burial as the
clothes on the body and body itself was wrapped with mud and soil
which corroborates the fact of concealing the dead body by burial
after death caused by head injury and burning.
9. In the case of Prahlad Singh Bhati Vs. NCT, Delhi and another -
(2001 4 SCC 280), Hon'ble the Supreme Court has held some
parameters for grant of bail, which are being quoted hereunder:-
"8. The jurisdiction to grant bail has to be exercised on the basis
of well-settled principles having regard to the circumstances of
each case and not in an arbitrary manner. While granting the
bail, the court has to keep in mind the nature of accusations, the
nature of evidence in support thereof, the severity of the
punishment which conviction will entail, the character, behaviour,
means and standing of the accused, circumstances which are
peculiar to the accused, reasonable possibility of securing the
presence of the accused at the trial, reasonable apprehension of
the witnesses being tampered with, the larger interests of the
public or State and similar other considerations. It has also to be
kept in mind that for the purposes of granting the bail the
legislature has used the words "reasonable grounds for believing"
instead of "the evidence" which means the court dealing with the
grant of bail can only satisfy it (sic itself) as to whether there is a
genuine case against the accused and that the prosecution will be
able to produce prima facie evidence in support of the charge. It
is not expected, at this stage, to have the evidence establishing the
guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt."
10. The facts that the accused-applicant is found to have committed
willingly the death of his wife after beating her brutally in connection
with the demand of dowry soon before her death is prima facie
established from the ante mortem injuries found on the person of the
deceased reported in post mortem examination report of the dead
body. The dead body was burnt and buried at a secret place is also
prima facie established, moreover, no information of death was given
to the father and other family members of the deceased which reflects
the criminal mens rea of the accused. He further contended that the
body was recovered only on exhuming the dead body from the place
of burial with the permission of District Magistrate on information of
witnesses during the investigation. These all established that the death
of deceased, Pinky was a result of planned and premeditated murder.
11. In the aforesaid circumstances, the brutality with wife a 22 years
old lady and mother of an one year's infant child in causing her death,
beating her cruelly by the present accused applicant "her husband" is
not only grave in nature but heinous also, and is evident of callous
greed of a heartless husband and self centered irresponsible father of
the infant child. All the witnesses have not been examined as offered
by the prosecution in charge sheet and still a material number of
witnesses remain to be examined. The cruel nature and instinct of the
applicant in case of his release on bail certainly would adversely affect
the witnesses.
12. At this stage, the prosecution has succeeded successfully to prima
facie establish its case against the present accused-applicant who is
the main accused of the case.
13. In the aforesaid circumstances, the application for release of bail
does not deserves to be allowed, accordingly, the same is hereby