1.     The present suit had come to be instituted for a permanent
injunction restraining defendants 1 to 4, their associates and the other
sister concerns from publishing, republishing reports carrying details
of articles or telecasts in respect of a purported video dated 09 March
2022. A further relief was claimed for the issuance of a permanent
injunction directing the defendant No.5 to ensure compliance with any
decree that may be drawn in terms of relief (a). A claim for damages
was also laid in terms of relief (c).
2.      Learned counsel appearing for the plaintiff submits that
pursuant to the interim injunction which was granted by the Court on
30 November 2022 and 09 December 2022 the defendant
intermediaries have taken remedial steps and action. In view of the
above, he submits that the relief of damages is not claimed or pressed
any further. A prayer is consequently made for the disposal of the suit
itself in terms of the injunction which was granted on 30 November
2022 and 09 December 2022.
3.      The counsels appearing for the intermediaries have opposed the
suit being decreed in terms of the injunction orders or for the said
orders being made absolute on the ground that it would in essence
place them under a continuing obligation to attend to the issues that
may arise and in accordance with the terms which were put down by
the Court in its orders 30 November 2022 and 09 December 2022.
4.      However, in order to balance the interests of both sides it would
appear expedient to dispose of the suit on the following terms.
5.      The suit shall stand decreed with the defendants being required
to take down any offending URLs pertaining to the video dated 09
March 2022 if not already removed in terms of the injunctions of 30
November 2022 and 09 December 2022. The Court further leaves it
open to the plaintiff to bring to the notice of the intermediaries any
remaining URLs which relate to the offending video of 09 March
2022 and other identical videos, clips or still footage pertaining to the
subject matter. Any such request if made, may be independently
examined and evaluated by the intermediaries and if found to be
forming part of the subject matter of the instant suit, further steps may
be taken in accordance with the injunction which was granted on 30
6.     In light of the aforesaid order a prayer is made by learned
counsel for the plaintiff for refund of the court fee that had been
deposited. The Court has taken note of the provisions made in Order
XXIII Rule 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 [CPC] and which
enables the Court to decree a suit upon satisfaction being reached and
recorded in light of the action and steps that may be taken by
defendants and which may satisfy the claim raised by the plaintiff.
7.     Since in the present matter the plaintiff and its claim stands
satisfied in light of the steps that have been taken by the defendant, the
Court is of the considered opinion that the decree as drawn would
clearly fall within the ambit of Order XXIII Rule 3 of the CPC. The
plaintiff consequently is held entitled to refund of Court fee.
8.     The suit along with the pending I.A. shall stand decreed on the
aforementioned terms.
9.     Learned counsel for plaintiff has handed over the amended
memo of parties today across the board. The same is stated to have
been filed vide diary No.206365/2023 of even date. Let the same be
taken on record.