For the State :              Mr. S. G. Mukherjee, learned P.P.
The appeal is directed against the judgment and order dated
16.05.2015 and 18.05.2015 passed by the learned Additional District &
Track First Court, Islampur, Uttar Dinajpur in
Sessions Trial No. 35 of 2014 arising out of Sessions Case No. 127 of
2014 under Section 376 of the Indian Penal Code and sentenced him to
suffer imprisonment for 10 years and a fine of Rs.50,000/-, in default to
suffer further imprisonment for one year.
Prosecution case as alleged against the appellant is to the effect
that the appellant cohabited with the victim girl, who is a minor, on the
false promise of marriage. As a result, the girl became pregnant. When
she asked the appellant to marry her, he evaded the issue. Appellant
had last cohabited with the victim on 16.02.2010 at 8.30p.m. in a
bamboo grove.      The matter came to the knowledge of the family
members. A salish was held. At the salish, appellant refused to marry
the victim girl due to strong objection of his family members. Under
such circumstances, victim girl lodged first information report with the
police resulting in registration of Chakulia Police Station Case No. 61 of
2010 dated 01.03.2010 under Sections 376/493 of the Indian Penal
Code. In conclusion of trial, charge-sheet was filed and charges were
framed against the appellant under Sections 376/493 of the Indian
During trial prosecution examined eight witnesses to prove its
case.    Defence of the appellant was one of innocence and false
implication.   In conclusion of trial, learned Trial Judge by impugned
judgment and order convicted and sentenced the appellant, as
Learned Counsel appearing for the appellant submits that the
victim was a consenting party. The appellant was a young person and
there was free mixing between the parties. Marriage between the couple
could not fructify due to resistance of the parents of the appellant.
Hence, the appeal ought to be allowed.
Learned Counsel appearing for the State submits that the victim
was a minor at the time of occurrence and the appellant had forcibly
ravished the girl on the first occasion. Thereafter, he had repeatedly
cohabited with the victim on the false promise of marriage. Hence, the
appeal is liable to be dismissed.
P.W. 1 is the minor victim. She deposed that the appellant took
her in a bamboo grove and committed rape on her. She has tried to
resist him but he did not listen. The appellant promised to marry her.
Thereafter, she cohabited with him on a number of times on the
assurance of marriage.       As a result, she conceived.      When she
approached the appellant he refused to marry her. A salish took place
wherein the appellant agreed to marry her but his parents did not agree
with the marriage. As a result, she lodged first information report. She
gave birth to a child who is 4½ years of age.      Evidence of P.W. 1 is
corroborated by her mother, P.W. 4. P.W. 5 has proved the salish
wherein the appellant had admitted the incident but his parents did not
agree with the marriage. P.W. 2 is the medical officer who examined the
victim and found her 24 weeks pregnant. P.W. 6 is the headmaster of
Khikirtola M.S.K. where the victim studied.         He proved her Transfer
Certificate (Exhibit – 2) wherein her date of birth is recorded as
18.03.1993. Hence, the victim was below 17 years at the time of the
incident. P.W. 7 is the scribe and P.W. 8 is the investigating officer.
The evidence of record clearly establishes that the appellant had
cohabited with her on the promise of marriage. However, I find it is
difficult to accept that the initial cohabitation was forceful as such
allegation is significantly absent in the first information report lodged by
P.W. 1. It is argued that the appellant had agreed to marry her but the
marriage could not fructify due to resistance of his parents. Hence, it
cannot be said that the appellant did not intend to marry her at the
time when they cohabited. I find much substance in such submission.
Mere failure to keep a promise without anything more cannot lead to
the irresistible conclusion that the promise had been dishonestly made
from the inception.     Evidence has come on record that the appellant
and the victim girl wanted to marry each other and cohabited.           As a
result, she became pregnant but due to resistance of the parents of the
appellant marriage was not held.         Thus, it cannot be said that the
appellant did not have intention to marry the victim at the time when
they cohabited but such marriage was not possible due to obstruction
from elders in the family. Moreover, it appears from “Exhibit – 2” that
the date of birth of the victim is 18.03.1993 and she was above 16 years
at the time of occurrence. Thus, victim had crossed the age of consent.
From the materials on record, it appears that the cohabitation was
consensual. Appellant was a young person and the marriage proposal
did not come to fruition due to opposition from elders. Hence, it cannot
be said that the appellant did not intend to marry from the inception of
the relationship.       Furthermore, it would be incorrect to punish the
appellant as the promise to marry did not fructify due to subsequent
event, namely, opposition from family elders which is not attributable to
In this regard reference may be made to Deelip Singh @ Dilip
Kumar vs. State of Bihar1 wherein the court held as follows:-
“30. ...whether the promise to marry, if made by the accused, was
false to his knowledge and belief from the very inception and it was
never intended to be acted upon by him. As pointed out by this Court in
Uday case the burden is on the prosecution to prove that there was
absence of consent. Of course, the position is different if the case is
covered by Section 114-A of the Evidence Act. Consent or absence of it
could be gathered from the attendant circumstances. The previous or
contemporaneous acts or the subsequent conduct can be legitimate
guides.”
In light of the aforesaid discussion, I am inclined to set aside the
conviction and sentence and acquit the appellant of the charges levelled
against him.
Appellant Saddam     Hussain shall be forthwith released from
custody, if not wanted in any other case, upon executing a bond to the
satisfaction of the trial court for a period of six months in terms of
section 437A of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
The appeal is, accordingly, allowed.
All connected applications, if any pending, be disposed of.
Let a copy of this judgment along with the lower court records be
forthwith sent down to the trial court at once.
Photostat certified copy of this judgment, if applied for, shall be
made available to the appellant within a week from the date of putting
in the requisites.
I agree.