Through: Mr. Sanjay Jain, ASG with Mr.
Through: Mr. Sanjay Jain, ASG with Mr.
W.P.(C) 705/2020 & 5691/2021                                             Page 1 of 6
for R-5.
1.      This hearing has been done through video conferencing.
2.      The present petitions have been filed by Petitioners/Workmen
(hereinafter “Workmen”) who were contractually employed with the
The grievance of the Workmen is that their services were illegally
terminated by the Respondent Authorities, under the pretext of changing the
contractor. Accordingly, the Workmen have approached this Court praying
for reinstatement in service as also for a direction to the Respondent
Authorities to give preference to the them over fresh contractual employees.
3.      Notice was issued in this matter on 22nd January, 2020. On 27th
November, 2020, the Court was informed that a new Contractor, namely
M/s. WAPCOS Limited, had been appointed by the Respondent Authorities.
The new Contractor was, therefore, sought to be impleaded in the matter.
Further, the previous Contractor, namely, M/s. UP Rajkiya Nirman Nigam
Ltd. and the sub-contractor namely M/s. HST Enterprises were deleted from
the array of parties.
4.      On 20th May, 2021, the Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 - ESIC, had taken
the position that they have no objection if the Workmen are accommodated
by the new Contractor, M/s. WAPCOS Ltd., subject to them fulfilling the
eligibility criteria. On 25th May, 2021, ld. Counsel for M/s. WAPCOS Ltd.,
submitted that the new Contractor is only a consultancy agency, and
M/s.WAPCOS had sub-contracted the employment of contractual
W.P.(C) 705/2020 & 5691/2021                                         Page 2 of 6
employees to one, M/s. Shri Krishna & Co., w.e.f. 15th May, 2021.
5.      On 7th October, 2021, this Court was informed that a Committee has
been constituted for suggesting a draft policy in respect of the contractual
employees, and a report by the said Committee was stated to be placed
before the Standing Committee of the ESIC. The said Report was also
directed to be placed before this Court, in a sealed cover. The ESIC was
further directed to place on record the contracts entered into by it with the
previous contractors, sub-contractors as also the new contractors. Last and
final opportunity was also granted to the ESIC to decide the representation
made on behalf of the Workmen, within four weeks therefrom. However,
from the events that unfolded thereafter, it appears that no decision was
taken by the said Committee.
6.      Insofar as the list of old and new contractual workers who were being
employed by the ESIC are concerned, the Court had repeatedly directed the
ESIC to place on record an affidavit. On the last date, in view of the fact that
the explanation of the ESIC for non-filing of the affidavit had been found to
be unacceptable, the following directions were issued:
“11. Moreover, in the present case, the Court has
noticed that the contractors are being changed from
time to time, Further, old employees, who have worked
with the ESIC for 10 to 15 years, have been
discontinued without any reason. In this respect, the
stand of the ESIC is that the ESIC tries to
accommodate the old employees as much as possible.
Petitioners/Workmen, submits that in the ESI Hospital,
Okhla as also ESI Hospital, Jhilmil, new contractual
employees have been taken into service, after the filing
of the present petitions.
12. Under these circumstances, it is necessary to
W.P.(C) 705/2020 & 5691/2021                                           Page 3 of 6
ascertain as to what is ESIC’s policy in respect of
contractual employees. The list of employees in terms
of the last order also is directed to be placed on
record. All the previous orders of this Court shall be
complied with by the next date. Let an affidavit be
placed on record giving the information sought by the
previous orders.”
13. Considering that there has been repeated non-
compliance of the previous orders passed by this
Court, as also the fact that a clear policy in respect of
the contractual employees has not been placed on
record, Mr. Mukhmeet S. Bhatia (IAS), Director
General, ESIC and Dr. Deepak Kumar Sharma,
Medical Commissioner, ESIC to join the virtual
proceedings on the next date.
7.      Today, Mr. Sanjay Jain, ld. ASG appears on behalf of the ESIC. Mr.
Mukhmeet Singh Bhatia, Director General, ESIC has also joined the virtual
proceedings, in terms of the last order.
8.      On the basis of the submissions made before this Court, it is learnt
that the ESIC intends to frame a proper policy in respect of contractual
workers and to put in place a mechanism to exercise supervision over
contractors who are supplying the manpower for the various ESIC
establishments. Time is sought for constituting a committee to draft a proper
policy which would have applicability on a pan-India basis for all ESIC
establishments, in respect of engagement of contractual workers, their
working conditions, preferences, if any, to be given to long serving
contractual workers even when new contractors are engaged, safeguards to
be employed in the agreements to protect the interest of the contractual
workmen, as also the terms and conditions of the contracts to be entered into
with contractors.
W.P.(C) 705/2020 & 5691/2021                                           Page 4 of 6
9.      Accordingly, the following directions are issued:
i.      ESIC shall constitute a committee in order to frame a
broad policy for all its establishments in respect of
contractual workers. Let the details of the said
Committee be placed on record by the next date of
hearing.
ii.     The said Committee shall consist of at least two experts,
two representatives from the Workmen and two
representatives from the Contractors, as also other
officials, as the ESIC deems appropriate, in order to
frame the proposed policy.
iii.    The proposed policy would take into account all the
requisite measures that need to be employed to ensure
that the interests of the contractual workers is not
adversely affected in any manner.
iv.     The said committee shall also look at the terms and
conditions that should be incorporated in agreements
which would be entered into by the ESIC with the
contractors.
v.      The issue relating to engagement of PSUs, which in-turn,
engage third parties as sub-contractors and whether the
same ought to be permitted, would also be considered by
the said committee.
10.     Insofar as the present Petitioners/Workmen are concerned, since the
earlier contractor’s term is stated to be expiring in March, 2022, the ESIC
shall consider accommodating the Petitioners/Workmen who have been
W.P.(C) 705/2020 & 5691/2021                                             Page 5 of 6
serving the ESIC for the last 10 to 15 years, in case a new contractor is being
engaged or if the earlier contractor is being granted an extension. The same
shall, however, be without prejudice to the               remedies that the
Petitioners/Workmen may avail of, in accordance with the law, in respect of
their employment and their alleged termination by the contractor.
11.     List on 14th February, 2022.
12.     The officials of ESIC are exempted from appearance on the next date.
W.P.(C) 705/2020 & 5691/2021                                          Page 6 of 6