Dated this the 12th day of January, 2023
The prayers in this writ petition are as follows :-
“i.   To declare that appearance of 3rd respondent for written
main examination on 20-05-2022 and 21-05-2022            and
permitting participation of 3rd respondent for the interview
conducted on 22-08-2022 for the appointment to the post
of District and Sessions Judge in Kerala Higher Judicial
Service in pursuance of Exhibit P1 notification while he
was in judicial service is illegal, arbitrary and void ab-
initio and contrary to the law laid down in Dheeraj Mor Vs
High Court of Delhi 2020 (7) SCC 401.
ii.   declare that 3rd respondent is ineligible and incompetent
to be appointed as District and Sessions Judge in Kerala
Higher Judicial Service in pursuance of Exhibits P1 and P7
as he ceased to be a practising lawyer during the selection
process.
iii.  To call for the record leading to Exhibit P7 select list in
pursuance of Exhibit P1 notification and quash the same to
the extent of including the name of the 3 rd respondent
therein.
iv.   To issue a writ of mandamus or any other appropriate writ
order or direction, directing the respondents 1 and 2 to
not to appoint 3rd respondent as District and Sessions
Judge in pursuance of Exhibit P7 select list.
v.    To issue a writ of mandamus or any other appropriate writ
order or direction, directing the respondents 1 and 2 to
appoint petitioner as District and Sessions Judge as he is
eligible and included in Exhibit P7 select list in pursuance
of Exhibit P1 notification.”
2.    Heard the learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner,
the learned counsel appearing for the 2nd respondent and the
learned Senior Counsel appearing for the 3rd respondent.
3.    The petitioner and the 3rd respondent were applicants
for appointment to the post of District and Sessions Judge which
was notified by Ext.P1. The petitioner had applied in respect of
category No.4 (NCA vacancy of Scheduled Tribe) as well as
category No.6 (regular vacancies), while the 3rd respondent had
applied only under category No.4. Both the petitioner as well as
the 3rd respondent were working as Additional Public Prosecutors
at the time of submission of the applications. It is submitted that
thereafter,    the   3rd respondent    was appointed   as  Munsiff-
Magistrate pursuant to an application submitted by him in
response to Ext.P4 notification by Ext.P6 proceedings dated
9.3.2022.    It is submitted that in Ext.P6, the 3 rd respondent's
name figured as serial No.9 and he was undergoing training in
the Kerala Judicial Academy with effect from 4.4.2022.        It is
contended that the 3rd respondent ceased to be a practising
lawyer on his appointment as Munsiff-Magistrate by Ext.P6 dated
4.    The 3rd respondent had appeared in the preliminary
examinations for appointment to the post of District and Sessions
Judge on 20.2.2022 and thereafter, in the main examinations held
in May, 2022 and the interview conducted in August, 2022.
Thereafter, Ext.P7 selection notice was issued on 22.9.2022 in
which, the name of the 3rd respondent is included as serial No.1
in category No.4/2021 (NCA vacancy, Scheduled Tribe) and the
name of the petitioner is included as serial No.2. It is submitted
that going by the decision of the Apex Court in Dheeraj Mor v.
High Court of Delhi [(2020) 7 SCC 401], the 3rd respondent who
was not a practising advocate as on the date of his appointment
as District and Sessions Judge is not entitled to such appointment
and therefore, the petitioner is liable to be appointed instead. It
is contended that by the issuance of Ext.P6 order of appointment
dated 9.3.2022, the 3rd respondent ceased to be a practising
advocate and as such, he cannot aspire for appointment as
District and Sessions Judge. It is submitted that the inclusion of
the 3rd respondent's name in Ext.P7 list, as also the order passed
by the Government as Ext.P8 are against the dictum laid down by
the Apex Court in Dheeraj Mor's case and are liable to be set
aside. The learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner also places
reliance on a decision of a Division Bench of this Court in
Rejanish K.V. v. K. Deepa and others [2020 KHC 5612] and of a
Single Judge of this Court in Deepa v. State of Kerala [2020 (4)
5.     A counter affidavit has been filed on behalf of the 2nd
respondent wherein it is submitted that the petitioner as well as
the 3rd respondent were applicants to the post of District and
Sessions Judge which is notified by Ext.P1.                 It is stated that
clauses     4(f)   and    4(g)   of   the    notification     stipulated    the
qualifications as follows :-
“4(f)     He shall be a practising Advocate having a standing of
not less than 7 (seven) years of practice, as on the first day of
4(g)    He shall be an Advocate continuing in practice at the
time of appointment (As per judgment of the Hon'ble Supeme
Court dated 19.02.2020 in Dheeraj Mor v. High Court of
It is submitted that the petitioner and the 3 rd respondent were
Assistant Public Prosecutors while applying for the post and they
were both included in the select list for appointment to the post
of District and Sessions Judge under recruitment No.4/21 (NCA
vacancy - ST).        It is submitted that the 3rd respondent was
included in the select list for appointment as Munsiff-Magistrate
in the category of recruitment by transfer as evidenced by
Ext.P5.    It is submitted that since the appointment was by
transfer, the candidate retains a lien over the post in the parent
cadre under Rule 8 of Part II KS & SSR. It further submitted that
the 3rd respondent was never appointed as Munsiff-Magistrate
and that he was only appointed as a Munsiff-Magistrate Trainee
for the pre-induction training as provided in the Kerala Judicial
Service Rules. It is submitted that the provisions of the Kerala
Judicial Service Rules are perfectly clear that the training offered
is pre-induction training and that only on successful completion
of training can a person be appointed as a Judicial Magistrate in
the Kerala Judicial Service.         It is submitted that the 3rd
respondent had sought the permission of the High Court for
being relieved from the training for Munsiff-Magistrate and to
allow him to rejoin the post of Assistant Public Prosecutor Grade
I. The administrative committee had considered the request and
had permitted the 3rd respondent to be relieved from the training
and to report the matter to the Government. Thereafter, Ext.P8
order was also passed by the Government permitting the 3 rd
respondent to rejoin duty as Assistant Public Prosecutor. It was
while so that he had been appointed as District and Sessions
Judge.     It is, therefore, contended that as on the date of
submitting his application as also on the date of his appointment,
the 3rd respondent was a practising lawyer and that there is
absolutely no irregularity in his appointment.
6.    The learned counsel for the 2 nd respondent places
reliance on the decisions of the Apex Court in Malik Mazhar
Sultan v. U.P. Public Service Commission [2007 (2) KLT Online
1137 (SC)], High Court of Kerala v. Reshma [2021 (1) KLT online
1057 (SC)] by which the judgment of the Division Bench of this
Court in High Court of Kerala v. Reshma [2020 (4) KLT Online
1025] was overruled.
7.    The 3rd respondent has also placed a detailed counter
affidavit on record stating that it was after Ext.P1 notification
that the notification for selection to the post of Munsiff-
Magistrate had been issued and that the 3rd respondent had been
deputed for training as Munsiff-Magistrate trainee as per Exts.P5
and P6 as a by transfer appointee. He had participated in the
selection for the post of District Judge after obtaining permission
from the High Court.       It is submitted that he had thereafter
submitted a request for being relieved from the training which
had been duly granted by the High Court and Ext.P7 order was
issued by the Government permitting him to rejoin duty as
Assistant Public Prosecutor Grade I. The learned Senior Counsel
has also placed reliance on a decision of the Apex Court in Sunil
Kumar      Verma       v. The    State   of   Bihar   and   others
8.    I have heard the learned counsel appearing on all sides
at considerable length. I have also gone through the judgments
which have been placed before me. The question raised is with
regard to the eligibility of the 3rd respondent for appointment as
District and Sessions Judge.          The petitioner and the 3 rd
respondent were both Assistant Public Prosecutors.         The 2 nd
respondent has stated that the petitioner as well as the 3 rd
respondent were eligible for appointment.            The question,
therefore, is only whether the 3rd respondent had any ineligibility
for appointment. The post of Munsiff-Magistrate is borne on the
Kerala Judicial Service and is governed by the Kerala Judicial
Service Rules, 1991.      The method of appointment of Munsiff-
Magistrate is by direct recruitment and transfer. Sub rule (3) of
Rule 5 of the Kerala Judicial Service Rules provides that out of
every     four    vacancies       arising    in   the category      of    Munsiff-
Magistrates, the first, second and third shall be filled or reserved
to be filled by direct recruitment and the fourth by recruitment
by transfer from the categories mentioned therein.                       Assistant
Public Prosecutors Grade I and Grade II are included in the
categories from which by transfer appointment of Munsiff-
Magistrates is contemplated.               Rule 6 of Rules provides that all
first appointments by direct recruitment or transfer to category 2
(Munsiff-Magistrates) shall be made from the list of approved
candidates in the order shown therein. Rule 7 of the Rules reads
“7.    Preparation of lists of approved candidates and
reservation of appointments.-(1) The High Court of Kerala shall,
from time to time, hold examinations, written and oral, after
notifying the probable number of vacancies likely to be filled up
and   prepare    a   list  of   candidates   considered  suitable  for
appointment to category 2.          The list shall be prepared after
following such procedure as the High Court deems fit and by
following   the  rules    relating  to  reservation  of appointments
contained in rules 14 to 17 of Part II of the Kerala State and
(2)    The list consisting of not more than double the number
of probable vacancies notified shall be forwarded for the approval
of the Governor. The list approved by the Governor shall come into
force from the date of the approval and shall remain in force for a
period of two years or until a fresh approved list is prepared,
whichever, is earlier.”
Rule 8 provides that every person selected for appointment to
category 2 shall undergo such training as may be prescribed in
this behalf by the High Court.            It is, therefore, clear from a
reading of the provisions that appointment by transfer to the post
of Munsiff-Magistrates is also to be made from a list prepared by
the High Court in accordance with Rule 7. Thereafter, a training
is prescribed by Rule 8. It is evident from the provisions of the
Rules that what is contemplated is a pre-induction training. The
Rules also provided that all first appointments by direct
recruitment or transfer shall be made from the list prepared in
accordance with Rule 7.
9.    In the instant case, the 3rd respondent was admittedly
selected for appointment as Munsiff-Magistrate by transfer. He
was     deputed     for   training   by   Ext.P6 notification.          Ext.P6
specifically provides that the Governor has approved the select
list for appointment of Munsiff-Magistrate trainees from the open
selection,     2020     for    subsequent     appointment       as    Munsiff-
Magistrate in the Kerala Judicial Service.              Thereafter, the 3 rd
respondent, with the prior permission of the High Court                    had
participated in the selection process for the post of District Judge
and was successful in the same. Thereafter, he had submitted his
resignation and the resignation was accepted by the High Court
as well as the Government.              It was thereafter that he was
appointed as District Judge.
10.   Having considered the contentions advanced on all
sides, I notice that the embargo contained in Dheeraj Mor's case
is specifically with regard to the selection of persons who have
been appointed as Judicial Officers as District and Sessions
Judges in the quota set apart for direct appointment from the
Bar.    After a detailed discussion on the facts and law, the Apex
Court specifically held as follows :-
“90. In the light of the foregoing discussion, it is held
that under Article 233, a judicial officer, regardless of her or his
previous experience as an Advocate with seven years' practice
cannot apply, and compete for appointment to any vacancy in
the post of District Judge; her or his chance to occupy that post
would be through promotion, in accordance with the Rules
framed under Article 234 and proviso to Article 309 of the
Constitution of India.”
In the instant case, a reading of the provisions of the Kerala
Judicial Service Rules would make it amply clear that the initial
induction in the post of Munsiff-Magistrate is as pre-induction
trainees and that Ext.P6 is an order deputing the incumbents
whose names are contained in Ext.P5 list for the pre-induction
training. Since the Special Rules specifically provide for a pre-
induction training and a later appointment as Munsiff-Magistrate
after completion of the period of training, the contention of the
petitioner that the 3rd respondent stood appointed as Munsiff-
Magistrate and was therefore a judicial officer cannot be
accepted. The 3rd respondent had sought the permission of the
High Court to be relieved from the training and such request was
also granted by the High Court and informed to the Government.
The Government had passed Ext.P7 order re-appointing the 3rd
respondent who had a lien in the post of Assistant Public
Prosecutor Grade I, as such.
11.   The Apex Court in Sunil Kumar Verma v. The State of
Bihar and others had considered a case where the petitioner was
an applicant for the post of Additional District Judge and Sessions
Judge in the Bihar judicial service. He submitted an application
in September, 2016, but the selection did not proceed further. In
the meanwhile, he had applied for the post of Civil Judge (Junior
Division) in the State of Uttar Pradesh and he was selected and
appointed as such on 16.1.2017. The Apex Court had considered
the issue and found as follows :-
“9.     The present appeal arises out of peculiar facts and
circumstances.      Undisputedly,   the Appellant     had applied    in
response to the advertisement issued by the High Court of
Judicature at Patna.    As on the date of his application, he was a
lawyer having practiced for more than 7 years and was, therefore,
very much eligible to apply for the direct recruitment category.
10.     However, in the meantime, an advertisement was
issued by the State of Uttar Pradesh, in response to which he
applied and went through the selection process successfully and
was appointed as Civil Judge (Junior Division).
11.     In the meantime, the selection process conducted by
the High Court of Judicature at Patna which had come to a
standstill, proceeded further in the year of 2018.      The Appellant,
therefore, after obtaining the requisite permission from the High
Court of Judicature at Allahabad participated in the selection
process, in which he was found to be meritorious.          After being
selected, he applied to the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad for
grant of permission to resign so as to join in the State of Bihar as an
Additional District and Sessions Judge.
12.     It could thus be seen that firstly, the Appellant was
neither in services of the Bihar Subordinate Judicial Services Cadre
on the date on which he applied and secondly, nor was he in the
services of the Bihar Subordinate Judicial Officer Cadre on the date
on which he was selected.
13.     In that view of the matter, we find that the law laid
down in the case of Dheeraj Mor (supra) is not applicable in the
peculiar facts and circumstances of the present case.”
The appellant was directed to be reinstated within two weeks and
held to be entitled to continuity in service for all purposes
including seniority.
The facts of the instance case would also disclose that
the 3rd respondent was a judicial officer neither on the date of
submission of his application for appointment as District Judge
nor on the date of his appointment as such. Moreover, he was
only a trainee Munsiff-Magistrate from 4.4.2022.        In the above
factual situation, I am of the opinion that the prayers as sought
for are not liable to be granted. The writ petition fails and the
same is, accordingly, dismissed.