Counsel for Revisionist :- G.A.
1. Present revision has been filed by the State under Section 397/401
Cr.P.C. against the order dated 14.10.2020 passed by learned Special
Judge/M.P./M.L.A./ VI-Additional Sessions Judge, Raebareli on an
application filed by the Public Prosecutor for withdrawal from prosecution
in Criminal Case No.573 of 2012: State vs Mayankeswar Saran Singh and
others arising out of Crime No.158 of 2007 under Sections 147, 148, 149,
307, 436, 397, 395, 323, 504, 506, 427 IPC and 2(3) U.P. Gangsters and
Anti-Social Activities (Prevention) Act, (for short 'Gangsters Act') Police
2. Learned trial Court has rejected the said application on the ground that
charge has not yet been framed inasmuch as the accused has not remained
present before the Court. The case has remained pending since 2007.
Application for withdrawal from prosecution under Section 321 Cr.P.C. was
moved in the year 2012/2019. However, Public Prosecutor in application
had not stated any fact on the basis of which it would be evident that
withdrawal from prosecution would be in larger public interest. Public
Prosecutor has only mentioned in the application that there is no sufficient
evidence available on record to support the charge. Prosecution case is
weak and, therefore, in public interest, permission be granted for
withdrawal from prosecution. It has been observed that on the basis of
present case, provisions of Section 2/3 of the Gangsters Act were invoked
against the accused Mayankeswar Saran Singh. District Magistrate gives
permission for invoking the provisions under Section 2/3 of the Gangsters
Act only where there is sufficient evidence against the accused for his
prosecution. Learned Magistrate therefore, held that stand of the
prosecution itself is contradictory.
3. It has been further observed that Public Prosecutor has not applied his
judicial mind properly at the time of filing of the application. Accused,
Mayankeswar Saran Singh was a sitting M.L.A. and State Minister in the
Cabinet of the State Government. It has been said that despite him holding a
constitutional post, he along with 20-25 people sprinkled petrol on the
house of the complainant and set it on fire. Withdrawal from prosecution in
such a case would not be in public interest, and if such a case is allowed to
be withdrawn, wrong massage would be sent in public and it would not be
in the public interest.
4. The facts of the case are that the election for U.P. Legislative Assembly
2007, respondent No.2- Mayankeswar Saran Singh, who was sitting M.L.A.
from Tiloi Constituency in Raebareli was a candidate of Samajwadi Party
and Dinesh Pratap Singh was the candidate of Bahujan Samajwadi Party in
the said State Assembly Election. The complainant (respondent No.14) was
supporter of Mr.Dinesh Pratap Singh, candidate of Bahujan Samajwadi
Party. He was earlier a supporter of the accused, Mayankeswar Saran Singh.
5. During course of said election for U.P. Legislature Assembly Election
2007, an FIR came to be registered on a complaint of respondent No.14
alleging that on 03.05.2007 at around 10:00 P.M., when the complainant
was sitting outside his house at that time, respondent No.2 along with his
20-25 supporters came from 4 vehicles. They started abusing him. Accused-
Maynkeswar Saran Singh exhorted others to kill the complainant as he had
opposed him in the election. He also exhorted his supporters to take out
petrol from the vehicles and set the house of the complainant on fire. On
this exhortation, Ashok Singh, Krishna Kumar Soni, Manoj Singh,
Narsingh, Kunj Bihari Singh, Lallan Singh and 8-9 persons, who came
along with him took out petrol from their vehicles and ran towards the
complainant. The complainant went inside his house and closed the door
from inside. Persons came with accused-Mayankeswar Saran Singh tried to
break open the house, and when they were not successful, they sprinkled
petrol and set the door of the house on fire. It was said that that complainant
could flee from the place from another door. On raising alarm by him, some
villagers came running towards the house of the complainant but the
accused terrorized them by firing and threatened them that if anyone come
near the house of the complainant, he would loose his life. After an hour,
the accused went back in their vehicles. It was alleged that wife and
children of the complainant were badly assaulted. It was further alleged that
the accused were throwing children in the fire. However, their mother could
save them. It was further alleged that the accused had also taken away
jewellery, which was kept for marriage of the daughter of the complainant,
and his household items were set on fire. The accused had destroyed tractor
of the complainant and they had set the tractor trolley on fire.
6. On the basis of the compliant, FIR No.31 of 2007 was registered on
04.05.2007 against respondent No.2 and other accused.
7.   Police after investigating the offence filed charge-sheet against
respondent No.2 and other persons on which cognizance was taken on
8. Public Prosecutor had filed an application under Section 321 Cr.P.C. for
withdrawal from prosecution after the State Government granted
permission for withdrawal from prosecution. In the said application, it was
said that Mr.Dinesh Pratap Singh, who was rival candidate in the State
Assembly Election 2007, was present at the police station when the FIR
came to be registered on 04.05.2007. It was further said that medical
examination of the son of the complainant was conducted on 04.05.2007 at
12:50 Hours. However, no medical examination of any other person was
conducted. It was further said that the investigating officer recorded the
statements of the family members of the complainant, and there were
glaring contradictions in the statements of the family members and other
independent witnesses. The application further mentions that on considering
the evidence available in the case diary, case against the accused appears to
be very weak. Complainant's son, Sajjan Singh did not mention that how he
received three injuries. Son of the complainant was in security of Dinesh
Pratap Singh. There is no date mentioned in the approval allegedly granted
by District Magistrate for invoking provisions of the Gangsters Act against
the accused and, therefore, it was prayed that the application be allowed and
it should be withdrawn from prosecution.
9.    Notice was issued to the complainant, respondent No.14. Initially, he
opposed the application for withdrawal but on 06.03.2020, he moved
another application and said that he did not press his objection agaisnt
withdrawal from prosecution and his objection be rejected and he would
have no objection, if application under Section 321 Cr.P.C. was allowed.
10. Heard Mr.Anurag Verma, leanred A.G.A. along with Mr.V.K. Sahi,
learned Additional Advocate General for the State and Mr.Sudhir Pandey,
learned counsel for opposite party No.2.
11. Section 321 Cr.P.C. as applicable in the State of U.P. reads as under:-
"321. Withdrawal from prosecution. The Public Prosecutor or
Assistant Public Prosecutor in charge of a case may, on the
written permission of the State Government to that effect (which
shall be filed in the Court), with the consent of the Court, at any
time before the judgment is pronounced, withdraw from the
prosecution of any person either generally or in respect of any
one or more of the offences for which he is tried; and, upon such
(a) if it is made before a charge has been framed, the accused
shall be discharged in respect of such offence or offences;
(b) if it is made after a charge has been framed, or when under
this Code no charge is required, he shall be acquitted in respect
of such offence or offences: Provided that where such offence-
(i) was against any law relating to a matter to which
the executive power of the Union extends, or
(iii) involved the misappropriation or destruction of,
or damage to, any property belonging to the Central
(iv) was committed by a person in the service of the
Central Government while acting or purporting to act
in the discharge of his official duty, and the
appointed by the Central Government, he shall not,
unless he hag been permitted by the Central
to withdraw from the prosecution and the Court shall,
before according consent, direct the Prosecutor to
produce before it the permission granted by the
12. The scope of Section 321 Cr.P.C., ambit of power and manner in which
it has to be exercised by the Public Prosecutor have been dealt with in
several decisions by the Supreme Court. Only a few decisions rendered by
the Supreme Court would be apt to quote here to throw light on the scope of
Section 321 Cr.P.C. and ambit and manner of exercise of the power by the
Public Prosecutor under the aforesaid section. Ultimate authority to allow
withdrawal from prosecution vests with the Court and the guiding
consideration must always be interest of administration of justice when
deciding the question whether prosecution should be allowed to be
withdrawn or not.
13. In Bansi Lal Versus Chandan Lal and others (1976) 1 SCC 421, the
Supreme Court has held in para-5 which, on reproduction, reads as under:-
"5...........Therefore when the Additional Sessions Judge made the
impugned order, there was no material before him to warrant the
conclusion that sufficient evidence would not be forthcoming to
sustain the charges or that there was any reliable subsequent
information falsifying the prosecution case or any other
circumstance justifying withdrawal of the case against the
respondents. Consenting to the withdrawal of the case on the
view that the attitude displayed by the prosecution made it
"futile" to refuse permission does not certainly serve the
administration of justice. If the material before the Additional
Sessions Judge was considered sufficient to enable him to frame
the charges against the respondents, it is not possible to say that
there was no evidence in support of the Prosecution case. The
application for stay of the proceeding made before the
committing Magistrate cannot also be said to falsify the
prosecution case. If the prosecuting agency brings before the
court sufficient material to indicate that the prosecution was
based on false evidence, the court would be justified in
consenting to the withdrawal of the prosecution, but on the
record of the case, as it is, we do not find any such
14. In Balwant Singh and others Versus State of Bihar (1977) 4 SCC
448, the Supreme Court, while considering the role of the Public Prosecutor
while moving an application for withdrawal from prosecution, has dealt
upon the consideration which must weigh for moving such an application.
The Public Prosecutor must keep in mind the administration of justice
inasmuch as he is discharging the statutory responsibility and while
discharging the statutory responsibility the only factor, which should be
considered, is administration of justice and nothing else.
Relevant portion of paragraph-2 is reproduced hereinbelow:-
"2. .....................The statutory responsibility for deciding upon
withdrawal squarely vests on the public prosecutor. It is non-
negotiable and cannot be bartered away in favour of those who
may be above him on the administrative side. The Criminal
Procedure Code is the only matter of the public prosecutor and
he has to guide himself with reference to Criminal Procedure
Code only. So guided, the consideration which must weigh with
him is, whether the broader cause of public justice will be
advanced or retarded by the withdrawal or continuance of the
prosecution. As we have already explained, public justice may be
a much wider conception than the justice in a particular case.
Here,     the      Public    Prosecutor     is   ordered to   move   for
15. In Sheonandan Paswan Versus State of Bihar and others (1983) 1
SCC 438, the Supreme Court has held that before an application is moved
under Section 321 Cr.P.C., the Public Prosecutor needs to apply his mind to
the facts of the case independently, without being influenced by outside
factors. Relevant paragraphs, on reproduction, read as under:-
"85. In our opinion, the object of Section 321 Cr.P.C. appears to
be to reserve power to the Executive Government to withdraw
any criminal case on larger grounds of public policy such as
inexpediency of prosecutions for reasons of State; broader public
interest like maintenance of law and order; maintenance of
public peace and harmony, social, economic and political;
changed         social     and    political    situation; avoidance   of
destabilization of a stable government and the like. And such
powers have been, in our opinion, rightly reserved for the
Government; for, who but the Government is in the know of
such conditions and situations prevailing in a State or in the
country? The Court is not in a position to know such situations."
134. The statutory responsibility for deciding upon withdrawal
squarely rests upon the Public Prosecutor. It is non-negotiable
and cannot be bartered away. The court's duty in dealing with the
application under Section 321 is not to reappreciate the grounds
which led the Public Prosecutor to request withdrawal from the
prosecution but to consider whether the Public Prosecutor
applied his mind as a free agent un-influenced by irrelevant and
extraneous or oblique considerations as the court has a special
duty in this regard inasmuch as it is the ultimate repository of
legislative confidence in granting or withholding its consent to
withdrawal from prosecution. The court's duty is to see in
furtherance of justice that the permission is not sought on
grounds extraneous to the interest of justice."
16. The Supreme Court has also dealt with in a catena of decisions the
manner in which an application for withdrawal from prosecution moved by
the Public Prosecutor needs to be considered by the Court.
17. In State of Punjab Versus Union of India and others (1986) 4 SCC
335, the Supreme Court has held that while granting permission to the
Public Prosecutor for withdrawal from prosecution, the Court needs to be
satisfied itself that the Public Prosecutor has properly exercised statutory
function and has not attempted to interfere with the normal course of justice
for ulterior purposes. The administration of criminal justice should be the
touchstone on which the application under Section 321 Cr.P.C. needs to be
decided. Relevant portion of paragraph-1, on reproduction, reads as under:-
"1. ............ The ultimate guiding consideration while granting a
permission to withdraw from the prosecution must always be the
interest of administration of justice and that is the touchstone on
which the question must be determined whether the prosecution
should be allowed to withdraw. The Public Prosecutor may
withdraw from the prosecution of a case not merely on the
ground of paucity of evidence but also in order to further the
broad ends of public justice, and such broad ends of public
justice may well include appropriate social, economic and
political purposes."
18. Similar views have been reiterated in Sheonandan Paswan Versus
State of Bihar and others (1987) 1 SCC 288 by the Supreme Court.
Paragraph-73, on reproduction, reads as under:-
"73. Section 321 gives the Public Prosecutor the power for
withdrawal of any case at any stage before judgment is
pronounced. This presupposes the fact that the entire evidence
may have been adduced in the case, before the application is
made. When an application under Section 32I Cr.P.C. is made, it
is not necessary for the court to assess the evidence to discover
whether the case would end in conviction or acquittal. To
contend that the court when it exercises its limited power of
giving consent under Section 32I has to assess the evidence and
find out whether the case would end in acquittal or conviction,
would be to rewrite Section 321 Cr.P.C. and would be to concede
to the court a power which the scheme of Section 321 does not
contemplate. The acquittal or discharge order under Section 321
are not the same as the normal final orders in criminal cases. The
conclusion will not be backed by a detailed discussion of the
evidence in the case of acquittal or absence of prima facie case
or groundlessness in the case of discharge. All that the court has
to see is whether the application is made in good faith, in the
interest of public policy and justice and not to thwart or stifle the
process of law. The court, after considering these facets of the
case, will have to see whether the application suffers from such
improprieties or illegalities as to cause manifest injustice if
consent is given. In this case, on a reading of the application for
withdrawal, the order of consent and the other attendant
circumstances, I have no hesitation to hold that the application
for withdrawal and the order giving consent were proper and
strictly within the confines of Section 321 Cr.P.C."
19. In S.K. Shukla and others Versus State of U.P. and others (2006) 1
SCC 314, the Supreme Court has held that the Public Prosecutor cannot
work like a post box. He needs to act objectively being an officer of the
Court and it is always open to the Court to reject the prayer if it is not
guided in the interest of administration of justice. Relevant portion of
paragraph-32, on reproduction, reads as under:-
"32. .....The Public Prosecutor cannot act like a postbox or act on
the dictates of the State Government. He has to act objectively as
he is also an officer of the court. At the same time the court is
also not bound by that. The courts are also free to assess whether
a prima face case is made or not. The court, if satisfied, can also
reject the prayer."
20. In Vijaykumar Baldev Mishra alias Sharma Versus State of
Maharashtra (2007) 12 SCC 687 the Supreme Court has held as under:-
"12. Section 321 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 provides
for withdrawal from prosecution at the instance of the public
prosecutor or Assistant public prosecutor. Indisputably therefor
the consent of the Court is necessary. Application of mind on the
part of the Court, therefore, is necessary in regard to the grounds
for withdrawal from the prosecution in respect of any one or
more of the offences for which the appellant is tried. The
provisions of TADA could be attracted only in the event of one
or the other of the four 'things' specified in Nalini (supra) is
found applicable and not otherwise. The Review Committee
made recommendations upon consideration of all relevant facts.
It came to its opinion upon considering the materials on record.
Its recommendations were based also upon the legality of the
charges under TADA in the fact situation obtaining in each case.
It came to the conclusion that in committing the purported
offence, the appellant inter alia had no intention to strike terror in
people or any section of the people and in fact the murder has
been committed only in view of group rivalry and because the
parties intended to take revenge, the provisions of the TADA
should not have been invoked.
13. The Public Prosecutor in terms of the statutory scheme laid
down under the Code of Criminal Procedure plays an important
role. He is supposed to be an independent person. While filing
such an application, the public prosecutor also is required to
apply his own mind and the effect thereof on the society in the
event such permission is granted."
21. In Rahul Agarwal Versus Rakesh Jain and another (2005) 2 SCC
377, the Supreme Court has held that while considering an application
moved under Section 321 Cr.P.C., the Court should consider all relevant
circumstances and find out whether the withdrawal from prosecution
advances the cause of justice. The withdrawal can be permitted only when
the case is likely to end in an acquittal and continuance of the case would
only cause severe harassment to the accused. Relevant para-10 is extracted
"10. From these decisions as well as other decisions on the same
question, the law is very clear that the withdrawal of prosecution
can be allowed only in the interest of justice. Even if the
Government directs the Public Prosecutor to withdraw the
prosecution and an application is filed to that effect, the court
must consider all relevant circumstances and find out whether
the withdrawal of prosecution would advance the cause of
justice. If the case is likely to end in an acquittal and the
continuance of the case is only causing severe harassment to the
accused, the court may permit withdrawal of the prosecution. If
the withdrawal of prosecution is likely to bury the dispute and
bring about harmony between the parties and it would be in the
best interest of justice, the court may allow the withdrawal of
prosecution. The discretion under Section 321, Code of Criminal
Procedure is to be carefully exercised by the court having due
regard to all the relevant facts and shall not be exercised to stifle
the prosecution which is being done at the instance of the
aggrieved parties or the State for redressing their grievance.
Every crime is an offence against the society and if the accused
committed an offence, society demands that he should be
punished. Punishing the person who perpetrated the crime is an
essential requirement for the maintenance of law and order and
peace in the society. Therefore, the withdrawal of the prosecution
shall be permitted only when valid reasons are made out for the
same."
22. This Court vide judgment and order dated 12th December, 2013 passed
in writ petition bearing Writ Petition No. 4683 (M/B) of 2013 ''Ms. Ranjana
Agnihotri and others Versus Union of India' while dealing the scope, power
and ambit under Section 321 Cr.P.C. has held in paras-116 and 117 which,
on reproduction, read as under :-
"116. In view of above, the Public Prosecutor is the final
authority to apply mind and take a decision whether an
application for withdrawal of a criminal case is to be moved or
not. For that, option is open to him to receive necessary
instructions or information from the Government to make up
mind on the basis of material made available. The Public
Prosecutor cannot act like post box or at the dictate of the State
Government. He has to act objectively as he is also an officer of
the court. It is also open for the appropriate Government to issue
appropriate instruction to him but he has to act objectively with
regard to the withdrawal of cases. But the instruction sent by the
government shall not be binding and it is the Public Prosecutor
who has to take a decision independently without any political
favour or party pressure or like concerns. The sole object of the
Public Prosecutor is the interest of administration of justice.
Power conferred on Public Prosecutor to take independent
decision for the interest of administration of justice is not
negotiable and cannot be bartered away in favour of those who
may be above him on administrative side. He is stood to be
guided by letter and spirit of Code of Criminal Procedure only
and not otherwise. Neither the Public Prosecutor nor the
Magistrate can surrender their discretion while exercising power
at their end.
117. Similarly, the Court has duty to protect the administration of
criminal justice against possible abuse or misuse by the
executive by resort of the provisions contained in Section 321
Cr.P.C. The court has to record a finding that the application
moved by Public Prosecutor is in the interest of administration of
justice and there is no abuse or misuse of power by the Public
Prosecutor or the Government. In case an application is allowed,
it must be recorded by the Court that the application has been
moved in good faith to secure the ends of justice and not in
political or vested interest. The court has final say in the matter
and the decision should be free and fair with independent
exercise of mind in the interest of public policy and justice. It
must ensure that the application is not moved to thwart or stifle
the process of law or suffers from such improprieties or
illegalities as to cause manifest injustice if consent is given."
23. In the present case, from reading of the application, it appears that
Public Prosecutor had filed the application under Section 321 Cr.P.C. in
good faith after careful consideration of the material available on record.
The FIR got registered because of political rivalry. The complainant himself
has submitted an application before the learned trial Court that he would
have no objection, if the application is allowed, and his earlier objection on
application under Section 321 Cr.P.C. for withdrawal from prosecution be
24. The Court is required to consider whether withdrawal from prosecution
would further cause of justice or not and whether it would be in public
interest to allow the withdrawal from prosecution. When the complainant
himself is not supporting the prosecution case, this Court is of the view that
there is no chance of conviction of the accused in the case. The case has
been remained pending since 2007 and continuance of trial would be
nothing but a futile exercise and Court's precious time would get wasted for
futile exercise, if the application for withdrawal from prosecution is not
25. Considering the stand of the complainant, this Court is of the view that
withdrawal from prosecution would be in the interest of justice. It would be
appropriate to allow the application for withdrawal from prosecution. In
view thereof, this Court finds that view taken by the learned Special Judge
does not appear to be correct view. The revision is allowed. Impugned order
dated 14.10.2020 passed by learned Special Judge/M.P./M.L.A./ VI-
Additional Sessions Judge, Raebareli is hereby set aside. The application
for withdrawal from prosecution is also allowed.