1. Applicant/accused has sought indulgence of this Court for grant of bail in FIR No.
RC0042022A0007 dated 11.05.2022 registered with Police Station CBI, ACB, Jammu
for commission of offences under section 7 of Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 r/w
120-B IPC on the grounds that he is a Plant Protection Officer in Agriculture
Department, J&K Government and is presently posted in Directorate Office of
Agriculture Department, Goli Pulli, Jammu; that he is also licensing authority under
Pesticide Act for issuing license to the persons dealing in pesticides; that the
complainant is pesticide supplier and has already been issued license for selling
pesticides for some items and the petitioner told the complainant the formalities
required in this regard and told him to complete all the formalities; that the complainant
has been insisting that the petitioner should grant him permission without his
completing the required formalities which was declined by the petitioner; that the
complainant malafide and irked filed a false and fabricated complaint alleged before the
respondent that the petitioner is demanding bribe under Prevention of Corruption Act;
that the petitioner never demanded any bribe from the complainant yet the respondent
along with the complainant came to the office of the petitioner and the complainant
forcibly threshed something into the pocket of the petitioner and when the petitioner
checked his pocket as to what has been threshed by the complainant in his pocket, the
trap team of the respondent caught hold of the petitioner and immersed his hands in the
solution and the petitioner has been arrested in on 11.05.2022 and is in custody of the
respondent; that there is no evidence against the petitioner with respect to demand of
bribe by him; that during the course of the proceedings of the application it was
revealed that the complainant wanted to include 24-25 more items in his license and the
accused was demanding Rs. 12,000/- from him; that the government has formulated a
policy of ease of doing business reform, under these reforms any license fee has to be
deposited online. The Deputy Director Central Agriculture Production Jammu vide his
letter No. Agri/DAJ/Dev-30/2022-23/118-21 dated 06.04.2022 intimated Director
Industries and Commerce in the requirement of J&K Bank credit account number to
settle amount in treasury head 0410-CH under EODB. This letter was issued in
pursuance to the circular No. 07-JK (GAD) of 2022 dated 28.01.2022 issued by
Principal Secretary to Govt. GAD. The Principal Secretary to Govt Agriculture
Productions and Formers Welfare Department vide Govt. Order dated 208-JK (Agri) of
2021 dated 02.12.2021 accorded sanction for providing end to end registration and
renewal process of services in online mode wherein registration for pesticide is also one
of the services. From the date of regular circular the acceptance of license fee through
treasury is unacceptable. The portal of the department was not functioning as it evident
from letter dated 06.04.2022 issued by Deputy Director and FW Jammu; that the
proposed fee scheduled under ease of doing business provides that for one time license
fee is Rs. 7500/- and inclusion of each products requires additional fee of Rs. 500/-. As
stated above the portal of the department was not functioning, therefore, the official of
the department were informing the applicants that they can pay the amount in cash in
the office and when the portal become functional the same will be deposited online; that
the complainant malafide lodged complaint that the official of the department are
demanding bribe of Rs. 12,000/-. The respondent on the said complaint, constituted a
trap laying team and tracked the petitioner on 12.05.2022 and arrested the accused; that
the petitioner filed a bail application before the learned Special Judge Anti-Corruption,
CBI Cases Jammu who vide its order dated 24.05.2022 dismissed the bail application
on the ground that the statement of the complainant and departmental witnesses have
not been recorded yet; his liberty is of paramount consideration as guaranteed under the
Constitution and it would be contrary to the concept of personal liberty if any person is
punished in respect of any alleged matter for which he has not been found guilty or
convicted thereof; grant of bail is a rule and its refusal is an exception; he is an innocent
and has not committed any offence muchless the offence whereas the CBI has charged
him taking recourse to Section 7 of Prevention of Corruption Act 1988 r/w 120-B IPC;
the allegations made against him would not constitute any offence yet the Court below
has only on one singular ground declined his request for bail; his incarceration would
result in violation of his right to life guaranteed to him under the Constitution of India;
it is true that the society has a vital interest in grant or refusal of bail because every
criminal offence is the offence against the State, but it is equally true that the order
granting or refusing the bail must reflect perfect balance between the conflicting
interests namely sanctity of individual liberty and the interest of the society; the
fundamental principle of criminal jurisprudence is that the presumption of innocence
always lies in favour of accused until he is found guilty; the seriousness of the charge is
no doubt one of the considerations while considering bail applications but that is not the
only test or the factor in the bail applications; generally the object of bail is to secure
the presence of the accused person at the trial by reasonable amount of bail, the object
of bail is neither punitive nor preventative however the deprivation of liberty must be
considered a punishment, the court owe more than verbal respect to the principle that
punishment begins after conviction and that every man is deemed to be innocent until
duly tried and found guilty; he undertakes to abide by all the conditions imposed by the
court if granted bail.
2. Respondent/CBI per-contra, by filing the objections has opposed the bail on the
grounds, that case FIR No. RC0042022A0007 dated 11.05.2022registered with Police
Station CBI, ACB, Jammu for commission of offences under section 7 of Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988 r/w 120-B IPC on the basis of complaint dated 10.05.2022 lodged
by one Nand Kishore S/o Yash Paul Sharma, R/o Ward No. 12 Shiv Nagar, R. S. Pura
for demand of bribe of Rs. 15,000/- by the accused Devinder Sharma, Plant Protection
Officer and Rajinder Kumar, Field Assistant, both working in the office of Directorate
of Agriculture, Jammu for approval of application of the complainant for addition of
pesticide products of different firms in the license of his cooperative society M/s Deva
Batala Agriculture Cooperative Ltd.; on receipt of the complaint, the verification
thereof was carried out by Sh. Sanjay Kumar, SI wherein the demand of bribe by both
the accused Davinder Sharma, Plant Protection Officer and Rajinder Kumar, Field
Assistant from the complainant was confirmed pursuant to which a trap was laid and
accused person namely Davinder Sharma, who had entered into criminal conspiracy
with accused Rajinder Kumar, was caught red-handed while accepting bribe of Rs.
12,000/- from the complainant whereby, the said accused persons were arrested on
11.05.2022 and taken into custody after following all the legal procedure;
3. Sh. M. K. Bhardwaj Ld. Sr. Counsel for petitioner/accused while advancing the case of
petitioner/accused for grant of bail, has strenuously articulated arguments, that as per
the allegations against petitioner/accused, on 11.05.2022 the CBI laid a trap and
arrested the petitioner/accused for accepting bribe money of Rs. 12,000/- which was
recovered from him and after completion of his CBI custody is presently lying-in
judicial custody and is not required for any further investigation. It is argued, that the
petitioner/accused has neither accepted any bribe money nor the same has been
recovered from him during the alleged trap. It is vehemently argued, that the
fundamental principle of criminal jurisprudence is that the presumption of innocence
always lies in favour of the accused until proved and found guilty, and keeping the
petitioner/accused in judicial custody in further incarceration will amount to inflicting
pre-trial punishment which is against the principle of criminal jurisprudence, no special
provisions for bail are provided in the Prevention of Corruption Act and the bail
application of petitioner/accused is to be governed under the provisions of Section 437
CrPC, the ―bail is rule‖ and ―jail is exception.‖It is moreso argued, that the personal
liberty as enshrined in the Constitution of India is of paramount importance which
should not be deprived, petitioner/accused cannot be kept in detention for an indefinite
period only upon the belief/mere apprehension that he will tamper with the prosecution
evidence which cannot be expected as all the witnesses of the case are the officials of
the CBI Department and none can expect that they will be influenced by
petitioner/accused, in bail application the general principle is that the object of bail is to
secure appearance of the accused person at his trial by reasonable amount of bail and
deprivation of liberty must be considered a punishment, the court owe more than verbal
respect to the principle that punishment begins after conviction and that every accused
is deemed to be innocent until duly tried and found guilty.    To buttress his arguments,
ld. senior counsel has relied upon the decisions of (i)Sanjay Chandra—Appellant
versus Central Bureau of Investigation—Respondent (2012) 1 Supreme Court Cases
40, (ii) 2007 Supreme (J&K) 48 (Mohd. Razak & Anr.—Appellant Versus State of
J&K & Anr.—Respondent), (iii) judgment/order of J&K High Court rendered in Bail
App No. 16/2020 (Rajesh Kumar—Applicant v/s Union Territory of Jammu and
Kashmir—Non-applicant)&(iv) judgment/order of J&K High Court rendered in Bail
App No. 174/2020 (Umesh Kumar—Petitioner(s) vs Incharge Police Station CBI and
anr.—Respondent(s).
4. Ms. Monika Kohli ld. counsel for the respondent-CBI, per-contra, has sought the
rejection of the bail of the petitioner/accused by vociferously projecting arguments, that
on 11.05.2022 a trap was laid wherein accused namely Davinder Sharma was caught
red handed while accepting bribe of Rs. 12,000/- from the complainant whereby the
petitioner/accused was arrested on the same day and taken into custody. It is argued,
that the case is at very initial stage of investigation and the petitioner/accused cannot
claim bail as a matter of right as he is indicted in non-bailable offence, and there is
every likelihood that if the petitioner/accused is enlarged on bail at this stage he may
tamper with the prosecution evidence and influence the witnesses thereby causing
irreparable harm to the fair investigation of the case, moreso, petitioner/accused has
abused his official position and has committed heinous crime under the provisions of
Prevention of Corruption Act, petitioner/accused is highly influential and his criminal
act is against the societal interest. It is moreso argued, that while granting bail the
Court has to keep in mind the nature of accusations, the nature of evidence in support
thereof, the severity of the punishment etc. and larger interests of the public/State, the
words „reasonable grounds for believing‟ used by the Legislature for the purpose of
granting bail means, that the Court while dealing with the grant of bail can only satisfy
it as to whether there is a genuine case against the accused, due to involvement of
government officials in accepting the illegal gratification/bribe the confidence of
common person has been shaken, and moreso the respondent has found cash from the
petitioner/accused. In support of her arguments, ld. counsel for the respondent-CBI has
placed reliance upon the decisions reported in, (i) (2013) 7 Scale 15 (Central Bureau
of Investigation vs V. Vijay Sai Reddy), (ii)2017(2) RCR (Criminal) 232 (Avneesh
Kumar Gupta v CBI) & (iii) judgment/order of J&K High Court rendered in Bail App
No. 39/2021 (Darbara Singh—Applicant(s) v/s Union Territory of J&K—
5. Heard Ld. Sr. Counsel for petitioner/accused & Ld. Counsel for respondent/CBI. I have
pursued the contents of bail application and objections filed by the respondent/CBI. I
have also bestowed my thoughtful consideration to the material aspects involved in the
case, have scanned the judgments relied upon by both the sides and have gone through
the relevant law on the subject matter meticulously.
6. Before deciding the case in hand, I would like to enumerate the factors which should be
taken in consideration while granting or refusing bail in a non-bailable case. Hon'ble
Supreme Court of India in case laws titled State of U.P vs Amarmani Tripathy, reported
in 2005(8) SCC 21, vide paragraph-18 and in CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 448 OF 2021
…RESPONDENT(S),             judgment delivered on 24-04-2021]         has culled out certain
factors to be taken in consideration while deciding bail application in non-bailable
"It is well settled that the matters to be considered in an application for the bail are:-
(I)    whether there is any prima-facie or reasonable ground to believe that the
accused has committed the offence;
(III) severity of the punishment in the event of conviction;
(IV) danger of the accused absconding or fleeing if released on bail;
(V) character, behavior, means, position and standing of the accused;
(VI) likelihood of the offence being repeated;
(VII) reasonable apprehension of the witnesses being tampered with; and
(VIII) danger, of-course the justice being thwarted by grant of bail.
Indeed, these guidelines are not exhaustive, nonetheless, these have to be considered
while passing an order in a bail application in a non-bailable offence. The
aforementioned factors for grant or refusal of bail in non-bailable offences as the case
in hand are discussed under the following headings.
(I)   Prima-facie or reasonable ground to believe that the petitioner/accused have
It is profitable to reiterate here, that case FIR No. RC0042022A0007 dated
11.05.2022registered with Police Station CBI, ACB, Jammu for commission of
offences under section 7 of Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 r/w 120-B IPC
against petitioner/accused on the basis of complaint dated 10.05.2022 lodged by
one Nand Kishore S/o Yash Paul Sharma R/o Ward No. 12, Shiv Nagar R. S. Pura,
Jammu for demand of bribe of Rs. 12,000/-, on receipt of the complaint the
verification thereof was carried out by Sh. Sanjay Kumar SI wherein the demand
of bribe by Davinder Sharma, Plant Protection Officer, Jammu from the
complainant was confirmed, pursuant to which a trap was laid and the accused
person namely Davinder Sharma was caught red-handed while accepting bribe of
Rs. 12,000/- from the complainant, whereby, the said accused person was arrested
on 11.05.2022. From the allegations set out in the FIR, it clearly transpires, that
there is a prima-facie case against the petitioner/accused.
The moot point for determination before this court is, even when there is a prima-
facie case against the accused, what should be the approach of court in the matter
In this regard, Hon‘ble J&K High Court in a case law reported in, 2010 (3) JKJ 129
(HC) [Jagdish Kumar & Ors. Versus State and Ors], the judgment/order rendered
by Hon‘ble Mr. Justice Sunil Hali (His Lordship the then was Hon‘ble Judge of J&K
High Court) while granting bail to accused indicted for commission of offences u/ss
306/498-A RPC and while discussing the principles of law in regard to „prima-facie
case‟,„approach of court in matter of bail‟ and „question of influencing
prosecution witnesses‟ in paras 17,18 & 19 of the judgment held as under:-
“17.While applying the aforementioned principles, it is
necessary for the court to examine the nature and gravity
of the circumstances under which the offence is
committed. Existence of a prima-facie case is essential. If
there is no prima-facie case, there is no question of
trial or that he is likely to abuse the discretion granted in
his favour by tempering with the evidence.
18. The circumstances which have been brought into focus
by the respondents as also by the learned sessions Judge,
Samba are that the accused persons tried to influence the
investigation at the initial stage. The post mortem was got
conducted by the Board only through the intervention of
learned Principal Sessions Jude to substantiate this plea. It
is mere bald assertion, which cannot be accepted unless
witnesses, it be seen that material witnesses are parents
and brothers of the deceased, which cannot be
influential is not sufficient unless there is some material to
that extent.
Ratio of the judgment (Supra) makes the legal proposition abundantly clear, that even
if prima facie case is established against accused, the approach of the court in granting
bail should be that the accused should not be detained by way of punishment, and
regarding influencing of witnesses, the material witnesses cannot be expected to be
win over by the accused.
In another case law reported in2019 Supreme (J&K) 220 (Naresh Singh–
appellant Versus State of J&K–Respondents), His Lordships Hon‘ble Mr. Justice
Tashi Rabstan while granting bail to the accused indicted for commission of offences
u/ss 12 POCSO Act r/w 342 RPC and while discussing the principles of „personal
liberty‟ enshrined in Article 21 of the Constitution of India vis-à-vis the general rule
that “bail is rule” and “jail is an exception”, in paras 7,8&12 of the judgment held
7. It is a trite law that personal liberty is a very precious
fundamental right enshrined in Article 21 of the
Constitution of India and deprivation of liberty is a matter
of grave concern. It should be curtailed only when it
the allegations of commission of non-bailable offence,
two conflicting interests are pitted against each other, that
is, liberty of individual involved and interest of society so
as to prevent crime and punish criminal. It becomes
responsibility of the courts to weigh the contrary factors.
The object of detaining a person in judicial custody is
not jail). Grant or denial of bail is entirely the discretion
of a Judge considering a case, but such discretion should
be exercised judiciously and not arbitrarily.
prosecution witnesses, seven material witnesses stands
already examined before the court including prosecutrix,
so the mere apprehension of the respondent that the
applicant- accused if enlarged on bail would temper with
the prosecution evidence or possibility of his winning
actually tried such tempering/intimidation. My view to
release the applicant-accused on bail further gets fortified
from the statement of prosecutrix so also from the
pulled her inside his car and molested and confined her in
his car for two hours, and when the parents of the
the School Authorities to attend the tuition classes and
neither any school buses were operated on that day. The
Ratio of the judgment (Supra) also makes the legal proposition manifest, that
fundamental postulate of criminal jurisprudence is the presumption of innocence lies
in favour of accused who is presumed to be innocent till guilt is proved, grant of bail
is a general rule and its refusal is an exception and deprivation of personal liberty
must be considered as punishment.
versus CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION—Respondent, relied by Ld.
Counsel for petitioner/accused, Hon‘ble Supreme Court of India while granting bails
to accused indicted in 2G Spectrum Scam Case for commission of offences u/ss
420-B, 468,471/109 IPC r/w Sec. 13(2) r/w 13(1) (d) of the Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988 and while expounding the principle of law that ‗the object of bail is to
secure appearance of accused persons at trial and deprivation of liberty is a
punishment‘, in paras 21, 22, 24, 25, 29, 34, 35 & 36 of the judgment/order observed
21. In bail applications, generally, it has been laid down from the
earliest times that the object of bail is to secure the appearance of
the accused person at his trial by reasonable amount of bail. The
object of bail is neither punitive nor preventative. Deprivation of
liberty must be considered a punishment, unless it can be
required to ensure that an accused person will stand his trial
when called upon. The courts owe more than verbal respect to
the principle that punishment begins after conviction, and that
every man is deemed to be innocent until duly tried and duly
found guilty.
22. From the earliest times, it was appreciated that detention in
custody pending completion of trial could be a cause of great
hardship. From time to time, necessity demands that some un-
convicted persons should be held in custody pending trial to secure
their attendance at the trial but in such cases, ‗necessity‘ is the
operative test. In this country, it would be quite contrary to the
concept of personal liberty enshrined in the Constitution that any
person should be punished in respect of any matter, upon which, he
has not been convicted or that in any circumstances, he should be
deprived of his liberty upon only the belief that he will tamper with
the witnesses if left at liberty, save in the most extraordinary
24. In the instant case, as we have already noticed that the
―pointing finger of accusation‖ against the appellants is `the
seriousness of the charge‘. The offences alleged are economic
offences which has resulted in loss to the State exchequer.
Though, they contend that there is possibility of the appellants
tampering witnesses, they have not placed any material in
support of the allegation. In our view, seriousness of the charge
is, no doubt, one of the relevant considerations while considering
bail applications but that is not the only test or the factor: The other
factor that also requires to be taken note of is the punishment that
could be imposed after trial and conviction, both under the Indian
Penal Code and Prevention of Corruption Act. Otherwise, if the
former is the only test, we would not be balancing the
Constitutional Rights but rather ―recalibration of the scales of
25. The provisions of Cr.P.C. confer discretionary jurisdiction on
Criminal Courts to grant bail to accused pending trial or in appeal
against convictions, since the jurisdiction is discretionary, it has to
be exercised with great care and caution by balancing valuable
right of liberty of an individual and the interest of the society in
general. In our view, the reasoning adopted by the learned District
Judge, which is affirmed by the High Court, in our opinion, a
denial of the whole basis of our system of law and normal rule of
bail system. It transcends respect for the requirement that a
man shall be considered innocent until he is found guilty. If
such power is recognized, then it may lead to chaotic situation and
would jeopardize the personal liberty of an individual.
29. In Gudikanti Narasimhulu v. Public Prosecutor, V.R.
Krishna Iyer, J., sitting as Chamber Judge, enunciated the
principles of bail thus: SCC pp. 242-46, paras 3, 5-9 & 13
“3. What, then, is “judicial discretion” in this bail context? In
the elegant words of Benjamin Cardozo:
The Judge, even when he is free, is still not wholly free. He is not
to innovate at pleasure. He is not a knight-errant roaming at will in
pursuit of his own ideal of beauty or of goodness. He is to draw his
inspiration from consecrated principles. He is not to yield to
spasmodic sentiment, to vague and unregulated benevolence. He is
to exercise a discretion informed by tradition, methodized by
analogy, disciplined by system, and subordinated to ―the
primordial necessity of order in the social life‖. Wide enough in all
conscience is the field of discretion that remains.‖
Even so it is useful to notice the tart terms of Lord Camden that
―the discretion of a Judge is the law of tyrants: it is always
unknown, it is different in different men; it is casual, and depends
upon constitution, temper and passion. In the best, it is oftentimes
caprice; in the worst, it is every vice, folly and passion to which
human nature is liable....‖
5……Perhaps, this is an overly simplistic statement and we must
remember the constitutional focus in Articles 21 and 19 before
following diffuse observations and practices in the English system.
Even in England there is a growing awareness that the working of
the bail system requires a second look from the point of view of
correct legal criteria and sound principles, as has been pointed out
6. Let us have a glance at the pros and cons and the true principle
around which other relevant factors must revolve. When the case is
finally disposed of and a person is sentenced to incarceration,
things stand on a different footing. We are concerned with the
penultimate stage and the principal rule to guide release on
bail should be to secure the presence of the applicant who seeks
to be liberated, to take judgment and serve sentence in the
event of the Court punishing him with imprisonment. In this
perspective, relevance of considerations is regulated by their nexus
with the likely absence of the applicant for fear of a severe
sentence, if such be plausible in the case. As Erle. J. indicated,
when the crime charged (of which a conviction has been sustained)
is of the highest magnitude and the punishment of it assigned by
law is of extreme severity, the Court may reasonably presume,
some evidence warranting, that no amount of bail would secure the
presence of the convict at the stage of judgment, should he be
enlarged. Lord Campbell, C.J. concurred in this approach in that
case and Coleridge J. set down the order of priorities as follows:
―I do not think that an accused party is detained in custody
because of his guilt, but because there are sufficient probable
grounds for the charge against him as to make it proper that he
should be tried, and because the detention is necessary to ensure
his appearance at trial .... It is a very important element in
considering whether the party, if admitted to bail, would appear to
take his trial; and I think that in coming to a determination on that
point three elements will generally be found the most important:
the charge, the nature of the evidence by which it is supported, and
the punishment to which the party would be liable if convicted.
In the present case, the charge is that of wilful murder; the
evidence contains an admission by the prisoners of the truth of the
charge, and the punishment of the offence is, by law, death.‖
7. It is thus obvious that the nature of the charge is the vital factor
and the nature of the evidence also is pertinent. The punishment to
which the party may be liable, if convicted or conviction is
confirmed, also bears upon the issue.
8. Another relevant factor is as to whether the course of justice
would be thwarted by him who seeks the benignant jurisdiction of
the Court to be freed for the time being.
9. Thus the legal principles and practice validate the Court
considering the likelihood of the applicant interfering with
witnesses for the prosecution or otherwise polluting the process of
justice. It is not only traditional but rational, in this context, to
enquire into the antecedents of a man who is applying for bail to
find whether he has a bad record - particularly a record which
suggests that he is likely to commit serious offences while on bail.
In regard to habituals, it is part of criminological history that a
thoughtless bail order has enabled the bailee to exploit the
opportunity to inflict further crimes on the members of society.
Bail discretion, on the basis of evidence about the criminal record
of a defendant is therefore not an exercise in irrelevance.
13. Viewed from this perspective, we gain a better insight into the
rules of the game. When a person, charged with a grave offence,
has been acquitted at a stage, has the intermediate acquittal
pertinence to a bail plea when the appeal before this Court pends?
Yes, it has. The panic which might prompt the accused to jump the
gauntlet of justice is less, having enjoyed the confidence of the
Court‘s verdict once. Concurrent holdings of guilt have the
opposite effect. Again, the ground for denial of provisional release
becomes weaker when the fact stares us in the face that a fair
finding — if that be so — of innocence has been recorded by one
Court. It may not be conclusive, for the judgment of acquittal may
be ex facie wrong, the likelihood of desperate reprisal, if enlarged,
may be a deterrent and his own safety may be more in prison than
in the vengeful village where feuds have provoked the violent
offence. It depends. Antecedents of the man and socio-
geographical circumstances have a bearing only from this angle.
Police exaggerations of prospective misconduct of the accused, if
enlarged, must be soberly sized up lest danger of excesses and
injustice creep subtly into the discretionary curial technique. Bad
record and police prediction of criminal prospects to invalidate the
bail plea are admissible in principle but shall not stampede the
Court into a complacent refusal.‖
Mhetre v. State of Maharashtra this Court observed that: (SCC
―(84) just as liberty is precious to an individual, so is the society‘s
interest in maintenance of peace, law and order. Both are equally
important.‖
35. This Court further observed: (Siddharam Satlingappa case SCC
―116. Personal liberty is a very precious fundamental right and it
should be curtailed only when it becomes imperative according
to the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case.‖
36. This Court has taken the view that when there is a delay in the
trial, bail should be granted to the accused [See Babba v. State of
Maharashtra, Vivek Kumar v. State of U.P. & Mahesh Kumar
Ratio of Sanjay Chandra‘s Case (Supra) makes the legal provisions vis-à-vis bail
abundantly clear, that the principle rule to guide release on bail is, ―to secure the
presence of accused during trial, the object of bail is neither punitive nor preventative,
deprivation of liberty must be considered a punishment, the courts owe more than
verbal respect to the principle that punishment begins after conviction and that every
man is deemed to be innocent until duly tried and duly found guilty‖.
of J&K & Anr.—Respondent), relied by Ld. Counsel for petitioners/accused, Hon‘ble
Mr. Justice J.P. Singh (His Lordships the then was Judge of J&K High Court) while
granting bail to accused persons arrested in offence u/s 5(2) of Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988 caught red handed in a trap while demanding & accepting bribe of Rs. 1000,
in paras 8, 9, 10, 11 & 12 held as under:-
8. So long as there were no such Special provisions in force
providing severe punishment and stringent provisions
regarding bail during investigation and trial of cases under
the Prevention of Corruption Act and such like other Laws,
persons accused of offences under the Prevention of
investigation and trial merely because they were alleged
to be involved for infraction of offences under the
offences under the Prevention of Corruption Act, general
principles governing grant or refusal of bail and
and bail in such non-bailable offences may not be claimed,
as of right, and in the absence of any special circumstances
warranting refusal of bail, the well recognized principle
that bail is the rule and refusal an exception would
10. I, therefore, do not see any substance in Mr. Salathiass
submission that the petitioners were required to be treated
differently because they had been arrested under Section
5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act 2006.
from custody on their furnishing personal recognizance
and recognizance of a surety each, in the amount of Rs.
10,000/- to the satisfaction of Registrar Judicial of this
Court. The petitioners shall file an undertaking that they
would not come directly or indirectly in contact with the
prosecution witnesses and shall not impede in any manner
whatsoever, the course of investigation.
Ratio of the judgment (Supra) further makes the legal proposition manifestly clear, that
even in cases under the Prevention of Corruption Act where no special provisions for bail
are provided these cases are governed by the provisions of Section 497 (437) of the Code
of Criminal Procedure and bail in such non-bailable offences may not be claimed as a
matter of right, but the grant or refusal of bail is well recognized by the principle that
―bail is rule‖ and ―refusal is an exception‖.
In the judgment/order of J&K High Court rendered in Bail App No. 16/2020
(Rajesh Kumar—Applicant v/s Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir—Non-
applicant), relied by Ld. Counsel for petitioners/accused, Hon‘ble J&K High Court
granted anticipatory bail to the accused indicted in FIR No. 0031 dated 24-01-2020
registered with P/S Nagrota for commission of offences u/ss 447/467/468/420/120-B
IPC r/w Section 3 of Public Property Damage Act r/w Sec. 7 P. C. Act r/w Sections
In judgment/order of J&K High Court rendered in Bail App No. 174/2020
(Umesh Kumar—Petitioner(s)             vs Incharge Police Station CBI and anr.—
Respondent(s), also relied by Ld. Counsel for petitioners/accused, Hon‘ble J&K High
Court granted bail to petitioner/accused indicted in case No. RC00420209A004 for
commission of offence u/s 7 of P.C. Act in a trap case wherein petitioner/accused was
caught red handed while demanding and accepting bribe of Rs. 5000 from complainant.
From the ratios of the judgments of “Sanjay Chandra‟s Case”, “Mohd
Razak‟s Case”, “Rajesh Kumar‟s Case” & “Umesh Kumar‟s Case” (Supra) relied
by Ld. Sr. Counsel for petitioners/accused, the principle of law deduced is, that while
considering a bail application in non-bailable offence, even where prima-facie case is
established against accused, the approach of court in the matter of bail should be that
―accused should not be detained by way of punishment, material witnesses cannot be
influenced, grant of bail is general rule and refusal an exception‖.
In [Central Bureau of Investigation Vs. V. Vijay Sai Reddy (2013) 7
Scale 15], relied by Ld. Counsel for CBI, Hon‘ble Supreme Court held, that while
granting bail court has to keep in mind various factors for grant or refusal of bail viz;
nature of accusation, nature of evidence in support thereof, severity of punishment,
character of accused, reasonable possibility of securing the presence of accused at trial,
reasonable apprehension of witnesses being tempered with and larger interest of
public/state and other similar considerations. To my considered view, the observations
of the Apex Court would be strictly followed in the case in hand. In 2017(2) RCR
(Criminal) 232 (Avneesh Kumar Gupta Vs CBI) relied by Ld. Counsel for CBI,
Hon‘ble High Court of Uttarakhand held, that graft case is entirely difference from
other common offences, as such, bail in such cases should be considered with great
circumspection and the courts have to strike a balance between societal interest and
individual interest and there should be zero tolerance to the corruption. In
judgment/order of J&K High Court rendered in bail App. 39/2021 (Darbara
Singh—Applicant(S) V/s Union Territory of J&K—Respondent(S)], relied upon by
Ld. Counsel for CBI, Hon‘ble J&K High Court in a graft case refused bail to the
accused by taking into consideration the status/progress of investigation that while
laying a trap accused was caught red handed on 29-01-2021 by CBI/ACB Jammu
wherein while demanding and accepting bribe the bribe amount of Rs. 50,000/- was
recovered from the accused and also from searches of his office and residential
premises cash of Rs. 1,45,000/- from his Jammu residence and sum of Rs. 5,10,000/-
was found from his Chandigarh residence alongwith other documents relating to
investment in property i.e. Flat No. B-2 Dr. Ambedkar Co-Operative House Building
Society Ltd. Sector 76 Mohali and Plot measuring 250 Sq yards R.K.M City Sector
111-112 SAS Nagar Mohali. It is apt to reiterate here, that none of the decisions relied
upon by Ld. Counsel for CBI lay down an invariable rule of law that in all the non-
bailable offences and especially in cases under Prevention of Corruption Act bail
should always be refused, but the grant or refusal would depend upon the facts of the
case and the stage of the investigation.
Now, coming back to the grips of present case, it is noteworthy to reiterate
here, that on a trap laid on 11.05.2022 graft amount of Rs. 12,000/-was recovered from
the possession of the accused namely Davinder Sharma. In light of the ratios of the
judgments (Supra) relied upon by Ld. Sr. Counsel for petitioner/accused, law is no
longer res-integra that even if there is a prima-facie case against accused, the approach
of the court in the matter of bail is not that the accused should be detained by way of
punishment and that ―bail is a rule‖ and ―jail is an exception‖.
(II)        Nature      and     gravity of Charge:-
The nature and gravity of charge is not very serious. It is the allegations against
petitioner/accused that on the basis of complaint, CBI laid a trap on 11.05.2022 and
recovered alleged graft amount of Rs. 12,000/- from accused namely Davinder Sharma
and he was arrested on 11.05.2022 which led to registration of FIR No.
RC0042022A0007 dated 11.05.2022registered with Police Station CBI, ACB, Jammu
for commission of offences under section 7 of Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 r/w
120-B IPC. It is true, that corruption is rampant in the society and its tentacles are
spreading with alarming speed affecting the credibility of the society itself and the
proper governance. As long as, there are no special provisions in force providing
severe punishment and stringent provisions regarding bail during investigation and
trial of cases, persons accused of offences under Prevention of Corruption Act cannot
be treated differently to deny them the consideration of bail during investigation and
trial merely because they are alleged to be involved for infraction of offences under
P.C. Act and their bail applications are to be governed under the provisions of Sec.
497(437) of Code of Criminal Procedure and the guiding factor would be that grant of
bail is rule and refusal an exception.
(III) Severity of Punishment & danger of accused absconding or
fleeing if released on bail:-
Petitioner/accused is not indicted in offences punishable with life imprisonment or
death penalty, as the maximum punishment provided for commission of offence u/s 7
of P.C. Act 1988 is seven (7) years. It is beaten law, that when the punishment is
severe, there is every danger of accused absconding or fleeing from justice if released
on bail. More severe the punishment is, more are the chances of the accused to abscond
during to the trial or flee from justice if released on bail. Petitioner/accused is a Govt.
servant, hence there are no chance of his abscondence/fleeing from justice if released
on bail.
(IV) Character, behavior, means & position of the accused:-
Prior to the registration of trap case against petitioner/ accused, there are no allegations
against him that he is habitual offender or has earlier been indulged in any type of
crime. Petitioner/accused is the Govt. servant and at present is under suspension. Right
from the day of his arrest on 11.05.2022 after the police/CBI custody he is now in
judicial custody and nothing has been placed on record by respondent/CBI that he has
exhibited any unruly behavior/conduct during investigation or during judicial custody.
(V) Likelihood of the offence being repeated:-
Petitioner/accused after his arrest on 11.05.2022 was taken into CBI custody and now
is lying in judicial custody. Petitioner/accused is a Govt. servant and there are no
allegations against petitioner/accused that he is habitual offender or has earlier been
indulged in any type of crime. Nothing has been placed on record that if enlarged on
bail there is likelihood of petitioner/accused to repeat the offence.
(VI) Reasonable apprehension of the witnesses being tempered with:-
It is unambiguously reiterated here, that from the date of arrest of petitioner/accused on
11.05.2022, for the last more than 36 days he is lying in detention. It is settled law, that
mere apprehension that petitioner/accused would temper with the prosecution evidence
or intimidate the witnesses cannot be ground to refuse the bail unless the prosecution
viz; respondent/CBI shows with substantial evidence that accused actually tried such
tempering/intimidation. The material witnesses in the case are the CBI officials and it
is beyond comprehension that they would be influenced by petitioner/ accused.
Arguments of Ld. Counsel for respondent/CBI that petitioner/accused would temper
with the prosecution evidence or influence the witnesses appears to be conjectural and
mere surmise.
(VII) Danger, of course, the justice being thwarted by grant of bail:-
In view of the plethora of judgments referred by Ld. Sr. Counsel for petitioner/accused
and ratios of the judgments deduced therefrom, it can be safely held, that a balance
has to be struck between the ―right to individual liberty‖ and ―interest of the society‖.
The law as discussed above is no longer res-integra that while considering an
application for grant or refusal of bail in non-bailable offence, concept of ‗personal
liberty‘ as enshrined in Article-21 of the Constitution of India is of paramount
importance and the general rule is that ‗bail is rule‘ and ‗jail an exception‘.
Petitioner/accused is lying in detention for the last more than 36 days and presently is
in judicial custody and is not required for the purpose of investigation any more. The
fundamental postulate of criminal jurisprudence is that an accused is presumed to be
innocent till guilt is proved against him. Keeping of petitioner/accused in continuous
detention would amount to infringement of his fundamental right to life and liberty
which would amount to his incarceration and inflicting pre-trial punishments which is
against the mandate of criminal jurisprudence as punishment can only be inflicted after
full flagged trial and after holding the accused guilty. In view of the aforesaid
discussion, it is amply clear, that there would be no danger of the course of justice
being thwarted if petitioner/accused is granted bail. Therefore, petitioner/accused has
carved out a strong case for grant of bail in his favour. The bail application succeeds
and is allowed. Accordingly, petitioner/accused is admitted to bail subject to his
furnishing one surety bond in the sum of Rs. 50,000/- to the satisfaction of Registrar
Judicial this Court with furnishing of personal recognizance of like amount before
Superintendent District Jail, Ambphalla Jammu. Before parting, the following
conditions are imposed upon the petitioner/accused;
(i)   that the petitioner/accused shall not influence the prosecution witnesses or
intimidate them or dissuade them from deposing before the court;
(ii) that the petitioner/accused shall appear before the trial court on each and
every date of hearing during the trial except for special circumstances
(iii) that the petitioner/accused shall not leave the territorial jurisdiction of the
trial court without seeking prior permission from it;
(iv) that in case respondent/CBI collects any material during the period the
petitioner/accused is on bail that he is influencing the witnesses or has tried
to intimidate them the prosecution would be within their rights to move an
application before this court for cancellation of his bail.
7.      Disposed of accordingly.