This is a Review Petition filed by the State to revise the order passed in
W.A.No.2759 of 2018, dated 11.01.2019 by this Court.
2. It is a case of the Review Applicant/State that the Respondent herein
who is the Writ Petitioner/Rajeshkumar from Villupuram District was selected
as Police Constable. He had suppressed the fact that there was criminal case
against him. In the application form, for the Post of Police Constable, there
were columns regarding pending criminal cases or cases in which the
candidates were involved.                In those columns, the Respondent/Writ
Appellant/Candidate had stated “no case pending”.
3. Before admitting the candidate, after the selection, on verification by
the Police, it was found that the Respondent/Writ Appellant was involved in a
criminal case for the offences under Sections 294 (b), 355, 353 and 506(i) of
IPC in Cr.No.471 of 2013 on the file of the Ulundurpet Police Station,
Villupuram District. Therefore, the Inspector of Police of Ulundurpet Police
Station had sent a report regarding adverse remarks against the
4.   Based on the said adverse remarks against the Respondent/Writ
Appellant, even though he got selected through the written test and the
physical test, his name was not considered and the rejection was informed to
him. Aggrieved by the same, he approached this Court by filing Writ Petition
in W.P.No.7879 of 2018. The learned Single Judge accepting the contention
of the learned Special Government Pleader for the State/Superintendent of
Police, Villupuram had dismissed the Writ Petition.
5. Aggrieved by the Order of the Writ Court, the Writ Petitioner had
filed Writ Appeal in W.A.No.2759 of 2018. The Writ Appeal No.2759 of 2018
was allowed directing the authority concerned to appoint the appellant as
Grade-II Police Constable and send him for training along with the batch of
police constables, if any undergoing training or in future.
6. Aggrieved by the judgment made in the Writ Appeal, the State has
filed this Review Application seeking to revise the judgment of this Court
made in W.A.No.2759 of 2018 dated 11.01.2019.
7.   Mr.P.Kumaresan, learned Additional Advocate General for the
Review Applicant/State contended that as per Tamil Nadu Police Subordinate
Service Rules, 1955, suppression regarding pending criminal case is a
disqualification.
8. The learned Additional Advocate General relied on the ruling of the
Hon’ble Supreme Court reported in 2022 SCC OnLine 1300 [Satish Chandra
Yadav -vs- Union of India and others] wherein it has been held as under:
“Service Law – Probation/Probationer – Termination of Service –
Suppression of material information – Board principles of law applicable
to such cases – Enumerated – On facts held, termination of service of
CRPF probationer for suppression of material information of pending
criminal case justified.”
9. Here the fact is different. The Respondent/Writ Appellant was a
juvenile on the date of alleged criminal case. The criminal case ended in
acquittal.          Subsequently,      the   Respondent/Writ Appellant            had     filed
Crl.R.C.No.39 of 2018 under Sections 397 and 401 of Cr.P.C. against the
judgment of the learned I Additional District Munsif-cum-Judicial Magistrate
No.I, Ulundurpettai, Villupuram District, passed in C.C.No.12 of 2014 dated
11.03.2014 to convert the acquittal as honorable acquittal on the ground that
the Respondent/Writ Appellant was a juvenile on the date of alleged
occurrence i.e., he was aged 17 years and 6 months.                         In the above-said
Criminal Revision Case, in the concluding paragraph, the learned Single Judge
of this Court had observed as follows:
“5. The decision of the Apex court in Shah Nawaz vs. State of Uttar Pradesh [AIR
2011 SC 3107] explains that Rule 12 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection
of Children) Rules, 2007, describes four categories of evidence which may be
provided as also the order of preference. A reading of Rule 12 makes clear that
the matriculation or equivalent certificate has been given the pride of place. The
question of juvenility can be raised at any stage. Petitioner produced proof of his
having been a juvenile on the date of occurrence giving rise to C.C.No.12 of
2014, by way of Secondary School Leaving Certificate. Therefore, the entire trial
against petitioner is vitiated. While so, there is absolutely no difficulty in coming
to the aid of petitioner to remove the impediment standing in his way of gainful
public employment by informing that his acquittal in C.C.No.12 of 2014 shall be
read as honorable acquittal.”
10.Even if there is suppression as stated by the Review Applicant/State,
the Tamil Nadu Police Subordinate Service Rules cannot prevail over the
Parliamentary intent in enacting the law which is in tune with the object of the
International Conference of Juveniles in conflict with law held under the
auspicious of the United Nations at Beijing, where the Government of India is
also a signatory. Since the Respondent/Writ Appellant was not arrested in the
case, he had not disclosed the fact. Also, he was of the bona fide belief that
the case ended in acquittal.       Even for the sake of arguments, if there is
suppression as per Section 24 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of
Children) Act, 2015, there cannot be a stigma to the conviction. Already this
Court had allowed the Writ Appeal. Therefore, seeking to review the order on
the side of the Government will not help the cause of the State.             If the
arguments of the learned Additional Advocate General is to be accepted, then
the Parliamentary intent in passing legislation i.e., Juvenile Justice (Care and
Protection of Children) Act, 2015 will be defeated, particularly Section 24,
thereby preventing the juvenile in conflict with joining the mainstream of the
society.        Here the offence is under Sections 294b and 353 of IPC and
particularly against the uncle of the Writ Petitioner and in the evidence, the
Village Assistant concerned had deposed that on the date of alleged
occurrence, there was crowd since she was aware of the names of the
individuals there and the uncle of the Writ Petitioner had been visiting her
repeatedly for patta transfer, the name was known to her. Therefore, she had
furnished the name of the uncle of the Writ Petitioner. That cannot be held
against the Writ Petitioner/Respondent herein who was aged 17 ½ years on the
date of occurrence since he had not completed the age of majority. The
Respondent/Writ Appellant has accompanied his uncle to the office of the
Village Administrative Officer and even after the case ended in acquittal, the
Writ Petitioner had approached this Court in Crl.R.C.No.39 of 2018 for
honorable acquittal.
11. The learned Counsel for the Respondent/Writ Appellant invited the
attention of this Court to provisions to Section 24 of the Juvenile Justice (Care
& Protection of Children) Act, 2015 which is extracted hereunder:
“24.Removal of disqualification on the findings of an offence. - (1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
a child who has committed an offence and has been dealt with under the
provisions of this Act shall not suffer disqualification, if any, attached to a
conviction of an offence under such law:
Provided that in case of a child who has completed or is above the age of
sixteen years and is found to be in conflict with law by the Children’s Court
under clause (i) of sub-section (1) of section 19, the provisions of sub-section (1)
shall not apply.
(2) The Board shall make an order directing the Police, or by the
Children’s court to its own registry that the relevant records of such conviction
shall be destroyed after the expiry of the period of appeal or, as the case may be,
a reasonable period as may be prescribed:
Provided that in case of a heinous offence where the child is found to be
in conflict with law under clause (i) of sub-section (1) of section 19, the relevant
records of conviction of such child shall be retained by the Children’s Court.”
12. As per the Provisions of the Juvenile Justice (Care & Protection of
Children) Act as amended in 2015, there shall not be a stigma against
Juveniles. Even if there is a conviction, the Provision has to be interpreted
positively favouring the inclusion of the individual in the mainstream of the
society. The legislature in enacting the Juvenile Justice (Care & Protection of
Children) Act, in the light of the Beijing conference regarding Juveniles, it has
to be considered/interpreted favouring the Juveniles.
13. Under those circumstances, the learned Counsel for the
Respondent/Writ Appellant submitted that the case is incriminated as per
report of the Inspector of Police where the uncle of the Respondent/Writ
Appellant has gone to the Office of the Village Administrative Officer, Arali
Village. There was an altercation between the Village Assistant of the Village
Administrative Officer and the uncle of the Respondent/Writ Appellant. The
Respondent/Writ Appellant has just accompanied him.                             Based on the
altercation, the case was registered as though the uncle of the Respondent/Writ
Appellant had prevented the Village Assistant from discharging her duty
attracting Section 353 of IPC along with Sections 294(b) and 506(i) of IPC
were invoked, at the stage of FIR. After investigation, while laying the final
report, the offence under Section 506(i) of IPC was dropped. During trial, on
appreciation of evidence, the Accused were acquitted.                On the date of
occurrence, the Respondent/Writ Appellant was aged 17 years and six months
and was not an adult. Therefore, the Provisions of the Juvenile Justice (Care &
Protection of Children) Act, 2015 was invoked.              After the acquittal, the
Respondent/Writ Appellant had moved this Court invoking Section 482 of
Cr.P.C., for Hon'ble acquittal. This was done to erase any stigma arising out of
criminal case. Even if the Respondent/Writ Appellant had not approached this
Court under Section 482 of Cr.P.C., still there is no stigma as per Section 24 of
the Juvenile Justice (Care & Protection of Children) Act.
14. Mr.K.Ravi Ananda Padmanaban, learned Senior Counsel submitted
that after Police selection, if there is acquittal, it need not be a ground to reject
the candidature of the individual and he cited the following rulings in support
(iii) (2011) 4 MLJ 1006 (SC) [Commissioner of Police
and others -vs- Sandeep Kumar].
Superintendent of Police, Tiruvannamalai District].
(v) The decision of this Court in the case of C.Vijayaraj
-vs- The Director General of Police and others in
W.P.(MD)Nos.1145 of 2010 and batch.
(vii) (2016) 8 SCC 471 [Avtar Singh -vs- Union of India
and others].
(ix) The decision of this Court in the case of K.Sneha -vs-
The Director General of Police and another in W.P.No.10788
of 2020.
(x) The decision of this Court in the case of The Director
General of Police and another -vs- K.Sneha in W.A.No.2046
of 2021.
(xi) The decision of this Court in the case of M.Sivan
Sakthi -vs- The Director General of Police and others in
W.P.(MD)No.11930 of 2020 and batch.
(xii) The decision of this Court in the case of The
Chairman, Tamil Nadu Uniformed Services Recruitment and
others -vs- R.Thendral and another in W.A.Nos.1040 and 1055
of 2020.
(xiii) The decision of this Court in the case of Sivan
Sakthi -vs- The Superintendent of Police in W.P.(MD)No.15688
of 2022.
15. While the submissions of the learned Additional Advocate General
are based on the Tamil Nadu Police Subordinate Services Rules, the
submissions of the learned Counsel for the Respondent/Writ Appellant are
based on the Provisions of the Juvenile Justice (Care & Protection of Children)
Act, 2015.          Section 24 of Provisions of the Juvenile Justice (Care &
Protection of Children) Act, 2015 clearly states that there shall not be any
stigma even if there is a conviction.
16. The age of the Respondent was 17 years on the date of occurrence
and the fact that he had accompanied his uncle with regard to the enquiry in
the Office of the Village Administrative Officer.        The case having been
registered against the uncle and nephew and both have been acquitted after
contest and on appreciation of evidence. Even if there is Conviction, as per
Section 24 of the Juvenile Justice (Care & Protection of Children) Act, 2015 it
is not necessary that the Petitioner shall disclose the criminal case since there
is no stigma as per the Act. From the angle of a normal human conduct, when
the Juvenile in conflict with law had not been convicted, the individual
candidate giving details of the criminal case creates apprehension in his mind
that his application will be rejected before the selection procedure begins.
Therefore, having been acquitted, his application stating that no criminal case
pending on the date, is found to attract the Provision of Section 24 of the
Juvenile Justice (Care & Protection of Children) Act, 2015. When the Special
Act prohibits stigma on the juveniles in conflict with law, the State shall not
act contrary to Section 24 of the Juvenile Justice (Care & Protection of
Children) Act, 2015 invoking stigma on the very same individual for the
criminal case that he faced. This is found unacceptable under the Principle of
a Special enactment. The Parliament intended to enact a Special Law to
protect the children in conflict with law on the basis of Beijing Conference
Convention to which India was a signatory. When that be the case, the Review
Applicant/State ignoring those developments and sticking on to the age-old
practice and claim suppression based on the Tamil Nadu Police Subordinate
Service Rules, is found unacceptable.
17.Mr.Ravi Ananda Padmanaban, learned Senior Counsel for the
Respondent/Writ Appellant submitted that the alleged criminal offence was
committed as a Juvenile. As per the Provisions of Juvenile Justice (Care &
Protection of Children) Act, 2015 and also as per the earlier Act, 2000, if the
Juvenile is in conflict with law, even if convicted, shall not suffer
disqualification. The attempt of the State as Review Petitioner seeking to
review the Judgment/Order in W.A.No.2759 of 2018 is against the legislative
intent of the Parliament in enacting the Special Act.
18.The candidate seeking employment in Government Service has to
give correct particulars and also to undertake the particulars furnished in the
Application Form are true and if any suppression of material fact is found out
in future, the State can initiate action disqualifying him/her from service. The
Respondent/Writ Appellant had accordingly signed the undertaking and had
stated that he had not faced any criminal cases since he has not been convicted.
Therefore, it will not amount to the suppression of material fact as pointed out
by Mr.P.Kumaresan, learned Additional Advocate General for the State as
19.Mr.Ravi Ananda Padmanaban, learned Senior Counsel for the
Respondent would submit that the Respondent viz., Rajeshkumar was not
arrested and he, as well as his uncle, had obtained Anticipatory Bail. Further,
as a normal prudent human being, he had been in the belief that he is not
facing any criminal case as he was not arrested or he has not undergone
conviction. Therefore, he was on the bona fide belief that he would not face
any criminal case. Further, he cited Rules 6, 7 and 8 of the Tamil Nadu Police
Subordinate Service Rules, 1955, in which it is clearly stated that in an earlier
occasions, even in cases of convictions in which the Probation of Offenders
Act was extended, it was not treated as a disqualification.             Here, the
Respondent/Writ Appellant was acquitted, after full trial.
20.It is the submission of the learned Additional Advocate General that
the acquittal was not an honourary acquittal. It was an acquittal on benefit of
doubt. Therefore, it is a disqualification. Also, he would further submit that it
is a case where the Respondent/Writ Appellant as well as his uncle are alleged
to have abused and assaulted the Village Administrative Officer. Therefore,
the FIR in Cr.No.471 of 2013 on the file of Ulundurpet Police Station was
registered against them for the offences under Sections 294(b), 353, 506(i) of
IPC.        For which, the learned Senior Counsel would submit that after the
investigation, the offence under Section 506(i) of IPC was dropped. Even in
the trial, P.W-1-Village Administrative Officer had clearly stated that there was
an Assistant in the Office of the Village Administrative Officer, he was unable
to figure out the person who had attacked her. Since the Respondent herein
and his uncle used to visit regularly for seeking transfer of Patta, their names
were known to her, therefore, she had invoked their names in the FIR and she
had clearly stated that they did not attack. When P.W-1 had not at all stated
anything incriminating against the Respondent, the submission of the learned
Additional Advocate General seeking the review of Judgment is unwarranted.
21.Even if the Respondent had suffered conviction as per the Provisions
of Juvenile Justice (Care & Protection of Children) Act, 2015, there cannot be
any disqualification on a juvenile in conflict with law. If the submission of the
learned Additional Advocate General is to be accepted, then the Rules go
against the Parliamentary intent in enacting the socially beneficial legislations.
Therefore, the learned Senior Counsel for the Respondent/Writ Appellant
would contend that this Review Application is not maintainable and is to be
dismissed in the light of the Provisions of the Juvenile Justice (Care &
Protection of Children) Act, 2015. He further submitted that convictions under
Sections 294 (b), 353 of IPC were treated as petty offences and were set aside
by the Hon'ble Supreme Court. Therefore, in the light of the above, the learned
Senior Counsel for the Respondent seeks to dismiss this Review Application
and also prays to direct the State to consider the appointment of the
22.On consideration of the rival submissions, in the light of the
Provisions of Juvenile Justice (Care & Protection of Children) Act, 2015
particularly Section 24 of the Act and in the light of the submission made by
the learned Senior Counsel for the Respondent and on perusal of the rulings
cited by the learned Senior Counsel for the Respondent/Writ Appellant, the
submission of the learned Additional Advocate General seeking Review is
unacceptable and unjustified.
23.If the submission of the learned Additional Advocate General is to be
accepted, it amounts to negating the well-intended social legislation namely
the Juvenile Justice (Care & Protection of Children) Act, 2015. Also, in the
light of the reported ruling of the Hon'ble Supreme Court relied on by the
learned Senior Counsel, even after the case of the Respondent/Writ Appellant
is to be treated as conviction for the sake of argument, still, the Provision
under Sections 294 (b) and 353 of IPC are treated as petty offences. Therefore,
the same could be ignored by the candidate himself on the advice of the
learned Counsel who appeared for him in the criminal trial. When the case had
ended in acquittal, there is no reason to give details regarding facing criminal
cases that cannot be treated as suppression of material fact.
24.In the alternative, even as per the Rules quoted by the learned
Additional Advocate General, as pointed out by the learned Senior Counsel for
the Respondent, in the previous instances they had given the benefit of the
Probation of Offenders Act to the persons who have been convicted under
Sections 294(b), 353 of IPC treating them as petty offences, the Accused had
been considered for appointment.
25.In the light of the fact that after a tough selection procedure, the
candidate from rural village, who had passed the written test and physical test
and had been successful, had been denied the appointment based on the Tamil
Nadu Police Subordinate Service Rules ignoring the Parliamentary intent in
enacting the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015
which was enacted by the Parliament as a signatory to the Beijing Convention
on the Rights of the children under the guidance of the United Nations.
Therefore, the submission of the learned Additional Advocate General has to
be rejected. Otherwise, it amounts to convicting and attaching the stigma on
the Respondent and all the Judicial Orders in favour of the Respondent being
thrown to the wind. Therefore, the submission of the learned Additional
Advocate General is rejected. In the light of the submission of the learned
Senior Counsel for the Respondent placing reliance on the rulings cited above
are accepted.
26.Here by invoking the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of
Children) Act the Respondent in this Review Application and the Petitioner in
the original Writ Petition had obtained order from the High Court to convert
the acquittal as honorable acquittal in the principles of the Juvenile Justice
(Care and Protection of Children) Act. Therefore, the Review Application by
the State has to be rejected.
27.The appeal by the State in the case of The Director General of
Police and another -vs- K.Sneha in W.A.No.2046 of 2021 to reverse the order
of the Writ Court was rejected with the following observations:
“4.3.We find that even in exercise of powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C., discretion
could have been exercised in the present case and in any case the discretion
exercised by learned Single Judge under Article 226 of the Constitution of India,
in the facts of this case, can not be said to be erroneous in any manner, which
may call for any interference in exercise of power under Clause 15 of Letters
28.In a similar case in W.P.No.177 of 2013 [Sivanesan Vs. The
Superintendent of Police, Tiruvannamalai District, Tamil Nadu] the then
learned Judge of this Court (Justice K.Chandru) had on the basis of the rulings
cited by the learned Counsel for the Petitioner in (2011) 4 SCC 644
[Commissioner of Police -vs- Sandeep Kumar]; (2006) 5 SCC 475 [Lata
Singh -vs- State of UP]; 2008 (2) CTC 97 [Manikandan -vs- Chairman,
2903 [Ram Kumar -vs- State of UP] and (2008) 3 SCC 222 [State of
Haryana -vs- Dinesh Kumar] had allowed the Writ Petition filed by the said
Sivanesan stating as under:
“19.In the light of the above background, the impugned order passed by the
Superintendent of Police cannot be justified and hence it is set aside. The
respondent is hereby directed to grant an appointment order to the petitioner
within a period of three weeks from the date of receipt of copy of this order.
Accordingly, the writ petition will stand allowed. No costs. Consequently
connected miscellaneous petition stands closed.”
29.In a similar case in W.P.No.1145 of 2010 [C.Vijayaraj -vs- The
Director General of Police] the then learned Judge of this Court (Justice
R.S.Ramanathan) had on the basis of the rulings cited by the learned Counsel
for the Petitioner has held as under:
“9.In the batch of cases, in W.P.(MD)No.474 of 2013 etc., I delivered
judgment today, wherein in respect of cases, where the petitioners have
suppressed their involvement in the criminal cases, either in the application form
or during police verification and such persons, who were latter acquitted can be
considered for appointments, considering the fact that the Hon'ble Supreme
Court has referred the issue, whether a person can be denied a job for
suppression of involvement in the criminal case in the application form or during
the verification roll to the Larger Bench and set aside the orders of the
respondents in rejecting the application on that ground. In these cases also, in
respect of the petitioner in W.P.(MD)No.16858 of 2012 in the order, dated
24.08.2010, it was stated that he was eligible to participate in the next
recruitment. In W.P.(MD)No.10539 of 2012, the case was compromised between
the parties and the witnesses turned hostile and he was acquitted. In
W.P(MD)No.1525 of 2011, the petitioner was acquitted, as the witnesses turned
hostile. In W.P(MD)No.1145 of 2010, the petitioner's offence was compounded
and he was acquitted. In W.P.(MD)No.5190 of 2010, the petitioner was acquitted
and in all these cases, the petitioners were prosecuted for offences under
sections, 294(b), 323, 354, 427, 341 and 506(ii) IPC and such offences could not
be characterised as offences involving Moral Turpitude. Though, the petitioners
participated in the selection for the year 2007 to 2010, immediately after their
rejection, they approached this court by filing the writ petitions and therefore,
their candidatures cannot be rejected on the ground that the selection for the
year 2007 to 2010 was over.”
30.Under these circumstances, the learned Additional Advocate General
seeking to revise the judgment already passed in the Writ Appeal based on the
latest judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court reported in 2022 SCC Online
SC 1300 in the case of Satish Chandra Yadav -vs- Union of India and
Others, where it was held as follows:
“Service Law – Probation/Probationer – Termination of Service – Suppression of
material information – Broad principles of law applicable to such cases - Enumerated –
On facts held, termination of service of CRPF probationer for suppression of material
information of pending criminal cases justified.”
31. This judgment is the basis for filing the Review Petition seeking
review of the judgment already passed by the Division Bench of this Court in
W.A.No.2759/2018 dated 11.01.2019. The Division Bench judgment in
W.A.No.2759/2018 holds good in the light of the section 19 of Juvenile Justice
(Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2000, prior to the amendment. As per
Section 24 of Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, as
amended in 2015, the facts in the latest ruling of the Hon'ble Supreme Court is
not applicable to the facts and circumstances of this case. In the reported
ruling of the Hon'ble Supreme Court, it is a suppression of the pending
criminal case. It is the contention of the learned Senior Counsel for the
Respondent that the Respondent/Writ Petitioner was not at all arrested and he
obtained Anticipatory Bail. He was under the impression that the case is not
pending since he had been granted Bail. It is the view of ordinary citizen.
Further, the learned Senior Counsel submitted that as per Section 24 of the
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015, the Parliamentary
intent in enacting the legislation has to be considered that there shall not be
any stigma against a Juvenile in conflict with law even if convicted. Here it is
not conviction, it was acquittal and this Court in the Criminal Revision
modified it as honorable acquittal as the Respondent in this Review Petition
was a Juvenile before the trial Court. The claim of the juvenility could be
raised at any stage.             Therefore, that was the reason for filing
Crl.RC.No.39/2018. Under those circumstances, the Review Petition based on
the latest ruling will not hold good in the light of the Section 24 of Juvenile
Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, amended in 2015. Therefore, if
the Review is to be accepted, it amounts to ignoring the Parliamentary intent in
enacting a progressive legislation whereby the Juvenile in conflict with law is
permitted to join the mainstream without stigma. Rehabilitation and social re-
integration of the Juvenile in conflict with law to join the mainstream are the
main objects of the Act. If the State itself seeks to attach stigma, then the
purpose of enacting the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act,
2015 will be defeated, which the Court of law will not accept. Therefore,
grounds of Review do not hold good considering the age of the
Respondent/Writ Appellant as Juvenile on the date of the alleged offence and
Rule 14(b)(ii) & (iv) of Tamil Nadu Special Police Subordinate Service Rules
cannot prevail over the Parliamentary enactment, benefiting a Juvenile in
conflict with law. Therefore, the Review Application has to necessarily fail
and hence, it is dismissed.
32. If it is to be allowed, it gives a different interpretation thereby
defeating the Parliamentary intent in passing a progressive legislation. In the
light of the observation made by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the concluding
paragraph of Pawan Kumar's case (cited supra), this Review Petition is to be
dismissed. The relevant portion of the said judgment is extracted as under:
“14.Before concluding this judgment we hereby draw attention of the
Parliament to step in and perceive the large many cases which per law and
public policy are tried summarily, involving thousands and thousands of people
through out the country appearing before summary courts and paying small
amounts of fine, more often than not, as a measure of plea-bargaining.
Foremost along them being traffic, municipal and other petty offences under the
India; Penal Code, mostly committed by the young and/or the inexperienced.
The cruel result of a conviction of that kind and a fine of payment of a paltry
sum on plea-bargaining is the end of the career, future or present, as the case
may be, of that young and/or in experienced person, putting a blast to his life
and his dreams. Life is too precious to be staked over a petty incident like this.
Immediate remedial measures are therefore necessary in raising the toleration
limits with regard to petty offences especially when tried summarily. Provision
need be made that punishment of fine upto a certain limit, say upto Rs.2000/- or
so, on a summary/ordinary conviction shall not be treated as conviction at all
for any purpose and all the more for entry into and retention in government
service. This can brook no delay, whatsoever.
15.As a result of the above discussion, we allow this appeal, set aside the
judgment and decree of the High Court as also that of the two courts below and
decree the suit of the appellant as prayed for, with costs.”
33. In the light of the above discussion, the Review Application is
dismissed. In the light of the Parliamentary intent in enacting the Juvenile
Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015, the Respondent being
extended the benefit of Provision to Section 24 of the Juvenile Justice (Care
and Protection of Children) Act, 2015.
34. As per the judgment in Writ Appeal No.2759 of 2018, the Hon'ble
Division Bench had issued directions as follows:
“In the result, the writ appeal is allowed. Order of the writ court
dated 9.4.2018 passed in W.P.No.7879 of 2018, is set aside. The concerned
authority is directed to appoint the appellant as Grade-II Police Constable
and send him for training along with the batch of police constables, if any
undergoing training or in future. However, there shall be no order as to costs.
Consequently, the connected civil miscellaneous petition is closed.”
Accordingly, we reiterate the same direction to the Review
Petitioner/State to consider the appointment of the Respondent/Writ Appellant
in the present batch of recruitment of constables that is now proceeding in the
State within a period of three weeks from the date of receipt of a copy of this
order. No costs.