With the appearance of Mr. Tahir Majid Shamsi, learned Assistant
Solicitor General of India, Caveat stands discharged.
2.          Mr. Tahir Majid Shamsi, learned Assistant Solicitor General of India
accepts notice on behalf of respondent Nos. 1&4 and Ms. Saba Gulzar assisting
counsel to Mr. B.A Dar, learned Sr. AAG accepts notice on behalf of the respondent
3.            Instant intra court appeal has been filed by the appellant against the
order impugned dated 29th of March, 2021 passed by learned writ Court in WP(C)
No.382/2021, title “Mehbooba Mufti Vs. Union of India and Others”.
4.             It is contended that the writ petitioner, appellant herein submitted an
application for issuance of passport in her favour before respondent No.4 i.e., the
Passport Officer, Regional Passport Office, Srinagar. However, despite lapse of
several months, the request of the appellant was not acceded to by the aforesaid
passport authority, which forced the appellant to file writ petition bearing WP(C)
No.383/2021 before the writ Court.
5.           It is submitted that the Additional Director General of Police, CID,
J&K/respondent No.3 has forwarded a report/ Police Verification Report (PVR) to
the office of Regional Passport Officer, Srinagar on 18th of March, 2021 and on the
basis of the report so submitted, the respondent No.4 issued a communication dated
26th of March, 2021. For facility of reference, it would be appropriate to reproduce
the relevant portion of communication dated 26th of March, 2021 hereunder:
“This has reference to your passport file No.SG1065057682420
dated 14th of December, 2020. In this regard it is to intimate
•    Whereas your fresh passport application was received
on 14th of December, 2020 and as per norms forwarded
for Police Verification Report (PVR) on the same date,
•    Whereas Clear Police Verification Report (PVR) in
favour of all passport applicant belongs to J&K is
mandatory and J&K CID, is the Nodal Agency in this
• Whereas the PVR received from Addl. Director General
of Police, J&K-CID do not favour issuance, of passport
PASSPORT CASE", vide No.CID/Final/21/017558-
• In view of the J&K CID report, your case was found to
attract refusal under provisions of section 6(2)(c) of the
In light of the above, your application for issuance
of passport is Refused.”
6.            The aforesaid report was also produced by Mr. Shamsi, learned ASGI
before the writ Court.
7.             After considering the arguments, submissions advanced by learned
counsel for the parties and perusal of the writ record, the learned Single Judge
dismissed the writ petition. The dismissal of the writ petition forced the writ
petitioner, appellant herein to knock portal of this Court by filing the present appeal
questioning order impugned dated 29th of March, 2021 on the strength of the
grounds taken therein.
8.              Mr. Jahangir Iqbal Ganie, learned senior counsel appearing for the
appellant at the very outset submits that the appellant can avail the remedy available
to her under the Scheme, however because of the certain observations made by
learned Single Judge in order/judgment dated 29 th of March, 2021, the appellant
left with no other option but to file the present appeal.
9.           It is further submitted by learned senior counsel that the appellant would
feel satisfied in case this appeal is, disposed of, by giving liberty to her for
approaching the appropriate authority to avail the proper remedy under the Scheme,
if the respondents shall consider the same un-influenced by the observations made
in the judgment impugned dated 29th of March, 2021. Learned counsel appearing
for the respondents are not averse to the proposal put-forth by Mr. Jahangir Iqbal
Ganie, learned senior counsel.
10.            In view of the stand taken by learned counsel for the parties and with
their consensus, this appeal is, disposed of, by providing liberty to the appellant to
approach the appropriate authority to avail the proper remedy available to her under
the Scheme. On receipt of the appeal, the authority concerned shall consider and
decide the same on its merits, strictly under rules, regulations and the provisions of
the Act, that too un-influenced by the observations made in the judgment impugned
dated 29th of March, 2021. Needless to state that this Court has not expressed any
opinion on the merits of the case.
11.             Disposed of as above along with connected CM.