for a period of 7 years and to pay a fine of Rs. 25,000/- (Rupees Twenty five
thousand only) for the offence punishable under Section 9(m) r/w 10 of the
POCSO Act, 2012. In default of payment of the fine amount, the accused shall
undergo rigorous imprisonment for a term of 6 months.
(2) In case of realization of the fine amount of Rs.25,000/- (Rupees
Twenty Five Thousand only) the entire amount shall be given to PW1 as
compensation under Section 357(1)(b) Cr.PC.
(3) The accused is allowed to get set off on the substantive sentence
for the period from 23/01/2020 till 11/02/2020 the period he had undergone
detention as an under trial prisoner.
Name of accused         Father's name      Occupation Religion       Residence    Age
Offence Complaint Appre - Released Commen Close of Sentence Explanation
hension on bail cement of trial           /order    of delay
01/01/14 22/01/20 23/01/20 11/02/20 10/06/22 25/01/23 07/02/23                No delay
This case having been finally heard on 25/01/2023 and the court
on 07/02/2023 delivered the following :
This case is charge sheeted against the accused for the offences
punishable under Sections 376(2)(l) IPC, 3(b) r/w 4, 5(m) r/w 6, 5(n) r/w 6,
5(p) r/w 6 of the POCSO Act, 2012 by the Inspector of Police, Mannanthala
Police Station in Crime No.80/2020.
On 01/01/2014 while CW1 the victim was aged 9 years, she used to reside
with her grandmother CW8 Nalini and her deceased grandfather at Gopika
House, Vengulathukonam, Tatchaparambu, Keralathyapuram. The accused and
his wife CW13 Ajithakumari were her neighbours residing at Sreeja Bhavan,
Poundikonam Ward, Uliyazhathura Village. On the night of 01/01/2014 the
grandfather of CW1 the victim developed chest pain and he was taken to the
hospital. CW8 Nalini entrusted the care of CW1 the victim with CW13
Ajithakumari. The accused had also gone with her grandparents to the hospital.
After he had returned back to his house, in between 11.50 pm on 01/01/2014
and 6 am on 02/01/2014 he laid down next to CW1 the victim who was
sleeping in his bedroom, situated on the northern side of the hall room of his
house along with his wife CW13 Ajiithakumari. While CW1 the victim was
sleeping in between the accused and his wife, the accused sexually assaulted
her by inserting his hands inside her dress and pressed her chest and kissed her
with sexual intent. When CW1 the victim prevented the accused, he pushed her
hands aside and inserted his hands inside her panties and touched her vagina
and caused pain to her vagina with his finger nails. Hence, the accused has
committed the offences punishable under Sections 376(2)(l) IPC, 3(b) r/w 4,
5(m) r/w 6, 5(n) r/w 6, 5(p) r/w 6 of the POCSO Act, 2012.
3. As per Order No.1/21 dated 07/01/21 of the Hon’ble District
and Sessions Judge, Thiruvananthapuram, the case was transferred to this
Court for trial.
4.On issuance of summons the accused entered appearance. He
was already on bail. Copies of prosecution records were given to him under
Section 207 Cr.PC. After hearing both sides under Sections 226 and 227
Cr.PC, it was found that there were no grounds to discharge the accused. No
offences under Sections 376(2)(l) IPC, 3(b) r/w 4, 5(m) r/w 6, 5(n) r/w 6, 5(p)
r/w 6 of the POCSO Act, 2012 were made out. So, charges under Sections 7
r/w 8, 9(m) r/w 10, 9(n) r/w 10 of the POCSO Act, 2012 was framed against
the accused. It was read over and explained to the accused. He pleaded not
5. PW1 to PW21 were examined and Exts.P1 to P3, P4, P4(a),
P5, P5(a), P6 to P27 were marked from the side of the prosecution. CW5,
CW31 and CW32 were given up by the prosecution.             The accused was
examined under Section 313 (1)(b) Cr.PC on all the incriminating
circumstances against him. According to the defence, this is a false case. The
accused is implicated by PW1 on the instigation of her maternal aunt PW5 due
to a civil dispute regarding widening of a pathway to the house of the accused,
which passes through the side of the family house of PW1. This civil dispute is
attributed as the reason for the long delay of 6 years by the defence. The
accused has in his examination under Section 313 (1)(b) Cr.PC has stated that
he has lived a decent life. He retired from Bank. After his retirement he was
taken on contract basis by the Bank for a further period of 2 years. After
hearing under Section 232 Cr.PC it was found that there were no grounds to
acquit the accused at this stage. So, the accused was called upon to enter into
his defence. The accused did not adduce any defence evidence. Heard both
6. Points that arise for consideration are as follows :
1. Whether PW1 was a child as defined under Section 2(d)
of the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act,
2012 as on the date of occurrence, that is, on 01/01/2014?
2. Whether the accused sexually assaulted PW1 with
3. Whether the accused had sexually assaulted PW1 while
she was a child below 12 years of age?
4. Whether the accused had sexually assaulted PW1 in
spite of sharing a domestic relationship with her?
5. In the event of conviction, what shall be the order
7. Point No. 1 : To sustain an offence under the provisions of the
Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 the victim should be a
child as defined in Section 2(d) of the Act. Section 2(d) defines the term ‘child’
to mean any person below the age of eighteen years.
8. In the instant case, to prove that PW1 is a child, prosecution
has relied on Ext P26 matriculation certificate which shows her date of birth as
25/10/2004. That apart, PW1 has also deposed that her date of birth is
25/10/2004. PW2, her mother has also testified that PW1 was born to her on
25/10/2004. In Jarnail Singh v. State of Haryana (2013 KHC 4455) the
Supreme Court had considered the determination of age of victim by relying
on Rule 12 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Rule,
2007 which states that in the scheme of Rule 12(3), if an option is expressed in
a preceding clause, it has over riding effect over an option expressed in a
subsequent clause. The highest rated option available would conclusively
determine the age of a minor. In the scheme of Rule 12(3), matriculation or
equivalent certificate of the child is the highest rated option. In case, the said
certificate is available, no other evidence can be relied upon. Only in the
absence of the said certificate Rule 12(3) envisages consideration of the date of
birth entered, in the school first attended by the child. In case such an entry of
date of birth is available, the date of birth depicted therein is liable to be
treated as final and conclusive and no other material is to be relied upon. Only
in the absence of such entry Rule 12(3) postulates reliance on a birth certificate
issued by a corporation or a municipal authority or a Panchayat. Yet again, if
such a certificate is available, then no other material whatsoever is to be taken
into consideration, for determining the age of the child concerned, as the said
certificate would conclusively determine the age of the child. It is only in the
absence of any of the aforesaid, that Rule 12 (3) postulates the determination
of the age of the child on the basis of medical evidence. In the instant case,
prosecution has already produced Ext P26 matriculation certificate which
shows that PW1 was born on 25/10/2004. The incident took place in between
11.50 pm on 01/01/2014 and 6 am on 02/01/2014, that means PW1 was 9 years
and 2 months old on the date of incident. These discussions on evidence and
legal aspects are enough to conclude that PW1 was a child on the date of
incident as defined under Section 2(d) of the POCSO Act, 2012. Therefore, it
can be safely concluded that the prosecution has proved the first step in the
case. Hence, this point is found in favour of the prosecution.
9. Point Nos.2 and 3 : Since these points are connected with each
other, they are discussed together. According to the prosecution, the accused
had sexually assaulted PW1 when she was aged 9 years between 11.50 pm on
01/01/2014 and 6 am on 02/01/2014 while she was sleeping at his house in
between him and his wife PW11 when her grandfather was taken to hospital on
the night of 01/01/2014 following chest discomfort. The accused sexually
assaulted PW1 by inserting his hands inside her dress and pressed her chest
and kissed her with sexual intent. When PW1 prevented the accused, he
pushed her hands aside and inserted his hands inside her panties and touched
her vagina and caused pain to her vagina with his finger nails.
10. Accused has denied the prosecution case. According to him,
this is a false case preferred by PW1 on the instigation of PW5, her maternal
aunt who is the owner of her family house, situated next to the house of the
accused over widening of a pathway leading to his house which is passing on
the eastern side of her family house. The defence asserts this aspect by saying
that otherwise PW1 a brilliant and bright child who had come to know about
sexual abuse while studying in Class 4 at Le Cole Chempaka would have
disclosed the same when it had occurred. Since, such an incident did not take
place, PW1 made up a story to falsely implicate the accused in this case to help
PW5 take her vengeance against him over the dispute regarding the pathway.
11. At the time of giving evidence PW1 is aged 17 years and is
studying in Class 12 at Al-Ameen School, Ernakulam. She would say that she
was sexually assaulted by the accused who was her neighbour while she stayed
with her grandparents during 2014. The incident unfolds when she discloses
the unfortunate event that took place in 2014 to PW3, school counsellor when
PW2 her mother took her for counselling on 06/01/2020 after PW1 started
exhibiting behavioural disorders, laziness, lack of interest in studying, loss of
appetite etc.
12. PW3 is the School Counsellor at Cotton Hills School,
Vazhuthacaud. She has deposed that PW1 was brought to her by PW2 for
counselling. During the counselling session PW1 disclosed about the sexual
assault she was subjected to. So, PW3 made her write down the incident in a
paper, which is produced in court and marked as Ext P4(a). PW3 has stated
that PW1 found it difficult to tell her about the incident, so she adopted the
technique in counselling by making PW1 write down all what she wanted to
say in a paper. It is after reading the contents written by PW1 in Ext P4(a)
paper that PW3 spoke further with PW1. The entry contained in Ext P4(a)
paper       is      reproduced       here     for       clarity    sake      “
……………………………”. The entry contained in Ext P4(a) paper can be
translated as follows: “That night, he had abused me. Did many things on my
body. He put his hands inside my dress and pressed my chest and did
something. I was wearing a skirt. He removed that, removed my
undergarments and did something there. It caused pain. When he was doing
something at both the places, I felt like something. Thought I would die”. Ext
P4(a) paper is appended to Ext P4 adolescent screening format. She has
entered in Col. No. 16 of Ext P4 as answer to the question as to whether she
wants to disclose any other incidents, she is seen to have written the following
“I had an abusement at my age of 8 from my neighbour”. The entry in Ext
P4(a) is like an explanation PW1 gave to PW3 after she has filled out Ext P4
form. The defence has challenged the genuineness of Ext P4(a) and has
suggested that it was only an afterthought by the investigating officer to make
the case strong. But the defence has failed to cross-examine PW3 the school
counsellor to whom PW1 had given Ext P4(a) paper in that connection. PW21
investigating officer has denied that Ext P4(a) paper is fabricated to suit the
case. PW5 the maternal aunt of PW1 has deposed that she came to know about
the sexual abuse met out to PW1 when PW2 informed her after the
counselling. She has also given evidence to the effect that it was she who had
suggested to PW2 to take PW1 for counselling when PW2 had earlier old her
about the changing attitude of PW1, which PW5 thought could be the onset of
teenage issues. PW4 is one of the counsellors at Snehitha. She has deposed
that she did counselling for PW1 when referred to her by CWC on 18/01/2020
and 19/01/2020. She would say that PW1 disclosed to her that she has written
Ext P4(a) paper when she had a counselling session with PW3. PW4 who is
qualified in MA (Sociology) has stated in general about the reasons why
students do not study could include family issues, mental injury, living
environment etc. The defence has tried to bring in evidence that PW1 had
issues with her studies due to the strained relationship of her parents. Here, the
answer given by PW1 in response to question No. 7 contained in Ext P4
adolescent screening form shows that her family environment is calm and
peaceful. Likewise, her answer to question No. 12 in Ext P4 adolescent
screening form asking whether family issues cause her strain, she has
answered in negative. Even from the evidence given by PW1 and PW2 the
defence has failed to show that the relationship between her parents are
strained and it is her family issues that has resulted in her moody behaviours.
PW4 has also deposed that she is not aware of any marital dispute between the
parents of PW1. So, the attempt by the defence to bring in evidence regarding
the existence of marital discord between the parents of PW1 as the cause of her
distress failed. Coming back to Ext P4(a) paper, PW3 had deposed that she had
handed over Exts.P4 adolescent screening form and P4(a) paper to PW7. PW7
was the Additional Head Mistress of Cotton Hills Girls School during 2020.
She would say that PW3 had given her Ext P4 adolescent screening form and
Ext P4(a) paper and it is from it that she came to know about the incident.
Thereafter, PW7 forwarded Exts.P4 adolescent screening form and Ext P4(a)
paper to police as per Ext P7 forwarding note. PW21 investigating officer
would say that in order to ascertain that PW1 is the author of Ext P4 adolescent
screening form and Ext P4(a) paper, he had obtained sample handwriting of
PW1 as Ext P3 on 21/06/2020 and had seized Exts.P5 Maths answer sheet, Ext
P5(a) English answer sheet and Ext P6 Malayalam Note book and had
forwarded it to FSL for comparison as per Ext P25 forwarding note. PW22 is
the Assistant Director (Documents) of State FSL, Thiruvananthapuram who
made comparison of the handwriting of PW1 seen on Exts.P4 adolescent
screening form and Ext P4(a) paper with her Ext P3 specimen handwritings
and standard documents viz., Exts.P5, P5(a) and P6. She has deposed that the
standard items supplied for comparison were marked as A1 to A20 and the
specimen standard writing were marked as S1 to S30. The red enclosed
questioned documents were marked as Q1 and Q2. She would say that she had
carefully and thoroughly examined and compared the questioned writings and
the standard writings in all aspects of handwriting identification and detection
of forgery using scientific instruments in the State FSL at Thiruvananthapuram
and concluded that the person who has written the standard writings is the
author of the questioned writing. She has issued Ext P27 opinion with the
result of the examination as “The person who wrote the blue enclosed standard
writings stamped and marked A1 to A20 and S1 to S30 also wrote the red
enclosed questioned writings similarly stamped and marked Q1 and Q2”.
Thus, with Ext P27 report of the expert, it can be concluded that PW1 had
written the entries seen in Exts.P4 adolescent screening form and Ext P4(a)
paper. The defence did not succeed in showing that Ext P4(a) was an
afterthought by PW21 the investigating officer. Instead the prosecution has
cemented its case that Ext P4 adolescent screening form and Ext P4(a) paper
were written by PW1 on 06/01/2020 when she was taken by her mother PW2
to see PW3 through the oral evidence of PW1, PW2, PW3, PW4, PW5, PW7
and PW21 and from Ext P27 expert report.
13. Coming to the main aspect in this case, whether the accused
had sexually assaulted PW1 in between 11.50 pm on 01/01/2014 and 6 am on
02/01/2014, it is seen that PW1 has deposed before court that till her Class 6
she had resided with her maternal grandparents at Gopika House. The accused
was her neighbour. His family was close to her family. On the night of
01/01/2014 her grandfather developed discomfort of chest. On the instructions
of her grandmother, she had called her neighbours for help. She had also called
the accused, whom she has addressed as Sundaresan Maman. With the aid of
her neighbours and the accused her grandfather was taken to hospital. The
accused had told his wife PW11 to take PW1 to their house while her
grandparents were away to the hospital. PW1 has stated that PW11 took her to
their house, which as per Ext P13 ownership certificate belongs to the accused.
PW11 made PW1 lie down on their bed near the wall. She fell asleep. During
her sleep, she felt that somebody had hugged her. She thought it was PW11
because when she had fallen asleep PW11 alone was next to her on the bed.
She would further say that after hugging, that person had taken her hands and
put it on that person’s body and she could feel hair. In quick response, she took
her hands back and opened her eyes to see that the accused is lying on the side
of the wall, where she had laid down to sleep. She saw PW11 sleeping to her
side with her back towards PW1. PW1 realised that she was sleeping in
between PW11 and the accused. PW1 has further deposed that the accused put
his hands through her dress and pressed her chest and kissed her. When she
tried to block the accused with her hands, he pressed her hands down and
inserted his hands through her skirt and panties and inserted his finger into her
vagina causing her pain that made her think that she is going to die. Thereafter,
she is seen to have asked PW11 that she wants to sleep in another room. PW11
was not ready for that. Due to constant insistence from the part of PW1, PW11
took her to her son’s room. They slept on the floor. PW1 has stated that she
could identify the accused as the assaulter from the light that was reaching the
bedroom from outside at night. She has described that light as the usual light
one gets to see inside a room at night as coming from outside through
windows. She has denied to the specific question by the defence that it is only
her feeling that the accused had sexually assaulted her.
14. This is the evidence given by PW1 in this case against the
accused suggesting sexual assault by him when she was aged 9 years on
01/01/2014. The learned counsel appearing for the accused has argued that
PW1 had gone to the school next day, she had seen her father on the next day
etc., but she did not disclose the incident to anyone for 6 years. So, this casts a
doubt on the evidence given by PW1 and the court should reject her evidence
in toto. Evidence adduced shows that PW1 while studying in Class 4 at Le
Cole Chempaka came to understand what social abuse is when an animation
movie was played at her school. She was residing with her grandparents till her
Class 6, after which her parents took her with them. The learned defence
counsel argues that when PW1 came to understand about social abuse while
studying in Class 4, at least then she could have disclosed it to her family,
friends or teachers. Here the evidence of PW1 again attains importance that
she was afraid about the incident which was the reason why she did not
disclose it to anyone. After the incident, she would say that she was reluctant
to go to the house of the accused, though she was forced by her grandmother to
go to his house to get clothes stitched by PW11. She is seen to have visited the
house of the accused after the incident only with her grandmother. She has also
stated that the accused used to run away seeing her after the unfortunate
incident. This behavior from the side of the accused suggests his guilt or shame
as his subsequent conduct which is a relevant fact in issue. The reason given
by PW1 that she was afraid to disclose the incident to anyone soon after the
incident can be because of many factors as understood from the evidence
adduced like, the close relationship of her family with the family of the
accused, she was residing with aged grandparents and not with her parents
which must have resulted in mental agony to a small child of 9 years while her
brother got to live with her parents, living with grandparents and living away
from parents must have created an emotional and mental distance in her mind
with her parents, non-awareness of what actually took place on the night of
01/01/2014, her fear on re-visiting the incident which she described as near
death experience, lack of close friends at school etc. As answer to question No.
8 in Ext P4 adolescent screening form whether she shares her sadness to
anyone, she has written that she does not share her grief to anyone. This aspect
shows that she is of a peculiar type who does not share her grief or happiness
to anyone, which could be due to lack of emotional bonding with her parents,
friends etc. Researches and studies show that there are numerous reasons why
a child or even a grown up adult may not disclose about a sexual assault and it
may linger at the bottom of their heart as their dirty, scary secret, but they open
up or disclose it to someone they find they can confide in or someone whom
they trust will listen to them and not judge them etc. In the instant case,
according to PW1 she was afraid of the incident and also not aware of the
nature of the event that occurred to her. Her subsequent reluctance to visit the
house of the accused also shows that she had distanced herself from
Sundaresan Maman after the incident, which unfortunately her parents failed to
notice earlier. Many such factors contribute to non-disclosure of sexual assault
by children. PW1 is seen to have confided in PW3. PW3 had deposed that she
found that PW1 found it difficult to speak about the incident so she made PW1
write out what happened to her and Ext P4(a) paper is the result of that. So, the
delay of 6 years in lodging Ext P18 FIR cannot be considered as fatal to the
prosecution when PW1 has explained the reasons which has acquired the
confidence of the court. In Tulsidas Kanolkar v. State of Goa ((2003) 8 SCC
590), it is held that delay in lodging the FIR cannot be used as a ritualistic
formula for discarding the prosecution case and doubting its authenticity. It
only puts the court on guard to search for and consider if any explanation has
been offered for the delay. Once, it is offered, the court is to only see whether it
is satisfactory or not. In case if the prosecution fails to satisfactorily explain
the delay and there is possibility of embellishment or exaggeration in the
prosecution version on account of delay, it is a relevant factor. On the other
hand, satisfactory explanation of delay is weighty enough to reject the plea of
false implication or vulnerability of the prosecution case. In the instant case,
PW1 was afraid to disclose the incident and was also unaware of the
catastrophe which had befallen on her. So, the delay in lodging Ext P18 FIR
does not in any way render the prosecution version brittle.
15. The next contention raised by the defence is that the accused
is falsely implicated in this case due to a civil dispute between him and PW5.
PW1 admits the existence of a pathway passing through the eastern side of her
family house. However, she does not know whether the family house belonged
to PW5. She does not know the existence of any civil dispute between PW5
and the accused. PW5 has admitted that the family house belonged to her. She
has also admitted that there is a pathway passing through the eastern side of
her property. However, she has denied surrendering property for widening the
pathway or existence of a civil dispute with the accused and his family. PW11
the wife of the accused has given evidence in her cross-examination that PW5
surrendered property for widening of the eastern pathway on the request of the
accused for a real estate person who had agreed to pay the consideration for
the same. It was in December, 2019. It is also deposed by PW11 that the
accused had also surrendered property for widening of the pathway. When
PW5 was not paid the consideration by the real estate person, she thought that
the accused was the person behind her surrendering her property for widening
the pathway and it is in order to take vengeance against the accused, she has
made PW1 to file a false against him about an incident that never took place in
2014. PW11 would say that she remembers about an incident where the
grandfather of PW1 was taken to hospital on 01/01/2014. But she has
categorically denied taking PW1 to her house on that night. In her re-
examination, the prosecution succeeded in showing that PW11 is not a reliable
witness. She failed to depose the extent of land PW5 surrendered for the
widening of the pathway. She could not even state how much extent of
property her husband had surrendered. She has also stated that PW5 alienated
her property in 2018, which is contradictory to what she is seen to have stated
in her cross-examination that PW5 had surrendered property in December,
2019. All these evidences show that PW11 is not a trustworthy witness. That
apart, it may be noted that hardly any family member would fit a person in a
POCSO case to take revenge by risking the future and honour of their child.
Not all people are hard hearted to bring dishonour to their child. Life of a
female child ends when a false accusation is levelled by her against a person
only to take revenge on him. Moreover, in the instant case, evidence shows
that the family of PW1 and the family of the accused were very close till PW1
disclosed the incident on 06/01/2020. The accused had taken the grandfather of
PW1 to Medical College on the night of 01/01/2014. This is clear from the
evidence given by PW1, PW2 and PW9. PW9 has deposed that on 01/01/2014
he along with the accused and three others have taken the grandfather of PW1
to Medical College in the car owned by Jayakumar. PW6 is the wife of said
Jayakumar. She has deposed that the neighbours had taken the grandfather of
PW1 in a car to the hospital on 01/01/2014. Ext P14 records show that the
grandfather of PW1, Mr. Rajendran was admitted at Medical College Hospital
on the night of 01/01/2014 following discomfort of chest and discharged on
03/01/2014. PW2 has stated that on receiving phone call from PW1 on the
night of 01/01/2014 in the phone of PW5 about the illness of her father, she
and her family went to the Medical College from Pettah house and waited for
her father to be brought there. Her mother had then informed her that PW1 is
entrusted with PW11. The close relationship between the families will not
generate any doubt that staying over at the neighbour’s house would result in
sexual assault. This confidence and trust of the family of PW1 is what made
them permit her to stay with PW11 and the accused on the night of
01/01/2014. So, a conjoint reading of these evidences establish that the
contention raised by the accused that he is framed in this case is not
16. Regarding the time of commission of the offence, PW21 has
deposed that during investigation it was revealed to him that the incident took
place in between 11.50 pm on 01/01/2014 and 6 am on 02/01/2014. He has
filed Ext P24 report in this regard. PW9 who knows both the families of PW1
and the accused has stated that he had taken the grandfather of PW1 in the car
of Jayakumar along with the accused and 3 others on the night of 01/01/2014.
He does not know the exact time when they had taken him to the Medical
College. It is further deposed by him that after having spent 2 hours he and the
accused had returned home. PW1 would say that she does not remember the
time as she went to sleep along with PW11. It is only when she felt the accused
on her that she realized that he had returned home after admitting her
grandfather in the hospital. It is quite natural for a child aged 9 years not to
take note of the time of any incident. She then remembers her sleeping in the
room of the son of the accused with PW11. She woke up next morning when
her father had come to pick her from the house of the accused and dropped her
to school that day. So, as rightly revealed in the investigation, the time of
incident is in between 11.50 pm on 01/01/2014 and 6 am on 02/01/2014.
Hence, this contention raised by the defence is also rejected.
17. Now, coming to the fact of how PW1 could witness the incident
at night in a room where the lights were switched off. PW1 has deposed that
she slept near the wall on the bed of the accused along with PW11 on her side.
At night during her sleep she felt someone hugging her. In her sleep, she
thought it was PW11, because she had seen only PW11 lying beside her when
she went to sleep. When the person who had hugged her lifted her hands and
kept on his body, she could feel hair and opened her eyes to see the accused
lying next to the wall where she had earlier slept. She has categorically
deposed that she could see the accused clearly from the mild light that was
coming from the windows of the said room. This is an innocent answer of a
child. Scientifically speaking, the pupils of our eyes constrict when there is
bright light so that less amount of light enters our eyes in order to prevent
damaging of retinal cells. In dim light the pupils of our eyes expand so that
more light enters leading to improved vision. This phenomenon is called as
Pupillary Light Reflex or Photo Pupillary Reflex. This phenomenon is
responsible for a person to see things in dark. As soon as lights are turned off
the already constricted pupils fail to gather enough light and thus we
experience complete darkness. But as time passes the pupils expand in size
allowing as much light present in the surrounding like light coming from the
moon, street lamp, lights kept switched on outside the house etc., to enter our
eyes giving us visibility. This phenomenon is what is explained by PW1 in her
own simple ways which made her see the accused lying next to her on the side
of the wall, him hugging her and sexually assaulting her. Therefore, it can be
safely concluded from these discussions that there was enough visibility for
PW1 to see the accused at night and wrongs done by him on her.
18. On analyzing the oral evidence of PW1, it is to be borne in
mind that no girl wishes to falsely implicate a man in a case stating that the
man had sexually assaulted her. The delay in disclosing the unfortunate event
to anyone causing delay of 6 years in registering Ext P18 FIR is well explained
by PW1. The aspect of tutoring PW1 to give a false statement is also ruled out
from the circumstances that can be understood from the evidence adduced in
this case, like, her non-awareness of any enmity between PW5 and the
accused, her introvert nature which makes her to keep to herself her secrets,
grief, happiness etc., her behavioural changes which PW2 and PW5 had
noticed, her sitting alone and appearing to be gloomy as noticed by her Math
teacher PW8 etc. There is a likelihood that PW1 must have deposed more
before the court than what she would narrated in Ext P1 FIS or in Ext P2
statement under Section 164 Cr.PC. or in Ext P4(a) paper. This cannot be seen
as an exaggerated version of what had happened to her. This could only be
because of lack of her recollecting power of an incident that took place at a
tender age of 9 years. The incident she has taken courage to disclose after 6
years of its happening is embedded in her subconscious mind, but she may not
be able to depose exactly of all the incidents, which could be the reason why
she has deposed that the accused had inserted his fingers into her vagina and
caused her pain. Altogether reading of the evidence by PW1 inspires the
confidence of the court that she was sexually assaulted by the accused when
she was aged 9 years.
19. Sexual intent is the crux of the offence of sexual assault.
Intention and knowledge are different states of mind. They are nonetheless
facts which can be proved, of course not by direct evidence. They are to be
inferred from circumstances of each case. Such an inference, one way or the
other, can only be made if a reasonable man would, on the facts of the case,
make it. The circumstances in which touch or physical contact occurs would be
determinative of whether it is motivated by ‘sexual intent’. There could be a
good explanation for such physical contact which include the nature of the
relationship between the child and the offender, the length of the contact, its
purposefulness; also, if there was a legitimate non-sexual purpose for the
20. The act of the accused shows that he after lying next to PW1
hugged her, made her to hug him, then inserting his hand inside her dress and
pressing her chest and kissing her and by pressing her hands down when she
resisted and then inserting his fingers inside her panties cannot be termed as
something he has done with good intention. The only word that can be used to
describe such an act from the side of the accused is his sexual intent. So, the
prosecution is aided with presumption under Sections 29 and 30 of the POCSO
Act as the prosecution has already laid foundation for its case, which the
accused failed to rebut by preponderance of probability.
21. Other contentions raised by the defence is that Ext P9 scene
mahazar prepared on 23/01/2020 cannot be said to be fool proof as PW21 did
not investigate the age of the furniture present in the bedroom as furniture that
were present there in the year 2014. These are trivial contentions. It is
immaterial whether PW21 mentions the age of the furniture in Ext P9 scene
mahazar or not or PW14 Village officer mentions it in Ext P12 scene plan or
not. Non-seizure of dresses worn by PW1 and the accused on 01/01/2014 is
also not fatal to the prosecution considering the facts and circumstances of this
22. As already discussed that when PW1 has satisfactorily
explained the delay in lodging Ext P18 FIR and the explanation is found
satisfactory by the court and accepted, when the evidence of PW1 is consistent
which has inspired the confidence of the court and is corroborated by the
evidence of other prosecution witnesses as an abundant caution, it can be said
that the prosecution has proved that the accused had committed sexual assault
on PW1 while she was aged 9 years and 2 months in between 11.50 pm on
01/01/2014 and 6 am on 02/01/2014. Thus, these points are found in favour of
the prosecution.
23. Point No. 4 : Admittedly, the accused was the neighbour of
PW1 while she was staying at her family house along with her grandparents.
Evidence adduced in this case shows that the families of PW1 and the accused
were close for years till 06/01/2020. There is no evidence that the accused and
PW1 are related in any manner so as to share a domestic relationship. An
offence punishable under Section 9(n) r/w 10 of the POCSO Act is attracted
only when the child is subjected to sexual assault by a relative through blood
or adoption or marriage or guardianship or foster care or having a domestic
relationship with a parent of the child or who is living in the same or shared
household with the child. The accused has not shared any one such kind of
relationship with PW1. Therefore, it can be safely concluded that the
prosecution has failed to prove this point.
24. Point No. 5 : From the discussions made in the aforesaid
points, it is found that the accused is not guilty of the offence punishable under
Section 9(n) r/w 10 of the POCSO Act, 2012. The accused is found guilty of
the offences punishable under Sections 7 r/w 8 and 9(m) r/w 10 of the POCSO
(1) The accused is acquitted of the offence punishable under Section
9(n) r/w 10 of the POCSO Act, 2012 under Section 235 (1) Cr.PC.
(2) The accused is convicted of the offences punishable under
Sections 7 r/w 8, 9(m) r/w 10 of the POCOS Act, 2012 under Section 235 (2)
(Dictated to the Confidential Assistant, typed by her, corrected and
pronounced by me in the open court on this the 7th day of February, 2023).
25. The accused is heard on the question of sentence. He pleaded
for mercy. He is aged 63 years. He submits that he is looking after his aling
wife. His wife is fully dependent on him. He further submitted that his source
of livelihood is his pension amount of Rs.18,000/- per month.            No criminal
antecedents of the accused is proved or brought out by the prosecution. Sexual
abuse or sexual harassment is never contained to a present moment. It lingers
across a person’s lifetime and has pervasive long-term ramifications. From the
facts and circumstances of this case, it is found that it is not a fit case to invoke
the provisions of the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958. The object of imposing
sentence to an accused is also to be seen as a deterrence to the society.
Sentencing the accused in this case is based on the evidence adduced and the
gravity of the offence committed by him on a 9 year old child along with the
factors concerning him.
26. In view of Sections 71 IPC and 26 of the General Clauses Act,
1897 separate sentences cannot be imposed on the accused for the offences
punishable under Sections 7 r/w 8 and 9(m) r/w 10 of the POCSO Act in view
of Art. 20(2) of the Constitution. The punishment for the offence under Section
9(m) r/w 10 of the POCSO Act is an aggravated form of sexual assault which
is contained in Section 7 r/w 8 of the POCSO Act. Therefore, the accused can
be sentenced only for the offence punishable under Section 9(m) r/w 10 of the
POCSO Act, 2012 which prescribes for a higher degree of punishment when
the prosecution has succeeded in proving that PW1 was aged only 9 years and
2 months when the incident took place.
(1) The accused is sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a
period of 7 years and to pay a fine of Rs.25,000/- (Rupees Twenty five
thousand only) for the offence punishable under Section 9(m) r/w 10 of the
POCSO Act, 2012. In default of payment of the fine amount, the accused shall
undergo rigorous imprisonment for a term of 6 months.
(2) In case of realization of the fine amount of Rs.25,000/- (Rupees
Twenty Five Thousand only) the entire amount shall be given to PW1 as
compensation under Section 357(1)(b) Cr.PC.
(3) The accused is entitled to get set off on the substantive sentence
for the period from 23/01/2020 till 11/02/2020 the period he had undergone
detention as an under trial prisoner.
(Dictated to the Confidential Assistant, typed by her, corrected and
pronounced by me in the open court on this the 7th day of February, 2023).
PW4.         Anithakumari.S, Councilor of Snehitha
PW12.        Dr.Manoj.R, Assistant Surgeon in Casualty
PW15.        Lalithambika.T, Charge Officer in Sreekaryam
PW20.        Gopichandran.O.V, Sub Inspector of Police
P5(a)       Answer sheet (English) dated 03/03/2020.
P6.         Note Book of the victim