1.     This criminal revision petition under Section 102 of the
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 (for
short, 'the Act') has been preferred by the child in conflict with
law/petitioner challenging the judgment and order dated
24.082021 passed by the Court of Principal Sessions Judge,
Mandya, in Crl.A.No.360/2021 and the order dated 10.12.2020
passed by the Juvenile Justice Board, Mandya (for short, 'the
Board'), in FIR No.5/2020 (JC.No.26/2020).
2.     Heard the learned Counsel for the petitioner and the
learned HCGP on behalf of the respondent-State.
3.     Facts leading to filing of this petition as revealed from the
records that may be necessary for the disposal of this petition
are, on the basis of the complaint lodged by CW-1 - Ningamma,
a criminal case was registered against the petitioner and others
in Crime No.110/2020 for the offences punishable under
Sections 341, 302, 120B, 109 read with 34 IPC. It is averred in
the complaint that her son Raghu was murdered by the
petitioner at the instance of other accused persons and during
the course of investigation, the petitioner was arrested and he
is in custody.
4.     The petitioner, initially, had filed an application under
Section 12 of the Act before the Board seeking bail and the
Board before considering the same, passed orders under
Section 15 of the Act on 10.12.2020, and accordingly held that
the bail application did not survive before it for consideration.
The    petitioner  instead  of   challenging  the said  order  in
accordance with law, had filed a separate application under
Section 439 Cr.PC before the Court of Principal Sessions Judge,
Mandya, in S.C.No.3/2021 which was dismissed on 08.02.2021.
Challenging the said order passed in S.C.No.3/2021, petitioner
had approached this Court in Crl.R.P.No.605/2021. In the said
revision petition, the learned Counsel for the petitioner sought
permission to withdraw the revision petition with liberty to
exhaust the remedy of filing an appeal under Section 101 of the
Act. This Court had, therefore, dismissed the said revision
petition with liberty as prayed. The petitioner, thereafter, has
preferred Crl.A.No.360/2021 before the Court of Principal
Sessions Judge, Mandya, under Section 101 of the Act. The
same was dismissed by the Appellate Court on 24.08.2021. It
is under these circumstances, the petitioner is before this Court
in this revision petition.
5.     Learned Counsel for the petitioner submits that the
petitioner being aged below 18 years as on the date of the
alleged incident, ought to have been granted bail having regard
to Section 12 of the Act. He submits that the Board as well as
the Appellate Court have failed to properly appreciate Section
12 of the Act.
6.     Per contra, learned HCGP appearing for the respondent-
State has argued in support of the impugned orders and
submits that the petitioner has attempted to escape from the
Observation Home, Mysuru, and in this regard, a separate case
has been registered in Crime No.63/2021. He submits that the
material on record would go to show that the petitioner has not
been co-operating for speedy disposal of the case and it is
under these circumstances, his bail application has been rightly
rejected, and accordingly, prays to dismiss the petition.
7.     I have carefully considered the arguments addressed and
also perused the material available on record.
8.     The petitioner, after his arrest, had filed an application
under Section 12 of the Act with a prayer to release him on
bail. After receipt of the said application, the Board had
CRL.RP No. 1372 of 2022
proceeded to pass an order under Section 15 of the Act which
provides for a preliminary assessment of the juvenile, wherein
a juvenile aged between 16 to 18 years is involved in
committing a heinous crime, for the purpose of testing whether
the juvenile can be deemed to be considered as an adult and
can be tried before a criminal court under Section 6 of Cr.PC in
accordance with the ordinary procedure of law and on passing
of an order under Section 15 of the Act regarding the
preliminary assessment of the juvenile and if it finds that there
is a need for trial of the said juvenile as an adult, then the
Board may order transfer of trial of the case to the Children's
Court having jurisdiction to try such offence. The term
'Children's Court' is defined under Section 2(20) of the Act,
which reads as under:
established under the Commissions for Protection of
Child Rights Act, 2005 (4 of 2006) or a Special
Court under the Protection of Children from Sexual
Offences Act, 2012 (32 of 2012), wherever existing
and where such courts have not been designated,
the Court of Sessions having jurisdiction to try
offences under the Act."
9.    Section 15 of the Act provides the mechanism for
determination of mental and physical capacity of the juvenile
CRL.RP No. 1372 of 2022
aged between 16 to 18 years regarding the commission of
offences and the consequences thereof, in order to presume
such juvenile as an adult by employing legal fiction. The
juvenile, therefore, need not be an adult as on the date of
committing the crime, but if his age is between 16 to 18 years,
depending upon the preliminary assessment as provided under
Section 15 of the Act, in law such juvenile can be considered as
an adult. Such an enquiry provided under Section 15 of the Act
has immense ramification on such a juvenile aged between 16
to 18 years, and therefore, it is of paramount importance that
such an enquiry as provided under Section 15 of the Act is
required to be conducted strictly following the provisions of law
in its letter and spirit. The purpose of such preliminary
assessment test is to ascertain as to whether the juvenile is
required to be tried as adult by the Children's Court or by the
10.   From a reading of Section 15 of the Act, it is evident that
the Board is required to conduct the preliminary assessment
test with regard to the mental and physical capacity of the
juvenile to commit the heinous offence and also his ability to
understand    the  consequences     of   the  offence   and   the
CRL.RP No. 1372 of 2022
circumstances in which he allegedly committed the offence. For
the purpose of arriving at a just conclusion, the Board while
conducting such a preliminary assessment test, is required to
take the assistance of experienced psychologists and other
experts as provided under Section 15 of the Act. After securing
necessary reports from these experts, it is for the Board to pass
an independent order by applying its mind to the facts of the
case, and therefore, an order under Section 15 of the Act needs
to demonstrate satisfaction regarding the mental, physical
capacity of the juvenile to commit the heinous offence and his
ability to understand the consequences of the offence and the
circumstances in which he committed the offence. The Hon'ble
Supreme Court in the case of SHILPA MITTAL VS STATE OF
NCT OF DELHI & ANOTHER - AIR 2020 SC 405, at paragraph
18 has observed as under:
"18. The Children’s Court constituted under
the Act of 2015 has to determine whether there is
actually any need for trial of the child as an adult
under the provisions of Cr.PC and pass appropriate
orders in this regard. The Children’s Court should
also take into consideration the special needs of the
child, tenets of fair trial and maintaining child--
friendly atmosphere. The Court can also hold that
there is no need to try the child as an adult. Even if
the Children’s Court holds that the child has to be
CRL.RP No. 1372 of 2022
tried as an adult, it must ensure that the final order
includes an individual care plan for rehabilitation of
the child as specified in sub-section (2) of Section
19. Furthermore, under Sub-section(3) such a child
must be kept in a place of safety and cannot be
sent to jail till the child attains the age of 21 years,
even if such a child has to be tried as an adult. It is
also provided that though the child may be tried as
an adult, reformative services, educational services,
skill development, alternative therapy, counselling,
behaviour modification, and psychiatric support is
provided to the child during the period the child is
kept in the place of safety."
11.   From the aforesaid analysis, it is very clear that in a case
where the juvenile aged between 16 to 18 years is brought
before the Court with an allegation of having committed
heinous offence as defined under Section 2(33) of the Act, a
duty is cast on the Board to pass an order regarding the
preliminary assessment of the said juvenile under Section 15 of
the Act. In the present case, after the petitioner filed an
application under Section 12 of the Act before the Board for
grant of bail, the Board prior to passing any order on his
application for bail, proceeded to consider his case under
Section 15 of the Act, and accordingly, has passed the order
dated 10.12.2020 holding that the Board is satisfied that there
CRL.RP No. 1372 of 2022
is a need for trial of the petitioner as an adult by the Children's
Court and in the result, the Board held that his bail application
did not survive for consideration, and accordingly, rejected the
same. It is this order which was questioned by the petitioner in
Crl.A.No.360/2021       before     the   Principal   Sessions Judge,
Mandya, under Section 101(1) of the Act pursuant to the liberty
reserved to him by this Court in Crl.R.P.No.605/2021.
12.   The learned Sessions Judge, without appreciating that the
order impugned before him was an order passed under Section
15 of the Act which is appealable under Section 101(2) of the
Act, has proceeded to consider the appeal as if it is a bail
application and has rejected the appeal. Section 101(2) of the
Act, reads as under:
(2) An appeal shall lie against an order of the
Board    passed    after   making    the   preliminary
assessment into a heinous offence under section
15 of the Act, before the Court of Sessions and the
Court may, while deciding the appeal, take the
assistance   of    experienced     psychologists   and
medical    specialists   other   than   those   whose
assistance has been obtained by the Board in
passing the order under the said section."
CRL.RP No. 1372 of 2022
13.   From the reading of the said provision of law, it is very
clear that whenever an appeal is filed challenging the order
passed    under    Section   15    of  the   Act,  the   Sessions
Court/Children's Court deciding the appeal shall take the
assistance of experienced psychologists and medical specialists
other than those whose assistance has been already taken by
the Board in passing the order under Section 15 of the Act. In
the present case, no such exercise has been undertaken by the
learned Sessions Judge, and on the other hand, the learned
Sessions Judge has dealt with the appeal as if it is an appeal
arising out of the order passed under Section 12 of the Act
rejecting the bail application filed by the juvenile. The learned
Sessions Judge has completely misread the scope of an appeal
under Section 101(2) of the Act which arises from an order
passed under Section 15 of the Act.
14.   Though in the present case, the appeal has been filed
invoking Section 101(1) of the Act, since the order impugned in
appeal is one passed under Section 15 of the Act, the appeal
lies only under Section 101(2) of the Act and not under Section
101(1) of the Act. This aspect has been lost sight of by the
15.    From the reading of Section 18(3) of the Act, it is clear
that once an order is passed by the Board stating that there is
a need for trial of the juvenile as an adult, then the Board may
order transfer of the trial of the case to the Children's Court
having jurisdiction to try such offences, and accordingly, in the
present case, the Board has passed an order in exercise of its
power under Section 18(3) of the Act. Once such an order is
passed by the Board, it has no jurisdiction to consider the bail
application pending before it, and therefore, the Board had
rightly rejected the same on the ground that the same will not
survive for consideration. As against the said order, the juvenile
has an option to file an appeal before the Sessions Court under
Section 101(2) of the Act or he may also choose to file an
application under Section 12 of the Act before the Children's
Court to which his case is transferred in compliance of the
requirement under Section 18(3) of the Act by the Board after
having passed an order under Section 15 of the Act.
16.    The Bombay High Court in the case of SHUBHAM @
MAHARASHTRA (Bail Application No.2282/2021, disposed of on
21.10.2022), considering the question whether on being tried
CRL.RP No. 1372 of 2022
as an adult, is the juvenile denuded the statutory right
available to him under Section 12 of the Act, has answered the
said question in the negative and has held that the application
under Section 12 of the Act by the juvenile against whom an
order under Section 15 of the Act is passed for trying him as an
adult is maintainable and he need not file an application under
Section 439 Cr.PC for grant of bail. The parameters for
considering the application for bail by a juvenile under Section
12 of the Act are clearly distinguishable from the application
one under Section 439 Cr.PC. As against the orders passed
under Section 12 of the Act, an appeal lies to the competent
court under Section 101(1) of the Act whereas against the
order passed under Section 15 of the Act appeal lies to the
competent court under Section 101(2) of the Act.
17.   Section 12 of the Act provides that a juvenile who is
brought    before  the   Board    shall  be   released  on   bail
notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, or any other law for the time being in force
with or without surety or placed under the supervision of a
probation officer or under the care of any fit person. The only
embargo in not releasing the juvenile on bail under this Section
CRL.RP No. 1372 of 2022
is the proviso to the said Section which prescribes that if there
appears reasonable ground for believing that the release is
likely to bring the juvenile into association with any known
criminal   or  expose    the  juvenile  to moral,   physical   or
psychological danger or the juvenile's release would defeat the
ends of justice.
18.    Undisputedly, the petitioner was aged 16 years 11
months 9 days at the time of committing the crime and after
recording the reasons and complying with the requirement of
Section 15 of the Act, the Board has recorded a finding that the
petitioner is required to be tried as an adult by the Children's
Court. Inspite of the petitioner challenging the said order in
appeal before the Sessions Court, it is always open to him to
also file an application under Section 12 of the Act for grant of
bail. If the same is filed, the Sessions Court is required to
consider the same strictly in compliance of the requirement of
Section 12 of the Act. Since the learned Sessions Judge has
failed to consider the appeal arising out of an order passed
under Section 15 of the Act in compliance of the requirement of
Section 101(2) of the Act, the impugned judgment and order
CRL.RP No. 1372 of 2022
passed by the Sessions Court in Crl.A.No.360/2021 cannot be
sustained. Accordingly, the following order:
19.    The   revision   petition   is    allowed.   The  order   dated
24.08.2021 passed by the Principal Sessions Judge, Mandya, in
Crl.A.No.360/2021 is set aside and the appeal is remitted to
the   learned    Sessions    Judge      for   fresh  consideration   in
accordance with law. It is open for the petitioner to file an
application seeking bail under Section 12 of the Act and if such
an application is filed, the Sessions Court is directed to consider
the same strictly with the requirement of Section 12 of the Act.
Considering the fact that the petitioner is likely to complete
three years in custody within a short period, the Sessions Court
is directed to consider and dispose of the criminal appeal and
the application under Section 12 of the Act, if any, filed by the
petitioner, within a period of one month from the date of
receipt of a copy of this order.