On 22.02.2021, we had issued notice in the Special Leave
Petition and stayed the operation of the impugned order.
The present    application has     been filed  for stay   of the
contempt  proceedings    on   account   of  the  order   passed  on
To say the least, we are quite shocked at the perusal of the
order dated 02.03.2021. Once the operation of the order has
been  stayed,   the   natural   consequence   would  be   that  the
contempt proceedings would be kept in abeyance.       It is not as
if this aspect was not brought to the notice of the learned
Judge dealing with the Contempt Petition No.139/2020 as an
application   had   been   filed    for  exemption  from   personal
appearance. However, the exemption from personal appearance
was granted only for the date of 02.03.2021 and the matter was
listed on 08.04.2021 once again directing both the officers to
remain present in Court in pursuance to an earlier order dated
Once the order of which contempt was alleged was stayed,
there would be no cause for calling the officers as there was
no question of any non-compliance of the order which had been
stayed.   This   Court   has   even    on   various    occasions   through
judicial     pronouncements       deprecated        the     practice    of
unnecessarily calling officers to Court. In that context, it
has been observed that the trust, faith and confidence of the
common   man   in   the  judiciary     cannot    be   frittered   away  by
unnecessary     and   unwarranted     show    or    exercise   of   power.
Greater the power, greater should be the responsibility in
exercising such power1. The frequent, causal and lackadaisical
summoning    of    high    officials      by   the     Court   cannot   be
appreciated.      We may add that this does not mean that in
compelling situations the same cannot be done but the object
cannot be to humiliate senior officials.2 In the present case,
we are concerned with contempt proceedings.              No doubt if the
order is not complied with, presence can be directed unless
exempted. However, if the operation of the order is stayed, we
fail to understand what purpose was being served by calling
the officers for the next date as no specific date had been
fixed by the Court post the stay having been granted. We do
believe that this is unnecessary harassment of the officers
and there was no occasion to pass the order on 02.03.2021. It
has resulted in the petitioners being compelled to move the
present application.
1 State of U.P. & Ors. v. Jasvir Singh & Ors. – 2011 (4 ) SCC 288
2 R.S. Singh v. U.P. Malaria Nirikshank Sangh & Ors. – 2011 (4 ) SCC 281
We  stay   the  contempt  proceedings in  Contempt  Petition
No.139/2020 pending before the High Court of Judicature at
Allahabad, Lucknow Bench, Lucknow and further make it clear
the no presence of any officer concerned is required.  We also
make it clear that as and when, if the occasion so arises, for
restarting the contempt proceedings, the matter will be placed
before a Bench of another Judge.
A copy of this order be placed before the learned Judge who
passed this order as well as the Chief Justice.
The IA stands disposed of.
Learned counsel for the respondent has entered appearance
and prays for and is granted three weeks to file counter
Rejoinder if any, be filed within two weeks thereafter.
List after summer recess.
Interim order to continue.
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (C)   No(s).   7487/2020
(Arising out of impugned final judgment and order dated 05-03-2020
in SAD No. 127/2020 passed by the High Court Of Judicature At
Date : 06-04-2021 These matters were called on for hearing today.
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
The IA stands disposed of in terms of the signed order.
Learned counsel for the respondent has entered appearance
and prays for and is granted three weeks to file counter
affidavit.
Rejoinder if any, be filed within two weeks thereafter.
List after summer recess.
Interim order to continue.
[Signed order is placed on the file]