1.     Petitioner has challenged order dated 28.08.2021 passed by
learned Principal Sessions Judge, Srinagar, whereby the petitioner’s
application for grant of default bail has been dismissed.
2.     It appears from the record that on 04.02.2021, a police party
intercepted petitioner and co-accused on National Highway at JVC,
Bemina. During the search of the petitioner, 1008 capsules of
Spasmoproxyvon plus were recovered from him which he had kept in
an orange coloured bag. FIR No.14/2021 for commission offences
under Section 8/21 of NDPS Act came to be registered at Police Station,
Parimpora, and investigation of the case was set into motion.
3.     The petitioner moved an application for grant of default bail
before the learned Principal Sessions Judge, Srinagar, on 04.08.2021,
contending therein that the investigating agency has failed to produce
the charge sheet against him despite lapse of 180 days and, as such, he
is entitled to compulsive bail. The learned Sessions Judge, after
considering the matter came to the conclusion that even though the
charge sheet was not produced by the investigating agency within the
stipulated period of 180 days from the date of arrest of the petitioner,
yet because the petitioner was on interim bail with effect from
24.05.2021 to 08.07.2021, as such, after excluding the said period, the
petitioner has been in custody only for 140 days, thus, he is not entitled
to grant of default bail.
4.     It is the contention of the petitioner that the period during which
he was released on interim bail should be treated as period under
custody for the purpose of counting the total period for which the
petitioner has been in custody, whereafter his plea for grant of default
bail should be considered. According to the petitioner, the learned
Sessions Judge has fallen into an error by excluding the period during
which the petitioner was released on interim bail.
5.     I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the
impugned order and the material on record.
6.     The short question which is required to be determined in this
revision petition is as to whether the period during which the petitioner
was enlarged on temporary bail is required to be excluded while
determining the total period during which he has been in custody in the
7.     As per 36A(4) of the NDPS Act, 1985, Section 167 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, which deals with the matters relating to remand
and default bail, has its modified application in respect of persons
accused of offences punishable under Sections 19, 24 or Section 27A
or for offences involving commercial quantity, inasmuch as maximum
period of remand has been provided as 180 days instead of 90 days.
8.     It is not in dispute that the petitioner was found allegedly in
possession of commercial quantity of the contraband drug. It is also not
in dispute that investigating agency had not sought extension in period
of custody of accused/petitioner beyond 180 days in terms of proviso
to sub-section (4) of Section 36A of the NDPS Act. It is also admitted
that the investigating agency did not file the charge sheet within 180
days of date of initial arrest of the petitioner. It is admitted case of the
parties that the petitioner was released on temporary bail with effect
from 24.05.2021 to 08.07.2021.
9.     Learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the grant of
temporary bail in favour of the petitioner would not alter the situation
as according to him, the interim bail granted to the petitioner was
subject to certain conditions and his release was not unfettered. It is
being contended that custody of an accused released on bail is deemed
to be the custody of the Court and, as such, the whole period, without
excluding the period during which the petitioner was on interim bail
has to be taken into account while considering his application for grant
of default bail. To support his contention, learned counsel for the
petitioner has relied on the judgment of the Supreme Court in Niranjan
Singh & anr. Vs. Prabhakar Rajaram Kharote & ors., AIR 1980
10.    The contention of learned counsel for the petitioner that an
accused released on conditional interim bail is deemed to be in the
custody of the Court, is preposterous, so far as its application to
determination of the matter relating to computation of total period of
custody for the purpose of granting of default bail, is concerned.
11.    In Gautam Navlakha vs. National Investigation Agency, 2021
SCC Online SC 382, the judgment relied upon by the learned Sessions
Judge, it has been clearly laid down that broken periods of custody have
to be counted while computing the total period of custody undergone
by an accused for the purpose of considering his default bail plea, which
in other words means that the period during which an accused has not
been in custody or has been enlarged on bail cannot be computed while
calculating the period of custody for the purposes of considering the
default bail plea.
12.    A Court while exercising the discretion of granting bail even for
a limited period imposes conditions under Section 439(1)(a), then an
accused is released from custody on execution of bonds but imposition
of such conditions cannot by any stretch of imagination be construed to
mean that accused person is in custody. By imposition of such
conditions, the physical custody of the accused does not vest with the
Court as his movement is not in any way restricted. It cannot be stated
that he was in physical custody of the Court so as to claim the
computation of such period in reckoning the period of 180 days of
detention to acquire the statutory right under proviso to sub-section (2)
of Section 167 Cr. P. C read with Section 36A(4) of the NDPS Act.
13.     In view of the foregoing discussion, the petitioner in the instant
case cannot be treated to be in detention or custody for the period he
was released on temporary bail. The contention of learned counsel for
the petitioner that the period during which the petitioner was released
on temporary bail should be computed for the purposes of reckoning
the period of 180 days is without any merit and deserves to be rejected.
The impugned order passed by the learned Sessions Judge is well
reasoned and the same does not call for any interference.
14.     For the foregoing reasons, I do not find any merit in this petition.
The same is, accordingly, dismissed.