    petitioners have also prayed to pass appropriate orders for
    specific and reasonable financial assistance to the members
    of the petitioners’ Association/Union for the period of
    lockdown and thereafter for the survival of their families in
    view of Section 12 of the Disaster Management Act, 2005.
3. It is sought to be submitted by the learned Advocate Mr. K R
    Koshti appearing for the petitioners that the members of the
    petitioners who are surviving on their income from driving
    auto rickshaw have suffered huge financial losses due to
    lockdown declared by the State in view of the Covid-19
    Pandemic, however the State has not granted any specific
    reliefs or facilities to the persons who are working as
    unorganized or self employed workers. According to him,
    Section 12 and 13 of the Disaster Management Act have laid
    down the guidelines for granting minimum standard of relief
    to be provided to the persons affected by the disasters like
    Covid Pandemic and the same have been refused by the
    respondent No. 3 Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation on the
    ground that the Government has already declared the Atma
    Nirbhar Gujarat Sahay Yojna. According to Mr. Koshti, the
    auto rickshaw drivers should have been treated as self-
    dependent persons and should have been given special relief
    package     by  providing     financial assistance      under          the
    provisions contained in the Disaster Management Act.
4. It cannot be gainsaid that the rigour of Covid Pandemic had
    affected the lives and livelihood of people world over and has
    caused great financial losses to every sector of the society. It
    can also not be denied that the State Government considering
    the plight of the people at large has provided reliefs in terms
                                                  Downloaded on : Sun Jul 25 14:12:14 IST 2021
        of free food, medical cover and shelter, etc. from time to time
        and has also granted ex-gratia assistance on account of loss
        of livelihood. The State Government has also declared the
        Atma Nirbhar Gujarat Sahay Yojna for the persons affected
        by    Covid-19   Pandemic.     Under  the   circumstances,             the
        petitioners cannot claim as a matter of right to get financial
        assistance or monetary benefits for auto rickshaw drivers,
        more particularly when all the businesses and professions
        have been badly affected due to the Pandemic. Even
        otherwise, as per the settled legal position, the wisdom and
        advisability of the policies are ordinarily not amenable to the
        judicial review, unless the policies are contrary to statutory
        or constitutional provisions or are arbitrary. In absence of
        any violation of legal, statutory or fundamental rights of the
        petitioners, the petition could not be entertained.
    5. In that view of the matter, the petition being devoid of merits
        is dismissed.
                                                      Downloaded on : Sun Jul 25 14:12:14 IST 2021
