(Gaurishankar Garg & another Vs. The State of M.P.)
Shri Vivek Khedkar, Advocate for the petitioners.
Shri Manish Nayak, Panel Lawyer for the respondent/State.
Heard finally with the consent of both the parties.
Case diary perused.
This petition invoking inherent powers of this Court under
section 482 of the Cr.P.C. has been filed seeking quashment of FIR
registered as Crime No. 352/2017 at Police Station Sabalgarh,
District Morena alleging offence punishable under section 2 of the
Prevention of Insults to National Honour Act, 1971 (for brevity
2.     Prosecution story, in short, is that on 17/8/2017 a complaint
was lodged by Sweety Rajawat, Sub Inspector, P.S. Sabalgarh,
District Morena to the effect that on 16/8/2017, she found that in the
compound of Balaji ITI College, Gurudwara Road, Sabalgarh, the
national flag continued to remain hoisted till 8.30 PM and, as such,
intentional insult to National Flag was being caused. The incident of
insult to National Flag was witnessed by Rajkumar Bansal, Ajit and
Bhawar Singh and photographs were also taken. Accordingly, the
offence under section 2 of the Act was registered.
3.     Learned counsel for the petitioners submits that even if the
allegations contained in the FIR are treated to be true, then too they
do not consitute any offence as alleged. In support of his contentions,
(Gaurishankar Garg & another Vs. The State of M.P.)
learned counsel has placed reliance on decisions of the Apex Court
in the cases of State of Haryana and others Vs. Bhajanlal and
others, 1992 Supp (1) SCC 335, Union of India Vs. Naveen Jindal
and another, (2004) 2 SCC 510, Ganesh Lal Bathri Vs. State of
M.P., (2003) 2 JLJ 296, Amgonda Vithoba Pandhare Vs. Union of
Vs. State of Maharashtra and Anr., 2012 Cr.L.J. 3142 and the
Single Bench decision of this Court rendered at Indore Bench in
M.Cr.C. No.5230/2012 (Dr. Vikram Dutta Vs. State of M.P. and
Anr.) decided on 25.01.2018.
4.     The relevant provisions of Sec.2 of 1971 Act read thus:-
“2. Insult to Indian National Flag and Constitution of
India. Whoever in any public place or in any other place
within public view burns, mutilates, defaces, defiles,
disfigures, destroys, tramples upon or otherwise brings
into contempt (whether by words, either spoken or
written, or by acts) the Indian National Flag or the
Constitution of India or any part thereof, shall be punished
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
years, or with fine, or with both. Explanation 1.-
Comments expressing disapprobation or criticism of the
Constitution or of the Indian National Flag or of any
measures of the Government with a view to obtain an
amendment of the Constitution of India or an alteration of
the Indian National Flag by lawful means do not
constitute an offence under this section. Explanation 2.-
The expression "Indian National Flag" includes any
picture, painting, drawing or photograph, or other visible
re- presentation of the Indian National Flag, or of any part
or parts thereof, made of any substance or represented on
any substance. Explanation 3.-The expression "public
place" means any place intended for use by, or accessible
to, the public and includes any public conveyance.
Section 2 attracts punishment of imprisonment for a term of
(Gaurishankar Garg & another Vs. The State of M.P.)
three years or with fine or both when a person is found in public
place within public view burning mutilating, defacing, defiling,
disfiguring, destroying, trampling upon or bringing or otherwise
bringing into contempt by words spoken or written or by act begin
the Indian National Flag. Allegation against petitioners is of leaving
National Flag at hoisted position at about 8.30 PM i.e. between
sunset and sunrise. This act of petitioners does not squarely fall
within Sec.2 of 1971 Act. Thus, the act of leaving the National Flag
in hoisted position even after sunset may be an act of advertent or
inadvertent forgetfulness and subject matter of misconduct but not
contemptuous unless it is shown that hoisting and flying the National
Flag between sunset and sunrise is expressly prescribed as an
offence in specific terms.
5.     The fundamental rule of interpretation of penal provision
requires that every penal provision is to be interpreted strictly. If an
act does not fall within the four corners of the offence described by
the statute, then the said act cannot suffer rigors of penal provision.
In this regard, the decision of The Apex Court in R. Kalyani
Vs. Janak C. Mehta and Ors., (2009) 1 SCC 516, is noteworthy:-
“37. Maxwell in The Interpretation of Statutes (12th Edn)
says: "The strict construction of penal statutes seems to
manifest itself in four ways: in the requirement of express
language for the creation of an offence; in interpreting
strictly words setting out the elements of an offence; in
requiring the fulfillment to the letter of statutory
conditions precedent to the infliction of punishment; and
in insisting on the strict observance of technical provisions
concerning criminal procedure and jurisdiction."
38. In Craies and Statute Law (7th Edn. At p. 529) it is
(Gaurishankar Garg & another Vs. The State of M.P.)
said that penal statutes must be construed strictly. At page
530 of the said treatise, referring to U.S. v. Wiltberger,
[(1820) 2 Wheat (US) 76], it is observed, thus :
"The distinction between a strict construction and a more
free one has, no doubt, in modern times almost
disappeared, and the question now is, what is the true
construction of the statute? I should say that in a criminal
statute you must be quite sure that the offence charged is
within the letter of the law. This rule is said to be founded
on the tenderness of the law for the rights of individuals,
and on the plain principle that the power of punishment is
vested in the Legislature, and not in the judicial
department, for it is the Legislature, not the Court, which
is to define a crime and ordain its punishment."
39. In Tuck & Sons v. Priester, [(1887)] 19 QBD 629]
which is followed in London and County Commercial
Properties Investments v. Attn Gen., [(1953) 1 WLR 312],
"We must be very careful in construing that section,
because it imposes a penalty. If there is a reasonable
interpretation, which will avoid the penalty in any
particular case, we must adopt that construction. Unless
penalties are imposed in clear terms they are not
enforceable. Also where various interpretations of a
section are admissible it is a strong reason against
adopting a particular interpretation if it shall appear that
the result would be unreasonable or oppressive."
From the above,       it is evident that the act of leaving the
National Flag at hoisted position between sunset and sunrise does
not satisfy the ingredients which constitute the offence punishable
u/S.2 of 1971 Act.
6.     Learned counsel for respondents has attempted to seek
assistance from the Indian Flag Code, 2002 (for brevity, “Flag
Code”), in particular, Clause of Sec.2(2.2)(xi) of Flag Code. He
submits that in particular Clause under the said Flag Code allowing
National Flag to remain hoisted between sunset and sunrise is
prohibited. As such it is urged that if provision of Sec.2 of 1971 Act
(Gaurishankar Garg & another Vs. The State of M.P.)
is read in conjunction with the said clause of Flag Code, then
petitioners have prima facie committed the offence punishable u/S.2
7.      The relevant clause of the Indian Flag Code, 2002 is
reproduced below for ready reference and convenience:-
“2(2.2)(xi)- Where the Flag is displayed in open, it should,
as far as possible, be flown from sunrise to sunset,
irrespective of weather conditions.”
8.      It is not in dispute that the said Flag Code is not “law” as
defined in Article 13 of Constitution of India and is a mere
compendium of executive instructions as held by the Apex Court in
Union of India Vs. Naveen Jindal and another, (2004) 2 SCC 510,
the relevant extract of which reads thus:-
“28. Before we proceed further, it is necessary to deal
with the question, whether Flag Code is "law"? Flag
Code concededly contains the executive instructions of
the Central Government. It is stated that the Ministry of
Home Affairs, which is competent to issue the
instructions contained in the Flag Code and all matters
relating thereto are one of the items of business
allocated to the said Ministry by the President under the
Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules,
1961 framed in terms of Article 77 of the Constitution of
India. The question, however, is as to whether the said
executive instruction is "law" within the meaning of
Article 13 of the Constitution of India. Article 13(3)(a)
of the Constitution of India reads thus :
"13. (3) (a) "Law" includes any Ordinance,
order bye-law, rule, regulation, notification, custom or
usage having in the territory of India the force of law."
29. A bare perusal of the said provision would clearly go
to show that executive instructions would not fall within
the aforementioned category. Such executive instructions
may have the force of law for some other purposes; as
for example those instructions which are issued as a
supplement to the legislative power in terms of clause
(1) of Article 77 of the Constitution of India. The
(Gaurishankar Garg & another Vs. The State of M.P.)
necessity as regard determination of the said question
has arisen as the Parliament has not chosen to enact a
statute which would confer at least a statutory right upon
a citizen of India to fly a National Flag. An executive
instruction issued by the appellant herein can any time
be replaced by another set of executive instructions and
thus deprive Indian citizens from flying National Flag.
Furthermore, such a question will also arise in the event
if it be held that right to fly the National Flag is a
fundamental or a natural right within the meaning of
Article 19 of the Constitution of India; as for the purpose
of regulating the exercise of right of freedom guaranteed
under Article 19(1)(a) to (e) and (g) a law must be
made.”
9.      As such since the Flag Code does not have any statutory force
it cannot attract any offence. Besides, the Flag Code lays down that
as far as possible National Flag should be flown between sunrise and
sunset. Meaning thereby that it should not be flown between sunset
and sunrise. Use of expression "as far as possible" in the said clause
of Flag Code, which is a mere instruction, is sufficient for this Court
to conclude that flying of National Flag between sunset and sunrise
is not prohibited by law.
10.     Consequently, present MCrC stands allowed and the FIR
registered as Crime No. 352/2017 at Police Station Sabalgarh,
District Morena alleging offence punishable under section 2 of the
1971 Act and all consequential proceedings stand quashed.