This Civil Revision Petition has been preferred to set aside the fair and
decreetal order passed in I.A.No.4 of 2021, in HMOP No.67 of 2020 dated
28.10.2021 on the file of the II Additional Sub Court, Coimbatore.
2. Heard the learned counsel for the petitioner as well as the learned
counsel for the respondent and perused the materials available on record.
3. The revision petitioner is the wife against whom the respondent
husband has filed a petition in HMOP.No.67 of 2020, to declare the marriage
as null and void. During the pendency of the proceedings, a petition was filed
in I.A.No.4 of 2021, to subject the revision petitioner for medical
examination. The said petition was allowed. Aggrieved over that, the
petitioner has filed this Civil Revision Petition.
4. The learned counsel for the revision petitioner submitted that the
medical examination on the petitioner was ordered to ascertain whether she
had taken treatment for her health issues, which is beyond the scope of the
pleadings made in the original petition; the respondent had filed a petition in
I.A.No.4 of 2021, to refer the revision petitioner to the Medical Board in order
to examine about her Hormonal imbalance and irregular periods; according to
the revision petitioner, the petition has been filed just to damage the self-
esteem of the revision petitioner and that cannot be encouraged; the learned
Trial Judge has also ordered for examination of the genital organs of the
revision petitioner in the guise of referring the revision petitioner for
examining the complaint of hormonal imbalance and menstrual irregularity;
though the revision petitioner had admitted the fact of non-consummation of
marriage and menstrual irregularity, she has been unnecessarily referred for
medical examination.
5. The learned counsel for the respondent submitted that the main
allegation made by the respondent against the revision petitioner is that the
revision petitioner is unfit for marital life and she did not cooperate with the
respondent for conducting happy married life; she herself has admitted that
even before marriage, she had irregular periods and hormonal imbalance and
for which, she had taken treatment; however, no documents have been
produced to show her health condition; since the medical report and
examination of her medical condition would help to resolve the issue in
dispute, the respondent has filed a petition in I.A.No.4 of 2021 and it has been
rightly allowed.
6. The records would show that in the original petition filed by the
respondent, he has stated that after marriage, the revision petitioner did not
cooperate to have sex and refused for consummation. It is further alleged that
the revision petitioner had told the respondent that she had hormonal
imbalance and due to which, she is unable to cooperate with him to have sex.
The grievance of the respondent is that the petitioner had suppressed about her
health condition and other factors and cheated him. On these allegations, he
filed a petition to annul the marriage solemnized between the revision
petitioner and the respondent on 14.11.2018.
7. In the counter filed by the revision petitioner, it is stated that it is the
respondent who was not willing to share the bed with her and even when she
asked him to go for medical examination, he did not concede; since the
revision petitioner had irregular periods, she informed the respondent and both
of them went for medical examination; even on the advise of the doctor, the
respondent omitted to produce the report of his sperm count. According to the
revision petitioner, the respondent himself felt insecure, but blamed her for his
inability.
8. For these kind of allegations, it would have been better if the learned
Trial Judge had ordered for medical examination of both the parties. The
Hormonal imbalance or irregular menstruation of the women, cannot be
considered as female impotency or she is unfit to have sex. Despite the
respondent himself has sought a prayer to refer the revision petitioner to
Medical Board in order to get a report about her previous treatment for any of
her health issues and allied issues, the learned Trial Judge had ordered to
subject the revision petitioner alone for medical examination in order to give a
report on irregular menstruation and hormonal imbalance. It is to be noted that
the fact about the irregular menstruation was admitted by the revision
petitioner herself. It is needless to say that the hormonal imbalance is
associated with irregular menstruation. The revision petitioner herself has
already gone to a gynaecologist and got examined and stated about those facts
in her counter. Hence, it is unnecessary to ask her to subject to medical
examination on the order of the Court.
9. The learned Trial Judge has gone to an extent further and observed in
his order that the revision petitioner should prove satisfactorily that she is fit
to have sexual relationship and to conceive a child. Even persons who are fit
for sexual relationship and have active physical relationship may not conceive
immediately for the reasons not known. Only when the couples understand
themselves and obtain medical opinion and follow the advise of the doctors,
the problem can be resolved. Here is the case where the couples throw
allegations on each other that the other party is not active for consummation
of the marriage.
10. When the revision petitioner has stated that she does not suffer
from any structural defect of the genitals and her problem is only with regard
to hormonal imbalance, such condition cannot be construed as impotency.
Had the respondent filed a petition for dissolution of marriage by alleging
mental cruelty due to non co-operation of the revision petitioner for having an
active sexual life, it would have been a different situation. But, on the
allegations of the hormonal imbalance and irregular periods, the respondent
has filed the petition to annul the marriage by stating that it is void.
11. In the same order passed by the learned Trial Judge, a clarification
was also sought as to the medical examination for which the revision
petitioner should be subjected. During that course, the learned Trial Judge has
come to a conclusion that the revision petitioner should also undergo the
examination of her genitals along with the other examinations connecting to
irregular periods and hormonal imbalance. Since the above order is a
clarification given to the order already passed, the said order also forms part
of the impugned order. When the revision petitioner herself admitted about the
non-consummation of marriage and the reason for it is the non-cooperation on
the side of the respondent, to subject the revision petitioner for medical
examination and that too for examining her genitals, would only affect her self
esteem.
12. In fact, in the main petition itself, the trial seems to have been
completed and the arguments were heard. The matter is at the stage of
pronouncing judgment. Under such circumstances, the Family Court is at
liberty to pass appropriate orders taking into account of the evidence available
on record instead of directing the revision petitioner alone to go for medical
examination in order to confirm the admitted facts about hormonal imbalance
and irregular periods.
13. In view of the above said reasons, this Civil Revision Petition stands
allowed and the order passed by the II Additional Sub Judge, Coimbatore in
I.A.No.4 of 2021, in HMOP No.67 of 2020 dated 28.10.2021, is set aside. No
costs. Consequently, connected miscellaneous petition is also closed.