1.      The petitioners have filed this petition, under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India, seeking the following prayers:
“20. (A) BE PLEASED to issue a writ of mandamus or
any other writ, order or direction to direct the Respondent
Bank to issue a No-Due certificate to the Petitioners and to
further release the mortgage documents deposited and in the
custody of the Respondent bank and execute such documents
as required for release of mortgage in the interest of justice.
(B) BE PLEASED to direct the Respondent Bank to take all
steps to release the charge registered in its favour with
Statutory Authorities such as Registrar of Companies,
Central Registry of Securitisation Asset Reconstruction and
Security Interest of India (‘CERSAI’ for short), Land
Revenue Authorities and/or any other authority in the
interest of justice.
(C) BE PLEASED to issue a writ of certiorari or any other
writ, order or direction to declare and quash the proceedings
undertaken by the Respondent bank under the provisions of
the SARFAESI Act, 2002 including the proceedings under
Section          14          being         Application                No.
DC/MAG/Securitisation/S.R. 72/2016 pending before the
Ld. Collector, Ahmedabad annexed at Annexure J to this
petition, as being illegal, null & void ab-initio, without
jurisdiction, without the authority of law and in violation of
the provisions of SARFAESI Act, 2002 as being illegal and
a nullity in the interest of justice.”
2.1     The petitioner no. 1 is a company incorporated under the
Companies Act 1956 and the petitioner no. 2 is a partnership firm. The
petitioner received a letter from the respondent – State Bank of India
dated 11.09.2017 offering One Time Settlement (OTS) stating that the
bank had outstanding dues of Rs.12,34,54 ,566/- which could be settled
by payment of Rs.9,90,58,133/-. According to the bank, if the amount
was paid before 31-12-2017, the petitioners will be eligible for an
additional incentive of 10% over the OTS amount.
2.2    One of the terms of this OTS was that since the petitioners had
been issued a notice under the Securitisation And Reconstruction Of
Financial Assets And Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 ( for
short the ‘SARFAESI Act’), the notice is issued without prejudice to the
rights to continue the action and unless a compromise is arrived at under
the present OTS scheme.         On 25.09.2017, a letter was sent by the
petitioner no. 1 indicating that it had arranged for Rs.1,24,00,000/- in the
current account of the respondent Bank. By a letter dated 03.10.2017, the
bank accepted the application money and appropriated the amount
towards OTS.      On 04.10.2017, the petitioner no.1 indicated that it would
remit the entire OTS amount before 31-12-2017. It was requested to the
bank that if the amount is repaid before 31-12-2017, the bank should
release the documents and give a no due certificate. Several letters were
written by the petitioners to bank that as the petitioners had paid the OTS
amount, the title documents be released and consent terms be filed before
the DRT and further to provide a No-due certificate. It is the case of the
petitioners that despite this specific condition and the full payment having
been made, the bank is neither releasing the documents and also not
giving no due certificate.
2.3      The bank thereafter sent a letter dated 28.08.2018 stating that as the
case of the petitioners was reported as fraud to RBI for some fraudulent
transactions which took place during the year 2016, the petitioners are not
entitled to the benefits of OTS . The petitioners have also not been
returned the money which the petitioners deposited as a part of the OTS
settlement. According to the petitioners, the bank has not given the cause
as to when the case was reported to the RBI and what is the case against
3.       Mr A L Shah, learned Senior Counsel appearing with Mr. Aditya
Gupta, learned advocate for the petitioners has made the following
3.1      The principle of promissory estoppel squarely applies against the
respondent Bank.        Once the petitioners had paid the entire amount
pursuant to the offer made by the bank under the OTS scheme and change
their situation, it could not have cancelled the OTS letter when at no stage
the case was reported as fraud. The allegations of fraud are bald in nature
and no particulars are discussed in the letter dated 28.08.2018.
3.2    The action of the bank in not releasing the title papers and issuing a
no due certificate and clearing the charge of the bank and also not
withdrawing the legal action against the petitioners under the SARFAESI
Act is bad. Inviting the attention to the relevant pages and annexures to
the rejoinder, he would submit that the petitioners’ loan application was
for Rs.14 crores. The application clearly stated that the company will
replace the collateral securities that were initially offered within 6 months
and provide the properties as collateral security shown in the application.
The original properties’ market value was Rs.2665.75 lakhs which was to
be replaced by other properties having a market value of Rs.3295.00 lacs.
The Bank's appraisal report and the Memorandum of Sanction was also
placed on record of the bank that clearly expressed that the company will
replace this collateral security within 6 months and provide the properties
which are detailed in the Memorandum of Sanction. The final sanction
letter of the bank did not include the term of replacing the original
security and therefore the petitioner wrote to the bank that it was not
interested in availing the working capital facility.
3.3    Accordingly, the bank released the equitable mortgage by
executing a release deed on 17.12.2013. On 01.01.2014, the petitioners
wrote to the bank that the company had requested for a credit facility by
offering certain collateral security. On a temporary basis it was therefore
requested that a certain property be given as collateral security with an
agreement to replace the same within 6 months. The letter therefore
specifically mentioned that now that the company was informed that the
bank will replace the Collateral security,          Sanction letter has been
3.4     The bank by two separate letters asked two separate law firms for
title clearance of the new property. Letters were also written to the valuer
to carry out valuation of the new property offered for replacement of the
original property given as security. One letter was written to one Shri
Hasmukh Patel and the other to one Shri Vipulbhai of Multimulayankan.
The valuation report of value of the property offered as replacement of
the original security at market value of Rs. 33,69,00,000/- and realisable
value of Rs.30,32,10,000/-. On 18.08.2014, the bank wrote one letter to
its zonal office stating that as per the original sanction letter it was agreed
to replace the existing collateral of 109 flats and 15 shops with certain
properties at Odhav.
3.5     Mr. Shah would submit that as per the OTS letter dated 11.09.2017
against      the   ledger  outstanding     of   Rs.1,23,45,44,565/-,             only
Rs.9,90,58,133/- was to be paid. Additional incentive of 10% on the
OTS amount would be given if the entire OTS amount is paid on or
before 31-12-2017. The petitioner accordingly deposited the amount on
4.10.2017. The total amount deposited was Rs.89,15,22,320/-. Reminder
was sent to the bank and the bank was            requested to release the
documents and issue no due certificate. The bank had filed application
under section 14 of the Securitization Act which had to be withdrawn. A
criminal case was filed by the bank in the year 2016 which was converted
into criminal inquiry and then by a detailed judgement the same was
dismissed without even issuing any summons to the petitioners.
3.6     Mr. Shah would rely on a decision of the Supreme Court in the
case of Gujarat State Financial Corporation vs. Lotus Hotels Private
Limited reported in AIR 1983 SC 848 and submit that the principle of
promissory estoppel would apply which would estop the bank from
backing out of the obligations arising out of the OTS letter and the
4.      Mr. Anip Gandhi, learned advocate appearing for the respondent
Bank would submit that the petition is not maintainable on the ground of
alternative remedy available to the petitioners under the SARFAESI Act.
He would rely on the decision of the Apex Court in the case of United
Bank of India vs. Satyawati Tondon and others reported in (2010) 8
SCC 110 and submit that as per Section 17 of the SARFAESI Act, the
petitioner should have approached the Debt Recovery Tribunal.
4.1 Mr. Gandhi would further submit that the petitioners had taken a loan
from the erstwhile State Bank of Bikaner and Jaipur which merged with
the State Bank of India. The bank came out with a One Time Settlement
scheme which was available to all accounts except the loan account about
which is reported to the RBI as fraud. He would rely on clause 2.1 of the
scheme which indicated that cases reported as fraud to RBI will not be
4.2    Mr. Gandhi would submit that the petitioners had committed fraud
by selling the collateral mortgage securities namely the flats and the
shops without permission, release or without obtaining NOC from the
bank and also did not deposit the sale proceeds with the bank to satisfy
the loan amount. The bank therefore apart from lodging a criminal case
had also registered a complaint with the Economic Offences Wing at
Mumbai. He would submit that since the petitioners were made aware
that their account would be declared as fraud, only with a view to saving
their   skin      and future action,    they  deposited   an     amount          of
Rs.89,15,22,320/- with the bank.        The act of withdrawing the OTS
settlement was in accordance with law and in accordance with the RBI
guidelines which prevented the bank from settling the loan account in
cases of fraud.
5.      Having considered the submissions made by the learned counsel
for the respective parties, at the outset it is required to be mentioned that
Mr. Anip Gandhi’s contention that the petition is barred by alternative
remedy of SARFAESI Act is without merit. Reliance placed on the
decision in the case of Satyawati Tondon and others (supra) would not
be applicable to the facts of the present case as here the prayer is for
returning the documents of mortgage deed as promised. Once an OTS is
entered into and amount paid, the bank ought not to have backed out.
The contention therefore that the petition is barred by alternative remedy
is misplaced.
5.1     The sequence of events as stated hereinafter indicate that the bank
ought to have released the properties by executing a release deed and
return the documents which are in custody of the bank and also ought to
give a no due certificate to the petitioners. Perusal of the fresh proposal
for working capital- cash credit put up by the petitioners would indicate
that as security collateral residential flats 109 in number and 15 total
shops situated at Rajipa Greenland with the market value of Rs. 2665.76
lacs was offered. The letter also stated that the company will replace the
above collateral within 6 months and provide properties at Odhav which
had a market value of Rs. 3295.00 lacs. The realisable value was
Rs.3130.25 lacs and the distress value was Rs. 2965.50 lacs.                       A
memorandum of sanction was issued and details of the collateral security
were furnished.
5.2    It was also pointed out that the company will replace the above
collaterals within 6 months. The final sanction letter did not include the
term of replacing the original security. The petitioners informed the bank
that they were not interested in availing the loan. A letter was written on
16.12.2013 by the petitioner that since they were not interested in the loan
their original properties be released and the documents be returned .
5.3    The bank actually entered into a release deed. The release deed
was executed on 17.12.2013.        On 1st January 2014,        the petitioners
addressed a letter to the bank that they had cancelled the entire loan
document to avoid problems but now the company has been informed
that the bank was willing to replace the collateral security and release the
charge on the collateral security consisting of 109 flats and shops. That
the bank was willing to accept the exchange of collateral securities was
evident from the action of the bank in writing letters to advocates on 10th
of April 2014 asking them to investigate into the title of properties in
exchange of the properties that the petitioners offered and furnish a title
clearance certificate. Even two valuation reports were called for from
two separate valuers by the bank for the property offered as alternate
security collateral. This therefore evidently suggested that the bank had in
fact accepted the offer of the petitioner as initially stated in the proposal
to exchange the collateral securities. The letter dated 18th August 2014 of
the bank addressed to the petitioners categorically stated that as per
original sanction, the Bank had agreed to replace the existing collaterals
that is 109 flats and 15 shops with the properties in exchange. The
valuation reports called for by the bank from the two valuers itself
suggested that the properties in exchange offered as collateral security
not only had clear and marketable title but even the distress value of the
said new property was almost twice the amount of the loan granted.
5.4    The sequence of events would indicate that pursuant to the OTS
settlement offered by the bank. The entire OTS amount was accepted by
the bank which was paid on or before 31-12-2017. This was before the
bank had declared and reported the account as fraud. Once the petitioners
had clearly stated in the loan application that wsthe offered security was
only for a temporary period of six months which the petitioners will
replace with the property mentioned as alternative securities and when the
bank had by its letter dated 18th August 2014 unequivocally accepted the
stand by initially offering to release the equitable mortgage by executing
a document dated 17.12.2013 and the bank relying on such assurance had
accepted the condition of the loan document the bank was clearly
estopped from changing its position to the detriment of the petitioners.
6.      The stand of the bank in not honouring its terms of settlement by
keeping the proceedings before the Debt Recovery Tribunal pending and
not issuing a release deed of mortgage properties and also no due
certificate is illegal and contrary to law. When the entire amount was paid
pursuant to the OTS settlement, the bank could not have cancelled the
settlement vide its letter dated 28.08.2018 stating that as the case of the
petitioners was reported as fraud, the petitioners were not entitled to the
benefits of ATS. In light of the decision in the case of Lotus Hotel
(Supra), it is clear that the principle of promissory estoppel applies. The
bank by its conduct of offering an OTS settlement intended to create legal
relations which the petitioners had acted upon in light of the promise
made and paid the amount on or before 30th of December 2017. This
action was apparently accepted in principle by the bank as not only for
the title clearance certificate but valuation reports letters were written by
by the bank to the advocates and the valuers. The amounts were paid and
accepted by the bank and once the petitioners had acted upon on the
promise set out by the bank, the bank cannot be allowed to go back on its
proposal on the basis of a letter dated 28th August 2018 stating that the
scheme of OTS was not applicable as the cases of the petitioners was
reported as fraud. The act on behalf of the bank therefore in not releasing
the title documents, not issuing of a no due certificate and not
withdrawing the pending legal actions against the petitioners is arbitrary
and violates the constitutional guarantee enshrined under Article 14 of the
Constitution of India as held by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of
Central Bank of India versus Devi Ispat (2010) 11 SCC 186. The
relevant portion of the judgement reads as under:
“11. A statute may expressly or impliedly confer power on a
statutory body to enter into contracts in order to enable it to
discharge its functions. Dispute arising out of the terms of
such contracts or alleged breaches have to be settled by the
ordinary principles of law of contract. The fact that one of
the parties to the agreement is a statutory or public body will
not by itself affect the principles to be applied. The disputes
about the meaning of a covenant in a contract or its
enforceability have to be determined according to the usual
principles of the Contract Act. Every act of a statutory body
need not necessarily involve an exercise of statutory power.
Statutory bodies, like private parties, have power to contract
or deal with property. Such activities may not raise any issue
of public law. In the present case, it has not been shown how
the contract is statutory. The contract between the parties is
in the realm of private law. It is not a statutory contract. The
disputes relating to interpretation of the terms and conditions
of such a contract could not have been agitated in a petition
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India. That is a
matter for adjudication by a civil court or in arbitration if
provided for in the contract. Whether any amount is due and
if so, how much and refusal of the appellant to pay it is
justified or not, are not the matters which could have been
agitated and decided in a writ petition. The contractor should
have relegated to other remedies."
11) We have gone through the factual details in both the
decisions. It is not in dispute that a specific mandamus was
sought for in both the cases for implementation of a clause in
a contract which was rightly negatived under Article 226. It
is settled law that the disputes relating to interpretation of
terms and conditions of a contract could not be
examined/challenged or agitated in a petition filed
under Article 226 of the Constitution. It is a matter for
adjudication by a civil court or in arbitration, if provided for
in the contract or before the DRT or under the Securitization
Act. In the case on hand, the respondent- Company has
demonstrated that based on the advise of the appellant-Bank,
they shifted their accounts to another Nationalized Bank and
through an arrangement with the State Bank of India, a
cheque of Rs.15 crores was deposited by their Bank and in
token of the same, by statement of accounts dated
14.05.2009 the appellant- Bank clearly mentioned that there
is no due or nil balance from the respondent-Company
(Emphasis supplied). In such circumstances, when the relief
sought for does not relate to interpretation of any terms of
contract, the Bank being a Nationalized Bank, a Writ Court
can issue appropriate direction in certain circumstances as
mentioned above. In such a factual matrix, the reliance
placed on these two decisions is not helpful to the appellant-
7.      Accordingly, the petition is allowed.          The respondent bank is
directed to issue a no due certificate to the petitioners and further release
the mortgage documents deposited which is in the custody of the bank
and is further directed to execute such documents as may be required for
the release of mortgage of the properties in question. Further directions
are issued that the bank shall withdraw the pending proceedings against
the petitioners under the SARFAESI Act pending before the competent
authorities. The proceedings pending before the competent authorities
under the SARFAESI Act are declared as null and void and treated as if
not pending in accordance with the terms of the OTS entered into
between the parties.
8.      In view of the order made in this petition, the merits of Special
Civil Application No. 9069 of 2021 need not be examined and shall also
stand allowed in light of the reasoning mentioned herein above. Civil
Application also stands disposed of in view of the judgement and order in
the main matter.
After the pronouncement of the judgement today, Mr. Anip
Gandhi, learned advocate appearing for the respondent bank requests for
stay of the judgement. Request is rejected.