2.    Both these Appeals before this Court are by the plaintiff who
had filed a suit for specific performance, which was dismissed
and later his First Appeal before the High Court was dismissed
on the grounds       of delay. We may state        here that the
Plaintiff/Appellant was not a party to the contract of which a
specific performance was sought. The contract was executed
between the defendant and a company called M/s Himalayan Ski
Village Pvt. Ltd. which was for sale of an ‘agricultural land’ in
Himachal Pradesh. There were two plots of land for which two
different “agreements of sale” were executed, and hence two civil
suits were filed.
3.    In both the above appeals, there is a common challenge
against order dated 17.12.2018 passed by the Single Judge of the
High Court of Himachal Pradesh in CMP (M) No.75 of 2018 &
CMP (M) No.76 of 2018. The impugned order dismisses the delay
condonation applications filed under Section 5 of the Limitation
Act, 1963, declining to condone a delay of 254 days, because the
reasons assigned for the condonation were not sufficient reasons
for condonation of the delay. The Appellant herein had earlier
filed two suits (bearing nos. 28/2012 & 29/2012), for specific
performance which were dismissed by the District Judge, Kullu
vide order dated 30.12.2016.
4.     According to the Appellant the delay ought to have been
condoned and his appeal should have been heard on its merits.
5.    What we have here is a pure civil matter. An appeal has to
be filed within the stipulated period, prescribed under the law.
Belated appeals can only be condoned, when sufficient reason is
shown before the court for the delay. The appellant who seeks
condonation of delay therefore must explain the delay of each
day. It is true that the courts should not be pedantic in their
approach while condoning the delay, and explanation of each
day’s delay should not be taken literally, but the fact remains
that there must be a reasonable explanation for the delay. In the
present case, this delay has not been explained to the satisfaction
of the court. The only reason assigned by the appellant for the
delay of 254 days in filing the First Appeal was that he was not
having sufficient funds to pay the court fee! This was not found
to be a sufficient reason for the condonation of delay as the
appellant was an affluent businessman and a hotelier. In any
case, even it is presumed for the sake of argument that the
appellant was short of funds, at the relevant point of time and
was not able to pay court fee, nothing barred him from filing the
appeal as there is provision under the law for filing a defective
appeal, i.e., an appeal which is deficient as far as court fee is
concerned, provided the court fee is paid within the time given by
the Court. We would refer to Section 149 of Civil Procedure Code,
1908 which reads as under :-
deficiency of Court Fees.- Where the whole
or any part of any fee prescribed for any
document by the law for the time being in
force relating to court fees has not been paid,
the Court may, in its discretion, at any stage,
allow the person, by whom such fee is
payable, to pay the whole or part, as the case
may be, of such court-fee; and upon such
payment the document, in respect of which
such fee is payable, shall have the same
force and effect as if such fee had been paid
in the first instance.”
It also needs to be emphasized that this Court as well as various
High Courts, have held that Section 149 CPC acts as an
exception, or even a proviso to Section 4 of Court Fees Act 18701.
In terms of Section 4, an appeal cannot be filed before a High
Court without court fee, if the same is prescribed. But this
provision has to be read along with Section 149 of CPC which we
have referred above. A short background to the incorporation of
Section 149 in CPC would explain this aspect.
Section 4.- Fees on documents filed, etc., in High Courts in their Extraordinary Jurisdiction.—No
document of any of the kinds specified in the First or Second Schedule to this Act annexed, as
chargeable with fees, shall be filed, exhibited or recorded in, or shall be received or furnished by,
any of the said High Courts in any case coming before such Court in the exercise of its
extraordinary original civil jurisdiction; or in the exercise of its extraordinary original criminal
jurisdiction; In their appellate jurisdiction.—or in the exercise of its jurisdiction as regards appeals
from the 1[judgments (other than judgments passed in the exercise of the ordinary original civil
jurisdiction of the Court) or one] or more Judges of the said Court, or of a Division Court;—or in
the exercise of its jurisdiction as regards appeals from the 2[judgments (other than judgments
passed in the exercise of the ordinary original civil jurisdiction of the Court) or one] or more Judges
of the said Court, or of a Division Court;" or in the exercise of its jurisdiction as regards appeals
from the Courts subject to its superintendence; as Courts of reference and revision.—or in the
exercise of its jurisdiction as a Court of reference or revision; unless in respect of such document
there be paid a fee of an amount not less than that indicated by either of the said Schedules as the
proper fee for such document.
6.       The provision as given under Section 4 of the Court Fees Act
was felt to be extremely rigorous at times and for this reason in
the old Code of Civil Procedure i.e. of 1882, an amendment was
inserted in the year 1892 which was Section 522-A which reads
“If a memorandum of appeal or application
for a review of judgment has been presented
within the proper period of limitation, but is
written upon paper insufficiently stamped,
and the insufficiency of the stamp was
caused by a mistake on the part of the
appellant or applicant as to the amount of
the requisite stamps, the memorandum of
appeal or application shall have the same
effect, and be as valid as if it had been
properly stamped:
Provided that such appeal or application
shall be rejected unless the appellant or
applicant supplies the requisite stamp
within a reasonable time after the discovery
of the mistake to be fixed by the court.”
7.       The above provision was later enacted, albeit in a differently
worded form in the Code of Civil Procedure of 1908, which is
present Section 149. In Mannan Lal v. Mst. Chhotaka Bibi &
Ors.2 this Court while dealing with Section 149 of CPC and
Section 4 of the Court Fees Act, referred to the history of
amendment, as we have stated above, and had this to say in its
para 12 and 13 of the judgment:-
“12. The above section therefore mitigates
the rigour of Section 4 of the Court Fees Act
and it is for the court in its discretion to
allow a person who has filed a
memorandum of appeal with deficient court
fee to make good the deficiency and the
making good of such deficiency cures the
defect in the memorandum not from the
time when it is made but from the time
when it was first presented in court.
13. In our view in considering the question
as to the maintainability of an appeal when
the court fee paid was insufficient to start
with but the deficiency is made good later
on, the provisions of the Court Fees Act and
the Code of Civil Procedure have to be read
together to form a harmonious whole and
no effort should be made to give precedence
to provisions in one over those of the other
unless the express words of a statute clearly
override those of the other.”
8.       In Mannan Lal (supra), this aspect was dealt in rather
detail, where the Court referred to several decisions of different
High Courts on interpretation of Section 149 CPC and Section 4
of Court Fees Act. It particularly referred to the decision of the
Allahabad High Court which is S. Wajid Ali v. Mt. Isar Bano Urf
Isar Fatima & Ors.3 wherein it was held that a court has to
exercise its discretion for allowing a deficiency of court fees to be
made good but once it was done, a document was to be deemed
to have been presented and received on the date when it was
originally filed, and not on the date when the defects were cured.
Therefore this Court in Mannan Lal (supra) further stated as
“21. The words used in that judgment are no
doubt of wide import. But however that may
be in the case before us there can be no
difficulty in holding that an appeal was
presented in terms of Order 41 Rule 1 of the
Code inasmuch as all that this provision of
law requires for an appeal to be preferred is
the presentation in the form of a
memorandum as therein prescribed. If the
court fees paid thereon be insufficient it does
not cease to be a memorandum of appeal
although the court may reject it. If the
deficiency in the fees is made good in terms of
an order of the court, it must be held that
though the curing of the defect takes place on
the date of the making good of the deficiency,
the defect must be treated as remedied from
the date of its original institution.
22. In view of the above reasons, we find
ourselves unable to concur in the judgment of
the High Court. In the main judgment under
appeal, the reasoning appears to be that the
memorandum of appeal had no effect before
the making good of the deficiency and as the
same took place after 12th November 1962
the appeal was not saved by Section 3(2) of
the U.P. Act. The learned Chief Justice of the
Allahabad High Court expressed the opinion
that a memorandum of appeal barred by time
stood on a footing different from the one in
which there was deficiency in the court fee
paid. According to him under Section 3 of the
Limitation Act it is an appeal that is dismissed
and not a memorandum of appeal. When
therefore Section 4 of the Court Fees Act deals
with     a   memorandum         of    appeal the
consideration of the laws of limitation bears
no analogy to a deficiency in court-fees. With
due respect we are not impressed by the
above reasoning. As already noted, although
there is no definition of the word “appeal” in
the Code of Civil Procedure, it can only be
instituted by filing a memorandum of appeal.
The filing of a memorandum of appeal
therefore brings an appeal into existence; if
the memorandum is deficient in court-fee, it
may be rejected and if rejected, the appeal
comes to an end. But if it is not rejected and
time is given to the appellant to make up the
deficiency and this opportunity is availed of,
Section 149 of the Code expressly provides
that the document is to have validity with
retrospective effect as if the deficiency had
been made good in the first instance. By
reason of the deeming provision in Section
149 the memorandum of appeal is to have full
force and effect and the appeal has to be
treated as one pending from the date when it
was before the Stamp Reporter and the
deficiency noted therein.”
This position has been reiterated by this Court in several of its
later decisions such as P.K. Palanisamy v. N. Arumugham &
Anr.4, Ganapathy Hegde v. Krishnakudva & Anr.5 and K.C.
Skaria v. Govt. of State of Kerala & Anr.6
9.       We do not have a case at hand where the appellant is not
capable of purchasing the court fee. He did pay the court fee
ultimately, though belatedly. But then, under the facts and
circumstances of the case, the reasons assigned for the delay in
filing the appeal cannot be a valid reason for condonation of the
delay, since the appellant could have filed the appeal deficient in
court fee under the provisions of law, referred above. Therefore,
we find that the High Court was right in dismissing Section 5
application of the appellant as insufficient funds could not have
been a sufficient ground for condonation of delay, under the facts
and circumstance of the case. It would have been entirely a
different matter had the appellant filed an appeal in terms of
Section 149 CPC and thereafter removed the defects by paying
deficit court fees. This has evidently not been done.
10.        This Court, while emphasizing the scope of Section 5 of the
Limitation Act, in the case of Mahant Bikram Dass Chela
Chandigarh And Others7 has held:
“21. Section 5 of the Limitation Act is
a hard task-master and judicial
interpretation has encased it within a
narrow compass. A large measure of
case-law has grown around Section 5,
its highlights being that one ought not
easily to take away a right which has
accrued to a party by lapse of time and
that therefore a litigant who is not
vigilant about his rights must explain
every day’s delay. These and similar
considerations which influence the
decision of Section 5 applications are
out of place in cases where the appeal
itself is preferred within the period of
limitation but there is an irregularity in
presenting it. Thus, in the instant case,
there was no occasion to invoke the
provisions of Section 5, Limitation Act,
or of Rule 4, Chapter I of the High Court
Rules. If the Division Bench were aware
that Rule 3 of Chapter 2-C is directory,
it would have treated the appeal as
having been filed within the period of
limitation, rendering it inapposite to
consider whether the delay caused in
filing the appeal could be condoned.”
This Court in the case of Basawaraj and Another versus
Special           Land      Acquisition    Officer8   while  rejecting     an
application for condonation of delay for lack of sufficient cause
has concluded in Paragraph 15 as follows:
“15. The law on the issue can be
summarised to the effect that where a
case has been presented in the court
beyond limitation, the applicant has to
explain the court as to what was the
“sufficient cause” which means an
adequate and enough reason which
prevented him to approach the court
within limitation. In case a party is
found to be negligent, or for want of
bona fide on his part in the facts and
circumstances of the case, or found to
have not acted diligently or remained
inactive, there cannot be a justified
ground to condone the delay. No court
could be justified in condoning such an
inordinate delay by imposing any
condition whatsoever. The application is
to be decided only within the parameters
laid down by this Court in regard to the
condonation of delay. In case there was
no sufficient cause to prevent a litigant to
approach the court on time condoning
the delay without any justification,
putting any condition whatsoever,
amounts to passing an order in violation
of the statutory provisions and it
tantamounts to showing utter disregard
to the legislature.”
Therefore, we are of the considered opinion that the
High Court did not commit any mistake in dismissing the
delay condonation application of the present appellant.
11. This apart, even on merits, we do not find it a case which
calls for our interference. The facts of the case are that one, M/s.
Himalayan Ski Village Pvt. Ltd. had entered into an ‘Agreement
for Sale’ with an agriculturist/landowner of Himachal Pradesh,
for sale of his agricultural land. Now the admitted position in the
State of Himachal Pradesh is that under Section 118 of the
Himachal Pradesh Tenancy and Land Reforms Act, 1972 (for
short ‘1972 Act’), only an agriculturist, which is defined under
Section 2(2) of the 1972 Act, can purchase land in Himachal
Pradesh, which would mean a landowner who personally
cultivates his land in Himachal Pradesh. If a non-agriculturist
has to purchase a land, it can only be done with the prior
permission of the State Government under Section 118 of the
Act. M/s. Himalayan Ski Village was a private company, which
was admittedly not an ‘agriculturist’ and therefore was not
capable under the law to purchase the land in Himachal Pradesh
and therefore it was a condition of the agreement to sale that the
defendant would secure the necessary approval from the
government within a stipulated period of time. The admitted
position is that this approval was not given to the defendant by
the State Government and then the defendant assigned his right
to the plaintiff who thereafter filed the suit for specific
Section 118 of the Himachal Pradesh Tenancy and Land
Reforms Act, 1972 reads as under:
contrary contained in any law, contract,
agreement, custom or usage for the time
being inforce but save as otherwise
provided in this Chapter, no transfer of
land (including transfer by a decree of a
civil court or for recovery of arrears of
land revenue) by way of sale deed, gift,
will, exchange, lease, mortgage with
possession, creation of a tenancy or in
any other manner shall be valid in
2[Explanation. For the purpose of this
sub-section the expression “Transfer of
land” shall not include.
i.   Transfer by way of inheritance;
ii. Transfer by way of gift made or will
executed, in favour of any or all legal
heirs of the donor or the testator, as
iii. Transfer by way of lease of land or
building in a municipal area;
a) a benami transaction in which land is
transferred to an agriculturist for a
consideration paid or provided by a non-
agriculturist; and
b) an authorization made by the owner
by way of special or general power of
attorney or by an agreement with the
intention to put a non-agriculturist in
possession of the land and allow him to
deal with the land in the like manner as
if he is a real owner of that land.]
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall be
deemed to prohibit the transfer of land
by any person in favour or,
permission of the State Government for
the purposes that may be prescribed.”
12. The admitted position is that M/s Himalayan Ski Village
Pvt. Ltd. failed to get the permission from the State Government
under Section 118 of the 1972 Act.
13. What was done instead was, that when the purchaser failed
to get the requisite permission from the State Government under
Section 118 of the 1972 Act, it assigned its rights to the Plaintiff
(i.e., the present Appellant before this Court), and the Plaintiff in
turn filed a suit for Specific Performance against the defendants
i.e., Surender Singh-Defendant No. 1 who is Respondent No. 1
herein. It was only later that he also impleaded M/s Himalayan
Ski Village Pvt. Ltd.- Defendant No. 2 who is Respondent No. 2
14. The Trial Court dismissed the suits of the plaintiff primarily
on grounds that getting permission from the State Government
was an essential condition, which had not been fulfilled by him
as per Section 118 of the 1972 Act and under the facts and
circumstances of the case, the assignment in terms of the
Plaintiff was not proper and valid.
15. All other conditions which have been stipulated in the
Agreement to Sell depended on this primary condition i.e.,
permission from the State Government, under Section 118 of the
1972 Act. There is no specific clause in the “Agreement to Sell”,
which says that in case the purchaser fails to obtain required
permission from the State Government, it could assign its rights
to an agriculturist of Himachal Pradesh and the seller therefore
would not have any objection in executing the Sale deed in favour
of such an assignee.
16. In the present case the assignment is not valid as there was
no prior consent or approval of the seller before the assignment.
In the absence of such a condition and in lieu of the fact that
before assignment of its rights to the plaintiff/Appellant herein
no permission of the seller was obtained, there was no question
of granting a decree of Specific Performance in favour of the
plaintiff. Consequently, this is not a case which calls for our
17. We may here add that the whole purpose of Section 118 of
the 1972 Act is to protect agriculturists with small holdings.
Land in Himachal Pradesh cannot be transferred to a non-
agriculturist, and this is with a purpose. The purpose is to save
the small agricultural holding of poor persons and also to check
the rampant conversion of agricultural land for non-agricultural
purposes.     A person who is not an agriculturist can only
purchase land in Himachal Pradesh with the permission of the
State Government. The Government is expected to examine from
a case to case basis whether such permission can be given or
not. In the present case, it thought it best, not to grant such a
permission.           However, the purpose of the transfer remains the
same, which is a non-agricultural activity. By merely assigning
rights to an agriculturist, who will be using the land for a
purpose other than agriculture, would defeat the purpose of this
Act. In the case of Ashok Madan and Another versus State of
H.P. and Other9 the Himachal Pradesh High Court had laid
down the following important observation with respect to Section
118 of the 1972 Act:
"12. The law is, therefore, clear that
merely the nomenclature or the title of
the document sill not determine what
are the rights created by the document.
The intention of the parties must be
gathered on a combined reading of all
the documents and the behaviour of the
parties in the manner in which they
treated the document. Section 118 was
introduced with a view to restrict the
transfer of land in favour of non-
agriculturist except to specified persons
as contained in the Section itself. The
purpose behind it was that the
economically advantageous class does
not take undue advantage of the small
agriculturists by purchasing their small
holdings. The provision was introduced
as rich persons who were not
agricultural land in Himachal Pradesh
at high price exploiting the local
Himachali people. However, the section
itself provided that in special cases
permission can be granted for transfer
of land to non-agriculturist. The
constitutional validity of this Section
was upheld in Smt. Sudarshana Devi v.
Union of India, ILR 1978 HP 355.”
19. Under the facts and circumstances of the case we do not
find any scope for interference in the matter. Consequently, both
the appeals stand dismissed.