Mr. C. S. Vaidyanathan, learned senior counsel appearing for
the State of Uttar Pradesh, has handed over an additional affidavit
dated 19.07.2021, pursuant to our order dated 16.07.2021, in which
“3.     That     pursuant     to      the    order    dated
16.07.2021    passed    by   this    Hon’ble   Court,   the
Government    of   Uttar    Pradesh     again  convened   a
meeting   of   the   U.P.   State    Disaster    Management
Authority on 17.07.2021 under the Chairmanship of
the   Hon’ble   Chief    Minister.       The  Addl.   Chief
Secretary    Home   informed     the   Authority   that  in
response to the Appeal of the State Government,
all the Kaanwar Sanghs have given their positive
response and all Police Commissioners, Divisional
Commissioners, District Magistrates/SSPs/SPs have
clearly given their report that all the Kanwar
Sanghs of the respective districts have given in
writing their consent that in view of health and
safety   of   the    Public,     Kanwar    Yatra   will  be
postponed by them this year also.
4.      That     the    State      Disaster      Management
Authority (UP-SDMA) took cognizance of the above
reports received from the various districts and
has made the following recommendations :-
(I)     SDMA agreed with the offer of the Kanwar
Sanghs and welcomes their proposal that they will
voluntarily not take out any Kanwar Yatra in the
current year and they themselves have postponed
the Kanwar Yatra.        From this, it is clear that
like last year i.e. 2020, this year also there is
no possibility of Kanwar Yatra.
(ii)   Also, it is known that last year at the
same time, the Covid-19 graph was on an increase
whereas this year the level of Covid pandemic in
the  entire   State   is  at    its   lowest   with   Covid
positivity rate being only 0.042%.
(iii)     Last    year   also    keeping    in   view   the
decision of Sanghs to defer the Kanwar Yatra no
orders were issued to restrict the Kanwar Yatra
and no adverse situation had arisen.            Therefore,
the SDMA advised that like last year, keeping in
view the decision of Kanwar Sanghs to voluntarily
defer the Kanwar Yatra this year also, there is
no  necessity    to   issue   any    orders    restricting
(iv)   If   at   local   level    any   devotee    goes  to
local temple/shivalaya for Jalabhishek, then it
will be necessary for them to fully comply with
the    existing      Covid-19      protocol      regarding
religious ceremonies.
(v)    SDMA    also   considered     the   fact    that  if
orders   are   issued   to   restrict/ban      the   Kanwar
Yatra,   then   demand   can   be   raised   to   restrict
other   religious    ceremonies     of   other   religions
/communities due to which social order could be
(vi)   All the religious organisations are giving
their full support in the state of Uttar Pradesh
and Priests (Dharam Gurus) have also made appeals
to the people to comply with the Covid protocol.
(vi)   The neighbouring States where restrictions
have been placed/not placed on Kanwar Yatra, will
ensure that Kanwar devotees from their respective
States do not enter in the State of Uttar Pradesh
and Government of India should be requested to
issue directions to this effect.”
Considering that the pattern of last year is to be followed by
the State of Uttar Pradesh, in which it is clear that the “Kanwar
Sanghs”   of  the  various   districts    have  given    in  writing   their
consent that, in view of the health and safety of the public, the
Kanwar yatra will be postponed this year also, it is necessary now
to close this matter.     We may only remind the authorities at all
levels to have regard to Article 144 of the Constitution of India,
and ensure that untoward incidents which directly affect the lives
of the public will be looked upon sternly and prompt action taken
immediately, reminding the authorities of a paragraph in our order
dated 16.07.2021, which is set out once again, given the importance
of the Citizens’ of India’s Right to Life :
“We are of the view that this is a matter which
concerns everyone of us as citizens of India,
and goes to the very heart of Article 21 of the
Constitution   of   India,   which   has  a  pride  of
place in the fundamental rights Chapter of our
Constitution.     The health of the citizenry of
India and their right to “life” are paramount.
All  other  sentiments,    al   beit   religious,  are
subservient   to    this   most   basic    fundamental
right.”
We   have  also  heard    Sh.  K.   Radhakrishnan,     learned  senior
counsel, who has intervened asking us to see that the Union of
India   and   the  State   Governments     are  very    vigilant   and   not
complacent, so that infectious or contagious diseases which have
inter-state ramifications are fully contained.   We appreciate the
concern of Sh. Radhakrishnan, and have addressed this concern in
the preceding paragraph.
In I.A.No. 83827 of 2021, Sh. Vikas Singh, learned senior
counsel, appears on behalf of the applicant.   The State of Kerala
is represented by Sh. G. Prakash, learned counsel, who asks for
time to file an affidavit in reply to this application.    We give
time until the end of today to file an affidavit in reply to this
The matter to be placed tomorrow i.e. on 20.07.2021 as first