Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 11068 of
Counsel for Applicant :- Nadeem Murtaza,Amit Jaiswal,Anjani
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
(1)   The instant bail application has been nominated by Hon’ble the
Chief Justice to this Bench vide order dated 22.02.2022, hence
the instant bail application has been listed before this Court.
(2)   Applicant-Mohammad Azam Khan has filed the instant first
application for bail under Section 439 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, seeking bail in Case Crime No. 02 of 2018,
under Sections 201, 204, 420, 467, 468, 471 read with 120-B of
the Indian Penal Code, 1860 and Section 13 of the Prevention
of Corruption Act, police station SIT, district Lucknow (Sadar).
(3)   Heard Shri Kapil Sibal, learned Senior Advocate assisted by
Murtaza and Shri Amit Jaiswal, for the applicant and Shri
Vinod Kumar Shahi, learned Additional Advocate General
assisted by Shri Anurag Verma, for the State/respondents.
(4)   It has been alleged in the FIR that on a complaint filed by the
retired Executive Engineer, U.P. Jal Nigam dated 22.03.2017
regarding the irregular appointment on 1300 vacant posts in
U.P. Jal Nigam, the State of U.P., vide letter No. 966ih/N
%&iq&3&2017&10     ,l-vkbZ-Vh-@2017    dated    13th  July,  2017,
entrusted the matter to the Special Investigating Team, Uttar
Pradesh, Lucknow (hereinafter referred to as “S.I.T.”) to
conduct enquiry on it. Pursuant to the aforesaid order dated 13th
July, 2017, the Additional Director General, S.I.T., Uttar
Pradesh, Lucknow vide order dated 18.07.2017, appointed the
Inspector Shri Atal Bihari, SIT, Lucknow, as enquiry officer
into the matter. After completion of enquiry, the Inspector, SIT,
Lucknow had submitted its report dated 28.03.2018 to the State
Government. After that, a Committee headed by Principal
Secretary (Home), Government of U.P., Lucknow, vide order
dated 25.04.2018, approved the recommendation made in the
enquiry report dated 28.03.2018 and directed to make further
action into the matter.
(5) Further, it has been alleged in the FIR that during enquiry, it
was found that an advertisement was issued for recruitment on
the post of Assistant Engineer on 19.11.2016; for recruitment on
the post of Junior Engineer on 28.10.2016; and for recruitment
on the post of Clerks and Stenographers on 18.06.2016, in total
for 1300 posts, by calling applications and examination fee
from the candidates through on-line.      It is alleged that the
Chairman of the Jal Nigam had unauthorizedly approved the
proposal of the Managing Director and the Officer-on-Special
Duty for conducting the examination of Assistant Engineer and
Junior Engineer and for conducting the examination of Clerks
and Stenographers through M/s Aptech Ltd., Mumbai without
the recommendation of Jal Nigam Board on 25.10.2016 and
19.05.2016, respectively.   It has further been alleged that as
per Section 7 (3) of the Uttar Pradesh Water Supply and
Sewerage Act, 1975 the Chairman of UP Jal Nigam has no
managerial authority and there is no provision in the Act for the
post of Officer-on-Special Duty (OSD). According to Section 8
of the said Act, the Jal Nigam Board has the right to recruit
personnel in the Jal Nigam. It is alleged that the work of
communicating the files related to the recruitment to the Special
Officer/Chairman without presenting it before the Jal Nigam
Board by the Managing Director has been done with malicious
intent in contravention of the provisions of the Act. Computer
Based Test (CBT) was conducted on various dates for selection
to all the above posts. The Chairman of the UP Jal Nigam,
Officer-on-Special Duty, Managing Director, Jal Nigam and
other officers of Jal Nigam, in violation of the rules, without
submitting the proposal before the Jal Nigam Board and
without obtaining the approval from the Government, approved
04 posts for recruitment from the candidates of Computer
Science/Electrical and Electronics out of approved 09 posts of
Assistant Engineer (Electrical / Mechanical), by misusing the
position of the post. The above 04 posts were not approved by
the Government. According to the rules of Jal Nigam, the
Managing Director and Chairman have no right regarding the
change of posts. The proceedings related to the examination of
32 successful candidates for interview of Stenographers dated
20.12.2016,    have    been   unauthorizedly,  irregularly   and
arbitrarily cancelled by the Chairman, causing loss of
Government exchequer amounting to Rs 37,50,000.00.
(6) It is also alleged in the F.I.R. that in the agreement entered
between UP Jal Nigam and M/s Aptech Ltd. for the recruitment
of the posts in question, it has been mentioned that as soon as
the examination is over, the answer key will be displayed. The
responsible officers of Jal Nigam and authorized representatives
of M/s Aptech Ltd. deliberately conspiring themselves to give
undue advantage to ineligible candidates with dishonest and
fraudulent intentions, violating the aforesaid provision, had
uploaded the answer key on the website of Jal Nigam on
28.02.2017 i.e. after about 02 months after declaration of the
result only when demand under the Right to Information Act
was made by the candidate(s) for uploading the answer key,
because of which, deficiency in answer key and response sheet
could not be revealed in time and the candidates did not get the
time to react on it, whereas on 03.01.2017, the candidates were
issued appointments after declaring the result and also made
joining. After uploading the answer key and response sheet on
the website, 43 objections on the questions asked by the
candidates in the computer based test and their answers were
sent to the U.P. Jal Nigam through representations. With regard
to the objections, in the report sent by M/s Aptech Ltd. dated
22.07.2017, it was accepted that in the paper of Assistant
Engineer’s examination, 07 questions and correct options of 20
questions were found to be wrong. It is alleged that despite
knowing the wrong questions/answers by the Managing
Director, the result of the examination was not modified
deliberately under conspiracy and the primary data of the
examination, which was secured on the cloud server and was
valuable evidence of the case, deleted/destroyed. Later, in
respect of the appointments made on the post of Assistant
Engineer, the fact was brought to the notice of the Court in the
petitions filed in the Hon’ble High Court, Lucknow Bench that
the appointments in question have been found to be void ab
initio.
(7) It has also been alleged that the candidates selected for the post
of Assistant Engineer, who got less marks in CBT examination,
were given maximum marks of 90 percent in the interview,
whereas the candidate who got maximum marks in CBT
examination was declared failed by providing 58% marks. This
process is in relation to many selected candidates. In this way,
the entire process of recruitment to these posts has been done
irregularly and arbitrarily through criminal mischief. In the
selection of the post of Assistant Engineer, 27 questions/
answers have been accepted to be wrong by M/s Aptech Ltd.
This confession is very serious and from this the criminal act of
all the officers/other persons involved in the recruitment
process is prima facie proved.
(8) Further, it has been alleged that 04 candidates selected for the
post of Assistant Engineer (Electrical / Mechanical) Mohd.
Shams. Syed Ahmed Ali, Samrah Ahmed, and Kailash
Vishwakarma have given correct answers to 58 questions out of
80 and wrong answers to 22 questions, which are identical
(similar). It is for 58 questions to have the same correct answer
out of 80 questions, but 22 questions cannot have the same
wrong answer. The above crime is certified to be completed
with the criminal connivance of the responsible officers of U.P.
Jal Nigam and the authorized representatives of M/s Aptech
Ltd., the organization conducting the examination. The
interview of the candidates for the posts of Assistant Engineer
was held on 30-12-2016 and 31-12-2016 and after declaring the
result on 03-01-2017 and on issuing appointment letter to the
successful candidates on the same date, joining was done,
which is evidence of conspiracy on the then officers involved in
the examination process.
(9) It is also alleged that in the CBT examination conducted for the
posts of Junior Engineer (Civil and Electrical / Mechanical), the
answer to a total of 06 questions and 16 questions is wrong in
the answer-key. U.P. Jal Nigam and M/s Aptech Ltd.
deliberately did not upload the answer key on the website
immediately after the date of examination in order to give
undue advantage to each other through criminal collusion and
indulged in getting ineligible candidates selected/employed.
The merit list was to be prepared after due solution of the above
wrong questions and answers, which was not prepared due to
the connivance of the responsible officers of Jal Nigam,
Chairman, UP Jal Nigam and authorized representatives of M/s
Aptech Ltd. and undue advantage has been received by the
ineligible candidates and the eligible candidates have been
deprived of the opportunity to be selected/employed. These
criminal acts are certified against the responsible officers of the
UP Jal Nigam, the Chairman and the authorized representatives
of M/s Aptech Ltd. During the investigation, it was found from
the collected evidence that the then Managing Director of UP
Jal Nigam involved in the recruitment process, other officers,
Officer-on-Special Duty, Secretary, Urban Development and
Chairman, by misusing their official powers, had made criminal
misconduct with the authorized representatives of M/s Aptech
Ltd. By making a pact, the recruitment process was made
irregular / illegal and in violation of the rules / provisions and
deleted / destroyed valuable evidence by deleting the primary
data of the examination from the cloud server, giving unfair
advantage to the candidates appearing in the examination.
(10) Shri Kapil Sibal, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf
of the applicant has argued that Case Crime No. 02 of 2018
registered at police station SIT, District Lucknow (Sadar)
relates to the conduct of on-line examination of the U.P. Jal
Nigam. At that time, the applicant was the Minister of Urban
Development and in that capacity, he was also appointed as
Chairman of the U.P. Jal Nigam. He argued that for the conduct
of on-line examination, the Jal Nigam selects service providers
having experience in conducting on-line examinations. The
particular service provider who is ultimately charged with the
responsibility of conducting the on-line examinations for
recruitment to the U.P. Jal Nigam is recommended through a
selection process and the Institution selected is recommended
by the Managing Director of the U.P. Jal Nigam and the
Minister in-charge has to approve the recommendation before
the selected institution is formally granted the contract to
conduct the on-line examination.      He argued that in this view
of the matter, the Managing Director of the U.P. Jal Nigam had
submitted a proposal dated 03.03.2016 (Annexure No.9) for
conducting on-line examinations through Tata Consultancy
Services, which was approved by the applicant being Chairman
of the U.P. Jal Nigam on 04.03.2016 in terms of Sections 9 and
10 of the U.P. Water Supply and Sewerage Act, 1975, however,
Tata Consultancy Services expressed its inability to conduct the
said examination. Therefore, another proposal/recommendation
was made by the Managing Director of the U.P. Jal Nigam for
conducting the said on-line examination through M/s Aptech
Ltd. vide office note/order dated 19.05.2016, which was also
approved by the applicant being Chairman of the U.P. Jal
Nigam on 19.05.2016 in terms of in terms of Sections 9 and 10
of the U.P. Water Supply and Sewerage Act, 1975.
(11) Elaborating his submissions, Sri Sibal has argued that except
approving the recommendation of the Managing Director for
appointment of service provider i.e. M/s Aptech Ltd. for
conducting the said on-line examination, the applicant was not
involved in the process of selecting M/s Aptech Ltd. either
directly or indirectly. The recommendation for appointing M/s
Aptech Ltd. was made by the U.P. Jal Nigam pursuant to the
recommendation of the Chief Engineer in the file noting dated
19.05.2016. Moreso, M/s Aptech Ltd. is a listed company on
the BSE and NSE and apparently has 32 years of experience in
the field of education, training and assessments domain across
33 countries worldwide. It is more than 800 education and
training centres across the country. In the State of U.P., M/s
Aptech Ltd. has approximately 50 centres covering the entire
State and has helped more than 10,000 students getting jobs
across various countries. M/s Aptech Ltd. is also an ISO 27001,
ISO 9001, CMM Level 3 and Certi-in testified service provider
with experience of more than 14 years in delivering
assessments using computer based mode of delivery.           He
submits that the experience within the State of U.P. and other
States has been communicated by the Chief Executive Officer
& Managing Director, Aptech Ltd. vide letter dated 03.03.2020
to the Chief Minister, State of U.P., Lucknow (Annexure
No.RA-3 to the rejoinder affidavit).
(12) Shri Sibal has drawn the attention of the Court to clause (v) of
the aforesaid letter dated 03.02.2020, which reads as under :-
“(v) It has falsely been alleged in the FIR that
the original result data of the examination has
been destroyed. It is submitted that the said data
continues to be retained by Aptech in its archives
in compliance with its obligations under the
Agreement executed with Jal Nigam. As per
Aptech’s data retention policy (as approved by
the Jal Nigam) and the terms of the Contract
executed between Aptech and Jal Nigam, the
data of the examination was retained in Aptech’s
primary data center for a period of three months,
and thereafter, the data was migrated to the
secondary data center (both the primary and
secondary data centres are maintained for Aptech
by a Company by the name of “Ctrl S”).
Thereafter, the data was shifted in the local
storage of Aptech which is maintained at its Head
Office in Mumbai, and archived. It is pertinent to
state that throughout this process and till date, the
primary data of the examination remains intact in
its original form in a secure format with adequate
access controls. Hence, the primary data of the
examination has not been tampered with, nor has
it been destroyed.”
(13) Learned Senior Counsel, therefore, has argued that M/s Aptech
Ltd. has also stated in the aforesaid letter that the primary data
of the examination remains intact in its original form in a secure
format with adequate access controls and that the primary data
of the examination has not been tampered with, nor has it been
destroyed, hence the allegation that the primary data is not
available and that the examination was manipulated to include
some and exclude other seeking appointment, is incorrect.
(14) Sri Sibal has argued that on-line examination of the shortlisting
candidates were interviewed on 30/31.12.2016 and the final list
of selected candidates was published on 03.01.2017. Soon after
the change of Government of U.P. on 18.03.2017, the
Government passed an order dated 11.08.2017 terminating the
employment of the selected candidates. This order of
termination of the selected candidates was challenged by the
selected candidates in several writ petitions before this Court at
Allahabad. A Division Bench of this Court at Allahabad, vide
order dated 28.11.2017, allowed the bunch of writ petitions,
leading Writ-A No. 37143 of 2017 : Ajit Singh Patel and 10
others Vs. State of U.P. and 3 others, by setting-aside the order
of termination dated 11.08.2017 and directed the reinstatement
of the writ petitioners along with payment of salary. His
submission is that one of the allegation in the FIR against the
applicant is that the selection of Assistant Engineer (Electrical/
Mechanical) was done by adopting unfair means. This Court at
Allahabad, while passing the order dated 28.11.2017, found that
out of five candidates qua whom unfair means were alleged
since their right and wrong answers were identical, four
candidates had appeared in the written examination from
different examination centres from different districts and the
two candidates who appeared in the same district were in
different examination centres, hence it was held by this Court at
Allahabad that the State Government by levelling a general
allegation, without examining the controversy in the correct
perspective, has come to the conclusion that the selection has
been made by adopting unfair means. Furthermore, allegation
that four posts of Assistant Engineer (Computer Science/
Electrical & Electronics) have not been sanctioned by the State
Government and, therefore, the entire selection proceedings
were illegal, was also rejected by this Court at Allahabad while
passing the order dated 28.11.2017 (supra).
(15) So far as the allegation in the FIR against the applicant is that
since the posts were not sanctioned, the applicant should be
charged with criminality and be prosecuted, is concerned, Sri
Sibal has drawn attention to the Court towards the order dated
28.11.2017 (supra) passed by this Court at Allahabad and has
argued that while passing the order dated 28.11.2017 (supra),
this Court at Allahabad had considered the allegation levelled
against the applicant and has recorded the following
“It is not acceptable that 4 posts of Assistant
Engineer (Computer Science / Electronics and
Communication / Electrical and Electronics) have
not been sanctioned by the State Government as
such the selection against the aforesaid 4
vacancies rendered the entire selection
Government Order dated 16.11.2016 whereby the
permission was accorded to fill up 113 posts, 9
posts of Assistant Engineer (Electrical /
Mechanical) which was bifurcated in 5 posts of
Assistant Engineer (Electrical / Mechanical) and 4
posts of Assistant Engineer (Computer Science /
Electronics and Communication / Electrical and
Electronics), the Court finds that the permission to
advertise the 9 posts of Assistant Engineer
permission was accorded by the Chairman to fill
up 4 posts of Assistant Engineer in the discipline
of (Computer Science / Electronics and
Communication / Electrical and Electronics) which
was ratified by the Board of Directors.”
(16) Sri Sibal, learned Senior Advocate has thus argued that order of
the State Government terminating the employment of the
selected Assistant Engineers dated 11.08.2017 was passed in
violation of principle of natural justice and there was no attempt
made to distinguish the case of tainted and non-tainted
candidates and, therefore, this Court at Allahabad set-aside the
order of termination dated 11.08.2017 while passing the order
dated 28.11.2017 (Supra).
(17) It has been argued by the learned Senior Counsel that the order
dated 28.11.2017 was challenged by the U.P. Jal Nigam before
the Apex Court by filing Special Leave to Appeal No. 5410-
5419 of 2018. The Apex Court, vide order dated 16.03.2018,
disposed off the aforesaid SLP with a limited liberty to re-work
the answer scripts on the basis of corrections in question and
model answers. Pursuant to the aforesaid liberty granted to the
U.P. Jal Nigam, a review application, bearing No. 2 of 2018,
has been filed before this Court at Allahabad, which was
disposed of by this Court at Allahabad vide order dated
25.07.2018.     He argued that the order dated 25.07.2018
disposing the review application and the main order dated
28.11.2017 were challenged by the U.P. Jal Nigam before the
Apex Court by filing Civil Appeals Nos. 11017-18 of 2018. The
Apex Court, vide judgment and order dated 15.11.2018, upheld
the judgment of this Court at Allahabad but allowed the Jal
Nigam to re-work the question and answer sheets and revise the
merit list and issue a fresh reasoned order after providing
opportunity of hearing to the affected candidates.           His
submission is that instead of reinstating the candidates, on
04.12.2018, the U.P. Jal Nigam passed an order of fresh
appointment without back wages or continuity of service.
Thereafter, the U.P. Jal Nigam once again passed an order
terminating the Assistant Engineers, Junior Engineers, Clerks
and Stenographers without affording them any opportunity of
hearing by passing an order dated 02.03.2020.
(18) Sri Sibal has argued that the second termination order dated
02.03.2020 was challenged before the Apex Court by filing
Writ Petition (Civil ) No. 491 of 2010 : Abhishek Kumar Singh
Vs. G.Pattanaik and others and the Apex Court remanded the
matter to this Court at Allahabad vide judgment and order dated
03.06.2021. The matter is presently sub judice before this Court
at Allahabad. He argued that the applicant being an ex officio
Chairman of the U.P. Jal Nigam was not involved in this
process of selection and there is nothing to show from the
record that he can be attributed with any knowledge of how this
process took place nor is there any material on record of his
association with a single candidate who was selected. The entire
case against the applicant is actuated by mala fides considering
the fact that the applicant is sought to be made an accused in 87
criminal cases of which he has obtained bail in 84 cases. The
instant case is one of the remaining cases in which the applicant
is seeking bail.    He further argued that applicant has been
granted bail in all the cases registered against him except three
cases i.e. (1) Crime No. 980 of 2019, Police Station Civil Lines,
District Rampur; (2) Crime No. 312 of 2019, Police Station
Azeem Nagar, Rampur; and (3) the present case i.e. Case Crime
No. 02 of 2018, P.S. SIT, Lucknow.
(19) It has been argued by the learned Senior Counsel that in case
crime no. 980 of 2019, after the bail of the applicant was
rejected by a Co-ordinate Bench of this Court, the applicant had
filed SLP, bearing SLP (Crl.) No. 2655 of 2021, before the
Apex Court. The Apex Court, while appreciating the fact that
the charge-sheet has already been submitted after completion of
investigation and the cognizance has been taken, was pleased to
opine that the continued custody of the appellant may not be
necessary for the purpose of investigation and trial. In the
present case also, the charge-sheet has been submitted and the
cognizance on the same has been taken.
(20) Sri Sibal has further argued that now charge-sheet has been
filed in the present matter on 24.05.2021 resurrecting several
baseless claims and allegations that were finally decided by this
Court at Allahabad vide judgment and order dated 28.11.2017
(Supra), which was affirmed by the Apex Court. He argued that
against the applicant, four allegations have been made in the
charge-sheet, which are as under :-
“(i)   Despite the Chairman having no powers under
Section 7 (3) of the U.P. Water Supply and Sewerage
Act, 1975, the accused bifurcated 9 posts of Assistant
Engineer (Electrical/Mechanical) to create 4 posts of
and Communication/Electrical and Electronics) under
criminal conspiracy for the purpose of appointing
candidates of his choosing.
(ii)   Despite the Chairman having no powers under
Section 7 (3) of the U.P. Water Supply and Sewage
Act, 1975, the accused appointed M/s Aptech, an
agency of his choosing, under criminal conspiracy for
the purpose of appointing candidates of his choosing.
(iii)  In violation of administrative duties and acting
in excess of his duties, for illegal gain and in violation
of rules, pursuant to a criminal conspiracy, the
accused during the selection process forged a
valuable security and increased the CBT (computer
based test) score of 169 ineligible candidates
because of which eligible candidates could not be
selected.
(iv)   Another allegation made against the applicant
is of cancellation of an earlier process of selection of
stenographers,     which     process   was    closed     to
completion.”
(21) The submission of learned Senior Counsel is that there is no
factual averment in the charge-sheet to substantiate an
allegation of forgery against the applicant and no explanation
has been given as to the valuable security alleged to have been
forged, therefore, Sections 467, 468 and 471 of the Indian Penal
Code could not be attracted. He argued that there is no factual
averment that the applicant fraudulently or dishonestly induced
any person to part with any property or make, alter or destroy
any valuable security. Therefore, there is no basis in the charge-
sheet for invoking Section 420 of the Indian Penal Code against
the applicant.
(22) Insofar as the charges under Sections 201 and 204 of the Indian
Penal Code are concerned, Shri Sibal has argued that M/s
Aptech Ltd. has filed an affidavit before this Court at Allahabad
in writ petitions challenging the order of termination of Junior
Engineers that the primary data of computer based test is still
available with them and the Special Investigating Team has
never asked for the said data despite it being brought to their
notice. However, the applicant had no role to play in respect of
the allegations relating to the preservation of primary data. The
Special Investigating Team seems to be falsely claiming that the
primary data of the Computer Based Test has been destroyed
and making false allegations of destruction of evidence.
Similarly,    there   is  no   allegation   regarding   fraudulent
misrepresentation or conversion of any property entrusted to
him as a public servant nor is there any recovery has been
stated in the charge-sheet to explain how a charge under Section
13 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 is made out
against the applicant. He argued that since Aptech has stated
that the primary data of the Computer Based Test is intact and is
still available with them, the question of invoking Section 66 of
the Information Technology Act, 2000 relating to damaging a
computer system does not arise.
(23) So far as the allegation relating to cancellation of an earlier
selection process of Stenographers which was on the verge of
completion is concerned, the decision for the same was taken
by the Managing Director and other officers of the U.P. Jal
Nigam. He argued that as the number of successful candidates
selected for the interview was not sufficient, and upon the
proposal of the Managing Director and Chief Engineer, the
applicant only approved the said proposal.
(24) Shri Sibal has argued that out of 15 accused persons of the
instant case, 12 persons had earlier preferred anticipatory bail
applications and the same were granted interim relief by a Co-
ordinate Bench of this Court, which was later on confirmed by
the Co-ordinate Bench of this Court by passing order dated
23.09.2021 in a bunch of Anticipatory Bail Applications,
leading Bail No. 10301 of 2020, whereas the anticipatory bail
application of two accused persons is pending disposal,
however, they were granted interim protection by a Co-ordinate
Bench of this Court.
(25) Shri Sibal has argued that the applicant has joined the
investigation on 01.10.2020 when he was called for the first
time by the Investigating Officer and after that, he was never
called by the Investigating Officer in the instant case.      He
argued that the applicant has been incarcerated in jail in the
present case since 19.11.2020. The FIR of the instant case has
been registered on account of political vendetta. He argued that
applicant    has   always     co-operated   with    the   enquiry
officer/Investigating Officer during the course of enquiry/
investigation in the present FIR. There is no allegation of
influencing the prosecution witnesses by applicant during
course of investigation. Further there is no apprehension that
the applicant is likely to influence the prosecution witnesses
and there is no supporting material on the possibility of
applicant influencing witnesses. The applicant is neither in
political power nor is he holding any post in the Government of
the day so as to be in a position to interfere with the course of
justice or tamper with the witnesses. More so, almost all the
prosecution witnesses are official witnesses. The applicant is
law abiding citizen having deep roots in the society and he is
not a fight risk and is willing to abide by all the conditions as
may be imposed by this Court while granting bail.
(26) Per contra, Shri Vinod Kumar Shahi, learned Additional
Advocate General appearing on behalf of the State has
vehemently opposed the prayer of bail of the applicant and has
argued that looking to the nature and gravity of the offence
committed by applicant, the applicant is not liable to be
enlarged on bail. It is submitted that after a detailed
investigation, applicant and the other co-accused have been
charge-sheeted for the offences under Sections 201, 204, 420,
467, 468, 471 read with Section 120-B IPC and Section 13 of
the Prevention of Corruption of Act for having hatched the
conspiracy for the recruitment of different posts in the Jal
Nigam being Chairman of the Jal Nigam. He argued that the
posts in question, which were advertised, were not duly
sanctioned by the Government. There is condition precedent
that before declaration of the final result, answer key ought to
be published so that aggrieved candidate, if any, may raise
objection but this has not been done in the instant case. He
argued that the office of the Chairman of the Nigam shall not be
deemed to be an office of profit and shall have no authority on
managerial function of the Nigam as per Section 7 (3) of the
Uttar Pradesh Water Supply and Sewerage Act, 1975 but even
then, the applicant being Chairman of the Jal Nigam had
exercised the said power.
(27) So far as four allegations made in the charge-sheet against the
applicant is concerned, learned Additional Advocate General
has very fairly stated that there is no direct evidence against the
applicant in the charge-sheet and he only submitted that the
applicant being a powerful and influential person, no direct
evidence could be collected against him.
(28) The pleadings between the parties have been exchanged.
(29) I have examined the submissions advanced by the learned
Counsel for the parties and gone through the record.
(30) Initially the First Information Report, bearing Case Crime No.
02 of 2018, under Sections 409, 420, 120-B, 201 I.P.C. and
Section 13 (1) of the Prevention of Corruption Act was lodged
at police station S.I.T., district Lucknow (Sadar), against the
applicant and co-accused persons on the allegations of irregular
recruitment/appointment being made on 1300 posts in the Jal
Nigam through M/s Aptech Ltd., Mumbai. After due
investigation, the Investigating Officer has submitted charge-
sheet dated 24.05.2021 against the applicant and co-accused
person Girish Chandra Srivastava under Sections 201, 204, 420,
467, 468, 471 read with Section 120B I.P. and Section 13 of the
Prevention of Corruption Act. The trial Court has taken
cognizance on the aforesaid charge-sheet. After that, the
applicant had approached the Special Judge (Anti-Corruption)
(C.B.I.) (Central), Lucknow by filing bail application bearing
No. 5968 of 2021 (C.N.R.No. U.P.L.K.O. 1009669 2021),
which was rejected by the Special Judge (Anti-Corruption)
(C.B.I.) (Central), Lucknow, vide order dated 10.09.2021. Now,
the applicant has filed the instant first application for bail
before this Court.
(31) Before going further, this Court deem it appropriate to refer
some of the decisions of the Apex Court in regard to grant of
bail, which are as under :-
(I)    In Prahlad Singh Bhati vs. NCT of Delhi & others:
(2001) 4 SCC 280, the Apex Court highlighted the
aspects which are to be considered by a court while
dealing with an application seeking bail. The same is
reproduced as under :-
arbitrary manner. While granting the bail,
the court has to keep in mind the nature of
punishment which conviction will entail, the
character, behavior, means and standing of
the accused, circumstances which are
possibility of securing the presence of the
accused       at     the   trial,   reasonable
tampered with, the larger interests of the
public or State and similar other
"reasonable grounds for believing" instead
of "the evidence" which means the court
(II)  In Kalyan Chandra Sarkar vs. Rajesh Ranjan alias
Pappu Yadav & Anr. : (2004) 7 SCC 528, the Apex
Court held that although it is established that a court
considering a bail application cannot undertake a detailed
examination of evidence and an elaborate discussion on
the merits of the case, the court is required to indicate the
prima facie reasons justifying the grant of bail.
(III) In Prasanta Kumar Sarkar vs. Ashis Chaterjee :
(2010) 14 SCC 496, the Apex Court observed that where
a High Court has granted bail mechanically, the said
order would suffer from the vice of non-application of
mind, rendering it illegal. The Apex Court held as under
with regard to the circumstances under which an order
granting bail may be set aside. In doing so, the factors
which ought to have guided the Court's decision to grant
bail have also been detailed as under :-
"It is trite that this Court does not, normally,
interfere with an order passed by the High Court
granting or rejecting bail to the accused.
However, it is equally incumbent upon the High
Court to exercise its discretion judiciously,
cautiously and strictly in compliance with the
basic principles laid down in a plethora of
decisions of this Court on the point. It is well
settled that, among other circumstances, the
factors to be borne in mind while considering an
application for bail are:
(i) whether there is any prima facie or reasonable
ground to believe that the accused had
(ii) nature and gravity of the accusation;
(iii) severity of the punishment in the event of
(iv) danger of the accused absconding or fleeing,
(v) character, behaviour, means, position and
standing of the accused;
(vi) likelihood of the offence being repeated;
(vii) reasonable apprehension of the witnesses
being influenced; and
(viii) danger, of course, of justice being thwarted
by grant of bail."
(IV) In Anil Kumar Yadav vs. State (NCT of Delhi) : (2018)
12 SCC 129, it is observed and held by the Apex Court
that while granting bail, the relevant considerations are,
(i) nature of seriousness of the offence; (ii) character of
the evidence and circumstances which are peculiar to the
accused; and (iii) likelihood of the accused fleeing from
justice; (iv) the impact that his release may make on the
prosecution witnesses, its impact on the society; and (v)
likelihood of his tampering.
(32) In the instant case, four charges, as referred hereinabove, have
been levelled against the applicant. On specific query being
made to learned Additional Advocate General about the said
four allegations levelled against the applicant in the F.I.R. and
what clinching evidence has been collected during the course of
the investigation showing his active role in the recruitment
process in question on the basis of which charge-sheet has been
submitted against the applicant, learned Additional Advocate
General has very fairly stated that there is no direct evidence
against the applicant in the charge sheet and he only stated that
the applicant being a powerful and influential person, no direct
evidence could be collected against him.
(33) It has been pointed out that in all, 87 criminal cases have been
registered against the applicant. The applicant has been released
on bail in all cases, except two cases including the present case.
(34) It is noticed that at present, the applicant is no longer holding
any post in the affairs of the State. There is no further chance of
tampering the evidence. The charge-sheet has been filed on
24.05.2021 and the trial Court has taken cognizance on it. It
further transpires that on the recommendation of the Managing
Director and officials of the U.P. Jal Nigam, the applicant being
the Chairman of the U.P. Jal Nigam had only consented the
recruitment to be done by M/s Aptech Ltd. when TCS shown its
inability to conduct the said on-line examination.
(35) Without expressing any opinion on the merits of the case and
taking into account the facts that out of fifteen accused persons
of the instant case, twelve accused persons have been granted
anticipatory bail by a Co-ordinate Bench of this Court and two
accused persons have been granted interim bail; applicant has
been incarcerated in jail in the instant case since 19.11.2020;
the learned Additional Advocate General has failed to point out
any clinching evidence from the charge-sheet against the
applicant, which shows the active participation of the applicant
in the recruitment process in the U.P. Jal Nigam; learned
Additional Advocate General has also failed to indicate any
misappropriation or financial irregularity on the part of the
applicant but only stated that the selection process for
recruitment in U.P. Jal Nigam was irregular and not in
accordance with the prescribed procedure, which was
adjudicated and decided in writ petition by a Co-ordinate Bench
of this Court; charge-sheet has been submitted against the
applicant and the trial Court has taken cognizance on it; and
there is no further chance of tampering the evidence, this Court
is of the view that the continued custody of the applicant, prima
facie, may not be necessary for the purpose of further
investigation and trial in the instant case.
(36) Accordingly, the instant application for bail is allowed.
(37) Let the applicant, Mohammad Azam Khan, involved in Case
Crime No. 02 of 2018, under Sections 201, 204, 420, 467, 468,
471 read with Section 120-B I.P.C. and Section 13 of the
Prevention of Corruption Act, Police Station SIT, District
Lucknow (Sadar) be released on bail on his furnishing a
personal bond with two sureties each in the like amount to the
satisfaction of the Court concerned with the following
(i)    The applicant shall not tamper with the prosecution
evidence by intimidating/pressurizing the witnesses,
during the investigation or trial;
(ii)   The applicant shall co-operate in the trial. The applicant
shall file an undertaking to the effect that he shall not
seek any adjournment on the dates fixed for evidence
when the witnesses are present in Court. In case of
default of this condition, it shall be open for the trial
court to treat it as abuse of liberty of bail and pass orders
in accordance with law.
(ii)   The applicant shall remain present before the trial court
on each date fixed, either personally or through his
counsel. In case of his absence, without sufficient cause,
the trial court may proceed against him under Section
229-A of the Indian Penal Code.
(iii) In case, the applicant misuses the liberty of bail during
trial and in order to secure his presence, proclamation
under Section 82 Cr.P.C. is issued and the applicant fails
to appear before the court on the date fixed in such
proclamation, then, the trial court shall initiate
proceedings against him, in accordance with law, under
Section 174-A of the Indian Penal Code.
(iv) The applicant shall remain present, in person, before the
trial court on the dates fixed for (i) opening of the case,
(ii) framing of charge and (iii) recording of statement
under Section 313 Cr.P.C. If in the opinion of the trial
court, absence of the applicant is deliberate or without
sufficient cause, then it shall be open for the trial court to
treat such default as abuse of liberty of bail and proceed
against him in accordance with law.
(v)   The applicant shall not leave India without the previous
permission of the concerned trial Court and if he has
passport, the same shall be deposited by him before the
concerned trial Court.
(38) The trial Court is directed to expedite the trial of the aforesaid
case and conclude the same, in accordance with law,
expeditiously, if there is no legal impediment.