The  Special  Leave   Petition(Crl.)    Nos.   2669-2670   of  2021
(State of West Bengal vs. Dipak Mishra) and connected Diary No.
8430 of 2021 titled SK Supian vs. Dipak Mishra & Others Etc. were
assigned   to  this  Bench   at  lunch  break   today   i.e.  26-03-2021,
after the same was mentioned before the Bench presided over by
Hon’ble the Chief Justice of India.
The papers in connection with Diary No. 8430 of 2021 titled
SK Supian vs. Dipak Mishra & Others Etc. have been forwarded to
this Bench, but, not the papers in connection with S.L.P.(C) Nos.
2669-2670   of  2021   (State   of  West  Bengal    vs.   Dipak  Mishra).
We, therefore, take up only Diary No. 8430 of 2021 titled SK Supian
Permission to file the Special Leave Petitions are granted.
Heard the learned Counsel for the parties.
These Special Leave Petitions are against a common order dated
5th March, 2021 passed by a Division Bench of Calcutta High Court,
in two writ petitions filed as Public Interest Litigation (PIL)
being WPA(P) No. 68 of 2021 (Nilanjan Adhikary v. The State of West
Bengal   and   Others)   and   WPA(P)    No.67  of    2021    (Dipak   Mishra    v.
The  State   of   West   Bengal    and   Others)    whereby     an   order    dated
10th February,     2020    passed    by   the   Additional       Chief    Judicial
Magistrate    discharging     the   petitioner     from     Criminal    Case    No.
368 of 2007 and other similar orders passed on diverse dates,
discharging various persons accused from criminal cases against
them, have been stayed and the concerned Courts have been directed
to take note of the orders of stay and to deal with the Criminal
Cases accordingly.
Learned    Counsel   appearing     on  behalf    of   the   petitioner     has
argued that even though the persons who had been discharged from
the   Criminal    Cases     were   directed     to    be    impleaded      in   the
writ   petition,   the    orders    of   discharge     impugned     in  the    writ
petition   were    stayed    without     hearing    the     discharged     persons
including the petitioner herein.
Learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner as also
Counsel appearing on behalf of the State submitted that the Public
Interest   Litigations     were   initiated    by   persons     belonging     to  a
political    party    for     oblique     reasons.      The    Public     Interest
Litigations should not, therefore, have been entertained.
While it is true that the Court is required to examine whether
a litigation is really in public interest or to advance some other
interest in the garb of public interest, at the same time, a Public
Interest    Litigation     cannot    be    thrown    out     only    because    the
petitioner    belongs   to   a   rival   political     party.       Persons    with
political   affiliations     are,   as   much  entitled      to   file   a  public
interest litigation as any other person.           Whether the litigation is
bona fide or not is a different issue which has to be examined by
the Court on a case to case basis, having regard to the nature of
the complaint before it.
Learned Counsel also adverted to Section 321 of the Criminal
Procedure    Code    to   argue    that    the    Public   Prosecutor    or
Assistant Public Prosecutor in charge of a case might, with the
consent   of   the   Court,    at  any  time   before    the  judgment   is
pronounced, withdraw from the prosecution of any person, either
generally, or in respect of any one or more of the offences for
which he is tried.
In   Rajender    Kumar   Jain  v.   State   through   Special   Police
Establishment and Ors. Etc. Etc. reported in (1980) 3 SCC 435 cited
“14.   Thus, from the precedents of this Court, we gather:
“1. Under the scheme of the Code, prosecution of an offender
for a serious offence is primarily the responsibility of the
executive.
2. The withdrawal from the prosecution is an executive
function of the Public Prosecutor.
3. The discretion to withdraw from the prosecution is that
of the Public Prosecutor and none else, and so, he cannot
surrender that discretion to someone else.
4. The Government may suggest to the Public Prosecutor that he
may withdraw from the prosecution but none can compel him to do
5. The Public Prosecutor may withdraw from the prosecution
not merely on the ground of paucity of evidence but on other
relevant grounds as well in order to further the broad ends of
public justice, public order and peace. The broad ends of public
justice will certainly include appropriate social, economic and,
we add, political purposes sans Tammary Hall enterprises.
6. The Public Prosecutor is an officer of the court and
responsible to the court.
7. The court performs a supervisory function in granting its
consent to the withdrawal.
8. The court's duty is not to reappreciate the grounds which
led the Public Prosecutor to request withdrawal from the
prosecution but to consider whether the Public Prosecutor applied
his mind as a free agent, uninfluenced by irrelevant and extraneous
considerations. The court has a special duty in this regard as it
is the ultimate repository of legislative confidence in granting or
withholding its consent to withdrawal from the prosecution.
15. We may add it shall be the duty of the Public Prosecutor to
inform the court and it shall be the duty of the court to
apprise itself of the reasons which prompt the Public Prosecutor
to withdraw from the prosecution. The court has a responsibility
and a stake in the administration of criminal justice and so has
the Public Prosecutor, its “Minister of Justice”. Both have a
duty to protect the administration of criminal justice against
possible abuse or misuse by the executive by resort to the
provisions of Section 361 of the Criminal Procedure Code. The
independence of the judiciary requires that once the case has
travelled to the court, the court and its officers alone must
have control over the case and decide what is to be done in each
16. We have referred to the precedents of this Court where it
has been said that paucity of evidence is not the only ground on
which the public prosecutor may withdraw from the prosecution.
In the past, we have often known how expedient and necessary it
is in the public interest for the public prosecutor to withdraw
from prosecutions arising out of mass agitations, communal
riots, regional disputes, industrial conflicts, student unrest
etc. Wherever issues involve the emotions and there is a
surcharge of violence in the atmosphere it has often been found
necessary to withdraw from prosecutions in order to restore
peace, to free the atmosphere from the surcharge of violence, to
bring about a peaceful settlement of issues and to preserve the
calm which may follow the storm. To persist with prosecutions
where emotive issues are involved in the name of vindicating the
law may even be utterly counter-productive. An elected
Government, sensitive and responsive to the feelings and
emotions of the people, will be amply justified if for the
purpose of creating an atmosphere of goodwill or for the purpose
of not disturbing a calm which has descended it decides not to
prosecute the offenders involved or not to proceed further with
prosecution already launched. In such matters who but the
Government can and should decide, in the first instance, whether
it should be baneful or beneficial to launch or continue
prosecutions. If the Government decides that it would be in the
public interest to withdraw from prosecutions, how is the
17. Under the Code of Criminal Procedure it is the Public
Prosecutor that has to withdraw from the prosecution and it is
the court that has to give its consent to such withdrawal.
Rightly too, because the independence of the judiciary so
requires it, as we have already mentioned. Now the Public
Prosecutor is an officer of the court. He sets the criminal law
in motion in the court. He conducts the prosecution in the court
for the people. So it is he that is entrusted with the task of
initiating the proceeding for withdrawal from the prosecution.
But, where such large and sensitive issues of public policy are
involved, he must, if he is right-minded, seek advice and
guidance from the policy-makers. His sources of information and
resources are of a very limited nature unlike those of the
policy-makers. If the policy-makers themselves move in the
matter in the first instance, as indeed it is proper that they
should where matters of momentous public policy are involved,
and if they advise the Public Prosecutor to withdraw from the
prosecution, it is not for the court to say that the initiative
comes from the Government and therefore the Public Prosecutor
cannot be said to have exercised a free mind. Nor can there be
any quibbling over words. If ill informed but well meaning
bureaucrats choose to use expressions like “the Public
Prosecutor   is   directed”   or   “the  Public   Prosecutor   is
instructed”, the court will not on that ground alone stultify
the larger issue of public policy by refusing its consent on the
ground that the Public Prosecutor did not act as a free agent
when he sought withdrawal from the prosecution. What is at stake
is not the language of the letter or the prestige of the Public
Prosecutor but a wider question of policy. The court, in such a
situation is to make an effort to elicit the reasons for
withdrawal and satisfy itself, that the Public Prosecutor too
was satisfied that he should withdraw from the prosecution for
good and relevant reasons.”
Our attention has also been drawn to V.L.S. Finance Limited v.
S.P. Gupta and Anr.     reported in (2016) 3 SCC 736 where this Court
“41.In this context, reference to a two-Judge Bench decision
in Vijaykumar Baldev Mishra v. State of Maharashtra[Vijaykumar
Baldev Mishra v.State of Maharashtra, (2007) 12 SCC 687 :
(2008) 3 SCC (Cri) 362] would be fruitful. In the said case,
the Court held that Section 321 CrPC provides for withdrawal
from prosecution at the instance of the Public Prosecutor or
Assistant Public Prosecutor. Indisputably, therefore, the
consent of the Court is necessary. Application of mind on the
part of the Court, therefore, is necessary in regard to the
grounds for withdrawal from the prosecution in respect of any
one or more of the offences for which the appellant is tried.
The Public Prosecutor in terms of the statutory scheme laid
down under CrPC plays an important role. He is supposed to be
an independent person. While filing such an application, the
Public Prosecutor also is required to apply his own mind and
the effect thereof on the society in the event such permission
is granted.”
At this stage we need not go into the question of whether the
Public Prosecutor/Assistant Prosecutor concerned applied his mind
to the charges against the accused persons or whether the facts and
circumstances   of  the   case  warranted   discharge   of  the  accused.
Suffice it to mention that as argued by the learned Counsel for the
petitioner, though the High Court has directed that the petitioner
and  others   similarly   circumstanced   be   impleaded,  the   order  of
discharge of the petitioner has been stayed without hearing the
petitioner.     Since   the  order  affects   the  petitioner   adversely,
the petitioner should have been heard, more so since the order of
discharge of the petitioner impugned in the writ petition had been
passed over a year before the writ petition was filed.
Mr.   Rohatgi    appearing   on   behalf   of   the  respondent-writ
petitioner   argued   at   length  questioning    the  propriety   of  the
decision of the State as mala fide and against public interest.
The writ petitions are pending in the High Court and have been
appearing in the cause list. We expect that the Division Bench of
the High Court will take up the writ petitions and finally decide
the same within a week or two. It will be open to the respective
parties to raise all contentions before the High Court.
However, since the order which affects the petitioner, herein,
has  been   passed   without   hearing   the   petitioner,   we   deem  it
appropriate to pass an order staying the operation of the order
dated 05-03-2021, only insofar as it pertains to the petitioner
viz. SK Supian, for a period of two weeks till date or until
further orders of the Division Bench of the High Court, whichever,
is earlier.
The Special Leave Petitions are, accordingly, disposed of.
The Registry is directed to list these Special Leave Petitions
before the Regular Bench on 05-04-2021.