Case :- APPLICATION U/S 482 No. - 12691 of 2021
Opposite Party :- State Of U P And Others
Counsel for Applicant :- Aklank Kumar Jain,Bhanu Pratap Dhakray
Hon'ble Vivek Agarwal,J.
1. Sri B.P. Dhakray alongwith Sri Aklank Kumar Jain, learned
counsel for the applicant, Sri Anil Kumar, learned counsel for
private respondent and Sri Vikas Goswami, learned AGA for
the State.
2. Sri Anil Kumar reading order dated 15.9.2020, whereby an
application moved on behalf of the present applicant under
section 91 Cr.P.C has been rejected by the court of learned
Additional Sessions Judge/ POCSO Act, Court No. 2, Hathras
submits that Yesterday arguing counsel for Applicant
misrepresented two facts namely that his application under
section 91 is still pending and has not been decided, whereas it
was already decided on 15.9.2020. It is submitted that main
ground to challenge the proceedings before the court below is
that as per information received by the applicant under the
Right to Information Act, he was on duty as traffic police
personnel on 28.2.2019 and his duty timings were from 3:00 to
10:00 pm at Ghaziabad. He was dispatched for duty at 2:00 pm.
3. Sri Anil Kumar submits that this is contrary to fact recorded
in the said order dated 15.9.2020, wherein on internal page no.
3, learned Additional Sessions Judge has categorically recorded,
that as per the Investigating Officer, he has filed Purcha No.
SCD-02, alongwith case diary and according to his
investigation, accused carries mob number : 9412882334 and
its presence was found close to the place of incident.
4. Sri Vikas Goswami, when asked to supply copy of the Purcha
No. SCD-02 enclosed with the case diary, submits that
complete case diary has not been sent to the office of Advocate
General. Sri Manish Goel, learned Addl. Advocate General is
requested to look into the matter, and it is directed that office of
Advocate General shall not accept any case diary unless a
certificate is appended by the Investigating Officer of the case
that he is producing complete original or true copy of the case
diary containing page from 1 to ....alongwith Index of the
documents which form part of the case diary, and in case it is
found that incomplete case diary is accepted without
endorsement of the I.O. causing inconvenience to the court and
wastage of precious time then office of Advocate General may
                                      be held responsible and consequences may follow.
                                      5. Let this order be communicated to all the Superintendents Of
                                      Police by the learned Addl. Advocate General for its immediate
                                      compliance w.e.f. 16.8.2021. Sri Goswami is directed to
                                      produce complete case diary on 12.8.2021.
                                      6. Let a copy of this order be supplied to Sri Manish Goel,
                                      Addl. Advocate General for the State.
Location: High Court of Judicature at
