Digitally signed by      #522, 8TH CROSS, MCECHS LAYOUT
WP No. 20978 of 2022
WP No. 20978 of 2022
The petitioners are before this Court calling in question
order    dated   17-10-2022    issued   by   the   2nd  respondent
blacklisting the 1st petitioner or any of its sister concerns or
partners    to   have   any   business    dealings   with   the    1st
respondent/Union of India, Ministry of Railways.       For the sake
of convenience the petitioners would be referred to as the
petitioner unless specifically referred to by their ranking and
the respondents as Railways.
2. Heard Sri A.S. Ponnanna, learned senior counsel
appearing for the petitioner and Sri M.B.Nargund, learned
Additional    Solicitor  General   of  India   appearing    for   the
3. Brief facts that leads the petitioner to this Court, in the
subject petition, as borne out from the pleadings, are as
The 1st petitioner is a partnership firm engaged in the
business of carrying out construction activities on contract basis
for various Government organizations and claims to be in the
said   business    from   2011.   Concerning    the   Railways,   the
petitioner claims that it has executed all the works that are
assigned by the Railways following due process of law and in
compliance with Rules and Regulations. The issue in the case
does not concern any notice issued inviting tender or award of
contract for execution of works. The issue concerns aftermath
of award of a particular tender. A tender was notified in which
the petitioner had emerged to be a successful bidder which was
construction of road over the bridge of railway span composite
girder and PSC girder at Yeswanthpur – Yelahanka section.
4.  The    commencement       of work    had   happened     on
05-06-2015.       The concerned authority notified an order of
completion on 05-11-2018. After about 2 years of completion
WP No. 20978 of 2022
of construction work, statement of charges/ misconduct against
the petitioner comes to be issued on 10-08-2021 enclosing
statement of charges directing the petitioner to submit its reply
on or before 12-09-2021. The charges were four in number.
The petitioner on 08-09-2021 submitted an elaborate reply on
each of the charges. On 16-05-2022; a second reply and again
on 17-06-2022 a third reply in greater detail and on 01-08-
2022, the petitioner as insisted by the respondent/Railways
informed that it would attend the office of the respondent on
04-08-2022 along with copies of detailed reply statements that
were submitted from time to time. The petitioner claims to
have attended the office and explained all the details.     What
comes about as a result of the said proceeding is the impugned
order.     The impugned order is dated 17-10-2022 which
blacklists the petitioner/firm and bans it in any dealings with
the Railways for a period of 5 years. Not stopping at that, on
the very same day, a communication is sent to the Tender
Inviting Authority and the Tender Inviting Authority rejects the
bid of the petitioner on the ground that the petitioner has been
WP No. 20978 of 2022
blacklisted on 17-10-2022. It is these actions that are called in
question in the subject petition.
5.  The   learned  senior    counsel appearing   for   the
petitioners, though has urged several contentions, what would
merit consideration for the present is the contention that the
order which blacklists the petitioner bears no application     of
mind as it contains no reasons. It is his submission that the
order blacklisting has serious consequence upon the petitioner
and the immediate consequence is non-consideration of his
case in the tender on the ground that he has been blacklisted.
Therefore, he submits that the order that blacklists the
petitioner is untenable and requires to be reconsidered. He
would submit that in the event the Court would not be
considering the issue with regard to non-application of mind in
the impugned order, he would then make his submissions on
merits of the matter.
6. The learned Additional Solicitor General representing
the respondent/Railways would refute, on the threshold, the
issue that is raised by the learned senior counsel for the
WP No. 20978 of 2022
petitioner with regard to non-application of mind on the part of
the respondent in passing the impugned order and submits that
the order need not be reasoned one. That charges were framed
against the petitioner/Firm, notice was issued to it, personal
hearing was accorded and then the order comes to be passed.
With all these proceedings, there is compliance with the
principles of natural justice and, therefore, the order need not
be   reasoned.   He   would   submit   that  the  petitioner has
committed a grave misconduct insofar as the road over the
bridge that it had constructed had collapsed, endangering life of
road users. He would place reliance upon the judgment of the
Apex Court in the STATE OF ODISHA AND OTHERS v.
PANDA INFRAPROJECT LIMITED – (2022) 4 SCC 393 to
buttress the aforesaid submission.
7. I   have  given   my   anxious   consideration  to the
submissions of the respective learned senior counsel and
perused the material on record. In furtherance whereof, what
would merit consideration at this juncture is,
WP No. 20978 of 2022
“Whether the order blacklisting the petitioner and
banning it, in business for five years, suffers from want
of application of mind?”
8. Since the issue to be decided now, is the impugned
order, the same is extracted for the purpose of ready
reference. The order reads as follows:
“Sub: Banning of business dealings with M/s Krishi
Infratech (Partnership firm), No.19, Ground
andits allied/sister firms.
M/s Krishi Infratech (Partnership firm) were served with
a Memorandum and Statement of charges/misconduct for
banning of business dealings with them for indulging
malpractices, executed substandard quality of works by
deviated firm the contractual agreement with mala fide
intention causing pecuniary loss to the Railways in connivance
with Railway Officials.
2. Reply to the Memorandum submitted by M/s Krishi
Infratech (Partnership firm) through South Western
Railway has been considered in detail by the Competent
Authority, who has concluded that M/s Krishi Infratech
(Partnership fir) has indulged in malpractices, executed
substandard quality of works in connivance with Railway
Officials, violating general conditions of contract.
3. It has therefore, been decided by Ministry of Railways
(Railway Board) to ban business dealing with M/s Krishi
Infratech (Partnership firm), No.19, Ground Floor, 3rd
floor, 4th cross, 3rd phase, 5th block, BSK 3rd Stage,
Bengaluru-560085 and also with their allied/sister
concerns/and partners for a period of 05 (five) years
commencing with immediate effect on Indian Railways and
Production Units etc.
4. Receipt of this letter may please be acknowledged.”
What precedes the order needs to be considered albeit in brief.
Statement of charges was issued against the                petitioner
concerning contract agreement of the year 2017 and the said
statement of charges was communicated to the petitioner on
10-08-2021.      The    petitioner     on  08-09-2021     replies   in
elaboration every one of the charges. The reply did not stop at
that. Other replies were also submitted from time to time; one
on 17-06-2022 and again when the petitioner was called to the
office for hearing on 04-08-2022. All these replies were in great
elaboration, which the learned senior counsel for the petitioner
would submit had completely demolished the charges. It is his
further contention that personal hearing was accorded only on
charge No.4 as it was laid later and not on any other charge.
Nonetheless, the replies given by the petitioner on their perusal
would indicate that they are in great elaboration.            Certain
procedure is also stipulated by way of codes. Code No.1027
depicts procedure to be followed by the Railway Board of
banning business applicable to all Ministries of Government of
WP No. 20978 of 2022
India. Insofar as Railways are concerned, Clause (g) of Code
No.1030 is required to be followed.             Clause (g) reads as
“(g) Procedure to be followed by Railways/ Production
Units, etc. for Banning of business with a Contractor/Firm
The following procedure will be followed:
(i) All cases of banning of business with building
contractors will be dealt with by the Ministry of Railways. The
Railways/Production Units, etc., therefore, should send their
proposals with a self-contained note, which should also contain
particulars of all the Partners and allied firms, including their
addresses, a draft Show Cause Notice in form as per
Annexure-10.7 with a statement of charges/ misconduct, to
the Railway Board for further action. All such proposals
initiated on the basis of the Vigilance or CBI reports and the
proposals initiated by the concerned Executive Branches on the
Railways on their own where the building contractor is
suspected by the concerned Head of the Department should be
sent to the Vigilance Directorate through the Railway’s
Vigilance Branch. However, such proposals initiated by the
concerned Executive Branches on the Railways on their own
which do not attract any vigilance angle from the point of view
of involvement of Officers/Staff therein, shall be sent by the
Railways to the concerned Directorate in the Board’s Office.
The communications to and from the contractor/firm shall,
however, be routed through the Railway concerned.
(ii) Banning order when issued shall be applicable to all
Railways/Production Units, Subordinate Offices and PSUs under
Ministry of Railways to whom copies of the orders shall be
sent.
(iii) For banning business by all the Ministries with a
contractor/firm, the same procedure as referred in para(g) (i)
above shall apply, except that prior approval of Ministry of
Urban Development would be necessary before serving the
show cause notice upon the firm concerned and also before
WP No. 20978 of 2022
issuing final order    of   banning   of   business  with   the
contractor/firm.
(iv) Where banning is contemplated/ordered, separate
action for removal from the list of approved contractors is not
called for. It would be automatic, once the banning order is
issued.”
The procedure stipulated under the Code is for issuance of show
cause notice calling for explanation and then passing of orders.
The    petitioner   was  issued    statement    of  charges   and    it
submitted its reply as observed hereinabove.          What comes of
the reply is the order impugned dated 17-10-2022 (supra).
9. The impugned order at the first paragraph notices that
memorandum and statement of charges was served on the
petitioner for misconduct. Paragraph-2 notices that the reply is
given by the petitioner and paragraph-3 reads that the Ministry
of Railways have decided to ban business dealings with the
petitioner for 5 years. Except these three paragraphs there is
no mention even to the extent of a word concerning reply
submitted by the petitioner except saying that the Railways
have considered the reply in detail and have concluded for
banning. It does not even mention that the reply is not found
WP No. 20978 of 2022
to be satisfactory. It is this action that does not inspire
confidence of the Court.
10. It is not in dispute that the impugned order is an
order blacklisting the petitioner or banning it for business for a
period of five years commencing from 17-10-2022. Therefore,
the order has economic and civil consequences upon the
petitioner.   Any order having civil or economic consequences
should bear application of mind. Application of mind is
discernible only when the order contains reasons, as reasons
are live links between the decision maker and the decision
taken. A perusal at the impugned order would not indicate even
a semblance of application of mind on the part of the
Competent Authority who takes away the right of the petitioner
to enter into a trade for a period of 5 years.     Such an order
which has a sweeping ramification could not have been casually
passed by the respondent/Railways.
11. It is now well settled that where an authority makes
an order which has the effect of affecting civil or economic
rights of a person and which action is liable to be reviewed by
WP No. 20978 of 2022
the constitutional Courts as provided under the Constitution, it
must record reasons in support of the order that it makes. It
hardly requires any emphasis that compulsion of disclosure of
reasons guarantees consideration and application of mind; it
would introduce clarity and minimize arbitrariness. Therefore,
a reasoned order is always desirable by any judicial, quasi
judicial or administrative functionaries to pass, for the reason,
that reasons are the heartbeat of a conclusion, without which
the order becomes lifeless. The order impugned does not
indicate any of the tenets of audi alteram partem.         Merely
giving a show cause notice and seeking a reply would not
suffice.  The reply must be considered and that consideration
should bear presence in the order that would be passed on
consideration of such reply, failing which, it would demonstrate
an inscrutable face of the sphinx. On this solitary ground, in the
considered    view   of  this  Court,   the   order  is  rendered
12. Insofar as the judgment relied on by the learned
Additional   Solicitor   General     in the    case   of  PANDA
INFRAPROJECT LIMITED (supra) is concerned, the same
WP No. 20978 of 2022
would not be applicable to the facts of the case at hand, as that
was concerning observations of principles of natural justice to
the extent where an opportunity was given to show cause and
reply was sought for from the hands of the Contractor who was
sought to be blacklisted. The judgment does not consider the
issue whether the order of blacklisting must contain reasons or
13. In view of the preceding analysis qua the order dated
17-10-2022, the Court is of the considered view that the same
is to be obliterated, as there are no reasons indicated in the
order  to   blacklist the    petitioner. It  is trite  that, “an
unreasoned order, is an unreasonable order”.
14. For the aforesaid reasons, I pass the following:
(i)   Writ Petition is allowed in part and the order
dated 17-10-2022 passed by the Railways
stands quashed.
(ii)  The matter is remitted back to the hands of
the respondent No.2 to pass appropriate
orders in accordance with law, bearing in
mind the observations made in the course of
WP No. 20978 of 2022
this order as also the justification tendered by
the petitioner, in replies to the notice on 08-
09-2021, 16-05-2022 and 17-06-2022.
(iii)   The petitioner shall also be afforded an
opportunity of hearing on all the charges
where it has not been afforded opportunity of
hearing.
(iv)    Consequential action taken pursuant to the
order dated 17-10-2022 shall remain subject
to further orders that would be passed by the
authorities in terms of these proceedings. The
authorities shall pass appropriate orders
within four weeks from the date of receipt of a
copy of this order, if not earlier.
(v)     All other contentions other than the one
considered hereinabove shall remain open.