Heard learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner and carefully
perused the material placed on record.
The petitioner filed an application under Section 438 Cr.PC seeking grant of
anticipatory bail. The same was accompanied with an I.A. seeking ex-parte ad-interim
bail/interim protection during the pendency of the main application.
When the application was listed before it on 17.01.2022, the High Court passed
“Shri Sundeep Shrivastava, counsel for applicant.
Shri Alok Nigam, Govt. Advocate for the State. Shri Goutam Khetrapal, counsel
for complainant/objector.
Call for case diary.
Learned State counsel is directed to verify criminal antecedents of applicant, if
List this case for final hearing in due course.”
The main grievance of the petitioner is that the High Court merely admitted the
anticipatory bail application filed by him with a further direction to list in due course,
but did not consider his I.A. seeking interim protection during pendency of the bail
application although co-accused in the same FIR has been granted interim protection
from arrest till the final disposal of application for anticipatory bail by the High Court.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that till date, the matter has not
been listed for hearing and no order has been passed about the interim protection
during the pendency of the anticipatory bail application filed by his client. Learned
counsel further submitted that if the petitioner is arrested during the pendency of
anticipatory bail application, it would become infructuous and his legal right will be
defeated. He therefore seeks to ensure that the matter is heard by the High Court and
the valuable right of the petitioner be protected.
Having heard learned counsel for the petitioner and on carefully perusing the
impugned order, we are compelled to disapprove the course adopted by the High
Court as a matter of procedure. When an application for anticipatory bail was listed
before the learned Single Judge, which was also accompanied by an application for
ad-interim relief, the learned Judge should have decided the same one way or the
other, so far as the ad-interim prayer or should have taken up for consideration after
giving some reasonable time to the State. Even if admitted, the learned Judge should
have listed the same for final disposal on a specific date, keeping in view the nature
of relief sought in the matter. Not giving any specific date, particularly in a matter
relating to anticipatory bail, is not a procedure which can be countenanced.
We are of the considered view that this type of indefinite adjournment in a matter
relating to anticipatory bail, that too after admitting it, is detrimental to the valuable
right of a person. We make it clear that we have not adverted to the merits involved
in the case since it is premature for us to do so at this stage. However, having noted
the manner in which the learned Single Judge has dealt with the matter we find it
necessary to emphasize that when a person is before the Court and that too in a
matter involving personal liberty, least what is expected is for such a person to be
given the result one way or the other, based on the merit of his case and not push him
to a position of uncertainty or be condemned without being heard, when it matters.
Hence, we request the learned Single Judge of the High Court to dispose of the
anticipatory bail application, pending adjudication before him, on its own merits and
in accordance with law, expeditiously and preferably within a period of two weeks from
the date of receipt/production of a copy of this order. If the main application cannot be
disposed of for any reason, the I.A. for interim relief be considered on its own merits.
Till such time, we grant interim protection from arrest to the petitioner herein.
We clarify that this shall however not influence the view to be taken by the Learned
Single Judge on merits.
The special leave petition stands disposed of accordingly.
As a sequel to the above, pending interlocutory applications also stand disposed