H   State of H.P. & ors.
State of H.P. & ors.                             ….Respondents
Munish Gupta & ors.                                                        …..Petitioners
State of H.P. & ors.
Whether approved for reporting?1 Yes
For the Petitioner(s):Mr. Shrawan Dogra, Mr. Lovneesh Kanwar,
Senior Advocates with Mr. Peeyush Verma,
rt  Mr. Satish Sharma, Mr. Devender K.
For the Respondents:Mr. Anup Rattan, A.G. with
for respondent-State.
Since common questions of law and facts arise for
consideration in all these petitions, therefore, the same were
H   taken up together for hearing and are being disposed of by a
common judgment.
2             For the sake of convenience and in order to maintain
clarity, facts of CWP No. 1686/2020 are being referred to.
1     Whether reporters of the local papers may be allowed to see the judgment? Yes.
3          All   the   petitioners        hold      Bachelor’s        degrees       in
Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry (B.V.Sc. & AH) and
being duly qualified were appointed as Veterinary Officers on
contract basis initially pursuant to advertisement issued by the
Himachal Pradesh Public Service Commission (HPPSC) and
thereafter their services have been regularized.
It is the specific case of the petitioners that the State
had not made any appointment to the post of Veterinary Officer
through HPPSC since 1998 and in between 1998 to 2003 such
appointments were made on ad-hoc basis, which were later on
regularized as per policy of the State Government.
5          It is also the case of the petitioners that after the year
2003, the State had been making appointments to the post of
Veterinary Officers on contract basis only and it was for the first
time in the year 2010 that the respondent-State                                made
appointments through HPPSC.
H   6          The Finance Department                vide its notification dated
1.9.1998 effective from 1.1.1996 provided for 4-tier pay scale to
the following categories serving in the State:
V. Animal Husbandry Veterinary Class-I services
Meaning thereby that the State for the purpose of revision of pay
scale amongst others had equated the following categories:
II. H.P. Health Services Class-I (Dental) and
C     Further, the State Government vide notification dated
23.6.2000 framed the guidelines
for implementation
in respect of the above mentioned categories.
Subsequently vide notification dated 9.8.2012, the respondent-
H   State granted 4-tier    pay scale in
respect of Veterinary services as under:-
the revised pay scales               in
2   15600-39100 after 4 years           6600             25250/-
3   15600-39100 after 9 years           7600             31320
4   37400-67000 after 14 years          8600
All the officers from the post of Veterinary Officer to
Deputy Director constituted a common service known as the H.P.
Technical   Services) and, therefore,
Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Services Class-I (Gazetted
on the basis of above pay
scale pattern, according to length of service, the placement                  of
each officer was to be determined on the basis of completion of
4, 9 and 14 years of service counted from the initial date of
regularization
in service. However, the respondent-State while
such service ignored       the service rendered by the
petitioners prior to regularization on contract basis unlike their
counterparts, who fall within the categories of               H.P. Health
Services Class-I (General List) and H.P. Health Services Class-I
H   (Dental), constraining the petitioners to file these writ petitions
for grant of the following substantive reliefs:-
(1) The impugned decision dated 28.02.2020 (ANNEXURE P-
19) passed by respondent No.1 may be quashed and set
(2) Cabinet Decision, if any, not granting due benefit to the
petitioners as prayed for in this writ petition may also be
quashed and set aside;
(3) The respondents may be directed to count entire service
rendered by the petitioners on contract basis before their
respective regularization may be counted for the purpose of
grant of benefit under 4, 9,14 years (Assured Carrier
Progression Scheme) pay scale on the pattern the same has
been extended to other Medical Officers (General), Medical
Officers (Dental) and Veterinary Officers (Regular);
(4) That the period of service of the petitioners for the
purpose of grant of 4, 9,14 years (Assured Carrier
Progression Scheme) pay scale may be directed to be
counted from the initial date of joining of the petitioners on
contract basis with the respondent Department;
(5) That any other interpretation by the respondent State for
C    not counting the contract service of the petitioners and
depriving them of the benefit of such service for the benefit
of 4, 9, 14 years (Assured Carrier Progression Scheme) pay
ig  h          scale may be read down in the manner that entire service
including contract service before regularization is to be
counted for the said service benefit and the arrear of
amount be paid along with interest till the date of
realization.
The respondent-State has contested              these petitions
by filing reply wherein preliminary submissions have been made
to   the effect that the contractual services of the petitioners
(Veterinary Officers appointed on contract basis) on the analogy
of Medical Officers (appointed on contract basis) in the Health
and Family Welfare Department for the purpose of granting 4-tier
pay scale cannot be counted as the petitioners are dealing with
animals, whereas the Doctors of Health Department are dealing
with humans where stakes are much higher and the duties and
responsibilities are round the clock and thus are not equivalent.
Moreover, all the appointments are made on contract
basis in the State and such services are regulated             as per the
terms and conditions     prescribed in the agreement as well as
column No. 15-A of the Recruitment and Promotion Rules of the
concerned post.
It is averred that there is no such provision             in the
terms and conditions for appointment on contract basis to count
the services rendered on contract basis for the purpose of
granting the benefit of 4-tier pay scale.
12         Further, the job specification     of MBBS doctors and
H   Veterinary Officers are quite different. The decision to count the
contractual services of Medical Officers for the benefit of 4-tier
pay scale was taken by the State with a view to provide good
medical facilities to people of the State even        also in the far-
flung areas. There is no parity between the MBBS doctors and
Veterinary Officers. It is also averred that principle of equal work
for equal pay is also not applicable in the instant case(s).
Lastly, it is averred that the responsibilities of MBBS
doctors are more onerous in comparison to that of Veterinary
Officers and there is valid distinction in the working and nature
of operation between the MBBS Doctors and Veterinary doctors,
hence the contractual services of the petitioners for grant of 4-tier
pay scales cannot be counted.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and
have also gone through the material placed on record.
At the outset, we need to refer to certain judgments
rendered by this Court, which have important bearing on the
outcome of these petitions.
16         In CWP(T) No. 2773/2008, titled as Dr. Arun
Sirkeck and Ors. vs. State of Himachal Pradesh, decided on
27.5.2009, this Court categorically held that the Veterinary
H   Officers appointed on contract basis cannot be discriminated by
the State by not counting the ad-hoc service at par with the
Medical Officers serving in the Himachal Pradesh Health Services
Class-I (Generalist) and (Dental) and accordingly, the State was
directed to count the services of the Veterinary Officers on ad-
hoc basis for all intents and purposes.              It shall be apt to
reproduce relevant observations, which read thus:-
“Petitioner No.1 was appointed on 30.7.1988. He
has worked uninterruptedly till the date of his regular
appointment on 18.6.1992. This appointment cannot be
termed purely as stopgap or fortuitous or ad hoc.
Similarly, petitioner No.2 was appointed on ad hoc
basis as Veterinary Officer on 30.7.1988. He has also
completed four years till his regular recruitment through
the                           Service     Commission          on
22.6.1992. This period can also not be excluded for the
purpose of granting the benefit under Annexure A-1.
Petitioner No.3 has also worked for a considerable
period of two years from 23.9.1993 to 13.3.1995. It
would be erroneous to exclude the services which the
petitioners have rendered on ad hoc basis for the
C    purpose of counting seniority for the release of four tier
pay scales. They were in possession of essential
ig  h          educational qualification at the time of their recruitment.
They have been clubbed together with seven remaining
services of the State as per Annexure A-1.
In the present case, the petitioners are similarly
H              situated vis-à-vis the Medical Officers serving in the
and (Dental). They could not be discriminated against
by the State Government by not counting their ad hoc
services at par with the Medical Officers serving in
and (Dental). The explanation given for not according
this benefit to the petitioner is flimsy and artificial. The
petitioners cannot be denied this benefit only on the
ground that they have not furnished bonds at the time
of their initial appointment on ad hoc basis. What was
to be seen in fact by the respondents was that whether.
they have continuously worked on ad hoc basis till their
regularization or not. The petitioners though appointed
on ad hoc basis have worked uninterruptedly and they
have    been    recruited
recommendations made by the Himachal Pradesh
Public Service Commission. The Medical Officers serving
in the Himachal Pradesh Health Services Class-I
(Generalist) and (Dental) were appointed on ad hoc
subsequently
recommendations made by the Himachal Pradesh
C  Public Service Commission. The explanation made by
the respondent-State on the basis of non-furnishing of
bonds is artificial. Rather, it is a case of invidious
ig  h   discrimination. The petitioners have been clubbed
together as per Annexure A-1 and they could not be
discriminated against by the respondent-State for the
purpose of grant of four tier pay scales. The services
H       rendered       by      the     petitioners       on      ad
basis till their regularization are required to be counted.
The very idea of furnishing the bonds by the Medical
Officers or for that matter by any employee is to serve
the State for a particular period. In the present case,
without furnishing bonds, the petitioners have worked
uninterruptedly on ad hoc basis as Veterinary Officers.
Thereafter their services were regularized and they are
working     as      Veterinary      Officers        with       the
respondent-State.
The learned Senior Additional Advocate General
has strenuously relied upon Annexure R-IV dated
12.1.2004. This letter would apply prospectively. The
rights accrued to the petitioners on the basis of
Annexures A-2 and A-3 cannot be taken away by a
letter dated 12.1.2004. The petitioners are entitled to be
treated at par with the doctors serving in the Himachal
Pradesh             Services     Class-I    (Generalist)      and
(Dental) on the basis of Annexures A-2 and A-3.”
In another matter relating to non grant of
Practicing Allowance (NPA) to Veterinary Officers working on
contract basis at par with the medical Officers (Generalist) as well
as Medical Officers (Dental), a learned Single Judge of this Court
in CWP No. 124/2011, titled as Abhinav Soni vs. State of
H.P, held the same to be discriminatory and consequently the
Veterinary Officers were held to be entitled to NPA on basis of
H   parity.
18         The respondent-State thereafter assailed the aforesaid
judgment by filing LPA No. 720/2011, titled as State of
Himachal Pradesh vs. Abhinav Soni, which came to be decided
on 27.7.2015 by the learned Division Bench of this Court, to
which one of us (Justice Tarlok Singh Chauhan) was party. The
Court specifically held that the respondent-State could not make
basis that the MBBS doctors deal with human beings, whereas
distinction to deny NPA to the Veterinary Officers simply on the
Veterinary Officers having the same qualification and same
degree are dealing with animals as is evident from paras 14 and
15 of the judgment which read as under:-
14. How distinction can be made between a MBBS
Doctor, who deals with human being and a Veterinary
Officer, who is also having the same qualification and
same degree, but is dealing with animals.
15. Thus, it appears that the decision made by the writ
respondents-appellants herein is not sustainable in the
C     eyes of law, rather, is discriminatory.
While dismissing the appeal filed by the respondent-
State, it was observed as under:-
26. Keeping in view the facts of the case read with the
tests laid down by the Apex Court from time to time and
H              the discussions made hereinabove, we are of the
considered view that the State-writ respondents have
made discrimination on the following grounds:-
(i)NPA     has   been   granted     to   the    Veterinary
Officers appointed on regular basis, but not
to   the     Veterinary      Officers     appointed        on
contract basis despite the fact that they are
performing          same       job,      are         discharging
same duties and responsibilities.
(ii)   The    Medical      Officers,    who
appointed on contract basis, were given the
benefit of NPA, but was denied to the writ
petitioners-respondents
27. Having said so, we hold that the Veterinary Officers
appointed on contract basis are also entitled to NPA
right from the date of filing of the writ petition, as
directed by the Writ Court/learned Single Judge.
What would thus be evident from the aforesaid
discussions so far is that          this Court has already recognized
parity between MBBS doctors and Veterinary Officers in the
matters of counting of ad-hoc service and also grant of NPA to the
Veterinary Officers at par with the MBBS doctors.
20         However,        the     moot      question         is     whether          the
respondent-State can deny the grant of 4-tier pay scale to the
H   Veterinary Officers that too at the flimsy ground, which has
otherwise been rejected i.e. only on the ground that the
petitioners are dealing with animals and the doctors serving in
the Health and Family Welfare Department are dealing with
humans. The answer clearly is in the negative, more particularly,
when this contention has expressly been rejected by this Court
while adjudicating and deciding the aforesaid LPA No. 720/2011.
Apart from above, stand of the respondent-State is
otherwise not tenable in view of the judgment rendered by
learned Division Bench of Delhi High Court in W. P. (C) No.
2780/2011, titled as Dr. Chandra Shekhar Sahukar vs.
Union of India, decided on 14.10.2014, wherein Veterinary
Doctors like in the instant cases were being discriminated and
singled out
from the benefit of Dynamic Assured Career
Progression mechanism (DACP) only on the ground that the
duties being performed by the medical practitioners i.e. GMMOs
were distinct from Veterinarians.      It shall be apt to reproduce
paras 27, 29, 30 & 31 of the judgment, which read as under:-
ig  h         27. The respondent's argument is primarily hinged on
executive supremacy in policy making, in the area of
determining   conditions     of   service,      such      as    career
progression programmes. This argument, when made,
H             ordinarily prevails. However, when this is to be tested
against a constitutional value such as the guarantee of
equality and protection against discrimination, the principle
which the Courts adhere to is that if the complaint
establishes an apparent classification, that has to be
justified. At the superficial level, no doubt, medical
practitioners, i.e GDMOs of the CHS can be said to be
distinct from veterinarians. Yet what is important is that
both the Fifth CPC in its report (Paragraph 55.291) and the
Sixth CPC in its report (Paragraph 3.8.25) recommended
complete parity in respect of pay, allowances and "career
prospects" to all categories of doctors. This was concededly
W.P.(C) 2780/2011 Page 13 understood by the UOI to mean
complete parity in such matters, to justify grant of such
parity or equivalence to dentists and "Dental doctors" who,
like the veterinarians did not find express mention in this
regard. Having thus extended benefit to one category of
medical practitioners- i.e. dentists- without any discussion,
but the mere extension of the logic underlying the CPC's
recommendation,      the   UOI   should     have      shown       why
veterinarians differed and did not deserve such parity. Here
too there is no explanation, save the power of the executive
authority to formulate policy.
C  29. Having recognized a parity in regard to almost all
matters, such as pay-scales, emoluments, Non-Practising
Allowance, etc, singling out veterinarians for exclusion-
ig  h   which,    in   the   present     case,    amounts        to
discrimination- from the benefit of the DACP, offends Article
14. If viewed from the background of the circumstance that
the expression "complete parity" occurring in the Fifth CPC
H       recommendation was interpreted in both the letter and the
spirit, in the W.P.(C) 2780/2011 Page 14 case of dentists,
who got that benefit of the DACP, only on the strength of
such phrase, whereas the veterinarians were denied that
benefit without any reason at all, the discrimination is
aggravated; it is utterly arbitrary.
30. The respondent's argument, i.e that veterinarians are
classifiable differently from the other doctors, is, in the
opinion of the court, a tenuous and unmerited one. This
court here recollects the decision in Roop Chand Adlakha
and Ors. v. Delhi Development Authority & Ors. [1988] Supp
(3) SCR 253, a decision of the Supreme Court, which deals
with the process of classification and points out how
classification itself can produce inequality:
"19...........The process would be constitutionally
valid if it recognises a pre-existing inequality and
acts in aid of amelioration of the effects of such pre-
ou existent inequality. But the process cannot in itself
generate or aggravate the inequality. The process
cannot merely blow-up or magnify in-substantial or
microscopic differences on merely meretricious or
plausible differences. The over-emphasis on the
C      doctrine of classification or any anxious and
sustained attempts to discover some basis for
classification may gradually and imperceptibly
ig  h       deprive the article of its precious content and end
in replacing Doctrine of equality by the doctrine of
classification. The presumption of good faith in and
of constitutionality of a classification cannot be
H           pushed to the point of predicating some possible or
hypothetical but undisclosed and unknown reason
for   a   classification   rendering      the     precious
guarantee of equality "a mere rope of sand."
31. In the present case, there is no reason at all to say that
veterinarians are different from other classes of medical
and dental W.P.(C) 2780/2011 Page 15 practitioners- for
the purpose of denying the DACP benefit- when they are
treated at par with those categories in the matter of pay
respondents acted in a discriminatory manner in refusing to
extend the DACP to the petitioners and other veterinarians.
The impugned orders of the CAT are accordingly set aside;
a direction is issued to the respondents to ensure that the
DACP is granted to Veterinary Officers on the basis of the
CPC's recommendations' implementation to GDMOs and
Dental Doctors from the date the latter category (Dental
Doctors) were given that benefit.
22         On  rt    the    basis     of       the        aforesaid
pronouncements, we have no hesitation in concluding that the
respondent-State while denying the benefit of 4-tier pay scale to
the petitioners from the initial date of appointment at par with
the medical officers have indulged in hostile discrimination and
thereby violated Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
H   23         There are other reasons to hold the action of the
respondent-State to be discriminatory. Firstly, the respondent-
State itself had extended the benefit of 4-tier pay scale to Medical
Officers serving in the Himachal Pradesh Health Services Class-I
(Generalist) from their initial date of appointment.                     However,
similar benefits were not extended to the Medical Officers serving
in the Himachal Pradesh Health Services Class-1 (Dental). Then
Officers (Dental) in O.A. No. 5053/2015, titled as Dr. Bhim
this action of the respondent-State was challenged by the Medical
Chand and ors. vs. State of H.P. & ors., decided on
23.12.2016, wherein the learned erstwhile H.P. Administrative
Tribunal held the petitioners therein to be similarly situated with
the Medical Officers, who had been granted 4-tier pay scale after
taking into consideration the services rendered by them on
contract or ad-hoc basis and the respondent-State, in its wisdom,
did not assail the aforesaid judgment
implement the same.
This issue is otherwise no longer res
integra and covered by the judgment of the Delhi High Court in
the observations and findings
case, more particularly, by
recorded in para 27 thereof
H   24         Secondly,   the   State     has      otherwise
invidious discrimination inasmuch as some of the veterinarians
indulged       in
like the petitioners have also been extended the same benefit of
grant of 4-tier pay scale from their initial date of appointment, as
is evident from the letter dated 17.6.2013 which reads thus:-
Government of Himachal Pradesh Department of
The Additional chief Secretary (AH) to the
Government of Himachal Pradesh
The Director of Animal Husbandry
Dated the Shimla 171002 17.06.2013
Subject: Regarding grant of Four Tier Pay scale to the
On the recommendation of the Departmental Promotion
Committee, I am directed to convey the approval of the
C  Government for the grant of           higher pay scales
admissible in accordance with the instructions issued
ig  h   by the Finance Department vide their letter No. Fin
(PR)B(7)59/2010 dated 09.08.2012, after completion of
4,9 and 14 year service in a cadre, in the following
manner to Veterinary Officers:-
H       Veterinarians to whom the higher pay scale is to be
granted on completion of 14 years of service on one
post i.e. Rs. 37400-67000+ 8600 Grade Pay.
Sr. No.   Name and Date of ad- Date        of     Date            Higher pay
Designation hoc/regular completion
of              notional
rt 21.8.98      20.8.12        1.1.2013
A faint attempt was made by the learned Advocate
to argue that the Medical Officers governed by the
Himachal Pradesh Health Services Class-I (Generalist) were
H   granted 4-tier pay scale from the initial date rendered on
contractual basis because of relaxation of the Rules granted by
the government and it is more than settled that such relaxation
cannot be claimed as a matter of right.
26         Strong reliance in support of such contention is
placed on the judgment rendered by the Hon’ble Supreme Court
in State of U.P. vs. Vikash Kumar Singh (2022) 1 SCC 347,.P.
more particularly in para 7.1 thereof which reads as under:-
7.1 The learned Single Judge thereafter while quashing
and setting aside the eligibility lists dated 18.03.2019 and
10.05.2019 has issued the writ of mandamus commanding
or directing the competent authority to grant relaxation in
qualifying service, which as such was permissible under
Rule 4 of the Relaxation Rules, 2006. The word used in the
Rule 4 of Relaxation Rules, 2006 is “MAY”. Therefore, the
relaxation may be at the discretion of the competent
authority. The relaxation cannot be prayed as a matter of
right. If a conscious decision is taken not to grant the
relaxation, merely because Rule permits relaxation, no writ
C    of mandamus can be issued directing the competent
authority   to   grant   relaxation   in   qualifying      service.
ig  h          Therefore, the High Court has committed a grave error in
issuing the writ of mandamus commanding the competent
authority to grant relaxation in the qualifying service.
Consequently, the High Court has also erred in quashing
H              and setting aside the eligibility lists dated 18.03.2019 and
10.05.2019, which as such were prepared absolutely in
consonance with the Rules, 1990 and Rules, 2006. The
impugned judgments and orders passed by the learned
Single Judge as well as the Division Bench of the High
Court are not sustainable in law.
27           We find this submissions to be totally untenable for
more than one reason. Such as, there is no relaxation granted (at
least   no such document                                     .P
has been placed on record by the
respondent-State) when similar benefit
of 4-tier pay scale was
granted to the Doctors governed by H.P. Health Services Class-I
Lastly and more importantly, it was the respondent-
State itself, who, after careful consideration, had identified
aforesaid 8 categories       by treating services at par for limited
for grant of 4-tier pay scale. Obviously, then there
cannot be any inter se discrimination in the officers falling under
these categories so as to deny the veterinarians the benefit of 4-
tier pay scale from the initial date of appointment.
In view of aforesaid discussions and reasons, we find
all   these   petitions    and   the     same       are    allowed.
Accordingly, the impugned decision dated 28.2.2020 is quashed
H   and set aside. Consequently, the decision taken by the cabinet
rejecting the claim of the petitioners, which otherwise is bereft of
any reasons, is also quashed and set aside. The respondent-State
is directed to count the services rendered by the petitioners on
contract basis before their respective regularization for the
purpose of benefit under 4-tier pay scale on the same pattern as
has been extended to the Medical Officers (Generalist) and
(Dental) and Veterinary Officers (Regular). The monetary benefits
be paid within a period of 90 days from the date of the judgment
failing which the respondent-State shall be liable to pay interest
@ 7.5% thereon till its realization. Pending application(s), if any,
stand disposed of.
ou                         (Tarlok Singh Chauhan)
rt                       (Virender Singh)