1.      This matter has been listed on office noting pursuant to the
proceedings before the Local Commissioner on 20th May, 2022 appointed
by this Court for recording of evidence.
2.      The present suit has been filed seeking to, inter alia, injunct the
defendants/occupants from unlawfully entering any part of the first floor
including the balcony of Shop No.4/6 on the ground floor of the premises
bearing No.4/1-14 (A-1/4), Eleven Style Mile, Ward 1, Mehrauli, New
Delhi. Issues were framed in the suit on 02nd August, 2019 and a Local
Commissioner was appointed to record evidence of the parties. An initial
sum of Rs.1,00,000/- was fixed as the fees to be paid to the Local
Commissioner, which was to be borne by the plaintiff.
Signed By:SAKSHI        CS(OS) 3379/2015                                                 Page 1 of 5
3.      It has been noted in the proceedings before the Local Commissioner
on 20th May, 2022 that the counsel for the defendant made a request to re-
examine DW-1, which request was opposed by the counsel appearing on
behalf of the plaintiff.
4.      Accordingly, the Local Commissioner has referred the matter to the
Court for appropriate directions.
5.      The relevant extracts from the proceedings of 20th May, 2022 are set
“The statement of Ms. Neha Dutta, DW-1 was completed
on 02.05.2022. On that date she was fully cross examined.
However, during the completion of the cross examination,
Sh.Kuldeep Kumar, Advocate for the defendant had made a
request that he be permitted to re-examine the witness. Since, it
was already 4.25 PM, therefore, the question of re-examination
was kept open to be taken up today.
Sh. Kumar submits that he would like to re-examine the
witness (DW-1) with regard to the questions where the witness
has replied 'YES' or 'NO' only and the explanation for
reaching at the truth and for the proper adjudication of the
issues in question are necessary to be asked and replied for a
fair conclusion.”
6.      Counsel appearing on behalf of the defendant has placed reliance on
Section 138 of the Evidence Act, 1872 as well as the judgment of the
Supreme Court in Rammi Alias Rameshwar v. State of Madhya Pradesh,
7.      Relying on the aforesaid judgment of the Supreme Court, it is
contended on behalf of the counsel for the defendant that the defendant is
entitled to re-examine DW-1 on account of the answers given by the said
witness in the cross-examination. He states that since the witness has replied
Signed By:SAKSHI        CS(OS) 3379/2015                                                 Page 2 of 5
only in ‘yes’ or ‘no’, he is entitled to re-examine the said witness to get a
proper explanation from the witness in respect of the questions posed to her.
8.      On the other hand, the counsel for the plaintiff vehemently opposes
the said request. She places reliance on the judgment of this Court in Simrin
Singh v. Amrit Srinivasan and Ors., 2018 SCC OnLine Del 7177. She
submits that a witness cannot be allowed to be re-examined so as to provide
an explanation when the said witness has answered the question in ‘yes’ or
‘no’. She further submits that the witness is an educated person and a law
graduate and has consciously chosen to give the answers in the aforesaid
manner.
9.      I have heard the counsels for the parties.
10.     Before dealing with the judicial precedents cited by the counsels for
the parties, it is deemed apposite to refer to the relevant portion of Section
138 of the Indian Evidence Act, which is as under:
Direction of re-examination. –– The re-examination shall be
directed to the explanation of matters referred to in cross-
examination; and, if new matter is, by permission of the Court,
introduced in re-examination, the adverse party may further
cross-examine upon that matter.”
11.     Counsel for the plaintiff has correctly placed reliance on the judgment
in Simrin Singh (supra). The relevant observations of the Court are set out
“9. Though Section 138 supra permits re-examination 'to
explain the matters referred to in cross-examination' and
permits further cross-examination of the witness thereafter,
only if the Court has in re-examination permitted new matters
to be introduced (else, after re-examination, there is no right of
further cross-examination) but in my opinion, the words
Signed By:SAKSHI        CS(OS) 3379/2015                                                  Page 3 of 5
'explain matters referred to in cross-examination' cannot be
interpreted so widely as to permit in routine, re-examination
of witness and in the name of re- examination, undo what has
been achieved/revealed in cross-examination. In my view, re-
examination, particularly in civil cases, has to be permitted
rarely. I say so because civil proceedings are essentially
adversarial, as distinct from adjudication of criminality,
which, with the passage of time, is more inquisitorial than
adversarial, with the prosecution as well as the Judge being in
search of truth, rather than letting a finding on criminality
being returned for failure and defaults of the accused.
11. The words 'explanation of matters referred to in cross-
examination' in Section 138 supra, in my view, have to be
interpreted as re-examination confined to explanation of the
sense and meaning of the expressions used by the witness in
cross-examination, if they be in themselves doubtful and also
the motive by which the witness was induced to use those
expressions. Re-examination, in my view, cannot go further
than that. I reiterate that re-examination cannot be sought
and allowed, with the sole object of giving a chance to the
witness to undo the effect of statements earlier made in cross-
examination. Lacunae in evidence led cannot be filled up
under the pretext of re-examination.”
12.     This Court in Simrin Singh (supra) has observed that in the garb of
‘explanation of matters referred to in cross-examination,’ a witness cannot
be recalled for re-examination in a routine manner. Further, such re-
examination cannot be used to fill in the lacunae in the evidence.
13.     The distinction between a criminal trial and a civil trial has also been
noted by this Court in Simrin Singh (supra). In civil cases, re-examination
can only be permitted rarely as civil proceedings are adversarial in nature as
opposed to criminal cases, which are inquisitorial in nature.
Signed By:SAKSHI        CS(OS) 3379/2015                                                   Page 4 of 5
14.     The judgment in Rammi (supra) relied upon by the defendant is in the
context of a criminal case and therefore, the observations made therein were
in that context and would not be applicable in the present case.
15.     In the guise of re-examination, the counsel for the defendant cannot
ask the witness to give further explanation to the answers given by her.
There is no ambiguity in the answers given by the witness that requires
explanation through re-examination. In the present case, the witness, who is
a law graduate, has consciously chosen to give her answers in ‘yes’ or ‘no’
without giving any explanation in support thereof.
16.     Needless to state that any interpretation in respect of the answers
given by the witness can be addressed by the counsels at the time of making
submissions. Re-examination cannot be used to give a chance to the witness
to undo the statement of the witness made in cross-examination and fill in
the lacunae in evidence.
17.     Therefore, in the facts and circumstances of the case, this Court is of
the view that no case for re-examination is made out.
18.     Counsel for the plaintiff submits that in view of the time and efforts
put in by the Local Commissioner, the plaintiff is willing to pay a further
fees of Rs.75,000/- to the Local Commissioner.
19.     Accordingly, it is directed that the plaintiff shall pay an additional
sum of Rs.75,000/- to the Local Commissioner.
20.     With the aforesaid observations, the matter may be placed before the
Local Commissioner on the dates fixed.
Signed By:SAKSHI        CS(OS) 3379/2015                                                 Page 5 of 5