1.     Present contempt petition has been filed with the following prayers:-
“a. That this Hon’ble Court be pleased to hold the
Respondents No. 1 to 6 hereinabove, guilty of gross, deliberate
and continuing contempt of the orders dated 17.10.2006,
30.05.2008 and the order dated 04.04.2016 along with the
undertaking recorded in the order dated 04.04.2016 passed by
b.      That Respondents 1 to 5 who are responsible for the day-
to-day management and conduct of affairs of the Respondent
No.6 Company be punished with civil imprisonment and
c.      Attach the movable and immovable properties of the
d.      In case this Hon’ble Court comes to the conclusion that
the same constitutes criminal contempt, the matter be referred
to the Hon’ble Division Bench for taking appropriate action in
e.      That immediate orders be passed directing the
Respondents No. 1 to 6 as mentioned hereinabove, to comply
with the 17.10.2006, 30.05.2008 and the order dated
04.04.2016 along with the undertaking recorded in the order
dated 04.04.2016 passed by this Hon’ble Court;
f.      That immediate orders be passed directing the
Respondent No.6 to file the true and correct accounts of its
income and expenditure relating to its business of their JIVA
Spas in this Hon’ble Court in compliance with the order dated
30.5.2008 passed by the Hon’ble Division Bench, and if the
same has been filed every six months, to direct the Respondent
No. 6 to provide a copy of the same to the Petitioners;
g.      That immediate order be passed directing the Respondent
No. 6 to file true and correct accounts of the income from the
advertisement and marketing of products under the mark ‘JIVA’
and/or its sub-brands and to furnish a copy of the same to the
h.      That immediate orders be also passed restraining the
Respondent no. 6 from in any manner using the mark/word
JIVA either as a trademark, trade name, corporate name, house
i.      Impose exemplary cost on the Respondents for
committing acts amounting to contempt of this Hon’ble Court;
j.      Pass any other order/s that this Hon’ble Court deems fit
and proper in the interest of justice.”
2.     Factual exposition, as set out by the Petitioners/Plaintiffs is that vide
order dated 17.10.2006, this Court had granted an ex parte ad interim
injunction against Respondent No.6 herein (Defendant No.1 in the suit) and
its Managing Director (Defendant No.2 in the suit), restraining them from
adopting and/or using the trademark ‘JIVA’ or any other identical or
deceptively similar or confusing mark, in relation to their goods and services
and from manufacturing, advertising and marketing, etc. any goods or
services under the said trademark. In an appeal against the said order, the
Division Bench of this Court, vide order dated 30.05.2008 partly allowed the
appeal, whereby the order dated 17.10.2006, restraining the Appellants
therein from using the trademark ‘JIVA’ for their Spas run in the hotels
established by them, was vacated, subject to certain conditions, while the
order to the extent it restrained the Appellants from selling, using or offering
for sale/use any ayurvedic product under the trademark ‘JIVA’, was
confirmed.
3.     In 2014, it is averred, that when it came to the knowledge of the
Petitioners that the orders were being violated by Respondent No.6, a
contempt petition being CCP(O) No.126/2014 was filed, wherein, after
hearing the parties extensively, the Court had taken on record the statement
and assurance on behalf of the Respondents therein including Respondent
No.6 that they would not use the mark ‘JIVA’ in relation to disputed goods
or for any cosmetic, soaps, ayurvedic, non ayurvedic, or any other allied and
cognate goods, except in respect of ‘JIVA’ for Spa and in relation to pillow,
towels, handkerchiefs and other articles related to the Spas.
4.     Learned counsel for the Petitioners submits that recently, it has come
to the notice of the Petitioners that Respondent No.6 has been advertising
and marketing its non-ayurvedic products such as towels, under the
trademark ‘JIVA’ on the websites of its hotels as well as through
e-mails. Along with the pictorial presentation of the facilities available in the
Spas, Respondent No.6 is providing a written description of variety of Spa
services and other therapeutic treatments available, including description of
the ayurvedic products used therein, thereby indirectly advertising the
products, against which there is a restraint order, leading to a deceptive
association of its ayurvedic and non-ayurvedic products to the trademark
‘JIVA’. Such advertisements, according to the learned counsel, are in clear
violation of the order dated 17.10.2006 read with order dated 30.05.2008
and the assurance given by Respondent No.6 to the Court on 04.04.2016.
5.     Mr. Mukul Rohatgi and Mr. Sandeep Sethi, learned Senior Counsels
appearing on behalf of Respondents No. 1 to 5 and Respondent No.6
respectively, vehemently oppose the allegations made by the Petitioners. It
is submitted that the undertaking given to the Court on 04.04.2016 is being
complied with in letter and spirit and it is reiterated and reassured on behalf
of the Respondents that they shall continue to do so and will not use the
mark ‘JIVA’ in relation to the disputed goods or goods such as cosmetics,
soaps, ayurvedic/non-ayurvedic products and/or allied or cognate goods, as
undertaken before the Court on 04.04.2016. It is further submitted that the
Division Bench had, vide order dated 30.05.2008, vacated the restraint order
dated 17.10.2006 to the extent of use of the trademark ‘JIVA’ for the Spas
run by Respondent No.6 in its hotels and there is no restriction or restraint
from advertising or marketing products using the trademark ‘JIVA’ related
to running of the Spas or the products such as pillows, towels etc., used in
relation thereto.
6.     I have heard learned counsel appearing on behalf of the Petitioners
and learned Senior Counsels appearing on behalf of the Respondents.
7.     From the above narrative, shorn of unnecessary details, it emerges
that vide order dated 17.10.2006, this Court had restrained the Defendants
therein from using the mark ‘JIVA’ or any identical or deceptively or
confusingly similar mark in relation to the impugned goods and services.
The restraint order extended to inter alia offering for sale and/or advertising,
marketing any goods or services under the said trademark. Operative part of
“Accordingly, till the next date of hearing, the defendants, their
agents, representatives, assigns, their hotels, resorts etc. are
restrained from adopting and/or using the trade mark ‘JIVA’ or
any other identical or deceptively similar or confusing trade
mark and/or trademark ‘JIVA’ in relation to any of their goods
and services from directly or indirectly adopting and/or using
the same. The defendants are further restrained from
manufacturing, producing or rendering or offering for sale
and/or advertising marketing any goods or services under the
trade name and/or trademark ‘JIVA’.”
8.     However, the Division Bench in an appeal in FAO(OS) No.44/2007
passed two different directions, partly allowing the appeal. For the sake of
ready reference, order dated 30.05.2008 is extracted hereunder:-
“46. In the result, we allow this appeal in part and to the
a. Order dated 17th October, 2006 passed by the learned Single
Judge to the extent the same restrains the appellant from using
the trademark ‘JIVA’ for its Spas run in the hotels established
by it shall stand vacated, subject to the appellant filing an
undertaking to the effect that (i) it shall maintain true and
correct accounts of its income and expenditure relating to the
business of the said Spas and file the same in this court every
six months; and (ii) that it shall not start any spa independent of
hotel owned/leased or mortgaged by it under the trademark
b. The impugned order to the extent it restrains the appellant
from selling/using or offering for sale/use any ayurvedic
product under the trademark ‘JIVA’ shall stand confirmed and
made absolute pending final disposal of the suit.”
9.     On a contempt petition being filed by the Petitioners in 2014 being
CCP(O) No.126/2014, in the present suit, Respondent No.6 made a
statement before the Court, which as captured in para 17 of the order dated
“17. He submits that such use was not intentional or
deliberate. Upon instruction from his client, the statement was
made that during the pendency of the suit, the defendants are
prepared to make the statement that they would not use the
mark JIVA in relation to disputed goods as alleged by the
plaintiff except in respect of JIVA for spa and in relation to
pillow, towels and handkerchief and only related articles of spa
but would not use JIVA for any cosmetic, soaps, ayurvedic or
even non-ayurvedic or any other allied and cognate goods, but
it would do without prejudice to contest the suit on merit.”
10.    On the basis of the said assurance, given on behalf of Respondent
No.6, the Court observed as under and disposed of the contempt petition:-
“18. In view of the statement made on behalf of the
defendants, I am of the view that there is force in the
submissions of the defendants. The said suggestions of the
defendants are reasonable and they are entitled to use the same
during the pendency of the suit, however as stated by them they
shall not use the mark JIVA for soaps, cosmetics, ayurvedic and
non ayurvedic in order to avoid confusion. The same would be
used as Jiva Spa Centre.”
11.    Succinctly put, contention of the learned counsel for the Petitioners is
that Respondents are guilty of violating the orders of this Court, as they are
advertising and marketing on their websites and through e-mails, non-
ayurvedic products such as towels under the trademark ‘JIVA’. It is also the
contention that along with the pictorial representations of the non-ayurvedic
products, Respondent No.6 also provides a written description of its various
Spa services and a list or description of ayurvedic products and goods being
used in various treatments, thereby deceptively associating its ayurvedic
products under the trademark ‘JIVA’. The screenshots of the websites,
according to the Petitioners, clearly show advertisement of non-ayurvedic
products in association with advertisement of therapies and Spa using
signature oils, etc. In my considered view, the contentions, as aforesaid, are
devoid of merit.
12.    From a holistic reading of the aforesaid orders, it is evident that the
Division Bench had vacated the order dated 17.10.2006 to the extent it
restrained the Appellants therein from using the trademark ‘JIVA’ for their
Spas run in their hotels, subject to certain conditions, which are incorporated
in para 46(a) of the said order. Clearly, there was no restraint on any
advertisement or marketing with respect to running of the Spas, the services
and facilities offered therein or articles such as pillows, towels,
handkerchiefs, etc. related to the Spas, under the trademark ‘JIVA’.
Restraint order by the learned Single Judge, on offering for sale/use of the
ayurvedic products under the trademark ‘JIVA’, as confirmed by the
Division Bench in para 46(b) of the order, cannot be extended to running of
the Spas and the articles used therein, which is evident from a plain and
conjoint reading of paras 46(a) and 46(b) of the order dated 30.05.2008.
Reading of para 17 of the order dated 04.04.2016, as extracted above,
fortifies that Respondents were permitted to use the mark ‘JIVA’ in respect
of the Spas, run by the Respondents in their hotels as well as in relation to
pillows, towels, handkerchiefs and other articles related to the Spas. It is on
this understanding that the Court had disposed of the contempt petition on
04.04.2016, upon being satisfied with the explanation tendered by the
Respondents and recording their assurance to comply with the Court orders.
13.     Perusal of the documents, on which the Petitioners have predicated
their allegations of contempt, annexed with the present petition, reflects that
Respondents have only advertised facilities and services rendered in their
Spas along with pictures of the articles used in relation thereto. Pictorial
presentations indicate that Respondents have only given descriptions of the
various therapies, Spa treatments etc. available at their Spas along with the
benefits that flow out of the said treatments. Albeit the pictures in the
e-mails and on the websites showcase certain products, however, the mark
‘JIVA’ is only reflected on the towels. The bottles alleged to be the
infringing products do not contain any label or description so as to even
remotely indicate or suggest that any ayurvedic or non-ayurvedic products
under the trademark ‘JIVA’ are being advertised or marketed, in violation of
the orders of the Court, as alleged by the Petitioners. It is significant to note
that each of the articles depicted in the pictures are those which are related
to the Spas, particularly, the towels, and fall within the window of permitted
user, by virtue of the order of the Division Bench and statement given to the
Court on behalf of Respondent No.6, on 04.04.2016. Petitioners, by their
arguments and relying on the documents annexed to the present petition, are
wanting this Court to interpret the orders of the Court to read that the
Respondents were restrained from marketing/advertising the products used
in relation to the services rendered in the Spas. Firstly, this Court is unable
to find any such restraint in the order passed by the Division Bench in para
46(a) of the order dated 30.05.2008 and secondly, as noted above, the
Respondents are, in fact, not advertising or selling ayurvedic or non
ayurvedic products for any other purpose, through the advertisements on
their websites or the e-mails, as alleged by the Petitioners.
14.    The power vested in the High Court to punish for contempt is a very
special and drastic power and needs to be exercised with great care and
caution, as held in various judgments. It is equally settled that while
exercising the contempt jurisdiction, Court cannot travel beyond the four
corners of the orders, alleged to be violated or read into the order what is not
explicitly directed or restrained. A Petitioner approaching the Court alleging
contempt, cannot call upon the Court, in a contempt jurisdiction, to interpret
the order differently from the manner in which it reads and only those
directions which are plainly self-evident have to be taken into account to
determine the violation or disobedience. It bears repetition to state that this
Court is unable to read any explicit or even implied direction/restraint in any
of the orders, referred to and relied upon by the Petitioners which restrained
the Respondents from marketing, advertising the articles used in relation to
their Spas. I draw strength in my view from the judgment of the Supreme
Court in Jhareswar Prasad Paul and Another v. Tarak Nath Ganguly and
Others, 2002 SCC OnLine 583, relevant para of which is as follows:-
“11. The purpose of contempt jurisdiction is to uphold the
majesty and dignity of the courts of law, since the respect and
authority commanded by the courts of law are the greatest
guarantee to an ordinary citizen and the democratic fabric of
society will suffer if respect for the judiciary is undermined. The
Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 has been introduced under the
statute for the purpose of securing the feeling of confidence of
the people in general for true and proper administration of
justice in the country. The power to punish for contempt of
court is a special power vested under the Constitution in the
courts of record and also under the statute. The power is
special and needs to be exercised with care and caution. It
should be used sparingly by the courts on being satisfied
regarding the true effect of contemptuous conduct. It is to be
kept in mind that the court exercising the jurisdiction to punish
for contempt does not function as an original or appellate court
for determination of the disputes between the parties. The
contempt jurisdiction should be confined to the question
whether there has been any deliberate disobedience of the order
of the court and if the conduct of the party who is alleged to
have committed such disobedience is contumacious. The court
exercising contempt jurisdiction is not entitled to enter into
questions which have not been dealt with and decided in the
judgment or order, violation of which is alleged by the
applicant. The court has to consider the direction issued in the
judgment or order and not to consider the question as to what
the judgment or order should have contained. At the cost of
repetition, be it stated here that the court exercising contempt
jurisdiction is primarily concerned with the question of
contumacious conduct of the party, which is alleged to have
committed deliberate default in complying with the directions in
the judgment or order. If the judgment or order does not
contain any specific direction regarding a matter or if there is
any ambiguity in the directions issued therein then it will be
better to direct the parties to approach the court which disposed
of the matter for clarification of the order instead of the court
exercising contempt jurisdiction taking upon itself the power to
decide the original proceeding in a manner not dealt with by
the court passing the judgment or order. If this limitation is
borne in mind then criticisms which are sometimes levelled
against the courts exercising contempt of court jurisdiction
“that it has exceeded its powers in granting substantive relief
and issuing a direction regarding the same without proper
adjudication of the dispute” in its entirety can be avoided. This
will also avoid multiplicity of proceedings because the party
which is prejudicially affected by the judgment or order passed
in the contempt proceeding and granting relief and issuing
fresh directions is likely to challenge that order and that may
give rise to another round of litigation arising from a
proceeding which is intended to maintain the majesty and
image of courts.”
15.    For all the aforesaid reasons, no contempt is made out.
16.    Contempt petition is, accordingly, dismissed.