      2.     Notice for respondent Nos.1 and 2 shall be
accepted by learned Additional Government Advocate. For
the order proposed, notice to respondent No.3 is dispensed
with.
      3.     The Public Interest Litigation has been filed
seeking the following reliefs:
             “a)   Issue a writ in the nature of
      Certiorari or any other appropriate writ,
      direction or order declaring the impugned Act,
      The Karnataka Civil Services (Validation of
      Selection and Appointment of 2011 Batch
      Gazetted Probationers) Act, 2022, Dated
      14.03.2022      vide    ANNEXURE-J,     as   being
      unconstitutional, illegal and void, and/or
             b)    Issue a writ in the nature of
      Certiorari or any other appropriate writ,
      direction or orders setting aside the appointment
      orders     issued     dated    22.03.2022,    vide
      ANNEXURE-K in pursuance of the impugned Act
      vide ANNEXURE-J.
       c)      Pass any other orders as may be deemed
       fit in the facts and circumstances of this case.”
       4.      Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that
earlier, the entire selection held was challenged before this
Court     in    W.P.Nos.13617-13627/2017       and   connected
matters. It is alleged that it was thereafter that the
respondents have enacted the Karnataka Civil Services
(Validation of Selection and Appointment of 2011 Batch
Gazetted Probationers) Act, 2022 in order to overcome the
judgment passed by the High Court. The contention is that
the enactment of the impugned Act is colourable exercise of
power and as such, bad in law.
       5.      We have considered the submissions and gone
through the record.
       6.      We are of the considered view that the entire
Act would not become bad in law simply because the earlier
selection was challenged in the High Court and was
quashed and thereafter, the impugned Act has come in
force. Learned counsel for the petitioner has not been able
to show any provision of the impugned Act which can be
treated to be unconstitutional, illegal or void.
      7.    In view of the above, we do not find any reason
to grant indulgence. So far as the consequential prayers
made in the writ petition, suffice it to observe that the
aggrieved persons have already approached the Karnataka
State  Administrative   Tribunal  where   the   matters are
pending consideration. As such, such reliefs are not
required to be considered by this Court at this stage.
      8.    The writ petition, being devoid of merit, is
