1.     This appeal is against the judgment and order dated
18.09.2008 passed by the First Additional Sessions Judge,
Kannauj in S.T. No.57 of 1998 convicting the appellant (Satya
Prakash) under Section 302 IPC and sentencing him to
imprisonment for life with fine of Rs.5,000/­ and a default
sentence of additional one month.
2.     In a nutshell, the prosecution story as narrated in the first
information report (FIR) is that, on 28.06.1998, at about 9 pm,
the informant Harish Chandra (PW­1) and his brother Phool
Chandra (the deceased) were sitting at the door of their house
when Satya Prakash (the appellant), Kanhaiya (who died during
trial), both sons of Shiv Balak Tripathi, Bahadur son of Jaijram
Yadav and Ramu Tripathi son of Kailash Nath Tripathi came
armed with country made pistols and, on exhortation of
Kanhaiya, the appellant (Satya Prakash) fired from his country
made pistol at the deceased, with a view to take his life, which
hit the deceased. On raising alarm, Mool Chand Raidas (PW­2),
Ram Kumar Tripathi (not examined), and Shiv Sharan Tripathi
(not examined) and various other persons came and witnessed
the incident. The accused ran away by extending threats. The
written report (Ex. Ka­1) of the incident, alleging as above, was
submitted by PW­1 by adding that the brother of the informant,
namely, Phool Chandra (the deceased), has been taken to the
hospital and after getting him admitted in the hospital, the
informant has come to lodge the FIR. This written report was
registered as    Case Crime No.410 of 1998 at P.S. Kannauj,
District Kannauj, vide G.D. Entry No.30 (Ex. Ka­5), dated
28.06.1998, at 23.10 hrs, of which the Chik FIR (Ex. Ka­4) was
prepared and both were proved by PW­6 (retired Head
Constable Chhedi Lal Gupta). Initially, the case was registered
under Section 307, 504, 506 IPC but, later, vide report No.3,
dated 29.06.1998, at 2.15 am, the case was converted to one
punishable under Section 302, 504, 506 IPC. The carbon copy of
the G.D. Entry No.3 in respect of alteration of the charging
section was proved by PW­6 and exhibited as Ex. Ka­6. In the
meantime, a seizure memo (Ex. Ka­2), dated 28.06.1998, signed
by Mool Chand Tripathi (PW­3) and Atul Kumar Tripathi (PW­
4), in respect of lifting blood stained earth and plain earth as
well as one empty 12 bore cartridge from the spot, was prepared
which was proved by PW­3, PW­4 and the first investigating
officer (I.O.) (PW­8). On 28.06.1998 itself, site plan (Ex. Ka­8)
was also prepared by PW­8 and, on 29.06.1998, at about 11 am,
inquest was completed at Dixit Hospital, Kannauj of which
inquest report (Ex. Ka­9), witnessed by PW­1, amongst others,
was prepared. Thereafter, at about 6.20 pm, on 29.06.1998,
autopsy on the body of the deceased was carried out at District
Hospital, Fatehgarh of which, post­mortem report (Ex. Ka­3)
was prepared and proved by Dr. S.K. Saxena (PW­5).
3.     The post­mortem report (Ex. Ka­3) reveals: (i) that Rigor
Mortis had passed away on upper extremities though present in
lower extremities; (ii) that there was a multiple pellets entry
wound on front of the head, forehead and face including both
eyes and upper part neck with margins inverted lacerated and
ecchymosed; and (iii) that internal examination disclosed
presence of 150 gm of pasty matter in the stomach; trachea and
larynx lacerated; frontal bone of the skull (occipital region) and
nose fractured. The estimated time of death was half a day
4.     After  completing     the   investigation,    the    second
investigating officer Om Prakash Sharma (PW­7) submitted
charge sheet (Ex. Ka­7). On which, cognizance was taken and
the case was committed to the court of session. All the accused
were charged under section 302 read with section 34 IPC and
section 506 IPC. The accused pleaded not guilty and claimed for
5.     In the trial, the prosecution examined:­ Harish Chand
Tripathi (PW­1­ the informant ­ the brother of the deceased) as
an eye witness; Mool Chand Raidas (PW­2), as an eye witness
but he was declared hostile; Mool Chand Tripathi (PW­3 ­ the
other brother of the deceased) as witness of the seizure memo
(Ex. Ka­2); Atul Kumar (PW­4 ­ the son of the deceased),
another witness of the seizure memo (Ex. Ka­2); Dr. S.K. Saxena
(PW­5), who conducted the post­mortem examination of the
deceased; Head Constable Chhedi Lal Gupta (PW­6), who made
GD entry of the written report of the incident as well as
alteration in the charging section; Om Prakash Sharma (PW­7),
the    second    investigating    officer,  who    completed   the
investigation and submitted charge sheet; and Ganesh Bajpai
(PW­8), the first investigating officer (I.O.), who proved various
steps of investigation including collection of blood stained earth,
plain earth and empty 12 bore cartridge from the spot;
preparation of site plan; inquest proceedings; preparation of
photo nash, chalan nash, etc; and the steps to arrest the
6.     The   incriminating    circumstances     appearing  in  the
prosecution evidence were put to the accused persons including
the appellant for recording their statement under Section 313
CrPC. The accused claimed that they are innocent; the
prosecution story is false; and that they have been implicated on
account of previous enmity.
7.     The trial court by placing reliance on the ocular evidence
of PW­1 and upon finding that no specific role was attributed to
other accused except the present appellant, convicted and
punished the appellant and acquitted the remaining accused.
8.     We have heard Sri Kamal Krishna, learned Senior Counsel,
assisted by Sri Chandra Narayan Mishra, for the appellant; Sri
Rajendra Prasad Mishra and Ms. Arti Agrawal, learned AGA, for
the State; and have perused the record.
9.     The learned counsel for the appellant has submitted as
(a) That no serious motive for the crime has been proved
as against the appellant to kill the deceased because the motive,
if any, to commit crime was as against PW­1 (the informant),
inasmuch as informant's wife's niece, who was married to the
appellant, had left the appellant and, therefore, the appellant
bore a grudge against the informant as, despite requests, he
failed to ensure restitution of appellant's conjugal rights.
(b) That the presence of the informant i.e. sole eye
witness of the incident (PW­1) at the spot appears doubtful
because if he had been present, the motive being against him,
he would not have been spared; that PW­3 is not an eye witness;
and that though, PW­4, in his deposition in Court, stated that he
saw 4 persons including the appellant running away from the
spot but, that was an improvement on what he stated under
section 161 CrPC. Thus, no one witnessed the incident.
(c) That the testimony of PW­1 does not inspire
confidence for the following reasons:
(i) In his examination­in­chief he states that he and the
deceased were sitting on a Takhat (wooden cot) placed in the
verandah of their house when the accused arrived with pistol
and, on exhortation of Kanhaiya, the appellant fired at the
deceased, which hit the deceased on the face and he fell on the
spot whereas, the body of Phool Chandra was not found inside
the house but on the road. This suggests that the deceased had
not witnessed the incident. However, later, to make his
testimony in sync with the spot position, during cross
examination, by way of improvement, he stated that when the
accused arrived and were abusing, the deceased went out and
thereafter, shot was fired. This improvement was during the
course of trial and that too, after examination­in­chief, whereas,
such stand was not there even in the statement recorded under
(ii) PW­1 stated that after the deceased was hit by
gunshot, the deceased was rushed, in an injured condition, to
Vinod Hospital in a cart. There, the doctor, seeing deceased’s
condition, advised to take him to Kanpur, upon which, while
PW­3, the other brother of PW­1, was making arrangements to
take the deceased to Kanpur, PW­1 came to the police station to
lodge the FIR. This story narrated by PW­1 is at variance with
the statement of PW­4, the son of the deceased, who stated that
when he heard the gunshot he came out to the spot, saw a
gathering of people at the spot and his father lying on the road;
the police arrived within half an hour, and took away his father.
PW­4 also stated that he had gone to the police station with the
body of his father and from there, they had taken the deceased
to Vinod Dixit Hospital where Dr. Vinod told that his father is no
more alive; thereafter, they all waited with the body at the
police station and in the morning, the inquest report was
prepared and the body was sent for postmortem.             If PW­4
testimony, which finds corroboration in the testimony of PW­8,
is to be accepted, the deceased had died at the spot therefore,
rushing the deceased to the hospital and, thereafter, returning
back to the police station to lodge the FIR appears to be a ploy
to buy time to explain the delay in lodging the FIR as this delay
was utilised to contrive the prosecution story.
(iii) PW­1's testimony is unreliable also for the reason that
in his statement made during cross examination on 15.02.2005,
he stated as follows:­
“eSus fjiksVZ esa ;g ckr ugh fy[kk;h Fkh fd Qwypan r[kr ls mrjdj
lM+d ij x;sA eSUks njksxk th dks Hkh ;g ckr ugh crk;hA u eSus 4-6-01
dks eSus U;k;ky; esa Hkh ;g ckr ugh crk;hA tSlk dksVZ lkgc us le>k
oSlk fy[kok;kA eSUks U;k;ky; esa fnukad 4-6-01 ds c;ku esa ;g ckr ugh
dgh fd ^^eSa o esjs HkkbZ Qwypan edku ds ckgj r[kr ij cSBs Fks rHkh
pkj vfHk;qDr --------------------- bruk dgrs gh lR;izdk'k us Qwypan ij reaps
ls Qk;j dj fn;kA tks esjs HkkbZ ds psgjs ij yxk o esjs HkkbZ rqjar yM+
[kM+kdj fxj x;sA^^ lgh ckr ;gh gS fd esjs HkkbZ xksyh yxus ij lM+d
ij fxjs FksA lR; izdk'k ds vykok fdlh us u dksbZ Qk;j fd;k u dksbZ
ckr dghA Qwypan ls lR;izdk'k ds dksbZ jaft'k ugh FkhA tks Hkh jaft'k
Fkh og lR;izdk'k dh eq>ls FkhA lR;izdk'k ds firk us esjs firk dks
ykfB;ksa ls ekjk FkkA ;gh iqjkuh jaft'k FkhA blh jaft'k dh otg ls
The above extracted statement of PW­1 reflects that PW­1
narrated what he was tutored to narrate and not what he
actually witnessed.
(d) That not only the FIR but all police papers prior to
inquest appear to have been prepared at one go therefore, the
FIR appears ante­timed. This is so, because the FIR, as per
record, was registered at 23.10 pm on 28.06.1998 under
Sections 307, 504, 506 IPC but the fard recovery of blood­
stained earth, plain earth and the empty cartridge, which is
stated to have been prepared on 28.06.1998, at about 9.30 pm,
not only bears the details of the case i.e. Case Crime No.410 of
1998, but, also Sections 302/307/504/506 IPC, which means
that the GD entry made on 29.06.1998 at 2.15 am converting
the case into one punishable under Section 302 IPC from
Section 307 IPC is a sham document. This suggests that the
deceased was killed by an unknown assailant, he died at the
spot and, later, the entire prosecution story that the deceased
was rushed to the hospital and, on return from the hospital, the
FIR was lodged has been contrived on guess­work and past
(e) The learned counsel for the appellant further
submitted that, according to the doctor (PW­5), the deceased
ate his meal about 3 to 4 hours before; therefore, testimony of
PW­1 that he and the deceased have had dinner 15 minutes
before is falsified. Further, PW­1 is an interested witness as,
admittedly, his wife's niece, married to the appellant, had left
the appellant and therefore, he had a motive to implicate the
appellant. Thus, looking to the circumstances narrated above, in
absence of corroboration from an independent witness, his
testimony is not of that unimpeachable category as to form basis
of conviction. Further, there is no recovery of the murder
weapon to connect the appellant to the crime. Hence, it is a fit
case where the appellant be extended benefit of doubt and
acquitted. More so, when he has already suffered incarceration
of over 15 years.
10.   Per contra, learned AGA submitted that it is well settled
that the first information report need not be an encyclopaedia
therefore, even if PW­1 (the informant) had not stated in the
FIR that the deceased went out and was shot when he was on
the road, the substratum of the prosecution story that the
deceased was shot by the appellant remaining intact, and the
medical evidence indicated that the appellant died on account
ante­mortem gunshot injury, the prosecution story is not liable
to be disbelieved merely because all the details of the manner in
which the incident occurred were neither disclosed in the FIR
nor in the statement recorded under section 161 CrPC. He
further submits that the site plan prepared by the I.O. refers to
the spot as the place where the injured was found lying, which
means that the deceased was not dead at the spot. Thus, the
story that he was rushed to the hospital and on return
therefrom, the FIR was lodged appears natural and not
contrived. Otherwise also, when a person is injured, even if he
may be dead, there is always an attempt to rush him to the
hospital to save him, even if there is no possibility of him
surviving the injury. Hence, the statement of PW­1 that the
deceased was rushed to the hospital does not at all dents the
reliability of PW­1's testimony. Learned AGA further submits
that assuming that in the seizure memo prepared on
28.06.1998, case crime number and section 302 IPC is
mentioned at the top that, by itself, is not sufficient to discard
the first information report as ante­timed or bogus because it
could be possible that the seizure memo may have been
completed afterwards. He further submits that assuming that
there may be some lapses in the investigation and due care was
not taken while filling the papers that, by itself, is not a ground
to discard the ocular testimony of PW­1 whose presence in the
house has not been questioned and no suggestion has been put
to PW­1 that he was not present in the house at the time of the
incident. He further submits that the testimony of PW­1 is
reliable and the conviction recorded by the trial court is
justified, more so, because the testimony of PW­1 finds
corroboration from the medical report. Hence, he prayed that
the appeal be dismissed.
11.    Having noticed the rival submissions, before we proceed
to analyse the weight of the respective submissions, it would be
appropriate to notice the testimony of the prosecution witnesses
in brief.
12.    PW­1 (Harish Chandra). In his examination­in­chief, on
04.06.2001, stated that the accused Satya Prakash and Kanhaiya
are real brothers. The accused Ramu is cousin of Satya Prakash
whereas accused Bahadur is Satya Prakash's neighbour. Satya
Prakash is married to PW­1's wife's niece. As Satya Prakash used
to ill treat his wife, she left her matrimonial home and went to
her Maika (parents house); to have her back, Satya Prakash
used to pressurise PW­1. For that reason, Satya Prakash had a
grudge against PW­1 and his family.
In respect of the incident, in his examination­in­chief, PW­
1 stated that on 28.06.1998, at about 9 pm, he and the deceased
were sitting in their verandah on a Takhat (wooden cot) when
all the four accused came with country made pistols and, on
exhortation of Kanhaiya, Satya Prakash fired at the deceased,
which hit him on the face, as a consequence whereof, the
deceased fell on the spot. Upon which, PW­1 raised alarm,
where after Mool Chand Raidas (PW­2), Shiv Sharan (not
examined) and Ram Kumar Tripathi (not examined) arrived and
the accused escaped by extending threats. Thereafter, PW­1
made arrangement for a cart to carry the deceased to Vinod
Dixit Hospital where he was admitted for treatment. There, the
doctor told that his condition is serious therefore he be taken to
Kanpur. While PW­1’s brother Mool Chandra Tripathi (PW­3)
was making arrangement to take the deceased to Kanpur, PW­1
went to lodge the FIR. PW­1 also stated that PW­3 took the
deceased to Kanpur but on way, near Chaubeypur, the deceased
died therefore, he returned with the body to the hospital. On
receipt of information regarding death of the deceased, oral
information thereof was given to the police. Next day, inquest
was conducted. He stated that in the night of the incident itself,
the I.O. had come to the spot; recorded his statement; inspected
the spot; and recovered blood stained earth and empty
cartridge. He stated that at the time of the incident, there was
light from electricity bulb.
In his cross examination, held on 14.02.2005, he
disclosed the dimensions of the verandah where PW­1 and the
deceased were sitting on a Takhat at the time of the incident.
He also disclosed that the main door of his house opens towards
east on that very verandah; whereas, just after the verandah
there is road.
In his cross­examination, held on 15.02.2005, he disclosed
that the marriage of Satya Prakash (the appellant) with PW­1’s
wife’s niece was held in the year 1996 and that Satya Prakash’s
wife remained in her matrimonial home for about two years.
Describing the spot, he stated that outside the door there was
bulb, which had been shown to the investigating officer and that
in the street also, there was an electricity pole having a bulb;
and he had informed the investigating officer about the source
of light, though, it was not written in the report or in his
statement. He also stated that at the time of the incident, the
deceased was sitting on right side of PW­1 and that no other
person was present at that time. On suggestion that he was
sleeping inside the house, he stated that though, they used to
sleep inside the house but, as they had meal (dinner) 10­15
minutes before, they (i.e. PW­1 and the deceased) were sitting
on the wooden cot in the verandah. On further cross­
examination, in respect of the manner in which the incident
occurred, he stated that Satya Prakash and the other accused
came hurling abuses and when he first saw the accused, they
were at a distance of 4­5 meters from the verandah. Leading
them was Satya Prakash. PW­1 stood there at the verandah
whereas the deceased stood up from the wooden cot and came
out on the road; there, the deceased was shot at from a distance
of about 3 meters. Before the shot was fired, hot words were
exchanged for 1­2 minutes. As soon as the gunshot hit the
deceased, PW­1 raised alarm. On raising alarm, several
neighbours arrived. The first three to arrive were Ram Kumar
Tripathi, Shiv Sharan and Mool Chand Raidas (PW­2). When
they arrived, the deceased was lying injured; they all lifted the
deceased and took him on a cart to the hospital. Atul (PW­4)
also arrived at the hospital. They reached the hospital at about
quarter to 10 pm. At the hospital, doctor gave some treatment
and told that the condition of the deceased is serious and he
should be taken to Kanpur. At this stage, PW­1 stated as
“eSus fjiksVZ esa ;g ckr ugh fy[kk;h Fkh fd Qwypan r[kr ls mrjdj
lM+d ij x;sA eSUks njksxk th dks Hkh ;g ckr ugh crk;hA u eSus 4-6-01
dks eSus U;k;ky; esa Hkh ;g ckr ugh crk;hA tSlk dksVZ lkgc us le>k
oSlk fy[kok;kA eSUks U;k;ky; esa fnukad 4-6-01 ds c;ku esa ;g ckr ugh
dgh fd ^^eSa o esjs HkkbZ Qwypan edku ds ckgj r[kr ij cSBs Fks rHkh
pkj vfHk;qDr --------------------- bruk dgrs gh lR;izdk'k us Qwypan ij reaps
ls Qk;j dj fn;kA tks esjs HkkbZ ds psgjs ij yxk o esjs HkkbZ rqjar yM+
[kM+kdj fxj x;sA^^ lgh ckr ;gh gS fd esjs HkkbZ xksyh yxus ij lM+d
ij fxjs FksA lR; izdk'k ds vykok fdlh us u dksbZ Qk;j fd;k u dksbZ
ckr dghA Qwypan ls lR;izdk'k ds dksbZ jaft'k ugh FkhA tks Hkh jaft'k
Fkh og lR;izdk'k dh eq>ls FkhA lR;izdk'k ds firk us esjs firk dks
ykfB;ksa ls ekjk FkkA ;gh iqjkuh jaft'k FkhA blh jaft'k dh otg ls
In addition to above, PW­1 stated that 45­46 years before
also, some incident had taken place as a result of which there
was enmity between the families of the deceased and Satya
In respect of light, PW­1 stated that it was a dark night
and the Moon had come out late.
On further cross examination, he stated that he had not
gone to Kanpur with the deceased; that the police informed him
between 1.30 am to 1.45 am that his brother (Phool Chandra)
i.e. the deceased is not alive. On receiving this information, he
again went to the hospital at about 2 am where the police and
the body of his brother was there. Thereafter, he returned back
home and delivered information to the family. Next day, the
body was taken for postmortem. On further cross examination,
he stated that he gave information to the police about half an
hour after his brother (the deceased) was taken to Kanpur. PW­
1 also stated that his other brother Mool Chandra (PW­3) and
two police personnel had accompanied his brother (the
deceased) to Kanpur.
In respect of time of arrival of the I.O. at the spot, PW­1
stated that before his brother (the deceased) was taken to the
hospital, though, the I.O. had not arrived but two constables
had come. PW­1 denied the suggestion that he lodged the FIR
after the death of his brother on the suggestion of the police
personnel. He, however, he admitted that the written report was
prepared at the hospital. He also denied the suggestion that it
was a dark night and some unknown person had killed his
brother and that no one witnessed the incident and that with
the help of police on the basis of past enmity, false implication
was made.
13.   PW­2 (Mool Chand Raidas). He stated that he did not
witness the incident. Consequently, the prosecution declared
him hostile. During his cross­examination by the public
prosecutor, he stated that in the night of the incident he was at
his in­laws place at Bilgram, District Hardoi and that he
returned after five days. When confronted with his previous
statement recorded under Section 161 CrPC, he denied having
given any such statement. In his cross examination by the
defence, he stated that when he returned from his in­laws place,
he came to know that some unknown miscreants had killed
Phool Chandra (the deceased).
14.   PW­3 (Mool Chandra). He is brother of the deceased. He
stated that at the time when the incident took place he had gone
to Bazaar. When he returned back, he came to know that his
brother Phool Chandra (the deceased) has been shot by Satya
Prakash and that Phool Chandra's family members have taken
him to the hospital. He stated that the police had arrived at the
spot and had collected plain earth and blood stained earth in
two separate boxes and had also lifted one empty cartridge. PW­
3 stated that the inquest was conducted at the hospital and he
was a signatory to the inquest report. He reiterated what PW­1
had stated in respect of the motive for the crime.
In his cross examination, PW­3 reiterated that when he
arrived, just after the incident, Phool Chandra (the deceased)
had already been taken to the hospital. He stated that at 9.30
p.m. the police had arrived on a Jeep. He could not tell whether
I.O. was there or not, but constables were there; and a seizure
memo was prepared. The police had stayed there for half an
hour and had visited the house of Satya Prakash (the appellant)
and had enquired from the neighbours there. He stated that his
brother (the deceased) was in the hospital; and that he had
taken him to Kanpur with 3­4 other persons including police
men. He admitted his signature on Ex. Ka­2 and also admitted
that in Ex. Ka­2, case crime No.410 of 1998 was written. He,
however, denied the suggestion that the first information report
was lodged after the death of Phool Chandra.
15.    PW­4 (Atul Kumar). He is the son of the deceased. He
stated that at the time of the incident, at about 9 pm, he was
having dinner. His uncle (PW­1) and his father (the deceased)
were having talks. A bulb was lit there. On hearing noise and
gunshot, he went out and saw four persons, namely, Satya
Prakash, Kanhaiya, Bahadur and Ramu, running away. His
father was lying on the road and his uncle (PW­1) and others
told him that those were the four persons who have killed PW­
4’s father. He stated that his uncle (PW­1) had written the
report. He stated that the police had arrived at the spot and had
lifted the empty cartridge, blood stained earth and plain earth
from the spot. He stated that he had signed the seizure memo
(Ex. Ka­2). He reiterated the same motive as narrated by PW­1.
In his cross examination, he stated that at the time of the
incident, he was eating food inside the house. He heard a
gunshot and on noise coming from outside, he went out
immediately and saw that crowd had gathered and his father
(the deceased) was lying on the road, at a distance of 10 paces
from the verandah. Police came within half an hour and lifted
his father and before lifting his father, they lifted blood stained
earth and plain earth from the spot as also the empty cartridge
and got his signature on the memorandum. On being confronted
with his previous statement recorded under Section 161 CrPC,
PW­4 admitted that earlier he had not made a statement that he
saw Satya Prakash, Kanhaiya, Bahadur and Ramu running away.
On further cross examination, he stated that he had
gone with his father to the police station and from there, he
went to Vinod Dixit Hospital. Where, Vinod Dixit told him that
his father had died. Upon getting that information, he took back
the body to the police station. He remained with the body at the
police station through the night and in the morning, inquest
report was prepared and the body was sent for post­mortem.
PW­4 stated that they had taken the body to the police station at
10 pm. He denied the suggestion that on suggestion of the
police he made the statement that he saw the accused running
away. He also denied the suggestion that seizure memo was
prepared on the next day at the police station.
16.    PW­5 (Dr. S.K. Saxena). He proved the post­mortem
report, which has already been noticed above, and stated that
the injury sustained by the deceased could have been caused at
9 pm on 28.06.1998 and as there was no blackening, charring
or tattooing, the shot must have been fired from a distance of 6
feet or more. He also stated that he found 12 pellets embedded
in the brain and the shot could have resulted in instantaneous
death. He added that the nature of injuries were such that the
victim could not have survived for long without medical
support. He also stated that the deceased may have had his
meals 2 to 3 hours before.
prepared the GD entry of the first information report. He also
proved that at 2 am on 29.06.1998, upon receipt of information
with regard to the death of Phool Chandra, the case was
converted to that of murder.
In   his   cross   examination, he    stated that initial
investigation of the case was handed over to S.I., M.D. Verma,
who was present at the Thana when the report was lodged. He
denied the suggestion that the deceased was killed by
miscreants and information in respect of his death having been
received earlier, the GD was kept vacant to enter the case later.
18.    PW­7      (Om     Prakash   Sharma,      retired   Deputy
Superintendent of Police). He was the second Investigating
Officer who, after completing the investigation, submitted
charge sheet which was proved by him as Ex. Ka­7.
In his cross examination, he stated that he had not
visited the spot.
Lucknow). He stated that he was the Station House Incharge of
Police Station Kannauj on the date and time of the incident.
Initially, the investigation was handed over to M.D. Verma but
as the injured died in the night, he took over the investigation.
He proved various stages of investigation such as collection of
blood­stained, plain earth and empty cartridge from the spot
vide Ex. Ka­2; preparation of site plan vide Ex. Ka 8; and
preparation of inquest report (Ex. Ka 9), photo nash (Ex Ka­10),
challan nash (Ex. Ka10) under his direction by S.I. M.D. Verma
as well as arrest /surrender of the accused persons.
In his cross examination, he stated that he received
information about the incident on RT set while he was on round
in the area. Though he could not remember the time of receipt
of such information but stated that immediately, thereafter, he
had arrived at the spot and when he reached the spot, he saw
the body there. Immediately, he inspected the spot. Existence of
bulb in the verandah was not shown to him. He did not record
the statement of Atul, which was recorded by O.P. Sharma. He
denied the suggestion that FIR was written after inquest.
20.   On a conspectus of the entire prosecution evidence, the
features that stand out are as follows:­
(i) PW­1 is the only eye witness of the incident because,
though, PW­4 claims that he saw the accused running away but,
the fact that he saw the accused running away was not disclosed
by him in his statement recorded under section 161 CrPC with
which he was confronted during his deposition. PW­2, the other
eye witness turned hostile and stated that he was elsewhere and
not at the spot. In so far as PW­3 is concerned, he arrived at the
spot, after the body was lifted.
(ii) PW­1 states that the deceased was rushed to the
hospital for treatment; there he was advised to be taken to
Kanpur but, on way to Kanpur, he died. In between, PW­1
lodged the report. Whereas, PW­4, the son of the deceased,
states that within half an hour of the incident, the police had
arrived, they lifted the body of his father. He also accompanied
the body to the police station and from there the body was
taken to Vinod Dixit Hospital. There Vinod Dixit declared him
dead and, thereafter, the body was taken back to the police
station where it was kept overnight and in the morning, inquest
was conducted; whereafter, the body was sent for postmortem.
(iii) PW­1, neither in the written report (FIR), nor in the
statement recorded under section 161 CrPC, stated that the
deceased, during the course of the incident, went out of the
house and was shot at on the road, whereas, the site plan, as
well as the evidence, suggests that the deceased was shot at on
the road just outside his house. Notably, even in his statement­
in­chief, during his deposition in court, it was not disclosed by
PW­1 that the deceased had gone out and was shot at on the
road. Rather, he stated that PW­1 and the deceased were sitting
on the wooden cot (Takhat) when the accused arrived and, on
exhortation of co­accused Kanhaiya, Satya Prakash (the
appellant) fired at the deceased which hit the deceased on his
face and he fell on the spot. Importantly, in his statement­in­
chief, PW­1 did not disclose that the deceased went out on the
road and, there, was shot by the accused. Interestingly, to
explain this major lacuna, in the cross examination, he made an
improvement by stating that the shot was fired after a brief
altercation, which lasted 1 to 2 minutes; and, when the accused
party arrived and hurled abuses, the deceased stood up from the
wooden cot and went out on the road, where he was shot at. To
further explain his improved stand during cross­examination, he
stated that what he stated earlier on 04.06.2001 was as was
told to him by “Court Sahab”. We inquired from the learned
counsel for the parties as to what Court Sahab means, to which
they responded by saying that it is a colloquial term for public
prosecutor. Be that as it may, the improvement in the eye
witness account noticed above, was for the first time during the
course of PW­1’s deposition in court and that too, at the time of
cross examination.
(iv) The FIR is stated to have been lodged at 23.10 hrs on
28.06.1998 while the deceased was in an injured state though
not dead; and the conversion of the case into one punishable
under Section 302 IPC is post midnight i.e. on 29.06.1998,
whereas, the seizure memo (Ex. Ka 2) and the site plan (Ex. Ka
8), both dated 28.06.1998, prepared immediately on arrival of
the police at the spot at 9.30 p.m., reflects not only the case
crime number but also section 302 IPC. This indicates that the
seizure memo as well as the site plan was not prepared at the
spot as is also the finding of the trial court.     But, what is
interesting is that PW­4, the witness to Ex Ka­2, states that it
was prepared before the body was lifted by the police, whereas,
according to the PW­3, this was prepared at about 9.30, when
the deceased, in an injured condition, had already been taken to
the hospital. What assumes importance is that, in any case, Ex.
Ka­2 and Ex Ka­8 though, on record, were prepared before lodging
the FIR yet, they reflect the entry of the case crime number of
the case as also the charging Section 302 IPC suggesting that
these papers were prepared when the deceased was dead. It also
suggests that the investigating agency had not been meticulous
and it had been preparing the records at its convenience.
(v) PW­8, the investigating officer, states that he had
received information of the incident through RT set; and that he
arrived at the spot without any delay and saw the body at the
spot. This suggests that the deceased was dead on the spot.
(vi) PW­5, the doctor, who conducted post­mortem, on
suggestion, admitted that the nature of the injuries were such
that the deceased would have died instantaneously and could
not have survived for long without medical support.
(vii) No evidence, either documentary or oral, of any kind
in respect of treatment or admission of the deceased in an
injured condition in the Hospital has been brought on record to
demonstrate that the deceased in an injured condition was
taken to the hospital for treatment or medical attention.
(viii) That there does not appear any evidence to
demonstrate that the murder weapon was recovered and
connected with the empty cartridge found on the spot.
21.   Having noticed the aforesaid key features in the
prosecution evidence, the issue that arises for our consideration
is whether the testimony of solitary eyewitness (PW­1) is
confidence inspiring and whether it could form the basis of
conviction. To test the credibility of a witness, first, it has to be
seen whether the presence of the witness from where he
witnessed the incident at the spot is natural or is duly proved.
In the instant case, the spot where the deceased was shot, by
cogent evidence including the site plan, is proved to be a public road,
in front of the house of the deceased. The time of the incident is
also proved to be at 9.00 pm from the testimony of the
witnesses to which there is no challenge. Further, there is no
challenge to the presence of PW­1 in the house where he, his
family and the deceased used to reside. In fact, there is no
suggestion to PW­1 that he resided elsewhere or that he was at
some other place when the incident occurred. The defence did,
however, make suggestion to PW­1 that no one witnessed the
incident, which occurred in the darkness of night; and that some
unknown person did the act; whereas, the accused were falsely
implicated on the basis of past enmity.       So far as enmity is
concerned, that is admitted with PW­1, inasmuch as, PW­1’s
wife’s niece had deserted the appellant; as a result whereof, the
appellant had been pressurising PW­1 to send her back. This
might be a reason for being inimical towards the deceased as
well but not to the extent the enmity was with PW­1. Be that as
it may, what needs to be ascertained is whether PW­1 was with
the deceased at the time of the incident or was inside the house,
like other members, and only when gun shot was heard, he,
with others, rushed out to witness the deceased lying injured or
dead, as the case may be.
22.   To test whether a witness is trustworthy and reliable; and
whether he is speaking the truth, there are no cut­and­dry
formulae. Ordinarily, reliability of a witness is to be tested after
going through his entire testimony and weighing it in
conjunction with other material/ evidence on record so as to
find out whether it has a ring of truth about it or is contrived.
While testing the reliability and credibility of a witness, minor
contradictions or omissions in his deposition which have no
material bearing on the substratum of the prosecution case are
to be overlooked, if, otherwise, the testimony is intrinsically
natural, reliable and trustworthy. But where the witness appears
to be lying on material particulars and making improvements to
fill up lacunae, credibility of that witness gets hit.   Another
important test, though not conclusive, is whether the witness at
the first opportunity to make a disclosure of what he knows, has
made that disclosure. Because, where, even on opportunity, the
disclosure is withheld, or delayed, a doubt arises as to whether
the story is contrived, based on guess­work or ill motives,
particularly, where several persons are implicated with either no
role or ornamental role.
23.    In the instant case, the ocular account rendered by PW­1
that the deceased in an injured condition was rushed to the
hospital and, there, the doctor advised to take him to Kanpur
and, while that process was on, PW­1 came to lodge the first
information report does not appear truthful. Rather, the
deceased appears to have died on spot. This we say so, because,
according to PW­4, the son of the deceased, the police had
arrived at the spot within half an hour and had taken the body
of the deceased to the police station and, thereafter, the body
was taken to the hospital. It appears the body was taken to the
hospital not for treatment or saving the life but to confirm the
death. This fact gains probability also from the statement of
PW­8, who states that when he arrived at the spot, the body was
there on the road. The time of arrival of the police at the spot
can be gathered from the testimony of PW­3 and PW­4. PW­3
fixes the time of arrival at 9.30 pm whereas PW­4 says half an
hour after the incident. As, according to the prosecution story,
incident occurred at 9.00 pm, police must have arrived by or
about 9.30 pm. This means that the informant (PW­1) as well as
deceased’s son (PW­4), both had opportunity to lodge the FIR
when the body was taken to the police station. Once we accept
this position, then why the FIR was not lodged then? Answer to
this, holds the key to this case. To give an answer to this, by
way of explanation, PW­1 takes the stand that the deceased was
alive and was rushed to the hospital and there it was advised to
take him to Kanpur. Under these circumstances, the explanation
rendered was a material aspect on which we have found PW­1
not speaking the truth. But, this throws up another question,
that is, whether the FIR was lodged at 23.10 hours or later, as
suggested by the defence.
24.    Ordinarily, ante­timing of an FIR is to be established by
gruelling cross­examination with reference to the entries made
in the General Diary of the date to demonstrate that there was
no case registered in between, enabling interpolation; and that
the police papers prepared subsequent to the purported time of
registration of the FIR bear no details of the case. Be that as it
may, in this case, the defence though have made suggestion
with regard to the FIR being ante­timed but have not been able
to demonstrate that the FIR was ante­timed. But, what assumes
importance is that according to the prosecution evidence,
seizure memo (Ex. Ka­2) and site plan (Ex. Ka 8) were prepared
when the police arrived at the spot, which means on or about
9.30 pm, whereas, the FIR was lodged at 23.10 hours, that is, at
11.10 pm. Yet, in Ex Ka­2 and Ex. Ka 8, not only the case crime
number but also section 302 IPC is mentioned when, otherwise,
there was no section 302 IPC at the time of registration of the
case. This discrepancy the trial court noticed and overlooked by
observing that it is a practice of the police to fill papers not on
spot but later. No doubt, this does happen and, therefore, it
cannot be a clinching circumstance to totally discredit the
lodging of the FIR at the time when it is purported to have been
lodged but, what it does is that it taints the police investigation
and therefore, much mileage cannot be derived by the
prosecution from the so­called prompt FIR inasmuch as the
police records appear to have been prepared at one go. Under
the circumstances, we would have to           be circumspect and
independently assess the worth of the ocular account rendered
by PW­1 so as to find out whether it is wholly reliable and
trustworthy, more so, because he is the sole eye witness. At this
stage, we may also observe that this is a case where the
deceased was shot at on the road from a distance of over six feet
thus, being a case of single gun shot, what would have to be
examined is whether the incident was a hit and run kind of an
incident or it occurred in the manner alleged by PW­1.
25.    According to PW­1, he and the deceased were sitting on
the cot when the accused arrived. Initially, in the FIR as well in
the statement in chief, he stated that while PW­1 and the
deceased were sitting on the cot, the accused arrived and, on
exhortation of Kanhaiya, Satya Prakash fired the shot which hit
the deceased on face and he fell on the spot. As per this initial
statement, there was no altercation and no movement of the
deceased from the cot therefore, the site where the deceased
fell, after being hit, came to be inside the house in its verandah.
But, as the spot from where the deceased was lifted fell on the
road, outside the house, during cross­examination, PW­1 made
improvement and introduced the story that when the accused
party came, the deceased rose from the cot went out on the
road, entered into an altercation for 1­2 minutes and then the
shot was fired, as a result whereof, the deceased fell on the
road.    This improvement was made for the first time during
cross­examination after few years of the examination in chief;
and this improved story was not there even in the statement
recorded under section 161 CrPC with which PW­1 was
confronted.    Further,   when     he   was   asked   about    this
improvement, PW­1 stated that what he had stated earlier, on
04.06.2001, is what the Court Sahab had advised him to state.
This renders his testimony not wholly reliable and shakes our
confidence in his deposition and when we look at it from
another angle, that is, he has not been found truthful with
regard to the deceased being alive and rushed to the hospital for
treatment, various questions arise in our mind, that is, whether
he really witnessed the incident or he also arrived at the spot,
like others, when the gun shot was heard; and whether the FIR
and the prosecution story is contrived, based on guess­work, or
suspicion, or ill­motive. Be that as it may, the upshot of the
discussion is that the testimony of PW­1 having not been found
truthful on a material particular and inconsistent as well, in the
sense that it improves upon the earlier statement, in respect of
the manner in which the incident occurred, it is not wholly
reliable and this by itself is sufficient to extend the benefit of
doubt to the accused­appellant. More so, when the prosecution
case is based on testimony of a solitary eye witness, who has
himself not suffered any injury, and the testimony does not find
corroboration from other independent evidence. At this stage,
we may notice that though the prosecution had also examined
PW­4 as a witness who saw the accused running away from the
spot, but this deposition of his is at variance with his statement
under section 161 CrPC where he did not state having seen the
accused running away. We, therefore, do not propose to rely on
the testimony of PW­4 to lend credence to what PW­1 deposed.
26.    For all the reasons stated above, we are of the considered
view that the prosecution has failed to prove its case beyond the
pale of doubt and, therefore, the appellant is entitled to the
benefit of doubt. Consequently, the appeal is allowed. The
judgment and order of conviction and sentence recorded by the
trial court is set aside. The appellant is acquitted of the charge
for which he has been tried and convicted. The appellant shall
be released from jail forthwith, unless wanted in any other case,
subject to compliance of the provisions of Section 437­A Cr.P.C.
to the satisfaction of the trial court.
27.    Let a copy of this order be certified to the court below
along with the record for information and compliance.