This is the sad story of a Music teacher, who was forced to
fight throughout her service to get a full-time post of Music
teacher, after completing five years in the part time post. I highly
suspect, whether our education system is giving due importance
to music. There are several studies about the benefits of music for
young children. Most kids love music. We all slept when we were
kids with a ‘lullaby’ of our mother. Mother’s 'lullaby' is the first
song a kid hears in his/her life. There will not be a child in this
country who has not heard a ‘lullaby’ from her mother or the
grandparents while he/she goes to sleep. If any child has lost
his/her parents in his/her early age, the kith and kins or this world
itself will sing a ‘lullaby’ for the sound sleep of that child. That is
our     culture      and     tradition.      In     Malayalam     language
“Omanathinkal Kidavo…..” is the famous ‘lullaby’ that was
composed by Irayimman Thambi on the birth of Maharaja
Swathi Thirunal of Travancore.           Sree     Kaithapram    Damodaran
Namboothiri           wrote     a   ‘lullaby’   in   a   Malayalam     film
“santhwanam” (Unni vavavo….). Music director of that song was
the famous musician Mohan Sithara. The lyrics says that, for a
sound sleep of my child, the sun, the stars and the three world
itself should sleep. It will be better to extract that portion of the
The studies show that, Music has got serious importance in child
development. Some of the studies show that, it improves fine
motor skills in the child because when music starts, normally kids
will dance and jump. Music can have a lasting effect on their
mobility and strength. Music develops language skills as song
lyrics are rooted in various languages. Music can affect the
emotions of the child. Singing, dancing, clapping etc. in a class
room will definitely improve the self- confidence of a child. It will
encourage team work. These are only some of the advantages of
Music as per the studies available in the internet. Therefore, in
my opinion,      starting from mother’s “lullaby” in the early age,
music should continue throughout the school days of the children.
Therefore, the Government should seriously think about the
sanctioning of regular Music teachers’ post in all schools, at least
in primary section, irrespective of the student’s strength or
number of periods. Currently, the Music teacher’s post is
sanctioned based on number of students in a school, number of
periods etc. If the strength of students in one school is less, then
the post of Music teacher will not be sanctioned in that school.
This in reality is a discrimination to the student community
because if a student is studying in a school where there is less
number of students they will not get the help of a Music teacher
when compared to the students of another school where there is a
post of Music teacher solely because the number of students in
that school is high. What sin is committed by a student for
denying Music solely because he/she is studying in a school with
less than the required number of students? The student’s strength
or number periods in a school ought not have been a criteria for
sanctioning at least for the post of Music teacher. Similarly
additional financial liability to the state also should not be a
reason for not sanctioning the post of music teachers in schools
because the future of this nation is in the hands of the children. Of
course, it is a policy decision to be taken by the Government and
hence this court cannot give any specific direction to sanction the
post of music teacher in all schools by invoking the powers under
Article 226 of the constitution of India. But the government
should think about it seriously. I am sure that the government will
rise to the occasion because the happiness and development of
the mental health of every child is important in a welfare state.
The registry will forward a copy of this judgment to the 1 st
respondent, the Government for taking appropriate decision in
the light of the above observations.
2. Petitioner, Smt. R.Helen Thilakom, was appointed by the
3rd  respondent,      the  Corporate Manager,    as  a  Part  Time
Instrumental Music Teacher in the Light to the Blind School,
Varkala   under     the   LMS  Corporate  Management.     She  was
appointed as a permanent teacher in the school as per Ext.P1
order. Ext.P1 appointment order was approved by the 2 nd
respondent, The District Educational Officer, Attingal, as evident
by Ext.P2 order. The petitioner's appointment order was approved
with effect from 02.01.1992 as Part Time Instrumental Music
Teacher. A retirement vacancy of Full Time Music Teacher arose
in Samuel LMS High School, Parasala due to the retirement of
Smt.Renjitha Bhai under the common management of the 3rd
respondent. When a vacancy arose, the petitioner requested the
3rd respondent to appoint her by promotion as per the provisions
of Rule 43, Chapter XIV(A) of the Kerala Education Rules 1959
(hereinafter reffered to as, “KER”). According to the petitioner,
she passed SSLC and is also a holder of Diploma named
"Ganabhushanam" in Violin which is the accepted qualification to
be appointed as Music Teacher in High Schools / U.P. Schools as
laid down in KER.       The vacancy arose on 30.03.1999. The
petitioner's application to promote her to the retirement vacancy
was rejected and one D.Sarojakumari from Parasala School was
promoted to the existing vacancy on 12.07.1999. The petitioner
challenged the promotion order and the 2nd respondent directed
the 3rd respondent to appoint the petitioner in the post of Full
Time Music Teacher. The Appeal filed by Sarojakumari before the
Deputy Director of Education, Thiruvananthapuram was also
rejected. But revision filed by Sarojakumari was allowed by the
Government and the Government directed to appoint her in the
retirement vacancy. Aggrieved by the same, the petitioner filed
O.P. No.36789/2002 before this Court and this Court allowed the
Original   Petition  along   with   O.P. No.36563/2002   filed    by
Sarojakumari,     as per   Ext.P3   judgment.  Sarojakumari    filed
W.A.No.1621/2003 and W.A.No.1735/2003 against Ext.P3 common
judgment and both the writ appeals were dismissed by this Court
by upholding Ext.P3 common judgment. Therefore, the petitioner
is entitled to be promoted as Full Time Music Teacher with effect
from 30.03.1999 on the date of occurrence of vacancy in Parasala
High School is the submission. Hence the 1st respondent passed
Ext.P5 order declaring that the petitioner is eligible for the post of
Full Time Music Teacher in Samuel LMS High School, Parasala.
Meanwhile Sarojakumari filed a Special Leave Petition before the
Apex Court and the Apex Court admitted the case and directed
the Secretary, Department of Education to produce seniority list
of teachers working under the common management. Ext.P6 is
the order of the Apex Court. By the time a vacancy arose in the
Light to the Blind School, Varkala due to retirement of a full-time
music teacher Smt.T.J. Sarasangy. By Ext.P7 order, the petitioner
was promoted and appointed as Full Time Music Teacher to the
said post with effect from 01.06.2011. Ext.P8 is the joining report
of the petitioner dated 09.06.2011. The petitioner is working as
Full Time Music Teacher in Varkala School from 01.06.2011
3. In the meantime the 1 st respondent passed an order
declaring    that   Part Time  Music    Teachers     working    in   4
Government Blind Schools and 8 Aided Blind Schools in the State
of Kerala are entitled for promotion as full-time music teacher on
completion of 5 years of service, as evident by Ext.P9.       The 1 st
respondent modified Ext.P9 order as per Ext.P10 order dated
29.09.2015 declaring that the Part Time Music Teachers working
in the 12 blind schools are entitled for promotion as Full Time
Music Teachers on completing 5 years service as Part Time Music
Teachers. This order was implemented with retrospective effect.
On the basis of Exts.P9 and P10, the petitioner submitted an
application through proper channel to the 2 nd respondent to
promote her as Full Time Music Teacher on completion of 5 years’
service as Part Time Music Teacher. She had submitted that she
was appointed on 02.01.1992 as Part Time Music Teacher and as
she had completed 5 years of service on 02.01.1997, thus she is
entitled for promotion as Full Time Music Teacher on 02.01.1997
as per Exts.P9 and P10. The 2nd respondent considered her
request and passed an order dated 15.02.2016 stating that the
petitioner is not entitled for the benefit of promotion to the full-
time post because she has worked only 3 days in a week. Ext.P11
is the    order. Against Ext.P11, the petitioner submitted a
representation before the 1st respondent as evident by Ext.P12.
The 1st respondent also rejected the claim of the petitioner by
stating that she is not entitled for the benefit of Ext.P10
Government Order because she has worked in the school only for
3 days per week up to 31.05.2011 and therefore, she is not
entitled for getting the benefits of Full Time Teacher as per
Ext.P10. Ext.P13 is the order. It is the case of the petitioner that
Exts.P11 and 13 orders are unsustainable and nowhere in the two
Government Orders it is stated that a Part Time Music Teacher
who has only worked 3 days per week is not entitled for the
benefits of the Government Order. It is also the case of the
petitioner that the 2nd respondent passed an order dated
17.09.2016 giving Ext.P10 benefit to one V.M. Aliyamma who was
junior to the petitioner who is working in the Light to the Blind
School, Varkala as evident by Ext.P14. Ext.P15 is the certificate
issued by the Headmaster, Light to the Blind, Varkala certifying
that the petitioner is working in the school as Part Time
Instrumental Music Teacher from 02.01.1992 with 9 periods in a
week. It is clear from Ext.P15 that she is working 9 periods in a
week as per workload allotted by the Manager to a Part Time
Music Teacher. It is the further case of the petitioner that
Smt.V.M.Aliyamma who got promotion as per Ext.P14 was also
working 9 hours per week during the period of her service. It is
also submitted that from Exts.P9 and P10, a teacher appointed as
Part Time Music Teacher in the 12 Blind Schools are entitled for
promotion as Full Time Music Teacher on completion of 5 years’
service in the post of Part Time Instrumental Music Teacher
retrospectively. It is also the case of the petitioner that there is no
condition in the said Government Orders that the teacher shall
work in the school with minimum number of periods or on all
days. Aggrieved by Exts.P11 and P13, this writ petition is filed.
The prayers in this writ petition are extracted hereunder:
I)     issue a writ of certiorari or other appropriate writ,
order or direction to quash Exhibits-P11 and P13
ii)    Issue a writ of mandamus or other appropriate writ,
order or direction directing the respondents to grant
the benefits of Exhibit-P10 Government order to the
petitioner with effect from 02.01.1997;
iii)   Issue a writ of mandamus or other appropriate writ,
order or direction directing the respondents to
promote the petitioner as full time music teacher with
effect from 02.01.1997 and to grant all service
benefits thereon such as grade promotion, salary
increase, arrears of salary etc in terms of Exhibit-P10
Government order;
iv)    To declare that the petitioner is entitled for getting
promotion as full time music teacher with effect from
02.01.1997 on the basis of Exhibit-P9 and P10
Government orders;
v)     Grant such other reliefs as are deem just and
necessary in the facts and circumstances of the case.
4.    Heard Advocate N.James Koshy, the learned counsel for
the petitioner and Advocate K.M.Faisal, the learned Government
5.    The counsel for the petitioner submitted that the
petitioner is entitled the benefit of Exts.P9 and P10 Government
Orders and therefore, she is entitled to be promoted as Full Time
Music Teacher with effect from 02.01.1997.       The counsel also
submitted that nowhere in Exts.P9 and P10 it is stated that a
teacher who worked only 3 days in a week is not entitled the
benefit of Exts.P9 and P10.    The counsel also took me through
Exts.P14 and P15 to substantiate the case of the petitioner. The
counsel further took me through Ext.P16 which shows that the
benefit of Ext.P10 Government Order was given to one Jayamma
Philip, Instrumental Music Teacher whose case is similar to that
of the petitioner.      The Government Pleader supported the
impugned orders in this case.
6.    This Court considered the contentions of the petitioner
and the Government Pleader. A perusal of Exts.P9 and P10 orders
of the Government will show that Part Time Teachers who
completed 5 years of service in the schools mentioned in those
orders are entitled full time post. As rightly pointed out by the
counsel for the petitioner, nowhere in Exts.P9 and P10 it is stated
that the teachers who worked only 3 days in a week are not
entitled the benefit of Full Time Teacher. Moreover, a perusal of
Ext.P14 will show that another teacher in the same school in
which the petitioner is working was given the full-time benefit,
after Exts.P11 and P13 orders. In addition to that, Ext.P16 also
shows that a similarly situated teachers like the petitioner was
given the benefit of Exts.P9 and P10 orders. There is no
stipulation in Ext.P9 or in Ext.P10 to the effect that, a part time
teacher who worked for 5 days in a week alone is entitled to the
full-time benefit. There is no dispute in the fact that the petitioner
was working as a part time teacher. Under such circumstances, in
my opinion, there is no justification in denying the benefit of
Exts.P9 and P10 orders to the petitioner.           The Government
Pleader took me though the counter affidavit filed by the 2 nd
respondent. The only contention raised in the counter affidavit is
that the petitioner has only worked for 3 days per week. But a
perusal of Ext.P15 certificate issued by the Headmaster, Light to
the Blind School, Varkala will show that the petitioner was
working in the school as Part Time Instrumental Music Teacher
from 02.01.1992 with 9 periods in a week. There is no dispute on
these aspects. Under such circumstances, in my opinion, the
petitioner is entitled to the benefits of Exts.P9 and P10 orders. It
is submitted by the counsel for the petitioner that the petitioner is
going to retire on 31.03.2023. If that is the case, the 1 st
respondent can be directed to pass consequential orders forthwith
so that the petitioner can retire from service as a Full Time
Teacher with retrospective effect for which post she was fighting
during her entire service.
7. In Carnatic Music, the term ‘Mangalam’ indicates the
wrapping up a concert with an auspicious ending with an
auspicious ragam. Usually chosen ragas for “Mangalam’ by
musicians       are    like     “Sourashtram”,       “Sree    Ragam”,
“Madhyamavathi”, “surutti” etc. Let the petitioner, who is going to
retire from service as a music teacher this year, retire with full of
joy and also by reciting a beautiful “Mangalam” in any of the
ragam like “Sorashtram” or “Sree Ragam” or “Madhyamavathi”,
or “surutti” at her farewell function from the school.
Therefore, this writ petition is allowed in the following
1.   Exts.P11 and P13 are set aside. It is declared that
the petitioner is entitle the benefit of Ext P10 order.
2.   The 1st respondent is directed to pass consequential
order to grant the benefit of Ext.P10 Government
Order    to the    petitioner   and   to  promote   the
petitioner as Full Time Music Teacher with effect
from 02.01.1997, as expeditiously as possible, at any
rate, within one month from the date of receipt of a
copy of this judgment.
3.    Respondents 1 to 3 will take necessary steps to
disburse    all   service  benefits   such   as   grade
promotion, salary increase, arrears of salary etc to
the petitioner in terms of Ext.P10 Government
Order, as expeditiously as possible, at any rate,
within a period of three months from the date on
which    the    promotion    is effected   by   the  1st
respondent as directed above.
4.   Registry will forward a copy of this judgement to the
first respondent for considering the issue mentioned
in the 1st paragraph of this judgement.