Union of India and others.
….. for the Petitioner.
….. for the Respondent No.1.
….. for the Respondent Nos. 2 to 6.
1. This writ petition has been preferred by the petitioner
Pawan Kumar Niroula challenging the order dated
05.10.2021    passed     by   the    Central     Administrative
Tribunal, Kolkata Bench( hereinafter be referred to as the
Tribunal) in O.A. No. 352/09/SKM/2021.
2. In the tribunal application the petitioner sought for the
a) An order be passed directing the respondent authorities
concerned to immediately allow the applicant to join his
duties as TGT at Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalaya, Ravangla,
b) An order be passed directing the respondent authorities
concerned     to    forthwith  set   aside/cancel/withdraw/
rescind the decision of the respondent no. 2 to conduct
summary trial into the allegation against the applicant
vide reference no. PER-14032/2/2020-Estt- III/13728-
c) An order be passed directing the respondent authorities
concerned     to    forthwith  set   aside/cancel/withdraw/
rescind    the   order    of  suspension    being   Ref. No.
PER.DP/NVS (SHR)/PK Niroula/6170 dated 16.02.2020
and the subsequent orders of extension.
3. The Learned Tribunal by the order impugned permitted
the respondent authorities to proceed with the order for
summary trial and directed the petitioner to co-operate
with the authorities.
4. The seminal question involved in this writ petition is as to
whether the order of suspension inflicted upon the
petitioner   is     sustainable in law and the committee
constituted    for    summary     trial  pertaining  to  the
allegations of sexual harassment against the petitioner
has statutory force after enactment of The Sexual
harassment      of  Women     at   Workplace    (Prevention,
Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013 and amendment of
relevant    provisions  of   the   Central  Civil   Services
(Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1965      in the
light of the Act.
5. The background facts as projected by the petitioner and
which are necessary for adjudication may be adumbrated
The petitioner is a teacher and he was appointed by
the respondent Navodaya vidyalaya Samiti on 17.11.1997
as   TGT(Trained     Graduate    Teacher)-Nepali.  He   was
initially posted at Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalaya, North
Sikkim. Later he was transferred to Bihar in the year
2006 and in the year 2007 he was again transferred to
North Sikkim. Lastly, he was transferred to his present
place of posting in the year 2011.
On 15.02.2020 the respondent no. 4, the principal,
made a written complaint with the Officer-in-Charge of
Ravangla Police Station to the effect that he received
complaints from several students of Jawahar Navodaya
Vidyalaya against the petitioner alleging commission of
sexual harassment (molestation) on 14.02.2020 and
immediately thereafter, he set up an internal committee
to enquire into the complaints. It was also stated in the
complaint that around 67 students complained in writing
with the said committee that they were personally
harassed by the petitioner. On such allegations the
principal requested the Officer-in-Charge of the police
station to take appropriate legal action against the
On the basis of the aforesaid complaint Ravangla
Police Station Case No. 02 of 2020 dated 15.02.2020
under Section 10 of the Protection of Children from
Sexual Offences Act, 2012 was registered against the
petitioner for investigation. The petitioner was arrested by
the Investigating Officer on 15.02.2020, but subsequently
he was released on bail by the concerned Court.
The petitioner was not informed about any disciplinary
action taken against him, but from unofficial sources he
came to know that he was placed under suspension.
However, in reply to an Email dated 11.06.2020 seeking
information regarding his status as he intended to join
his duties, the respondent no. 4 by communicating an
order being No. PER.DP/NVS(SHR)/PK Niroula/6170
dated 16.02.2020 informed him that he was placed under
suspension with effect from 15.02.2020 in terms of sub-
rule (2) of Rule 10 of the Central Civil Services
(Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1965. The
petitioner being aggrieved by the order of suspension
made an appeal before the Chairman of Navodaya
Vidyalaya Samiti under Rule 23 of the Central Civil
Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1965
on 10.07.2020, but he is yet to know about its fate.
6. Initially, the order of suspension inflicted upon the
petitioner was from 15.02.2020 and it was extended for a
period of 90 days. Even during the pendency of the
appeal preferred by the petitioner before the Chairman of
the said Samiti, the order of suspension was extended for
an another period of 90 days. Subsequently, such
suspension order was further extended for another term
of 90 days and ultimately it was extended             up to
7. By an order dated 16.06.2020 the respondent school
authorities informed the petitioner that the respondent
no. 2 constituted a committee for summary trial for
inquiring   into  the   allegations levelled   against  him
dispensing with the regular disciplinary proceedings in
terms of the Central Civil Services (Classification, Control
and Appeal) Rules, 1965.
8. It is contended by the petitioner that as the complaint
against him is of the nature of sexual harassment at
workplace, the respondent school authorities should have
constituted internal complaints committee and such
committee shall be deemed to be the inquiring authority
appointed by the disciplinary authority. Under such
factual scenario, the petitioner assails the impugned
order on the grounds that the Learned Tribunal ought
not to have directed the respondent authorities to
proceed with the order of summary trial which has no
legal force in view of the       advent of The Sexual
Harassment of Women at Workplace ( Prevention,
Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013.
9. Admittedly, the Central Civil Services (Classification,
Control and Appeal) Rules, 1965 are applicable to the
teachers of Jawahar Nabadaya Vidayalaya, Ravangla,
South Sikkim which is wholly financially aided by the
10.   As it is evident from the documents on record, on a
written complaint made by the respondent no. 4 with the
local police station one Ravangla P.S Case no. 2 dated
15.02.2020    under   Section 10 of POCSO         Act was
launched for investigation against the petitioner and he
was arrested on 15.02.2020. On the following date i.e. on
16.02.2020 the school authority by an order dated
16.02.2020 placed the petitioner under suspension on
the ground of his detention.
11.   Learned Counsel appearing for the petitioner has
argued that the order of suspension inflicted by the
respondent school authorities smacks of illegality as the
suspension order was passed while the petitioner was
detained in custody for 24 hours. In such context,
Learned Counsel submits that in terms of Rule 10 (2) (a)
of the Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and
Appeal) Rules, 1965 (hereinafter be referred to as the CCS
CCA Rules) a government servant shall be deemed to
have been placed under suspension by           an order of
appointing authority with effect from the date of his
detention, if he is detained in custody, whether on a
criminal charge     or otherwise, for a period     exceeding
forty-eight hours. It is not in dispute that the respondent
authorities placed the petitioner under suspension within
24 hours of his detention.      That being so, the order of
suspension is illegal ab initio as it was made in gross
violation of Rule 10(2) of the CCS CCA Rules.
12.   What we find from the documents on record, the order
of suspension made on 16.02.2020 was extended from
time to time and finally it was extended till 10.02.2021.
Amid such continuing suspension, the respondent school
authorities by an order dated 16.06.2020 constituted the
committee     for summary      trial to   enquire   into the
allegations of sexual harassment against the petitioner.
13.   In the decision in the case of Ajay Kumar Choudhary
-Vs- Union of India reported in (2015) 7 SCC 291, the
Hon’ble Apex Court has held as under:
“Suspension, specially preceeding the formulation
of charges, is essentially transitory or temporary in
nature, and must perforce be of short duration. If it
is for an indeterminate period or if its renewal is not
based     on    sound    reasoning      contemporaneously
available on the record, this would render it punitive
in   nature.    Departmental/disciplinary proceedings
invariably commence with delay, are plagued with
procrastination prior and posts the drawing up of
the    memorandum        of   charges,     and    eventually
culminate after even longer delay.
Protracted      periods    of   suspension,     repeated
renewal thereof, have regrettably become the norm
and not the exception that they ought to be. The
suspended      person      suffering   the    ignominy    of
insinuations, the scorn of society and the derision of
his department, has to codure this excruciation even
before     he    is   formally     charged      with   some
misdemeanour, indiscretion or offence. His torment
is his knowledge that if and when changed, it will
inexorably     take     an   inordinate     time   for   the
inquisition or inquiry to come to its culmination,
that is, to determine his innocence or inquiry.
Hence, it is directed that the currency of a
suspension order should not extend beyond three
months if within this period the           memorandum of
charges/charge-sheet is not served on the delinquent
officer/employee;        if    the     memorandum         of
charges/charge-sheet is         served, a reasoned order
must be passed for the extension of suspension.”
14.   After the petitioner was under suspension for more
than 100 days, he without being served with any charge-
sheet, was handed down the order dated 16.06.2020
informing that a committee was constituted for summary
trial to enquire into the complaints against him.
15.   In view of the law declared by the Hon’ble Apex Court
in the case of Ajay Kumar Choudhary supra, the order
of suspension exceeding 90 days without any justifiable
ground is vitiated with illegalities.   It is not in dispute
that the petitioner preferred an appeal against the order
of suspension under Rule 23 of CCS CCA Rules on
09.07.2020, but, the authority turned deaf ear to the
appeal.   Such acts on the part of the concerned
respondent authority reek of malafides. Under such
factual matrix, the order of suspension which is illegal ab
initio and its extension did not conform to       the  legal
principles enunciated by the Hon’ble Apex Court in the
decision of the Ajay Kumar Choudhary supra is liable
to be quashed.
16.   Learned Counsel appearing for the respondent school
authorities has submitted that the notification dated
20.12.1993 issued by the Navadaya Vidyalaya Samiti
prescribing the constitution of committee for summary
trial to enquire into allegations of sexual harassment
against any teacher of the school carries legal force as the
notification has been upheld by the Hon’ble Apex Court
in the decision in the case of Avinash Nagra –Vs-
Navadaya Vidyalaya Samiti reported in JT 1996 (10)
17.   Be that as it may, the legal scenario as to dealing with
the complaints of sexual harassment at workplace has
undergone a sea-change after the law declared by the
Hon’ble    Supreme Court in the case of Vishaka –Vs -
State of Rajasthan reported in (1997) 6 SCC 241 and
after enactment of The Sexual Harassment of Women at
Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act,
2013. In the decision in Vishaka the Hon’ble Apex Court
directed that every organisation public or private shall
have to constitute an internal complaints committee to
enquire into any complaint of sexual harassment made
by any aggrieved woman. In a later decision in the case of
Medha Kotwal Lele and Others-Vs- Union of India and
Ors reported in (2013) 1 SCCC 297 the Hon’ble Supreme
Court further passed the similar directive as to formation
of internal complaints committee at every workplace.
18.   However,    the   Sexual   Harassment     of Women    at
Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act,
2013 which came into force on 09.12.2013 now occupies
the field and the Act contains a mechanism to deal with
complaints of sexual harassment. In this regard it will be
apposite to refer to Section 4 of the Act.
Section 4 of the Act reads as under:
“4. Constitution of Internal Complaints
Committee.-(1) Every employer of a workplace
shall,   by   an   order   in   writing,   constitute  a
Committee      to   be   known      as   the   “Internal
Provided that where the offices or
administrative units of the workplace are located
at different places or divisional or sub-divisional
level, the Internal Committee shall be constituted
at all administrative units or offices.
consist of the following members to be nominated
(a) a Presiding Officer who shall     be a
woman employed at a senior level at workplace
Provided that in case a senior level
woman employee is not available, the Presiding
Officer shall be nominated from other offices or
administrative units of the workplace referred to
Provided further that in case the other
offices or administrative units of the workplace do
not have a senior level woman employee, the
Presiding Officer shall be nominated         from any
other workplace of        the same employer or other
amongst employees preferably committed to the
cause of women or who have had experience in
social work or have legal knowledge;
governmental       organisations     or   associations
committed to the cause of women or a person
familiar      with the issues relating to sexual
Provided that at least one-half of the total
Members so nominated shall be women.
(3) The Presiding Officer and every Member of
the Internal Committee shall hold office for such
period, not exceeding three years, from the date
of their nomination as may be specified by the
employer.
(4) The Member appointed from amongst the
non-governmental organisations or associations
shall be paid such fees or allowances for holding
the proceedings of the Internal Committee, by the
employer, as may be prescribed.
(5)   Where the Presiding Officer or any Member
(a) contravenes the provisions of section 16; or
(b) has been convicted for an offence or an inquiry
into an offence under any law for the time being
in force is pending against him; or
(c)   he has been found guilty in    any disciplinary
proceedings or a disciplinary proceeding is pending
(d)    has so abused his position as to render his
continuance in        office prejudicial to the public
such Presiding Officer or Member, as the case
may be, shall be removed from the Committee and
the vacancy so created or any casual vacancy shall
be filled by fresh nomination in accordance with the
provisions of this section.”
19.   In order to implement section 4 of the Act in letter and
spirit and to make the internal complaints committee
viable and    independent the Hon’ble Apex Court in a
recent decision in the case of Punjab and Sind Bank
and Others –Vs-     Durgesh     Kuwar reported in (2020)
SCC     Online SC 774      has observed at paragraph 22
that   clause ( c ) of Section 4 (2) indicates that     one
member of the internal complaints committee has to
be    drawn    from   amongst        a   non-governmental
organisation or association committed to the cause of
women     or a person familiar    with issues   relating to
sexual harassment. The purpose of having such a
member is to ensure the presence of an independent
person who can aid, advise and assist the committee and
thereby it obviates an institutional bias.
20.   The committee in question for summary trial as
constituted    by  the   respondent    school   authorities
comprises the following members:
21.   As discussed above, it is axiomatic that the committee
so formed by the respondent school authorities cannot be
termed as an internal complaints committee as envisaged
under    the   provisions  of Section 4     of the Sexual
Harassment      of   Women    at  Workplace     (Prevention,
Prohibition   and    Redressal)  Act,  2013.   Though    the
committee was constituted in terms of the notification
dated 20.12.1993 issued by Navadaya Vidyalaya Samiti,
but, the    committee dehors of      the fundamental legal
requirements under Section 4 of the Act, has now lost
its statutory force.
22.   Learned Counsel for the respondent school authorities
has further argued that since the allegations of sexual
harassment have been made by the girl students of the
school, the provisions of the aforesaid Act will not be
applicable to the respondent school.
23.   In this context, the definition of ‘aggrieved woman’ as
defined under Section 2 (a) of the Act may be referred. As
per Section 2 (a) an aggrieved woman means in relation to
a workplace, a woman, of any age whether employed or
not, who alleges to have been subjected to any act of
sexual harassment by the respondent. That being so, the
provisions of the Act squarely apply to the students of the
school.
24.   Now, we may advert to another relevant provision of
the aforesaid Act. Section 11 of the Sexual Harrasment of
Women      at   Workplace   (Prevention,   Prohibition  and
Redressal) Act,2013, inter alia, provides that the internal
complaints committee, shall, where the respondent is an
employee, proceed to make inquiry into the complaint in
accordance with the provisions of the service rules
applicable      to   the   respondent.   After   the   Sexual
Harrasment        of  Women     at   Workplace    (Prevention,
Prohibition and Redressal) Act,2013 came into force the
relevant     service     rules  viz  Central   Civil  Services
(Conduct) Rules, 1964 and the Central Civil Services
(Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1965 were
suitably       amended. Rule 3C of Central Civil Services
(Conduct) Rules, 1964, amongst others, reads as under:
1. No Government servant shall indulge in any act of
sexual harassment of any woman at any workplace.
2. Every government servant who is in-charge of a
workplace shall take appropriate steps to prevent
sexual harassment of any woman at the workplace.
25.   For the purpose of this rule ‘sexual harassment’
includes anyone or more of the following acts or
behaviour (whether directly or by implication) namely:
i)     Physical Contact and advances; or
ii)    A demand or request for sexual favours; or
iii)   Making sexually coloured remarks; or
v)     Any other unwelcome physical, verbal, non-
verbal conduct of a sexual nature.
26.   On the other hand, the amended Rule 14 of the
Central Civil        Services ( Classification, Control and
Appeal) Rules, 1965, inter alia, enjoins as follows:
Where there is a complaint of sexual harassment
within the meaning of Rule 3C of the Central Civil
Services      (Conduct)    Rules,   1964,   the   complaints
committee      established       in   each    ministry    or
department      or   office   for    inquiring   into  such
complaints, shall be deemed to be the inquiring
authority appointed        by   the disciplinary authority
for the purpose of this rule          and the complaints
committee shall hold, if separate procedure has not
been prescribed for the complaints           committee for
holding the enquiry into the complaints of sexual
harassment, the inquiry as far          as practicable    in
accordance     with the procedure laid down in these
rules.
27.   In view of the legal position as above, the committee
constituted for summary trial without adhering to the
mandatory requirements of the law and the rules as
quoted above loses its legal force. Therefore, viewed from
all aspects, the impugned order passed by the Learned
Tribunal holding the legality of the committee for
summary trial is not sustainable in law.
28.   Therefore, in view of the observations as above, the
question as raised for resolution is answered in the
negative.
29.   In the result, the writ petition succeeds.
30.   The impugned order dated 05.10.2021 passed by the
Bench in O.A.No. 352/9/SKM/2021 is hereby set aside.
The     Tribunal     application     being    No.    O.A.No.
352/9/SKM/2021 is allowed.
31.    The order of suspension against the petitioner vide
order dated 16.02.2020 made by the respondent no. 4
and extended from time to time and the order dated
16.06.2020     by which the committee for summary trial
was constituted are hereby quashed.
32.    The respondent school authorities are directed to allow
the petitioner to join his duties within one month from
date. They are also directed to pay all the back wages to
the petitioner within two months         from the date    of
joining of his duties.
33.    In view of the above, the writ petition stands disposed
34.    No order as to costs.
35.    Urgent certified website copies of this judgment, if
applied for, be given to the parties upon compliance with
all requisite formalities.