This public interest petition has been filed by the Tax Bar
Association of Jodhpur pointing out various difficulties faced by the
assessees on account of the official portal of the income tax
department having various glitches. The first and the primary
prayer made by the petitioners was for extension of time limit for
filing returns and furnishing tax audit reports. In this context, the
prayer made was to issue direction to the CBDT to extend such
(2 of 3)              [CW-513/2022]
time limit up to 15.02.2022 in exercise of the power under Section
119 of the Income Tax Act, 1961.
The other limb of the petitioners’ grievance is that unless and
until all glitches on the official portal are removed, any extension
of time limit would be illusory. In other words, if the department
grants only the time extension for filing the returns and audit
reports but the portal does not accept the proper declaration, such
time extension would be of no consequence. Consequently, the
prayer made by the petitioners is to give direction to the income
tax department to remove all the defects and glitches in the
official portal.
Mr. Vikas Balia, learned counsel for the petitioners stated
that yesterday the Government of India had declared extension of
last dates for filing returns and tax audit reports for the
assessment year 2021-22. In that view of the matter, the first
grievance of the petitioners stands resolved.
With respect to the second limb of the petitioners’ grievance
for removal of all the defects and glitches in the official portal at
this stage. We are of the view that at this stage, we are not
inclined to entertain the same. Firstly, as noted, there has been
across the board extension of last dates for compliances.
Presumably,      these    extensions           are       granted because    the
Government of India had realized that on account of technical
difficulties, several assesses may not have been in a position to
make the compliances. There is nothing for us to presume that the
administration is not cognizable of such defects and that proper
steps for removing of such defects would be taken so that the
extension of last date for compliances does not remain illusory but
the assesses can meaningfully take advantage of such extension.
(3 of 3)               [CW-513/2022]
The prayers made by the petitioners in this respect are rather
wide and non specific. At this stage, we leave it to the
administration to deal with these issues at its level. We are
hopeful that proper resolution of the difficulties of assessees would
be made at the level of the administration itself without the
requirement of Court’s intervention.
This petition is therefore disposed of at this stage with the
above observations, leaving it open to the petitioners to raise
these issues if in future the difficulties persist.
The petition is disposed of accordingly.