I.A. 20529/2022 (Order XXXIX Rules 1 and 2 of the CPC)
1.     This judgement provides the reasons for the order in this case,
which was pronounced on 9th January 2023.
2.     The plaintiff Subway IP LLC is a Company incorporated in the
State of Delaware, U.S., which operates a well-known global chain of
restaurants under the name ‗SUBWAY‘, with the name being
represented with the well-known logos                   and                . The
plaintiff is the properietor, in India, of registrations not only of the
‗SUBWAY‘ word and device marks, but also of ‗SUBWAY CLUB‘
CS(COMM) 843/2022                                                     Page 1 of 26
and ‗VEGGIE DELITE‘, being the names allotted by the plaintiff to
its club sandwich and vegetable sandwich respetively. The plaintiff
holds the following trade mark registrations in India:
S.      Trade Mark           Registration          Class Date                     of     Valid till
No.                          No.                              application
3.        Copies of the registrations have been placed on record. The
defendant does not dispute the proprietorship, by the plaintiff, of the
aforesaid registered trade marks.
Rights protected under the Madrid Protocol read with Section 36F(1) of the Trade Marks Act:
―36-F. Effects of international registration. –
(1)       From the date of the international registration of a trade mark where India has
been designated or the date of the recording in the register of the International Bureau
about the extension of the protection resulting from an international registration of a trade
mark to India, the protection of the trade mark in India shall be the same as if the trade
mark had been registered in India.
4.     The plaintiff, therefore, asserts exclusivity over the word and
device marks SUBWAY,                       ,           ,           , VEGGIE
5.     Defendant 1 Infinity Foods LLP is a partnership firm of which
Defendants 3 and 4 are partners. Defendants 3 and 4 are licensees of
the plaintiff, to whom the plaintiff has granted the right to franchise
the plaintiff‘s outlets vide agreement dated 30th May 2019. Since
then, Defendants 3 and 4 have, through the outlets owned by them,
been serving and distributing the products of the plaintiff. Recitals A
and B in the franchise agreement dated 30th May 2019, on which Mr
Sethi learned Senior Counsel for the plaintiff places reliance, read as
―A.     Subway IP LLC, a Delaware limited liability company with
a principal office in Doral, Florida, USA (―SIP‖) owns a
proprietary system for establishing and operating restaurants
featuring sandwiches, pizza and salads under the trade name and
service mark Subway* (the "System"). The system was developed
spending considerable money, time, and effort. The System
includes the trademark Subway*, other trademarks, trade names,
service marks, commercial announcements (slogans) and related
insignia (logos) SIP name [the ―Marks‖]. The System also includes
confidential information and goodwill. The parties acknowledge
that SIP owns the Marks registered with the India Trade Mark
Registry, including the trademark "Subway" in international
classes 30 and 32 on July 20, 1989 under registration numbers
513704 and 513705, respectively; ―Subway & Design‖ in class 42
on March 27, 2007 under registration number 1347782; ―Subway‖
in international class 42 on August 7, 2008 under registration
number 1349577; and "VEGGIE DELITE" in classes 29 and 30 on
May 18, 2015 under registration number 1750661.
B.      SIP granted a non-exclusive license to Subway
International B.V., a Netherlands limited liability company
(―Licensor‖) to use the System in countries outside the United
States of America, Canada, Australia, Colombia and Brazil to
establish and sublicense others to establish Subway* restaurants.
Licensor granted a sublicense to us.‖
CS(COMM) 843/2022                                                   Page 3 of 26
6.     The plaintiff alleges that the following acts of Defendant 1
infringe the plaintiff‘s intellectual property rights:
(i)    the use of the brand name and logo              under which
the two restaurants run by Defendant 1 in Delhi operate, with an
identical yellow and green colour scheme,
(ii)   the use of the brands VEGGIE DELICIOUS and SUB
ON A CLUB which, according to the plaintiff, are deceptively
similar to the plaintiff‘s registered VEGGIE DELITE and
SUBWAY CLUB marks,
(iii)  usage of identical, or substantially similar, signage, outlet
décor, menu cards, paper napkins and staff uniforms,
(iv)   use of photographs and wall art, in their outlets, which
are similar to the photographs and wall art in the plaintiff‘s
(v)    use of food preparation procedures, techniques, service
ingredients, formulae, recipes, ingredients, and placement of the
service counters in the restaurants identical to that seen in the
plaintiff‘s outlets, and
(vi)   verbatim reproduction, on the defendants‘ website, of the
recitals in the plaintiff‘s website, with similar layout of
headings etc.
7.     At request of learned Counsel for the defendants, this Court, on
21st December 2022, adjourned this matter to enable the defendants to
examine whether they could carry out modifications which would
satisfy the plaintiff that they were no longer infringing the plaintiff‘s
intellectual property rights.
8.     The defendants, thereafter, addressed e-mail dated 22nd
December 2022, to the plaintiff, offering to make certain changes in
their logo/lay out, etc., which would assuage the grievance of the
plaintiff regarding infringement of its intellectual property rights by
the defendants. Specifically, the defendants offered to (i) change the
colour combination used in the signage outside their restaurants to a
combination of purple, pink, white or red, (ii) change the colour of the
logo (―the S logo‖ hereinafter) to a combination of one or more of
the colours purple, pink, white or red, (iii) not to use yellow or green
either in the aforesaid signage or the S logo, (iv) pull down the
websites of the defendants which copied the text found on the website
of the plaintiff and (v) change the names ―VEGGIE DELICIOUS‖ and
―SUB ON A CLUB‖, by which they designated their sandwiches to
―VEG LOADED REGULAR‖ and ―TORTA CLUB‖.
9.     The plaintiffs, however, vide e-mail dated 22nd December 2022,
This is with reference to the captioned matter and your email
below, contents whereof we have relayed to our client.
Regrettably, your client‘s proposal does not address the issue of
their use of the objectionable marks SUBERB,              ,   , the
trade dress/colour scheme/get-up/layour identical to that of
restaurants under our client‘s mark/name SUBWAY and/or
elements of their SUBWAY System etc. Consequently the
proposal forwarded by you on behalf of your clients, is not
acceptable to our client and we shall be proceeding with the matter
tomorrow before the Hon‘ble High Court.
Yours sincerely,
10.      This is the situation which now prevails.
11.      In these circumstances, I have heard learned Counsel on the
present IA 20529/2022, which this order proceeds to decide.
12.      Before proceeding further, it would be appropriate to reproduce,
here, the ―before‖ and ―after‖ pictures, to depict the changes that the
defendants have undertaken in order to satisfy the grievance of the
plaintiff, thus:
13.   Insofar as the website of the defendants is concerned, Mr.
Pushkar Sood, learned Counsel for the defendants submits that the
defendants have taken down all their websites and is reconstructing
CS(COMM) 843/2022                                          Page 7 of 26
their website at present. As such, he submits that, if one were to seek
to access the defendants‘ website, the following message would
14.       Mr. Sandeep Sethi, learned Senior Counsel for the plaintiff,
submits that his client is not satisfied with the changes that the
defendants have undertaken, as noted hereinabove.
15.       Mr. Sethi sought to submit that the acts of infringement
committed by the defendant before they agreed to undertake
modifications as noted above, were blatant. The intent of the
defendants to copyright on the plaintiff‘s goodwill is, therefore, he
submits, transparent. He, in the circumstances, invokes the following
principle laid down by Lord Lindley in Slazenger & Sons v. Feltham
―One must exercise one's common sense, and, if you are driven to
the conclusion that what is intended to be done is to deceive if
possible, I do not think it is stretching the imagination very much
to credit the man with occasional success or possible success. Why
should we be astute to say that he cannot succeed in doing that
which he is straining every nerve to do?‖
CS(COMM) 843/2022                                                        Page 8 of 26
Citing Slazenger2, Mr Sethi exhorts the court not to grant any relief to
the defendants.
16.       Mr. Sethi, further relying on the decisions in Ruston and
Hornsby Ltd v. The Zamindra Engineering Co.3, Parle Products (P)
Ltd v. J.P.& Co.4 and Midas Hygiene Industries (P) Ltd v. Sudhir
Bhatia5, submits that the marks SUBWAY and SUBERB are
deceptively similar to each other even as word marks. As such, he
submits that even if the colour scheme of the said marks is to be
changed, the marks would continue to remain deceptively similar. He
also cited, in this context, three decisions of the High Court of Ontario
in Mr Submarine Ltd v. Bikas6, Mr Submarine Ltd v. Emma Foods7
and Mr Submarine v. Haralambos Voultsos8, apart from the decision
of T.S. Thakur, J. (as he then was, sitting singly as a Judge of this
Court) in Motorpresse International Verlagsgeselischaft Holding
mbH & Co. v. Mistrale Publishing Pvt Ltd9. Mr Sethi submits that,
as the defendants were a franchisee holder of the plaintiff, this is a
case of rank dishonesty, entitling the plaintiff to injunctive relief ipso
facto.
17.       Mr Pushkar Sood, appearing for the defendants submits, per
contra that, with the changes that the defendants have volunteered to
make, the allegation of infringement and passing off, levelled by the
plaintiff, can no more sustain.             He submits that the defendants have
only two outlets, at Shalimar Bagh, Delhi and at Gurgaon, and have
already implemented these changes at both the outlets. He further
submits that the defendants have even changed the wall décor of their
outlets, and removed the photographs and images, on the walls, to
which the plaintiff objected. The menu card and staff uniforms of his
clients, too, he submits, had been changed so as not to resemble those
of the plaintiff. With the change in colour scheme, the ‗S‘ sign of the
defendant, he submits, no longer resembles the ‗S‘ sign of the
plaintiff. The plaintiff cannot, he submits, claim any exclusivity in
respect of the initial ‗Sub‘ part of the ‗SUBWAY‘ mark, as ‗Sub‘ is
generic with respect to the products in relation to which it is used. He
relies on the judgement of the Supreme Court in J.R. Kapoor v.
Micronix India10 and of a coordinate Single Bench of this Court in
Bigtree Entertainment Pvt Ltd v. Brain Seed Sportainment Pvt Ltd11.
18.       This Court is presently concerned, in the application filed by the
plaintiff under Order XXXIX Rules 1 and 2 of the CPC, with whether,
after the modifications that the defendants have undertaken, the
defendants can still be said to be infringing the plaintiff‘s registered
trade mark, or passing off their goods and services as those of the
plaintiff, so as to entitle the plaintiff to an injunction.
19.       Infringement, under Section 29(1) to (5)12 of the Trade Marks
Act, can only be of registered trade marks. The marks of which the
29.    Infringement of registered trade marks. –
(1)       A registered trade mark is infringed by a person who, not being a registered proprietor or
a person using by way of permitted use, uses in the course of trade, a mark which is identical with,
or deceptively similar to, the trade mark in relation to goods or services in respect of which the
CS(COMM) 843/2022                                                                          Page 10 of 26
plaintiff has subsisting registrations, which are entitled, consequently,
to protection under Section 28 of the Trade Marks Act, are
(i)        the word mark SUBWAY,
The plaintiff has no other registered trade mark, to which it is
entitled to protection against infringement from this Court.
20.    Section 17(2) of the Trade Marks Act does not permit
(i)        dissection of a trade mark and claiming of exclusivity in
respect of part of the mark (―the anti-dissection rule‖), or
trade mark is registered and in such manner as to render the use of the mark likely to be taken as
being used as a trade mark.
(2)        A registered trade mark is infringed by a person who, not being a registered proprietor or
a person using by way of permitted use, uses in the course of trade, a mark which because of—
(a)       its identity with the registered trade mark and the similarity of the goods or
services covered by such registered trade mark; or
(b)       its similarity to the registered trade mark and the identity or similarity of the
goods or services covered by such registered trade mark; or
(c)       its identity with the registered trade mark and the identity of the goods or
services covered by such registered trade mark,
is likely to cause confusion on the part of the public, or which is likely to have an association with
the registered trade mark.
(3)        In any case falling under clause (c) of sub-section (2), the court shall presume that it is
likely to cause confusion on the part of the public.
(4)        A registered trade mark is infringed by a person who, not being a registered proprietor or
a person using by way of permitted use, uses in the course of trade, a mark which –
(a)       is identical with or similar to the registered trade mark; and
(b)       is used in relation to goods or services which are not similar to those for which
the trade mark is registered; and
(c)       the registered trade mark has a reputation in India and the use of the mark
without due cause takes unfair advantage of or is detrimental to, the distinctive character
or repute of the registered trade mark.
(5)        A registered trade mark is infringed by a person if he uses such registered trade mark, as
his trade name or part of his trade name, or name of his business concern or part of the name, of his
business concern dealing in goods or services in respect of which the trade mark is registered.
CS(COMM) 843/2022                                                                          Page 11 of 26
(ii)     claiming of infringement in respect of any matter which
is common to the trade or otherwise of a non-distinctive
character (publici juris).
21.       The judgement of a Division Bench of this Court in South
India Beverages Pvt Ltd v. General Mills Marketing Inc.13 has,
however, subjected the anti-dissection rule to a caveat, where part of a
mark constitutes its dominant feature and is distinctive in nature, or
has acquired secondary meaning by dint of long usage. The relevant
passages from the decision may be reproduced thus:
―The Rule of Anti-Dissection
16.      This rule mandates that the Courts whilst dealing with
cases of trademark infringement involving composite marks, must
consider the composite marks in their entirety as an indivisible
whole rather than truncating or dissecting them into its component
parts and make comparison with the corresponding parts of arrival
mark to determine the likelihood of confusion. The raison
d'tre underscoring the said principle is that the commercial
impression of a composite trademark on an ordinary prospective
buyer is created by the mark as a whole and not by its component
parts [Fruit of the loom, Inc. v. Girouard14; Autozone,
Inc. v. Tandy Corporation15].
The Identification of ‘Dominant Mark’
19.      Though it bears no reiteration that while a mark is to be
considered in entirety, yet it is permissible to accord more or less
importance or ‗dominance‘ to a particular portion or element of a
mark in cases of composite marks. Thus, a particular element of a
composite mark which enjoys greater prominence vis-à-vis other
constituent elements, may be termed as a ‗dominant mark‘.
20.      At this juncture it would be apposite to refer to a recent
decision of this Court reported as Stiefel Laborataries v. Ajanta
Pharma Ltd.16 The Court whilst expounding upon the principle of
‗anti-dissection‘ cited with approval the views of the eminent
author on the subject comprised in his authoritative treatise-
McCarthy on Trademarks and Unfair Competition. It was
“41. The anti-dissection rule which is under these
circumstances required to be applied in India is really
based upon nature of customer. It has been rightly set out
in McCarthy on Trademarks and Unfair Competition about
the said rule particularly in Para 23.15 which is
reproduced hereunder:
Conflicting composite marks are to be
compared by looking at them as a whole,
rather than breaking the marks up into their
component parts for comparison. This is the
“anti dissection” rule. The rationale for the
rule is that the commercial impression of a
composite trademark on an ordinary
prospective buyer is created by the mark as
a whole, not by its component
parts. However, it is not a violation of the
anti-dissection rule to view the component
parts of conflicting composite marks as a
preliminary step on the way to an ultimate
determination of probable customer reaction
to the conflicting composites as a whole.
Thus, conflicting marks must be compared
in their entireties. A mark should not be
dissected or split up into its component parts
and each part then compared with
corresponding parts of the conflicting mark
to determine the likelihood of confusion. It is
the impression that the mark as a whole
creates on the average reasonably prudent
buyer and not the parts thereof, that is
important. As the Supreme Court observed:
“The commercial impression of a trademark
is derived from it as a whole, not from its
elements separated and considered in detail.
For this reason it should be considered in its
entirety.” The anti-dissection rule is based
upon a common sense observation of
customer behaviour : the typical shopper
does not retain all of the individual details
of a composite mark in his or her mind, but
retains only an overall, general impression
created by the composite as a whole. It is the
overall impression created by the mark from
the ordinary shopper's cursory observation
in the marketplace that will or will not lead
to a likelihood of confusion, not the
impression created from a meticulous
comparison as expressed in carefully
weighed analysis in legal briefs. In litigation
over the alleged similarity of marks, the
owner will emphasize the similarities and
the alleged infringer will emphasize the
differences. The point is that the two marks
should not be examined with a microscope
to find the differences, for this is not the way
the average purchaser views the marks. To
the average buyer, the points of similarity
are more important that minor points of
difference. A court should not engage in
“technical gymnastics” in an attempt to find
some minor differences between conflicting
marks.
However, where there are both similarities
and differences in the marks, there must be
weighed against one another to see which
predominate.
The rationale of the anti-dissection rule is
based upon this assumption:“An average
purchaser does not retain all the details of a
mark, but rather the mental impression of
the mark creates in its totality. It has been
held to be a violation of the anti-dissection
rule to focus upon the “prominent” feature
of a mark and decide likely confusion solely
upon that feature, ignoring all other
elements of the mark. Similarly, it is
improper to find that one portion of a
composite mark has no trademark
significance, leading to a direct comparison
between only that which remains.”
21. The view of the author makes it scintillatingly clear, beyond
pale of doubt, that the principle of ‗anti dissection‘ does not
CS(COMM) 843/2022                                                     Page 14 of 26
impose an absolute embargo upon the consideration of the
constituent elements of a composite mark. The said elements may
be viewed as a preliminary step on the way to an ultimate
determination of probable customer reaction to the conflicting
composites as a whole. Thus, the principle of ‗anti-dissection‘ and
identification of ‗dominant mark‘ are not antithetical to one
another and if viewed in a holistic perspective, the said principles
rather compliment each other.
23. It is also settled that while a trademark is supposed to be
looked at in entirety, yet the consideration of a trademark as a
whole does not condone infringement where less than the entire
trademark is appropriated. It is therefore not improper to identify
elements or features of the marks that are more or less important
for purpose of analysis in cases of composite marks.
26. Dominant features are significant because they attract
attention and consumers are more likely to remember and rely on
them for purposes of identification of the product. Usually, the
dominant portion of a mark is that which has the greater strength
or carries more weight. Descriptive or generic components,
having little or no source identifying significance, are generally
less significant in the analysis. However, words that are arbitrary
and distinct possess greater strength and are thus accorded greater
protection. [Autozone, Inc. v. Tandy Corporation15]‖
(Emphasis supplied)
22.    The Court has, therefore, to consider whether, as a whole, the
mark of the defendant infringes the registered trade marks of the
plaintiff. If they do not, then, the Court may examine whether, if any
part of the plaintiff‘s registered trade marks, which constitutes the
dominant part thereof, stands so infringed by the defendant‘s mark.
23. The word mark ‗SUBWAY‘ and the device marks of the plaintiff
CS(COMM) 843/2022                                                     Page 15 of 26
23.1 To my mind, it is clear that the defendant‘s mark
cannot be said, in any manner of speaking, to infringe any of the
plaintiff‘s word marks or device marks.
23.2 ‗SUBERB‘ is not phonetically similar to ‗SUBWAY‘, though
both are words of two syllables. The first syllable ‗SUB‘ is common.
‗Sub‘, when used in the context of sandwiches, it is well known, is an
abbreviation for ‗Submarine‘, which represents a well known variety
of long-bodied sandwiches, generally 6 or 9 inches in length.
‗Submarine Sandwich‘ has, in fact, its own Wikipedia page, the
opening passage of which reads thus:
―A submarine          sandwich,       commonly        known      as
a sub, hoagie (Philadelphia       metropolitan     area and Western
Pennsylvania           English), hero (New         York        City
English), Italian (Maine       English), grinder (New       England
English), wedge (Westchester,       NY),    or    a spuckie (Boston
English), is a type of American cold or hot sandwich made from a
cylindrical bread roll split lengthwise and filled with meats,
cheeses, vegetables, and condiments.[2][3] It has many different
names.
The terms submarine and sub are widespread in the US and not
assignable to any certain part, though many of the localized terms
are clustered in the northeastern United States.‖
A photograph of such a submarine sandwich, in which both the
plaintiff and the defendant deal, is also provided on the same page:
CS(COMM) 843/2022                                                    Page 16 of 26
23.3 Submarine             sandwiches,      or     ‗subs‘,   and    their    common
abbreviation are part of common knowledge and can, therefore, be
taken into account under Sections 56 and 57 of the Indian Evidence
Act, 1872, as held by the Supreme Court in the following passage
from Onkar Nath v. Delhi Administration17:
―The list of facts mentioned in Section 57 of which the Court can
take judicial notice is not exhaustive and indeed the purpose of the
section is to provide that the Court shall take judicial notice of
certain facts rather than exhaust the category of facts of which the
Court may in appropriate cases take judicial notice. Recognition of
facts without formal proof is a matter of expediency and no one
has ever questioned the need and wisdom of accepting the
existence of matters which are unquestionably within public
knowledge. (See Taylor, 11th Edn., pp. 3-12; Wigmore, Section
2571, footnote; Stephen's Digest, notes to Article 58; Whitley
Stokes' Anglo-Indian Codes, Vol. II, p. 887.) Shutting the judicial
eye to the existence of such facts and matters is in a sense an insult
to commonsense and would tend to reduce the judicial process to a
meaningless and wasteful ritual.‖
In fact, Mr Submarine Ltd, the petitioner in the three Mr Submarine
judgements on which Mr Sethi places reliance, also deals with outlets
serving submarine sandwiches. The very title of the franchise, ―Mr
Submarine‖, testifies to the commonality of the usage of ‗Submarine‘
as a moniker for sandwiches of a particular type. ‗Sub‘ is, therefore,
publici juris, when used in the context of such eateries.
23.4 No exclusivity can, therefore, be claimed, by the petitioner over
the first part of its registered SUBWAY mark, i.e, ‗SUB‘.                        The
plaintiff cannot claim a monopoly over all two-syllable words of
which the first syllable is ‗SUB‘, especially when used in the context
of eateries which serve sandwiches and similar items.
CS(COMM) 843/2022                                                        Page 17 of 26
23.5 Once, thus, the ‗SUB‘ part of the SUBWAY mark is out of the
way, there is, quite obviously, no similarity, at all, between ‗WAY‘
and ‗ERB‘.           This issue stands covered by the judgement of the
Supreme Court in J.R. Kapoor v. Micronix India18 , on which Mr
Sood rightly relies.
23.6 J.R. Kapoor18 dealt with the competing marks ‗MICRONIX‘
and ‗MICROTEL‘, of which the first syllable ‗Micro‘ was found to be
descriptive of the products in which the parties dealt. The Supreme
Court held, therefore, that no exclusivity could be claimed over the
prefix ‗Micro‘ and that, as the suffixes ‗Nix‘ and ‗Tel‘ were dissimilar
phonetically and otherwise, no infringement could be alleged. Para 6
of the report reads thus:
―6.     There are two things which impress us. Firstly, the
appellant is not manufacturing any one product such as the
boosters, which has been mainly taken into consideration by the
High Court. He is producing various electrical and electronic
apparatus in many of which micro-chip technology is used. Even
the boosters which he manufactures and sells are of two types, viz.,
transistorised boosters and integrated circuit boosters whereas the
respondent-plaintiff manufactures aerial boosters only of the first
type. Thus micro-chip technology being the base of many of the
products, the word „micro‟ has much relevance in describing the
products. Further, the word „micro‟ being descriptive of the micro
technology used for production of many electronic goods which
daily come to the market, no one can claim monopoly over the use
of the said word. Anyone producing any product with the use of
micro-chip technology would be justified in using the said word as
a prefix to his trade name. What is further, those who are familiar
with the use of electronic goods know fully well and are not likely
to be misguided or confused merely by, the prefix „micro‟ in the
trade name. Once, therefore, it is held that the word „micro‟ is a
common or general name descriptive of the products which are
sold or of the technology by which the products are manufactured,
and the users of such products are, therefore, not likely to be
misguided or confused by the said word, the only question which
has to be prima facie decided at this stage is whether the words
„tel‟ and „nix‟ in the trade names of the appellant and the
respondent are deceptive for the buyers and users and are likely to
misguide or confuse them in purchasing one for the other.
According to us, phonetically the words being totally dissimilar
are not going to create any such confusion in the mind of the users.
Secondly, even the visual impression of the said two trade names is
different. In the first instance, the respondent's trade name
„MICRONIX‟ is in black and white in slimmer letters and they are
ensconced in designs of elongated triangles both above and below
the said name. On the other hand, the appellant's trade name
„MICROTEL‟ is in thick bold letters in red colour without any
design around. As regards the logo, the respondent's logo consists
of the word „M‟ in a slim letter with „I‟ sporting a dot on it and
drawn in the well of „M‟. Below the letter „M‟ in small letters is
written the word „MICRONIX‟ and all these letters and words are
written in white in a black square in north-south direction. As
against this, the appellant's logo is one letter, viz., „M‟ which is
drawn in bold broad letter with its left leg slimmer than all other
parts which are in thick broad brush. The letter has also white
lines drawn across it which is in blue colour. There is no other
letter nor is it set against any background. We are, therefore,
unable to see how the visual effect of both the logos will be the
same on the mind of the buyers. This being the case, we are of the
view that there is not even the remotest chance of the buyers and
users being misguided or confused by the two trade names and
logos. Same is the case with the carton which merely reproduces
both the trade names and the logos.‖
It is obvious that the afore extracted passage from J.R. Kapoor
entirely covers the case at hand, insofar as the words ‗SUBWAY‘ and
‗SUBERB‘ are concerned.
23.7 One may also, in this context, rely on the decision in F.
Hoffman La Roche & Co. Ltd v. Geoffrey Manners & Co. Pvt Ltd19,
in which, while dealing with the marks ‗PROTOVIT‘ and
‗DROPOVIT‘, one of the grounds on which the Supreme Court held
that there was no infringement was that the suffix ‗Vit‘ was a common
abbreviation for Vitamin preparations, and that, discounting ‗Vit‘, the
CS(COMM) 843/2022                                                       Page 19 of 26
remainder first part of the competing marks were dissimilar. Para 8 of
the report reads thus:
―8.      In order to decide whether the word ―Dropovit‖ is
deceptively similar to the word ―Protovit‖ each of the two words
must, therefore, be taken as a whole word. Each of the two words
consists of eight letters, the last three letters are common, and in
the uncommon part the first two are consonants, the next is the
same vowel ‗O‘, the next is a consonant and the fifth is again a
common vowel ‗O‘. The combined effect is to produce an
alliteration. The affidavits of the appellant indicate that last three
letters ―Vit‖ is a well known common abbreviation used in the
pharmaceutical trade to denote vitamin preparations. In his
affidavit, dated January 11, 1961 Frank Murdoch, has referred to
the existence on the register of about 57 trade marks which have
the common suffix ―Vit‖ indicating that the goods are vitamin
preparations. It is apparent that the terminal syllable ―Vit‖ in the
two marks is both descriptive and common to the trade. If greater
regard is paid to the uncommon element in these two words, it is
difficult to hold that one will be mistaken for or confused with the
other. The letters ‗D‘ and ‗P‘ in ―Dropovit‖ and the corresponding
letters ‗P‘ and ‗T‘ in ―Protovit‖ cannot possibly be slurred over in
pronunciation and the words are so dissimilar that there is no
reasonable probability of confusion between the words either from
the visual or phonetic point of view.‖
23.8 Division Benches of this Court have also held to the same
effect.         In Astrazeneca UK Ltd v. Orchid Chemicals &
Pharmaceuticals Ltd20, the competing marks were ‗MERONEM‘ and
‗MEROMER‘, used for pharmaceutical preparations containing
Meropenem. The Court found that the suffix ‗Mero‘, when used in
such preparations, was an acronym for ‗Meropenem‘ and was,
therefore, descriptive and publici juris. ‗Nem‘ and ‗mer‘ were, it was
held not to be phonetically or otherwise similar.                       The plea of
infringement was, therefore, rejected. Para 19 of the report in the said
―19. Admittedly, ‗Mero‘, which is common to both the
competing marks, is taken by both the appellants/plaintiffs and the
respondent/defendant from the drug ‗Meropenem‘, taking the
prefix ‗Mero‘ which is used as a prefix in both the competing
marks. Both the appellants/plaintiffs and the respondent/defendant
are marketing the same molecule ‗Meropenem‘. Neither the
appellants/plaintiffs nor the respondent/defendant can raise any
claim for exclusive user of the aforesaid word ‗Meropenem‘.
Along with the aforesaid generic/common prefix, ‗Mero‘, the
appellants/plaintiffs have used the syllables ‗nem‘, whereas, the
respondent/defendant has used the syllable ‗mer‘. It is true that the
aforesaid words/trade names cannot be deciphered or considered
separately, but must be taken as a whole. But even if they are taken
as a whole, the prefix ‗Mero‘ used with suffix in the two
competing names, distinguishes and differentiates the two
products. When they are taken as a whole, the aforesaid two
trademarks cannot be said to be either phonetically or visually or in
any manner deceptively similar to each other.‖
23.9 Following Astrazeneca, another Division Bench of this Court
held, in Schering Corporation v. Alkem Laboratories Ltd21,
‗TEMOKEM‘ not to be deceptively similar to ‗TEMOGET‘, when
used for pharmaceutical preparations containing Temozolamide.
23.10 ‗SUBWAY‘ and ‗SUBERB‘, when used in the context of
eateries serving submarine sandwiches are not, therefore, deceptively
similar, as ‗SUB‘ is publici juris and common to the trade, and
‗WAY‘ and ‗ERB‘ are neither phonetically nor otherwise similar.
After the modifications undertaken by the defendant, the appearance
of the defendant‘s red and white ―                      ” mark cannot be said to be
deceptively similar to any of the plaintiff‘s ‗SUBWAY‘ device marks,
none of which use the red and white colour combination.                         Their
lettering, font and appearance are easily distinguishable from each
other.
23.11 Besides, there is substance in the defendant‘s contention that
the ‗SUBWAY‘ brand is so well known that there is hardly any
chance that a person who wishes to partake from a SUBWAY outlet
would walk into one of the defendant‘s two outlets and partake from
there. As has been held by the Supreme Court in several decisions,
including F. Hoffman La Roche19, the class of customers who would
use the goods and services of the parties is also a relevant
consideration. A person who wants to have food from a SUBWAY
outlet knows where to go; it would be quite unrealistic to visualize
him walking, instead, into one of the defendant‘s ‗SUBERB‘ outlets.
23.12 It cannot, therefore, be said that the defendant‘s ‗SUBERB‘
mark infringes either the plaintiff‘s ‗SUBWAY‘ word mark or any of
the plaintiff‘s ‗SUBWAY‘ device marks.
24. Re: Plaintiff‘s word marks ―SUBWAY CLUB‖ and ―VEGGIE
24.1 The plaintiff originally contended that its registered trademarks
―SUBWAY CLUB‖ and ―VEGGIE DELITE‖ stood infringed by the
defendants‘ marks ―VEGGIE DELICIOUS‖ and ―SUB ON A
CLUB‖. The defendants have, subsequently, modified the said marks
with respect to the sandwiches, to ―VEG LOADED REGULAR‖ and
24.2 Quite obviously, the marks ―VEG LOADED REGULAR‖ and
―TORTA CLUB‖, cannot be said to be similar, let alone confusingly
or deceptively similar to the marks ―VEGGIE DELIGHT‖ and
CS(COMM) 843/2022                                            Page 22 of 26
―SUBWAY CLUB‖. Between the marks ―VEGGIE DELIGHT‖ and
―VEG LOADED REGULAR‖, the only common feature is the initial
―VEG‖ syllable which, in the context of vegetarian sandwiches is
obviously publici juris and common to the trade.
24.3 Between the marks ―SUBWAY CLUB‖ and ―TORTA CLUB‖,
the only common feature is the second word ―CLUB‖ which, again, is
publici juris, when used in the context of club sandwiches, another
commonly known and commonly understood variety of sandwiches,
which normally contains three layers of bread, as opposed to the
normal two layers in other sandwiches.             In any event, the club
sandwiches form a distinct categories of sandwiches and when used in
the context of such sandwiches, the word ―CLUB‖ is publici juris.
24.4 The initial ―VEG‖ syllable in ―VEGGIE DELIGHT‖ and the
―CLUB‖ word in ―SUBWAY CLUB‖, if kept out of the reckoning,
there is no similarity between ―VEGGIE DELITE‖ and ―VEG
LOADED REGULAR‖ or between ―SUBWAY CLUB‖ and ―TORTA
24.5 The modifications carried out by the defendants in respect of
these two marks, therefore, sets at rest any allegation of infringement,
which could be levelled by the plaintiff in that regard.
25.1 The plaintiff does not hold any Indian or WIPO registration in
respect of the ―S‖ logo. No infringement can, therefore, be alleged in
that regard.
25.2 That apart, even otherwise, the ―S‖ logos of the plaintiff (          )
and the defendants (      ) are completely dissimilar.
25.3 Structurally, there is no similarity whatsoever between the ―S‖
of the plaintiff and the ―S‖ of the defendants. The plaintiff‘s ―S‖
comprises the normal letter ―S‖ within a larger ―S‖ formed by curved
upper and lower arrows pointing in opposite directions. None of these
features are present in the defendants‘ ―S‖.             The one point of
similarlity which Mr. Sethi had originally sought to urge between two
―S‖s, being similarity in colour, also stands effaced with the
modification, by the defendants, of the colour combination of its ―S‖
from green, white and yellow to red and white. Even the background
of the planitiff and defendants ―S‖s are different, the plaintiff‘s ―S‖
being in a green background and the defendants‘ ―S‖ on a black circle
in a white square.
25.4 There is no similarity, therefore, between the ―S‖ marks of the
planitiff and the defendants. Besides, as already noted, the plaintiff
holds no registration for the ‗S‘ mark.
26. Re: Passing off
26.1    No substantial arguments, on the aspect of passing off, were
advanced by Mr. Sethi. Passing off is, fundamentally, a matter which
requires trial, as an allegation of passing off cannot be decided by
merely comparing marks. Passing off is a non-statutory tort relatable
to the common law.          Commission of the tort would require the
defendant to pass off of its goods or the services as those of the
CS(COMM) 843/2022                                              Page 24 of 26
planitiff. In order to establish, even prima facie, commission of the
said tort, the plaintiff would have to demonstrate that a person of
average intelligence and imperfect recollection is likely, owing to the
manner in which the defendants use their marks and other such
features, to confuse the goods and services of the defendants with
those of the planitiff.
26.2 Any such possibility stands conclusively foreclosed even by the
reputation that the plaintiff commands in the market. There is no
likelihood, whatsoever, of a person of average intelligence, who
desires to partake of food from a ―SUBWAY‖ outlet, walking,
instead, into an outlet of the defendants. No material which could lead
to the inference of any such possibility has been placed on record by
the plaintiff.
26.3 On facts, therefore, prima facie, no case of passing off is made
27. Re: Other factors cited by Mr. Sethi
27.1 Mr. Sethi also relied on several other ―similarities‖ between the
plaintiff and the defendants, none of which, in my opinion, can be
cited as a ground to justify the prayer for injunction. Among these
factors were the similarity in the layout of the restraunts, counters,
staff uniform and menu cards. No person can claim any monopoly, in
law, over these aspects. As the law operates in this country, even if
the décor, layout, or appearance of the restaurant of the defendant is
identical, let alone similar, to that of the plaintiff, that cannot justify
CS(COMM) 843/2022                                              Page 25 of 26
an order of injunction by a Court. In that regard, this Court cannot
subscribe to the views expressed by the High Court of Canada in the
list of Mr Submarine decisions on which Mr. Sethi relies. The law in
this country does not allow grant of an injunction merely on the
ground that décor, layout or appearance of restaurants of two different
entities are similar. No claim of exclucivity in respect of the décor or
layout of premises or menu cards, or staff uniforms, is available in
Indian law.
27.2 The defendants have, nonetheless, modified the décor, layout,
wall hanging, menu cards and uniforms of the staff and its outlets so
as not to retain any similarity with the plaintiff in this regard. While I
reiterate that even if these features were similar, no claim to injunction
could be sustained by the plaintiff on that ground, in view of the
modification that the defendants have carried out, this issue does not
survive for consideration. There is, as things stand now, no similarity
between the defendants and the plaintiff even on these aspects.
28.     Subject, therefore, to the defendants carrying out the changes
stated in the additional affidavit dated 3rd January 2023, within one
week from today and undertaking not to use the allegedly infringing
marks hereafter, the prayer for interim injunction is dismissed.