Case :- APPLICATION U/S 482 No. - 29818 of 2021
Opposite Party :- State of U.P. and Another
Counsel for Applicant :- Chandra Bhan Gupta
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A,Santosh Kukmar Tiwari
1.    Heard learned counsel for the applicant, learned AGA for
the State and learned counsel for opposite party no.2.
This criminal misc. application U/s 482 Cr.P.C. is filed to quash
the entire proceeding of complaint case no.4444 of 2016
(Brijesh vs. Devendra Deva and ors) under section 500 of IPC,
P.S. Sadar Bazar, District Shahjahanpur pending in the court of
ACJM-II, Shahjahanpur and the summoning order dated
19.09.2017 passed in the aforesaid case as well as order dated
21.10.2021 passed by Special Judge, SC/ ST Act, court no.2
Shahjahanpur in criminal Revision No.210 of 2019.
2.    The opposite party no.2 filed a complaint before the
concerned Magistrate alleging therein that a news item was
published in Bareilly edition of Dainik Jagaran, daily newspaper
alleging defamatory and malicious imputation against the
complainant and by the said publication the accused persons
had acted to defame him. By the said news, the Dainik Jagran
Published a news item that on the order of DIG a case has been
registered in which his and his brother’s name i.e. Ram Prem
was published. By the said news item it was published that a
case in connection with attempt to murder and assault (maar-
peet) had been registered, whereas he and his brother are
reputed and respected persons and furthe they are never
involved in any criminal case. By the said news item the Bureau
Chief Devendra Deva, Editor-in-Chief Sanjay Gupta, printer and
publisher and General Manager Anugrah Narain Singh have
disreputed the complainant. He sent a notice on 29.04.2016
however neither they have given any reply nor published any
3.    The complainant examined himself under Section 200
Cr.P.C. and produced other witnesses under section 202 Cr.P.C.
Learned Magistrate by the impugned order has summoned the
applicant and three others to face trial for offence under section
500 IPC. Applicant and other co-accused preferred a criminal
Revision no.210 of 2019 before the Sessions Judge which has
been dismissed by the order dated 21.10.2021.
4.    The submissions of learned counsel for the applicant is
that Vipin Mishra filed an application dated 04.04.2016 lodging
an FIR against the persons named in the application and at the
instance of DIG Range, FIR crime no.663 of 2016 under section
420 IPC was lodged against Ram Pratap and Dixit Guest House
Shahjahanpur. In the said FIR, it is mentioned that FIR crime
no.1991 of 2010 under sections 307, 323, 504 & 506 IPC, P.S.
Powayan was registered against Ram Pratap S/o Baburam,
Sangam S/o Ram Pratap, Brijesh (opposite party no.2) and
Ram Pratap (brother of opposite party no.2). Proceeding/ said
case is going on. So the aforesaid impugned news item was
published on the basis of the version of the FIR dated
27.04.2016. Learned counsel contended that applicant is Editor-
in-Chief of Jagaran Prakashan ltd and is not responsible for day
to day reporting in local editions and same is done under
knowledge and supervision of editors and local reporters.
Applicant has no knowledge of the reports being published in
the local edition and could not have been impleaded as
accused. It is also contended that there is no specific allegations
against the applicant and in absence of any positive allegations,
the Magistrate was not justified to summon him. The learned
Magistrate has also failed to consider that one witness
examined by the complainant is his real brother while other is
also near relative and there is no independent witness. It is
further contended that in the present case there was no
intention to cause damage to the image of opposite party no.2
and hence section 500 of IPC is not applicable. Applicant has no
personal enmity with the opposite party no.2. The summoning
order has been passed against the applicant without application
of judicial mind in casual manner without assigning any reason
and it is an abuse of process of the court and law. Learned
counsel relied on following case laws:
Jaibrat Roy Chief Editor Rashtriya Sahara vs. State of U.P.
Vivek Goenka vs. State of Maharashtra and another (2007 CRI.
K M Mathew vs. State of Kerala 1991 LawSuit (SC) 598
Application U/s 482 Cr.P.C. No.25644 of 2007
5.    Learned AGA and learned counsel appearing for the
opposite party no.2 contended that the news item published in
daily news paper was based on totally wrong facts which stands
corroborated from the police report. According to police report,
no criminal case is registered against the complainant (opposite
party no.2) and his brother. It is further contended that news
item is based on false facts just to disrepute the complainant
and his family. Learned Magistrate enquired the matter and on
the basis of material available on record found that a prima-facie
case is made out and has passed the summoning order. There
is no illegality or infirmity in impugned summoning order. The
revision filed against the impugned summoning order has also
been dismissed, as there was no sufficient ground to quash the
impugned summoning order.
6.     It is undisputed that applicant is Editor-in-Chief of Jagran
Prakashan Ltd. There is no specific averment in relation to him
in the complaint.
7.     Learned counsel for the applicant has relied on the case
law K M Mathew vs. State of Kerala 1991 LawSuit(SC) 598 , in
which it has been held by Hon'ble Supreme Court that the Chief
Editor of a newspaper cannot be prosecuted as there are no
positive averments in the complaint regarding his culpability. It
has also been opined that to ask the Chief Editor to undergo the
trial of the case merely on the ground of the issue of process
would be oppressive. No person should be tried without a prima
facie case. The present complaint filed by the opposite party no.
2 complainant does not contain any positive averments in the
complaint about the knowledge of the objectionable character of
the matter mentioned in it.
8.     In Vivek Goenka vs. State of Maharashtra and Another
2007 CRI. L. J. 2194, on which applicant has placed reliance, it
has been held that the presumption would be that the person
whose name is printed as Editor or Resident Editor is
responsible for publication of news item and the Chairman or
Managing Editor would not be responsible for the news item
published. The proceedings were thereby quashed regarding
the Chairman and Managing Editor.
9.     Being Editor-in-Chief in absence of specific allegations
against the applicant the legal bar will apply against him. He
cannot be held responsible and prosecuted for any news item
published in any edition of the news paper. The learned
Magistrate has failed to consider the legal aspect of the matter
and has passed the summoning order, in violation of legal
provisions, hence summoning order in respect of the applicant
is not sustainable and is liable to be quashed.
10.   Application U/s 482 Cr.P.C. is allowed and the impugned
summoning order dated 19.09.2017             in respect of only
applicant- Sanjay Gupta is hereby quashed.