5.       To have a clear understanding of the case, it would
be useful to have a chronological narration of the facts giving
rise to this appeal.
(i) On 25.11.2019 at 10:14 hours, the police station
concerned receives an information that some untoward incident
has occurred in the house of Deceased No. 1 (for short D-1)
(identity of various victims including deceased is not being
disclosed because they are victim of sexual crime). The police
team visits the spot and discovers D-1, his wife (Deceased
No.2 - for short D-2) and infant son (Deceased No.3 - for short
D-3), aged about 4 months, lying dead; and D-1's daughter
(victim no.1- for short V-1 - PW2), aged about 8 years, and D-
1's minor son (victim no.2 - for short V-2), aged about 6 years,
lying injured. On the same day, Inquest in respect of D-1 is
completed by 11:45 hours and inquest report (Exb. Ka-10),
witnessed by five persons including the informant (PW-1), is
prepared. Likewise, inquest in respect of D-2 and D-3 is also
completed on the same day and inquest reports (Exb. Ka-15
and Exb. Ka-20, respectively) are prepared. PW-1 is one of the
five witnesses to all the three inquest proceedings.
(ii) In the meantime, V-1 is taken to Primary Health
Centre, Azamgarh where she is medically examined at 12:15
PM by PW-6, who prepares an injury report (Exb. Ka-4) noticing
following external injuries:
bone deep on left side of head, 6 cm above left
(b) Lacerated wound 3 cm x 0.3 cm x
bone deep on left side of forehead, 3 cm above lateral
end of left eyebrow;
muscle deep, just below left eyebrow; and
(d)    Lacerated wound 1 cm x 0.2 cm x
muscle deep which is below left eye.
All injuries fresh in duration, caused by hard and
blunt object and kept under observation. Patient was
referred to District Hospital, Azamgarh for X-ray and
expert opinion /management and needful.
(iii) V-2 was also examined by PW-6 on 25.11.2019
at 11:40 am of which injury report (Exb. Ka-3) is prepared
noticing following injuries:
bone deep on the median plain and left side of (sic)
of left forehead and left side of head, 3 cm above left
(b)   Lacerated wound 1.5 cm x 0.3 cm x
bone deep on right side of head, 5 cm above top of
(c)   Lacerated wound 1 cm x 0.2 cm x
bone deep on right side of forehead, 1 cm above
lateral end of right eyebrow; and
cartilage deep on left side of nose.
All injuries fresh in duration, caused by hard and
blunt object and kept under observation. Patient was
referred to District Hospital, Azamgarh for X-ray and
expert opinion/needful treatment and management.
(iv) A Field Unit Team, at the request of Station
House Officer (SHO), Mubarakpur and on the order of
Superintendent of Police, Azamgarh, headed by Vijay Kumar
(not examined), visited the spot, collected articles and prepared
an inspection report, dated 25.11.2019 i.e. Paper No. 10 Ka (at
page 39 of the paper book - not exhibited) and collected from
the spot following articles:-
(c)   Blood soaked piece of Pual (a mat made
from grass straw) from front of the house;
(d)   Blood soaked bra found on the spot;
(e)   Blood soaked piece of blanket found on the
(f)   Blood stained vest (Baniyan) with seam
found on the spot;
(g)   Delux Nirodh (Condom wrapper) and
scissor found on the spot;
(h)   Finger prints lifted from the bed found on
(i)   Hair found in the hand of D-2.
(v) At 17:33 hours, on 25.11.2019, PW-1 submitted
a written report (Exb. Ka-1) at PS Mubarakpur, District
Azamgarh, which was registered as first information report
(FIR) No. 0267 of 2019 under Section 302/307 I.P.C. In the
FIR, it is alleged: that on 25.11.2019 at 9:30 am, the informant
received an information that some incident has occurred at the
house of his brother (D-1); that on getting the information, the
informant went to the house of D-1, found the door of the house
open, D-1, his wife (D-2) and D-1's infant son (D-3) lying dead
and D-1's daughter (V-1) and D-1's elder son (V-2) seriously
injured; that immediately he took the victims to the Government
Hospital, Mubarakpur from where they were referred to Sadar
Hospital, Azamgarh and from Sadar Hospital they were referred
to Life Line Hospital, Azamgarh where both victims are under
treatment. The FIR alleges that V-1 told the informant that
Imtiyaz Nut, a resident of the village, has committed the crime.
(vi) In the evening of 25.11.2019, autopsy of the
three bodies is carried out by PW-8.
(vi a) Autopsy report of D-3 (Exb. Ka-9), which was
completed at about 9.00 pm, reveals a solitary ante-mortem
injury of the following description:-
“Contusion 15 cm x 8 cm over right
side of scalp, 5 cm posterior to right ear
with underlying right parietal bone
fracture.”
Rigor Mortis was present in lower extremities.
Stomach content found empty; small intestine filled
with gases; large intestine had faecal matter.
According to the opinion of the Doctor, death was
caused about a day before due to coma as a result of ante-
mortem head injury.
(vi b) Autopsy report of D-2 (Exb. Ka-8), which was
completed by 8.20 pm, reveals following ante-mortem injuries:
(a)    Lacerated wound 17 cm x 1 cm x bone
deep over left side of scalp, 5 cm posterior to left ear
(b)    Lacerated wound 1 cm x 0.5 cm x
bone deep over right eyebrow on lateral aspect 7 cm
interior to left tragus;
Underlying fracture of left temporal bone.
Stomach      content   found    empty;    small
intestine filled with gases; large intestine had faecal
matter.
Genital Organs: NAD; Vaginal wash for
spermatozoa test in 50 ml vial and blood sample sealed.
According to the opinion of the doctor, death
was caused about a day before due to coma as a result
of ante-mortem head injury.
(vi c) Autopsy of D-1 (Exb. Ka-7), which was
completed by 7.40 pm, reveals following ante-mortem injuries:
(a)   Multiple lacerated wound over right
side scalp in area 18 cm x 10 cm of lacerated wound are
bone deep with underlying bone fracture, 5 cm posterior
to left ear pinna, five in number;
(b)   Multiple lacerated wound over left side
of face in area of 16 cm x 14 cm with depressed bone
The skull disclosed left parietal bone fracture
and fracture of left maxillary bone fracture.
Stomach had 100 gm semi-digested food;
small intestine filled with gases; large intestine had
faecal matter.
According to the opinion of the doctor, death
could have occurred about a day before due to coma as
a result of ante-mortem head injury.
(vii)   On 26.11.2019, vide CD Parcha No. 2, the
statement of suspect Imtiyaz Nut is recorded, who states that
on the date and time of the incident he was in his own house
with his family and that he knows nothing about the incident.
The police in CD Parcha No.2, dated 26.11.2019, makes an
entry that upon enquiry it was found that Imtiyaz Nut was in his
house on the date and time of the incident. On this day
i.e.26.11.2019, the police also prepares site plan (Exb. Ka-32)
of the place of incident.
(viii) On 29.11.2019, vide CD Parcha No. 5,
information is received by the police from an informer with
regard to involvement of a person who weeps at the grave of all
the three deceased (D-1, D-2 and D-3) in the night at
Ibrahimpur road Kabristan and does not come out during day
(ix) On 30.11.2019, vide CD Parcha No. 6, the
name of that person, who weeps at the grave of all the three
deceased, is noted and put on record as that of Najeeruddin
son Abdul Aziz Ansari (the appellant herein).
(x) On 01.12.2019, vide CD Parcha No. 7, the
statement of V-1 is recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C. She
stated therein that in the night of 24.11.2019 when, after dinner,
she and her family had slept. On hearing noise, she woke up
and, in the light of a bulb lit in the room, she saw a bearded
man, a resident of her village, whose name is Najeeruddin, who
is also known as 'AOU PAU”. She stated that that person killed
her father with a brick and also killed her mother with the same
brick and that after removing the clothes of his mother, raped
her and when V-1 shouted and protested, he also hit her with
brick and also hit her brother with brick and then he raped V-1.
After doing that, he lifted V-1’s mother’s body and put her
naked on the floor and again raped her. Thereafter, he started
searching the Almirah where he found a photograph. Upon
noticing the photograph, he asked V-1 to identify one of the
persons in the photograph and when V-1 stated that the person
in the photograph is her maternal uncle then he put a cloth on
V-1's mother's body and scolded V-1 not to shout otherwise she
would also be killed. After that V-1 sat there.
(xi) On 01.12.2019, statement of Salauddin (PW-5)
was recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C. He informed the police
that on 01.12.2019, he was informed by Rehana (PW-3) and
her son Hanzala (PW-4) that they were shown a video clip by
Najeeruddin in which bodies of D-1 and D-2 were visible and
their children were shown in an injured condition and someone
was moving his hand over the breast of D-2.
(xii) On 01.12.2019, another statement of one Abu
Sad (not examined) was recorded, who also confirmed what
was stated by Rehana and her son to Salauddin (PW-5). On
the basis of the aforesaid statement, on 01.12.2019, vide CD
Parcha No. 7, the nomination of Imtiyaz Nut in the FIR was
found incorrect and sections 376, 376-A I.P.C. and section 5/6
of Pocso Act were added; and Najeeruddin's name was
recorded as a suspect.
(xiii) On 02.12.2019, vide CD Parcha No. 8, the
police arrested Najeeruddin and on the basis of                his
confessional statement, recovery of blood stained shirt, lungi,
vest, wrapped in a polythene was made of which site plan (Exb.
Ka-31) was prepared; and a blood stained brick, salwar,
duppatta, chemise and a cut piece of frock is recovered from
another place of which site plan (Ex. Ka-30) is prepared and a
common recovery memo of both the recoveries (Exb. Ka-25) is
prepared by Investigating Officer (I.O.) Akhilesh Kumar Mishra
(PW-11), which is witnessed by PW-5 amongst others. This
recovery     memorandum       (Ex.  Ka-25)    also records    the
confessional statement of the appellant to the effect that in the
night of the incident, the appellant had urge to have sex. He
purchased a potency (sex drive) enhancement pill and condom
from a shop keeper (PW-9). Thereafter he forcibly gained entry
into the house of the deceased and committed various crime.
He confessed to have video-graphed the incident but stated
that he had thrown the mobile in the river.
(xiv) On 02.12.2019 and 03.12.2019, search for the
mobile was made but the same could not be found.
Memorandums in respect of search made on 02.12.2019 and
03.12.2019 were prepared and produced as Exb. Ka-27 and
Exb. Ka-28, respectively, and a site plan (Ex. Ka-29) where
search was made was also prepared.
(xv) On 02.12.2019, internal medical examination of
V-1 is carried out. Her hymen is found fresh torn with redness
and tenderness. Redness and swelling was also noticed in the
anus. For determination of age she is referred to CMO,
Azamgarh. The internal examination report (Exb. Ka-5) was
prepared by doctor Rashmi Sinha (PW-7).
(xvi) On 03.12.2019, statement of V-1 is recorded
under Section 164 Cr.P.C. where she repeats what she stated
under section 161 CrPC.
(xvii) On 03.12.2019, by radiological procedure, the
age of V-1 is determined as 8 years old of which report (Ex Ka-
35) is prepared on 5.12.2019.
(xviii) On     04.12.2019,      PW-7       prepares
supplementary report (Ex. Ka 6) that no spermatozoa is noticed
in the vaginal smear obtained from V-1.
(xix) On 09.12.2019, vide CD Parcha No. 14,
charge sheet is submitted against the appellant with a note that
DNA and other forensic reports are awaited.
(xx) On 10.12.2019, the Court of Additional District
and Sessions Judge/Special Judge (Pocso), Azamgarh takes
cognisance on the charge-sheet dated 09.12.2019 for offences
punishable under Sections 302, 307, 376, 376-A, 376-AB, 377,
201 I.P.C. and section 5/6 Pocso Act.
(xxi) On 11.12.2019, following order is passed by
iqdkj ij vfHk;qDr uth:Ìhu tsy ls mifLFkrA mlds
fo}ku vf/koDrk mifLFkrA lgk;d ftyk 'kkldh; vf/koDrk
QkStnkjh o vfHk;qDr ds fo}ku vf/koDrk dks lqukA
lgk;d ftyk 'kkldh; vf/koDrk QkStnkjh }kjk U;k;ky;
ds le{k vkjksi ds leFkZu esa izLrqr fd;s tkus okys lk{;ksa dk
fooj.k izLrqr fd;k x;kA
mHk; i{k dks lquus rFkk i=koyh ij miyC/k izi=ksa ds
voyksdu ls vfHk;qDr ds fo:) izFke n`"V;k /kkjk& 302] 307]
376] 376,] 376 , ch] 377] 201 Hkk0na0la0 ,oa /kkjk& 5@6 ikDlks
vf/kfu;e dk vkjksi curk gSA
vr% vfHk;qDr ds fo:) mDr /kkjkvksa ds vUrxZr vkjksi
fojfpr fd;k x;kA vfHk;qDr dks vkjksi i<+ dj lquk;k o
le>k;k x;kA vfHk;qDr us vkjksi ls budkj fd;k ,oa fopkj.k
dh ;kpuk dhA i=koyh okLrs lk{; yap ckn is'k gksA
fnuk¡d% 11-12-2019                      g0 viBuh;
(xxii) On the basis of the above order, against the
appellant charges are framed as follows: under Section 302
I.P.C. for the murder of D-1, D-2 and D-3; under Section 307 for
attempt of murder of V-1 and V-2; under Section 376 I.P.C. for
committing rape of D-2; under Section 376-AB I.P.C. for
committing rape of V-1; under Section 376-A I.P.C. for
committing rape and murder of D-2, under Section 377 for
committing unnatural offence on V-1, under Section 201 I.P.C.
for destroying the evidence available in the mobile of the entire
incident; and under Section 5/6 Pocso Act for penetrative
sexual assault on V-1. The appellant denied the charges and
claimed for trial.
(xxiii) On 12.12.2019, statement of five witnesses,
(PW-4), and Sallauddin (PW-5), were recorded. Thereafter, on
13.12.2019, the cross-examination of PW-5 was concluded and
statement of doctor Abdul Aziz Ansari (PW-6), doctor Rashmi
Sinha (PW-7), doctor Santosh Kumar (PW-8), Ramji (PW-9),
Devendra Kumar Singh (PW-10); and Akhilesh Kumar Mishra
(PW-11) were recorded. On 16.12.2019, the cross-examination
of PW-11 was concluded and statement of doctor Manish
Kumar Shah (the radiologist who conducted radiological tests to
determine the age of V-1) was recorded. On 16.12.2019 itself,
the statement of the appellant under Section 313 Cr.P.C. was
(xxiv) On 19.12.2019, the appellant filed an
application 37 Kha for recall of witnesses PW-1 to PW-7 for
fresh cross-examination. In this application 37 Kha, it was
stated by the appellant that on the date when statement of PW-
1 to PW-7 was being recorded, he had not engaged any
counsel to represent him; that the police had obtained his
signature on blank paper and vakalatnama and under fear of
the police he signed as desired by the police and that he was
not even aware that any advocate was representing. In the
application, it was also stated that on 13.12.2019, he had
engaged two advocates, namely, Haribansh Yadav and Sri
Sarvajeet Yadav, to put forth his defence and that earlier the
police got all the witnesses examined as per their own sweet
will therefore, for proper cross-examination of those witnesses
by the counsels engaged by him, those witnesses be recalled.
On application 37 Kha, written objection was filed by the
informant. In the written objection (paper no. 38 Kha), it was
stated that the defence had engaged Sri Rabindra Nath Tiwari
and Deepak Gupta, Advocates, who extensively cross-
examined the witnesses and, thereafter, the statement of the
accused, under Section 313 Cr.P.C., was also recorded
therefore, the defence stand that no advocate was appointed is
incorrect and baseless and that the application for recall of the
witnesses is mala fide.
(xxv) On 04.01.2020, the trial court rejected the
application 37 Kha and fixed a date for the defence evidence, if
any. While rejecting the application 37 Kha, the trial court
observed that there existed a vakalatnama, dated 11.12.2019,
in favour of Rabindra Nath Tiwari and Deepak Gupta to
represent the accused - appellant and that though the accused
had submitted a fresh vakalatnama in favour of Haribansh
Yadav and Sarvajeet Yadav but he had not withdrawn the
earlier vakalatnama in favour of Rabindra Nath Tiwari and
Deepak Gupta. The court also observed that the statement of
PW-1 to PW-7 were recorded in the presence of the accused
and the order-sheet also bears the signature of the accused;
and further, the statement of PW-8, 9, 10, 11 and 12 were
recorded in the presence of Haribansh Yadav, Sarvajeet
Yadav, Rabindra Nath Tiwari and Deepak Gupta, Advocates
and the accused Najeeruddin, then, had raised no objection in
respect of their appearance therefore, the application 37 Kha is
liable to be rejected.
(xxvi)   On    07.01.2020,   the  court    gave   last
opportunity to the accused to lead defence evidence and fixed
16.01.2020. In between, on 10.01.2020, finger print expert
report, as entered in the CD, was received, which was taken on
record. On 16.01.2020, the matter was adjourned and,
thereafter, it was adjourned for one reason or the other
including COVID-19 pandemic.
(xxvi) The order sheet of the court below reflects
that on 21.10.2020, an order was passed by the trial court. In
that order it is mentioned that though the accused is present
through video conferencing but no person in his defence is
present and since report from the forensic laboratory has not
yet been received, next date i.e. 02.11.2020 is being fixed. On
02.11.2020, the matter was again adjourned to 09.11.2020. On
09.11.2020, forensic report (Paper No.48 Ka) was obtained
from U.P. Forensic Laboratory, Lucknow. The court gave last
opportunity to the accused to lead defence evidence. While
giving last opportunity, vide order dated 09.11.2020, the court
fixed 10.11.2020 as the next date. Thereafter, the matter was
adjourned from one date to the other for various reasons
including absence of the Presiding Officer. Finally, on 12.03.2020,
arguments on behalf of the prosecution were heard and 17.03.2021
was    fixed  for   remaining  arguments.   On 17.03.2021, the
arguments on behalf of prosecution were completed. On behalf
of the accused adjournment was sought. Consequently, on
17.03.2021, 18.03.2021 was fixed for arguments on behalf of the
accused. On 18.03.2021, the following order was passed:
i=koyh is'k gqbZA vfHk;qDr tsy ls mifLFkrA
i=koyh okLrs cgl fu;r pyh vk jgh gSA vfHk;qDr dh
vksj ls dksbZ LFkxu izk0i= Hkh ughA vfHk;kstu i{k }kjk
viuh cgl dh tk pqdh gSA ,slh fLFkfr es i=koyh fu.kZ;
gsrq fu;r fd;k tkuk mfpr gksxkA
i=koyh okLrs fu.kZ; fnukad 24-3-21 dks fu;r dh
tkrh gSA vfHk;qDr dh vksj ls fu.kZ; ds ,d fnu iwoZ rd
fdlh Hkh dk;Z fnol es viuh fyf[kr vFkok ekSf[kd cgl
izLrqr djus ds volj iznku fd;k tkrk gSA
(xxvii) On 23.03.2021, counsel for the defence
appeared and argued in part. For the remaining arguments,
25.03.201 was fixed. On 25.03.2021, the remaining arguments
on behalf of defence were advanced and 26.03.2021 was fixed
for orders. On 26.03.2021, the impugned judgment was
6.       We have heard Sri N.I. Jafri, learned senior
counsel, as an Amicus Curiae, assisted by Ms. Nasira Adil and
Mohd. Zubair, Advocates, for the appellant; Sri J.K. Upadhyay,
learned A.G.A., for the State; and Sri Ashutosh Gupta and Sri
Gyan Prakash Verma, for the informant.
7.       Before   we    proceed      to appreciate    the rival
submissions, we must have a glimpse of the prosecution
evidence.       The prosecution evidence can be divided into
following parts:-
(a)   Eye-witnesses account rendered by V-1 (PW-2);
(b)   Recovery of incriminating material, which can be
classified into two categories:
(i) Recovery at the instance of the accused of which
seizure memorandum Ex. Ka-25 was prepared by
PW11. This related to:- (i) recovery of blood stained
clothes, etc of the accused wrapped in a polythene
made from near a Neem tree near the place of
residence of the accused; and (ii) recovery of brick
(used for assault) and frock, etc of the deceased
made from bushes in an Eucalyptus grove of some
third party.
(ii) Recovery from the scene of crime, which again
can be divided into two categories. One made by
the I.O. and the other by the Field Unit Team. The
I.O. recovered blood stained and plain earth from
the scene of the crime of which recovery memo was
prepared and exhibited as Exb. Ka-26. Whereas,
the Field Unit Team collected blood swab from D-2's
body, blood swab from D-1's body, blood soaked
Pual (mat) from front of the deceaseds’ house;
blood soaked bra, cutting of blood soaked blanket,
blood soaked vest, wrapper of condom and a
scissor as also lifted finger prints from the bed and
hair from the hand of D-2.
The recovery memo prepared by Field Unit Team
dated 25.11.2019 has neither been proved nor has
been exhibited.
(c) Forensic evidence. This can be divided into three
categories: (i) Medical reports; (ii) Chemical analysis
reports; and (iii) Finger print expert report
(i) Medical reports include autopsy reports of the
three deceased which was marked as exhibits Ka-7,
Ka-8 and Ka-9, proved by PW-8; External injury report
of V-2 and V-1 marked as exhibits Ka-3 and Ka-4,
respectively,       proved by PW-6; Internal medical
examination report of V-1, which was marked as Exb.
Ka-5, proved by PW-7; Supplementary report in respect
of non presence of spermatozoa in the vaginal smear of
V-1, which was marked as Exb. Ka-6, proved by PW-
7; and Age report of V-1, marked as Exb. Ka-35,
submitted by the Chief Medical Officer, Azamgarh,
which has been proved by PW-12;
(ii) Chemical Analysis Report dated 07.11.2020
(Paper No.48 Ka) submitted by Scientific Officer,
Forensic Science Laboratory, Lucknow in respect of
DNA matching of the blood found on various articles
recovered either by the I.O. or by the Field Unit Team
as aforesaid. But this forensic report dated 07.11.2020
was obtained after recording of the statement of the
accused under Section 313 Cr.P.C. and was not put to
the accused for seeking his explanation under Section
(iii) Finger print expert report of the Director,
Finger Print Bureau, U.P., Lucknow, dated 03.01.2020,
Paper No.40 Ka/6 to 40 Ka/ 13. But this finger print
report was obtained after recording the statement of the
accused      under Section 313 CrPC and was not put to
the accused for seeking his explanation under section
(d)    Evidence of conduct of the accused- The
evidence relating to the conduct of the accused post
commission of crime can broadly be classified into two
categories: (a) pre-crime and (b) post crime. Pre-crime
conduct of the accused with regard to purchase of sex
drive enhancement pill and condom is sought to be
proved by PW-9. Post crime conduct is in respect of: (i)
showing video-clip of the incident to PW-3 and PW-4
and telling them that he knows the truth about the
incident and that the police has yet not been able to
know about the real criminal and that PW-3 and PW-4
should not behave like cowards; (ii) hiding during day-
time and crying at the grave of the three deceased
during night hours; and (iii) leading to recovery of
incriminating articles mentioned above.
(e) Formal Evidence - Such as lodging of FIR; proof of
various stages of investigation, etc.
8.     (A) Learned counsel for the appellant, at the outset,
submitted that this is a case where a re-trial would be required
for the following reasons:-
(i)     The appellant got no time to engage and consult his
lawyers to enable an effective cross-examination of the
prosecution witnesses as also for recording of his
statement under section 313 CrPC, which has vitiated the
trial. In support whereof, he highlighted the following
(a) On 13.12.2019, the appellant engaged lawyers
of his choice, whereas before that, on 11.12.2019,
charges were framed and, on 12.12.2019, five witnesses
were examined. Thereafter, on 13.12.2019, Haribansh
Yadav and Sarvajeet Yadav appeared for the appellant.
On the same day i.e. 13.12.2019 cross-examination of
PW-5 is undertaken and, thereafter, on the same day i.e.
13.12.2019, statement of six other prosecution witnesses,
namely, PW-6, PW-7, PW-8, PW-9, PW-10 and PW-11 is
recorded. Thereafter, on 16.12.2019 cross-examination
of PW-11 is completed and statement of PW-12 is
recorded. Such speed with which the trial proceeded
gave no opportunity to the appellant to effectively consult
his lawyer and brief them for an effective cross-
(b) Similarly, on 16.12.2019 itself, when recording
of statement of prosecution witnesses got over, no date
was fixed to enable the appellant to effectively consult his
lawyer and prepare for his examination under Section 313
Cr.P.C. and straight away the court proceeded to record
statement under section 313 CrPC.
(c) On 19.12.2019, highlighting the above, the
appellant submitted application 37 Kha for recall of
witnesses PW-1 to PW-7, which was rejected by
overlooking the following circumstances:-
(c 1) That      vakalatnama         dated
11.12.2019 allegedly executed by the appellant in
favour of advocates Rabindra Nath Tripathi and
Deepak Gupta was not accepted by Rabindra Nath
Tripathi whereas the      vakalatnama in favour of
advocates Haribansh Yadav and Sarvajeet Yadav
bears signature of both the said advocates as a
token of acceptance of the power.
(c 2) There appears over writing on the
date of acceptance of the Vakalatnama dated
11.12.2019 executed in favour of Rabindra Nath
Tripathi and Deepak Gupta Advocate.
(c 3) No objection to the application 37
Kha was taken by the State against whom
allegations were made whereas objection was taken
only by the informant.
(c-4) When Rabindra Nath Tripathi had
not accepted the vakalatnama then, in what capacity
he represented the appellant is a serious issue.
(c-5) It is quite strange that statement of
so many witnesses could be recorded at one go, on
a single day, and the counsel made no request for a
date to prepare for cross-examination because,
ordinarily, a counsel needs to consult his client to
prepare for cross-examination. Here, the allegations
were so serious that if charges were proved, death
penalty was one of the alternative punishments,
hence, normal prudence would suggest that the
counsel would like to consult his client to effectively
cross-examine the witness and for such purpose
seek a date. Such tearing hurry in getting the
examination of witnesses over; and, thereafter,
examination, under section 313 CrPC, undertaken
on the day when testimony of last two witnesses is
recorded; and the counsel for defence not seeking a
date for preparation, would suggest that there was
something wrong and, therefore, the application 37
Kha required deeper scrutiny.
(ii)    The prosecution produced no material object
recovered either from the scene of the crime or at the instance
of the applicant before the court and no link evidence was led to
demonstrate that it was the seized object that was          sent      for
forensic examination for obtaining reports in respect of finger
prints or DNA profiling. Hence, the forensic reports (i.e. relating
to finger prints and DNA matching) though, later, brought on
record were not admissible and, otherwise also, those forensic
reports were not put to the accused under section 313 CrPC
hence would have to be eschewed from consideration. Yet, the
trial court in its judgment placed reliance on those forensic
reports as would be clear from paragraph 61 of its judgment,
which vitiates the trial as well as the judgment. On this count
also, a retrial would be necessary.
(B) On merits of the prosecution case, the learned
counsel for the appellant submitted as follows:-
(i)     The eye-witness account rendered by V-1 (PW-2)
is not reliable. Sri Jafri urged that PW-2 is a child, who
could easily be tutored, and, therefore, it would not be safe
to base conviction on her testimony alone. More so, when the
FIR lodged by PW-1, on the basis of information received
from PW-2, was against one Imtiyaz Nut, who is an existing
person, and it appears that the police tried to save him.
Further, from the statement of PW-2 it appears that she
recognised the perpetrator of the crime on the basis of
his beard (nk< +h ) and by referring him as “nk< +h oky s vad y ”
though, during cross-examination, she, stated “nk<+h         oky s
v ad y es a ftudk uke ckn es irk pyk fd mudk uke uth: Ìhu gS ] ”
which means that she was not aware of appellant’s name.
But, if that was so, how could it be possible that she could
disclose the name of the appellant in her statement
recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C. when, by that time,
the appellant was not even arrested. This suggests that
even before the appellant was arrested and identified by
PW-2, or anything incriminating recovered from him,
appellant’s name was disclosed to the victim-PW-2.
Thus, her testimony could be considered tutored.
Further, PW-2 does not speak of preparing a video-clip.
Hence, the testimony of PW-3 and PW-4 that they were
shown video-clip falls to the ground.
(ii)   In respect of recovery and the forensic evidence, it
was submitted that the material object recovered has not
been produced in court and there exists no link evidence
to demonstrate as to which article was submitted for
forensic examination hence the forensic reports are a
waste paper. Moreover, the collection of incriminating
material from the spot has not been proved by any
member of the field unit team and even the I.O. has not
proved as to what was recovered by the field unit team
and, in any case, the material object recovered has not
been produced during trial. Hence, the recovery is
inconsequential. Further, those reports cannot be relied
upon as they have not been put to the accused under
section 313 CrPC.
(iii)  In respect of     testimony of PW-3 and         PW-4,
the     learned counsel for the appellant submitted that,
admittedly, the video clip was not recovered and, most
importantly, the investigating officer, during the course of cross-
examination, stated that he did not try to ascertain the mobile
number, which suggests, that no effort was made by the
investigating agency to ascertain whether the appellant had a
mobile and if he held a mobile, whether its CDR details,
disclosed its location at the scene of crime. All of this, coupled
with the fact that initially the accused was one Imtiyaz Nut,
would suggest that the investigation is hiding true facts.
(iv) In respect of the evidence of PW-5 in respect of the
accused hiding during day time and crying at the grave in the
night hours, it has been submitted that nothing has been
disclosed as to when PW-5 saw the appellant doing this.
Moreover, this is an imaginary story set up by the I.O. on the
basis of some information from an informer. This being pure
hearsay evidence therefore, not admissible. Likewise, evidence
of PW-9 regarding purchase of condom and sex drive
enhancement pill is, firstly, false because PW-9 held no licence
and, secondly, is inconsequential as there is no recovery of the
bill or wrapper of that drug. In so far as recovery of wrapper of
condom from the scene of crime is concerned that is
inconsequential because that can be used by D-1 himself to
ensure family planning.
(v)  Lastly, Sri Jafri submitted that the ocular evidence
of PW-2 regarding rape of D-2 is not supported by medical
evidence, as no spermatozoa was discovered in the vaginal
wash of D-2 and no injury on the genital area was noticed. It
was also submitted that there is nothing to indicate anal
intercourse with V-1 therefore, conviction under section 377
IPC is not at all justified.
Summarising his submissions, she Jafri submitted that
this is a case where there is no worthwhile reliable evidence
and the forensic reports in respect of DNA matching are not
admissible in absence of proof of recovery and the link
evidence, thus the appellant deserves to be acquitted.
9.    Sri J.K. Upadhyay, learned A.G.A., submitted that
the trial court gave adequate opportunity to the appellant to
cross-examine the prosecution witnesses; that the appellant
had engaged a private counsel on 11.12.2019 at the time when
the charges were framed; that the private counsel represented
the appellant when the statement of PW-1 to PW-5 were
recorded and the counsel also cross-examined those witnesses
as would be clear from the record therefore, the contention that
the witnesses PW-1 to PW-7 be recalled because their
examination occurred when there was no counsel representing
the appellant is not sustainable. He further submitted that the
testimony of PW-2 alone is sufficient to record conviction as
she not only saw D-1 and D-2 being killed by the appellant but
she also saw her mother being raped in front of her own eye
and thereafter she was also raped by the appellant. Hence, she
had every opportunity to recognise her offender. Even though
PW-2 may be a child witness, the image of her offender would
get imprinted in her memory and she can never forget.
Moreover, she has identified the appellant at the dock during
the course of her testimony and no questions could discredit
her testimony and therefore, her statement alone is sufficient to
uphold the conviction of the appellant.
10.   Sri Upadhyay also submitted that the police
witnesses and PW-5 have clearly proved the recovery of
incriminating material and the forensic report can be taken into
consideration by virtue of the provisions of section 293 Cr.P.C.
and therefore, merely because the forensic reports were
received after recording of the statement of the appellant under
Section 313 Cr.P.C., the judgment and order of the trial court
cannot be set aside only on that ground.
11.   In respect of non-recovery of mobile phone, Sri
Upadhyay submitted that even if the mobile phone was not
recovered, it will not wash away the testimony of PW-3 and
PW-4 because the appellant, in his statement recorded under
Section 313 Cr.P.C., did not categorically deny showing the
video clip to PW-3 and PW-4. Rather, in his answer to question
No.4, he stated that he had shown the video clip to Rehana of
the day incident, which was prepared on Monday. Even the
purchase of medicine from PW-9 is not denied, though the
appellant in his answer to question No.10, recorded under
Section 313 Cr.P.C., stated that he purchased some medicine
for his back ache from PW-9.
12.   Sri Upadhyay submitted that absence of injury to D-
2 on her genital area will not rule out rape because being a
married lady and mother of three children, she might not suffer
injury on account of penetration. Similarly, absence of
spermatozoa in the vaginal wash is of no consequence
because, according to the prosecution story, a condom was
used, which is corroborated by recovery of a condom wrapper
from the spot.
13.   Learned A.G.A. further submitted that in so far as
naming of Imtiyaz Nut in the FIR is concerned that would not be
of much significance because the informant (PW-1) in his
statement had clarified that the victim had not named Imtiyaz
Nut but had disclosed to him that it was a person who looked
like Imtiyaz Nut, hence, this would not be fatal to the
prosecution case.
14.   Learned A.G.A. also submitted that since this is a
case of gruesome rape and multiple murders as well as rape of
a minor girl, an exhibition of extreme depravity by the offender,
therefore, conviction must entail in death penalty. Hence, not
only the appeal be dismissed but the reference for confirmation
of the death penalty be accepted and the awarded punishment
be confirmed.
15.   Having noticed the rival submissions and having
perused the record, before we proceed to analyse the merit of
the prosecution evidence, we must first consider whether on the
facts of the case a retrial would be required, if so, from what
stage. Because, if a retrial is required, it would, then, be not
appropriate for us to express an opinion with regard to the merit
of the prosecution evidence as it may influence the trial court
and thereby cause prejudice to both sides.
16.   In the instant case, we find from paragraph 61 of the
trial court judgment that the trial court had placed reliance on
forensic report in respect of the DNA match between the
incriminating articles (i.e. hair, blood-stained frock, clothes, etc)
recovered from the scene of crime as well as at the instance of
the appellant and the blood sample of the appellant.
Importantly, the said forensic report has not been put to the
appellant under section 313 CrPC inasmuch as it was obtained
after the statement under section 313 CrPC was recorded.
17.   It is well settled that all incriminating circumstances
appearing in the prosecution evidence must be put to the
accused while recording his statement under section 313 CrPC.
According to section 313 (1) (b) CrPC, the stage of examination
of the accused under section 313 (1) (b) comes when the
witnesses of the prosecution have been examined and before
the accused is called on for his defence. This implies that after
the incriminating material is put to the accused, he gets a right
to lead evidence in defence.            No doubt, under section 293
CrPC, a forensic report from a Government scientific expert can
be accepted in evidence without the requirement of formal
proof, but, the accused, if he so choses, has a right to
challenge the report and lead evidence in rebuttal. The accused
may also challenge the very foundation of the report by
questioning the collection or recovery or seizure of the material
in respect of which the report is obtained. To ensure that the
accused gets opportunity to avail that right, section 313 (1) (b)
CrPC exists in the Code.
18.   In Nar Singh v. State of Haryana (2015) 1 SCC
496, the Supreme Court, on the issue as to what are the
various courses available to the appellate court where
incriminating material appearing in the prosecution evidence
has not been put to the accused, after considering various
earlier decisions, in paragraph 30 of the judgment, summarised
the law as under:-
“30.1.Whenever a plea of non-compliance
with Section 313 Cr.P.C. is raised, it is within the
powers of the appellate court to examine and
further examine the convict or the counsel
appearing for the accused and the said answers
shall be taken into consideration for deciding the
matter. If the accused is unable to offer the
appellate court any reasonable explanation of
such circumstance, the court may assume that
the accused has no acceptable explanation to
offer.
30.2. In the facts and circumstances of the
case, if the appellate court comes to the
conclusion that no prejudice was caused or no
failure of justice was occasioned, the appellate
court will hear and decide the matter upon merits.
30.3. If the appellate court is of the
opinion    that   non-compliance       with    the
provisions    of   Section   313   Cr.P.C.     has
occasioned or is likely to have occasioned
prejudice to the accused, the appellate court
may direct retrial from the stage of recording
the statements of the accused from the point
where the irregularity occurred, that is, from
the stage of questioning the accused under
Section 313 Cr.P.C. and the trial Judge may be
directed to examine the accused afresh and
defence witness, if any, and dispose of the
matter afresh.
30.4. The appellate court may decline to
remit the matter to the trial court for retrial on
account of long time already spent in the trial of
the case and the period of sentence already
undergone by the convict and in the facts and
circumstances of the case, may decide the appeal
on its own merits, keeping in view the prejudice
caused to the accused.”
19.   In the instant case, not putting the forensic report to
the appellant for sure has caused prejudice to the appellant as
he could neither tender his explanation to it nor could get
opportunity to lead evidence in rebuttal. Hence, paragraph 30.3
of the judgment in Nar Singh’s case (supra) gets attracted.
Therefore, on this ground alone, the matter would have to be
remitted back.
20.   Not only that, there appears another important lapse
on the part of the prosecution, which is, that the seized/
recovered material in respect of which report has been obtained
have not been produced before the court and got marked as
material exhibit. No doubt, paragraph 61 of the impugned
judgment refers to the articles recovered as material source for
the forensic report but, upon scanning the entire prosecution
evidence with the help of learned AGA, we could not find that
any such articles were produced before the court and identified
by any of the prosecution witnesses as the articles recovered or
seized from the scene of crime by the field unit team or by the
police i.e. investigating officer at the instance of the accused of
which seizure memorandum (Ex. Ka-25) was prepared.
Importantly, the collection report prepared by the field unit team
is not even exhibited.
21.    At this stage, we may notice the decision of the
Supreme Court in Jitendra and Another Versus State of
M.P., (2004) 10 SCC 562, wherein the prosecution placed
reliance on a Chemical Examiner report to show that the
articles seized were Charas and Ganja i.e. narcotics. Although
the High Court noticed that the Charas and Ganja alleged to
have been seized from the custody of the accused had neither
been produced in the court, nor marked as articles, but it
brushed aside the lapse by observing that it would not vitiate
the conviction as it had been proved that the samples were sent
to the Chemical Examiner in a properly sealed condition and
those were found to be Charas and Ganja. The High Court
relied on section 465 CrPC to hold that non-production of the
material object was a mere procedural irregularity and did not
cause prejudice to the accused. Negativing the view taken by
the High Court, the Supreme Court, in paragraph 6 of the
judgment, held as follows:
High Court is unsustainable. In the trial it was
necessary for the prosecution to establish by
cogent     evidence       that   the    alleged
quantities of charas and ganja were seized
from the possession of the accused. The
best evidence would have been the seized
materials    which   ought   to   have   been
produced during the trial and marked as
material objects. There is no explanation for
this failure to produce them. Mere oral
evidence as to their features and production
of panchnama does not discharge the heavy
burden which lies on the prosecution,
particularly where the offences punishable
with a stringent sentence….”
The above view has been consistently followed by the
Supreme Court in Ashok @ Dangra Jaiswal v. State of
State of Bihar, (2018) 2 SCC 305; Vijay Jain V. State of
Madhya Pradesh, (2013) 14 SCC 527. Though, later, in State
of Rajasthan V. Sahi Ram, (2019) 10 SCC 649, the Supreme
Court, paragraph 18 of its judgment, held that “if the seizure of
the material is otherwise proved on record and is not even
doubted or disputed, the entire contraband material need not
be placed before the court. If the seizure is otherwise not in
doubt, there is no requirement that the entire material ought to
be produced before the court. At times the material could be so
bulky…. that it may not be possible and feasible to produce the
entire bulk before the court. If the seizure is otherwise proved,
what is required to be proved is the fact that the samples taken
from and out of the contraband material were kept intact, that
when samples were submitted for forensic examination the
seals were intact,….”
22.    In the instant case, we notice from the statement of
the appellant recorded under section 313 CrPC that though the
recovery/ seizure memorandums were put to him by way of
question no.12 but the appellant denied the same. The articles
recovered or any portion of it entered in the seizure memo (Ex.
Ka-25) were not produced and marked material exhibits. In so
far as the recovery memorandum alleged to have been
prepared by the field unit team in respect of material recovered
from the scene of crime is concerned that has not been
exhibited and, on the record, despite assistance of the learned
AGA, we could find no statement of any of the prosecution
witnesses or of any member of the field unit team that lifted
articles from the scene of crime. In fact, Sri Vijay Kumar, a
member of the field unit team, who prepared the report has not
been     examined.    Accordingly,    once   neither  the    seized/
recovered article, nor a portion of it, was produced in court, and
the seizure having not been admitted, the forensic report in
respect thereto, remained a waste paper. This is a very serious
lapse on the part of prosecution and calls for disciplinary action
against the person responsible. Unfortunately, even the court
below overlooked the mistake. Similarly, though there appears
a finger print expert report on record in respect of finger prints
lifted from the bed by the field unit team but, neither the lifting of
finger prints have been proved nor the finger print expert report
has been put to the accused.
23.   Now, the question that arises is should the
prosecution get an opportunity to prove all those efforts,
particularly, when the matter is in respect of extremely grave
offence. In Zahira Habibulla H. Sheikh V. State of Gujarat,
(2004) 4 SCC 158, the Supreme Court observed:
“A criminal trial is a judicial
examination of the issues in the case and its
purpose is to arrive at a judgment on an issue
as to a fact or relevant facts which may lead
to discovery of the fact in issue and obtain
proof of such facts at which the prosecution
and the accused have arrived by their
pleadings; the controlling question being the
guilt or innocence of the accused. Since the
object is to mete out justice and to convict the
guilty and protect the innocent, the trial
should be a search for the truth and not a
bout    over    technicalities,   and   must    be
conducted under such rules as will protect
the innocent, and punish the guilty….
Failure to accord fair hearing
either to the accused or the prosecution
violates even minimum standards of due
process of law. It is inherent in the concept of
due process of law, that condemnation
should be rendered only after the trial in
which the hearing is a real one, not sham or a
mere farce and pretence. Since the fair
hearing requires an opportunity to preserve
the process, it may be vitiated and violated by
an over hasty, stage-managed, tailored and
partisan trial.
The fair trial for a criminal offence
consists not only in technical observance of
the frame and forms of law, but also in
recognition     and   just    application   of  its
principles in substance, to find out the truth
and prevent miscarriage of justice.”
24.  In Anokhilal v. State of Madhya Pradesh, (2019)
20 SCC 196, the apex court had occasion to examine a
somewhat similar matter as the present case. There also a
minor girl child was kidnapped, raped and murdered. In that
case, accused was represented by an Amicus Curiae. The
Amicus Curiae was appointed on the same day when the
charges were framed and, within next seven days, after
charges were framed, all the thirteen prosecution witnesses
were examined and before the DNA report could be available,
the final arguments were heard and the matter was adjourned
for placing on record the DNA report and for remaining final
arguments. Upon conviction by the trial court and dismissal of
appeal by the High Court, when the matter came before the
Supreme Court, upon a conspectus of various authorities on
the issue of fair and expeditious trial, in paragraph 20 of its
judgment, the Apex Court summarised the legal principles on
the issue as follows:
“20. The      following  principles,    therefore,
emerge     from    the  decisions    referred   to
20.1.   Article 39A inserted by the 42nd
amendment to the Constitution, effected in the
year 1977, provides for free legal aid to ensure
that opportunities for securing justice are not
denied to any citizen by reason of economic or
other disabilities. The statutory regime put in
place including the enactment of the Legal
Services Authorities Act, 1987 is designed to
achieve the mandate of Article 39-A.
20.2. It has been well accepted that Right to
Free Legal Services is an essential ingredient
of ‘reasonable, fair and just’ procedure for a
person accused of an offence and it must be
held implicit in the right guaranteed by Article
21. The extract from the decision of this Court
in Best Bakery case (as quoted in the decision
in Mohd. Hussain) emphasises that the object
of criminal trial is to search for the truth and the
trial is not a bout over technicalities and must
be conducted in such manner as will protect
the innocent and punish the guilty.
20.3. Even before insertion of Article 39-A in
the Constitution, the decision of this Court in
Bashira put the matter beyond any doubt and
held that the time granted to the Amicus Curiae
in that matter to prepare for the defense was
completely insufficient and that the award of
sentence of death resulted in deprivation of the
life of the accused and was in breach of the
procedure established by law.
20.4. The portion quoted in Bashira from the
judgment of the Madras High Court authored
by Subba Rao, J., the then Chief Justice of the
High Court, stated with clarity that mere formal
compliance of the rule under which sufficient
time had to be given to the counsel to prepare
for the defense would not carry out the object
underlying the rule. It was further stated that
the opportunity must be real where the counsel
is given sufficient and adequate time to
20.5. In Bashira as well as in Ambadas,
making substantial progress in the matter on
the very day after a counsel was engaged as
Amicus Curiae, was not accepted by this Court
as compliance of ‘sufficient opportunity’ to the
counsel.”
In Anokhilal’s case (supra), the relevant facts of that
case are noticed in paragraphs 21 to 24 of the judgment, which
are extracted below:-
“21. In the present case, the Amicus Curiae,
was appointed on 19.02.2013, and on the same
date, the counsel was called upon to defend the
accused at the stage of framing of charges. One
can say with certainty that the Amicus Curiae
did not have sufficient time to go through even
the basic documents, nor the advantage of any
discussion or interaction with the accused, and
time to reflect over the matter. Thus, even
before the Amicus Curiae could come to grips of
the matter, the charges were framed.
22.   The provisions concerned viz. Sections
227 and 228 of the Code contemplate framing
of charge upon consideration of the record of
the   case     and    the   documents    submitted
therewith, and after ‘hearing the submissions of
the accused and the prosecution in that behalf’.
If the hearing for the purposes of these
provisions is to be meaningful, and not just a
routine affair, the right under the said provisions
stood denied to the appellant.
23.    In our considered view, the Trial Court on
its own, ought to have adjourned the matter for
some time so that the Amicus Curiae could
have had the advantage of sufficient time to
prepare the matter. The approach adopted by
the Trial Court, in our view, may have expedited
the conduct of trial, but did not further the cause
of justice. Not only were the charges framed the
same day as stated above, but the trial itself
was concluded within a fortnight thereafter. In
the process, the assistance that the appellant
was entitled to in the form of legal aid, could not
be real and meaningful.
24.    There are other issues which also arise in
the matter namely that the examination of 13
witnesses within seven days, the examination of
the accused under the provisions of the Section
313 of the Code even before the complete
evidence was led by the prosecution, and not
waiting for the FSL and DNA reports in the
present case. DNA report definitely formed the
foundation of discussion by the High Court.
However, the record shows that the DNA report
was received almost at the fag end of the
matter,    and    after   such    receipt,   though
technically an opportunity was given to the
accused, the issue on the point was concluded
the very same day. The concluding paragraphs
of the judgment of the Trial Court show that the
entire trial was completed in less than one
month with the assistance of the prosecution as
well as the defense, but, such expeditious
disposal definitely left glaring gaps.”
In the contextual background of the facts noticed above,
the Apex Court, in paragraphs 26 to 29 of its judgment, held as
“26.    Expeditious      disposal   is  undoubtedly
required in criminal matters and that would
naturally be part of guarantee of fair trial.
However, the attempts to expedite the process
should not be at the expense of the basic
elements of fairness and the opportunity to the
accused, on which postulates, the entire
criminal administration of justice is founded. In
the pursuit for expeditious disposal, the cause
of justice must never be allowed to suffer or be
sacrificed. What is paramount is the cause of
justice and keeping the basic ingredients which
secure that as a core idea and ideal, the
process may be expedited, but fast tracking of
process must never ever result in burying the
cause of justice.
27.    In the circumstances, going by the
principles laid down in Bashira, we accept the
submission made by Mr. Luthra, the learned
Amicus Curiae and hold that the learned
counsel appointed through Legal Services to
represent the appellant in the present case
ought     to   have      been   afforded   sufficient
opportunity to study the matter and the
infraction in that behalf resulted in miscarriage
of justice. In light of the conclusion that we have
arrived at, there is no necessity to consider
other submissions advanced by Mr. Luthra, the
learned Amicus Curiae.
28.    All that we can say by way of caution is
that in matters where death sentence could
be one of the alternative punishments, the
courts must be completely vigilant and see
that full opportunity at every stage is
afforded to the accused.
29.    We, therefore, have no hesitation in
setting aside the judgments of conviction and
orders of sentence passed by the Trial Court
and the High Court against the appellant and
directing de novo consideration. It shall be open
to   the    learned   counsel   representing   the
appellant in the Trial Court to make any
submissions touching upon the issues (i)
whether the charges framed by the Trial Court
are required to be amended or not; (ii) whether
any of the prosecution witnesses need to be
recalled for further cross-examination; and (iii)
whether any expert evidence is required to be
led in response to the FSL report and DNA
report.    The    matter  shall,   thereafter,  be
considered on the basis of available material on
record in accordance with law.”
After holding as above, before parting with the case, the
Apex Court, in paragraph 31, also laid down certain guidelines
with regard to appointment of Amicus Curiae for representing
the accused in serious matters. The relevant guidelines as
contained in paragraph 31 of the judgment are extracted
“31. Before we part, we must lay down
certain norms so that the infirmities that we
have noticed in the present matter are not
31.1 In all cases where there is a possibility
of life sentence or death sentence, learned
Advocates who have put in minimum of 10
years    practice at  the    Bar   alone   be
considered to be appointed as Amicus
Curiae or through legal services to represent
an accused.
31.2 In all matters dealt with by the High
Court concerning confirmation of death
sentence, Senior Advocates of the Court
must first be considered to be appointed as
31.3 Whenever any learned counsel is
appointed     as  Amicus     Curiae,    some
reasonable time may be provided to enable
the counsel to prepare the matter. There
cannot be any hard and fast rule in that
behalf. However, a minimum of seven days’
time may normally be considered to be
appropriate and adequate.
31.4 Any learned counsel, who is appointed
as Amicus Curiae on behalf of the accused
must normally be granted to have meetings
and discussion with the concerned accused.
Such interactions may prove to be helpful as
was noticed in Imtiyaz Ramzan Khan.”
25.   From the decisions noticed above, what is clear is,
that both prosecution as well as defence must have fair
opportunity in the trial. The objective of the trial is to come
to the truth. Neither an innocent be punished nor guilty to go
scot-free. Sufficient time is to be given to both sides to have
their say and technicalities must not come in the way. In the
light of above, we are of the view that the prosecution as well
as the defence should get an even chance to lead evidence to
ensure that complete justice is done and truth prevails more so,
when not much time has elapsed since the commission of the
crime. This we say so also for the reason that in the instant
case, statement of as many as twelve witnesses were recorded
in three days i.e. 12.12.2019, 13.12.2019 and 16.12.2019,
spread over five days. Importantly, the statement under Section
313 Cr.P.C. was also recorded on 16.12.2019, that is the date
when the statement of last two witnesses, namely, PW-11
and PW-12 was recorded. Most importantly, by that time, the
DNA report was not even available and, interestingly, the Court
was made aware that the DNA report was not available though
has been sought for. Likewise, finger print report was also
not available when the statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C.
was    recorded.    Noticeably, all these reports were received
later, but were not put to the accused to seek his explanation
under Section 313 Cr.P.C. Yet, the trial court placed reliance
on the forensic reports as would be clear from paragraph 61
of its judgment. Above all, while doing so, the trial court did
not even take into consideration as to whether the collection
of the incriminating material by the Field Unit Team was proved
and whether the seized material was produced as a material
object and made material exhibit, if not, then what would be its
consequence. Noticeably, the Field Unit Team report dated
25.11.2019 regarding collection of various material from the
scene of crime is not exhibited. In fact, the person, namely,
Vijay Kumar, who prepared the report was not examined as a
prosecution witness. Yet, the DNA matching report has been
taken into consideration as a corroboratory material to record
conviction. In our view, all of this has resulted in serious
miscarriage of justice and, therefore, the matter requires a re-
26.  In addition to above, we notice from the record that
while rejecting application 37 Kha i.e. the application, dated
19.12.2019, moved on behalf of the appellant to recall PW-1 to
PW-7, the trial court over looked that the earlier Vakalatnama
dated 11.12.2019 though was in favour of two counsels,
namely, Ravindra Nath Tripathi and Deepak Gupta, but it was
accepted by D.K. Gupta alone. Further, there appeared
overwriting in the date of acceptance of the Vakalatnama by
D.K. Gupta. May be this was a clerical mistake, but since a very
serious charge was levelled by the accused-appellant in his
application 37 Kha that he had not engaged any counsel and
that all those witnesses were examined when he was
unrepresented, the court ought to have enquired from those
counsels in the presence of the accused whether they were
engaged by the accused and whether they had sufficient
opportunity to consult the accused to effectively prepare for
cross-examination. Notably, as many as five witnesses were
examined on 12.12.2019; and six witnesses were examined on
13.12.2019. Though, we do not wish to express our opinion as
to whether those witnesses are to be recalled but, as we have
already taken a view that the matter would have to be remitted
for a re-trial, we consider it appropriate to leave it open to the
accused-appellant to apply for recall of witnesses, which, if
made, shall be considered on its own merit and in accordance
with law, without being prejudiced by earlier rejection of
application 37 Kha. Similarly, we leave it open to the
prosecution either to recall and re-examine its witnesses, or to
produce     fresh   witness,    to   prove   collection/seizure    of
incriminating articles as well as produce the same as material
27.   For all the reasons recorded above, we reject the
reference for confirmation of death penalty and set aside the
judgment and order of conviction and punishment /sentence
passed by the court below with direction to the trial court for a
de novo consideration from the stage of examination of the
appellant under Section 313 Cr.P.C in the light of the
observations made above. This shall be without prejudice to the
right of the prosecution to call/recall a witness or witnesses to
prove the recovery made from the scene of the crime by the
Field Unit Team as also to produce the items recovered by
Field Unit Team as well as the Investigating Officer so as to
connect/ link the forensic reports with the items seized /
recovered. Likewise, it shall also be open for the appellant to
apply for recall of any of the prosecution witness or witnesses
or to produce expert report in rebuttal, if so advised. If any such
recall application is filed the same shall be considered on merit
without being prejudiced by earlier rejection of application 37
Kha. The matter shall, thereafter, be decided on the basis of
available material on record, in accordance with law.           It is
expected that the trial shall be completed expeditiously and that
all parties shall cooperate in that effort.
28.  As we have directed for a re-trial, we do not deem it
appropriate to express our opinion on the merit of the
prosecution case. Rather, we make it clear that we have not
expressed any opinion on the merit of the prosecution case as
also whether on the evidence already on record, conviction of
the appellant could be sustained or not.
29.  The appeal stands allowed to the extent indicated
30.  It may be clarified that as we are directing for a re-
trial, our order, by itself, should not be interpreted as a ground
to release the appellant on bail and, therefore, we clarify that
the appellant shall be treated as an under-trial prisoner till his
release, either on bail or otherwise.
31.  Let this order be certified and communicated to the
court below and the lower court record be also sent to the trial
court for compliance.