(LEAVE TO APPEAL) No. ­ 14 of 2016
Counsel for Applicant :­ Baijant Kumar Mishra
Counsel for Opposite Party :­ G.A.
1.    Heard Sri Baijant Kumar Mishra, learned counsel for the
appellant and learned A.G.A. Sri Ratan Singh through video
2.    The present appeal has been filed against the acquittal order
dated 11.01.2002 passed by Additional Sessions Judge, Court No.7,
Deoria in Sessions Trial No.94 of 1992 (State vs. Yogendra and
others) arising out of Case Crime No.150 of 1991, under Sections
147, 148, 302, 302/149 IPC P.S. Vishunpura District Doeria now
3.    The present appeal has been filed along with delay condonation
application filed under Section 5 of Limitation Act as well as along
with a Misc. Application for granting leave to appeal under Section
4.    The Stamp Reporter has reported this appeal beyond time by
5172 days and on the date of presenting this appeal before this Court
which was beyond time by 5173 days.
5.    Learned counsel for the appellant has submitted that appeal
filed at the instance of the informant would be maintainable under
Section 372 CrPC in view of the amendment inserted by Act No.5 of
2009 w.e.f. 31.12.2009. Learned counsel for the appellant has drawn
the attention of this Court towards Section 372 CrPC which is quoted
"372. No appeal to lie unless otherwise provided.—No appeal shall
lie from any judgment or order of a criminal court except as provided
for by this Code or by any other law for the time being in force:
Provided that the victim shall have a right to prefer an appeal against
any order passed by the court acquitting the accused or convicting for a
lesser offence or imposing inadequate compensation, and such appeal
shall lie to the court to which an appeal ordinarily lies against the
order of conviction of such court."
6.    Learned counsel for the appellant has submitted that the delay
was for the reason that in the year 2002 the appellant was suffering
from poor health and he could not approach his local counsel, when
he was feeling quite well he approached his counsel, then he got
information that a State appeal will be filed by the State. Thereafter,
the appellant went outside of house for earning livelihood and when
he came to Allahabad in the march, 2016 for his personal work, then
he got information that State appeal was not filed and therefore,
there is a delay in filing the present appeal.
7.    We have asked the learned counsel for the appellant as to how
this appeal would be maintainable as the judgment is of the year
2002 i.e. 11.01.2002, when the proviso to Section 372 CrPC, quoted
above, was not in force which was enforced w.e.f. 31.12.2009. It is
submitted by learned counsel for the appellant that the appellant is
the informant and therefore, he could have challenged the aforesaid
judgment in view of the aforesaid proviso.
8.    Before proceeding further it would be relevant to take note of
the judgment of Supreme Court in Mallikarjun Kodagali vs. State of
Karnataka and others, (2019) 2 SCC 752 (3 Judges), paragraphs
9, 24, 26, 27, 45, 46, 47, 48, 50, 51 and 72 whereof are quoted as
"9. With this background, we need to consider the questions that arise
before us consequent to the introduction of the proviso to Section 372
CrPC with effect from 31­12­2009. The questions are somewhat
limited: Whether a "victim" as defined in CrPC has a right of appeal in
view of the proviso to Section 372 CrPC against an order of acquittal
in a case where the alleged offence took place prior to 31­12­2009 but
the order of acquittal was passed by the Trial Court after 31­12­2009?
Our answer to this question is in the affirmative. The next question is:
Whether the "victim" must apply for leave to appeal against the order
of acquittal? Our answer to this question is in the negative.
24. Feeling aggrieved by the decision of the High Court, the National
Commission for Women preferred a petition for special leave to appeal
admittedly invoking the inherent powers of this Court. In that context
this Court held that in view of Section 372 CrPC no appeal shall lie
from a judgment or order by a criminal court except as provided by
CrPC or by any other law which authorises an appeal. The proviso to
Section 372 CrPC gives a limited right to the victim to file an appeal in
the High Court against any order of a criminal Court acquitting the
accused or convicting him for a lesser offence or the imposition of
inadequate compensation. This Court then observed as follows:
(National Commission for Women v. State (NCT of Delhi), (2010) 12
"8. ...The proviso may not thus be applicable as it came in the
year 2009 (long after the present incident) and, in any case,
would confer a right only on a victim and also does not envisage
an appeal against an inadequate sentence.”
26. The thrust of the decision of this Court, which appears to have
been misunderstood by the High Court, is with regard to entertaining a
petition under Article 136 of the Constitution by a third party. As far
as criminal matters are concerned, this Court undoubtedly held that
permitting a third party to prefer a petition under Article 136 of the
Constitution would be dangerous and would cause confusion. The
reasoning of this Court was not directed towards the proviso to Section
372 CrPC. It is only in passing that this Court observed that on the
facts of the case, the proviso to Section 372 CrPC might not be
applicable since it came into the statute book after the incident.
27. The decision of this Court in National Commission for Women is
quite clearly distinguishable and reliance on this decision by the High
Court is inapposite.
45. With regard to the second question, the High Court concluded that
the right to appeal is a substantive right. Consequently, the inescapable
conclusion would be that the right to appeal given to a victim would be
prospective and enforceable with effect from 31­12­2009 only. This
would be irrespective of the date of registration of the FIR or the date of
the occurrence. The High Court held as follows:(Tata Steel v. Atma
Tube Products Ltd., 2013 SCC OnLine P & H 5834 para 126)
“126. Since right to appeal is a substantive right and it cannot
be inferred by implication unless the Statute expressly provides
so, the only inescapable conclusion would be to hold that the
right to appeal given to a "victim" under proviso to Section 372
of the Code is prospective and has become enforceable w.e.f. 31­
12­2009 only. A "victim" is entitled to prefer appeal in respect of
any type of order referred to in the proviso to Section 372 if such
order has been passed on or after 31­12­2009 irrespective of the
date of registration of FIR or the date of occurrence etc. To be
more specific, it is clarified that it is the date of passing of the
order to be appealed from and not any other fact situation,
which shall determine the right to appeal of a "victim". As a
corollary thereto, it is held that the remedy availed by a "victim"
including revision petition against acquittal of the accused by an
order passed before 31­12­2009, cannot be converted into an
appeal under proviso to Section 372 and it shall have to be dealt
with in accordance with the parameters settled for exercising
revisional jurisdiction by a superior court.”
46. The Full Bench of the Delhi High Court also considered this issue in
Ram Phal v. State 2015 SCC OnLine Del 9802. The question
considered by the Delhi High Court was: SCC Online Del para 3)
“3.(b) Whether the appellate remedy under the proviso to
Section 372 CrPC is available with respect to only such offences
which were committed as on the date when the appellate right
was conferred by law or the appellate right would be available
with respect to the date of the decision or the appellate remedy is
without any reference to the two points of time i.e. the date
when the offence was committed or when the appellate right was
conferred by law, (Act No.5 of 2009 with effect from
47. While answering the question, the Delhi High Court referred to
Tata Steel decided by the Punjab & Haryana High Court. The Delhi
High Court referred to the conclusion that: (Ram Phal case para 56)
"56. ...a "victim" is entitled to prefer appeal in respect of any type
of order referred to in the proviso to Section 372 if such order
has been passed on or after 31­12­2009 irrespective of the date
of registration of FIR or the date of occurrence etc.”
48. Reference was also made to the Division Bench of the Patna High
Court in Parmeshwar Mandal v. State of Bihar, 2013 SCC Online Pat
602 and parts of the following passages were referred to and relied
upon. It was said in Parmeshwar Mandal:
“23. Proviso to Section 372 of the Code is in two parts. First
clause of the said proviso begins with ‘provided that’ and ends
with ‘Inadequate compensation’ and creates a right in the victim
to prefer appeal against any order passed by a court either (i)
acquitting the accused or (ii) convicting for a lesser offence or
(iii) imposing inadequate compensation. Thereafter, by inserting
conjunction ‘and’, another clause has been added in the same
sentence by which forum for preferring such appeal has been
identified, which relates to procedural part of law. Thus, the said
proviso contains both substantive part, creating right in the
victim to prefer an appeal, and procedural part, by identifying
the forum for filing such an appeal. It is not in dispute that the
substantive part of law operates prospectively, unless made
retrospective, and the procedural part is presumed to be
retrospective within its defined limits.
25. ...The Central Government, by Notification No. S.O.
3313(E) dated 30­12­2009, appointed 31st day of December
2009, as the date for the Act. 5 of 2009 to come into force,
which was published in Gazette of India, Ext., Pt.II, S.3(ii),
dated 30­12­2009. Hence, in absence of any express intention
notified by the Legislature to the contrary, it has to be concluded
that the right of victim, to prefer an appeal in terms of said
proviso to Section 372, became available to the victim(s) of all
cases in which orders were passed by any criminal court
acquitting the accused or convicting him for a lesser offence or
imposing inadequate compensation, on or after 31st of
December, 2009. In other words, date of judgment of a criminal
court has to be necessarily treated as the relevant date for
applying the test of maintainability of appeal by the victim
under three contingencies laid down under the proviso to Section
372 of the Code, irrespective of the date of occurrence,
institution of the case, cognizance or commitment.”
50. The Full Bench of the Rajasthan High Court in Baldev Sharma v.
Gopal 2017 SCC Online Raj 3005 considered (amongst others) the
following two questions:
“1. (i) Whether the proviso to Section 372 as introduced by the
amending Act No. 5 of 2009 which has been brought into effect
on 31.12.2009 can be given effect to in cases where the offence
occurred prior to 31.12.2009 and thereby given the right of
appeal to the victim in the event; (a) whether the court below
has acquitted the accused or (b) has convicted the accused for a
lesser offence or (c) has imposed inadequate compensation.
Though the judgment in such cases may have been passed by the
court below after 31.12.2009.
(ii) Whether the appeal by the victim under proviso to Section
372 is also required to be dealt with in the same manner as an
appeal filed by the State under Section 378 Cr.P.C. and the
provisions of Section 378 are required to be read into the
provisions of Section 372 Cr.P.C. with regard to appeals filed by
the victims.”
51. It was held, relying upon the same passages in Tata Steel and
Parmeshwar Mandal that “judgments passed on or after the said date
31­12­2009 are the ones in respect whereto, irrespective of the date of
the offence, the victim can avail the right to file an application seeking
leave to appeal.”
72. What is significant is that several High Courts have taken a
consistent view to the effect that the victim of an offence has a right of
appeal under the proviso to Section 372 CrPC. This view is in
consonance with the plain language of the proviso. But what is more
important is that several High Courts have also taken the view that the
date of the alleged offence has no relevance to the right of appeal. It
has been held, and we have referred to those decisions above, that the
significant date is the date of the order of acquittal passed by the Trial
Court. In a sense, the cause of action arises in favour of the victim of
an offence only when an order of acquittal is passed and if that
happens after 31.12.2009 the victim has a right to challenge the
acquittal, through an appeal. Indeed, the right not only extends to
challenging the order of acquittal but also challenging the conviction of
the accused for a lesser offence or imposing inadequate compensation.
The language of the proviso is quite explicit, and we should not read
nuances that do not exist in the proviso."
9.     It is not in dispute that the impugned judgment is of the year
2002. We are not satisfied with the argument of the learned counsel
for the appellant as the amendment has brought into force and
statutory right in favour of the victim was granted by way of
amendment under Section 372 CrPC w.e.f. 31.12.2009 and prior to
that amendment, in State case only the State Government could have
filed the appeal that too along with an application for granting leave
to appeal. The appellant at the time of passing of the impugned
judgment could have at the most challenged the order by filing
criminal revision which right was admittedly not exercised by the
appellant. It is after 14 years of the impugned judgment and even
after 7 years of the amendment having been enforced, he approached
this Court by filing delay condonation application along with an
application for granting to leave. It is not in dispute that in view of
the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court in Mallikarjun Kodagali
(supra), the appeal can be filed in the light of proviso to Section 372
CrPC and there is no requirement to file an application to grant leave
to appeal. However, this provision was not in force in the year 2002
as there is no specific provision that this amendment is retrospective
in nature. Therefore, in the opinion of the Court, the present appeal
would not be maintainable and accordingly, the same is dismissed as
not maintainable. We find that provision of Section 5 of Limitation
Act is, therefore, not available to the appellant and in fact, this
appears to be a meaningless attempt on the part of the appellant to
file this appeal by invoking the provision of Section 5 of Limitation
Act. As we find that the appeal itself is not maintainable and the
grounds narrated in the affidavit filed in support of delay
condonation application under Section 5 of Limitation Act need not
be looked into, which, in any case, are not sufficient to condone such
huge delay.
10.      Accordingly, the appeal stands dismissed as not maintainable.