1.   Petitioners have filed this petition seeking to quash the order/judgment
dated 14.02.2017 passed by the Central Information Commission, New Delhi
in CIC/C/A/2014/000289-SA, whereby, the Commission directed the Public
Information Officer, Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan, petitioner No.3 herein, to
furnish the complete and truthful information point-wise to Pushpa Devi,
respondent No.2 herein, as sought by her under the Right to Information Act.
2.   The instant writ petition came to be filed on 01.06.2017 and the matter
was heard on 02.06.2017 on the question of admissibility of petition.
Thereafter, on the said date, notice was also issued to the respondents.
However, none appeared on behalf of respondent-Pushpa Devi. The matter was
admitted to hearing on 08.09.2017 and post-admission notice was issued to the
respondents. Since none appeared on behalf of respondent-Pushpa Devi even
after issuance of post-admission notice, as such vide order dated 04.02.2022
the matter was directed to be proceeded exparte. Accordingly, the matter was
heard finally on 14.10.2022 in absence of respondent-Pushpa Devi and kept
reserved for pronouncement of judgment.
3.    The facts leading to filing of present petition are that respondent-Pushpa
Devi filed two applications before the Public Information Officer, Kendriya
Vidyalaya Sangathan, Gandhi Nagar, Jammu, petitioner No.3 herein, under the
Right to Information Act seeking to provide copies of all the complaints lodged
against one Mr. Vijay Kumar, Principal, Kendriya Vidyalaya, Chamba since
the date of his joining. However, the Public Information Officer vide
communication dated 01.03.2014 declined to provide the said information on
the ground that the information sought for qualifies as personal information
within the meaning of provisions of Section 8(1)(j) of the Act. Feeling
aggrieved, respondent-Pushpa Devi filed an appeal before the Central
Information Commission, which came to be allowed on 14.02.2017 with a
direction to the Public Information Officer, petitioner No.3 herein, to furnish
the complete and truthful information point-wise to respondent-Pushpa Devi as
sought by her under the Right to Information Act. Hence, the present petition
against the order of Central Information Commissioner.
4.    Heard learned counsel appearing for the petitioners and perused the writ
5.    The only question required to be determined in this petition is: whether or
not the information sought for by the respondent, namely, Pushpa Devi under
the Right to Information Act, 2005 qualifies as personal information within the
meaning of provisions of Section 8(1)(j) of the Act.
6.    It reveals that the respondent-Pushpa Devi sought to provide copies of all
the complaints lodged against one Mr. Vijay Kumar, Principal, Kendriya
Vidyalaya, Chamba since the date of his joining. After going through the file
and the relevant clause of Right to Information Act, we are in agreement that
the information sought for by the respondent-Pushpa Devi falls under the
expression personal information and the disclosure of which has no
relationship to any public activity or public interest, rather it would cause
unwarranted invasion of privacy of that individual. A similar question had
arisen before the Apex Court in a case, titled as, Girish Ramchandra
Deshpande vs Central Information Commr., 2013 (1) SCC 212, and what was
held by their Lordship in paragraphs 12 & 13 is reproduced hereunder:
“12. The petitioner herein sought for copies of all memos, show
cause notices and censure/punishment awarded to the third
respondent from his employer and also details viz. movable and
immovable properties and also the details of his investments, lending
and borrowing from Banks and other financial institutions. Further,
he has also sought for the details of gifts stated to have accepted by
the third respondent, his family members and friends and relatives at
the marriage of his son. The information mostly sought for finds a
place in the income tax returns of the third respondent. The question
that has come up for consideration is whether the above-mentioned
information sought for qualifies to be “personal information” as
defined in clause (j) of Section 8(1) of the RTI Act.
13. We are in agreement with the CIC and the courts below that the
details called for by the petitioner i.e. copies of all memos issued to
the third respondent, show cause notices and orders of
censure/punishment etc. are qualified to be personal information as
defined in clause (j) of Section 8(1) of the RTI Act. The performance
of an employee/officer in an organization is primarily a matter
between the employee and the employer and normally those aspects
are governed by the service rules which fall under the expression
“personal information”, the disclosure of which has no relationship
to any public activity or public interest. On the other hand, the
disclosure of which would cause unwarranted invasion of privacy of
that individual. Of course, in a given case, if the Central Public
Information Officer or the State Public Information Officer of the
Appellate Authority is satisfied that the larger public interest justifies
the disclosure of such information, appropriate orders could be
passed but the petitioner cannot claim those details as a matter of
right.”
7.     It seems the Central Information Commissioner has misinterpreted the
judgment and has not taken the same in its right perspective. Since, the said
judgment squarely falls to the facts of present case, as such the information
sought for by the respondent, namely, Pushpa Devi under the Right to
Information Act, 2005 qualifies as personal information within the meaning of
provisions of Section 8(1)(j) of the Act.
8.     Viewed thus, we find force in the petition. Accordingly, the same is
allowed and the order/judgment dated 14.02.2017 passed by the Central
Information Commission, New Delhi in CIC/C/A/2014/000289-SA is set aside.
Connected IA, accordingly, stands disposed of.