1. The instant matter came up for consideration on 17.2.2022 and in
view of the issue involved in the petition, the minor victim was
directed to be examined by the Medical Board for its opinion as to
whether the termination of pregnancy of victim is advisable or
2. Report of the Medical Board has been produced by Mr. Mohsin
Qadiri, Sr. AAG today accompanying to letter no. PA/HOD/GD/
3036 dated 18.2.2023 addressed by the Head of Department,
Gynaecology and Obstetrics, Government Medical College,
Srinagar, to the Medical Superintendent, Government LD
Hospital, Srinagar. The accompanying medical opinion reads as
“1. On examination, the general condition of the victim is
satisfactory.
2. Patient has 19 weeks of pregnancy as documented by
USG done on 18.2.2023 at LD Hospital, 18-20 weeks of
pregnancy as per fresh examination.
3. Patient is very high risk for MTP as it is a case of teenage
pregnancy.
4. MTP can be undertaken with extra high risk consent given
by guardians/parents.”
3. The petitioner father of the victim is present before this court in
person along with his counsel. Since the medical opinion
furnished provides that the patient is a very high risk being a case
of teenage pregnancy, thus the board has opined that the MTP can
be undertaken with “extra high risk consent” given by the
guardian/parent. In view of the aforesaid opinion, the petitioner
father of the victim volunteers and agrees to extend the consent as
is solicited by the medical board.
4. Having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case inasmuch
as the medical opinion supra and the statement made by the
petitioner father of the victim, the respondent 2, as such, is
directed to proceed with the case of termination of pregnancy of
the minor victim by the experts in the field after having a fresh
examination of the victim and in the event a final call is taken by
the experts for termination of pregnancy of the minor victim,
necessary measures shall also be taken in association with
respondents 3 and 4 for the preservation of the DNA sample of the
fetus. It is further directed that in case the process of termination
of pregnancy is undertaken, the minor victim be provided all
necessary medical facilities free of cost by the respondent 2.
Page 3 of 3                                      WP (C) 320/2023
5. A copy of this order shall be furnished to Mr. Sheikh Manzoor,
appearing counsel for the petitioner, as also to Mr. Mohsin Qadiri,
Sr. AAG for ensuring its compliance without any delay. A
compliance report of this order shall also be filed before this court
by or before next date of hearing.
7. Meanwhile, learned counsel for the petitioner shall ensure the
presence of the petitioner father before the respondent 2 for
completion and fulfillment of necessary requisites before the
experts undertake the process of termination of pregnancy of the
minor victim.
8. The opinion of the Medical Board produced by Mr. Mohsin
Qadiri, Sr. AAG is taken on record.