1.    Leave granted in all Special Leave Petitions.
2.    These appeals are challenging the common judgment and
order dated 24.4.2019 passed by the Division Bench of the High
Court of Judicature at Bombay in Writ Petition No. 2592/2013
and connected matters. Contempt Petition (Civil) No. 38/2021
has been filed against the alleged contemnor for disobedience of
orders dated 29.7.2019, 21.10.2019 and 22.11.2019 passed by
this Court in the appeal arising out of said SLP(C) No. 17009 of
2019.     For the present purposes, said Contempt Petition is
segregated with a direction to list the same before an appropriate
Court after six weeks.
3.    The Mumbai Municipal Corporation Act, 18881 has been
enacted by the State Government to consolidate and amend
1 “MMC Act”, for short
various Municipal Acts which were in force relating to the
Municipal administration of the city of Mumbai. The Municipal
Corporation of Greater Mumbai (“the Corporation” for short) has
been established and discharging its duties under the MMC Act.
4.    The MMC Act authorizes the Corporation to impose
property tax on lands and buildings. Importantly, property tax
is one of the main sources of revenue for the Corporation,
specifically after abolition of Octroi. The    MMC     Act  earlier
provided for levy of property tax on the basis of certain
percentage of rateable value of the buildings or lands. The basis
of determination of rateable value as provided in the MMC Act
was the annual rent for which such buildings or lands might
reasonably be expected to be let from year to year.
5.    The Corporation appointed Tata Institute of Social Sciences
(for short “TISS”) and University of Mumbai to study the system
of levy of property tax and to suggest alternative system for such
levy.   TISS submitted a detailed report recommending that
capital value­based system of assessment be adopted in place of
annual rental system.        After detailed discussions with stake
holders and based on the recommendations of TISS, the MMC
Act was amended by the Maharashtra Act No. XI of 2009. The
amendment       incorporated      an   option     and    empowered    the
Corporation to levy property tax on the basis of capital value as
an alternative to the earlier method of levying property tax on
the basis of rateable value.
6.   The Statement of Objects forming part of the Bill which led
to the passing of the Maharashtra Act No. XI of 2009 was as
Section 139 of the Mumbai Municipal Corporation
Act (Bom.III of 1888) provides for imposition of taxes by the
Municipal Corporation of Brihan Mumbai. The taxes to be
so imposed provide inter alia property taxes on buildings or
lands. The property taxes include water tax, water benefit
tax, sewerage tax, sewerage benefit tax, general tax,
education cess and street tax, which are leviable on the
basis of certain percentage of rateable value of the
buildings or lands.
2.    Section 154 of the Act provides the method of
fixing rateable value of any buildings or lands assessable to
property tax. The basis to determine the rateable value is
the annual rent for which such buildings or lands might
reasonably be expected to let from year to year, less 10 per
centum of the said annual rent and the said deduction is in
lieu of all allowances for repairs or on any other account
whatever.
3.    The determination or fixation of the rateable value
under different Municipal Acts or Municipal Corporation
Acts throughout India for the purpose of levy of property
taxes under these Acts has resulted in ceaseless dispute.
There has been a catena of decisions rendered by various
High Courts and the Supreme Court in respect of the
matter of fixation of rateable value particularly because of
the provisions of Rent Control Legislation in various States
including the State of Maharashtra. On account of these
decisions the annual rent to be taken into account for
fixation of rateable value of any buildings or lands has been
pegged down to the standard rent of any buildings or lands
according to the provisions of the Rent Control Acts. In so
far as the area of the Municipal Corporation of Brihan
Mumbai is concerned, the Rent Control Act, which provided
for standard rent for the first time, was the Bombay Rent
Restriction Act. 1939 (Bom. XVI of 1939). This Act was
repealed by the Bombay Rents, Hotel Rates and Lodging
House Rates (Control) Act, 1944 (Bom.VII of 1944), which
had been replaced by the Bombay Rents, Hotel and Lodging
House Rates Control Act, 1947 (Bom. LVII of 1947), which
has also been now repealed by the Maharashtra Rent
Control Act, 1999 (Mah. XVIII of 2000) which came into
force on the 31st day of March 2000 and is at present in
operation.     Thus the Rent Control Act has been in
operation in the Mumbai Municipal Corporation area for
over 65 years. In effect, therefore, the property tax has to
be determined on the basis of rateable value fixed
considering the annual rent, being the fair rent (standard
rent) alone, regardless of the actual rent received. Fair rent
very often means the rent prevailing prior for the year 1940
with some marginal modifications and additions. Because
of the limitations or restrictions brought into play by the
provisions of the Maharashtra Rent Control Act, 1999 and
the various judgements of the Court in respect of fixation of
rateable value for the purpose of levy of property taxes a lot
of subjectivity has crept into the system by which the rent
of buildings or lands is determined. Apart from this, it has
also resulted in lack of transparency, equity and rationality
in the system of assessment of property taxes. Property tax
is one of the main sources of revenue to the Corporation.
Due to such restrictions or limitations the income of the
Corporation from property tax has remained static. To
continue to compel the Corporation to levy and collect the
property tax on the basis of fair rent or standard rent
alone, while at the same time under Section 61 in Chapter
III and other provisions of the Mumbai Municipal
Corporation Act making it incumbent on the Corporation to
make adequate provisions to perform all its obligatory and
discretionary functions laid down by the Act may be to ask
for the impossible. The cost of maintaining and laying
roads, drains, water supply lines and providing other
essential civic services and amenities, the salaries of staff
and wages of employee and all other types of expenditure
have gone up steeply over the last more than 65 years.
4. With a view to exploring the possibility of reforming the
property tax system, so as to augment the revenue of the
Corporation, the Tata Institute of Social Sciences (TISS),
Mumbai were entrusted by the Corporation with the job to
study the present system of levy of property taxes and to
suggest any alternative system for such levy.              After
studying various systems available for assessment of
property taxes within and without India, they have
recommended that Capital Value Based System of
Assessment in place of the Annual Rental System may be
adopted, as according to them the trend in property tax
practices in developing countries is to move away from the
Annual Rental Value base to Capital Value base. The
capital value based system of assessment has the following
(1) Formula      based    assessment    is   possible  with
(2) Self­assessment is possible,
(3) Greater flexibility in tax administration which
provides control over revenue,
(4) Subjectivity is eliminated to the extent possible,
(5) There is transparency and easy to understand,
(6) Tax revenue can keep pace with inflation and cost of
5. The highlights of the system recommended by the Tata
Institute of Social Sciences is the shift from Annual Rental
Value to Capital Value as the base for the purpose of levy of
property taxes at a certain rate which may be determined
by the Corporation and such value is proposed to be
adopted as the value of any buildings or lands as is
indicated in the Stamp Duty Ready Reckoner for the time
being in force as prepared under the Bombay Stamp
(Determination of True Market Value of Property) Rules,
1995 and the capital value of the property could then be
computed by applying thereto factors such as location,
carpet area, type of construction, age of property and user
thereof. In this system properties which are old or of semi­
permanent structures including chawls, will be given due
consideration and concession.          Care is also taken to
provide for an appropriate cap on the increase on property
tax on account of switching over to the capital value base of
6. It is a modest attempt to enable the Corporation to
augment its revenue so as to meet the ever­rising
expenditure in providing appropriate an adequate
infrastructure for rendering civic services in the City like
Mumbai and its suburbs. Having regard to the status
thereof as a financial capital of India, the Mumbai City
requires a special attention.
7. The amendments to the Mumbai Municipal Corporation
Act (Bom. III of 1888) proposed in this Bill are intended to
achieve the above­mentioned objectives.”
7.   The MMC Act was, thereafter, amended by successive
amendments as a result of which newly introduced Section
154(1A)    and    (1B)    MMC      Act  now     authorizes     Municipal
Commissioner to fix the Capital Value of land and building with
the approval of the Standing Committee.                 Accordingly, the
Commissioner formulated Factors and Categories of Users of
Buildings or Lands (Assignment of Weightages by Multiplication)
Fixation of Capital Value Rules, 2010 (‘the Capital Value Rules of
2010’, for short) which came into force on and with effect from
20.03.2012, and Factors and Categories of Users of Buildings or
Lands (Assignment of Weightage by Multiplication) Fixation of
Capital Value Rules, 2015 (‘the Capital Values Rules of 2015’, for
short), which came into force on 01.04.2015.
8.   It must be stated here that on 20.01.2010 a resolution was
passed appointing an expert committee comprising of Dr. D.M.
Sukthankar, Dr. D.N. Choudhary and Dr. Roshan Namavati to
make recommendations on the Capital Value System. The draft
rules prepared by the Committee were published in various
newspapers on 18.10.2010 inviting objections. The last date for
submissions and objections after due extension expired on
30.11.2010, whereafter final report was submitted.               After
obtaining the sanction of the Standing Committee, the Capital
Value   Rules,    of   2010     were    published    on   20.03.2012.
Subsequently, the Capital Value Rules of 2015 were also framed.
9.   The relevant provisions of the MMC Act dealing with the
matters in issue are extracted here for ready reference:
“120. Constitution of Fines Fund. Fines collected under
section 83 shall be credited to a separate fund to be
called “the Fines Fund” the proceeds of which shall be
expended in promoting the well­being of municipal
officers and servants other than those appointed under
the provisions of Chapter XVIA of this Act, and for the
payment of compassionate allowances to the widows of
such officers and servants who die while in municipal
service and to such other relation of the officers and
servants as the corporation may from time to time
determine.
123. Accounts to be kept in forms prescribed by
Standing Committee. Subject to the provisions of
Chapter XVI­A of this Act accounts of the receipts and
expenditure of the corporation shall be kept in such
manner and in such forms as the Standing Committee
shall from time to time prescribe:
Provided that, the accounts of the Water and Sewage
Fund and the Consolidated Water Supply and Sewage
Disposal Loan Fund shall be maintained on the accrual
basis, unless otherwise prescribed by the Standing
125. Estimates of expenditure and income to be
prepared annually by Commissioner.
The Commissioner shall on or before each fifth day of
February, have prepared and lay before the Standing
Committee, in such form as the said Committee shall
from time to time approve, —
(1) (a) an estimate of the expenditure which must
or should, in his opinion be incurred by the
corporation in the next ensuing Official Year,
(ii) expenditure to be incurred by reason of
the obligations imposed on the corporation
arising out of the transfer to the
corporation of the powers, duties, assets
and liabilities of the Board of Trustees for
the improvement of the City of Bombay
constituted under the City of Bombay
or for any of the purposes of Chapter XII­
(iii) expenditure to be incurred on account
of the Brihan Mumbai Electric Supply and
(iv) expenditure to be incurred for the
purposes of clause (q) of section 61;
(v) expenditure to be incurred for the
purposes of Chapters IX and X;
(b) an estimate of the balances, if any (other than
balances) shown in the accounts maintained under
sections 123A and 123C which will be available for
re­appropriation       or    expenditure     at   the
commencement of the next ensuing official year;
(c) an estimate of the corporation’s receipts and
income for the next ensuing official year other than
from taxation and from the Brihan Mumbai
Electric Supply and Transport Undertaking and
other than that referred to in clause (c) of sub­
section (2) and in clause (d) of section 126C and in
(cc) an estimate of the amount due to be
transferred during the next ensuing official year to
the municipal fund under the provisions of
sections 460KK and 460LL;
(d) a statement of proposals as to the taxation
which it will, in his opinion, be necessary or
expedient to impose under the provisions of this
Act in the next ensuing official year;
(2) (a) an estimate of the expenditure which must
or should, in his opinion, be incurred by the
corporation in the next ensuing official year by
reason of the obligations imposed upon the
corporation arising out of the transfer to the
corporation of the powers, duties, assets and
liabilities of the Board of Trustees for the
Improvement of the City of Bombay constituted
under the City of Bombay Improvement Trust
Transfer Act, 1925 or for any of the purposes of
(b) an estimate of all balances, if any in the
account maintained under section 122A, which
will      be   available  for   re­appropriation  or
expenditure at the commencement of the next
ensuing official year;
(c) an estimate of the corporation’s receipts and
income for the next ensuing official year—
(i)    arising from sales, leases and other
dispositions of immovable property vesting
in the corporation by reason of the
enactment of the City of Bombay Municipal
(Amendment) Act, 1933 or acquired by the
Corporation for any of the purposes of
Chapter XII­A; and
(ii) being payments of interest on and
repayments in whole or part of the capital of
loans granted by the corporation and
secured on the aforesaid immovable
(d) an estimate of three times the amount of the
net estimated realisations of the corporation in
the then current financial year under the head of
general tax (including arrears and payments in
advance) divided by the rate fixed for general tax
for the then current financial year;
Provided further that, with effect from the
financial year 1974­75, this subclause shall have
effect as if for the words “three­times” the word
“twice” were substituted;
(e) an estimate of the Corporation’s receipts and
income, other than receipts and income referred
to in other clauses of this sub­section arising from
or relating to, transaction connected with the
obligations imposed upon the Corporation by the
transfer to the Corporation of the powers, duties,
assets and liabilities of the said Board of Trustees
or with the exercise of the powers and duties
conferred or imposed upon the Corporation by
Chapter XII­A including grants from the State
128. Fixing rates, of municipal taxes and of fares and
charges of “Brihan Mumbai Electric Supply and
(1) The Corporation shall, on or before the
twentieth day of March after considering the
Standing Committee’s proposals in this behalf, —
(a) determine, subject to the limitations and
conditions prescribed in Chapter VIII, the
rates at which municipal taxes shall be
levied, and the articles on which octroi shall
be levied, in the next ensuing official year:
Provided that, the Corporation may
determine different rates of property taxes
for different categories of users of a building
or land or part thereof; and
(b) approve, subject to the limitations and
conditions which may have been prescribed
by or under any of the enactments or any
licence referred to in clause (i­a) of sub­
section (2) of section 126B, the rates at
which the fares and charges in respect of
the Brihan Mumbai Electric Supply and
Transport Undertaking shall be levied.
(2) Except under sections 134,196, 460H and 460I,
the rates so fixed and the articles so appointed
shall not be subsequently altered for the year for
which they have been fixed.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub­
sections (1) and (2), the Corporation may, at any
time during the official years 2010­2011, 2011­
2012 and 2012­2013 determine, separately for
each of the said three years, the rates of property
taxes for different categories of users of a building
or land or part thereof. The rates of property taxes
so determined shall be effective and shall be
deemed to have been effective from the 1st of April
of those three years and the taxes for the said
three years shall be leviable and payable at the
rates so determined.
139. Taxes to be imposed under this Act. For the
purpose of this Act, taxations shall be imposed as follows,
(1) property taxes;
139A. Property taxes what to consist.
(1) Property taxes leviable on buildings and lands in
Brihan Mumbai under this Act shall include water tax,
water benefit tax, sewerage tax, sewerage benefit tax,
general tax, education cess, street tax and betterment
(2) For the purposes of levy of property taxes, the
expression “Building” includes ­a flat, a gala, a unit or
any portion of the building.
(3) All or any of the property taxes may be imposed on a
graduated scale.
(4) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, it shall be
lawful ­ for the Corporation to levy all property taxes on
the rateable value of buildings and lands until the
Corporation adopts levy of any or all the property taxes
on such buildings and lands on the capital value thereof
under section 140A.
140. Property taxes leviable on rateable value, or
capital value as the case may be, and at what rate. (1)
The following property taxes shall be levied on building
and lands in Brihan Mumbai, namely: ­
(a) (i) the water tax of so many per centum of their
rateable value, or their capital value, as the case may be,
as the Standing Committee may consider necessary for
providing water supply;
(ii) an additional water tax which shall be called ‘the
water benefit tax’ of so many per centum of their rateable
value, or their capital value, as the case may be, as the
Standing Committee may consider necessary for meeting
the whole or part of the expenditure incurred or to be
incurred on capital works for making and improving the
facilities of water­supply and for maintaining and
operating such works;
Provided that all or any of the property taxes may be
imposed on a graduated scale.
(b) (i) the sewerage tax of so many per centum of their
rateable value, or their capital value, as the case may be,
as the Standing Committee may consider necessary for
collection, removal and disposal of human waste and
(ii) an additional sewerage tax which shall be called the
“sewerage benefit tax” of so many per centum of their
rateable value, or their capital value, as the case may be,
as the Standing Committee may consider necessary for
meeting the whole or a part of the expenditure incurred
or likely to be incurred on capital work ­ for making and
improving facilities for the collection, removal and
disposal of human waste and other wastes and for
maintaining and operating such works;
(c) a general tax of not less than eight and not more than
fifty per centum of their rateable value, or of not less than
0.1 and not more than 1 per centum of their capital
value, as the case may be, together with not less than
one­eight and not more than five per centum of their
rateable value or not less than 0.01 and not more than
0.2 per centum of their capital value, as the case may be,
added thereto in order to provide for the expense
necessary for fulfilling the duties of the corporation
arising under clause (k) of section 61 and Chapter XIV;
(ca) the education cess leviable under section 195E;
(cb) the street tax leviable under section 195G;
(d) betterment charges leviable under Chapter XII­A.
(2) Any reference in this Act or in any instrument to a
water tax or a halalkhor tax shall after the
commencement of the Bombay Municipal Corporation
(Amendment) Ordinance, 1973, be construed as a
reference to the water tax or the water benefit tax or both
or the sewerage tax or the sewerage benefit tax, or both
as the context may require;
140A. Property taxes to be levied on capital value and
the rate thereof. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained
in section 140 or any other provision of this Act, the
Corporation may pass a resolution to adopt levy of
property tax on buildings and lands in Brihan Mumbai
on the basis of capital value of the buildings and lands on
and from such date, and at such rates, as the
Corporation may determine in accordance with the
provisions of section 128:
Provided that, for the period of five years from the
date on and from which such property tax is levied on
capital value, the tax shall not:
(i) in respect of building used for residential
purposes, two times, and
(ii) in respect of building or land used for non­
residential purposes, three times, and
(b)where the tax so levied on any building or land,
whether used for residential or for non­residential
purposes, gets reduced, be less than half of the
amount of the property tax leviable in respect
thereof in the year immediately preceding such
shall not exceed, ­
(i)     in respect of building used for residential
purposes, two times, and
(ii)    in respect of building or land used for non­
residential purposes, three times,
the amount of the property tax leviable in respect thereof
in the year immediately preceding such date:
Provided further that, where the property taxes
levied in respect of any residential or non­residential
building or portion thereof were on the basis of annual
letting value arrived at considering the leave and licence
charges, by whatever name called, then for the purposes
of the first proviso it shall be lawful for the Commissioner
to ascertain such tax leviable during such immediately
preceding year, as if such building or portion thereof were
self­occupied and had been so entered in the assessment
Provided also that, the property tax levied on the
basis of capital value of any building or land on revision
made under sub section (1C) of section 154 shall not in
any case exceed 40 per centum of the amount of the
property tax payable in the year immediately preceding
the year of such revision:
Provided also that, for the period of five years
commencing from the year of adoption of capital value as
the base, for levy of property tax under section 140A, the
amount of property tax leviable in respect of a residential
building or residential tenement, having carpet area of
46.45 sq. meter (500 sq. feet) or less, shall not exceed the
amount of property tax levied and payable in the year
immediately preceding the year of such adoption of
capital value as the basis.
Provided also that, for a period of five years
commencing on the 1st April 2015, the amount of
property tax leviable in respect of a residential building or
residential tenement, having carpet area of 46.45 sq.
meter (500 sq. feet) or less, shall not exceed the amount
of property tax which is being levied and payable in
respect of such residential building or tenement as on the
Provided also that, for the financial year 2019­20,
the provisions of the preceding proviso shall apply as if
the general tax leviable under clause (c) of sub­section (1)
of section 140 do not form part of the property tax
leviable under that section.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub­section (4)
of section 139A or any other provisions of this Act or
Resolution, if any, passed by the Corporation for adopting
the levy of property tax on the basis of capital value but
subject to the provisions of section 154A, buildings and
lands in respect of which the process of fixing capital
value is in progress on the 26th August 2010, being the
date of coming into force of section 3 of the Maharashtra
Municipal Corporations and Municipal Councils (Third
Amendment) Act, 2010, until it is so fixed, the tax
leviable and payable in respect of such buildings and
lands shall provisionally be equal to the amount of tax
leviable and payable in the preceding year, that is to say,
for the year commencing on the first day of April 2009
and ending on the thirty­first day of March 2010 and
such provisional tax shall be leviable and payable for
each of the years 2010­2011, 2011­2012 and 2012­2013,
according to the provisional bills which may be issued
separately for each such year; so, however, that on
fixation of capital value of the respective buildings and
lands,                final               bill            of
assessment of property taxes on the basis of capital value
may then be issued for each such year as aforesaid. After
such final assessment, if it is found that the assessee has
paid excess amount, such excess shall, notwithstanding
anything contained in section 179, be refunded within
three months from the date of issuing the final bill, along
with interest from such date as provided in the first
proviso to sub­section (5) of section 217, or after
obtaining the consent of the assessee, shall be adjusted
towards payment of property tax due, if any, for the
subsequent years; and if the amount of taxes on final
assessment is more than the amount of tax already paid
by the assessee, the difference shall be recovered from
the assessee.
(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub­section
(1) or (2) or any other provisions of this Act, the tax on
buildings and lands, which are liable to be assessed for
the first time on or after the 1st April 2010, shall
provisionally be equal to the amount of tax, as if such
buildings and lands are liable to be assessed in the year
2009­2010; and on ascertainment of the capital value of
such ‘buildings and lands, the corporation may issue a
final bill in respect of the years for which they are liable
to be assessed, on the basis of capital value thereof and
accordingly it shall be the duty of the owner and occupier
of such buildings and lands to pay such tax within the
period specified in the final bill issued as aforesaid.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 163 or
217 or any other provisions of this Act and having regard
to the fact that the property tax bill has been issued in
accordance with the provisions of sub­section (2), not
being a final bill, such bill shall not be questioned before
any forum; and no complaint or appeal shall lie against
such bill merely on the ground that capital value in
respect of the property which is subject matter of the bill
is not yet fixed, or that the amount of tax leviable and
payable at the rate of property tax determined by the
Corporation is not yet finally ascertained, or on any other
ground whatever.
Explanation.­ For the purposes of this section, after the
Corporation adopts the Capital Value as the basis of levy
of property tax, the property tax in respect of any taxable
building shall be revised after every five years and on
each such revision, such amount of property tax, shall
not in any case exceed the forty per cent of the amount of
the property tax levied and payable in the year
immediately preceding the year of the revision.
154. Rateable value or capital value how to be
determined. (1) In order to fix the rateable value of any
building or land assessable to a property­tax, there shall
be deducted from the amount of the annual rent for which
such land or building might reasonably be expected to let
from year to year as unequal to ten per centum of the said
annual rent and the said deduction shall be in lieu of all
allowances for repairs or on any other account whatever.
(1A) In order to fix the capital value of any building or
land assessable to a property tax the Commissioner shall
have regard to the value of any building or land as
indicated in the Stamp Duty Ready Reckoner for the time
being in force as prepared under the Bombay Stamp
(Determination of True Market Value of Property) Rules,
1995, framed under the provisions of the Bombay Stamp
Act, 1958, as a base value2 or where the Stamp Duty
Ready Reckoner does not indicate Value of any properties
in any particular area wherein a building or land in
respect of which capital value is required to be determined
is situate, or in case such Stamp Duty Ready Reckoner
does not exist, then the Commissioner may fix the capital
value of any building or land taking into consideration the
market value of such building or land, as a base value.
The Commissioner while fixing the capital value as
aforesaid, shall have regard3 to the following factors,
(a) the nature and type of the land and structure
of the building, ­
(b) area of land or carpet area of building,
(c) user category, that is to say, (i) residential, (ii)
commercial (shops or the like), (iii) offices, (iv)
hotels (upto 4 stars), (v) hotels (more than 4
stars), (vi) banks, (vii) industries and factories,
(viii) school and college building or building used
for educational purposes, (ix) malls and (x) any
other building or land not covered by any of the
above categories,
(e) such other factors as may be specified by rules
made under subsection (1B).
(1B) The Commissioner shall with the approval of the
Standing Committee, frame such rules as respects the
details of categories of building or land and the weightage
by multiplication to be assigned to various such factors and
categories for the purpose of fixing the capital value under
sub­section (1A).
(1C) The capital value of any building or land fixed under
sub­section (1A) shall be revised every five years:
Provided that, the Commissioner may, for reasons to
be recorded in writing, revise the capital value of any
The expressions were added / substituted by 2010 Amendment.                   The erstwhile sub­
section (1A) introduced by Maharashtra Act No. XI of 2009 was : ­
““(1A) In order to fix the capital value of any building or land assessable to a
property tax the Commissioner shall have regard to the value of any building or
land as indicated in the Stamp Duty Ready Reckoner for the time being in force as
prepared under the Bombay Stamp (Determination of True Market Value of
Property) Rules, 1995, framed under the provisions of the Bombay Stamp Act,
1958, or where the Stamp Duty Ready Reckoner does not indicate value of any
properties in any particular area wherein a building or land in respect of which
capital value is required to be determined is situate, or in case such Stamp Duty
Ready Reckoner does not exist, then the Commissioner may fix the capital value of
any building or land taking into consideration the market value of such building or
land, as a base value; and also have regard to the following factors, namely: ­
(a) the nature and type of the land and structure of the building,
(b) area of land or carpet area of building,
(c) user category, that is to say, (i) residential, (ii) commercial (shops or
the like), (iii) offices, (iv) hotels (upto 4 stars), (v) hotels (more than 4
stars) (vi) banks, (vii) industries and factories, (viii) school and college
building or building used for educational purposes, (ix) malls and (x)
any other building or land not covered by any of the above categories,
(d) age of the building, or
such other factors as may be specified by rules made under subsection (1B).””
building or land any time during the said period of five
years and shall accordingly amend the assessment book in
relation to such building or land under section 167.
(1D) (a) Notwithstanding       anything   contained    in  sub­
(i) due to the spread of COVID­19 pandemic, the
capital value of any building or land fixed under
sub­section (1A) shall not be revised in the year
2020­21 and the year 2021­22;
(ii)for the year 2020­21 and the year 2021­22, the
property tax bill for any building or land shall be
the same as is for the year 2019­20;
(iii) the capital value of any building or land fixed
under sub­section (1A) shall be revised in the
year 2022­23, as if the clause (i) is not applicable
for the year 2020­21 and the year 2021­22.
(b)Subject to the proviso to sub­section (1C), the
next revision shall be in the year 2025­26, and,
thereafter, the revision of capital value of any
building or land, shall be in accordance with the
provisions of sub­section (1C).
(2) The value of any machinery contained or situate in or
upon any building or land shall not be included in the
rateable value or the capital value, as the case may be, of
such building or land.
154A. Provisional fixation of capital value in certain
cases. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 154,
the rateable value of any building or land or part thereof,
for the official year 2009­2010, shall be the provisional
capital value of such building and lands in respect of the
official years 2010­2011, 2011­2012 and 2012­2013, and
such provisional capital value shall be deemed to be the
capital value validly and legally fixed under the provisions
of this Act, pending fixing the capital value thereof, and it
shall be lawful for the Commissioner to treat it as such for
the purposes of assessment book kept under the provisions
of this Act, and the bill for property taxes issued under
sub­section (2) of section 140A shall be deemed to have
been validly and legally issued under the provisions of this
Provided that, in respect of the buildings and lands which
are liable to be assessed for the first time on or after the 1st
April 2010, the capital value of such buildings and lands
shall, until the final capital value is determined under this
section, be provisionally equal to the amount of rateable
value worked out on the basis of the prescribed letting
rates by the corporation in respect of the official year 2009­
155. Commissioner may call for information or returns
from owner or occupier or enter and inspect assessable
premises. (1) To enable him to determine the rateable
value or the capital value, as the case may be, of any
building or land and the person primarily liable for the
payment of any property tax leviable in respect thereof the
Commissioner may require the owner or occupier of such
building or land, or of any portion thereof, to furnish him,
within such reasonable period as the Commissioner
prescribes in this behalf, with information or with a written
return signed by such owner or occupier­
(a) as to the name and place of abode of the owner
or occupier, or of both owner and occupier of such
building or land; and
(b) as to the details in respect of any or all the
items as enumerated in clauses (a) to (e) of sub­
section (1A) of section 154 in relation to such
building or land or any portion thereof.
(2) Every owner or occupier on whom any such requisition
is made shall be bound to comply with the same and to give
true information or to make a true return to the best of his
knowledge or belief.
(3) The Commissioner may also for the purpose aforesaid
make an inspection of any such building or land.
156. Assessment book what to contain.
The Commissioner shall keep a book, in such form and
manner as he may, with the approval of the Standing
Committee, determine, and such book shall be called “the
assessment book” in which shall be entered every official
(a) a list of all buildings and lands in Brihan Mumbai
distinguishing each either by name or number, as he
(b) the rateable value or the capital value, as the case
may be, of each such building and land determined
in accordance with the foregoing provisions of this
(c) the name of the person primarily liable for the
payment of the property taxes, if any, leviable on
each such building or land;
(d) if any such building or land is not liable to be
assessed to the general tax or is exempt from
payment of property tax either in whole or in part, as
the case may be, the reason of such non­liability or
exemption, as the case may be;
(e) when the rates of the property taxes to be levied
for the year have been duly fixed by the corporation
and the period fixed by public notice, as hereinafter
provided, for the receipt of complaints against the
amount of rateable value or the capital value, as the
case may be, entered in any portion of the
assessment book, has expired, and in the case of any
such entry which is complained against, when such
complaint has been disposed of in accordance with
the provisions hereinafter contained, the amount at
which each building or land entered in such portion
of the assessment book is assessed to each of the
property taxes, if any, leviable thereon;
(f) if under section 169, a charge is made for water
supplied to any buildings or land by measurement or
the water taxes or charges for water by measurement
are compounded for, or if, under section 170, the
sewerage taxes or sewerage charges for any building
or land are fixed at a special rate, the particulars and
amount of such charges composition or rates;
(g) such other details, if any, as the Commissioner
from time to time thinks fit to direct.”
10. The relevant portion of the Capital Value Rules, 2010 is as
“No. AC/NTC/1310/2011­22 dated 20.03.2012. In
exercise of the powers conferred by clause (e)s of sub­
section (1A) and sub­section (1B) of section 154 of the
Mumbai Municipal Corporation Act (Act No. Bom.III of
1888), and of all other powers enabling him in this
behalf, the Commissioner, after having obtained the
approval of the Standing Committee, as required
under the said sub­section (1B), hereby makes the
following rules to provide for the factors and
categories of users of buildings or lands and the
weightage by multiplication to be assigned to various
such factors and categories for the purpose of fixing
the capital value of buildings and lands in Brihan
Mumbai, namely:­
1. Short title and commencement: ­ (i) These rules
may be called for the Factors and Categories of
Users of Buildings or Lands (Assignment of
Weightages by Multiplication) Fixation of Capital
(ii) They shall come into force forthwith.
3.    Capital of open land :­ Save otherwise provided
in these rules, where, within the precincts of a
building there is vacant land other than the land
appurtenant to the building, such land shall be
treated as open land and the capital value thereof
shall be fixed accordingly, as provided for in rule 21.
4.    User categories of open land and weightages by
multiplication to be assigned thereto:­ User categories
of open land shall be as specified in column (2) of Part
1 of schedule ‘A’ and the weightages by multiplication
to base value, to be respectively assigned thereto the
purpose of fixing capital value, shall be as shown in
column (3) of the said Part I of schedule ‘A’.
5.    User categories of buildings or part thereof and
weightages by multiplication to be assigned thereto:­
User categories of buildings part thereof shall be as
specified column (2) of each of Parts II, III and IV of
schedule 'A' and the weightages by multiplication to
the relative base value, to be respectively assigned
thereto for the purpose of fixing capital value, shall be
as in column (3) of each of the said Parts II, III and IV
of schedule 'A'.
6.    The nature and type of building and the
weightage by multiplication to be assigned thereto:­
The nature and type of a building shall be as specified
in column (2) of schedule ‘B’ and the weightages my
multiplication to be assigned thereto for the purpose
of fixing capital value, shall be shown in column (3) of
the said schedule ‘B’.
7.    The weightage by multiplication to be assigned
to a building on account of the age thereof: ­ The
weightage by multiplication to be assigned to a
building on account of age factor, for the purpose of
fixing capital value, shall be according to the age of
the building as shown in column (2) of schedule ‘C’
and the weightage by multiplication be assigned
thereto shall be as shown in column (3) of the said
8.    The weightage by multiplication on account of
floor factor to be assigned to RCC building with lift: ­
Weightage by multiplication on account of floor factor
to be assigned to a RCC building with lift, for the
purpose of fixing capital value, shall be according to
the number of floors as shown in column (2) of
schedule 'D' and the weightage by multiplication to be
assigned thereto shall be as shown in column (3) of
the said schedule 'D'.
9.    Area of hoarding or tower for the purpose of
fixing capital value: ­Area of hoarding or tower for the
purpose of fixing capital value thereof shall mean, ­
(a) in the case of a hoarding, the area of the square
of the extremities of the poles on which the hoarding
is erected plus the area of the hoarding; and
(b) in the case of a tower, the area covered by the
extremities of the foundation of the tower.
10. Built­up area of a flat or a building: (1) The total
carpet area of a flat shall be reckoned by including
the area of the following items, namely: (i) terrace in
exclusive possession, (ii) mezzanine floor, (iii) loft
(excluding loft in residential flat) or attic, (iv) dry
balcony and (v) niches; and
(2) The total built­up area of a building shall be
reckoned by including the areas of the following
items, namely: ­ (i) total area of the flats in the
building computed in accordance with sub rule (1), (ii)
basement, (iii) stilt, (iv)porch, (v) podium, (vi) service
floor, (vii) refuge area, (viii) entrance lobby, (ix) lounge,
(x) air­ conditioning plant room, (xi) air handling
room, (xii) the structure for an effluent treatment
plant and (xiii) watchman cabin
(3) The built­up area of any of the following items
shall not be reckoned while computing the carpet
area of a building or part thereof, namely: ­
(i) lift room above topmost storey, (ii) lift well,
(iii) stair­case and passage thereto including
staircase room, (iv) chimney and elevated
tank, (v) meter room, (vi) pump room, (vii)
underground and overhead water tank, (viii)
septic tank, (ix)flower­bed and (x) loft in
residential flat
(4) Where only the carpet area of a flat or building is
available on the record of the Corporation and the
total built­up area thereof, computed in the manner
as aforesaid in sub­rule (1), or, as the case may be,
sub­rule (2), is not available on such record, then the
total built­up area of the flat or, as the case may be,
of a building shall be arrived at in the following
manner, namely :­
Built­up area = 1.2 x carpet area as available on
the record of the Corporation +
11. Fixation of capital value of a flat or building or
part thereof.­       (1) While fixing the capital value of
a flat, the capital value of any one or more of the
relevant items specified in sub­rule (1) of rule 10, as
fixed in accordance with the provisions of rules 14,15,
or sub­rule(1) of rule 16, as the case may be, shall be
added to the capital value of the flat.
(2) While fixing the capital value of a building or part
thereof, the capital value of any of the one or more of
the relevant items specified in sub­rule (2) of rule 10
as fixed in accordance with the provisions of sub­rule
(2) or, as the case may be, (3) of rule 16, shall be
added to the capital value of the building or part
12. Fixation of capital value of a building where
there are tenants: ­ The capital value of a building or
part thereof which is occupied by a tenant shall be
fixed at 75% of the capital value of such building or
part thereof; fixed in accordance with the provisions
of sub­rule (1), or, as the case may be, sub­rule (2) of
Explanation. ­ For the removal of doubts, it is hereby
declared that the provisions of this rule shall not
apply to a building or part thereof if, ­
(1) it is occupied by a licensee to whom it is
given on leave and licence;
s(2) it is occupied by an office bearer or officer or
an employee of the landlord.
13. Fixation of capital value of religious buildings :­
The capital value of a religious building which is a
temple, math, gurudwara, mosque, takth, church,
durgah, synagogue, or agiary or the like, and is used
or intended to be used for the purpose of religious
worship or offering prayers or performance of any
religious rites or rituals by a person of, or belonging
to, the relevant religion, creed, or sect, shall be fixed
at the rate of base value applicable to a residential
building as indicated in the Ready Reckoner; and by
applying the relevant weightages by multiplication
provided for in these rules.
14. Fixation of capital value of open terrace: ­ If an
open terrace in exclusive possession is attached to a
flat, the capital value of such terrace of a non­
residential flat shall be fixed at 40% of the relative
rate of base value of such flat, and of residential flat
at 10% of the relative rate of base value of such flat;
and by applying the relevant weightages by
multiplication provided for in these rules.
15. Fixation of capital value of mezzanine floor, loft
and attic floor: ­
(a) the capital value of mezzanine floor shall be
fixed at 70% of the relative rate of base value of the
flat beneath the mezzanine floor; and by applying the
relevant weightages by multiplication provided for in
(b) the capital value of loft or attic floor shall be
fixed at 50% of the relative rate of base value of the
flat beneath the loft, or as the case may be, the attic;
and by applying the relevant weightages by
multiplication provided for in these rules;
Provided that, where the rate of base value
applicable to the mezzanine floor, loft or attic floor
having regard to its user is higher or, as the case may
be, lower than the rate of base value applicable to the
flat beneath such mezzanine floor, loft or attic floor,
the capital value of such mezzanine floor, loft or attic
floor shall be fixed at 70% or 50%, as the case may
be, of such higher or lower rate of base value; and by
applying the relevant weightages by multiplication
provided for in these rules.
16. Fixation of capital value of certain other items
which are part of a flat or a building or part thereto,­
(1) The capital value of dry balcony and niches shall
be fixed at 25% of the relative rate of base value of the
flat, if any one of these items are part of the flat; and
by applying the relevant weightages by multiplication
provided for in these rules.
(2) The capital value of any one or more of the
following items, namely:­ (i)porch, (ii) air­conditioning
plant room, (iii) air­handling room, (iv) structure for
an effluent plant, (v) watchman cabin and (vi) refuge
area, shall be fixed at 25% of the relative rate of base
value of the building or part thereof, if any one or
more of these items are part of the building or part
thereof; and by applying the relevant weightages by
multiplication provided for in these rules.
(3) The capital value of any one or more of the
following items, namely:­ (i) service floor, (ii) entrance
lobby and (iii) lounge, shall be fixed at the relative
rate of base value of the building or part thereof, if
any of these items are part of the building or part
thereof; and by applying the relevant weightages by
multiplication provided for in these rules.
17. Fixation of capital value in respect of demolished
(1) Where a building is fully demolished, or has fully
collapsed, the land beneath it shall be deemed to be
open land and the capital value thereof shall be fixed
accordingly, as provided for in rule 21.
Explanation – For the purpose of this rule, it is
hereby declared that where a building is, or is being,
demolished, or has collapsed, resulting in the land on
which it stood or stands being rendered open land, or
only walls or the like are standing but there is no
structure as such which can be occupied, and on
such demolition, or collapse, debris or any remains of
the demolished or collapsed building are not yet
removed, the land beneath such building shall be
deemed to be open land.
(2) Where only part of a building is demolished or has
partly collapsed and the remaining part is yet
occupied by occupiers, land beneath the portion of
the building which is demolished or has collapsed
shall be deemed to be open land and the portion of
the structure which is occupied shall be treated as a
building, for the purpose of fixing the capital value
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub rules
(1) and (2), where a cessed building is, or is being,
demolished, or has collapsed, the land beneath the
building or portion of the building which is
demolished or collapsed shall be deemed to be open
land and the capital value thereof shall be fixed as
open land and assigning thereto a weightage by
multiplication of 0.30 of the base value of open land.
18. The capital value of storage tank .­The capital
value of storage tank shall be fixed in the following
manner, namely : –
(1) storage tank above the ground level :­
(a) land ­ at the rate of open land in the Ready
Reckoner and weightage by multiplication to be
assigned thereto shall be 1.25,
(b) storage tank ­ capacity of storage tank in
litres multiplied by the rate of Rs.40 per litre, with
weightage by multiplication to be assigned thereto on
account of age factor as in schedule ‘C’,
(c) total capital value of a storage tank = total of
items (a) and (b).
(2) storage tank below the ground level :­
(a) land ­ at the rate of open land in the Ready
Reckoner and weightage by multiplication to be
assigned thereto shall be 1.25,
(b) storage tank ­ capacity of storage tank in
litres multiplied by the rate of Rs.50 per litre, with
weightage by multiplication to be assigned thereto on
account of age factor as in schedule ‘C’,
(c) total capital value of a storage tank = total of
items (a) and (b).
19. Capital value of amenities of luxurious RCC
building not to be separately fixed again.­ Where the
capital value of a luxurious RCC building is fixed
under these rules, then no capital value of the
amenities specified in the definition of the expression
‘luxurious RCC building’ shall be separately fixed for
the purpose of levy of property tax.
20. Valuation of open land capable of utilising more
than 1 floor space index (F.S.I) or transfer of
development right (T.D.R.) ­As the Ready Reckoner
provides for the rate of base value of open land with 1
floor space index, open land which is capable of
utilizing more than 1 floor space index or any transfer
of development right shall be valued at an increased
rate in proportion to the higher floor space index or
transfer of development right proposed to be utilized
and approved under the building plan submitted to
the Corporation for approval.
21. Capital value of open land or building or part
thereof.­Capital value of open land or building shall
be fixed under the provisions of the Act and these
rules in the following manner, namely:
(1) Capital value (CV) of open land
Rate of base value (BV) of a open land according
to Ready Reckoner X weightage by multiplication
as per user category (UC) (Part I of schedule 'A')
X permissible or approved floor space index (FSI)
X area of land (AL).
(2) Capital value (CV) of a building –
Relative rate of base value (BV) of a building
according to Ready Reckoner X weightage by
multiplication as per user category (UC) (Parts II,
III, or as the case may be, IV of schedule 'A') X
weightage by multiplication as per the nature
and type of building (NTB) (schedule 'B') X
weightage by multiplication on account of age of
building (AF) (schedule 'C') X weightage by
multiplication on account of floor factor (FF) for
RCC building with lift (schedule 'D') X carpet
area (CA).
Examples: ­ Some examples based and worked out on
the formulae as aforesaid are shown in the Appendix.
22. Non­application of Guidelines of Stamp Duty
Valuation. ­ Notwithstanding anything contained in
the "Important Guidelines of Stamp Duty Valuation"
as specified in the Ready Reckoner, the provisions
made in these rules shall have primacy over those
guidelines and none of those guidelines shall apply
for fixing capital value under the Act and these rules.”
11. The relevant portion of Capital Value Rules of 2015 is as
“No.AC/NTC/1147/2014­15. In exercise of the powers
conferred by clause (e) of sub­section (1A), sub­section
(1B) and sub­section (1C) of section 154 of the Mumbai
Municipal Corporation Act (Act No.Bom.III of 1888), and
of all other powers enabling him in this behalf, the
Commissioner, after having obtained the approval of the
Standing Committee, as required under the said sub­
section (1B), hereby makes the following rules to provide
for the factors and categories of users of lands and
buildings and the weightage by multiplication to be
assigned to various such factors and categories for the
purpose of fixing the capital value of lands and buildings
in Brihan Mumbai, namely: ­
1. Short title and commencement: ­(1) These rules may
be called the Factors and Categories of Users of
Buildings or Lands (Assignment of Weightages by
Multiplication) Fixation of Capital Value Rules, 2015.
(2) They shall come into force from 1st April 2015.
2. Definitions – In these rules, unless the context
otherwise requires:­
(c) “hoarding” includes boards used to display
advertisements, erected on poles, on the ground or on a
(g) “open land” includes land not built upon or land
being built upon, but does not include land appurtenant
(h) “Ready Reckoner” means the Stamp Duty Ready
Reckoner, for the time being in force, referred to in sub­
section (1A) of section 154 of the Act;
3. Capital value of open land :­ Save otherwise provided
in these rules, where, within the precincts of a building
there is vacant land other than the land appurtenant to
the building, such land shall be treated as open land and
the capital value thereof shall be fixed accordingly, as
provided for in rule 21.
4. User categories of open land and weightages by
multiplication to be assigned thereto:­ User categories of
open land shall be as specified in column (2) of Part 1 of
schedule ‘A’ and the weightages by multiplication to base
value, to be respectively assigned thereto the purpose of
fixing capital value, shall be as shown in column (3) of
the said Part I of schedule ‘A’.
5. User categories of buildings or part thereof and
weightages by multiplication to be assigned thereto:­ User
categories of buildings or part thereof shall be as
specified column (2) of each of Parts II, III and IV of
schedule 'A' and the weightages by multiplication to the
relative base value, to be respectively assigned thereto for
the purpose of fixing capital value, shall be as in column
(3) of each of the said Parts II, III and Iv of schedule 'A'.
6. The nature and type of building and the weightage by
multiplication to be assigned thereto:­ The nature and
type of a building and type of building shall be as
specified in column (2) of schedule "B" and the
weightages assigned thereto for the purpose of fixing
capital value, shall be shown in column (3) of the said
7. The weightage by multiplication to be assigned to a
building on account of the age thereof: ­ The weightage by
multiplication to be assigned to a building on account of
age factor, for the purpose of fixing capital value, shall be
according to the age of the building as shown in column
(2) of schedule ‘C’ and the weightage by multiplication be
assigned thereto shall be as shown in column (3) of the
said schedule "C".
8. The weightage by multiplication on account of floor
factor to be assigned to RCC building with lift: ­
Weightage by multiplication on account of floor factor to
be assigned to a RCC building with lift, for the purpose of
fixing capital value, shall be according to the number of
floors as shown in column (2) of schedule 'D' and the
weightage by multiplication to be assigned thereto shall
be as shown in column (3) of the said schedule 'D'.
9. Area of hoarding or tower for the purpose of fixing
capital value: ­Area of hoarding or tower for the purpose
of fixing capital value thereof shall mean, ­
(a)in the case of a hoarding, the area of the square of the
extremities of the poles on which the hoarding is erected
plus the area of the hoarding; and
(b)in the case of a tower, the area covered by the
extremities of the foundation of the tower.
10.          Carpet Area area of a flat or a building: (1) The
total carpet area of a flat shall be reckoned by including
the area of the following items, namely: (i) terrace in
exclusive possession, (ii) mezzanine floor, (iii) loft
(excluding loft in residential flat) or attic, (iv) dry balcony
and (v) niches; and
(2) The total carpet area area of a building shall be
reckoned by including the areas of the following items,
namely:­ (i) total area of the flats in the building
computed in accordance with sub rule (1), (ii) basement,
(iii) stilt, (iv)porch, (v) podium, (vi) service floor, (vii) refuge
area, (viii) entrance lobby, (ix) lounge, (x) air­ conditioning
plant room, (xi) air handling room, (xii) the structure for
an effluent treatment plant room and (xiii) watchman
cabin (xix)sewerage treatment plant room (xv) water
treatment plant room
(3) The carpet area of any of the following items shall not
be reckoned while computing the carpet area of a
building or part thereof, namely:
(i) lift room above topmost storey, (ii) lift well, (iii)
stair­case and passage thereto including staircase
room, (iv) chimney and elevated tank, (v) meter
room, (vi) pump room, (vii) underground and
overhead water tank, (viii) septic tank, (ix)flower­
bed and (x) loft in residential flat, (xi) entrance
lobby of residential building
11. Fixation of capital value of a flat or building or part
thereof.­ (1) While fixing the capital value of a flat, the
capital value of any one or more of the relevant items
specified in sub­rule (1) of rule 10, as fixed in accordance
with the provisions of rules 14,15, or sub­rule(1) of rule
16, as the case may be, shall be added to the capital
value of the flat.
(2) While fixing the capital value of a building or part
thereof, the capital value of any of the one or more of the
relevant items specified in sub­rule (2) of rule 10 as fixed
in accordance with the provisions of sub­rule (2) or, as
the case may be, (3) of rule 16, shall be added to the
capital value of the building or part thereof.
13. Fixation of capital value of religious buildings :­ The
capital value of a religious building which is a temple,
math, gurudwara, mosque, takth, church, durgah,
synagogue, or agiary or the like, and is used or intended
to be used for the purpose of religious worship or offering
prayers or performance of any religious rites or rituals by
a person of, or belonging to, the relevant religion, creed,
or sect, shall be fixed at the rate of base value applicable
to a residential building as indicated in the Ready
Reckoner; and by applying the relevant weightages by
multiplication provided for in these rules.
14. Fixation of capital value of open terrace: ­ If an open
terrace in exclusive possession is attached to a flat, the
capital value of such terrace of a non­residential flat shall
be fixed at 50% of the relative rate of base value of such
flat, and of residential flat at 20% of the relative rate of
base value of such flat; and by applying the relevant
weightages by multiplication provided for in these rules.
15. Fixation of capital value of mezzanine floor, loft and
(a) the capital value of mezzanine floor shall be
fixed at 70% of the relative rate of base value of the flat
beneath the mezzanine floor; and by applying the
relevant weightages by multiplication provided for in
(b) the capital value of loft or attic floor shall be
fixed at 50% of the relative rate of base value of the flat
beneath the loft, or as the case may be, the attic; and by
applying the relevant weightages by multiplication
provided for in these rules;
Provided that, where the rate of base value
applicable to the mezzanine floor, loft or attic floor having
regard to its user is higher or, as the case may be, lower
than the rate of base value applicable to the flat beneath
such mezzanine floor, loft or attic floor, the capital value
of such mezzanine floor, loft or attic floor shall be fixed at
70% or 50%, as the case may be, of such higher or lower
rate of base value; and by applying the relevant
weightages by multiplication provided for in these rules.
17. Fixation of capital value in respect of demolished
(1) Where a building is fully demolished, or has fully
collapsed, the land beneath it shall be deemed to be open
land and the capital value thereof shall be fixed
accordingly, as provided for in rule 21.
(2) Where only part of a building is demolished or has
partly collapsed and the remaining part is yet occupied
by occupiers, land beneath the portion of the building
which is demolished or has collapsed shall be deemed to
be open land and the portion of the structure which is
occupied shall be treated as a building, for the purpose of
fixing the capital value thereof.
19 A Assessment of Amenities in Luxurious RCC bldg
Where Property tax in respect of amenities of
luxurious RCC building was not levied since 1 st April
2010 as per Rule 19, while determining the property
tax leviable from 1st April 2015, subject to capping as
provided for in section 140A such tax shall be
considered which would have been continued to levy
from 1st April 2010.
20. Valuation of open land capable of utilising more than
1 floor space index (F.S.I) or transfer of development right
(T.D.R.) ­As the Ready Reckoner provides for the rate of
base value of open land with 1 floor space index, open
land which is capable of utilizing more than 1 floor space
index or any transfer of development right shall be valued
at an increased rate in proportion to the higher floor
space index or transfer of development right proposed to
be utilized and approved under the building plan
submitted to the Corporation for approval.
21. Capital value of open land or building or part
thereof.­Capital value of open land or building shall be
fixed under the provisions of the Act and these rules in
the following manner, namely:
Rate of base value (BV) of a open land according to
Ready Reckoner X weightage by multiplication as per
user category (UC) (Part I of schedule 'A') X permissible or
approved floor space index (FSI) X area of land (AL).
CV = BV x UC x FSI x AL
(2) Capital value (CV) of a building –
Relative rate of base value (BV) of a building
according to Ready Reckoner X weightage by
multiplication as per user category (UC) (Parts II, III, or as
the case may be, IV of schedule 'A') X weightage by
multiplication as per the nature and type of building
(NTB) (schedule 'B') X weightage by multiplication on
account of age of building (AF) (schedule 'C') X weightage
by multiplication on account of floor factor (FF) for RCC
building with lift (schedule 'D') X carpet area (CA).
CV = BV x UC x NTB x AF x FF x CA
22. Non­application of Guidelines of Stamp Duty
Valuation. ­ Notwithstanding anything contained in the
"Important Guidelines of Stamp Duty Valuation" as
specified in the Ready Reckoner, the provisions made in
these rules shall have primacy over those guidelines and
none of those guidelines shall apply for fixing capital
value under the Act and these rules.”
12. In Appendix II of Capital Value Rules of 2010, 13 examples
are provided. Examples 12 and 13 from said appendix are as
Rate of base value   Rs.36,400          not applicable
Nature and Type      not applicable     not applicable
Age of Building      not applicable     not applicable
Rate of base value Rs.33,200       not applicable
Nature and Type    not applicable  not applicable
Age of Building    not applicable  not applicable
13. Number of petitions were filed challenging the validity of
computation and levy of property tax based on capital value
system. The petitions also challenged the vires of Capital Value
Rules of 2010 and Capital Value Rules of 2015.             Some of the
petitions also challenged the amendment effected to the MMC
Act pertaining to the implementation of the Capital Value
System for computing and assessing property tax. During the
pendency of these matters before the High Court interim orders
were passed by the High Court on or about 29.01.2014 which
were thereafter modified by subsequent order dated 24.02.2014.
The operative part of the order dated 24.02.2014 was as under: ­
“5. In the meantime the petitioners shall pay municipal
taxes at the pre­amended rates and also the additional
tax at the rate of 50% of the differential tax between the
tax payable under the old regime and now payable on
the basis of capital value of the property.           The
petitioners will pay such amounts and the Municipal
Corporation shall accept the amounts within prejudice
to rights and contentions of parties.”
After exchange of pleadings, all the matters were taken up for
hearing with Writ Petition No. 2492 of 2014 filed by the Property
Owners’ Association and others as the lead matter.                  Having
considered the rival submissions, the High Court rejected the
challenge as to the validity of various provisions of the MMC Act.
It, however, held Rules 20, 21 and 22 of the Capital Value Rules
2010 and 2015 to be ultra vires the provisions of the MMC Act.
14. Before considering the challenge raised on various grounds,
at the outset the High Court dealt with the approach to be
adopted by a Court while dealing with the challenge to the
validity of tax laws, and concluded that in case of taxing statute,
more latitude would be required to be given to the legislature
and that the burden on the petitioners challenging the validity
would be more onerous.                Thereafter   the challenge  was
considered under following heads: ­
(a)   The argument on legislative competence.
The submission that the tax in terms of the instant
legislation would be one covered by Entry 86 of List I of the
Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, was not accepted and
the challenge in that behalf was rejected with following
“155.    The legislation providing for the levy of
property tax by a municipality on the basis capital
value will be covered by Entry 49 of List­II. Now
coming to the impugned provisions, we find that
capital value of lands and buildings is adopted only
as a measure to determine the tax on lands and
buildings. There is no attempt to levy a tax on
capital value of assets. Therefore, the conclusion
which can be drawn is that the State Legislature was
competent to enact provisions regarding property tax
based on capital value under Entry­49 of List­II of
Seventh Schedule. The argument that the impugned
amended provisions of the BMC Act impinge upon
the powers of the Central Legislature covered by
Entry­86 of List­I of Seventh Schedule deserves to be
rejected. The adoption of capital value as a basis or
measure of tax on land and building will not attract
Entry­86 of List­I of Seventh Schedule.
(b)   Challenge to the validity of sub­Sections (1)(a) and
(1)(b) of Section 140 regarding water tax and
sewerage tax.
The      submissions      were     rejected    with      following
A tax is a compulsory exaction as a part of common
burden without promise of any special advantages to
classes of taxpayers, whereas a fee is a payment for
services rendered, benefit provided or privilege
conferred. Coming back to sub­sections (1)(a) and (1)
(b) of section 140, the same provide for levy of such
water tax as the Standing Committee may consider
necessary for providing water supply. The imposition
of this tax does not depend on whether the water is
being supplied to the premises or property in respect
of which water tax is demanded. Similarly, in case of
additional water tax, the expenditure incurred or to
be incurred for capital works for making or improving
the facilities of water supply may not be for a direct
benefit to the premises or property subject matter of
levy of tax. The Municipal Corporation may not be
providing water supply to a particular premises or
land at a particular point of time but it may be
providing it to other properties in the city. Similarly,
in respect of sewerage tax or additional sewerage tax,
in case of an open land there may not be any
requirement for collection or removal and disposal of
human and other wastes or for doing capital works
for making and improving the facilities for collection
and removal of waste. Thus, in case of these four
taxes, it is a compulsory exaction as part of a
common burden without promise of any special
advantages or promise to the tax payers. The said
taxes are imposed to generate revenue. Even
assuming that in the levy of tax under these four
heads, an element of quid pro quo exists, that by
itself does not mean that the levy ceases to be in the
nature of tax. We, therefore, reject the argument that
these four taxes cannot be levied in respect of vacant
land or a land under construction which is not
enjoying any service such as water supply or
collection of sewerage or waste.
159. Where the facilities of water supply or sewerage
collection are provided to a land or building, as per
the Rules framed under sections 169 and 170 of the
BMC Act, the water charges or sewerage charges, as
the case may be, by way of fees can be recovered
which would have direct nexus with the quality and
quantity of services provided. Where charge is
collected, taxes covered by the above four heads
cannot be levied. Therefore, we do not agree that the
aforesaid four taxes are not in substance a tax but
the same are in the nature of fees.”
(c)   Challenge to the validity of sub­Section (1) (c) (a) of
Section 140 regarding levy of Education Cess.
The submissions were rejected thus:­
On plain reading of sub­section (1) of section 195E, it
is clear that this section provides for levy of additional
tax on buildings and lands which is called as
education cess of so many per centum not exceeding
12 per centum of their rateable value or so many per
centum of their capital value, as the case may be, as
may be determined by the Corporation. Sub­section
(1) of section 195E provides that levy of said
additional tax is for the purposes of clause (q) of
section 61. Under clause (q) of section 61, it is an
obligation of the BMC to maintain and aid schools of
primary education. Therefore, as in the case of the
aforesaid four taxes which we have discussed above,
this tax is a compulsory exaction as a part of a
common burden. We, therefore, do not see any merit
in the submission that the aforesaid provisions
are ultra vires the provisions of the Constitution of
India. The argument whether education cess can be
levied on the basis of capital value is dealt with
separately.”
(d)   Similarly, the argument with regard to sub­Section (1)
(d) of Section 140 dealing with levy of Betterment Charges
was rejected with following observations: ­
“162. In none of the Petitions in this group, it is
demonstrated that a demand is made from the
petitioners for payment Betterment Charge. Elaborate
procedure for determination thereof is laid down. The
Authority which has power to determine the charge is
the Improvement Committee. As per section 49B of
the BMC Act, the said Committee consists of 26
elected councilors of BMC. Moreover, the betterment
charge is not payable on the basis of the capital
value. Hence, the main ground of attack in these
petitions about the levy of property taxes based on
capital value has no relevance to levy of Betterment
charges.”
(e)   Consideration of challenge on the basis of violation
of provisions of Chapter IXA and in particular,
Article 243­X of the Constitution of India.
The substratum of the challenge was that the levy and
collection as provided in clauses (a) and (b) of Article 243­X
of the Constitution must be by the Corporation consisting of
the elected and nominated councillors and not by any other
authority     under     Section    4   of   the  MMC      Act. The
submissions in that behalf were rejected as under:­
“173. `We, firstly, deal with the argument that as the
power to levy and collect property taxes has been
assigned to the Municipality i.e. the Corporation, the
power must be exercised by the Corporation
consisting of elected and nominated councilors and
not by any other municipal authority. If the said
argument is accepted, it will lead to absurdity for the
reason that the exercise of fixing the capital value of
all properties, fixing the rate of tax at a particular
percentage of capital value, imposition, levy and
collection will have to be done by the Corporation
which consists of the elected councillors and
nominated councillors and by no other municipal
authority. It will be impossible for the Corporation to
do so.”
“181. To conclude, the BMC Act has been already
amended in terms of Article 243­ZF. Perusal of
various provisions of Part­IXA of the Constitution of
India shows that the constitutional provisions itself
provide for the State Legislature enacting law
providing for constitution of committees and
conferring them with powers and authority. We have
already referred to the various provisions including
clause (b) of Article 243­W. Therefore, the provision of
section 4 of the BMC Act is consistent with the
provision of Part­IXA. Clauses (a) and (b) of Article
243­X cannot be read in isolation and merely because
Legislature authorizes the Standing Committee to fix
the rates of property taxes and to approve rules
framed by the Commissioner in accordance with sub­
section (1B) of section 154, the relevant provisions of
the BMC Act cannot be said to be ultra vires Article
243­X. The powers under the charging sections in
Chapter VIII are conferred on the Corporation itself
including the power to exercise option of taking
recourse to capital value regime for the levy of
property taxes. Moreover, we have pointed out that
certain provisions of Chapter VIII are machinery
provisions. As required by law, the decision adopting
Capital Value System has been taken by the
Corporation consisting of 227 elected and nominated
councillors. This power cannot be said to be unguided
power only because sub­section (1) of section 140A
does not expressly lay down any specific conditions
for exercise of the option. The provisions which confer
power on the Standing Committee to fix the rates of
taxes contain sufficient guidelines. Even the provision
of sub­section (1A) of section 154 which confer power
on the Commissioner to determine capital value
contains more than sufficient guidelines. We see no
violation of Article 243­X or any other provisions of
182. If we accept the submissions canvassed across
the bar by the petitioners, not only the decision to
adopt capital value system but the job of fixing rates
in case of all categories of property taxes,
determination of capital value of all properties liable
to taxes, process of serving notices under section 162,
giving hearing on complaints and deciding the
complaints will have to be done by the Corporation
consisting of elected councillors and nominated
councillors and by no one else. Such interpretation
put to clauses (a) and (b) of Article 243­X will lead to
absurdity and the provisions will become unworkable.
Such interpretation will defeat the object of 74th
Amendment to the Constitution and, therefore, the
challenge on the ground of violation of Article 243­X
must fail.”
(f)  Submissions on the ground of excessive delegation.
While observing that the power conferred in sub­
Section (1A) of Section 154 of the MMC Act on the
Commissioner to fix capital value, was not at all an
unguided power and that sufficient guidelines were set out,
it was concluded thus: ­
“185. …. There are sufficient guidelines and
safeguards. Moreover, in case of taxes where power to
fix rates is given to the Standing Committee, the same
will always form part of proposals of the Standing
Committee which will be considered by the
Corporation in accordance with clause (e) of
subsection (1) of Section 128 for determination of
rates. The BMC Act does not provide for delegation of
essential functions of the Corporation. Conferment of
powers on the Standing Committee and Improvement
Committee and other municipal authorities is within
the four corners of Part­IXA of the Constitution.
Therefore, the argument of excessive delegation has
no merit and deserves to be rejected.”
(g)  Submission based on violation of Article 14 of the
Constitution of India.
The submission that there was manifest arbitrariness
in the impugned provisions and that the provisions were
confiscatory in nature, were rejected by the High Court. It
was observed thus: ­
“189. …. There is an argument canvassed that there
is a disparity of tax payable in respect of residential
and hotel properties. An argument is canvassed that
there is disparity between five star hotel properties
and other hotel properties. On first principle, the
submissions cannot be accepted.            The user of
residential properties, 5­Star hotel properties and
other hotel properties is different. These properties
form part of distinct classes and by its vary nature
cannot be treated as equal. Therefore, it is very
difficult to sustain an argument that there is manifest
arbitrariness in the impugned provisions. As the
provisions do not lead to confiscatory nature of taxes,
violation of Article 14 is not attracted.”
(h)  Challenge to the notification issued under the
The submissions in that behalf were also negatived
with observation that by adopting capital value system, only
the computation of property tax was altered.
(i)  The ground of retrospective operation of the
impugned provisions of the BMC Act.
The contentions advanced in that behalf were rejected
by the High Court after making following observations: ­
“205. The liability to pay property taxes was always
provided in the BMC Act. By the impugned
amendments, only the basis of computing property
taxes has undergone a change. Assuming that there
is any retrospective operation, it is no facilitate
transition form one regime to another. As per the
amendments, the final assessment for the years
2010­11, 2011­12 and 2012­13 can be made after
expiry of the respective years. But provisional
assessment has to be made during the respective
three years. The impugned provisions do not take
away or affect any vested right as only the
procedure/method of computing the property taxes
has undergone a change. By virtue of the impugned
amendments, a property in respect of which taxes
were not payable earlier does not become subject to
taxes. It cannot be said that by the impugned
amendment, from an earlier date, any new obligation
or disability has been attached in respect of any
earlier transactions. The impugned amendments will
affect the properties which even under the
unamended Act, were subject to payment of property
tax. The impugned provisions do not bring about any
unreasonable or arbitrary consequences. Thus, there
is no merit in the contention based on retrospective
operation.”
Thus, the majority of submissions advanced on behalf of the
writ petitioners were rejected by the High Court.
15. The High Court however accepted the challenge on three
grounds, namely: ­
(i)   Challenge to the Capital Value Rules of 2010 on
retrospective operation,
(ii) Challenge to the Capital Value Rules of 2010 and 2015,
on the ground that the rule making power did not
permit the Commissioner to determine capital value.
(iii) Rule 20 of the Capital Value Rules of 2010 was held to
be ultra vires the provisions of sub­Section (1A) and (1B)
of Section 154 of the MMC Act.
16. On the first issue, the High Court observed that neither
clause (e) of sub­Section (1A) nor sub­Section (1B) of Section 154
of the MMC Act conferred powers to frame rules with
retrospective effect.     The Capital Value Rules of 2010, which
came into effect from 20.3.2012, were, therefore, held to be
applicable prospectively and that said Rules could not be applied
17. With regard to the second issue, it was observed that there
was no provision in the MMC Act regarding consideration of
development potential of vacant land for determining its capital
value.   The conclusion arrived at by the High Court in that
behalf was as under: ­
“211. Now we turn to the Capital Value Rules of 2010.
As stated earlier, there is no provision which enables
the Commissioner to frame rules for laying down
guidelines for determining capital value. Rule 2
contains definition. Rule 3 provides that where within
the precincts of the building there is a vacant land
other than the land appurtenant to the building, such
land shall be treated as open land and capital value
thereof shall be fixed as provided in Rule 21. As
observed earlier, the rule making power is confined to
the three aspects mentioned above. As Rule 3 refers to
Rule 21, we will have to consider the provision of Rule
21. Perusal of Rule 21 and, particularly clause (1)
thereof shows that it lays down how the capital value
of the open land is to be determined. It provides for a
formula. It provides that the capital value of open land
will be equal to rate of base value of open land
according to SDRR multiplied by weightage by
multiplication as per user category. The said weightage
is provided in Part­I under heading "Open Land"
multiplied by permissible or approved FSI multiplied
by area of the land. Once the base value is determined
as per SDRR, it is obvious that the said value is fixed
taking into consideration potential of the land. The
rates in SDRR are fixed after taking into consideration
all the aspects of market value. The capital value has
to be decided in accordance with the base value which
has to be taken as per SDRR. Clause (1) of Rule 21
provides for weightage by multiplication as per user
category. It also provides that the rate of base value
shall be multiplied by permissible FSI for determining
the capital value of the land. There is no provision
under the BMC Act to take into consideration
development potential of vacant land for determining
its capital value. When the substantive provision i.e
sub­section (1A) of Section 154 lays down that the base
value has to be in terms of SDRR rates, the
subordinate legislation cannot provide for adding
additional value to SDRR rates on account of
availability of FSI. Thus, the provision of multiplying
base value with permissible or approved FSI is ultra
vires the provisions of the BMC Act. Moreover, the rule
making power does not permit the Commissioner to
frame the rules for determining what is the capital
value. The rule making power is confined to three
aspects which are pointed out earlier. Clause (1) of
Rule 21 which provides for taking into consideration
the potential FSI is not covered by any of the three
categories. Under sub­section (1B) of section 154 of the
BMC Act, the rules can be framed providing for details
of categories of buildings or land and the weightage by
multiplication to be assigned to various such
categories. Under clause (e) of sub­section (1A) of
section 154, factors which are to be taken into
consideration for determining base value can be
subject matter of rules. The factors referred in clause
(e) will have to be considered ejusdem generis. The
other factors provided are nature of the land, type of
land and structure, areas of land or building, user
category such as residential or commercial and the age
of the building. Under clause (e) of sub­section (1A) of
section 154, rules cannot be framed to decide how the
capital value should be determined. In fact, framing
rules for laying down the method of calculating the
capital value is itself ultra vires the statutory rule
making power.”
18. Rule 20 of the Capital Value Rules of 2010 was struck
down by the High Court on the reasoning that the effect of said
rule would be that the value higher than what was provided for
in  Stamp      Duty     Ready    Reckoner     would     be    taken into
consideration while computing the property tax. The High Court
observed as under: ­
“216. Rule 20 of Capital Value Rules, 2010 deals with
valuation of open land capable of utilizing more than
1.0 FSI or transfer of development right (TDR). It
provides that as the Ready Reckoner provides for the
rate of base value of open land with 1.0 FSI, open land
which is capable of utilizing more than 1.0 FSI or any
TDR shall be valued at an increased rate in proportion
to the higher FSI or TDR proposed to be utilized and
approved under the building plan submitted to the
Corporation for approval. Thus, the effect of rule 20 is
that while fixing capital value of open land, its
potential for development by using additional FSI or
TDR has to be considered. Thus, a value higher than
what is provided in SDRR should be taken into
consideration.”
“218. Rule 20 provides for taking into consideration
potential of construction on the vacant land for making
valuation. For the purpose of property taxes, not only a
vacant land but even a land under construction will
have to be treated as a vacant land. Wherever SDRR is
applicable, in view of sub­section (1A) of section 154,
the base value has to be as per SDRR rate for vacant
land. Rule 20 provides for taking into consideration
potential for development. It is completely contrary to
the provisions of the BMC Act as interpreted in the case
of Polychem Limited (supra) which requires even the
land under construction to be treated as a vacant land.
Moreover, rule 20 purports to lay down how valuation of
the land has to be made. The rule making power under
sub­section (1B) or clause (e) of sub­section (1A) of
section 154 does not confer any such power. Moreover,
if rule 20 is implemented, capital value which is higher
than SDRR rate will have to be fixed which will be in
violation of sub­section (1A) of section 154 which
mandates that the Commissioner will take into
consideration SDRR rate while finalizing capital value.
Thus, rule 20 is ultra vires the provisions of sub­
sections (1A) and (1B) of section 154 of the BMC Act.
There is no difference in Rule 20 of the Capital Value
Rules of 2010 and 2015.”
19. In the end, the conclusions arrived at and the directions
issued by the High Court were as under: ­
“229. Our conclusions can be summarized as under:
(i)   We uphold the constitutional validity of
the sprovision of the BMC Act which are
under challenge;
(ii)  The Capital Value Rules of 2010 shall
apply prospectively from the date on
which the same were made;
(iii) We strike down rules 20, 21 and 22 of
Capital Value Rules of 2010 and 2015. As
far as rules 3 and 17 are concerned, we
hold that as rule 21 has been struck
down, the capital value of properties
covered by the said rules shall not be
fixed in accordance with rule 21. As a
result of striking down of rules 20, 21
and 22, in those cases where the capital
value has been finally fixed either by
issuing notice under section 162 of the
BMC Act or by issuing final bills, the
Commissioner or the officer empowered to
exercise delegated powers will have to re­
determine the capital value in accordance
with sub­section (1A) of section 154 and
serve a fresh special assessment notice.
We hold that if a complaint is filed after
service of special assessment notice, the
same shall be disposed of only after giving
an opportunity of being heard to the
assessee filing such complaint. Only after
the complaint is disposed of in such a
fashion, a final bill can be served.
(iv)   As the Municipal Commissioner will
require a reasonable time to do the tasks
as aforesaid, the interim orders which are
operating in these petitions will have to
be continued till the service of final bills.
We also make it clear that though we are
setting aside the final bills issued, no
party will be entitled to claim refund of
the amounts paid under the interim
orders and till the final bills are served,
the petitioners will have to pay the
(v)    This judgment will apply only to the
properties subject matter of the petitions
in this group except Writ Petition No.
2592 of 2013 and PIL 46 OF 2014. We
make it clear that only those special
assessment notices and final bills which
are specifically challenged will stand set
aside. In Writ Petition No. 2592 of 2013,
the fresh exercise will have to be
properties in respect of which there is a
specific prayer for quashing the notices
and bills based on final assessment. The
details of properties held by 610 members
in the lead petition are not set out.
Hence, no relief can be extended to the
properties of the said members save and
except the properties subject matter of
bills and notices which are expressly
challenged.
(vi)   This judgment will not affect the final
bills which are accepted by the concerned
owners.
230. We record our appreciation for the valuable
assistance rendered by the learned counsel appearing
for various parties. We dispose of the petitions by
passing the following order:
(i)      We reject the prayers made for challenging the
constitutional validity of various provisions of the
Mumbai Municipal Corporation Act, 1888 as
prayed in the writ petition/PIL. We hold that
Rules 20, 21 and 22 of the Capital Value Rules of
the years 2010 and 2015 are ultra vires the
provisions of the Mumbai Municipal Corporation
Act, 1888 and, therefore, the same are struck
(ii)  We quash and set aside the special assessment
notices and final bills based on final capital value
fixed which are specifically the subject matter of
challenge in this group of petitions. The demand
of provisional taxes is not disturbed. The orders
specifically impugned which are passed on the
complaints do not survive. We direct the Mumbai
Municipal Corporation to re­fix the capital value
in respect of the properties subject matter of the
notices/final bills which are set aside in the light
of the findings recorded earlier. After re­
determination of capital value, special assessment
notices be issued to the persons primarily liable to
pay property taxes in respect of subject
properties. Thereafter, further steps shall be taken
by the Municipal Corporation in accordance with
(iii) We hold that the complaints filed objecting to the
special assessment notices issued under sub­
section (2) of section 162 shall be disposed of only
after giving an opportunity of being heard to the
complainants.
(iv)  Till the expiry of a period of 21 days from the date
on which fresh special assessment notices are
served in accordance with clause (ii) above, the
ad­interim/interim orders which are operating in
these petitions till today shall continue to operate
subject to compliance of requirement of deposit of
amounts by the petitioners as set out in those
orders. In those cases where the complaints are
lawfully filed within stipulated time pursuant to
the special assessment notices, the ad­
interim/interim reliefs will continue to operate on
the same conditions till the date of service of fresh
(v)   Rule is made partly absolute on the above terms;
(vi)  All pending chamber summonses and notices of
motion stand disposed of.”
20. The Corporation being aggrieved by the decision of the High
Court on three issues as stated above, approached this Court by
filing Special Leave Petition (Civil) No. 17009 of 2019.              While
issuing notice in the matter on 29.7.2019, by way of interim
relief, it was directed:
“Pending further consideration, the relationship
between the parties shall be governed by interim order
dated 24.2.2014 passed by the High Court and more
particularly by para 5 as quoted above.
We are conscious of the fact that there were more
than 150 petitions before the High Court but special
leave petition has been filed only in one matter.
However, since the issues in question are common to all
the matters and go to the root of the controversy, we
direct that this interim order shall apply in every single
petition which was considered by the High Court.”
Various interim applications have since then been preferred by
certain parties seeking impleadment and projecting their view
points. At the same time, some of the parties who were aggrieved
by the rejection of their submissions challenging the validity of
the various provisions of MMC Act and other issues which were
answered against them also preferred Special Leave Petitions.
21. Mr. K.K. Venugopal, learned Attorney General for India and
Mr. V. Sreedharan, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf
of the Corporation initially advanced submissions on the issues
which were answered against the Corporation.                 However, after
the submissions were advanced on behalf of various impleading
applicants and other parties including substantive petitions
challenging the correctness of the decision of the High Court,
submissions were also advanced in response.
22. The factual aspects regarding framing of the Capital Value
Rules of 2010 and 2015, as well as the background for some of
the amendments effected to the MMC Act, have been dealt with
in the written submissions of the Corporation, as under:
“2. The amendment to the MMC Act introducing the
capital value system was brought about inf 2009 (Act No.
XI of 2009 on Pg 24­39 in Compilation of Corporation –
Vol 4). Pursuant to the same, the Corporation passed
resolution dated 27.01.2010 for adoption of capital value
with effect from 01.04.2010 (Pg 6 of consolidated counter
affidavit on behalf of Respondents 2 to 4). Accordingly,
the section was already enacted by State Legislature
providing for levy of tax on capital value basis from
3. In January 2010, the Corporation appointed an expert
committee composing of Appointment of expert
committee comprising of Shri D.M. Sukthankar, Ex Chief
Secretary of the State of Maharashtra, Shri D.N.
Chaudhri, Ex Chairman of Maharashtra Law Commission
and Dr. Roshan Namavati, expert on valuation to make
recommendation on the introduction and smooth
implementation of capital value system. (Para 13, Pg 9 of
consolidated counter affidavit on behalf of Respondents 2
4. On 08.10.2010, the expert committee published draft
rules in various newspapers for comments of public at
large (Pg 79 to 94 in Compilation of Corporation – Vol 4).
The committee received 254 objections and suggestions
all of which were considered and scrutinized by the
committee. Thereafter, certain benevolent changes were
made by the committee and draft rules were
recommended to the Corporation on 29.12.2010. (Para
14, Pg 10 of consolidated counter affidavit)
5. After the rules were published, the Corporation
appointed a chartered accountant firm to suggest a
revenue neutral rate. Revenue neutral rate means such
rate as would yield the same amount of property tax as
being levied by the Corporation before introduction of
capital value system. (Para 39, Pg 22 of consolidated
counter affidavit)
6. Evidently, the rates can be determined only after
capital value of all properties are calculated on
memorandum basis. The work of fixing the capital value
of land and buildings across Greater Mumbai took time.
The scale of the work involved was very large and
extremely time consuming. The data of the old rateable
value system which was in physical form had to be
digitized for the purposes of the new capital value system.
This voluminous data covered approximately 2.75 lakh
properties (or 27.5 lakh individual units). In some cases
however, the data was not complete and the carpet area
was not available. In these cases the property owners
were given notices under Section 155 of the MMC Act to
furnish the details in the prescribed format.           The
response was however very limited and the officers of the
MCGM had to physically ascertain the required
information. (Para 31, Pg 19 of consolidated counter
affidavit on behalf of Respondents 2 to 4)
7. In light of the same, the State Legislature stepped in
and introduced L.A. Bill No. LXXIV of 2010 whereby
inserting sub­section (2) in Section 140A to enable the
Corporation to issue provisional bills for the year 2010­
11 and treat the rateable value of the building or land as
provisional capital value.      (Statement of object and
reasons on Pg 48 and 49 in Compilation of Corporation –
Vol 4). The said bill culminated into Act No. XXVII of
2010 (Pg 51 to 58 in Compilation of Corporation – Vol 4).
8. The amendments to the MMC Act provided that once
the capital value was fixed, final bills would be issued. If
the final bill was lower than the provisional bill, the
MCGM would refund the excess payment made with
interest at the rate of 6.25% p.a., or with the consent of
the tax payer, adjust the excess amount against future
bills (Section 140A(2). (Para 32, Pg 19 of consolidated
counter affidavit on behalf of Respondents 2 to 4)
9. Pursuant to the same, the Corporation started
implementation of the capital value system by issuing
provisional property tax bills.
10. In March 2011, the State Legislature observed that
the process of fixing the capital value which had started
in August, 2010 is bound to stretch beyond 31 st March
2011. This is so because there are more than 3 lakh
properties of which capital value has to be fixed for the
purposes of such levy of property tax thereon, but the
volume of work of fixing the capital value of all these
properties being so large that it may not be possible for
the Corporation to complete the fixation of capital value
of all these properties before 31st March 2011. As a
result of this, the work of fixing capital value would
continue during the year 2011­2012 also. Unless the
capital value of all the properties is fixed and the total
extent thereof is ascertained, it may not also be feasible.
11. Accordingly, by Maharashtra Ordinance No. X of
2011, the State Legislature expanded the scope of certain
transitory provisions as contained in sections 128, 140A,
154A and 219A of the Mumbai Municipal Corporation
Act, so as to enable the Corporation to separately issue
the provisional bills on the basis of rateable value
treating it as provisional capital value for the years 2010­
11 and 2011­12. Further, with a view to prevent loss of
revenue in respect of tax on properties which have
escaped from assessment, a new section 216B has also
been inserted in the Act to enable the Corporation to
assess such properties at any time within six years from
the date on which such properties should have been
assessed. (Statement of object and reasons on Pg 141
and 142 in Compilation of Corporation – Vol 4). The said
ordinance culminated into Act No. XI of 2011 (Pg 143 to
148 in Compilation of Corporation – Vol 4).
12. In March 2012, the State Legislature observed that
the process of fixing the capital value which had started
in August, 2010 is bound to stretch beyond 31 st March
2012. This is to because the proposal submitted to the
Standing Committee of the Corporation for rules and
rates have not yet received the approval. The general
election of the Corporation is due in February, 2012 and
new Standing Committee will be operative only from the
end of March, 2012.
13. Accordingly, the bill proposed to expand the scope of
transitory provisions so as to enable the Corporation to
separately issue the provisional bills on the basis of
rateable value treating it as provisional capital value for
the years 2012­13, as was done for the period 2010­11
and 2011­12. (Statement of object and reasons on Pg
155 and 156 in Compilation of Corporation – Vol 4). The
said ordinance culminated into Act No. VI of 2012 (Pg
157 to 162 in Compilation of Corporation – Vol 4).
14. It is submitted that, in present case there is no
retrospective levy of tax. The section for imposition of tax
on capital value was already in force from 01.04.2010.
Draft rules were already published in October, 2010. The
levy is broadly speaking on assesses who were paying tax
under earlier regime also.
15. The statute provided for transitionary arrangement
pursuant to which provisional bills were issued as per
Section 140A(2) read with Section 154A of the MMC Act
from official year 2010­2011 (under the capital value
system), 2011­2012 and till 2012­2013. Refunds are
granted, or shortfall recovered after the capital values are
fixed.
16. It is submitted that, time taken in assessment can
never make the levy retrospective when the section
imposing a tax is already in force. In case contention
raised by assesses is accepted, it would amount to
imposition of tax on rateable value even when the statute
provides for imposition of tax on capital value w.e.f.
Law laid down in Chhotabhai Jethabhai Patel and Co.
v. Union of India AIR 1962 SC 1006. The same notes and
proves the practice in USA of levying taxes from the
beginning of year even when the law is made during the
year.”
23. In response, the submissions advanced by various learned
counsel, in the order that they appeared, were as under:
(A) Mr.    Neeraj    Kishan     Kaul,    learned     Senior    Advocate
appearing for Indian Hotels Company Limited which has
intervened in the proceedings as well as filed substantial
challenge in the form of Special leave Petition (Civil)
No.2568 of 2019 submitted that the property tax as a
percentage of value was confiscatory and exorbitant. On
facts it was stated that initially for a property situated in
the city a property tax was to the tune of Rs.6.29 crores
per annum which had now risen to Rs.17.78 crores
showing an increase of 275 %. Reliance was placed on
paragraph 34 of the decision of this Court in Patel
Gordhandas      Hargovindas       &   Ors.   vs.  Municipal
Commissioner, Ahmedabad & Anr.4. It was further
submitted that the impugned provisions suffered from
excessive delegation which was without any guidelines
and in any case could not be retrospective in operation.
In support of the submission, reliance was placed on the
decisions of this Court in Marathwada University vs.
Limited v. Union of India & Ors. 6, Devi Das Gopal
Krishnan etc. vs. State of Punjab & Ors.7 and
Avinder Singh & Ors. vs. State of Punjab & Ors.8.
Learned Senior counsel then submitted that the tax
could be levied by the body constituted of elected
representatives and not by the Standing Committee and
that the power to tax could not be delegated.       It was
further submitted that since a new method of levying and
computing property tax was revised, it was rightly denied
retrospective application.
On facts, it was also submitted that certain areas of
the properties of the entity which housed pump rooms
and other facilities ought to be excluded while arriving at
the determination.
(B) Dr. Milind Sathe, learned Senior Advocate appeared for
certain entities in IA Nos.110990 of 2019, 163118 of
2019 and 160953 of 2019 and submitted that Rules 20,
21 and 22 of the Capital Value Rules, 2010 and 2015
were rightly struck down by the High Court. Relying on
the    decision   of  this   Court   in  The    Municipal
Corporation of Greater Bombay v. Polychem Ltd.9, it
was submitted that till the potential of the property was
translated into a habitable building, the land must be
treated and taxed only as land and not going by its
buildable potential.    It was further submitted that the
process of fixing and/or changing the value, must be
done in the same financial year.
(C) Mr. Shekhar Naphade, learned               Senior  Advocate
appearing for intervenors in IA Nos.110998 and 158888
of 2019 submitted that the existing buildings having
been demolished, the property could be taxed only as
land and not going by the projected or contemplated
developments as a shopping centre or a mall.
(D) Mr. H. Devarajan, learned Advocate who appeared for the
Property Owners Association submitted that in terms of
Article 243Y(1)(b) of the Constitution the matter ought to
have come through the suggestions of the Finance
Commission.     But the entire process was initiated as a
result of the suggestions made by the TISS.
It was also submitted that the exercise adopted in
the instant case was in violation of Article 243­X of the
Constitution. Reliance was placed on the decision of this
Court in State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors. v. Systematic
Conscom Ltd.10 to submit that the four components of
incidence of tax as explained in Paragraphs 17 and 18 of
said decision were not satisfied.    The learned counsel
further submitted that Sections 125 to 128 of the MMC
Act deal with budget, but by virtue of amendments to the
MMC Act, the rates were now being fixed without a
budget. According to the learned counsel, the element of
property tax under the new regime would be almost
twenty times the rent and thus would be confiscatory.
It was submitted that tax on lands and buildings
must be directly on the land as a unit and must have a
definite relationship with the land. The learned counsel
further submitted that the unit for calculation according
to SDRR and the Capital Value Rules, was not the same.
In one case, the reckonable unit was the built­up area
while under the second, the reckonable unit was the
carpet area.
(E) Mr. Darius Khambata, learned Senior Advocate who
appeared in I.A. No.157014 of 2014 submitted that Rules
20, 21, 22 of the Capital Value Rules of 2010 and 2015
were rightly held to be ultra vires. It was further
submitted that the factors delineated in sub­clause (a) to
(d) of Section 154 (A) of the MMC Act would be matters
“in presenti” and not with regard to future prospects and
that no reliance could be placed on sub­clause (e) to
introduce the concept of something “in futuro” i.e., the
potential in the market or capital value. It was further
submitted that there could be no retrospectivity to any
delegated legislation when the parent Act did not give
any    indication in  that behalf and     that the   final
assessment could have altered the basis in the same
financial year and not otherwise.
(F) Mr. Abhishek Bharti, learned counsel relied upon the
decision of this Court in State of Himachal Pradesh &
Ors. vs. Nurpur Private Bus Operators’ Union &
Ors.11, Mr. Shikhil Suri, learned counsel who appeared
for National Centre for Performing Arts and Tata Power
Company Limited adopted the submissions of Dr. Milind
Sathe and Mr. Darius Khambata, learned senior counsel.
Mr. Bhushan Deshmukh who appeared for the petitioner
in SLP(C) No. 25689/2019, also adopted the submissions
of Dr. Sathe and Mr. Khambata, learned senior counsel.
Mr. Satish Muley, learned counsel appearing for a
subsequent purchaser, also adopted the submissions of
Dr. Sathe and Mr. Khambata, learned senior counsel.
24. Mr.    V.   Sreedharan,    learned   senior  counsel   for the
Corporation made submissions in rejoinder. He also submitted
that the overall tax demand of the Corporation under the capital
value assessment actually decreased by 12% to Rs.2908 crores
as compared to Rs.3308 crores under the Relatable Value
System. The tax demand for residential units got reduced from
Rs.1030 crores to Rs.949 crores while that for the Offices and
Banks was reduced from Rs.979 crores to Rs.65 crores and from
Rs.342 crores to Rs.222 crores respectively. Thus, according to
the Corporation, under the new system only 32.20% units
suffered an increase while 21.95 % of the units actually got
benefitted as a result of reduction in the property taxes.
25. We will first deal with the submission that any proposal for
change or modification in the methodology adopted for levy of
property tax ought to have been initiated through the Finance
Commission alone. Article 243Y of the Constitution deals with
constitution of Finance Commission whose principal duty is to
review the financial position of the municipalities and to make
recommendations to the Governor as to the relevant principles
which should govern distribution of the net proceeds of the taxes
and the measures needed to improve the financial position of the
municipalities. In Campaign for People Participation in
Development Planning vs. Lieutenant Governor of NCT of
Delhi & Ors.12, a Division Bench of the High Court of Delhi had
the occasion to consider the scope of Article 243Y of the
Constitution. It was observed: ­
“14. Article 243I of the Constitution of India mandates
constitution of a Finance Commission by the Governors of
the States at the expiration of every 5th year. Article
243Y further mandates that the Finance Commission
constituted under Article 243I shall also review the
financial position of the municipalities and make
recommendations to the Governors as to the various
aspects specified therein. As per Clause (2) of Article 243Y,
the Governor shall cause every recommendation made by
the Finance Commission under the said Article together
with an explanatory memorandum as to the action taken
thereon to be laid before the legislature of the State.”
26. It is true that certain functions are entrusted to the
Finance Commission and the recommendations made by the
Finance Commission must carry great weightage. However, the
matter has to be seen from the perspective: whether any
“measures needed to improve the financial position of the
municipalities”         must     necessarily        emanate        from the
recommendations of the Finance Commission. Sub­Article (2)
contemplates that the recommendations made by the Finance
Commission along with the explanatory memorandum as to the
action taken thereon must be laid before the Legislature of the
State.   Thus, it is the Legislature of the State which will
ultimately take an appropriate action with respect to the
recommendations made by the Finance Commission and the
papers placed before it. If the Legislature itself has taken into
account certain prevailing situation, which according to the
Legislature is causing some prejudice to the financial health and
condition of the municipalities and, therefore, the method of
imposition of property tax ought to be changed, it cannot then
be said that the matter must necessarily and ought to have
emanated from the Finance Commission or that in the absence
of such recommendations by the Finance Commission, no steps
could have been taken by the Legislature.
27. Article 243X of the Constitution states that the Legislature
of a State may by law authorize a municipality to levy, collect
and appropriate such taxes etc. in accordance with such
procedure and subject to such limits as may be specified in law.
The exercise undertaken by the Legislature in the instant case is
completely consistent with the empowerment relatable to Article
243X of the Constitution and does not in any way go counter to
said empowerment.
28. Coming to the effect and scope of the statutory provisions,
it must be stated that Sections 123 to 128 of the MMC Act deal
with accounts and annual budget estimates.       With the fixed
parameters and scope of taxation, as well as, the elements that
can be covered by levy of such taxes, depending upon the
annual budget estimates, the rates of municipal taxes, fares and
charges can certainly be fixed in terms of Section 128 of the
MMC Act. In such cases, the width of the tax regime is already
decided and the rates of taxes would be dependent upon the
annual estimates.     What the present amendments seek to
achieve is to change the methodology on the basis of which
property tax can be levied.     Instead of rateable value, the
property tax can now be levied going by the capital value. Such
exercise could not have been undertaken through the process of
annual estimates and in terms of Sections 120, 123, 125 and
128 of the MMC Act. All that could be done under these
provisions would be to vary or change the rates and not the very
basis of taxation. The submission in that behalf, therefore, does
not merit acceptance.
29. We now turn to the scheme relating to property tax as is
discernable from the provisions of the MMC Act.        Section 139
deals with taxes including property taxes that can be imposed.
Section 139A deals with the kinds of property taxes while
Section 140 deals with the per centum of their rateable value or
the capital value as the case may be. Section 140A enables the
Corporation to adopt levy of property tax on the basis of Capital
Value of buildings and lands and puts a cap in the proviso to
sub­section (1). Section 154 then deals with how rateable value
and capital value are to be determined. Sub­section (1) deals
with rateable value while sub­section (1A), (1B) and (1C) deal
with capital value. The first part of Section 154(IA) contemplates
that the value indicated in the Stamp Duty Ready Reckoner for
the time being in force, would be the “base value.” According to
the second part, if such ready reckoner value is not available,
the market value can be taken into account while arriving at a
base value. According to the provision, while fixing the capital
value, the Commissioner “shall have regard” to the factors
enumerated in sub­clauses (a) to (e). Thus, the factors on the
basis of which capital value can be arrived at are delineated in
sub­clauses (a) to (e) of sub­section (1A) of Section 154. While
sub­clause (a) to (d) are clear and well defined, sub­clause (e)
refers to the factors as may be specified by rules under sub­
section (1B).    Said sub­section (1B) in turn authorizes the
Commissioner, to frame such rules, with the approval of the
Standing Committee as respects details of categories of building
or land and the weightage by multiplication to be assigned to
various such factors and categories for the purpose of fixing the
capital value.
30. Section 154(1A) of the MMC Act is the crucial provision for
the present discussion. The opening part of sub­Section (1A)
states that in order to fix the capital value of any building or
land assessable to property tax, regard shall be had to the value
of any building or land as indicated in the SDRR for the time
being in force. The value so indicated in SDRR is to be the base
value to which certain factors delineated in clauses (a) to (e) of
sub­Section (1A) are to be applied while fixing the capital value.
Clauses (a) to (d) are physical features or attributes of the land
or building which are in existence when the value is to be
reckoned. In essence, as submitted by Mr. Khambata, learned
senior counsel, these attributes are situations “in praesenti”.
The buildable potential of the land in future is not an attribute
“in praesenti” but is in the nature of likelihood of user or
exploitation of the asset “in futuro”.
31. The crucial question is: whether such potential of the land
or the likelihood of exploitation in future can also be taken into
consideration while fixing the capital value in terms of sub­
Section (1A), especially when none of the factors delineated in
clauses (a), (b), (c) and (d) speaks of future prospects or such
32. At this stage, we may deal with two decisions of this Court
having bearing on the controversy before us.
(A) It was observed in Patel Gordhandas4 that the
statutory provision did not contemplate levying of the
rates as a percentage of capital value. The relevant
portion of Paragraph 34 of the decision was:
..… We are therefore of opinion that though
mathematically it may be possible to arrive at the
same figure of the actual tax to be paid as a rate
whether based on capital value or based on
annual value, the levying of the rate as a
percentage of capital value would still be illegal
for the reason that the law provides that it
should be levied on the annual value and not
otherwise. By levying it otherwise directly at a
percentage of the capital value, the real incidence
of the rate is camouflaged, and the electorate not
knowing the true incidence of the tax may
possibly be subjected to such a heavy incidence
as in some cases may amount to confiscatory
taxation. We are therefore of opinion that fixing
of the rate at a percentage of the capital value is
not permitted by the Act and therefore R. 350­A
read with R. 243 which permits this must be
struck down, even though mathematically it may
be possible to arrive at the same actual tax by
varying percentages in the case of capital value
and in the case of annual value...”
(B) In Polychem Ltd.9, a part of the land was being
constructed upon while the rest was lying vacant.
The Assessor divided the plot notionally into two
parts – one, which was being built upon and the
other which was lying vacant. One of the questions
was:    whether       during     the    period     when    the
construction was going on and was not completed,
what    should     be   the     approach?     The    following
observations are noteworthy:
“12. The principles upon which lands are rated
in this country have been practically settled by
the decisions of this Court. But, no case was
brought to our notice in which an application of
these principles to land upon which a building
was being constructed was involved. In other
words, no case was cited by any party in which
the doctrine of sterility, as indicated above, was
invoked. We will, however, glance at the cases
cited before deciding the question raised before
22. The abovementioned authorities of this
Court, which were cited before us, enable us to
hold that the mode of assessment in every case
must be directed towards finding out the annual
letting value of land which is the basis of rating
of land, and, by definition, “land” includes land
which is either being built upon or has been
built upon. Nevertheless, a reference to the
provisions of the Act shows that, after a building
has been completed, the letting value of the
building, which becomes part of land, will be the
primary or determining factor in fixing the
annual rent for which the land which has been
built upon “might reasonably be expected to be
let from year to year”. All that Section 154 seems
to contemplate, by mentioning “land or building”,
is that land which is vacant or which has not
been built upon may be treated, for purposes of
valuation, on a different footing from land which
has actually been built upon. But, relevant
provisions of the Act do not mention and seem to
take no account, for purposes of rating, of any
building which is only in the course of being
constructed although Section 3(r) of the Act
makes it clear that land which is being built
upon is also “land”. Hence, so long as a building
is not completed or constructed to such an
extent that atleast a partial completion notice
can be given so that the completed portion can
be occupied and let, the land can, for purposes
of rating, be equated with or treated as vacant
land. It is only when the building which is being
put up is in such a state that it is actually and
legally capable of occupation that the letting
value of the building can enter into the
computation        for    rating     “Rebus     sic
Stantibus”. Although, the definition of land,
which is rateable, covers three kinds of “land”,
yet, for the purposes of rating Section 154
recognises only two categories. Therefore, all
“land” must fall in one of these two categories for
purposes of rating and not outside.”
(emphasis supplied)
33. Both the decisions were rendered in the regime when the
property tax could be levied on rateable value.      In the first
decision, it was found that fixing of the rate at a percentage of
the capital value was not a modality permitted by the Act and,
therefore, Rules 350­A read with Rule 243, which permitted
such exercise, were struck down. Therefore, to the extent the
rules went beyond the statutory import and extent, the
transgression was not accepted by this Court.      In the second
decision, it was held that so long as the building was not
completed and ready for occupation, the land in question for the
purposes of rating must be equated with and treated as “vacant
land”.   In the second decision, the construction was actually
going on but the building was not ready. The conclusion from
the second decision is quite clear that unless and until the
building was ready to be occupied, the land must be treated as
vacant land. Notably, the second decision was premised on the
methodology where the rateable value was the determining
criteria. Therefore, so long as the building could not be let out
in open market, the land would continue to be treated as “vacant
34. However, after the amendments, the emphasis has now
changed and the basis for taxation is now to be capital value of
land    and building.     Capital value again can have two
dimensions.    First, the value of land or building as it stands
today or secondly, the value as may be in future as per
anticipated development. However, the legislative intent, as is
clear from clauses (a) to (d), is about actual status and user as
on the date the capital value is to be reckoned or considered.
These clauses clearly show that the features contemplated
therein must be in existence as on such date and not what
would be the projection in future.
35. There are two ways in which sub­clause (e) of sub­Section
(1A) of Section 154 can be construed.       In the first case, said
clause can be read ejusdem generis along with sub­clauses (a) to
(d), in which event the scope of any rules to be made in terms of
power granted by sub­clause (e) read with sub­Section (1B),
would be relatable to the factors actually in existence and not as
something contemplated in future.      On the other hand, if the
clause is read independently, there is nothing in clause (e) or in
the language of sub­Section (1B) that the future prospects of the
land in question could be reckoned or noted for arriving at the
capital value. The conclusion is thus quite clear that the width
of clauses (a) to (e) read with sub­Section (1B) do not by any
stretch of imagination contemplate taking into account the
future prospects of the land in question.
36. Viewed thus, the conclusion arrived at by the High Court
on the second and third grounds, as stated in paragraph 15
(supra) are quite correct.        We, therefore, hold that the
empowerment in terms of clauses (a) to (e) read with sub­Section
(1B) or the conferral of rule­making power would not permit the
Corporation to determine the capital value beyond the scope of
said clauses (a) to (e).   Thus, for the purpose of determining
capital value, only the present physical attributes and status of
the land and building can be considered and not the future
prospects of the land.
37. At this stage, we may consider the scope of Rule 20 of the
Capital Value Rules of 2010 and the Capital Value Rules of
2015.    The said Rule refers to the Ready Reckoner which
provides for the rate of base value of open land with 1 (one) floor
space index.     However, the open land in question may be
capable of utilizing more than 1 (one) floor space index, for
instance in certain areas the floor space index may be 1.5 or 2.
Such component i.e. the capability of the land in question in
utilizing more then 1 (one) floor space index is a postulate which
is sought to be reckoned by Rule 20. The second component to
be added in terms of Rule 20 is the intended or proposed
utilization of Transfer of Development right which has been
approved under the building plan submitted for approval.
Nonetheless, this component is the intended use or exploitation
in future and not something which is available in presenti.
38. To the extent Rule 20 of the Capital Value Rules of 2010
and the Capital Value Rules of 2015 empower the Commissioner
to consider the capability of the open land of utilizing more than
1 floor space index (FSI) or any transfer of development right
(TDR), would go well beyond the permissible scope delineated by
the provisions of Section 154 of the MMC Act. The High Court,
in our view, was, therefore, right in concluding that Rule 20 of
the Capital Value Rules of 2010 and the Capital Value Rules of
2015 would be ultra vires the provisions of sub­Sections (1A) and
(1B) of Section 154 of the MMC Act.
39. We now turn to the issue regarding retrospectivity of the
Capital Value Rules of 2010. The factual narration relied upon
by the learned counsel for the Corporation does show that the
preparatory steps were being undertaken since 2010 with the
appointment of an expert committee and publication of draft
rules. It appears that the Corporation had to collect voluminous
data. But in order to enable the Corporation to compute or levy
property tax based on capital value, the concerned rules had to
be in force. There being no empowerment to compute and/or
levy property tax with retrospective effect by the statute itself,
the rule making power, in any view of the matter, could not have
created a liability pertaining to the period well before the Rules
came into effect. The first ground as set out in paragraph 15
(supra) was, therefore, rightly answered by the High Court
against the Corporation. Logically, the Rules having come into
force on 20.3.2012, the levy and computation of property tax on
capital value would be available and possible on and with effect
from 20.3.2012 and not with any retrospective operation.
40. The question then arises as to what would be the scope
and extent of the present property tax regime. It is quite clear
that with the amendment to Section 154 and other provisions,
the property tax can be levied on the basis of capital value of the
land or building. To that extent, there would be departure from
the regime which was in existence when Patel Gordhandas4
and Polychem Ltd.9 were decided by this Court.           Now, the
statute certainly empowers and contemplates imposition of
property tax on the capital value.    However, the capital value
must be one which answers the postulates in sub­clauses (a) to
(e) of sub­Section (1A) read with sub­Section (1B) of Section 154.
At the cost of repetition, we may say that since the statutory
provisions do not contemplate any likelihood of exploitation of
capacity in future, the capital value of the land and building
must be based on situation “in presenti”.     It must be clarified
here that in projects which are in progress, the value addition to
the property would be ongoing feature.      However, considering
clauses (a) to (d), it would mean that the governing principle
must be the actual use and not the intended use in future.
41. In    the   circumstances,   the  challenge   raised   by   the
Corporation must fail and we dismiss the appeal preferred by
42. We now turn to the challenges raised by the original writ
petitioners.   Those challenges on various grounds as detailed
hereinabove including the grounds of legislative competence;
validity of certain provisions and basis of alleged violation of
Article 14 of the Constitution, were considered by the High Court
in extenso. We do not find any reason or room to take a different
view. We, therefore, affirm the view and dismiss the challenge.
Consequently, the appeals preferred by the original writ
petitioners are dismissed.
43.   These appeals are disposed of in aforesaid terms without
any order as to costs.