“the Cr.P.C.”) for quashing and setting aside the FIR
being I-C.R. No.7/2018 registered with ACB Police
Station, Gandhinagar, for the offences punishable under
sections13(1)(e)          and   13(2)         of  the     Prevention              of
Corruption Act, 1988 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘P.C.
Act’ for short) as well as sought direction to the
concerned authority to declare that the only charge-sheet
in connection with FIR being I-C.R. No.6/2018 registered
with ACB Police Station, Gandhinagar shall lie against the
petitioner, and/or direction to the concerned department
to reinstate the petitioner into service.
2.              It is stated that on the basis of an intelligence
report against the officers of the Gujarat State Land
referred to as the ‘GSLDC’ for short) of receiving
commission and bribe, a raid was carried out on
12.04.2018,          where    the    petitioner       was      serving            as
Managing Director and the raiding team recovered a
black bag from the present petitioner, wherein cash of
Rs.1,28,000/-         and   gold   earrings along           with         bill     of
Rs.30,584/- were found. Petitioner states that pursuant to
the said search an FIR being I-C.R. No.6/2018 came to be
registered with ACB Police Station, Gandhinagar for the
offences punishable under sections 8, 10 and 13(2) of the
2.1             Petitioner    further        states    that      after          the
investigation, chargesheet came to be filed, wherein the
petitioner has been shown as accused no.2, and after
registration of the said FIR, another FIR being I-C.R.
No.7/2018 with same set of allegations came to be filed
on 16.04.2018 with the ACB Police Station, Gandhinagar.
2.2             It is stated that petitioner had approached this
Court by preferring Special Criminal Application No.3486
of 2018 for quashing of FIR being I-C.R. No.6/2018 and I-
C.R. No.7/2018 and alongwith the said application, the
petitioner had also preferred two regular bail applications
being Cr.M.A. No.9856 of 2018 and Cr.M.A. No.9866 of
2018. The petitioner has been released on regular bail by
order of this Court dated 19.06.2018 in connection to
both the FIRs, while quashing petition being SCR.A.
No.3486 of 2018 came to be disposed of as withdrawn
and liberty to the petitioner was granted to file afresh
after filing of the chargesheet. It is stated that after lapse
of two years chargesheet could not be filed and hence the
present successive petition.
3.              Mr. Narendra K.Amin, learned advocate for the
petitioner submits that, the present FIR is nothing but
repetition of investigation which has already taken place
in earlier FIR where chargesheet has already been filed.
He     submits        that  merely      after    three     days         of     the
registration         of  earlier  FIR,        on 16.04.2018           another
impugned FIR came to be registered with the same police
station but by another officer i.e. respondent no.2 herein.
He states that law does not permit registration of another
FIR for the same offence.
3.1             Mr. Amin submits that the impugned FIR and
further proceedings thereto is bad in law and the same
does not disclose any cognizable offence, therefore, the
same is required to be quashed and set aside. He submits
that the investigation in connection with the impugned
FIR has not progressed since last two years and from the
conduct of the investigating agency the chances of
petitioner being reinstated in service are hampered.
3.2             Mr. Amin contended that even by prima facie
reading of the FIR no case is made out against the
present petitioner, as the monthly salary of the petitioner
was more than the amount recovered during the raid. He
submits that during the search at the house of the
petitioner nothing incriminating had been discovered or
recovered which amounts to the case of disproportionate
assets. He submits that any disclosure of any alleged
offence does not warrant recording of series of FIR and
the said issue is now no longer res integra as had been
settled by the Hon’ble Apex Court in series of legal
pronouncements that recording of subsequent FIR for the
same transaction is abuse of process of law.
3.3             He submits that the provisions of the Cr.P.C.
clearly shows that an officer in-charge of a police station
has to commence investigation as provided in section 156
or 157 of the Cr.P.C. on coming to know the cognizable
offence and on completion of investigation and evidence
collected, the I.O. concerned has to form an opinion
under section 169 or 170 of Cr.P.C. and forward it to the
Magistrate concerned under section 173(2) of the Cr.P.C.
He submits that even after filing of such a report, for any
further information or material, there is no need to
register a fresh FIR, as I.O. is empowered to make further
investigation with permission of the Court and where
during further investigation, the I.O. collects further
evidence, oral or documentary, he is to forward the same
with one or more further reports which is evident from
sub-section (8) of section 173 of Cr.P.C.
3.4             In support of his submission, Mr. Amin relied
on the judgment of T.T. Antony Vs. State of Kerala,
reported in (2001) 6 SCC 181, contending that if an
offence is part and parcel of the same transaction forming
different facts then also on such basis, separate FIR
cannot        be    registered.    He       relied   on    the      following
observations of the said judgment, which are as under:
“The 1973 Cr.P.C. specifically provides for
further investigation after forwarding of
report under sub-section (2) of Section 173
Cr.P.C. and forwarding of further report or
reports to the concerned Magistrate under
Section 173(8) of Cr.P.C. It follows that if the
gravamen of the charges in the two FIRs -
the first and the second - is in substance and
truth the same, registering the second FIR
and     making     fresh       investigation       and
forwarding report under Section 173 Cr.P.C.
will be irregular and the Court can not take
cognizance of the same.
investigation does not warrant subjecting a
citizen each time to fresh investigation by
the police in respect of the same incident,
giving rise to one or more cognizable
offences,    consequent          upon      filing       of
successive FIRs whether before or after
filing the final report under Section 173(2)
Cr.P.C. It would clearly be beyond the
purview of Section 154 and 156 Cr.P.C. nay,
a case of abuse of the statutory power of
investigation in a given case. In our view a
case of fresh investigation based on the
second or successive FIRs, not being a
counter case, filed in connection with the
same or connected cognizable offence
alleged to have been committed in the
course of the same transaction and in
respect of which pursuant to the first FIR
either investigation is underway or final
report under Section 173(2) has been
forwarded to the Magistrate, may be a fit
case for exercise of power under Section 482
Cr.P.C. or under Article 226/227 of the
The course adopted in this case, namely, the
registration of the information as the second
FIR in regard to the same incident and
making a fresh investigation is not
permissible under the scheme of the
provisions of the Cr.P.C. as pointed out
above,     therefore,          the     investigation
undertaken and the report thereof cannot
but be invalid. We have, therefore, no option
except to quash the same leaving it open to
the investigating agency to seek permission
in Crime No.353/94 or 354/94 of the
Magistrate to make further investigation,
forward further report or reports and thus
proceed in accordance with law.”
3.5               Mr. Amin also relied on the judgments of (i)
Upkar Singh Vs. Ved Prakash and Ors., reported in
AIR 2004 SC 4320 (ii) Babubhai and Ors. Vs. State
of Gujarat, reported in AIR 2004 SC 4320 (iii) Anju
Chaudhary Vs. State of U.P. and Ors., reported in
2013 CriLJ 776 (iv) Surender Kaushik and Others Vs.
State of Uttar pradesh and Others, rendered in
Criminal Appeal No.305 of 2013 dated 14.02.2013 (v)
of Investigation and Ors., reported in AIR 2013 SC
3794 (vi) P.Sreekumar Vs. State of Kerala and Ors.,
reported in AIR 2018 SC 1482 (vi)                    Krishna Lal
Chawla and ors. Vs. State of U.P. and Ors., reported
Ahmed and Ors., reported in 2021 (4) AKR 533.
4.              Mr. Pranav Trivedi, learned APP contended
that, the submission advanced by the advocate for the
petitioner are misconceived. Mr. Trivedi submitted that
distinction has to be made between FIR registered under
Indian Penal Code and under P.C. Act. He submitted that
surprise search was conducted on the basis of the
information so received by the A.C.B. Department. The
allegation of corruption was against all the officers of
GSLDC, Gandhinagar and the first FIR No.6 of 2018
registered on 13.04.2018 gives detail account of the
events that got unfolded during the whole search and the
cause of first FIR No.6 of 2018 under Sections 8, 10, ,
13(1)(d)(ii), 13(2) of the P.C. Act is the incident of
unaccounted money between co-accused – K.C. Parmar
and the present petitioner being Managing Director.
4.1             APP Mr. Trivedi stated that the subsequent FIR
cannot be termed as second FIR, as is only against the
present petitioner, as he was found to be in possession of
cash and gold articles as could not satisfactorily account
for it, and hence FIR under sections 13(1)(e) and 13(2)
was lodged. The said instance has been made genesis for
the investigation of the possession of disproportionate
assets of the petitioner. He contended that in the earlier
FIR the chargesheet is filed against K.C. Parmar and
present petitioner. While investigation is still in progress
laying down the check period in the impugned FIR.
4.2             Placing  reliance        on the      judgment               of
Charansingh Vs. State of Maharashtra and Ors.,
reported in (2021) 5 SCC 469, learned APP submitted
that, Anti-Corruption Bureau has to follow the procedure
and verify the documents regarding the property, assets
and the likes to complete the investigation. Mr. Trivedi,
learned APP, submitted that the affidavit filed by the
investigating agency, A.C.B., on record of the matter
gives details of offences registered towards the search,
the details of grant allocated to GSLDC Department by
the Government being misused, the fact that the work has
not been done as per the allocation of the grant and the
abuse       of     the office,  the     details of     other       offences
registered against officers / employees of GSLDC in South
Gujarat, offences of disproportionate assets registered
against the officers / employees of GSLDC and the fact of
report of L.V.A. (Layered Voice Analysis) of accused K.C.
Parmar and the present petitioner – Kanaiyalal Sundarji
Detroja        conducted     at  Forensic      Science       Laboratory,
5.              FIR being I-C.R. No.6/2018 was registered on
13.04.2018 with ACB Police Station, Gandhinagar, under
sections 8, 10 and 13(2) of the P.C. Act, subsequently on
16.04.2018 section 13(1)(d)(ii) was reported to be added.
FIR alleges interalia that on the day of the visit, on
12.04.2018, during the course of search operation and in
presence of two panchas under videography, the chamber
of suspected K.C. Parmar was searched and from the left
side drawer of his table in his chamber, panchas had
removed one bag, wherein they found Indian currency
notes of Rs.200, Rs.500 and Rs.50 denomination in huge
quantity. The team through the employee of the State
Bank of India with the Money Counting Machine got
those money calculated, which came to Rs.40,52,500/-.
5.1             It was inquired from the accused as to how the
money came to him, which was found in his chamber
drawer. Shri K.C. Parmar stated that those monies were
not received for him. On further clarification he stated
that after his retirement, he was to remain there under
contract basis and since the head of the Administrative
Department is M.D., under his instructions, he accepted
the money that were coming from different quarters as
was not directly accepted by the M.D. Those monies were
to be paid through him. Initially he disagreed to accept
but since M.D. was his head and has to work under his
control, he used to accept money on his behalf, the
monies          so received from the concerned authority /
parties, he used to send it to the present petitioner -
5.2             It was stated by the co-accused K.C. Parmar
that in exchange, on being pleased, the petitioner would
voluntarily give him money as his hand expense, which
co-accused K.C. Parmar would accept, and, it was further
clarified by him that since the last two years, he was
accepting the money in that way and was handing it over
to the present applicant, which was accepted by the
applicant. This unacounted money, as was found during
the search in chamber of Shri K.C. Parmar, which, as
alleged, was accepted under the instruction of the
present applicant and as the same was prima facie found
to be as illegal gratification and as offence was under
connivance of both of them, being public servant, the
offence was registered under sections 8, 10, 13(1)(d)(ii)
and 13(2) of the P.C. Act against the present petitioner as
M.D. of GSLDC, Gandhinagar and co-accused - K.C.
Parmar as Joint Director.
5.3             On these prima facie facts, FIR No.6 of 2018
was registered. The said FIR No.6 of 2018, dated
13.04.2018 counts the whole sequence of the events that
had taken place on the day when the search was made on
12.04.2018 at the office of GSLDC, Gandhinagar under
the instructions of the Head Office of A.C.B. Police
Station, Gandhinagar. The allegation was that there was
continuous complaint of receiving commission of large
amount through the agents or officer/employee for the
last many years for sanctioning                 the grant            of the
government schemes, thus for verification of the reliable
information, under the instructions of the head office
keeping along with them Assistant Director N.R. Solanki,
under his direction and supervision, with two public
servants as panchas, the search operation was conducted
in Section-10/A Wing, where the office of Gujarat State
Land Development Corporation, Gandhinagar is situated.
5.4             It is alleged that during this search operation in
A-Wing,         Rs.1,28,000/-    uncounted     amount,        one         gold
pendant, earrings worth Rs.30,584/- along with bill was
found from the present petitioner. Further unaccounted
amount of Rs.40,52,500/- was found from co-accused K.C.
Parmar – Joint Director, Rs.9,00,000/- from M.K. Desai –
Assistant Director, Rs.5,00,000/- was found from S.M.
Vaghela – Field Officer, Rs.70,000/- was found from S.V.
Shah – Company Secretary; thus in total amount of
Rs.56,50,500/- were seized during the search operation in
presence of panchas, and when all the above referred
were asked to clarify about it, clarification was not found
reasonable, it was observed that these unaccounted cash
money of Rs.56,50,500/- was not noted in the Register
and as it was suspected that it was illegal gratification,
the money was seized under section 102 Cr.P.C. by way
of panchnama. Initially Janvajog (Entry of Preliminary
Information) No.1 of 2018 of A.C.B. Police Station,
Gandhinagar was registered. The videographed statement
of all the referred officers/employees of the Gujarat State
Land Development Corporation, Gandhinagar, during the
course of search, was recorded in presence of Assistant
6.              FIR No.6/2018 was registered by Dipakkumar
Vishnudayal Prasad before the A.C.B. Police Station,
Gandhinagar, while FIR No.7 of 2018 was registered by
Krishnaba Rajendrasinh Dabhi before the A.C.B. Police
6.1             In FIR No.7 of 2018, referring to the search
operation dated 12.04.2018, the said officer has noted
that for verification, the search operation was conducted
by the raiding party in the ‘A-Wing’ as a surprise check.
FIR No.7/2018 came to be registered under sections
13(1)(e) and 13(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, for
the unaccounted cash amount of Rs.1,28,000/-, one gold
pendant, earrings worth Rs.30,584/- along with a bill
found from the present petitioner. The present petitioner
stated before the raiding team, that the gold pendant and
earring was a gift for his wife for the anniversary and he
had taken loan of Rs.1,50,000/- from his friend Bhavin
Shah to purchase gold pendant and the earrings. Since
the bill was found in the name of some other person, for
verification in presence of panchas, under videography,
Assistant Director, Smt. Roopalben Solanki called Bhavin
Shah, through the phone of the petitioner keeping the
mobile on speaker mode. It is noted in the FIR that the
said fact was found to be false and since the petitioner –
accused could not give a satisfactory reply for the amount
of    Rs.1,28,000/-      and     the       gold  ornaments              worth
Rs.30,584/-, it was therefore observed that it was not
found from the lawful source, on that premise the
complaint under sections 13(1)(e) and 13(2) of the P.C.
Act was registered.
7.              Challenge to the subsequent FIR is given on the
ground that there can be no second FIR and no fresh
investigation on receipt of every subsequent information
in respect of the same cognizable offence or same
occurrence giving rise to one or more cognizable offence.
It was urged by Advocate Mr. Amin that all subsequent
information will be covered by section 162 Cr.P.C.
8.              Before analysing the factual aspect with the law
laid down from T.T. Anthony (supra) and the development
in the case laws, it would be fruitful to consider certain
observations made in the judgments referred by learned
(i)             The Hon’ble Supreme Court in case of T.T.
Antony Vs. State of Kerala (supra) observed that the first
information in regard to the commission of a cognizable
offence satisfies the requirements of the section; there
can be no second FIR and consequently there can be no
fresh      investigation  on  receipt      of   every      subsequent
information in respect of the same cognizable offence.
Further it was observed that, on receipt of information
about a cognizable offence or an incident giving rise to a
cognizable offence or offences and on entering the FIR in
the station house diary, the officer in-charge of a police
station has to investigate not merely the cognizable
offence reported in the FIR but also other connected
offences found to have been committed in the course of
the same transaction or the same occurrence and file one
or more reports as provided in Section 173 of the Cr.P.C.
(ii)            In Upkar Singh Vs. Ved Prakash and Ors.
(supra), the Hon’ble Supreme Court observed that, it is
clear that Court in the case of T.T. Antony v. State of
Kerala and Ors. has not excluded the registration of a
complaint in the nature of a counter case from the
purview of the Code; Court only held that any further
complaint by the same complainant or others against the
same accused, subsequent to the registration of a case,
was prohibited under the Code because an investigation
in that regard would have already being started and
further complaint against the same accused would
amount to an improvement on the facts mentioned in the
original complaint hence would be prohibited under
Section 162 of the Code.
(iii)            The Hon’ble Supreme Court in Babubhai and
Ors. Vs. State of Gujarat (supra), after surveying the
earlier decisions, expressed the view that the court has to
examine the facts and circumstances giving rise to both
the FIRs and the test of sameness is to be applied to find
out whether both the FIRs relate to the same incident in
respect of the same occurrence or are in regard to the
incidents which are two or more parts of the same
transaction, if the answer is affirmative, the second FIR is
liable to be quashed; however, in case, the contrary is
proved, where the version in the second FIR is different
and        they     are  in respect         of the     two       different
incidents/crimes, the second FIR is permissible.
(iv)             In Anju Chaudhary Vs. State of U.P. and Ors.
(supra) relied on by Advocate Mr. Amin, wherein the
Hon’ble Supreme Court on the permissibility of two FIRs
held that, there cannot be two FIRs, registered for the
same offence. However, where the incident is separate,
offences are similar or different, or even where the
subsequent crime is of such magnitude that it does not
fall within the ambit and scope of the FIR recorded first,
then a second FIR can be registered.
(v)              The   Hon’ble    Supreme      Court      in     case         of
P.Sreekumar Vs. State of Kerala and Ors. (supra),
observed that, there was no prohibition in law to file
second FIR and once it was filed, such FIR was capable of
being taken note of and tried on merits in accordance
with law.
(vi)             In case of Krishna Lal Chawla and ors. Vs. State
of U.P. and Ors. (supra), the Hon’ble Supreme Court laid
down that, Upkar Singh clarified that Apex Court’s
previous decision in T.T. Anthony will not bar the filing of
a second complaint with respect to the same incident, if
such second complaint is filed as a counter-complaint by
the other party; and laid down ratio that, trial Judge has a
duty under the constitution and the Code of Criminal
Procedure, to identify and dispose of frivolous litigation at
an early stage by exercising, substantially and to the
fullest extent, the powers conferred on him.
(vii)            The Hon’ble Supreme Court in case of B.V.
Byre Gowda Vs. Nisar Ahmed and Ors. (supra), observed
that a counter complaint is always permissible on the
same incident as there can be complaints and two FIRs, if
it is a case of complaint and counter complaint or a case
of consequential complaint, but those were not the fact of
the case therein and therefore observed that without a
shadow of doubt it would hit by ‘doctrine of sameness’.
9.              The crucial fact in the present matter is the
search operation in the GSLDC, Gandhinagar. The
surprise checking was on the basis of reliable information
received           about  large     scale     corruption          by         the
officers/authorities of GSLDC, Gandhinagar. The affidavit
of the P.I., A.C.B. Police Station, states of information of
the hefty commission received through their middlemen
or officers/employees for sanctioning the grants in
government schemes. On that date of 12.04.2018, the
team found unaccounted cash monies from five of the
officers. Such search was also made in other offices
almost throughout Gujarat; sixty cases were filed under
abuse of the office and corruption and thirteen cases
were for offences of disproportionate assets against the
officers/employees of GSLDC, across the State.
10.             In light of these facts, the investigation is
expected to be made in a proper and objective manner.
The investigation is required to be judicious, fair,
transparent and expeditious to ensure compliance with
the basic rule of law. The Court is also to ensure that
investigation is fair and does not in any way hamper the
freedom of an individual except in accordance with law.
10.1            The present petitioner was found to have
committed offence along with co-accused K.C. Parmar, for
that FIR No.6 of 2018 was registered under sections 8,
10, 13(1)(d)(ii) and 13(2) of the P.C. Act, while FIR No.7
of 2018 is against the petitioner as public servant, could
not satisfactorily account of pecuniary resources or
property         disproportionate    to      his known        sources           of
income. Another affidavit under seal cover was provided
to the Court by the A.C.B. officer to apprise the progress
of investigation in disproportionate assets case.
10.2            The fundamental difference between offence
under section 8, 10 with 13(d)(ii) and 13(e) of the P.C.
Act, marks in the form to establish the offence under
section 8 to prove that the accused accepted or obtained,
or agreed to accept, or attempted to obtain, from
someone; for himself or for some other person; any
gratification whatever; as a motive or reward for inducing
by corrupt or illegal means, any public servant to do or to
forbear to do any official act, or to show favour or render
any service to any of the persons specified in the section.
The receipt of gratification will complete the offence.
Well, whether section 8 or section 7 of P.C. Act would be
applicable to public servant is a matter of fact to be
decided by the prosecution.
10.3            Section 10 of the P.C. Act provides punishment
for abetment by public servant of offences defined in
section 8 or 9. Section 13(1)(d)(ii) of P.C. Act, is about the
public servant said to have committed the offence of
criminal misconduct by abusing his position, obtains for
himself or for any other person any valuable thing or
pecuniary advantage, which becomes punishable under
section 13(2) of the P.C. Act.
10.4            Section 13(1)(e) with the explanation as along
with penal provision under 13(2) of P.C. Act reads thus:
‘Section 13(1)- A public servant is said to
commit the offence of criminal misconduct,-
(e) “if he or any person on his behalf, is in
possession or has, at any time during the
period of his office, been in possession for
which the public servant cannot satisfactorily
account, of pecuniary resources or property
disproportionate to his known sources of
income.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this
section, “known sources of income” means
income received from any lawful source and
such receipt has been intimated in accordance
with the provisions of any law, rules or orders
for the time being applicable to a public
servant.”
13(2)     Any public servant who commits
criminal misconduct shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which shall be not
less than [four years] but which may extend to
[ten years] and shall also be liable to fine.”
11.             FIR No.6 of 2018 notes that the present
petitioner was asked to clarify about the cash amount
Rs.1,28,000/- and one gold pendant, earring worth
Rs.30,584/-; the bill was in the name of some other
person. The petitioner stated that he had taken loan from
the person, which when verified, was found to be false.
The      petitioner     could  not     satisfactorily    account            the
possession of cash and the gold articles, that has been
made the basis for the inquiry and investigation for
possession         of   disproportionate      assets     against            the
petitioner, and thus that incident of 12.04.2018, is made
the genesis for the registration of FIR No.7 of 2018.
12.             The   ingredients    that    must     be     proved           to
substantiate the charge under section 13(1)(e) are: (1)
the prosecution must prove that the accused is a public
servant, (2) the nature and extent of the pecuniary
resources or property which are found in his possession,
(3) it must be proved as to what were his known sources
of income i.e. known to the prosecution, (4) it must prove
quite objectively that the resources or property found in
possession of the accused were disproportionate to his
known source of income. Once the above ingredients are
satisfactorily proved, the offence of criminal misconduct
under section 13(1)(e) is complete, unless the accused is
able to account for such resources or property and it is
only thereafter the burden shifts to the accused to prove
his innocence.
12.1            The prosecution has to establish that the
pecuniary assets acquired by the public servant are
disproportionately larger than his known sources of
income. Thereafter, the public servant has to account for
such excess. Offence becomes complete on the failure of
the public servant to account or explain such excess. This
concept can be well explained by referring to the
judgment of State of Madhya Pradesh Vs. Awadh
Kishore Gupta & Ors., reported in 2004 CRI. L.J. 598.
Paras 5, 6 and 7 are reproduced hereinbelow:
“5. Section 13 deals with various situations
when a public servant can be said to have
committed criminal misconduct. Clause (e) of
sub-section (1) of the Section is pressed into
service against the accused. The same is
applicable when the public servant or any
person on his behalf, is in possession or has,
at any time during the period of his office,
been in possession, for which the public
servant     cannot         satisfactorily      account
pecuniary        resources          or        property
disproportionate to his known sources of
income. Clause (e) of sub-section (1) of
Section 13 corresponds to clause (e) of sub-
section (1) of Section 5 of the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1947 (referred to as 'Old
Act').   But     there        has  been      drastical
amendments. Under the new clause, the
earlier concept of "known sources of income"
has undergone a radical change. As per the
explanation appended, the prosecution is
relieved of the burden of investigating into
"source of income" of an accused to a large
extent, as it is stated in the explanation that
"known sources of income" mean income
received from any lawful source, the receipt
of which has been intimated in accordance
with the provisions of any law, rules orders
for the time being applicable to a public
servant. The expression "known sources of
income" has reference to sources known to
the prosecution after thorough investigation
of the case. It is not, and cannot be contended
that "known sources of income" means
sources known to the accused. The
prosecution cannot, in the very nature of
things, be expected to know the affairs of an
accused person. Those will be matters
"specially within the knowledge" of the
accused, within the meaning of Section 106 of
the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (in short the
6.    The phrase "known sources of income"
in Section 1(1)(e) {old Section 5(1)(e)} has
clearly the emphasis on the word "income". It
would be primary to observe that qua the
public servant, the income would be what is
attached to his office or post, commonly
known as remuneration or salary. The term
"income" by itself, is elastic and has a wide
connotation. Whatever comes in or is
received, is income. But, however, wide the
import and connotation of the term "income",
it is incapable of being understood as
meaning receipt having no nexus to one's
labour, or expertise, or property, or
investment, and having further a source
which may or may not yield a regular
revenue. These essential characteristics are
vital in understanding the term "income".
Therefore, it can be said that, though
"income" is receipt in the hand of its
recipient, every receipt would not partake
into the character of income. Qua the public
servant, whatever return he gets of his
service, will be the primary item of his
income. Other incomes which can conceivably
are income qua the public servant, will be in
the regular receipt from (a) his property, or
(b) his investment. A receipt from windfall, or
gains of graft, crime, or immoral secretions
by persons prima facie would not be receipt
from the "known sources of income" of a
public servant.
7.    The legislature has advisedly used the
expression "satisfactorily account". The
emphasis must be on the word "satisfactorily"
and the legislature has, thus, deliberately
cast a burden on the accused not only to offer
a plausible explanation as to how he came by
his large wealth, but also to satisfy the Court
that    his   explanation      was     worthy          of
12.2            The offence noted in the FIR No.6 of 2018
became complete on receipt of gratification, wherein
chargesheet has been filed against two persons which
includes the present petitioner, while the offence noted in
FIR No.7 of 2018 against the petitioner, was registered to
set the criminal action in motion. The fact of unaccounted
money was verified on the spot by calling the named
friend through phone.
12.3            In Charansing Vs. State of Maharashtra and
Ors. (supra) relied upon by learned APP, it has been held
in para 9.1 as under:
“9.1 - Thus, an enquiry at pre-FIR stage is
held to be permissible and not only
permissible but desirable, more particularly
in cases where the allegations are of
misconduct of corrupt practice acquiring the
assets/properties disproportionate to his
known sources of income. After the enquiry/
enquiry     at   pre-registration        of      FIR
stage/preliminary enquiry, if, on the basis of
the material collected during such enquiry,
it is found that the complaint is vexatious
and/or there is no substance at all in the
complaint, the FIR shall not be lodged.
However, if the material discloses prima
facie a commission of the offence alleged,
the FIR will be lodged and the criminal
proceedings will be put in motion and the
further investigation will be carried out in
terms of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
Therefore, such a preliminary enquiry would
be permissible only to ascertain whether
cognizable offence is disclosed or not and
only thereafter FIR would be registered.
Therefore, such a preliminary enquiry would
be in the interest of the alleged accused also
against whom the complaint is made.”
12.4            Referring to the case of Superintendent of
Police, C.B.I. Vs. Tapan Kumar Singh, reported in
(2003) 6 SCC 175, the Hon’ble Supreme Court in
Charansing Vs. State of Maharashtra and Ors. (supra)
observed in para 9.2 as under:
“9.2 Even as held by this Court in the case
of Superintendent of Police, CBI v. Tapan
Kumar Singh, a GD entry recording the
information by the informant disclosing the
commission of a cognizable offence can be
treated as FIR in a given case and the police
has the power and jurisdiction to investigate
the same. However, in an appropriate case,
such as allegations of misconduct of corrupt
practice by a public servant, before lodging
the first information report and further
conducting      the    investigation,     if     the
preliminary enquiry is conducted to
ascertain whether a cognizable offence is
disclosed or not, no fault can be found. Even
at the stage of registering the FIR, what is
required to be considered is whether the
information given discloses the commission
of a cognizable offence and the information
so lodged must provide a basis for the
police officer to suspect the commission of a
cognizable offence. At this stage, it is
enough if the police officer on the basis of
the    information      given      suspects         the
commission of a cognizable offence, and not
that he must be convinced or satisfied that a
cognizable offence has been committed.
Despite the proposition of law laid down by
this Court in catena of decisions that at the
stage of lodging the first information report,
the police officer need not be satisfied or
convinced that a cognizable offence has
been      committed,           considering          the
observations made by this Court in the case
of P. Sirajuddin (supra) and considering the
observations by this Court in the case of
Lalita Kumari (supra) before lodging the
FIR, an enquiry is held and/or conducted
after following the procedure as per
Prohibition Intelligence Bureau Manual, it
cannot be said that the same is illegal
and/or the police officer, Anti-corruption
Bureau has no jurisdiction and/or authority
and/or power at all to conduct such an
enquiry at pre- registration of FIR stage.”
No.1 of 2018 was first noted at A.C.B. Police Station,
which thereafter has led into registration of both the FIRs
and     as      noted    above   many         more     FIRs      have         been
registered. At the stage of registering the FIR, the police
officer is not required to be satisfied or convinced that a
cognizable offence has been committed. If the information
discloses commission of a cognizable offence, it will set in
the investigative machinery in motion to collect all
necessary          evidence,    thereafter        to     take      action          in
accordance with law.
14.             ‘Test of Sameness’ and ‘Consequence Test’ is at
present the guiding factor to decide the maintainability of
the FIR which is proposed to be second FIR or successive
FIR in respect of the same incident or crime. ‘Test of
Sameness’ as formulated in T.T. Antony was explained in
Babubhai Vs. State of Gujarat case, and ‘Consequence
Test’ as found to be relied upon in C.Muniappan was
made applicable in Amit Shah case.
A.              In case of Babubhai Vs. State of Gujarat,
reported in (2010) 12 SCC 254, it has been observed in
Para-21 as under:
“21. In such a case the court has to examine
the facts and circumstances giving rise to
both the FIRs and the test of sameness is to
be applied to find out whether both the FIRs
relate to the same incident in respect of the
same occurrence or are in regard to the
incidents which are two or more parts of the
same transaction. If the answer is in the
affirmative, the second FIR is liable to be
quashed. However, in case the contrary is
proved, where the version in the second FIR
is different and they are in respect of the two
different incidents/crimes, the second FIR is
permissible. In case in respect of the same
incident the accused in the first FIR comes
forward     with    a     different     version        or
counterclaim, investigation on both the FIRs
has to be conducted.”
B.              In the case of Amitbhai Anilchandra Shah
reported in (2013) 6 SCC 348, ‘consequence test’, as
laid down in C. Muniappan & Ors. Vs. State of Tamil
Nadu, reported in (2010) 9 SCC 567 was approved,
where it was explained that if an offence forming part of
the second FIR arises as a consequence of the offence
alleged in the first FIR, then offences covered by both the
FIRs are the same and accordingly, the second FIR will
be impermissible in law, so as to explain, that the
offences covered in both the FIRs shall have to be treated
as a part of the first FIR. It was observed that, to
determine whether different offences ought to be treated
as part of the same transaction, the “consequence test”
laid down in C.Muniappan, (2010) 9 SCC 567, may be
taken aid of. The said test prescribes that if an offence
forming part of the second FIR arises as a consequence of
the offence alleged in the first FIR then offences covered
by both the FIRs are the same and, accordingly, the
second FIR will be impermissible in law. In other words,
the offences covered in both the FIRs, shall have to be
treated as a part of the first FIR. Furthermore, merely
because two separate complaints had been lodged does
not mean that they could not be clubbed together and one
charge-sheet could not be filed.
C.              The Hon’ble Supreme Court in case of Arnab
Ranjan Goswami Vs. Union of India And Ors.,
reported in Writ Petition (Crl.) No.130 of 2020, while
referring the case of T.T. Antony Vs. State of Kerala
(supra) has observed that, T.T. Antony had come up for
consideration in Upkar Singh Vs. Ved Prakash, thus
observed the context in para-29 as under:
“29- The decision in TT Antony came up for
consideration before a three judge Bench in
Upkar Singh v Ved Prakash20 (“Upkar
Singh”). Justice N Santosh Hegde, speaking
for this Court adverted to the earlier decisions
of this Court in Ram Lal Narang v State (Delhi
Choudhary v Mst. Sita Devi22 (“Kari
Choudhary”) and State of Bihar v JAC
Saldanha23 (“Saldanha”). The Court noted
that in Kari Choudhary, this Court held that:
“11…Of course the legal position is that
there cannot be two FIRs against the same
accused in respect of the same case. But
when there are rival versions in respect of
the same episode, they would normally take
the shape of two different FIRs and
investigation can be carried on under both
of them by the same investigating agency.”
15.             ‘Test of Sameness’ is to be applied to find out
whether both the FIRs relate to the same incident in
respect of the same occurrence or are in regard to the
incidents which are two or more parts of the same
transaction, if so, then second FIR is not maintainable.
But when the version in second FIR is different and they
are in respect of the two different incidents / crimes, the
second FIR is permissible. So, when the version of second
FIR is different, and when in respect of same incident the
accused in the first FIR comes forward with a different
version or counterclaim, investigation on both the FIRs
has to be conducted. In the present matter, the accused
in FIR No.6 of 2018, Mr. K.C. Parmar, was asked about
the money found from the drawer of his table in his
chamber, which was Rs.40,52,500/-, he put up a claim
that he was collecting the money on behalf of the present
petitioner, so on that version of co-accused, the first FIR
was      registered.     The   second        FIR    is   touching             the
unaccounted money and gold article found in the
possession of present petitioner. It was not the say of the
petitioner that it was the money given to him by co-
accused, K.C. Parmar, or that from the money so given to
him, he had purchased the gold pendant and earring. The
statement of the accused was videographed, further
everything was noted in presence of two panchas. The
incident of co-accused, K.C. Parmar, obtaining pecuniary
advantage on behalf of petitioner, has brought the
petitioner under the vigor of sections 8, 10, 13(1)(d)(ii)
read with section 13(2) of the P.C. Act.
15.1            While for the case under sections 13(1)(e) read
with section 13(2) of the P.C. Act, for investigation of
disproportionate assets, if anything could have been
found that K.C. Parmar on behalf of the petitioner was in
possession of pecuniary resources or property, then that
could have added K.C. Parmar in the FIR No.7 of 2018 as
15.2            The simple distinction between sections 8,
13(1)(d)(ii) and section 13(1)(e) would be the act of
obtaining pecuniary advantage, the offence becomes
complete as soon as the gratification is obtained. While in
offence under section 13(1)(e), the emphasis is on
‘satisfactorily accounting’ of pecuniary resources or
property disproportionate to the known sources of income
of the prosecution. Further, as provided under section 17
of the P.C. Act, the offence referred in clause (e) of sub-
section (1) of section 13, shall not be investigated,
without the order of a Police Officer not below the rank of
a Superintendent of Police.
15.3            ‘Test of Sameness’ and ‘Test of Consequence’
can be examined on the anvil of determination, whether
the later complaint can be clubbed together with the
earlier complaint and one chargesheet could be filed.
Here to the facts of both the FIRs, the FIR No.7 of 2018 is
not the consequences of the offence alleged in the first
FIR      No.6      of  2018. Thus,         making     applicable            the
‘consequence test’, the FIR No.7 of 2018 cannot be
clubbed together with FIR No.6 of 2018, where the
offence got complete on co-accused having obtained the
pecuniary advantage for and on behalf of present
accused. The investigation in FIR No.6 of 2018, gets
complete on recording of the statement of the witnesses
to prove the offence, by filing the chargesheet, while
investigation in FIR No.7 of 2018 would begin asking the
accused to provide details of his property, assets, bank
statements, income-tax returns, as per the standard
procedure adopted by the A.C.B. for the check period.
The FIR No.7 of 2018 cannot be clubbed together with
FIR No.6 of 2018, to file one chargesheet against both the
accused, wherein one is the present petitioner.
16.             In light of the above discussions, it is concluded
that the FIR No.7 of 2018 is maintainable in law. In the
result, the petition does not sustain, hence, rejected. Rule
is discharged.