Biswanath Rath, J.      This writ petition involves the following prayer:
“It is, therefore prayed that this Hon’ble Court may graciously be pleased
to consider the facts stated in the Petition, admit the same and issue notice
to the Opp. Parties, call for records from the Court below and after
hearing the counsels from both the sides, allow the same and issue
directions to Opp. Party No.2 to grant renewal of Petitioner’s passport
bearing passport No.J0813101 without creating any further hindrance in
And/or pass such other order/s, whichever this Hon’ble Court
deems fit and proper.
And for this act of kindness, the Petitioner as in duty bound shall
ever pray.”
2.     Background involving the case is that petitioner being a
working professional working in oilfields in the UAE.                           For the
material disclosure in the writ petition, it appears petitioner has a
contractual service in a firm in UAE with 30 days renewal basis.
Having a passport bearing No. J0813101 already granted, petitioner is
continuing with his service              on the basis of visa granted by the
competent authority going to be expired on 17.05.2022. It is finding
the passport going to expire, as a consequence rendering Visa
becomes infructuous, petitioner made an application for renewal of the
passport to get Visa continuity in order to continue his service in the
overseas oilfields.          It is averred on the application being filed,
petitioner has been served with a communication by the opposite party
Bhubaneswar thereby declining to entertain the request of the
petitioner on the issue of renewal of passport on the shortcomings by
way of pendency of 2 criminal cases at least against the petitioner and
thus declined to entertain the request of the petitioner vide Annexure-2
herein giving rise to the filing of the present writ petition.
3.     Being aggrieved by such communication, filing the writ
petition, petitioner pleaded that looking to the nature of offence
involved and further the complaint involved therein being at the
instance of his wife for involvement of difference between the
husband and wife.           Petitioner claims that until unless there is final
outcome in such criminal proceedings, petitioner remaining in the
status of accused, mere pendency of such criminal proceedings should
not    come in the way of the renewal of passport and consequential
grant of Visa. It is in the above premises, the writ petition is filed
seeking a direction from this Court to the Passport Authority to allow
the renewal of the petitioner’s Passport bearing Passport No.
J0813101 in facilitating grant of Visa accordingly.
4.      Mr.Dhal, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the petitioner
taking through the pleadings and the grounds taken therein contended
that mere pendency of criminal proceedings and for such proceedings
being initiated at the instance of the wife for there is difference
between the husband and wife should not have been a ground
declining to entertain the renewal application.      Mr.Dhal, learned
Senior Counsel also contended that in the event there is refusal in
renewal of the passport involving the petitioner, petitioner will also
become jobless and such action may also create a stigma in the
petitioner’s getting further employment.     It is at this stage of the
matter, taking this Court to the provision at Section 6 (2) (f) of the
Passports Act, 1967 and the notification No.GSR 570(E) dated
15.8.1993 issued by the competent authority and further relying on
catena of decisions in the cases of Navin Kumar Sonkar Vs. Union
Palukuri Venkata Vs. Union of India Ministry of External Affairs,
represented by its Principal Secretary and Others. 2020 SCC OnLine
Kar 3437, Vangala Kasturi Rangacharyulu Vs. Central Bureau of
Investigation, (I.A.No.52346/ 2021 in Crl.A.No.1343/2017) decided
on 27.09.2021, in the case of Hardik Shah Vs. Union of India and
Another, 2021 SCC OnLine MP.2326, in the case of             Durydhan
Sahoo Vs. Republic of India, (2011) 50 OCR -587 and in the case of
Ballav Kr @ Sriballav Kar Vs. Govt. of India and another, (2019) 75
OCR-747 also attempted to take support of all these decisions to the
case of the petitioner.
5.     In his contest, Mr.Parhi, learned Assistant Solicitor General of
India   appearing     for the    Passport Authority taking through the
counter averments though not disputed the petitioner has the support
of the notification No.GSR 570(E) dated 15.8.1993 and also the
decisions relied on however taking this Court to the disclosures at
Annexure-2 contended that since the petitioner’s attempt is to leave
this country in the pendency of the criminal cases, there is difficulty
in granting the renewal of passport as the petitioner may not be
available with the competent authority in the event there is criminal
proceeding culminated with conviction. In the above background and
for the clear disclosure on pendency of criminal cases, Mr.Parhi
objected to the claim of the petitioner while defending the impugned
6.     Considering the rival contentions of the parties, this Court finds
undisputedly 2 criminal cases appear to be pending against the
petitioner. Looking to the disclosure at Annexure-2, impugned herein,
this Court finds the criminal cases involved one Laxmisagar P.S. Case
No.82 dated 13.03.2020 under Sections 294, 341, 323, 354, 500, 506,
507, 509,43 I.P.C., whereas the second case i.e. Bhubaneswar Mahila
P.S. Case No.59 dated 27.07.2017 under Sections 498 A, 323, 506, 34
IPC, 4 D.P.Act both registered against the petitioner and undisputedly
both the proceedings are still pending with an order of bail in favour
of the petitioner. It is at this state of the matter, this Court looking to
the provision at Section 6 (2) (d) & (f) of the Passports Act, 1967
“6.  Refusal of passports, travel documents etc-
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the passport
authority shall refuse to issue a passport or travel document for visiting any
foreign country under clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 5 on any one
or more of the following grounds, and on no other grounds, namely:
(d)       that the presence of the applicant outside India may, or is likely
to, prejudice the friendly relations of India with any foreign country;
(f)       that proceedings in respect of an offence alleged to have been
committed by the applicant are pending before a Criminal Court in India;”
Reading the aforesaid provision, this Court finds the aforesaid
provision restricts grant or renewal of passport in certain
circumstance indicated therein.
7.     This Court here takes into account the notification relied on by
both the parties.          Reading the notification No.GSR 570(E) dated
25.8.1993, this Court finds in considering the difficulties in renewal
aspect, above notification has been issued by the competent authority
to consider the pendency of criminal case in the granting of renewal of
the passport in certain circumstance more particularly issuing a set of
“(a) the passport to be issued to every such citizen shall be issued-
(i)       for the period specified in order of the court referred to
above, if the court specifies a period for which the passport has to
(ii)      if no period either for the issue of the passport or for the
travel abroad is specified in such order, the passport shall be issued
(iii)     if such order gives permission to travel abroad for a period
less than one year, but does not specify the period validity of the
passport, the passport shall be issued for one year;
(iv)      if such order gives permission to travel abroad for a period
exceeding one year, and does not specify the validity of the
passport, then the passport shall be issued for the period of travel
abroad specified in the order.
(b)       any passport issued in terms of (a)(ii) and (a)(iii) above
can be further renewed for one year at a time, provided the
applicant has not travelled abroad for the period sanctioned by the
court; and provided further that, in the meantime, the order of the
(c)      any passport issued in terms of (a)(i) above can be further
renewed only on the basis of a fresh court order specifying a
further period of validity of the passport or specifying a period for
(d)      the said citizen shall give an undertaking in writing to the
passport issuing authority that he shall, if required by the court
concerned, appear before it at any time during the continuance in
force of the passport so issued.”
Above notification clearly provides opportunity for grant of
renewal of passport subject to several rider but, however, the citizen
so applying shall have to give                an undertaking in writing to the
passport issuing authority that he shall, if required by the court
concerned, appear before it at any time during the continuance of the
passport so issued. The contingency prescribes herein appears to be
clearly covering the case of petitioner and in the opinion of this Court
there is in fact no restriction in the renewal of the passport or even
grant of passport in the pendency of the criminal proceeding involving
the party concerned which may be a time based renewal or grant.
This Court here takes note of reason of rejection of renewal finds
place in Annexure-2 where it has been clearly mentioned that in the
circumstance stated therein, petitioner’s application cannot be
considered under Tatkal category and at the same time he has been
asked to apply under normal category.                    This Court here through
paragrapgh-5 end of counter affidavit finds the file involving
petitioner is still pending and petitioner on the other hand did not turn
after the communication vide annexure-2 is made.                                 In the
circumstance, this Court observes nothing prevents to the petitioner to
attend to the query           at Annexure-2 and by submitting necessary
undertaking can very well apply for the renewal.
8.     It is at this stage, considering the apprehension of petitioner that
the Passport Authority is not willing to renew the Passport on sole
premises of pendency of criminal cases, this Court here proceeds to
discuss the land of Land applying to such cases as follows:
A).      Looking to the direction of the Hon’ble Apex Court in
the case of Vangala Kasturi Rangacharyulu Vs. Central Bureau of
Investigation, (I.A.No.52346/ 2021 involving Crl.A.No.1343/2017
decided on      27.09.2021, this Court finds here the case involves
conviction of the party involved therein under Sections 120-B,420,
468, 471, 477 A of the Indian Penal Code read with section 13(2)
and 13(1)     of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988. This Court
reading the aforesaid judgment of the Hon’ble Apex Court finds there
has been permission for renewal of passport even after a party is
convicted and       his challenge    to such conviction is pending
consideration vide Criminal Appeal No.1343 of 2017              but in
consideration of I.A.No.52346 of 2021 involving Crl. Appeal No.1343
B) In the case of Navin Kumar Sonkar Vs. Union of India &
Ors., I.L.R. (2018) M.P.677, this Court here finds        the decision
involves charges under Sections 498-A & 406 of I.P.C. vis-à-vis a
refusal of the passport. The High Court involved relying on a decision
in the case of Union of India and Ors. Vs. Charanjit Kaur, AIR 1987
(SC) 1057, considering the request for renewal of the passport directed
the competent authority to issue passport within two weeks but
however upon furnishing an undertaking in terms of Clause 6 (2) (d)
taken note hereinabove.
C)     Similarly, in the case of     Krishna Chiranjeevi Rao
Palukuri Venkata Vs. Union of India Ministry of External Affairs,
represented by its Principal Secretary and Others. 2020 SCC OnLine
Kar 3437, the Karnataka High Court in similar situation involving a
criminal case pending against the applicant therein under Section
120B read with Section 420, 419, 467, 468 and 471 of I.P.C. again
taking into consideration the provision in the Passports Act, 1967
and the Government circular has come to allow the claim of the
petitioner. This decision has also taken into account the decision in
Ashok Khanna Vs. Central Bureau of Investigation, (2019) 265
DLT 614        allowing the application with direction to the Passport
D)     In the case of Hardik Shah Vs. Union of India and
Another, 2021 SCC OnLine MP.2326. Going through the decision,
this Court finds this is also a similar case of refusal of grant of
passport again involving a criminal case against the petitioner therein
involving F.I.R. alleging demand of dowry etc. and there has been
allowing of renewal of passport.
E) In the case of Durydhan Sahoo Vs. Republic of India,
(2011) 50 OCR -587 disposed of by this Court involving offence
under Sections 7.13(2) read with 13(1)(d) of Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988 and there has been direction for grant of passport.
F) In the case of Ballav Kr @ Sriballav Kar Vs. Govt. of India
and another, (2019) 75 OCR-747, this Court also gave permission
for availing the passport.
This Court finds all the above decided cases have the support to
the claim of the petitioner.
9.      In the above facts and legal position, this Court here observes,
in considering the application of the petitioner for renewal of passport,
there is in fact no right appreciation of the matter, there is even no
consideration of the provision in the Act read together with the GSR
570 (E) dated 25.08.1993 coming to the rescues of the petitioner and
there is mechanical disposal of application and illegal asking.
10.                   In the above circumstance, while interfering in the
impugned order at Anenxure-2, particularly this Court permits the
petitioner to submit the required affidavit/undertaking giving therein
the position involving both the                criminal cases and supporting
documents establishing the petitioner is on bail at least one week of
this judgment to the concerned Passport Authority at Bhubaneswar.
In the event of receipt of such affidavit, the Passport Authority at
Bhubaneswar shall do well in completing the issue of renewal of
passport involving the petitioner within a week thereafter.
11.        In the result, the writ petition succeeds. No cost.