a society registered under the provisions
of the Socities Registeration Act,1960 and
a public charitable trust, registered under
the provisions of the Bombay Public
Trusts Act, 1950, having its office at Cricket
2.    Dr. Vijay Patil ( President ) having his
Office at Mumbai Cricket Association,
3.    Amol Kale ( Vice President ) having his
Office at Mumbai Cricket Association,
4.    Sanjay Naik (Secretary ) having his
Office at Mumbai Cricket Association,
5.    Shahalam Shaikh (Jt. Secretary) having his
Office at Mumbai Cricket Association,
6.    Jagdish Acharekar ( Treasurer) having his
Office at Mumbai Cricket Association,
8.    Ajinkya Naik, having his Office at
9.    Gaurav Payyade, having his Office at Mumbai
10. Vihang Sarnaik, having his Office at
11. Abhay Hadap, having his Office at
12. Kaushik Godbole, having his Office at Mumbai
14. Nadim Memon, having his Office at Mumbai
15. Khodadad Yezdigiri, having his Office at Mumbai
16. Samantha Lobotat ( Nominated ) having her
Office at Mumbai Cricket Association,
17. Uday Shinde ( Nominated by Accountant
General ) having his Office at
Mumbai Cricket Association, having her
Office at Mumbai Cricket Association,
Next to Sai Dham Temple, Aasha Nagar,
Ms.Sneha Phene a/w Ms.Garima Mehrotra a/w Ms.Khushi Sharma
for the Petitioner
Mr.A.S.Khandeparkar a/w Mr.Vikas Warerkar i/b M/s.Warerkar and
Warerkar for the Respondent no.1
Mr.Rashmin Khandekar a/w Mr.Anand Mohan i/b Mr.Abhishek Bhat
for Respondent no.19
1      The Petitioner challenges the order passed by the Ethics
Officer (Respondent No.18) thereby (i) barring the Petitioner from
the involvement in the game of the Cricket whatsoever for one year
and 2) from being a part of the governing body of Respondent no.1.
2      The Petitioner claims to be cricketer and has played for Ranji
Trophy, also led the India Under-19 team in the year 1994-95. The
Petitioner is a member of Apex Council of the Mumbai Cricket
Association, nominated by the Indian Cricketers’ Association.
3      Respondent no.19 filed a complaint with Respondent no.18
alleging that the Petitioner was guilty of “conflict of interest” as per
the constitution of Respondent no.1.        According to Respondent
no.19, the Petitioner was appointed as a Coach by Goregaon Sports
Club “GSC” and further, the brother of the Petitioner namely Ramesh
Powar was appointed as a Coach.             The Ethics Officer cum
Ombudsman allowed the complaint thereby removing him from his
post as a member of the Apex Council of MCA. The Petitioner is also
barred for a period of one year from the involvement in the game of
the cricket.
4      Ms.Phene the learned counsel for the Petitioner canvassed the
proposition in a lucid manner. According to the learned counsel, the
Petitioner is well known cricketer who regularly played for the Ranji
Trophy. He also led the Indian Under-19 team that visited Australia
in the year 1994-95. He was a member of the Apex Council of MCA
nominated by the Indian Cricket Association.
5      The finding that there was a conflict of interest on the part of
the Petitioner is arrived at by completely failing to consider Rules 21
and 26 of the Constitution of Respondent no.1. Two allegations were
made against the Petitioner in the Complaint, in a bid to justify that
there was “conflict of interest” (i) that subsequent to the Petitioner
being appointed as an Apex Council member, his brother was
appointed as a Coach for the Mumbai Senior Men’s Cricket team and
(ii) that the Petitioner was cricket coach in GSC while he was the
Apex Council Member. It is submitted by the learned counsel for the
Petitioner that the Petitioner was not required to disclose any of the
aforesaid situations, in as much as there could be said to be no
conflict of interest on his part. As per Rules 21(1) and 26(2)(A)(ii)
(a) and (b) of the Constitution of Respondent no.1, the appointment
of Coaches as also Selection Committees to select players for the
Mumbai teams was exclusively to be decided upon by the Cricket
Improvement Committee (CIC) consisting of former first class
players and the petitioner as an Apex Council member had no power
to decide upon the same.
6      There is no provision in the Constitution of Respondent no.1
which    gives   the   Apex   Council  the   power     to     reject   the
recommendations of the CIC. This aspect considered in light of Rules
21 and 26 which gives the exclusive power to the Cricket
Committee,     Cricket   and   Umpires   Committee        and      Cricket
Improvement Committee to decide on the aspect of appointments of
coaches and selection committees, must necessarily lead to the
conclusion that the Apex Council had no role whatsoever to play in
appointing coaches and / or selection committees.
The finding of the Ethics Officer that the post of an Apex
Council Member “calls for decisions of selection” is completely
unsubstantiated, and is made without reference to the Constitution
provisions including Rules 21 and 26, as such is erroneous and
7      The learned Ethics Officer has completely and without any
reasons, brushed aside the provisions of Rules 21 and 26 by holding
that other contentions raised by the respondent regarding the
Mumbai Cricket Club appointing his brother Ramesh Powar as Coach
on the recommendation of the independent body like CIC is
8      Moreover, the relationship of the petitioner and his brother,
both of whom are well known cricketers, was well known to all
concerned and the petitioner’s brother was appointed inspite of such
knowledge. It is further submitted that the petitioner had clearly
informed the Ethics Officer that within a few days of being appointed
as a coach, he had resigned and subsequently offered the position of
‘Sports Mentor’ to set up and mentor the various sports academics
for the development of sports in the club, which was accepted by
him. The Petitioner clearly provided a letter from the GSC to show
that his appointment as a Sports Mentor was coming to an end on
09.12.2021. Further, even as per Clause 1 of the original contract
by which the petitioner was appointed as a coach by GSC, his term
was to come to an end on 09.12.2021.
9      The principles of natural justice are also violated by the Ethics
Officer. There was certain correspondence of the MCA and / or the
Ethics Officer with the GSC, relied upon by the Ethics Officer to
disbelieve the stand of the petitioner that he resigned as a coach and
appointed as a Sports Mentor. The petitioner was never provided of
any such correspondence or the copies of the same. The fact that the
Ethics Officer has relied upon such correspondence is clear from the
observation made in paragraph 21 and 28 of the order passed by the
Ethics Officer where it is observed that the GSC has not produced the
documents of the resignation of the petitioner as a coach in the GSC
despite correspondence on email by MCA with the said club.
10     The Ethics Officer without any reasons, has held in the
impugned order that the alleged conflict of interest on the part of the
petitioner was intractable.       Rule 38(3) of the Constitution of
respondent no.1 has not been properly construed by the Ethics
Officer. Intractable conflicts are those that cannot be resolved by
disclosure and recusal, and would necessitate the removal of the
individual from a post or position occupied so that the conflict may
cease to exist.
11     Even if it is assumed without admitting that there was any
conflict of interest, a plain reading of Rule 38(3) of the Constitution
makes it clear that the alleged conflict of interest would at the
highest be tractable. In both the instances of conflict of interest
alleged against the petitioner, the complaint was made after the
alleged conflict of interest ceased to exist. When the complaint was
made, the petitioner’s brother was no longer a coach of any Mumbai
Teams, nor was the petitioner a coach at GSC. Moreover, at the time
the impugned order was passed, the petitioner was no longer
associated with the GSC even as a Sports Mentor. Therefore, there
could have been no finding of conflict of interest against the
petitioner. The finding of the Ethics Officer in paragraph 20 of the
impugned       order  that the   non-disclosure    made       the  conflict
intractable, is unreasoned and without considering the clear
definition of tractable and intractable conflict set out in the
constitution of respondent no.1.
12     It is further submitted in alternative by the learned counsel
that removal of an individual from a post or position was
contemplated only so that the conflict can cease to exist and was not
meant to be punitive in nature. Therefore, in the present case, the
removal of the petitioner as an Apex Council member when the
situations alleged to constitute conflict of interest had come to an
end, as also barring the petitioner for a period of one year from being
involved in the game of cricket in any manner, was in violation of
13     It is further submitted that the finding in paragraph 21 that
the respondent has used his position as a Member of the Apex
Council of MCA to get appointed as a Cricket-Head Coach in GSC and
later on, when he realized that it would create a problem, he
portrayed that now he is appointed in the said club as a Mentor in
GSC and for that he was to be paid remuneration of Rs.70,000/- per
month, is purely speculative and baseless inasmuch as there is no
material for arriving at such a conclusion that the petitioner, a
reputed international Cricketer, was appointed as a Mentor by GSC
because of his position as an Apex Council Member.
14     The learned counsel for the petitioner submits that contention
of the respondent that MCA is not a ‘State’ within the meaning of
Article 12 and the Constitution of India and the Writ Petition is not
maintainable, is erroneous. Reliance is placed on the judgment of
the Apex Court in the case of Board of Control for Cricket vs. Cricket
Association of Bihar & Ors1. So also, judgment of Kerala High Court
in the case of S.Sreesanth vs. BCCI & Ors. dated 07.08.2017 in Writ
Petition (C) No.6925 of 2017. The petitioner also relies upon the
judgment of the Jammu and Kashmir High Court in the case of
petitioner also relies upon the decision of the Patna High Court in the
case of Lakhan Raja vs. The Bihar Cricket Association & Ors.
delivered in Civil Writ Jurisdiction Case No.18043 of 2018.
15     The learned Advocate further submits that Ethics Officer is
quasi judicial Authority. Ethics Officer was appointed to reduce the
burden of the courts as has been held by the Apex Court in the case
of BCCI but the Ethics Officer in terms of Rule 39(3) of the
Constitution of respondent no.1, is necessarily required to follow the
principles of natural justice.   Ethics Officer is necessarily quasi-
judicial authority, as such the orders passed by it are amenable to
writ jurisdiction.
16     The learned counsel further submits that the Ethics Officer was
not appointed by the General Body of respondent no.1 as mandated
by its constitution. As per Rule 39 of the Constitution of respondent
no.1,   Ethics Officer is appointed by the Association only at the
Annual General Meeting. In the present case, Ethics Officer deciding
the matter was not appointed at the Annual General Meeting. As
such, the order passed by the Ethics Officer is without jurisdiction.
The objection was raised before the Ethics Officer. Ethics Officer
refrained from deciding the same.      Moreover, there is no reason
given in the impugned order for banning the petitioner for a period
of one year from involvement in the game of the cricket which
prevents from earning his livelihood for a period of one year. No
justification is coming forth whatsoever as to why it was necessary
to ban the petitioner for one year from earning his livelihood.
17     The learned counsel for respondent no.1 and 19 canvassed
their submissions.         According to the learned counsel for these
respondents, Writ Petition is not maintainable inasmuch as the
respondent no.1 is not a State within the meaning of Article 12 of
the Constitution of India. As such, this court would not exercise its
Jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.                        The
learned counsel also relied upon the following judgments of the Apex
1   Zee Telefilms Ltd. Vs. Union of India (2005) 4 SCC 649
dated 19th August 2021 passed by the Hon'ble Bombay High Court at Goa,
in Writ Petition No.123 of 2021)
dated 27th February 2006 in Writ Petition (C) No.272 of 2006 (MANU/GH/
(Order dated 16th March 2022 in Writ Petition No.27180 of 2021 (MANU/
11   Hiken Naresh Sha Vs. Board of Control for Cricket in India (2018 SCC
13   Board of Control for Cricket in India Vs. Cricket Association of Bihar
14   Board of Control for Cricket in India Vs. Cricket Association of Bihar (2016
15   Board of Control for Cricket in India Vs. Cricket Association of Bihar (2018
18     The learned counsel submits that this court would not in its
jurisdiction under Article 226 re-appreciate evidence and review
proportionality / quantum of punishment. Reliance is placed on the
judgment of the Apex Court in the case of Union of India vs.
19     The petitioner’s position of influence was found to be an
instance of conflict of interest under Rule 38(1)(v) of the MCA
Rules, inter alia because the CIC of the MCA who was responsible for
appointment          of    coaches,   functions  under        the     direct
superintendence/oversight of the Apex Council of which the
petitioner was a member.            The CIC is required to report its
recommendations for various positions, including coaches, directly
to the Apex Council of which the petitioner was a member. The
superintendence/management/governance exercised by the Apex
Council over the CIC (including on the appointment of coaches) is
evident from Rule 26(2)(A)(ii)(b); Rule 26(2)(A)(ii)(h); Rule 15(3)
and Rule 15(1)(iii) of the MCA Constitution. The petitioner did not
make any disclosure of conflict of interest. While serving on the
Apex Council, on 03.12.2020 the petitioner had entered into one-
year contract for monetary gain as “Head Cricket Coach” of GSC
(which is a member club of MCA).        The stipulated term of the
contract was 10.12.2020 to 09.12.2021. The petitioner had
admitted his engagement with GSC in the proceedings before the
learned Ethics Officer, as recorded in the Roznama dated
03.12.2021. The petitioner’s engagement with the GSC constitute
conflict of interest under Rule 38(1)(iii) of the MCA constitution.
The petitioner claims that he resigned from the position of Head
Cricket Coach and was appointed as a mentor at GSC is not borne out
of from any document on record nor he provides his date of
resignation as Head Coach of GSC.
20     The impugned order renders a reasoned finding thereafter as
to why the aforesaid conflicts were intractable in nature.          The
removal of the petitioner and debarring for a period of one year from
involvement in the game of cricket is within the scope of the powers
vested in the Ethics Officer under Rule 39(3) of the MCA
constitution. It is submitted that Rule 38 and 39 of the MCA were
part of Lodha Committee Recommendations and confirmed by the
Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of BCCI.
21     It is further contended that the petitioner was appointed as
Head Coach by the GSC but has admittedly made not disclosures to
the MCA and failed to produce any documents of resignation and
reappointment as a mentor with the GSC.            The petitioner has
admitted that as per the contract he was receiving an amount of
Rs.70,000/- and later Rs.1,00,000/- per month from the GSC which
he never disclosed to the MCA. This arrangement comes within the
ambit of 38(1)(iii) as he has engaged in a professional engagement
with a third party as a Head Coach in the GSC. The petitioner has
failed to make out any case for entertaining the Writ Petition.
22     We have considered the submissions canvassed by the learned
counsel for the parties. So also, gone through the impugned order.
23     The petitioner has raised the issue about the appointment of
the Ethics Officer cum Ombudsman. It is contended that the Ethics
Officer is not appointed in the Annual General Meeting as required.
The Ethics Officer cum Ombudsman is appointed by respondent no.1.
The same is not a disputed fact.        None of the members of the
respondent no.1 has disputed the appointment of Ethics Officer cum
Ombudsman. It is also not the case of the petitioner that the Ethics
Officer cum Ombudsman does not possess the necessary qualification
to act as an Ethics Officer cum Ombudsman. As such, objection of the
petitioner that Ethics Officer cum Ombudsman is not competent
having not been appointed in the Annual General Body Meeting need
not be considered in the present matter.
24      Before we proceed to deal with the submissions of the
respective learned counsel, it would be necessary and relevant to
reproduce the relevant provisions.
(1) There shall be an Apex Council for the MCA which shall be
primarily responsible for the governance of the affairs of the
(2)     The Apex Council shall comprise of 17 Councillors of
whom 5 shall be the elected Office Bearers as per Rule 6 and the
remaining 12 shall be:
(a)       Nine to be elected by the Ordinary Members of the
(b)       Two, one male and one female, to be nominated by
the Cricket Player's Association from amongst those of its
members who hail from the jurisdiction of MCA
(c)       One to be nominated by Accountant General of
Maharashtra from among the serving senior functionaries
of the office, co-terminus with the nominee's tenure;
(3)     A person shall be disqualified from continuing as
Councillor if he or she;
iii.      ls declared to be insolvent, or of unsound mind;
iv.       Is a Minister or a government servant or holds
public office except for the nominee under Rule 14(2)(c)];
v.        Holds any office or post in a sports or athletic
association or federation apart from cricket;
vi.       Has been an Office Bearer of the MCA or any other
state association for a cumulative period of 9 years or office
bearer of the BCCI for a cumulative period of 9 years;
vii.      Has been charged by a Court of Law for having
committed any criminal offence i.e. an order framing
charges has been passed by court of law having competent
(4)     Each of the elected Councilors shall have a term of 3
years in office, subject to a maximum of 3 Terms on the Apex
Council. A councillor who has held any post for two consecutive
terms either in a State Association or in BCCI (or combination of
both) shall not be eligible to contest any further election without
completing a cooling off period of three years. During the
cooling off period, such a councillor shall not be a member of
Governing Council or of any committee whatsoever of MCA or
the BCCI or of any other State Association. The expression
"Councillor"       should     not    be     permitted       to    be
circumvented by being a member of any other committee or of
the Governing Council in MCA or in BCCI or in any other state
association as the case may be.
(5)     No individual, including one filling up a vacancy under
Sub-Rule (9) below shall be a Councillor for more than 9 years.
In the event of a Councillor completing 9 years before the expiry
of his term, he shall cease to hold office on completion of 9
years.
(6)     No nominated Councillor shall have more than one term
of 3 years.
(7)     Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in these
Rules, a former President of the MCA shall not be entitled to be
elected or nominated to the Apex Council in any capacity except
for a second and final term as President, subject to sub-Rules (4)
and (5) above.
(8)     No Councillor, once elected, shall hold any office in any
other Associatioņ/s or BCCI. The Ordinary Members shall take
steps to fill up the vacancy so created immediately.
(9)     Any vacancy in the Apex Council due to death,
resignation, insolvency, unsoundness of mind, nomination to
the BCCI or other disqualification shall be filled up for the
remaining period:
a.       In the case of an elected Councillor, by elections at
a Special General Body meeting of the MCA convened by
the Secretary for that purpose within 45 days;
b.       In the case of a nominated Councillor, in the same
manner as prescribed for the respective nominee in Rule
10       For the purposes of the Societies Registration Act, the
governing body of the MCA shall be the Apex Council.
(1)      The affairs of the Association shall be governed by the
Apex Council and its framework of governance shall:
i. Enable strategic guidance of the entity;
ii.      Ensure efficient monitoring of management;
ii.      Ensure the performance of the respective roles,
responsibilities and powers of the CEO, Managers, Cricket
Committees and Standing Committees, except the
iv.      Ensure a distribution and balance-of authority so
that no single individual has unfettered powers;
(2)      The Apex Council shall have all the powers of the General
Body and authority and discretion to do all acts and things
except such acts as by these rules are expressly directed or
required to be done by the General Body. Exercise of such
powers, authorities and discretion shall be subject to the control
and regulation of the General Body. No regulation shall
retrospectively; invalidate any act of the Apex Council which
was otherwise valid.
(3) The Apex Council shall exercise superintendence over the
CEO, the Cricket Committees and the Standing Committees in
the discharge of their duties generally, and in particular, in
accordance with any general or special direction of the General
Body, except for the Governing Council of the T20
Mumbai League whenever which is directly accountable to the
(4)     In addition to and without prejudice to the generality of
powers conferred directly or by necessary implication under
these Rules and regulations and the Memorandum of
Association, the Apex Council shall exercise the powers
and perform the duties hereafter mentioned:
a. To control, permit and regulate all aspects regarding
visits of invitee teams in area controlled by MCA, visits of
teams within India and outside India and to settle terms on
which such visits shall be conducted.
b. ……..
(1)     The management of cricketing matters such as
selections, coaching and evaluation of team performance shall
be exclusively handled by the Cricket Committees comprising
only of former first class Players as set out in Rule 26
(2)     The management, evaluation and selection of umpires
shall be done by the Umpires Committee comprising only of past
BCCI panel Umpires as set out in Rule 27.
(3)     The reports of the Cricket and Umpires Committees shall
be sent to the CEO for being forwarded to the Apex Council, but
the CEO shall not in any' way be involved in the preparation,
approval or amendment of the same.
(1)     A Conflict Of Interest may take any of the following forms
as far as any individual associated with the MCA is concerned:
(i)       Direct or Indirect Interest: When the MCA, a
Member, the IPL or a Franchisee enter into contractual
arrangements with entities in which the individual
concerned or his/her relative, partner or close associate
has an interest. This is to include cases where family
members, partners or close associates are in positions that
may,      or    may    be     seen    to     compromise      an
individual's participation, performance and discharge of
roles.
A is an Office Bearer of the MCA when it enters into a
broadcast contract with a company where A’s son B is
employed. A is hit by Direct Conflict of Interest.
C is a Member of the IPL/T20 Mumbai League
Governing Council. The IPL/T20 Mumbai League enters
into a contract with a new franchisee, the Managing
Director of which is C's partner in an independent
commercial venture. C is hit by Indirect Conflict of
D is the Office Bearer of a State Association. D's wife E
has shares in an IPL/T20 Mumbai League Franchisee
which enters into a stadium contract with the State
Association. D is hit by Indirect Conflict of Interest.
F is President of the MCA. His son-in-law is a; Team
Official of a Franchisee. F is hit by Conflict of Interest.
G is an employee of the MCA. His wife runs a catering
agency that is engaged by the MCA. G is hit by Conflict of
(ii) Roles compromised: When the individual holds two
separate or distinct posts or positions under the MCA, a
Member, the IPL/T20 Mumbai League or the Franchisee,
the functions of which would require the one to be beholden
to the other, or in opposition thereof.
Illustration 1: A is the Coach of a team. He is also Coach
of an IPL/T20 Mumbai League Franchisee. A is hit by
Conflict of Interest.
Illustration 2: B-is Secretary of the BCCI. He is also
President of the State Association. B is hit by Conflict of
Illustration 3: C is the Vice President of the BCCI. He is
also President of a State Association and member of a
Standing Committee. C is hit by Conflict of Interest
Illustration 4: D is a Selector. He is also coach of an IPL/
T20 Mumbai League franchisee. D is hit by Conflict of
(iii) Commercial conflicts: When the individual enters into
endorsement contracts or other professional engagements
with third parties, the discharge of which would
compromise the individual's primary obligation to the game
or allow for a perception that the purity of the game stands
compromised.
Illustration 1: A runs a cricket academy. He is appointed
as a selector. A is hit by Conflict of Interest.
Illustration 2: B is a MCA commentator. He also runs a
sports management company which contracts members
of the team. B is hit by Confict of Interest.
Illustration 3: C is a selector. He is contracted to write a
column on a tour that the national team is on. C is hit by
Conflict of Interest.
Illustration 4: D is a team captain. He is also co-owner of
a sports management agency, which is contracted to
manage other team members. D is hit by Confilict of
Illustration 5: E is a member of the IPL Governing
Council. He is engaged by a cricket broadcaster to act as
an IPL commentator. E is hit by Conflict of Interest.
(iv) Prior relationship: When the individual has a direct or
indirect independent commercial engagement with a
vendor or service provider in the past, which is now to be
engaged by or on behalf of the MCA, its Member, the IPL or
the Franchisee.
Illustration 1: A is President of the MCA, Prior to his
taking office, he has been engaged professionally for his
services by a firm B. After A becomes President, B is
appointed as the official consultants of the MCA. A is hit
by Conflict of Interest.
Illustration 2: B is the Secretary of a State Association.
Prior to his election, he ran a firm C, specializing in
electronic boundary hoardings.             Upon becoming
Secretary, the contract for the Association's stadium
hoardings is granted to C. B is hit by Conflict of Interest.
Illustration 3: D is the Commissioner of the lPL. Before he
came into this office he used to engage as his auditor for
his business. After becoming Commissioner, E is
appointed as auditor to the IPL. D is hit by Conflict of
Illustration 4: F is the Captain of an IPL team, and G is
the teams manager. When F is made Captain of the
national team, G is appointed as the national team's
manager. F is hit by Conflict of Interest.
(v) Position of influence: When the individual occupies a
post that calls for decisions of governance, management or
selection to be made, and where a friend, relative or close
affiliate is in the zone of consideration or subject to such
decision-making, control or management. Also, when the.
individual holds any stake, voting rights or power to
influence the decisions of a franchisee/ club/ team that
participates in the commercial league(s) under MCA;
Illustration 1: A is a selector. His son is in the zone of
consideration for selection. A is hit by Conflict of Interest.
Illustration 2: B is the Secretary of a State Association.
He also runs a cricket academy in the State. B is hit by
Conflict of Interest.
Illustration 3: C is an umpire. His daughter D is a
member of a team which is playing a match in which C
officiates. C is hit by Conflict of Interest.
Illustration 4: E is the President of a State Association
and his company F owns 12 cricket clubs in the State
from which probables are selected for the State team. E is
hit by Conflict of Interest.
EXPLANATION: The illustrations which refer to a President /
Secretary / Vice-President may be read as illustrations
referring to any other Office Bearer, and also to the members
of the Apex Council, the Governing Council and the
(2)     Within a period of 15 days of taking any office under the
MCA, every individual shall disclose in writing to the Apex
Council any existing or potential event that may be deemed to
cause a Conflict of Interest, and the same shall be uploaded on
the website of the MCA. The failure to issue a complete
disclosure, or any partial or total suppression thereof would
render the individual open to disciplinary action which may
include termination and removal without benefits. It is clarified
that       a     declaration       does       not      lead     to   a
presumption that in fact a questionable situation exists, but is
merely for information and transparency.
(3)     A Conflict of Interest may be either Tractable or
a. Tractable conflicts are those that are resolvable or
permissible or excusable through recusal of the individual
concerned and/or with full disclosure of the interest
b. Intractable conflicts are those that cannot be resolved
through disclosure and recusal, and would necessitate the
removal of the individual from a post or position occupied
so that the conflict can cease to exist; Explanation: In
illustration (iii) of Rule 38(1)(i), if the wife held 51%
shares, the conflict will be treated as intractable. If the wife
holds 3% shares, whether the conflict is tractable or
intractable will have to be decided by the Ethics Officer on
the facts of the case. If the wife holds only 100 shares out of
1 crore shares, a disclosure of the same may be sufficient.
(4)     It is clarified that no individual may occupy more than
one of the following posts at a single point of time except where
prescribed under these Rules;
b) Selector / Member of Cricket Committee
e) Match Official
j)Any person who is in governance, management or
employment of a Franchisee / BCCI any other State
k) Member of a Standing Committee
n)Service Provider (Legal, Financial etc.)
o)Contractual entity (Broadcast, Security, Contractor, etc.)
p) Owner of a Cricket Academy
(5)     As far as incumbents are concerned, every disclosure
mandated under Sub-Rule (3) may be made within 90 days of
the Effective Date.
1) The Association shall appoint an Ethics Officer at the Annual
General Meeting for the purpose of guidance and resolution in
instances of conflict of interest. The Ethics Officer shall be a
retired Judge of a High Court so appointed by the Association
after obtaining his/her consent and on terms as determined by
the MCA in keeping with the dignity and stature of the office.
The term of an Ethics Officer shall be one year, subject to a
maximum of 3 terms in office.
2) Any instance of Conflict of Interest may be taken cognizance
of by the Ethics Officer:
b. By way of a complaint in writing to the official postal or
email address; or
c. On a reference by the Apex Council;
3) After considering the relevant factors and following the
principles of natural justice, the Ethics Officer may do any of the
a. Declare the conflict as Tractable and direct that:
i. The person declare the Conflict of Interest as per Sub-
ii. The interest that causes the conflict be relinquished;
iii. The person recuse from discharging the obligation or
duty so vested in him or her.
b. Declare the conflict as Intractable and direct that:
i.     The person be suspended or removed from his or
ii.    Any suitable monetary or other penalty be
iii. The person be barred for a specified period or for life
from involvement with the game of cricket;
The Ethics Officer is wholly empowered to also direct any
additional measures or restitution as is deemed fit in the
circumstances.
25      The Ethics Officer cum Ombudsman has observed that the act
of the present petitioner taking up the post of Head-Cricket Coach in
GSC can certainly be perceived to bring the interest of the
respondent in conflict with the interest of the game of cricket or
interest of the association and his act can also give rise to
apprehension of bias, lack of objectivity or monetary benefits. It is
also observed by the Ethics Officer that the respondent was getting
monetary benefit is clear from the contract signed with GSC. It is
also observed by the Ethics Officer in the impugned judgment that it
is clear that on 09.02.2021 when Ramesh Powar the brother of the
present petitioner was appointed by MCA as a Coach of Mumbai
Senior Team for the Season 2020-21, the petitioner was then and
even today is the member of the Apex Council of MCA. The fact that
the petitioner was an Apex Council Member when Ramesh Pawar
was appointed as a Coach, is not disputed and it goes to show that
the respondent had conflict of interest as stated in Rule 38(1) of
MCA.        The petitioner after being Apex Council Member on
04.10.2019, he should have made a declaration as required under
26      The learned Ombudsman has observed in paragraph 17 and 18
“17. Other contentions raised by the Respondent regarding
the MCA appointing his brother Ramesh Powar as Coach on the
recommendation of the independent body like Cricket
Improvement Committee is immaterial. What is material is the
conduct of the respondent in not maintaining transparency
which is seen from the fact that he did not declare his conflict of
interest on becoming Apex Council member. What is paramount
in the Constitution is ‘Transparency’ and the Respondent has
shown total lack of Transparency.
18.    It is an admitted fact that Mr. Ramesh Powar, the
brother of the Respondent had been appointed as coach by MCA
for a period from 21-8-2017 to 31-05-2018. Thus, when the
Respondent was appointed as Apex Council Member on 4th
October 2019, he knew that there is a possibility, if not
certainty of his brother Mr. Ramesh Powar being appointed
again     as   Coach     with   MCA     in    the      year      2019
or thereafter. In such case the Respondent should have filed his
Declaration as required under Rule 38 (2) of the Memorandum
of Association of MCA dated 30-9-2019. Rule 38 (2) for easy
reference is reproduced below:
(2) Within a period of 15 days of taking any office
under the MCA, every Individual shall disclose in
writing to the Apex Council any existing or
potential event that may be deemed to cause a
Conflict of Interest and the same shall be uploaded
on the website of the MCA. The failure to issue a
complete disclosure, or any partial or total suppression
thereof        would       render       the          Individual
open to disciplinary action which may include
termination and removal without benefits. It is
clarified that a declaration does not lead to a
presumption that in fact a questionable situation
exists,    but    is    merely    for    information         and
transparency.”
27      Respondent also did not make any disclosure of he being
appointed Head Cricket Coach by the GSC. The petitioner failed to
produce his resignation letter as a Head Coach. It is not disputed
that the petitioner was getting remuneration from GSC. It is also
observed by the Ethics Officer that the petitioner was also in a
position of influence as visualized under Rule 38(1)(5) of the MCA
28     The Apex Council is primarily responsible for the governance
of the affairs of the Association.
29     Rule 15 of the Constitution provides that the affairs of the
Association shall be governed by the Apex Council and its
framework of governance extends to ensure the performance of
respective roles, responsibilities and powers of the CEO, Managers,
Cricket Committees Standing Committees. Under section 15(3), the
Apex Council exercises superintendence over the CEO, Cricket
Committees and the Standing Committees in the discharge of their
30     Under section 21, the Management of cricketing matters such
as selections, coaching and evaluation of team performance is
exclusively handled by the Cricket Committees. Prima donna, the
contention of the Petitioner is that the brother of the Petitioner was
appointed as a Head Coach of the MCA by the Cricket Committee and
the Apex Council has no role to play.
31     Perusal of section 26(2)(A), the CIC is entrusted with the
function and the responsibility enumerated in section 26(2)(A)(ii).
One of the function of CIC is to appoint the Head Coach of each of the
Mumbai teams, so also recommend any outstanding player to the
CEO, to allow him to play in any ongoing selection match, with
special permission, for assessment of his class and performance and
under sub clause (h) of 26(2)(A)(ii), report their recommendations
to the Apex Council.    In view of that, it would be clear that the
selection and appointment of Head Coach of each of the Mumbai
Teams, has to be reported to the Apex Council. The Petitioner was a
member of the Apex Council and his brother was appointed as a
Head Coach of the Mumbai Cricket Association.
32     The Petitioner did not declare his conflict of interest and
became the Apex Council Member. The Petitioner did not maintain
the transparency as is held by the Ethics Officer cum Ombudsman.
The Petitioner was appointed as an Apex Council Member on
04.10.2019. Earlier also, the brother of the Petitioner was a coach
appointed by MCA for a period 21.05.2017 to 31.05.2018 and he
knew that his brother was in the zone of consideration. The said fact
was not disclosed. The Petitioner ought to have filed his declaration
as required under section 38(2). Under section 38(1)(v) a person
occupies a position of influence if he occupies a post that calls for
decisions of governance, management or selection to be made, and
where a friend, relative or close affiliate is in the zone of
consideration or subject to such decision-making, control or
management.      Also, when the individual holds any stake, voting
rights or power to influence the decisions of a franchisee / club /
team that participates in the commercial league under MCA.
33     It is held by the Ethics Officer cum Ombudsman that the
Petitioner was appointed as a Head Coach of GSC for remuneration.
GSC is a member of the MCA. Its team would participate in the
tournament conducted by the MCA. The GSC being a member of the
MCA would have a right to participate in the elections to be held of
34     Moreover, being a member of the Apex Council, a person would
be in a position of influence in matters of selection as the CIC has to
report its recommendation to the Apex Council.            In view of the
aforesaid facts, it cannot be said that the decision arrived at by the
Ethics Officer cum Ombudsman is perverse for this court to
35     The other limb of the arguments of the learned counsel for the
Petitioner is that there was no reason to debar the Petitioner from
involvement in the game of cricket for a period of one year.
36     Under section 39(3)(b), Ethics Officer has a power to suspend
or remove a person from his post and also to debar for a specific
period or for life for involvement in the game of cricket in case the
conflict is intractable. The Ethics Officer has come to the conclusion
that the conflict is intractable. The conflict could not have been
resolved through disclosure and recusal. The conflict of interest of
the respondent is not tractable. There is no full disclosure. If the
petitioner would have made disclosure then conflict of interest of
disclosure may have been tractable. Reasons are given by the Ethics
Officer in that regard.     The Ethics Officer has not debarred the
Petitioner for life from involvement in the game of cricket but for a
limited period of one year. No further penalty is imposed upon the
Petitioner though the Ethics Officer had powers to do so under
section 39(3)(b)(ii).    No further disqualification is also directed
against the Petitioner.     It cannot be said that the punishment
imposed and / or the order passed is shockingly disproportionate for
this court to intervene.
37     As on merits, we have not interfered with the findings of the
Ethics Officer cum Ombudsman.            We have not considered the
objection of the Respondents regarding maintainability of the Writ
Petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
38     In light of the above, no interference is called for.
39     Writ Petition is disposed of. No costs.