1. The case is called out through video conferencing.
2. Learned counsel for the bail-applicant Sri Jitendra Singh, Advocate
and learned A.G.A. for the State Sri Prem Prakash, Advocate are
connected through video conferencing in virtual hearing of the case.
3. The present bail-application is moved on behalf of accused-
applicant- Shameem Ahmad, who is involved in Case Crime No.209
of 2020, under Sections 306/511/109/506/504 of I.P.C., registered at
4. Reading over the first information report lodged on 20.10.2020,
learned counsel for the bail applicant submits the prosecution case, as
emerging from the first information report and the statements of the
witnesses that the informant-wife of the deceased, who belongs to
Kolkata (West Bengal), resides from 10-12 years as a tenant in House
No.155, Diamond Dairy, Udaiganj, District Lucknow which is owned
by one Zaved Khan, the co-accused. The landlord Zaved Khan wanted
them to vacate the house, therefore, her husband-the deceased
(Surendra Chakraborty) filed a suit against him for harassing them.
On 19.10.2020 in the afternoon, Zaved Khan came to the house,
started abusing her husband in filthy language and asked him to
vacate the house. When her husband told him his being in financial
trouble and inability to vacate the house, the landlord Zaved Khan
scoldingly asked him to set himself ablazed and die, if he is not able
to vacate the accommodation. However, on prayer and request made
by the complainant and other people, the landlord Zaved Khan went
back. Afterwards, her husband under humiliation became depressed
and so sad that started thinking about suicide.
5. It has been further alleged that journalists Shamim (the present
accused-applicant) and Naushad Ahmad (the co-accused), contacted
her husband (deceased) and induced him to set himself ablazed into
fire just in front of "Vidhan Sabha Bhawan" so that they may filmed
the incident by videography and telecast the same on television. If it
happens, the matter, so as planned will get highlighted and no one will
force him to evict him from his house. Under the aforesaid
inducement, given by both the accused i.e. the accused-applicant-
Shamim and co-accused, Naushad Ahmad brought her husband (the
deceased) in front of "Vidhan Sabha Bhawan", where her husband, as
induced and planned, poured oil on him and lit fire, the accused
journalists were making video of the incident. The policemen present
there, ran to save her husband by covering him with a blanket and
took him to a hospital where he subsequently died on 24.10.2020.
6. Learned counsel for the bail-applicant in the above context argued
that after registering first information report, police started
investigation and the statements of complainant and witnesses were
recorded, wherein prosecution finds no support. Learned counsel
further submitted that the applicant and the complainant do not know
each other neither they have any relation nor he is any beneficiary, if
the said house is vacated, the landlord Zaved Khan will only be
7. Learned counsel further submitted that the name of present
accused-applicant has been arrayed in the column of accused only
when he tried to help the deceased on the spot of incident with the
help of police subsequently made a video for evidence as he is a
journalist by profession and passing thereby at the time of incident.
Learned counsel further submitted that it is a settled principle of law
that a passing reference been made against any person would not be
sufficient to invite the penalty under the provisions of Section 306
8. Learned counsel further submitted that in order to constitute
abatement for suicide, there must be course of conduct or any such
actions of intentionally aiding or facilitating another person to end life
but the perusal of the F.I.R. does not disclose any such evidence or
allegation which could invite the penalty under Section 306 of the
9. Learned counsel further submitted that in order to constitute
abatement, intentional involvement of a person to aid or instigate
commission of suicide is imperative and any severance or absence of
any of these constituent would mitigate against the said indictment.
10. Learned counsel further submitted that there is no evidence to the
effect that the applicant had indulged in any such instigation or
abatement which could invite the allegations leveled against the
applicant for abating to commit suicide and as a matter of fact, no
such statement of deceased has been recorded during his treatment in
hospital nor in front of any magistrate.
11. Learned counsel further submitted that the applicant is co-editor of
Daily Hindi Newspaper in Janma Prasaran Times and RTI Activist and
due to this very reason so many officials were annoyed with him,
therefore, he has falsely been implicated in the present case.
12. Learned counsel further submitted that no overt act of abating or
any omission on part of the applicant has been leveled against the
applicant, the applicant is not a previous convict by any court of law
and for no fault of him, he is languishing in jail since 21.10.2020.
However, learned counsel further submitted that the applicant is ready
to furnish adequate and reliable sureties for his release and has a
permanent residence, therefore, there is no possibility of his
13. It is also argued by learned counsel for the bail-applicant that the
accused-applicant is entitled to be given parity as the co-accused,
Zaved who was landlord, has already been granted bail by the
Sessions Court vide order dated 31.10.2020.
14. Protesting the bail plea as argued by learned counsel for the bail-
applicant, learned A.G.A. for the State submitted that accused-
applicant was in regular touch with the deceased and he has enticed
the deceased to commit suicide as it is revealed from the call records
of the accused-applicant, moreover, three mobile phones are also
recovered from him. Learned A.G.A. further submitted that the
deceased was immediately carried to the Civil Hospital from where,
he was referred to Sips Hospital but subsequently he died on
24.10.2020 during his treatment.
15. Learned A.G.A. for the State further submitted that the present
accused-applicant is a person of mischievous character. On the basis
of instructions received to him, he has submitted that it is sufficient to
show the instinct of the accused that he will affect adversely the
witnesses and the evidences against him, if released on bail. Learned
A.G.A. further submitted that even after the lodging of first
information report, nature and behavior of the accused-applicant are
enough to dis-entitle him for grant of bail at this stage.
16. Learned A.G.A. further submitted that the learned trial court need
be directed to proceed expeditiously so as the complainant's evidences
alongwith other material witness of the fact are recorded so that the
complainant may be saved from being affected adversely by reason of
long drawn trial.
17. Having heard the arguments of learned counsel for the accused
and learned A.G.A. for the State, perused the relevant documents
available on record. The identity card of the accused has been
presented on behalf of the accused. Thus, the fact alleged in the F.I.R.
that he had contacted the deceased as a T.V. journalist is an accepted
18. The dispute of tenancy between the deceased and his building
owner, Zaved was pending in the Civil Court, this fact is also known
from the evidence collected by the prosecution. The fact mentioned in
the F.I.R. that Zaved was insisting on paying the rent due or vacating
the house and when the deceased refused to do so as usual citing his
financially tight condition, angered Zaved, abused in anger and said
that pay the rent otherwise leave the house or die by burning
somewhere. Immediately after this incident, the deceased did not
commit the incident of setting himself on fire, so that it can be called
an abatement to suicide. The incident of self immolation occurred
after five days on 24.10.2020.
19. The journalist keeps an eye on the anticipated or sudden events
happening in the society and brings them to the information of all the
people through various news media without any tampering, this is his
20. A journalist is not expected to dramatize a sensational and
horrifying incident and make news by putting his actor in pitiable
condition in danger of death.
21. In this case, from the statement of the F.I.R. and the statements of
the oral witnesses which have been recorded during the investigation,
prima facie it is established that the accused tempted the deceased that
if he would try to commit suicide in front of the Legislative Assembly
building, by making a video of him, he will telecast the same on
television with matter of misbehavior of Zaved with him. After this
Zaved will not be able to evict him out from the house.
22. During the investigation as electronic evidence, the investigator
has seized the video camera and film from the accused, evidence of
independent witness, an electronic engineer named Kuldeep Singh
posted in control room of Secretariat stated on the basis of C.C.T.V.
installed on the gate no.4, given statement which is annexure no.7 to
the counter affidavit, which discloses, according to the plan, the
deceased reached in front of the Legislative Assembly building in
front of the gate no.3, stood at middle of the road, put oil on himself
and set it on fire, meanwhile, a man identified as accused was seen
recording the film of the deceased even prior to this incident of his
self burning. Instead of saving the grievously burning deceased, the
accused kept on filming it till he was badly scorched. Policemen were
also seen trying to rescue the deceased from burning in the
confiscated film.
23. In these evidences, the case of the prosecution against the accused
is prima facie established that he told the deceased, living in mental
and financial distress, to the temptation and plan to get rid of them. He
was present with the deceased at the scene of the incident and filming
it. Therefore, the claim of his innocence by the accused is prima facie
not established.
24. So far as the grant of bail to the co-accused, Zaved is concerned,
the benefit of parity could not be given in the case of present accused-
applicant because in case of Zaved, only a passing remark to go and
die by burning was made on 19.10.2020. The deceased has not
committed suicide in pursuance of and under the effect of that remark.
In case of Zaved, no overt act in furtherance of his inducement, is
done to facilitate or to compel the deceased to commit suicide. The
suicide was committed on 24.10.2020, only after the plan suggested
by the present accused-applicant.
25. So far as the personal liberty of the accused and his right to be
released on bail is concerned, it is not valid in violation or in breach of
fundamental right of the other party. The complainant, who is already
mentally distressed by her husband's financial condition, who further
committed suicide under the influence of the accused, if the accused is
made free, she would be in danger. She is the main witness in the
case. For fair trial, the complainant would need a completely fear-free
environment as a witness. She has the right to have a fair trial of the
26. The criminal details of the accused are given in the counter
"1. Case Crime No.171/1999, under Sections 504, 506 and 427 of
I.P.C. registered at Police Station Cantt., District Lucknow.
2. Case Crime No.478/1999, under Sections 3/25 of Arms Act,
registered at Police Station Mahanagar, District Lucknow.
3. Case Crime No.21/2000, under Sections 160 of I.P.C.,
registered at Police Station Hussainganj, District Lucknow.
4. Case Crime No.22/2000, under Sections 4/25 of Arms Act,
registered at Police Station Hussainganj, District Lucknow.
5. Case Crime No.27/2000, under GOONDAS Act, registered at
6. Case Crime No.494/2000, under Section 110 of G. Act,
registered at Police Station Hussainganj, District Lucknow.
7. Case Crime No.86/2004, under Section 110 of G. Act,
registered at Police Station Hussainganj, District Lucknow.
8. Case Crime No.117/2010, under Section 110 of G. Act,
registered at Police Station Hussainganj, District Lucknow.
9. Case Crime No.275/2010, under Section 110 of G. Act,
registered at Police Station Hussainganj, District Lucknow.
10. Case Crime No.330/2013, under Sections 323, 504, 427 of
I.P.C., registered at Police Station Hazratganj, District Lucknow.
11. Case Crime No.228/2014, under Sections 386, 506 of I.P.C.,
registered at Police Station Wazirganj, District Lucknow."
27. These criminal details also cast doubt on him that he will take
undue advantage of his immunity and his status on bail.
28. Factors laid down in various judgment of Hon'ble the Supreme
Court for grant or refusal of bail are as follows:-
"(i) Whether there was a prima facie or reasonable ground to
believe that the accused had committed the offence;
(iii) severity of the punishment in the event of a conviction;
(iv) danger of the accused absconding or fleeing, if granted bail;
(v) character, behavior, means, position and standing of the
(vi) likelihood of repetition of the offence;
(vii) reasonable apprehension of the witnesses being influenced;
(viii) danger of justice being thwarted by grant of bail."
29. Hon'ble the Supreme Court further in the case of Sudha Singh Vs.
The State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr. reported in AIR 2021 SC 2149
"12. There is no doubt that liberty is important, even that of a
person charged with crime but it is important for the courts to
recognise the potential threat to the life and liberty of
victims/witnesses, if such accused is released on bail."
30. The application of the bail moved on behalf of accused-applicant
on the basis of above discussions is rejected.
31. The accused-applicant also has right of speedy trial. It is informed
by learned A.G.A., charge sheet has already been submitted before the
trial court. The officers entrusted with the prosecution i.e. Sri Manoj
Tripathi, D.G.C. (Criminal), Lucknow and Sri Surya Bhan, Joint
Director (Prosecution), Lucknow is directed to ensure the prosecution
witness before the trial court expeditiously and get them examined so
that the trial court may be able to decide the case expeditiously within
a prescribed period of one year.
32. Learned trial court below is also directed to expeditiously proceed
with the trial and conclude the same within a reasonable period of one
year from the date, certified copy of the order is placed before it. In
deciding the case on merit, the trial court need not to be swayed away
with any observation made by this Court in the order.
33. Learned Senior Registrar is directed to communicate the order of
the Court with regard to the expeditious disposal to both, the officers
of the police department and the trial court also.
34. The present accused-applicant may have right to avail remedy of
bail afresh after expiry of aforesaid period.