1.          Appellant’s application under Section 16 of the
Railway Claims Tribunal Act, 1987 claiming compensation for
injuries sustained due to accidental fall from, the train
carrying passengers, was rejected by Railways Claims
Tribunal, vide judgment and order dated 17 th March, 2009.
Thus, this Appeal    under Section 23 of the Railway Claims
2.           Appellant would claim, that, he fell down from a
local train, on 25th January, 2004 at around 17.00 hrs at Dadar
Railway Station due to heavy rush of passenger in the
compartment. As a result, he sustained serious injuries, to
spine and pelvis and had undergone six surgeries, at LTMG
Hospital, Mumbai. While travelling, he was carrying with him
a valid season ticket, bearing no.62490200, with journey
extension tickets, Mulund to CSMT and CSMT to Mulund.
Appellant would therefore claim, he was “bonafde passenger”
In support of the claim, he had produced on record, season
ticket (Pass), journey extension tickets, discharge card of
LTMG hospital, report of A.R. Shaikh, Railway Police Constable
446. That being so, he claimed compensation in the sum of
Rs.4,00,000/-. The claim was opposed by the respondents-
Railway, contending that, appellant had sustained injuries due
to his own act and negligence, and therefore claim was not
admissible, in absence of “untoward incident” within the
meaning of Section 123(c) of the Act of 1989.     Respondents,
relied on the evidence of Mr. Jagtap, Deputy Station Manager,
Dadar Railway Station and Station Masters’ Memo at Exhibit-
R1, to contend that, appellant was knocked down by BL-25 dn
(Badlapur train) at Kilometer 8/25 near platform no.4 at
Dadar, while tresspassing the front edge of the platform which
itself was an offence punishable under Section 147 of the
Railways Act. Next ground taken up and urged while denying
the claim, was that, appellant was not “bonafde passenger”.
3.          The Tribunal, upon appreciating the evidence held
that, appellant was not the, “bonafde passenger”, reason being,
although he was carrying and possessing the valid ‘Pass’
(season ticket) and journey extension tickets, for want of
identity card, season ticket could not have been held valid and
therefore applicant was a passenger travelling without ticket.
The next fnding recorded by the Tribunal is that, a Station
Master’s memo dated 25th January, 2004 (Exhibit-R1) in no
uncertain terms, reveals that, appellant was knocked down by
BL-25 dn train, near platform no.4 of Dadar Railway Station
and therefore report of A.R. Shaikh, Constable stating,
appellant fell from the train, required no consideration and
accordingly kept it out of consideration.        Consequently,
Tribunal concluded that, applicant was travelling without
proper pass and in absence of “untoward incident” the claim
was not admissible, and thus rejected the claim by judgment
and order dated 17th March, 2009. Hence, this Appeal.
4.          Heard learned counsel for the parties. Perused the
records and proceedings.
5.            Expression “passenger” as defned under Section
2(28) of Act of 1989 means, “a person travelling with a valid
pass or ticket. Expression “ticket” is not defned under the Act.
However, term “pass” defned under Section 2(28) does not
include ticket. Thus, to be understood, ticket includes “season
ticket”, which is popularly known as “Pass”. Herein, appellant
was travelling in the passenger train with valid and proper
season ticket no.6249200 with journey extension tickets and
this fact was not in dispute.            Inspite of     it, Tribunal held,
appellant was travelling “without ticket” and thus concluded,
applicant was not a “bonafde passenger”. Question is, whether,
for want of identity card, season ticket, carried and possessed
by applicant-passenger, was invalid, and as such, was not
“Bonafde Passenger”?              In the context of these facts,
respondents relied on instructions issued by the Ministry of
Railways. Instructions stipulate that;
“It is necessary for the passenger to produce the identity card
alongwith the season ticket, otherwise the season ticket will be
invalid and passenger will be treated without ticket. It is necessary
that, particulars of the passenger are properly and correctly
entered on the Identity Card and the photograph frmly pasted
thereon. The booking clerk will put a station stamp in such a way
that half of the stamp appears on the photograph and remaining
part appears on the Identity Card.”
Although, instructions stipulate, season ticket would be invalid
for want of Identity Card, in my view, for more than one
reason, non-production of the Identity Card alongwith the
season ticket by a passenger, who had sustained injury due to
accidental fall, itself would not render valid season ticket,
invalid.   First reason is that, applicant was travelling with
valid and proper season ticket. Therefore, he was “Passenger”
within the meaning      of  Section 2(29) of the Act.    Second
reason is, instructions relied on by the Railways, cannot be
said to be ‘mandatory’ and therefore would not render, proper
season ticket, automatically invalid for non-production of
identity card. Furthermore, in terms of provisions of Section
54 of the Act of 1989, every passenger shall, on demand by,
any railway servant present his “pass” or “ticket” to such
railway   servant    for   examination   during   the   journey.
Therefore, passenger producing proper season ticket without,
identify card, ipso-facto, would not render season ticket,
improper and/or invalid, unless, it is proved that passenger
was using season ticket, that was issued in the name of another
person. Although, Section 53 of the Act, prohibits transfer of
‘certain tickets’ however, it is not respondent’s case that,
season ticket produced by the applicant was issued in the name
of another person. Even otherwise, in this case, the appellant
had discharged the initial burden by fling an Affdavit of
relevant facts. Whereafter, burden was shifted on the Railways
to prove that, he was not a “bonafde passenger”.         Herein,
appellant had produced the valid season ticket bearing his
signature and also journey extension tickets, which bore
season ticket no.62490200. The signature of the appellant on
season ticket, was not disputed by the Railways. Moreover,
season ticket and the journey extension tickets, were
recovered, from the appellant while removing him at Hospital.
In  the   circumstances,    non-production   of  Identity   Card
alongwith season ticket, itself would not render proper season
ticket, invalid. Besides, in the case of Union of India Versus.
Rina Devi, the Apex Court has held that, mere presence of body
on railway premises will not be conclusive to hold that, injured
or deceased was a “bonafde passenger” for which claim for
compensation could be maintained. However, mere absence of
ticket with such injured or a deceased, will not negative the
claim that he was a “bonafde passenger”. Initial burden would
be on the claimant which can be discharged by fling an
Affdavit of the relevant facts and burden will then shift on the
Railways and the issue can be decided on the facts shown by
the attending circumstances.        Herein, the appellant has
discharged the initial burden by fing Affdavit alongwith the
relevant documents i.e. valid season ticket, journey extension
tickets and report of Constable. However, his evidence has not
been rebutted by the respondents-Railways and therefore the
fnding recorded by the Tribunal that, he was not a “bonafde
passenger” being contrary to evidence, is hereby quashed and
set aside.    Thus, I hold that, appellant was a “bonafde
6.          The next question that falls for the consideration is,
whether appellant had sustained injuries in “untoward
incident” within the meaning of Section 123C(2) of the
Railways Act, 1989. Appellant, in support of his claim, had
relied on the report of Constable, A.R. Shaikh. The report is at
Exhibit-A2.    It reveals therefrom that, Mr. Jagtap, Deputy
Station Manager had issued a station memo, calling upon Mr.
Shaikh to remove the appellant-injured at the hospital. The
evidence of the appellant and report of Constable, Shaikh was
discarded by the tribunal on the ground that, report of Shaikh
was contrary to Station Master’s Memo. The memo, according
to Tribunal reveals fact, that appellant was knocked down by
BL-25 dn train near platform no.4. In context of these facts, I
have perused the evidence of Mr. Jagtap, Deputy Station
Master, Dadar Railway Station. His evidence reveals that, on
25th   January,    2004,   one  unknown      passenger,  without
disclosing his identify informed him that, a person aged about
52 years was knocked down by Badlapur train kilometer 8/25
near platform no.4. In cross-examination, Mr. Jagtap admitted
that, personally he did not see the accident.            Moreso,
motorman of BL-25 dn train, had not given memo to the
Station Master, nor he was examined, by the respondents.
Thus, it is to be held that, evidence of Mr. Jagtap, Deputy
Station Manager was hear-say.        In view of these facts and
evidence on record, the fnding recorded by the Tribunal, that
appellant had not sustained injuries in “untoward incident”,
but suffered “self-inficted injuries”, is erroneous and therefore
quashed and set aside. Even otherwise, in the case of Union of
India Versus. Rina Devi, the Apex Court has clarifed that,
concept of “self inficted injuries” would require intention to
refect such injury and not mere negligence of any particular
degree. For all these reasons, the impugned order is quashed
and set aside.
7.          Appellant had moved an application under Section
16 of the Railway Claims Tribunal Act, 1987 claiming
compensation,    under the Railway Accidents and Untoward
Incidents (Compensation) Rules, 1990. It was an injury claim.
The compensation sought was in respect of the injuries
sustained by the appellant in an “untoward incident”. As such,
the   Railway Claim      Tribunal, shall      proceed to grant
compensation to the appellants in terms of Rule 3 of the Rules,
1990, after verifying the medical evidence produced by the
appellant in support of his claim, preferably before 31 st July,
2022, and in accordance with law, laid down by the Apex
Court, in the case of Union of India v/s. Rina Devi.
8.          The    Registry    shall   transmit,   records    and
proceedings in Original Application No. 675/2005 to the
Railway Claims Tribunal, Bench, Mumbai within two weeks
from the date of uploading the judgment on the website.
9.          The appellant shall appear before the Railway
Claims Tribunal Bench, Mumbai on 10th June, 2022.
10.         Appeal is partly allowed and disposed of.
Digitally signed by                                            (SANDEEP K. SHINDE, J.)