Mr. Imran Shaikh a/w. Amreen Shaikh for Respondent Nos.1 & 2.
Ms. S.D. Shinde, A.P.P. for Respondent No.3-State.
Sr.P.I. Mr.Anil Avhad and P.I. Mr.Rushi Inamdar, Kasturba Marg Police Station,
Mumbai are present.
1.            By Judgment and Order dated 1st February 2022 passed in
Criminal Writ Petition No. 579 of 2021, the Respondent Nos.1 & 2 herein are
directed to handover custody of Master ‘J’ to the Petitioner in the week
commencing from 22nd August 2022. Various other directions are also issued
by the said Judgment and Order.
2.            Respondent Nos.1 & 2 questioned the correctness of said
Judgment and Order dated 1st February 2022 before the Hon’ble Supreme
Court by way of Special Leave to Appeal (Crl.) No. 4377 of 2022. The
Hon’ble Supreme Court by its Order dated 16 th September 2022 was pleased
to dismiss the said Special Leave to Appeal by observing the following :-
“Taking note of the totality of circumstances and more
particularly the subsequent event after filing of this petition that
the petitioner No.2 (grandmother of the child) expired on
14.05.2022, we do not feel inclined to consider interference in
the order impugned, which has been passed by the High Court
in a petition seeking writ in the nature of Habeas Corpus. We
would, of course, leave the question of law open for
examination in an appropriate case.
So far the conditions and stipulations in the impugned
order are concerned, we leave it open for the parties to seek
their appropriate modification at the appropriate stage but, only
after the impugned order has been given effect to.”
Despite the Hon’ble Supreme Court directing that, the Order
passed by this Court be given effect to, it is the contention of the Petitioner
that the Respondent Nos.1 & 2 are not handing over custody of the minor
child namely Master ‘J’ to him. In this brief premise present Petition is filed.
3.           Present Petition is being heard since 18 th November 2022.
Various Orders earlier to this have been passed with a view to have smooth
transition of custody of Master ‘J’ to the Petitioner, who is his biological
father. Since first date of hearing of this Petition various opportunities were
granted to the Respondent Nos.1 & 2 to comply with the directions issued by
this Court and in particular to hand over custody of Master ‘J’ to the
In para Nos.47 and 48 of Judgment dated 1 st February 2022, the
Co-ordinate Bench has observed as under :
“47. At this stage, it is pertinent to note that the fact that the
petitioner and respondent no.1 and his family members were at
loggerheads over the custody of Master ‘J’ must have contributed
to the further alienation of Master ‘J’. The passage of time and
the negative estimation of respondent no.1 and his family
members about the petitioner might also have played a
significant role. This is recognised as a ‘parental alienation
syndrome’.
48.    The reluctance to join the company of, or animosity
towards, the father does not seem to be based on the experience
which Master ‘J’ have had, when the petitioner, Neeta and Master
‘J’ were residing together. The possibility of the perspective of
Master ‘J’ being influenced by the views of respondent no.1 and
his family members about the character, personality and overall
bearing of     the petitioner, cannot be ruled            out. At a
impressionable age such articulation about the opposite party, in
a custody battle, often affects the capacity to exercise an
intelligible preference. It is quite possible that when a child
spends time with a non-custodial parent, he may be disabused of
such perception.”
4.           In view thereof on earlier occasion to avoid any complications
and creation of scene or ruckus while the Petitioner accepts custody of
Master ‘J’ from Respondent Nos.1 & 2, we issued various directions and in
particular in Order dated 13th December 2022, we had directed the Senior
Inspector of Kasturba Marg Police Station, Mumbai to depute an Officer not
below the rank of Police Sub Inspector along with a woman Police Sub
Inspector to assist the Petitioner to take custody of the said child in the
precincts of the building where the Respondent Nos.1 & 2 are residing. The
said arrangement was made with a view to avoid any breach of peace or
bickering between the Petitioner and Respondent Nos.1 & 2. Subsequently, a
report was submitted through the learned A.P.P. that, on the said date i.e. on
13th December 2022 the police had accompanied Petitioner for taking
custody of the minor child namely Master ‘J’, however the said child was not
ready and willing to accompany Petitioner and therefore the custody of the
said child could not be handed over to the Petitioner. Thereafter on at least
two occasions, the learned Advocate appearing for Respondent Nos.1 & 2
had submitted before this Court that, the Respondent Nos.1 & 2 are ready
and willing to hand over custody of Master ‘J’ to the Petitioner, however the
said could not happen for the reasons known to them. Inter-alia                the
directions issued by this Court in Judgment dated 1 st February 2022 and
upheld by the Hon’ble Supreme Court by its Order dated 16 th September
2022 have not been complied with. In this precise background the present
Contempt Petition was taken up for hearing yesterday.
5.           Yesterday it was agreed between the learned Advocate for the
contesting parties that, the Respondent Nos.1 & 2 will hand over custody of
Master ‘J’ to the Petitioner in the evening in the precincts of the residential
complex where Respondent Nos.1 & 2 are residing. Unfortunately the said
could not happen and today the learned Advocate for Petitioner again made
a grievance that, the custody of Master ‘J’ has not been handed over to his
6.            Today Respondent Nos.1 & 2 have brought Master ‘J’ to the
Court though no such directions were issued to that effect. Present Petition
was called out for hearing at about 2.45 pm. At that time, this Court
suggested Respondent Nos.1 & 2 to hand over custody of Master ‘J’ to the
Petitioner in the precincts of this Court and in presence of concerned Police
Officers to avoid any bickering or scene being created by either of the parties.
It has been informed to this Court that, when the custody of Master ‘J’ was
handed over to the Petitioner, he tried to assault him and ran away from his
custody. The said fact is reported to this Court at about 3.15 pm.
The fact therefore remains that, the Order passed by this Court
dated 1st February 2022 and upheld by the Hon’ble Supreme Court by its
Order dated 16th September 2022 has not been complied with till time.
7.            In view of the above, we once again asked the learned Advocate
for Respondent Nos.1 & 2 as to when his client will hand over custody of
Master ‘J’ in favour of Petitioner, to which he on instructions submitted that,
today at about 7.00 pm the Respondent Nos.1 & 2 will hand over custody of
Master ‘J’ to Petitioner in the precincts of Kasturba Marg Police Station,
Mumbai. The said statement is accepted.
8.           In view thereof, the Respondent Nos.1 & 2 are directed to take
the child in the precincts of Kasturba Marg Police Station, Mumbai at about
7.00 pm today. We also direct the Senior Inspector of Police, Kasturba Marg
Police Station, Mumbai to depute two Police Officers out of which one be
lady Police Officer to monitor the handing over of the custody of Master ‘J’ in
favour of Petitioner by Respondent Nos.1 & 2 and to assist in avoiding breach
of peace or any scene created by either of the parties, if necessary.
9.           Present Order is passed in Open Court and in presence of
learned Advocate for both the parties so also in presence of learned A.P.P. and
the Police Officer attached to Kasturba Marg Police Station, Mumbai.
Therefore all the concerned will not insist for authenticated copy of the
present Order for complying with the statement made by learned counsel for
Respondent Nos.1 & 2 and the directions noted in para No.7 & 8 above.
10.          Stand over to 1st March 2023.
To be placed under the caption ‘For Compliance’.