Counsel for Respondent :­ C.S.C.,Manish Goyal
(Delivered by : Hon'ble Ashutosh Srivastava,J.)
Heard Sri Ashutosh Mishra, learned counsel for the
petitioners and Sri Ashish Mishra, learned counsel, who represents
the High Court, Respondent No.1. The learned Standing Counsel
has accepted notice of the writ petition on behalf of the Respondent
Sri Ashish Mishra, learned counsel for the respondent High
Court has filed counter affidavit. Learned counsel for the petitioners
does not want to file rejoinder affidavit. We, therefore, proceed to
decide the writ petition on merits.
The subject matter of the writ petition relates to the process
of Direct Recruitment to the U.P. Higher Judicial Services­2018
(Part II). The Allahabad High Court issued a Notification dated
12.11.2018 inviting applications for direct recruitment to the Uttar
Pradesh High Judicial Service­2018 (Part­II) against 59 vacancies
(SC­08, ST­01, OBC­16 and Unreserved­34) in the pay scale of
Rs.51550­1230­58930­1380­63070 from Advocates having not less
than 7 years standing as on the last date fixed for the submission of
application forms, who must have attained the age of 35 years and
must not have attained the age of 45 years as on 01.01.2019. The
age limit was relaxed by 3 years in case of SC/ST/OBC category
candidates, but such candidates must not have attained the age of
48 years as on 01.01.2019. 20% horizontal reservation for women
candidates belonging to the State of U.P. only was provided. The
applications were required to be filed online. A preliminary
examination (objective type) was to be held at Prayagraj
(Allahabad) on 03.02.2019. Both Advocates practicing within the
State of U.P. and outside the State of U.P. were eligible to apply,
but after obtaining requisite forwarding from the District and
Sessions     Judge/Registrar     General/Registrar     of   the    High
Court/Secretary General of the Supreme Court as applicable.
All the petitioners, who are five in number, although enrolled
with the Bar Council of U.P. are members of the M.P. Judicial
Services and working as Judicial Officers in the State of M.P. under
the supervision of the M.P. High Court at Jabalpur. The petitioners
are aggrieved by Rule 5 of the U.P. Higher Judicial Service Rules,
1975 insofar as it bars the Judicial Officers from participating in the
recruitment process for filing up the vacancies by direct
It is contended on behalf of the petitioners that the Rule 5 of
the 1975 Rules is violative of the fundamental rights of the
petitioners and the source of direct recruitment cannot be restricted
to practicing Advocates only. The petitioners were once practicing
Advocates and later on got selected as Judicial Officers and
otherwise satisfy the eligibility criteria laid down in the notification
dated 12.11.2018 issued for filing up the vacancies. The 1975 Rules
are liable to be declared unconstitutional to the extent it excludes
the persons possessing requisite experience in the field of law of
more than 7 years cumulatively as an Advocate and as a Judicial
Officer for being considered eligible to appear in the U.P.H.J.S.
For appreciating the arguments raised on behalf of the writ
petitioners, it would be appropriate to refer to Rule 5 of the U.P.
Higher Judicial Service Rules 1975, which is reproduced as under:­
“5. Sources of recruitment.­ The recruitment to the Service
a) by promotion from amongst the Civil Judges (Senior
Division) on the basis of Principle of merit­cum­seniority and
passing a suitability test.
b) by promotion strictly on the basis of merit through
limited competitive examination of Civil Judges (Senior Division)
having not less than five years qualifying service;
c) by direct recruitment from amongst the Advocates of not
less than seven years standing as on the last date fixed for the
submission of application forms.
A perusal of the Rule 5 of the 1975 Rules reveals that the
source of recruitment to the U.P.H.J.S. is by promotion as also by
direct recruitment. The source of recruitment by promotion is
confined to Judicial Officers [Civil Judge (Senior Division)] while
the source of direct recruitment is confined to Advocates with not
less than 7 years standing.
The U.P. Higher Judicial Service Rules, 1975 have been
framed in exercise of the power conferred by the Proviso to Article
309 read with Article 233 of the Constitution of India.
Article 309 of the Constitution of India deals with the
recruitment and conditions of service of persons serving the Union
or a State. The Article 309 provides the competence for the
Governor of a State or such person as he may direct to make the
rules regulating the recruitment and the conditions of service of
persons appointed to services and posts in connection with the
affairs of the State. Article 233 of the Constitution of India deals
with the appointment of District Judges. The Article 233 of the
Constitution of India is reproduced here­under:­
“Article 233 of Constitution of India "Appointment of
(1) Appointments of persons to be, and the posting and
promotion of, district judges in any State shall be made by the
Governor of the State in consultation with the High Court
exercising jurisdiction in relation to such State.
(2) A person not already in the service of the Union or of the
State shall only be eligible to be appointed a district judge if he has
been for not less than seven years an advocate or a pleader and is
recommended by the High Court for appointment.”
The Article 233 of the Constitution of India has been recently
interpreted by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the Civil Appeal No.1698
of 2020 (Dheeraj Mor Vs. Hon'ble High Court of Delhi) arising
out of SLP (C) No.14156 of 2015 and other connected matters
vide decision dated February 19 th, 2020 reported in 2020 SCC
online SC 213. The Hon'ble Apex Court after considering all
“59. In view of the aforesaid interpretation of Article 233,
we find that rules debarring judicial officers from staking their
claim as against the posts reserved for direct recruitment from bar
are not ultra vires as rules are subservient to the provisions of the
(i) The members in the judicial service of the State can be
appointed as District Judges by way of promotion or limited
competitive examination.
(ii) The Governor of a State is the authority for the purpose
of appointment, promotion, posting and transfer, the eligibility is
governed by the Rules framed under Articles 234 and 235.
(iii) Under Article 232(2), an Advocate or a pleader with 7
years of practice can be appointed as District Judge by way of
direct recruitment in case he is not already in the judicial service of
the Union or a State.
(iv) For the purpose of Article 233(2), an Advocate has to
be continuing in practice for not less than 7 years as on the cut­off
date and at the time of appointment as District Judge. Members of
judicial service having 7 years’ experience of practice before they
have joined the service or having combined experience of 7 years as
lawyer and member of judiciary, are not eligible to apply for direct
recruitment as a District Judge.
(v) The rules framed by the High Court prohibiting judicial
service officers from staking claim to the post of District Judge
against the posts reserved for Advocates by way of direct
recruitment, cannot be said to be ultra vires and are in conformity
with Articles 14, 16 and 233 of the Constitution of India.
(vi) The decision in Vijay Kumar Mishra (supra) providing
eligibility, of judicial officer to compete as against the post of
District Judge by way of direct recruitment, cannot be said to be
laying down the law correctly. The same is hereby overruled.
61. In the case of Dheeraj Mor and others cases, time to
time interim orders have been passed by this Court, and
incumbents in judicial service were permitted to appear in the
examination. Though later on, this Court vacated the said interim
orders, by that time certain appointments had been made in some
of the States and in some of the States results have been withheld
by the High Court owing to complication which has arisen due to
participation of the ineligible in­service candidates as against the
post reserved for the practising advocates. In the cases where such
in­service incumbents have been appointed by way of direct
recruitment from bar as we find no merit in the petitions and due
to dismissal of the writ petitions filed by the judicial officers, as
sequel no fruits can be ripened on the basis of selection without
eligibility, they cannot continue as District Judges.
They have to be reverted to their original post. In case their
right in channel for promotion had already been ripened, and their
juniors have been promoted, the High Court has to consider their
promotion in accordance with prevailing rules. However, they
cannot claim any right on the basis of such an appointment
obtained under interim order, which was subject to the outcome of
the writ petition and they have to be reverted.”
It would be apt to also quote the additional reasoning given
by Justice S. Ravindra Bhat, in respect of the issue decided by the
“90. A close reading of Article 233, other provisions of the
Constitution, and the judgments discussed would show discloses the
(a) That the Governor of a State has the authority to make
“appointments of persons to be, and the posting and promotion of,
district judges in any State (Article 233 [1]);
(b) While so appointing the Governor is bound to consult
the High Court (Article 233 [1]:Chandra Mohan (supra) and
Chandramouleshwar Prasad v Patna High Court 1970 (2) SCR
(c) Article 233 (1) cannot be construed as a source of
appointment; it merely delineates as to who is the appointing
(d) In matters relating to initial posting, initial
appointment, and promotion of District Judges, the Governor has
the authority to issue the order; thereafter it is up to the High
Court, by virtue of Article 235, to exercise control and
superintendence over the conditions of service of such District
Judges. (See State of Assam v Ranga Mahammad 1967 (1) SCR
(e) Article 233 (2) is concerned only with eligibility of those
who can be considered for appointment as District Judge. The
Constitution clearly states that one who has been for not less than
seven years, “an advocate or pleader” and one who is “not already
in the service of the Union or of the State” (in the sense that such
person is not a holder of a civil or executive post, under the Union
or of a State) can be considered for appointment, as a District
judge. Significantly, the eligibility­ for both categories, is couched
in negative terms. Clearly, all that the Constitution envisioned was
that an advocate with not less than seven years’ practise could be
appointed as a District Judge, under Article 233 (2).
(f) Significantly, Article 233 (2) ex facie does not exclude
judicial officers from consideration for appointment to the post of
District Judge. It, however, equally does not spell out any criteria
for such category of candidates. This does not mean however, that
if they or any of them, had seven years’ practise in the past, can be
considered eligible, because no one amongst them can be said to
answer the description of a candidate who “has been for not less
than seven years” “an advocate or a pleader” (per Deepak Agarwal,
i.e. that the applicant/candidate should be an advocate fulfilling
the condition of practise on the date of the eligibility condition, or
applying for the post). The sequitur clearly is that a judicial officer
is not one who has been for not less than seven years, an advocate
or pleader.
91. The net result of the decision in Chandra Mohan
(supra), and subsequent decisions which followed it, is that Article
233 (2) renders ineligible all those who hold civil posts under a
State or the Union, just as it renders all advocates with less than
seven years’ practice ineligible, on the date fixed for reckoning
eligibility. Equally, those in judicial service [i.e. holders of posts
other than District Judge, per Article 236 (2)] are not entitled to
consideration because the provision (Article 233 [2]) does not this
part of the case it is sufficient to say that there was consultation.”
prescribe any eligibility condition. Does this mean that any judicial
officer, with any length of service as a member of the judicial
service, is entitled to consideration under Article 233 (2)? The
answer is clearly in the negative. This is because the negative
phraseology through which eligibility of holders of civil posts, or
those in civil service (of the State or the Union) and advocates with
seven years’ service is couched. However, the eligibility conditions
are not spelt out in respect of those who are in the judicial service.
92. The omission, ­ in regard to spelling out the eligibility
conditions vis­à­vis judicial officers, to the post of District Judge, in
the opinion of this court, is clearly by design. This subject matter is
covered by three provisions: Article 233 (1)– which refers to
promotions to the post of District Judge; Article 234, which, like
Article 233 (1) constitutes the Governor as the appointing
authority in respect of judicial posts or services, (other than District
Judges), and like Article 233 (1), subject to recommendation of the
High Court concerned. This position is most definitely brought
home by the fact that Article 235 vests in the High Courts the
power of supervision and control of the judicial service, “including
the posting and promotion of, and the grant of leave to, persons
belonging to the judicial service of a State and holding any post
inferior to the post of district judge.” The corollary to this is that
the Governor is appointing authority for the post of District Judge,
and other judicial posts; both are to be filled after prior
consultation with the High Court, and crucially, the promotion of
judicial officers, to the post of District Judge, is regulated by
conditions (read rules) framed by the High Court.”
96. In the opinion of this court, there is an inherent flaw in
the argument of the petitioners. The classification or distinction
made­ between advocates and judicial officers, per se is a
constitutionally sanctioned one. This is clear from a plain reading
of Article 233 itself. Firstly, Article 233 (1) talks of both
appointments and promotions. Secondly, the classification is
evident from the description of the two categories in Article 233
(2): one “not already in the service of the Union or of the State”
and the other “if he has been for not less than seven years as an
advocate or a pleader”. Both categories are to be “recommended by
the High Court for appointment.” The intent here was that in both
cases, there were clear exclusions, i.e. advocates with less than
seven years’ practice (which meant, conversely that those with
more than seven years’ practice were eligible) and those holding
civil posts under the State or the Union. The omission of judicial
officers only meant that such of them, who were recommended for
promotion, could be so appointed by the Governor. The conditions
for their promotion were left exclusively to be framed by the High
101. The Constitution makers, in the opinion of this court,
consciously wished that members of the Bar, should be considered
for appointment at all three levels, i.e. as District judges, High
Courts and this court. This was because counsel practising in the
law courts have a direct link with the people who need their
services; their views about the functioning of the courts, is a
constant dynamic. Similarly, their views, based on the experience
gained at the Bar, injects the judicial branch with fresh
perspectives; uniquely positioned as a professional, an advocate has
a tripartite relationship: one with the public, the second with the
court, and the third, with her or his client. A counsel, learned in
the law, has an obligation, as an officer of the court, to advance
the cause of his client, in a fair manner, and assist the court. Being
members of the legal profession, advocates are also considered
thought leaders. Therefore, the Constitution makers envisaged that
at every rung of the judicial system, a component of direct
appointment from members of the Bar should be resorted to. For
all these reasons, it is held that members of the judicial service of
any State cannot claim to be appointed for vacancies in the cadre
of District Judge, in the quota earmarked for appointment from
amongst eligible Advocates, under Article 233.
Apart from the above observations, the Hon'ble Supreme
Court while interpreting Article 236(2) of the Constitution of India,
in the Case of Deepak Aggarwal Vs. Keshav Kaushik and others,
reported in 2013 (5) SCC 277, was pleased to observed as under:­
“88. As regards construction of the expression, if he has been
for not less than seven years an advocate in Article 233(2) of the
Constitution, we think Mr. Prashant Bhushan was right in his
submission that this expression means seven years as an advocate
immediately preceding the application and not seven years any
time in the past. This is clear by use of has been. The present perfect
continuous tense is used for a position which began at some time in
the past and is still continuing. Therefore, one of the essential
requirements articulated by the above expression in Article 233(2)
is that such person must with requisite period be continuing as as
advocate on the date of application. ”
In the light of the above, it is clear that under Article 233 of
the Constitution of India, a Judicial Officer regardless of his or her
previous experience, as an Advocate with 7 years practice, cannot
apply and compete for appointment to any vacancy in the post of
District Judge; his or her chance to occupy the post would be
through promotion in accordance with the Rules framed under
Article 233 and Proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India.
No relief can be given to the petitioners. The writ petition
fails and is, accordingly, dismissed.
The interim order dated 20.12.2018 stands discharged.