2.         The respondent instituted the suit to declare
that he has easementary right to reach his lands in the
property  by  walking   on   the     A,B,C,D  ridges,  which  were
stated to be situated in the centre of the appellant’s land
in Survey Nos. 461/8D, 8E, 9B and 9C.           He also sought to
establish his right to ride the cart on the lands in Survey
Nos. 8E and 9C during the non cultivation period and as a
consequential   relief   to     pass     a  mandatory   injunction
restraining the appellant or his agent from using the right
of the plaintiff.     He further sought, as per the amended
plaint,  to  pass   a  mandatory       injunction  to  remove  the
barricades made by the appellant on the way shown in A
point.
3.         After written statement was filed and evidence
was led, which included two Commission Reports, the Trial
Court found that the respondent had failed to establish his
right as claimed.     It is further found that there was an
alternate way to the respondent’s land.
4.         The  First  Appellate       Court   affirmed  the  view
taken  by  the  Trial  Court.        Thereupon,     the respondent
carried the matter in the Second Appeal.           The High Court,
in Second Appeal, has reversed the concurrent findings of
the courts and granted relief in the following manner:
“10.   The learned counsel appearing on behalf of
the   respondents   though         disputed    all   other
contentions, had not disputed the fact that the
land belongs to the plaintiff is situated in
adjacent to the land belongs to the defendant. The
learned counsel for the respondents is more on the
emphasis that the plaintiff was claiming cart track
for the purpose of reaching his land, which cannot
be provided in the absence of establishing any
easementary rights to that extent.           The defendant
is not restraining the plaintiff from using the
varapu for the purpose of reaching his land.
However, the defendant is objecting the usage of
the common pathway as cart track or as a road for
the purpose of reaching the land belongs to the
plaintiff.    If the plaintiff is permitted to
utilize the pathway / varapu for the purpose of
reaching his own agricultural land.           There cannot
be any serious objections on the side of the
defendants also.
11.    In view of the said submission, this Court
is able to arrive a conclusion that the pathway /
varapu, which is already in existence for the
purpose of reaching the land belongs to the
plaintiff is to be kept open for his usage and more
specifically, to reach his agricultural lands.
However, it is made clear that the plaintiff cannot
claim any cart track or road for the purpose of
reaching his agricultural land.          The plaintiff is
entitled to utilize the existing varapu / ridges
for the purpose of reaching his land and to carry
on his agricultural activities.         Such an order is
passed in the interest of both the parties
concerned. In view of the fact that the appellant
has established before this Court that he owns a
land adjacent to the land belongs to the defendant,
the plaintiff is entitled to use the pathway /
varaput for the purpose of reaching his land to
carry on his agricultural activities peacefully and
without any hindrance.       The defendants also shall
not cause any objections for the purpose of usage
of varapu by the plaintiff for the purpose of
reaching his land.
12.    In this view of the matter, the judgment and
decree passed by the Subordinate Court, Ariyalur
dated 29.01.1996 in AS No. 62/1992, confirming the
judgment and decree passed by the District Munsiff,
Jayamkondam dated 27.08.1991 passed in OS No.
446/1986 are set aside and the second appeal stands
allowed to the extent stated above. No costs.”
5.         We have heard Mr. S. Mahendran, learned counsel
appearing   on  behalf  of   the     appellant   and   Mr.  Senthil
Jagadeesan,   learned  counsel      appearing  on  behalf   of   the
6.         Learned   counsel   for     the  appellant   would   urge
before  us   that the  High   Court     has  erred   in  not  being
mindful of the jurisdictional mandate in Section 100 of the
CPC.   A Second Appeal can be maintained before the High
Court under Section 100 of the CPC only if a substantial
question of law arises for its consideration.
7.         He points out that a perusal of the impugned
judgment would show that a substantial question of law
is conspicuous by its absence.         In other words, it is
his complaint that the High Court has purported to
deal with the Second Appeal, as if it were an ordinary
appeal.   Therefore, it is not in conformity with the
mandatory requirement of Section 100 of the CPC.             In
this regard, he drew our attention to the judgment of
this   Court   in  Biswanath      Ghosh    (Dead)   By   Legal
Representatives   and  Others      v.   Gobinda    Ghosh    Alias
Gobindha Chandra Ghosh and Others [(2014) 11 SCC 605]
and Mallanaguoda and Others v. Ninganagouda and Others
[2021 (5) SCALE 362].     He would further contend that
the  High  Court  has  again    erred     insofar    as   it  has
relied upon the concession made by the counsel for the
appellant.     In   this   regard,       a   perusal     of   the
paragraphs, which we have referred, would apparently
show that the High Court has relied upon the statement
made by the counsel for the appellant, in the manner
it  is  done.     The  question,       according    to   learned
counsel for the appellant, is the legal effect of such
a concession on the rights of the appellant.             In this
regard, he drew our attention to the judgment of this
Court  in  Himalayan   Coop    Group     Housing    Society    v.
Balwan Singh and Others [(2015) 7 SCC 373] at paras 32
“32. Generally, admissions of fact made by a
counsel are binding upon their principals as long
as they are unequivocal; where, however, doubt
exists as to a purported admission, the Court
should be wary to accept such principal to make
such admissions.     Furthermore, a client is not
bound by a statement or admission which he or his
lawyer was not authorized to make.                 A lawyer
generally has no implied or apparent authority to
make an admission or statement which would
directly surrender to conclude the substantial
legal rights of the client unless such an
admission or statement is clearly a proper step in
accomplishing the purpose for which the lawyer was
employed. We hasten to add neither the client nor
the court is bound by the lawyer’s statements or
admissions   as   to   matters       of    law    or    legal
conclusions.      Thus,      according      to   generally
accepted notions of professional responsibility,
lawyers should follow the client’s instructions
rather   than  substitute        their    make   decisions
without consulting the client.          While in others,
the decision is reserved for the client.             It is
often said that the lawyer can make decisions as
to tactics without consulting the client, while
the client has right to make decisions that can
affect his rights.
33.    We do not intend to prolong this discussion.
We may conclude by noticing a famous statement of
an advocate in the discharge of his duty knows but
one person in the world and that person is his
client.”
8.         He also reinforced this proposition, namely that
counsel cannot make concession and thereby bind the party
in  circumstances  as   the    present     by   referring   to the
decision   reported in Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited v.
Mahendra Prasad Jakhmola and Others [(2019) 13 SCC 82] at
para 13, which reads as follows:
“13. Even a concession on facts disputed by a
respondent in its written statement cannot bind the
respondent. Thus, in Swami Krishnanand Govindanand
v. Oswal Hosiery, this Court held:
2. ...It appears that when the case was posted for
trial, the learned counsel appearing for the
respondent conceded the facts disputed by the
advocate was recorded by the Additional Rent
Controller thus: The respondent’s learned counsel
has admitted the ground of eviction and also the
fact that the applicant is a public charitable
institution and for that purpose it required the
3. … Whether the appellant is an institution within
the meaning of Section 22 of the Act and whether it
required bona fide the premises for furtherance of
its   activities,     are      questions     touching    the
jurisdiction of the Additional Rent controller. He
can record his satisfaction only when he holds on
these questions in favour of the appellant. For so
holding there must be material on record to support
his satisfaction otherwise the satisfaction not
based on any material or based on irrelevant
material, would be vitiated and any order passed on
such a satisfaction will be without jurisdiction.
There can be no doubt that admission of a party is
a relevant material. But can the statement made by
the learned counsel of a party across the Bar be
treated as admission of the party?            Having regard
to the requirements of Section 18 of the Evidence
Act, on the facts of this case in our view, the
aforementioned statement of the counsel for the
respondent cannot be accepted as an admission so as
to bind the respondent.          Excluding that statement
from consideration, there was thus no material
before the Additional Rent Controller to record his
satisfaction within the meaning of clause (d) of
Section 22 of the Act. It follows that the order
of eviction was without jurisdiction.”
It is pointed out there was denial of the plaintiff’s
case in the written statement.
9.         Mr. Senthil Jagdeesan, learned counsel for the
respondent,   on  the  other    hand,     would point   out  that a
perusal of the Second Appeal Memorandum would show that
three substantial questions of law were, in fact, raised in
the Second Appeal.    The Second Appeal is of the year 1999.
At  the  time   when  the  Second       Appeal  was   admitted,   a
substantial question of law was indeed framed by the High
Court mindful of the jurisdiction of Section 100 of the
CPC.  He points out that in fact, (a) substantial question
of law (b) to be found in the Memorandum of Appeal was
framed by the High Court.
10.         He   would   further     submit    that   the   appeal   was
taken   up  recently     and   this     Court    may   not    in   these
circumstances set aside the judgment for the reason that
the   learned   Judge   did    not    advert    to   any   substantial
question of law.     He would further contend that this is a
case   where    the   documents,       which    form    part    of   the
substantial question of law framed, were not considered and
there   was  occasioned    failure      of   justice    requiring    the
interference of the High Court.             He further pointed out
that there was concession made also and which only conduced
to promote the interest of justice.           All that has been done
by the High Court was to accept a right to the respondent
to make use of the land of the appellant for the purpose of
walking across his property admittedly located adjacently.
11.         The   scheme    of   the     Code   of   Civil    Procedure
accords finality to the findings of fact rendered by the
12.   This is undoubtedly subject to various well known
exceptions    which,    however,      cannot     permit    the   Second
Appellate Court to interfere with the findings of fact as a
matter of course.     Such restrictions are placed on the High
Court in order that there is finality to litigation at a
particular    level   in   the     hierarchy      of   Courts.       The
limitation on the exercise of power by the High Court in
the Second Appeal interfering with the judgment of the
First Appellate Court is premised on high public policy.
This limitation is sought to be secured by insisting upon
the requirement that a Second Appeal is considered only
when there is a substantial question of law.             Therefore,
the  existence  of   substantial       question   of  law  and  the
judgment which revolves around answering the substantial
questions of law are not mere formalities.           They are meant
to be adhered to.
13.  It is clear from the perusal of the judgment in this
case that the High Court has not framed any substantial
question of law.   It is also beyond dispute that two Courts
have concurred in their findings.           The respondent, as it
has been found,    has failed to establish his case that he
had the right, which he claimed, which was a right of way
as it were of making use of the property of the appellant.
14.        The property of the appellant, undoubtedly, is
situated adjacent to the property of the respondent.             In
fact, it is located on the north of the property of the
respondent.  It is also not in dispute that there is a road
running  east-west   on  the    north    of  the  property  of  the
15.        The case,    in fact,       of the   appellant in   this
regard was it was a road which was formed not too long in
the past but the formation of the said road was occasioned
by surrendering of the land by the persons (including the
appellant), who had lands in the area.
16.        The case set up by the respondent is one of
easement.   It does not appear to be on the basis of the
materials which have been produced before the Court, a case
which fell under Section 13 of the Indian Easements Act,
1882 which deals with ‘easements of necessity’.           It is true
that the respondent has averred that the respondent, who
purchased the property, was using it and his predecessors
were also using it from nearly 100 years.
17.   The First Appellate Court has come to the conclusion
that the case based on Section 15 of the Indian Easements
Act, 1882 is not made out.        Easement is a right.        It may
fall under any of the different kinds of easements but
short  of  a  right   which    it    is    for   the   plaintiff  to
establish, there cannot be a natural right as it were to
make use of the property of another.           When the two Courts
have concurred on appreciation of evidence, as is done in
this case to discountenance the plea of the respondent and
the  High  Court  has  not    borne     in   mind   any  substantial
question of law, we would think that the High Court has
clearly erred in coming to the findings.
18.        We  would   also     notice      even   the   substantial
question of law, which is said to have been framed by the
High Court at the time when the Second Appeal was admitted,
really does not appeal to us as a substantial question of
law.  The question of law raised is whether the two Courts
were correct in not considering A4, C2 and C4.            A4 appears
to be a survey sketch.        The survey sketch can at best
indicate  the  lie  of  the    properties.         The  lie  of  the
property in this case is really not in dispute as it is not
in dispute that the property of the respondent is located
to  the  south   of   the  property       of   the   appellant.      The
question is whether the right, which is claimed in the
plaint, namely the right of way, is established.                At best,
it may facilitate a finding that there was occasion giving
rise  to  rights   as   claimed.        C2   and   C4  are   Commission
Reports.    It may be one thing to say that the Courts did
not look into the Commission Reports in which case it may
amount to the Courts ignoring a vital piece of evidence and
giving rise to a substantial question of law.              It is a far
cry from the above when the Courts have bestowed their
attention   on  a   piece   of   evidence      and   then   come   to  a
particular conclusion.     In the latter eventuality, it would
only  be  a   case  of   the   Courts     appreciating     a   piece  of
evidence  and   arriving    at   a    finding.       Unless   the   said
finding is dubbed as perverse, it may not               give rise to a
substantial question of law.          It is not the submission of
the respondent that the Commission Reports i.e. C2 and C4
are not considered by the Trial Court.                No doubt it was
contended that the First Appellate Court did not consider.
19.  We are of the view that in the facts of this case
there was no occasion for the High Court to interfere in
Second Appeal.     In such circumstances, even though it may
be true that initially the High Court while admitting the
Second Appeal may have framed a question of law but the
judgment in the instant case is unsupportable.               We also do
not see any reason why we should remit back to the High
Court for fresh consideration.
20.  In above view, the appeal is allowed and the judgment
of the High Court is set aside.       No order as to costs.
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (C)     No(s).   11173/2019
(Arising out of impugned final judgment and order dated 22-11-2018
in SA No. 1532/1999 passed by the High Court Of Judicature At
JUDGMENT and IA No. 184424/2019 - EXEMPTION FROM FILING O.T. and
IA No. 66496/2019 - EXEMPTION FROM FILING O.T. and IA No.
DOCUMENTS/FACTS/ANNEXURES and       IA No. 66501/2019 - PERMISSION TO
Date : 24-08-2021    This matter was called on for hearing today.
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
Leave granted.
The appeal is allowed in terms of the signed order.
Pending applications stand disposed of.
[Signed order is placed on the file]