.          Criminal Appeal No.218 of 2013 has been filed by Appellant
(accused) against the judgment and order dated 13.02.2013 passed by
the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Niphad, District Nashik in
Sessions Case No. 32 of 2006 (for short “learned trial court”),
convicting Appellant for offences punishable under Sections 376 and
503 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short “IPC”) and sentencing
him to suffer rigorous imprisonment of five years and to pay fine of
Rs.1,000/-, in default whereof to undergo simple imprisonment for
one year.
2.         Criminal Appeal No.309 of 2014 has been filed by the State
of Maharashtra for enhancement of the sentence passed by the learned
trial court convicting the Appellant.
3.         Criminal Suo-Motu Petition No.2 of 2015 has been
registered by this court having issued a suo-motu notice for
enhancement of the sentence passed by the learned trial court vide
order dated 26.06.2013 in Criminal Appeal No.218 of 2013, which
“     Heard the learned Counsel for the applicant.
2.    The Appeal is admitted.
3.    The applicant herein is convicted for the offence
punishable under Section 376 of IPC, is sentenced to R.I. for five
years and to pay fine of Rs.1,000/- in default S.I. for one month.
The minimum sentence for the offence punishable under Section
376 of IPC is seven years. The reasons assigned by the Sessions
Court for awarding the sentence less than minimum is not
justified. The reasons assigned by the Sessions Judge is that the
applicant-accused is facing trial for 6-7 years and, therefore, a
lenient view has been taken. Another ground assigned by the
Sessions Court is that the applicant is aged about 60 years.
However, the fact remains that he has been convicted for the
offence punishable under Section 376 of IPC for committing rape
of his sister-in-law, who is physically handicapped i.e. she is deaf
and dumb. Hence, there was no reason for the Sessions Court to
take a lenient view.
4.     Issue notice to enhancement of sentence to the accused-
applicant. The notice be served upon the applicant in Nashik
Central Prison. Notice returnable on 10th July, 2013.
5.     The learned Counsel for the applicant submits that he
would file private paper book. Time is prayed for is granted.
Paper book to be filed within six weeks from today.
6.     In the meanwhile, call for R & P.”
4.         The facts emerging from the record of the case are as
4.1.       Mother of the victim, Meerabai Jairam Gare, first informant
filed First Information Report (FIR) No.I-98 of 2005 in respect of the
alleged incident of rape on her daughter 'X' with Lasalgaon Police
Station against the Appellant. Victim 'X' is wife of Bhausaheb Mudgul,
younger brother of accused. Victim, her husband Bhausaheb who is
blind and 2 years old son, accused Madhukar, Punjabai, wife of the
accused, father of the accused, Nivrutti, brother of the accused and
two children of accused all stayed together in the matrimonial house.
Victim 'X' is deaf and dumb and as such she communicates with the
help of gestures/sign language. Victim was married to Bhausaheb for
five years before the date of incident and had given birth to one son.
4.2.       First informant received information from Sunil (her son)
that victim was unwell, hence on 19.11.2005, her second son Shankar
on making enquiry with victim on telephone came to know that she
was being brought to her paternal house by her father-in-law. After
victim was dropped at her paternal house it was informed by her
father-in-law that she was suffering from fever and cold and had
visited the hospital for treatment.
4.3.       First informant inquired with victim about her wellbeing
upon which victim broke down and by gestures informed that accused
had ravished her three days ago and threatened her not to divulge the
incident to anybody. First informant immediately approached
Lasalgaon Police Station and lodged the report. Police Inspector Shri.
Sangle recorded statement of victim with help of first informant and
referred her for medical examination. He recorded statements of
witnesses and conducted spot panchanama. Appellant was arrested
and    referred   for   medical  examination.   After   completion         of
investigation, chargesheet was filed. Contents of charge that accused
on 16.11.2005 at about 21.00 to 22.00 hours in the residential house
of the victim committed rape without her consent and threatened her
with injury to her husband and reputation if she disclosed the offence
to anybody, were explained to accused in vernacular, however,
Appellant pleaded not guilty to the charge and claimed to be tried.
5.         Prosecution examined 6 witnesses to bring home the guilt of
the accused. PW-1 – Vrushali Shrikant Gharpure, special teacher and
translator of language of deaf and dumb persons was examined vide
Exhibit-23; PW-2 victim herself, was examined through PW-1 vide
Exhibit-25; PW-3 - Dr. Vijaysingh Dnyanoba Mundhe, Doctor who
examined the accused on 19.11.2005 was examined vide Exhibit-26;
PW-4 – Meerabai Jayram Gare, mother of victim was examined vide
Exhibit-31; PW-5 - Prabhakar Bhaguji Gade is the spot panchanama
witness; PW-6 - Dr. Sandhya Vilas Patil, Doctor who examined the
victim on 20.11.2005 was examined vide Exhibit-37. In addition
prosecution relied upon Chemical Analyser’s (CA) report in respect of
blood sample, pubic hair sample, nail clippings of accused; CA report
of blood sample, pubic hair sample, vaginal swab and vaginal smear
sample of victim vide Exhibit-46.
6.         Mr. Satpute, has argued that prosecutrix - victim has filed a
false complaint to implicate Appellant at the behest of PW-4 i.e.
mother of victim to pressurise and effect partition of the family field/
property; that on 16.11.2022, Appellant was not present in the home
and had gone alongwith other family members to attend ‘ kirtan’
program and returned alongwith the family members late in the night;
that the Investigating Officer (I.O.) was not examined by prosecution
to unearth the real facts; that there is substantial delay of 3 days in
filing the report after the alleged incident and it is fatal to the veracity
of the complaint; that no injuries were found on private parts of the
victim; that victim did not reveal about any such incident to the doctor
who attended to her in the hospital where she was taken by her father-
in-law and lastly recording of the statement of the victim by the police
was highly suspicious as it remains unexplained. Hence, he prays for
setting aside the impugned judgment and in the alternative submits
that since appellant has already undergone the sentence of 5 years
awarded by the impugned judgment, Criminal Appeal No.309 of 2014
filed by the State and Suo-Motu Petition No.2 of 2015, both be
7.         PER-CONTRA, Mr. Dedhia, learned APP, on behalf of the
State submitted that accused is brother-in-law of victim and on date of
incident i.e. 16.11.2005, all family members except accused, victim
and her blind husband, had gone to attend ‘ kirtan’ program in the
village temple; that at about 10:00 p.m. at night when the victim was
alone inside the house, accused entered inside, forced himself on her
and ravished her. He submitted that circumstantial evidence in the
present case clearly established commission of the overt act by
Appellant and it stands corroborated by medical evidence of the
doctor. He has therefore prayed and urged for enhancement of the
sentence of 5 years awarded to Appellant under the unamended
provisions of Section 376 IPC prior to 2018, once the conviction is
rendered by the trial court.
8.         We have perused evidence of the prosecution witnesses
carefully. Evidence of PW-1, PW-2 and PW-4 reveal that incident took
place on 16.11.2005 whereas FIR was lodged on 19.11.2005. It has
also come in evidence that immediately after the incident, victim
through gestures narrated and informed her father-in-law i.e. father of
the accused about the incident but no steps were taken. It is only on
19.11.2005, when victim was dropped at her paternal house, PW-4
lodged the report on learning about the incident on the same day
itself. Hence the delay, if any, in lodging the report as seen in the
present case is legitimate and is properly explained.
9.        Considering the fact that the incident had occurred inside
the house, however evidence given by victim through PW-1 read with
the evidence given by PW-4, mother of the victim clearly indicates and
proves the incident that took place. Witnesses have stated that victim
has narrated the incident to each of them by gestures. PW-4 being
mother of the victim, can be said to have been certainly acquainted
with the communication ability of victim. So also, PW-1 Vrushali
Gharpure, expert witness has also given evidence before the court.
10.       Prosecution has examined PW-1 and her evidence clearly
indicates that victim informed her in the presence of the court as to
how she was dealt with by the accused. Both, expert witness as well
as victim have deposed before court; questions asked to victim through
PW-1 and answers received by court through PW-1 having been
recorded by the court show the skill set of PW-1 to have entered into a
dialogue and communication with the victim in the presence of the
learned trial court Judge. In our view learned trial court has adopted a
proper procedure for recording of evidence of victim i.e. PW-2 who
was deaf and dumb. Having perused the evidence of PW-1 read with
the evidence of PW-2 and PW-4, mother, we are convinced that the
entire evidence supports the case of the prosecution. It is pertinent to
note that in the present case, testimony of PW-1, expert witness, is not
challenged before the trial court nor any suggestions are made
challenging her confidence/skill set in this regard. PW-1 admittedly
being the translator/interpreter had no interest in the trial.
Statements/gestures/sign language of the victim i.e. PW-2 as
interpreted by the interpreter i.e. PW-1 stand corroborated by the
evidence given by PW-4 i.e. the first informant, mother of the victim.
Evidence of these three witnesses is not shattered in any manner
whatsoever in cross-examination. Facts in the present case clearly
show that the interpreter had no interest in the prosecution’s case and
she had acted merely on the direction of the Investigating Officer
and/or of the learned trial court on the strength of her expertise of
being a special teacher in the school where hearing and speech
impaired children take education. Hence, the evidence of PW-1, PW-2
and PW-4 deserves to be accepted.
11.       In the present case, it seen that the incident had occurred on
16.11.2005 whereas the Partition Suit R.C.S. No.8 of 2006 was filed
by Bhausaheb Makaji Mudgul in 2006. If the defence relies upon the
partition dispute, then the said dispute ought to have been prevailing
on the date of the incident. However, that is not the case, considering
that the unfortunate incident had occurred well before the suit was
filed and hence defence of the pending partition suit cannot be
available to the accused. It is completely misplaced.
12.        It is pertinent to note that since the victim is deaf and dumb,
her evidence was recorded through the expert witness PW-1 i.e. the
special teacher for deaf and dumb vide Exhibit-23 under the provisions
of Section 119 of the Act. It is seen that PW-1 is an experienced
teacher working since 1987 with Smt. Mai Lele Shrawan Vikas
Vidyalaya, Nashik as a Special Teacher and was specially deputed to
give evidence after communicating with the victim by the Head-
Mistress of the institution. PW-1 is qualified and holds the degree of
Bachelor of Arts and Bachelor of Education (Deaf). PW-1 is thus an
expert witness and her testimony is therefore crucial. PW-2 - victim
through PW-1 has testified that on the date of the incident her
husband was sleeping outside the house and other family members
had gone out to the temple and she was sleeping inside the house
along with her son. According to victim at about 10:00 p.m., accused
entered into the house and closed the door of the room; thereafter
accused shut her mouth and ravished her; however before leaving,
accused told her not to disclose the incident to anybody and promised
to pay her a handsome amount. She has further testified that after her
family members returned home she informed her father-in-law about
the incident, however, the father-in-law thereafter decided to drop the
victim at her paternal house after 2 days. According to the victim, she
was operated upon for a surgery on her uterus and therefore her
husband was sleeping outside the room; that the uterus of the victim
was removed due to surgery; that after the surgery for 6 months
victim stayed at her parental house and had returned to the
matrimonial house 15 days before the incident and as per advice given
by the doctor was required to abstain from having sexual relation with
her husband for some time.
13.         It will be useful to refer to the Section 119 of the Indian
Evidence Act, 1872 which relates to dumb witnesses. Section 119
defines dumb witness as one who is unable to speak but may give his
evidence in any other manner in which he can make it intelligible,
either by writing, by signs and that such writing must be written and
the signs made in open court. If the above requirement is met then
evidence so given shall be deemed to be oral evidence. In the present
case, it is seen that provisions of Section 119 have been fully complied
with by the prosecution in proving its case. Victim i.e. PW-2 has
examined herself through the expert witness i.e. PW-1, who has
interpreted by sign language and gestures of the victim in the court, as
such the evidence so recorded is oral evidence. This testimony of the
victim herself through PW-1 as the interpreter has not been shaken at
all in cross-examination. It is seen that deposition of the victim i.e.
PW-2 has been done through PW-1 together and both of them have
been administered oath. Though elaborate cross-examination has been
done by the Advocate for the accused, the same is insufficient in so far
as disproving the incident is concerned. Questions have been asked to
the victim pertaining to the alleged partition suit wherein the victim
has given the following answer:-
I am not aware as to whether my husband has filed the case
against other members of the family for getting the field. My
brother and husband used to attend the court when
required.    The dispute prevailing between me and the
accused on account of agricultural field.             If accused
delivered the field then the dispute come to an end…………"
14.       Defence case solely relies upon one and only one fact i.e. the
dispute of partition of family property initiated by filing of the suit by
husband of the victim against the accused and the father of the
15.       It is to be understood that no woman would even otherwise
level and take the risk of levelling such a wild charge of ravishing her
only on the pretext of partition of the property. Victim is deaf and
dumb, whereas her husband is blind. For more than 5 years victim
and her husband have been part of the joint family with the parent in-
laws and the family of her brother-in-law. Unless and until such an
incident had happened or occurred there was no reason for the victim
to make such an allegation. It is further seen that since the victim was
deaf and dumb every aspect of the incident has been interpreted by
the PW-1 in evidence before the learned trial judge. It is pertinent to
note that partition suit being RCS No.8 of 2006 was filed in February
2006 whereas the incident has occurred on 16.11.2005. The evidence
given by PW-1 in interpreting the unfortunate incident as told by the
victim is believable. Evidence given by the victim herself (PW-2)
assumes importance in such a case.
16.        Cross-examination of the victim shows that she is confronted
with several questions, inter alia, pertaining to the partition dispute
and the partition suit between her husband on the one hand and the
father-in-law and accused on the other hand.               In her cross-
examination, victim has stated that the lis in the partition suit can
come to an end, if the portion of the field claimed by her husband is
delivered to him by accused and the father-in-law. This statement is
unfortunately viewed by the defence to mean that victim has filed a
false complaint. The answer given by the victim with respect to the
issue of partition would have no nexus whatsoever with the heinous
act of the accused. Evidence given by victim cannot be discarded on
the basis of the above statement. Such answer given by victim can
never be the basis for filing the complaint.
17.        That apart, evidence given by PW-4 mother of the victim in
understanding and narrating the incident as told to her by the victim
also deserves to believed as the same corroborates the evidence given
by PW-1 and PW-2.        In this backdrop, medical evidence, therefore
assumes significance. PW-3 - Dr. Vijaysingh Mundhe is the doctor who
has examined the victim whereas PW-6 - Dr. Sandhya Patil has
examined the accused. Certificate issued by PW-6 speaks for itself and
cannot be disbelieved though she has examined the victim three days
after the incident. This delay cannot be fatal for accepting the
certificate. PW-3 - Dr. Vijaysingh Mundhe has examined the accused
on 19.11.2005 i.e. within 24 hours after the incident and he has
collected samples of his pubic hair, blood sample, nail clippings and
sent them for chemical analysis. C.A. Report (Exhibit-45) clearly states
that ‘human semen is detected on pubic hair of accused’. Though the
victim is deaf and dumb, she gathered courage and informed her
father-in-law first and thereafter her mother and without wasting time
report was lodged. No married women would put at stake her life by
making such a serious allegation against her family member unless
18.        The Apex Court in the case of Bharwada Bhoginbhai
Hirjibhai Vs. State of Gujarat1, in paragraph No.9 has held as under:-
“9. In the Indian setting, refusal to act on the testimony of a
victim of sexual assault in the absence of corroboration as a
rule, is adding insult to injury. Why should the evidence of the
girl or the woman who complains of rape or sexual molestation
be viewed with the aid of spectacles fitted with lenses tinged
with doubt, disbelief or suspicion? To do so is to justify the
charge of male chauvinism in a male dominated society. We
must analyze the argument in support of the need for
corroboration and subject it to relentless and remorseless cross-
examination. And we must do so with a logical, and not an
opinionated, eye in the light of probabilities with our feet firmly
planted on the soil of India and with our eyes focussed on the
Indian horizon………….”
19.        The Apex Court in the above judgment has further held that
a girl or woman in the tradition bound non-permissive society of India
would be extremely reluctant even to admit that any incident which is
likely to reflect on her chastity had ever occurred.               She would be
conscious of the danger of being ostracized by the society or being
looked down by the society including by her own family members,
relatives, friends, and neighbors, she would face the risk of losing the
love and respect of her own husband and near relatives, and of her
matrimonial house and happiness being shattered.
20.        The Apex Court in the case of Sheikh Zakir Vs. State of
Bihar2, has held that a reading of the deposition of the complainant
shows that it has a ring of truth around. The absence of any injury on
the person of the complainant may not itself discredit the statement of
the complainant.       Merely because the complainant was a helpless
victim who was by force prevented from offering serious physical
resistance, she cannot be disbelieved. The Apex Court has further held
that if a conviction is based on the evidence of a prosecutrix without
any corroboration it will not be illegal on that sole ground.
21.        In the present case, testimony of PW-1, PW-2 and PW-4 if
read together clearly prove the chain of circumstances and act of the
accused.     The defence has failed to place any cogent material on
record. Therefore, taking into consideration the entire evidence on
record, deposition of the prosecution witnesses and circumstances
sought to be relied upon by the prosecution, we find that the
prosecution has succeeded in proving its case beyond reasonable
22.        In the case of Moti Lal Vs. State of M.P.3, the Supreme Court
while considering a case under Section 376 IPC, referred to the
observations of Vivian Bose, J. in Rameshwar Vs. The State of
Rajasthan4, and has observed that a woman or a girl who is raped is
not an accomplice; that corroboration is not the sine qua for
conviction in a rape case; that it is settled law that the victim of sexual
assault is not treated as accomplice and as such, her evidence does not
require corroboration from any evidence including the evidence of a
doctor; that in a given case even if the doctor who has examined the
victim does not find sign of rape, it is no ground to disbelieve the sole
testimony of the prosecutrix; that in normal course a victim of sexual
assault does not like to disclose such offence even before her family
members much less before public or before the police; the Indian
women has tendency to conceal such offence because it involves her
prestige as well as prestige of her family and only in few cases, the
victim girl or the family members has courage to go before the police
station and lodge a case.
22.1.      In the present case, it is seen that the victim is a helpless,
deaf and dumb married woman whose privacy and personal integrity
has been shattered by the Appellant. In paragraph 8 of the above
judgment, the Supreme Court has held as under:-
“8. Of late, crime against women in general and rape in
particular is on the increase. It is an irony that while we are
celebrating women's rights in all spheres, we show little or no
concern for her honour. It is a sad reflection on the attitude of
indifference of the society towards the violation of human
dignity of the victims of sex crimes. We must remember that a
rapist not only violates the victim's privacy and personal
integrity, but inevitably causes serious psychological as well as
physical harm in the process. Rape is not merely a physical
assault -- it is often destructive of the whole personality of the
victim. A murderer destroys the physical body of his victim, a
rapist degrades the very soul of the helpless female. The Court,
therefore, shoulders a great responsibility while trying an
accused on charges of rape. They must deal with such cases with
utmost sensitivity. The Courts should examine the broader
probabilities of a case and not get swayed by minor
contradictions or insignificant discrepancies in the statement of
the prosecutrix, which are not of a fatal nature, to throw out an
otherwise reliable prosecution case. If evidence of the
prosecutrix inspires confidence, it must be relied upon without
seeking corroboration of her statement in material particulars. If
for some reason the Court finds it difficult to place implicit
reliance on her testimony, it may look for evidence which may
lend assurance to her testimony, short of corroboration required
in the case of an accomplice. The testimony of the prosecutrix
must be appreciated in the background of the entire case and the
trial Court must be alive to its responsibility and be sensitive
while dealing with cases involving sexual molestations. This
position was highlighted in State of Punjab Vs. Gurmeet Singh5.”
22.2.       Thus, from the above, it is seen that rape is not merely a
physical assault but it destructs the whole personality of the helpless
woman.       In the present case, the victim is helpless handicapped
woman and thus, the present case requires to be dealt with utmost
sensitivity. As seen, the evidence of the prosecutrix in the present case
inspires confidence and also stands corroborated in material
particulars on the basis of testimony of the prosecution witnesses.
23.         In view of the above discussion and findings, and on
appreciation of the evidence, offence committed by the accused stands
proved beyond reasonable doubt. The only question that now remains
to be considered is as regards the sentence. Appellant has behaved in
the most horrific manner and shocked our conscience. The magnitude
of his offence is such that he has misused his position of trust and
committed an act as alleged and proved on a helpless handicapped
victim who could not speak or hear. We would have countenanced
the leniency shown by the learned trial court, but in the facts of the
present case, we are afraid that we cannot persuade ourselves to do
so. We disagree with the findings returned by the learned trial court in
so far as the award of sentence is concerned; learned trial court has
clearly erred in awarding the sentence of 5 years rigorous
imprisonment to the accused on the ground of taking into
consideration the age of the accused and that the accused was facing
trial for 6 - 7 years and attending the court; we do not agree with this
reasoning as it is contrary to the statute. Unamended Section 376 IPC
prior to 21.04.2018 as it stood referred to punishment for rape and
stated that except in the cases provided by sub-section (2) whoever
commits rape shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment of either
description for a term which shall not be less than 7 years, but which
may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
The present case is covered by the provisions of Section 376(1) IPC.
In view of the statutory provision, once the trial court had come to the
conclusion that the prosecution had squarely proved the offence of
rape committed by the accused on the victim beyond reasonable
doubt, then there is no reason to defer from the statutory provision
and award a lesser sentence than what is prescribed by the statute. It
is seen that the victim in the present case is a deaf and dumb woman.
Ravishing such a handicapped/helpless woman and more specifically
when she is alone inside the house and the entire case of the defence
falling apart without proving the chain of circumstances, the sentence
awarded by the learned trial court directing the accused to suffer
rigorous imprisonment for 5 years and to pay fine of Rs.1,000/- and in
default of payment of fine to undergo simple imprisonment for 1
month is therefore set aside to that extent and substituted by the
(i) accused Madhukar Makaji Mudgul is hereby convicted in
view of section 235 of the Criminal Procedure Code of the
offence punishable under Section 376 IPC and is sentenced
to suffer rigorous imprisonment for 7 years and to pay fine
of Rs.25,000/-, and in default of payment of fine the accused
shall further undergo simple imprisonment for 6 months;
rest of the impugned judgment and order shall remain as it
24.       Subject to the above modification of the sentence in the
impugned judgment dated 13.02.2013 to the aforesaid extent,
Criminal Appeal No.218 of 2013 filed by the accused fails and is
25.       In view of the above directions, Criminal Appeal No.309 of
2014 filed by the State stands allowed by substituting the sentence
awarded by the learned trial court to the Appellant from 5 years to 7
years rigorous imprisonment and fine from Rs.1,000/- to Rs.25,000/-,
and in default of payment of fine simple imprisonment for 6 months.
26.                Criminal Suo-Motu Petition No.2 of 2015 also stands
disposed in view of the above directions in Criminal Appeal No.309 of
27.                Appellant shall surrender before the learned Additional
Sessions Judge, Niphad, District Nashik in order to undergo the
remaining sentence as awarded within a period of four weeks from the
date of uploading of this judgment.              If the Appellant does not
surrender within a period of four weeks as directed, non-bailable
warrant be issued to effect arrest of Appellant to comply with the
present order in accordance with law.
28.                This Court had requested Advocate Mr. Ashish Satpute to
espouse the cause of the Appellant in Criminal Appeal No. 218 of
2013; he has assisted the court in appreciating the evidence on record.
His professional fee quantified as per rule to be paid to him by the