Dated this the 22nd day of April, 2022
This Criminal Revision Petition has been filed challenging
the judgment of the Additional Sessions Court IV Kollam in
Crl.Appeal No.27/2015 dated 9th June, 2017.
2. The first revision petitioner is the wife of the first
respondent.      The second revision petitioner is their minor
daughter. The second and third respondents are the brothers,
and the fourth respondent is the maternal uncle of the first
respondent. The revision petitioners filed MC No.39/2011 at the
Judicial First-Class Magistrate Court, Sasthamcotta (for short, ‘the
trial court’) claiming various reliefs u/s 12(1) of the Protection of
Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 (for short, the DV Act).
It was alleged that at the time of marriage, the parents of the first
petitioner gave 100 sovereigns of gold ornaments to her.
Moreover, her parents entrusted `5,00,000/- to the first and
second respondents. It was further alleged that later on
15/4/2008, the father and brother of the first revision petitioner
entrusted `13,00,000/- to the first respondent and his mother. It
is the case of the petitioners that utilizing the entire gold
ornaments and money given by the parents of the first petitioner,
the first respondent constructed a house on his property viz.,
Ajma Manzil. According to the petitioners, they along with the
first respondent resided in the said house and it is their shared
household. It was further alleged that on 9/12/2009 at around
9.30 p.m, the second and third respondents criminally trespassed
into the above said shared household and assaulted the first
petitioner. It was further alleged that thereafter on 28/12/2009 at
8.30 p.m., all respondents assaulted the first petitioner as well as
her father and brother at Ajma Manzil and the first respondent
stabbed the first petitioner with a knife on her head. It was also
alleged   that   the   respondents    disconnected   the   electrical
connection of the house and removed household articles from the
house. It was in these circumstances the petitioners approached
the trial court invoking the provisions of the DV Act claiming
protection, residential and monetary orders. The petitioners have
also sought for the return of gold ornaments and money
entrusted to respondents and for reinstating the electricity
3.   The first and second respondents entered appearance.
The third and fourth respondents were set ex parte. The first
respondent alone filed objection statement.            The marriage
between the first petitioner and first respondent and the paternity
of the child was admitted by the first respondent. However, he
contended that he divorced the first petitioner on 28/12/2009 by
pronouncing triple talaq. The allegations in the petition that the
parents of the petitioners entrusted gold ornaments and money
to him and utilizing the same he constructed the house were
denied by the first respondent. He has also denied the various
instances of domestic violence allegedly exercised by him and
the remaining respondents on the first petitioner pleaded in the
petition. He contended that Ajma Manzil is a house constructed
by him with his own funds and it is not a shared household.
According to him, the petitioners never resided in the house
along with him. It is his case that in fact the first petitioner along
with her father and brother trespassed into the house of the
second respondent on 8/12/2009 and attacked him.               It was
further contended that the matrimonial relationship between the
first petitioner and first respondent existed for just one week and
they never lived together in the shared household. He sought the
dismissal of the petition.
4. PWs1 to 4 were examined on the side of the
petitioners and Exts.P1 to P9 were marked. DW1 to DW8 were
examined and Exts.D1 to D22 were marked on the side of the
respondents. Exts.C1 and X1 were marked as court exhibits.
After trial, the trial court passed the following order in favour of
the petitioners.
b)    The respondents are restrained from committing any act
of domestic violence against the petitioners under section
18(a) of the Act.
c)     The petitioners are entitled to get residential order in
Kandolil   Puthanveedu     alias  Ajma Manzil   bearing   house
No.XVII/903 of the Chevalakkara Grama Panchayat. The
petitioners can reside in that house until the first respondent
secures a same level of alternative accommodation to the
petitioners.
d)    The first respondent shall pay Rs.25,000/- to the first
petitioner as compensation u/s 22 for the mental torture and
emotional distress.
e)     The first respondent u/s 20(3) of the Act shall pay
Rs.3,000/- each as monthly maintenance to the first and the
second petitioner on or before the 5th day of each month.
f)    The prayer for return of gold ornaments and money, and
the prayer for reinstating electricity connection are not
allowed.
g)    The first respondent shall also execute bond for Rs.2
lakhs for not committing the domestic violence in future.”
5. The respondents herein challenged the above order at
the Additional Sessions Court IV, Kollam (for short, ‘the appellate
court’). The appellate court allowed the appeal and dismissed the
MC. Aggrieved by the said judgment, this revision petition has
been preferred.
6. I have heard Sri.Shijin P.C., the learned counsel for the
revision petitioners, Sri.B.Mohanlal, the learned counsel for
respondents 1 to 4 and Sri.Sangeetha Raj, the learned Public
7. The parties are Muslims. It is not in dispute that the
first respondent married the first petitioner on 10/7/2006 and the
second petitioner was born in the said wedlock.                   The first
respondent took a contention that he divorced the first petitioner
on 28/12/2009 by pronouncing talaq. The trial court found that
the first respondent failed to prove the pronouncement of talaq.
However, the appellate court found that the Magistrate under the
exercise of the power under the provisions of the DV Act cannot
decide the validity of the talaq pronounced by the first
respondent.     It was further held that prima facie there is
material to show that the first respondent pronounced talaq and
as such the status of the petitioner is that of a divorced woman
and she is not entitled to claim maintenance. The appellate court
further found that the first petitioner miserably failed to prove
that the first respondent committed acts of domestic violence
and that the house in question is a shared household.
Accordingly, all the reliefs granted by the trial court were set
8. As per S.18 of the DV Act, the Magistrate is
empowered to pass a protection order in favour of the aggrieved
person and prohibit the respondents from committing any act of
domestic violence on being prima facie satisfied that the
domestic violence has taken place or is likely to take place. The
term ‘domestic violence’ has been defined u/s 3 of the Act. It
includes physical abuse as well as verbal emotional abuse and
economic abuse.      The specific instances of various domestic
violence on the part of the respondents have been clearly
pleaded in the petition. The first petitioner was examined as
PW1. She deposed before the trial court about the said specific
instances of domestic violence. There was no successful cross-
examination on those aspects. On the side of the petitioners,
Exts.P5 and P5(a), the copy of the FIR and FIS in Crime
No.586/2019 of Thekkumbhagam Police Station were produced in
order to substantiate their contention that the respondents
assaulted the first petitioner on 28/12/2009. In order to prove the
injury sustained in the said incident, the petitioners have also
produced a wound certificate dated 28/12/2009 issued by the
Taluk Headquarters Hospital, Sasthamcotta as Ext.P6. As against
this positive evidence given by the petitioners, no rebuttal
evidence has been adduced by the respondents.             The first
respondent did not mount the box.      It has come out in evidence
that the first respondent failed to maintain the petitioners. The
term ‘domestic violence’ as defined u/s 3 does not mean any
physical harassment alone.        As already stated, it includes
emotional or economic abuse as well. The term ‘economic abuse’
has been defined u/s 3(iv) of the Act. It includes deprivation of all
or any economic or financial resources to which the aggrieved
person is entitled under any law or custom and maintenance.
Thus, the non-payment of maintenance alone would constitute
domestic violence. The appellate court without considering this
positive evidence adduced on the side of the petitioners relying
on a flimsy ground that in Ext.P4 petition filed by the petitioners
there was no averment of domestic violence held that the
petitioners  failed  to  prove  that  the   first respondent    has
committed domestic violence. The said finding of the appellate
court, no doubt, is perverse and cannot be sustained.
9. The first respondent for the first time in the objection
statement took a contention that he divorced the petitioner by
pronouncing talaq on 28/12/2009. He relied on Exts.D2, D12 and
D13 to prove the factum of talaq.         Ext.D2 is the copy of
talaqnama. Ext.D12 is the certificate dated 7/5/2010 issued by
Kottukadu Jamaath and Ext.D13 is the certificate dated 21/1/2010
issued from the said Jamaath. It has been produced to prove that
the fact that the first respondent pronounced           talaq was
communicated to the local Jamaath.          Apart from the said
document, no evidence has been produced. Exts.D12 and D13
were not proved in accordance with law by examining their
authors. The first respondent did not mount the box to prove that
he pronounced talaq. Ext.D2 is only a copy, the original has not
been produced.      The first petitioner has even denied the
signature of the first respondent in Ext.D2. Admittedly the first
respondent pronounced triple talaq. The Apex Court in Shamim
Ara v. State of U.P. (2002 KHC 829) has held that a mere plea
taken in the written statement of a divorce having been
pronounced sometime in the past cannot by itself at all be
treated as a pronouncement of talaq by the husband on the wife
and talaq to be effective must be for a reasonable cause and be
preceded by attempts of reconciliation between the husband and
wife by two arbitrators, one chosen by the wife from her family
and the other by the husband from his family. The valid forms of
talaq recognized in Muslim law viz talaq ahsan and talaq hasan,
both contemplated a period (iddat), immediately after the
pronouncement of talaq, whether such pronouncement is only
once or thrice over three successive lunar months, when the
husband can revoke the talaq. It comes into effect only after the
said period. Talaq-i-biddat or triple talaq which instantaneously
severs the marital tie is not valid or legal under Muslim Personal
Law. The Constitution Bench of the Apex Court in Shayara
Banu and Others v. Union of India and Others [(2017) 9 SCC
1] examined the constitutional validity of the triple talaq and held
that the said form of talaq is violative of fundamental right under
Article 15 and declared as unconstitutional. Even according to the
first respondent, he pronounced triple talaq at a go without
following any of the procedures mentioned above. Hence, it is
invalid. In a petition filed by the wife under the DV Act, if the
husband disputes the marital status on the ground that he has
divorced the wife by the pronouncement of talaq, the Magistrate
has every power to decide whether the said plea is valid or not.
The finding of the appellate court that the Magistrate has no
power to decide the validity of the talaq is wrong and only to be
set aside.
10. That apart, the wording ‘aggrieved person’ as laid
down in S.2(a) of the DV Act clearly provided any woman, who is
or has been in a domestic relationship with the respondent. The
definition of ‘domestic relationship’ [S.2(f)] also means the
relationship between two persons, who live or have, at any point
of time, lived together in the shared household. The definition of
‘shared household’ [S.2(s)] also means where the person
aggrieved lives or at any stage has lived in a domestic
relationship. Therefore, none of the definitions contemplate that
on the date of filing such application, for the reliefs under the DV
Act, the party should be actually residing or living together. The
very word, ‘has lived together at any point of time’ necessarily
covers even the past cohabitation or past living together. This
court in Priya v. Shibu and Others (2008 (3) KHC 125) has held
that even if there is a past relationship or experience with the
parties concerned, the applicant will have locus standi to invoke
the jurisdiction of the Magistrate under the DV Act. It was
specifically held that even a divorced wife is entitled to file a
petition u/s 12(1) of the DV Act claiming the return of dowry and
ornaments and for maintenance payable u/s 125 of Cr.P.C. The
said decision was followed in Bipin v. Meera D.S. and Others
(2016 (5) KHC 367), and held that to obtain relief under the Act, it
is not required that the domestic relationship should continue as
on the date of the application. The Apex Court in Juveria Abdul
Majid Patni v. Atif Iqbal Mansoori and Another (2014 KHC
4645) has held that an act of domestic violence once committed,
the subsequent decree of divorce will not absolve the liability of
the respondent from the offence committed or to deny the
benefit to which the aggrieved person is entitled under the DV
Act. Here is a case where even according to the first respondent,
the alleged talaq was on 28/12/2009. All the allegations of
domestic violence pertain to the period prior to the said date.
Admittedly in those days, the matrimonial relationship was in
11.  The definite case of the petitioners is that Ajma Manzil
is a shared household and they along with the first respondent
resided therein. In order to prove the same, the 1 st petitioner
herself gave evidence as PW1. To corroborate the evidence of
PW1, PW3 who is the neighbour of PW1 also gave evidence. The
evidence of PWs1 and 3 clearly prove that the petitioners resided
in the said house. There is no contra evidence.            The 1st
respondent did not mount the box.       The appellate court went
wrong in holding that Ajma Manzil is not a shared household
relying on electricity bills showing trivial consumption. The
appellate court failed to take note of the fact that the specific
case put forward by the petitioners is that they were forcefully
evicted from the shared household by the respondents and the
electricity connection was disconnected. Whether the electricity
was consumed or not is not relevant in deciding the right of
residence in the shared household. Even the continued residence
or occupation of the shared household is not all required for the
entitlement of a wife to get a residential order.
12.  The petitioners have satisfactorily proved that they
were     entitled  for   protection,  residence,    monetary     and
compensation orders which were rightly granted by the trial
court. The first appellate court on flimsy reasons set aside the
reasoned order of the trial court. It is true that this court is not
supposed to reappreciate the evidence in a revision petition. But
this is not a case of reappreciation of evidence. It is a case where
the appellate court without appreciating the evidence in the
correct perspective set aside the well-reasoned order of the trial
court. The powers vested with this court u/s 397 r/w 401 of Cr. P.C
are inherent in nature to correct the judgments of the courts
below which suffers from gross illegality. The findings in the
impugned judgment of the appellate court have been arrived at
by ignoring the relevant materials and evidence on record. The
entire approach of the appellate court in dealing with evidence
and law on the point was patently wrong. The appellate court
has committed gross illegality in reversing the order of the trial
court and dismissing the petition. For these reasons, I hold that it
is a fit case where the discretionary power vested with this court
u/s 397 r/w 401 of Cr.P.C could be exercised.
In the result, the criminal revision petition is allowed. The
impugned judgment of the appellate court is set aside, and the
order of the trial court is restored.