In Re : Matters pending with interim orders in the
High Court at Calcutta and Courts subordinate to
it including the Tribunals within the State of West
Bengal and Union Territory of Andaman &
Nicobar Islands during the prevailing COVID-19
situation related non-availability of access to
The Court : This is a writ petition taken up by the Court on its own
motion in relation to matters pending with interim orders in the High
Court at Calcutta and Courts subordinate to it including the Tribunals
within the State of West Bengal and Union Territory of Andaman &
Nicobar Islands during the prevailing COVID-19 situation due to non-
availability of access to Courts.
Taking into consideration the different orders passed by the
Hon’ble Supreme Court of India including the order dated              March 08,
2021 in Suo Motu Writ Petition (Civil) No. 3 of 2020, we see that all
proceedings which fall under the cover of that order of the Hon’ble
Supreme Court of India stand governed by it.
All that remains is the continuance of interlocutory orders which
are in force in terms of the original order issued in this writ petition
namely, W.P.A. 5323 of 2020 and extended from time to time, which as
of now, stands extended till March 31st, 2021.
We do not see any reason to extend the original order any further
beyond March 31st, 2021, except as regards the matters which we
specifically order hereinbelow.
Conditional orders of Courts including relating to occupation of any
premises subject to payment of rent or occupational charges will
continue, notwithstanding the non-deposit of the rent or occupation
charges during the period 15 th March, 2020 till 20th April, 2021.
Similarly, rent or occupation charges not deposited in terms of the rent
control legislations will not immediately make the tenant or occupant
liable for eviction till 20th April, 2021 or earlier orders of Court.
This order will also apply to orders pertaining to the Original Side of
This order be published on the official website of this Court and
also be communicated to the Courts subordinate to this Court and all
General; and the Presidents and Secretaries of the three wings of the Bar
in this Court with a request to circulate the same among lawyers,
litigants and other interested.
No further orders are called for. Hence this suo moto writ petition is
disposed of.