At the instance of first wife, cognizance was taken
for the offences under Sections 494, 114 r/w Section 34
IPC in C.C.No.2105/2013 of the JFCM, Chavakkad on the
allegation that during the pendency of the appeal against
the decree of divorce, her husband entered into a second
marriage.    Reliance      was    placed   on  Chandra   Mohini
Srivastava v. Avinuh Prasad Srivastava         (LAWS (SC) 1966
10 34 = AIR (SC) 1967 581) in support of the argument
that the second marriage would stand hit by Section 15 of
the Hindu Marriage Act.         Another decision of the Apex
Court in Tejinder Kaur v. Gurmit Singh (LAWS (SC) 1988 2
85 = AIR (SC) 1988 839) was also placed in support of the
said argument.
2.   The question came up for consideration is whether
the offence under Sections 494 and 114 IPC would stand
attracted when a second marriage was solemnized after the
decree   of  divorce    of   first   marriage, but  before  the
culmination of its appeal and what would be the legal
effect, when the appeal ended in dismissal confirming the
decree of divorce.
3. To resolve the issue, it is necessary to have a
better   understanding  of what  actually  amounts to  the
offence of bigamy as engrafted under Section 494 IPC in
relation to Sections 15 and 17 of Hindu Marriage Act.
4.   In order to constitute the offence under Section
494 IPC, it must be satisfied that (i) the accused must
have contracted first marriage (ii) he must have married
again (iii) the first marriage must be subsisting and
(iv) the spouse must be living ( Pashaura Singh v. State
of Punjab and Another (AIR 2010 (SC) 922 : 2009 AIR SCW
7226). Further, it is necessary that the second marriage
should be void by reason of its taking place during the
life-time of the first husband or wife (Gopal Lal v.
State of Rajasthan (AIR 1979 (SC)713 : 1979 Cri LJ 652)).
5.   Section 15 of the Hindu Marriage Act after its
amendment deals with the stage in which a divorced person
can validly enter into a second marriage. It says that
after the decree of dissolving the marriage, either there
is no right of appeal against the decree or if there is
such a right, the time for appealing has expired without
an appeal having been presented or an appeal has been
presented, but has been dismissed, it shall be lawful
either   of   the   party    to  the    marriage   to  marry   again.
Though,   the    section    after    its   amendment   worded    in  a
positive    way   specifying     the    time   in   which  a   second
marriage can validly be entered into, by either of the
parties   to    the   marriage,     in   fact,   a   restriction    is
engrafted     against      a    second      marriage    during     the
subsistence     of   first    marriage.       On   the  other   hand,
Section    494    IPC   is    a  provision      fastening   criminal
liability    for   the   offence     of   bigamy,   subject   to   the
exception incorporated therein.            Section 17 of the Hindu
Marriage Act, 1955 says that any marriage between two
Hindus solemnized after the commencement of this Act is
void if at the date of such marriage either party had a
husband or wife living; and the provisions of sections
494 and 495 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) shall
apply accordingly.
6.   In   the   instant    case,    the  second   marriage    was
solemnized after the decree of divorce by the Family
Court, but during the pendency of an appeal and a stay
order.    But it is an admitted fact that the appeal ended
in   dismissal    subsequently      confirming    the  decree   of
divorce. Then the Doctrine of Merger would come into play
and the decree of the Family Court will stand merged in
the appellate decree. The        decree would operate not from
the date of first appellate decree, but from the date of
decree of divorce granted by the Family Court. In other
words, the decree of divorce confirmed in appeal would
stand   effective    from   the   date   of  original   decree  of
divorce of the Family Court and the appellate decree will
revert back to the date          of decree of divorce of the
Family    Court.   If    that   be    so,   on   account   of  the
confirmation of decree of divorce in appeal, the first
marriage will stand dissolved from the date of decree of
Family Court and thereafter it cannot be said that there
exists a subsisting marriage relationship or a living
spouse for the purpose of Section 494 IPC.               The legal
position settled in      Chandra Mohini Srivastava's case and
Tejinder    Kaur's    case   (supra)    must   be  understood   in
relation    to   Section    15   of    the  Hindu   Marriage   Act
governing validity of      a second marriage. Section 15 does
not override Section 28 of the Hindu Marriage Act, which
confers      a  right    of   appeal.   In  Section   15,  three
situations alone were recognized        i.e. (i) when there is
no right of appeal against the decree (ii) if there is
any right of appeal, the time for appealing has expired
without an appeal having been presented and (iii) an
appeal has been presented, but has been dismissed. The
Apex Court in Lila Gupta v. Laxmi Narain and Others (AIR
1978 SC 1351) held that the provision is directory and a
marriage in violation of the period mentioned therein is
not void, but voidable and hence no offence can be said
to   have    been   committed     under     Section    494   IPC.
Necessarily, it must be understood that once the appeal
ended in dismissal confirming the decree of divorce of
the Family Court, it would come under the third limb of
Section 15 of the Act irrespective of the fact that the
marriage was solemnized either before the presentation of
appeal or before the culmination of appeal. The question
whether the second marriage was solemnized during the
pendency of the appeal against the decree of divorce or
before   preferring    an   appeal  within   the  time  schedule
would   pale   into   insignificance,     when   the  decree   of
divorce was confirmed in the appeal, which would revert
back to the date of decree of divorce of Family Court and
hence the offence under Section 494 IPC will not stand
7.   The  perfunctory offence  alleged   under Section
114 IPC will not stand attracted when the main substratum
under Section 494 IPC becomes inoperative and nonest.
Hence, the cognizance taken for the offence under Section
494, 114 r/w Section 34 IPC will not stand in the eye of
law and the same is liable to be quashed. I do so.
The Crl.M.C. will stand allowed accordingly.