2              Rule. Rule made returnable forthwith. Heard finally by
3.             An additional reply of respondent no. 2 is taken on record.
On going through it, it becomes clear that this very petitioner has been
released by the Authority on furlough on six occasions in the past. These
occasions were of the year, 2008, 2012, 2015, 2016, 2019 and 2021.
The reply further shows that on each of the occasions, the petitioner had
surrendered himself to the Jail Authority on due date. In other words,
there has been not a single occasion when the petitioner has jumped
furlough. If, this is the record of the petitioner, we do not understand as
to why this time the petitioner has been denied the benefit of furlough
leave. We have tried to get some clues in this regard by going through
the impugned order. In the impugned order, however, what is stated are
the stereotyped reasons which do not satisfy us to say that the petitioner
is a kind of person who would not return to Jail, if he is released on
furlough. Past conduct of a person like the petitioner in such a matter is
very important and unfortunately same has not been considered while
passing the impugned order. The impugned order states only generalized
reasons like; the crime committed by the petitioner was heinous, there
still existed public wrath against the petitioner due to which, if the
petitioner was released on furlough, he might face some violence and
that, there would be possibility of disturbance of law and order situation,
if the petitioner was enlarged on furlough. These reasons do not make
any reference to any particular or specific instance on the basis of which
one can make a conclusion that the petitioner may face violence out of
public outrage that is still going on against him or that there would be
possibility of disturbance of law and order.
4.            In Criminal Writ Petition No. 355/2018 filed by this
petitioner challenging the order dated 31.01.2018 passed by the D.I.G.,
Prison, Nagpur rejecting his application for grant of furlough leave for a
period of 28 days, this Court took into account past conduct of the
petitioner and ruled in favour of the petitioner. It also took into account
the nature of proposed sureties and came to the conclusion that the
sureties proposed by the petitioner had already undertaken to return the
petitioner to the Prison on the due date. These very grounds are
available here also and so, we are of the view that this petition too
deserves to be allowed.
5.            Before parting with the judgment, we would like to
emphasize upon the nature of functions and duties to be discharged by
respondent no. 1. The petitioner is a prisoner who has been denied
furlough leave not on one occasion but, on several occasions, as pointed
out by the learned Counsel for the petitioner. The petitioner, as
submitted by the learned Counsel for the petitioner, was required to
knock at the doors of the Court, every time when there was rejection of
his furlough application and on each of the occasions, the impugned
order depriving the petitioner of furlough leave has been quashed by this
Court and the petitioner has been directed to be released on furlough
leave. Our experience has been that on each of the occasions when the
application of furlough leave was rejected, the concerned authority i.e.
Inspector General of Prisons, Nagpur had passed stereotyped orders,
without there being any application of mind to the available facts. In
fact, it is the duty of the Deputy Inspector General of Prisons to exercise
his power and discharge his duties by carefully considering all relevant
facts and circumstances and the applicable Rules. The applicable Rules
are the Prisons (Bombay Furlough and Parole) Rules, 1959 (for short the
“Prisons Rules, 1959”). Rule 2 of the Prisons Rules, 1959 confers
discretion upon the Deputy Inspector General of Prisons (Regional) to
appropriately decide the applications for grant of furlough. The
discretion conferred upon the sanctioning Authority i.e. the Deputy
Inspector General of Prisons, who is respondent no. 1 here, is not
unguided and uncanalized. It is a discretion which is controlled by
various provisions made in the Prisons Rules, 1959 and these provisions
are to be found to be contained in Rules starting from Rule 4 and ending
with Rule 17 of the Prisons Rules, 1959. Detailed procedure is prescribed
in Rule 8 of the Prisons Rules, 1959 as to how the applications for grant
of furlough leave should be dealt with. Sub-rule 7 of Rule 8 of the
Prisons Rules, 1959 makes it mandatory for the Authority to consider the
furlough applications and to record the reasons for rejecting the furlough
request and cause the same be conveyed to the concerned prisoner. The
requirement of recording of reasons under Rule 8(7) of the Prisons
Rules, 1959 is not an empty formality and certainly, is not a license for
passing an order recording same old reasons almost like a cliché. It is a
well settled principle of law that whenever there is discretion, it comes
with responsibility to exercise it reasonably, fairly and in a manner as to
fulfill the object of legislation under which it is given.
6.            The Prison Rules, 1959, primarily, have three objects to
fulfill, which have been pointed out by the Full Bench of the Gujrat High
Court in the case of Bhikabai Vs. State of Gujrat and others [AIR 1987
Guj 136]. They are as follows:-
“(i) to enable the inmate to maintain continuity with his
family life and deal with the family matters;
(ii) to save the inmate from the evil effects of continuous
(iii) to enable the inmate to maintain constructive hope
and active interest in the life.”
7.            In the case of Pralhad D. Gajbhiye Vs. State of Maharashtra
[1994 Cri L J 2555], the co-ordinate Bench of this Court has reiterated
the view taken in the case of Bhikabai (supra) wherein, the Division
Bench said that the principle object of grant of furlough is to enable the
prisoner to have family association and to avoid ill-effects of continuous
prison life. This view has been reiterated in several other judgments of
this Court. Thus, the object of Rules relating to grant of furlough to a
prisoner is to enable him to communicate himself with his family
members intermittently, so that he does not loose his sense of sociability
and either becomes a distressed and disturbed man or develops into a
hardened criminal. Both these states are dangerous to the welfare of the
society. That is the reason why the Hon’ble Shri Justice V. R. Krishna Iyer,
in the case of Indersingh Vs. State of Delhi [AIR 1978 SC 1091], found
that there was need for issuing certain positive directions in the matter
of grant of parole and said “responsible as the court is to ensure that the
deprivation of liberty is accompanied by curative strategy and human
8.            The law governing the subject of furlough, as discussed
earlier, requires no further elaboration of it here except in saying that the
exercise of the discretion in the matter of grant of furlough leave must
accord itself to the principles of reasonableness, fairness and also the
object of the Rules and it must be exercised for reasons properly
recorded with due application of mind to the relevant facts and
circumstances of the case.
9.            We may point out here some of the consequences of not
recording proper reasons with due application of mind by sanctioning
Authority. Whenever, such mechanical orders are passed, inconvenience
to the petitioner, delay in finally disposing of such matters and putting
additional burden on the State exchequer because of the requirement of
the prisoner being provided with Legal Aid at the State expense for
challenging the order come as inevitable consequences and casualty of
justice follows, which can be avoided. We are, therefore, of the view
that the sanctioning Authority under the Prisons Rules, 1959 must
ensure to exercise due care and caution in deciding applications for
furlough leave, while keeping in view the settled principles of law.
10.           However, a request is made by the learned Counsel for the
petitioner that as the petitioner has been compelled to approach this
Court because of passing of the impugned order in a mechanical manner
by respondent no. 1, the costs of the petition should be borne by the
concerned Prison Authority.       Considering the manner in which the
impugned order has been passed, recording some worn out reasons,
thereby revealing non-application of mind to the important and relevant
facts of the case and also the fact that, this is not the first occasion when
the petitioner has been required to experience inconvenience, delay and
injustice, we are of the view that prayer made by the learned counsel for
the petitioner is reasonable and deserves to be granted.
11.          For the reasons stated above, the criminal writ petition is
allowed with costs, which shall be paid by respondent no. 2 by
depositing it with High Court Legal Services Sub-Committee, Nagpur,
with right to recover the same from the concerned officer, in accordance
with law. The impugned order is hereby quashed and set aside.
12.          Respondent no. 1 is directed to release the petitioner on
furlough leave as per his entitlement, subject to such reasonable
conditions as may be imposed in the discretion of respondent no. 1
within a period of seven days from the date of receipt of the copy of this
13.          We direct the High Court Legal Services Sub-Committee,
Nagpur to quantify the costs of the petition and inform the same to
respondent no. 2 for its due payment by respondent no. 2.
14.          We further direct respondent no. 2 to make the payment of
quantified costs within a period of seven days from the date of the
receipt of the communication in that regard by it.
15.          We grant liberty to the Inspector General of Prisons, Pune to
consider the recovery of the costs of the petition, in accordance with law,
from the concerned officer, if thought fit.
16.                  Legal remuneration be paid to the learned Advocate
(Appointed) for the petitioner as per rules.
17.                  Rule is made absolute in the aforesaid terms.
SANDIP   Digitally signed