1.    The suit is listed before the undersigned in terms of the order dated
21st October, 2020 of Hon'ble the Judge-in-Charge, Original Side.
2.    From a reading of the order dated 21st October, 2020, it transpires that
during the hearing on that day a controversy arose, whether IA
No.14790/2019 filed on behalf of the defendants had been formally disposed
of or not, with the senior counsel for the defendants contending that the
same had not been disposed of and the senior counsel for the plaintiff
contending to the contrary.
3.    Observing that "the record shows that there is no formal disposal of
IA No.14790/2019", Hon'ble the Judge-in-Charge "to cut short the
controversy", directed IA No.14790/2019 to be placed before me on 5th
4.    On 5th November, 2020, when the matter came up before the
undersigned, it appeared that order could be passed by the undersigned,
merely referring to certain earlier orders. However, the senior counsel for
the defendants insisted on arguing and which arguments remained
inconclusive on that date and the matter adjourned to today.
5.    Before referring to the contentions of the counsels, I may state that the
order dated 21st October, 2020 of Hon'ble the Judge-in-Charge reminds me
of the order dated 1st August, 2012 of Justice Pradeep Nandrajog of this
Court, in CS(OS) No.2502/1987 titled M/s G.S. Jain & Associates Vs.
Indian Oil Corpn. Ltd. & Anr., when faced with a same/similar order. He
"1. Once the legislature speaks while enacting a law, it loses
the right of utterance; only the Court can speak on the law.
Similarly, when a Court adjudicates a suit and passes a decree,
it is the Executing Court alone which has the right to speak
about the judgment and decree.
2.     But, I have been bestowed the right of utterance by the
Superior Lords i.e. the Division Bench, before whom EFA(OS)
No.17/2010 and EFA(OS) No.18/2010 were listed in which an
order dated May 17, 2010 passed by brother Rajiv Shakdher, J.
as the Executing Court was challenged; and this is the reason
why I dare to speak, notwithstanding the Executing Court
having spoken and having interpreted my judgment, resulting in
a decree being drawn which was authored by me way back on
5.     Little did I realize that the crafty lawyers would set up a
7.     ……the Hon'ble Judges of the Division Bench have, vide
order dated July 25, 2012, required me to bestow my thought
and render my opinion; by way of clarification on the last
paragraph of my opinion.
8.     I cannot pen an opinion which would amount to a review
of the order passed by my learned brother Judge : Rajiv
Shakdher, J. who, as the Executing Court, has interpreted my
decision; and the decree.
10. Hoping that my brief opinion would suffice and would be
in discharge of my mandate as per the order made by the
6.     I cannot express my thoughts better than as expressed in the above
7.     The senior counsel for the plaintiff today, before the senior counsel
for the defendants could continue his arguments, has drawn attention to the
following orders authored by me in the suit:
(a)    dated 12th April, 2019, framing issues in the suit, permitting the
parties to file affidavits of their respective internet experts and
recording, that as of then, need for any evidence did not appear and
the question of permitting evidence will be considered, after hearing
the counsels.
(b)    dated 23rd July, 2019, recording that the senior counsel for the
plaintiff had been heard for over an hour and that though the senior
counsel for the defendants had at the outset contended that evidence
was required to be led but ordering, that the said question will be
decided, after hearing the counsels.
(c)    dated 9th October, 2019, in paragraph 10 whereof it was
clarified that I had proceeded to hear the counsels finally in the suit as
it appeared that no oral evidence is required on the issues or the
controversy and the findings can be returned on the basis of admitted
documents on record and that if during the hearing, either counsel
satisfied the Court that on a particular issue / controversy, oral
evidence was required, permission therefor will be granted.
(d)    dated 22nd October, 2019, when IA No.14790/2019 of the
defendants for cross-examination of the technical expert of the
plaintiff and for tendering into evidence affidavit by way of
examination-in-chief of the witnesses of the defendants and for hot
tubbing, had come up first before the Court and in paragraph 2
whereof it was recorded that the arguments on the said application be
also addressed by the defendants along with their arguments in the
suit.
8.     The senior counsel for the plaintiff states that the order dated 21st
October, 2020 of Hon'ble the Judge-in-Charge, Original Side erroneously
records that it was his contention that IA No.14790/2019 had been disposed
of; attention is invited to paragraph 3.1 of the said order to contend that it
correctly records his contention. He clarifies that IA No.14790/2019 has not
been disposed of but the question, whether any evidence is to be recorded,
would be decided, after hearing the counsels finally. He further states that
he had already concluded his arguments before me and the senior counsel for
the defendants also had commenced his final arguments on 30th January,
2020, whereafter vide order dated 13th October, 2020, the suit was
discharged from part heard.
9.     The aforesaid stand of the senior counsel for the plaintiff appears to
satisfy the senior counsel for the defendants, who has not addressed further.
10.    I clarify, that on hearing the counsels at length qua Case Management
including on framing of issues, on 1st April, 2019 and further on 12th April,
2019, I had formed an opinion that considering the nature of controversy, no
evidence was required to be recorded in the suit and the suit could be
decided on the basis of material on record. It was however observed that if
on hearing, it appeared that any particular aspect required recording of
evidence, recording of evidence thereon shall be permitted at that stage. I
further clarify that even thereafter when IA No.14790/2019 came up before
the undersigned, the opinion earlier formed remained unchanged and it was
intended that the arguments on IA No.14790/2019 be also heard along with
the final arguments of the senior counsel for the defendants in the suit and if
during the said arguments, the senior counsel for the defendants satisfies that
there is a need for recording evidence, evidence shall be taken at that time.
11.    It is unfortunate that substantial hearing undertaken in this suit, got
derailed, first for the reason of change of roster and thereafter owing to the
prevalent pandemic; by the time IA No.9309/2020 of the plaintiff for early
hearing came up before the undersigned on 13th October, 2020, more than
ten months had passed since the last hearing and which resulted in the suit
being released from part heard.
12.    I hope that the aforesaid serves the purpose for which Hon'ble the
Judge-in-Charge, Original Side listed the suit before the undersigned.
13.   List before Hon'ble the Judge-in-Charge, Original Side on 27th
November, 2020, for physical/virtual hearing.