1.         Notice was sent to respondent No. 2 through registered post on
21.12.2022. As per report, the same has been delivered to the
concerned. The service of respondent No. 2 is, therefore, complete.
2.         The petitioner/accused has filed the instant petition seeking transfer of
criminal challan titled, State of J&K vs. Shabir Ahmed Khan, which is
pending trial before the court of Chief Judicial Magistrate, Srinagar to
any other court of parallel jurisdiction at Jammu.
3.         It has been submitted in the petition that the petitioner is a politician
and due to political rivalry, in order to tarnish his image, he has been
falsely implicated in a case on the basis of a complaint made by
respondent No. 2, who happens to be wife of a separatist leader.
According to the petitioner, he engaged service of Mr. Mohd.
Abdullah Pandit, Advocate for defending his case before the court of
Chief Judicial Magistrate, Srinagar and when the said Advocate
argued his case before the learned Magistrate, he received threat to his
life and thereafter, he refused to appear on behalf of the petitioner. It is
further submitted that two more lawyers, namely, Mr. Maroof Khan
and Mr. Shokat were approached by the petitioner to appear on his
behalf but they also refused to accept the brief of the petitioner. It is
further submitted that the atmosphere surrounding the court premises
is highly surcharged and hostile and whenever, he appears before the
court, slogans are being raised against him inside and outside the court
premises. It is averred that at the time when the case is being taken up
for hearing, the court remains jam packed and the petitioner
apprehends grave and serious bodily attack from the crowd which
gathers over there, upon the instigation of the separatists.
4. Notice of the application was sent to the respondent/State as well as to
respondent No. 2/complainant. The State has put its appearance but no
objections to the application have been filed, despite lapse of seven
years from the date of its filing. The respondent No. 2/complainant has
not put in her appearance nor objections to the application have been
filed.
5. Heard learned counsels for the parties and perused the record.
6. Section 526 of the Jammu and Kashmir Cr.P.C., which is applicable to
the instant case vests power with the High Court to transfer a case
from Criminal Court Subordinate to its authority to any other such
Criminal Court of equal or superior jurisdiction. The grounds on such
power can be exercised by the High Court are enumerated in Clause
(a) to (e) of the said provision. One of the grounds of transfer of a case
is when it is made to appear to the High Court that a fair and impartial
inquiry or trial cannot be had in any Criminal Court subordinate
thereto. It is this ground which has been pressed into service by the
petitioner in the instant case.
7. Coming to the facts of the instant case as have been narrated
hereinbefore, it is not in dispute that respondent No. 2, who happens to
be wife of a separatist leader, wields some influence amongst certain
sections of people living in the valley who subscribe to his ideology. It
is a fact of common knowledge that incidents of attacks on
main-stream politicians and the people who do not subscribe to the
separatists ideology are still taking place in Kashmir Valley.
Therefore, it cannot be stated that apprehension expressed by the
petitioner to his life at Srinagar while facing trial before the court is
unfounded. The contention of the petitioner that at least three
Advocates of Srinagar whom he had approached to take up his case,
showed their inability to do so, has remained un-rebutted. Therefore,
the apprehension of the petitioner that he will not receive a fair trial of
the case at Srinagar, appears to be well founded.
8. Having regard to the aforesaid circumstances and keeping in view the
status of the petitioner and background of respondent No.
2/complainant, it appears that fair and impartial trial of the case that
has been filed against the petitioner on the basis of complaint lodged
by respondent No. 2, may not be possible at Srinagar.
9. In view of what has been discussed hereinabove, the petition is
allowed and the criminal challan, titled, State vs. Shabir Ahmed Khan
arising out of FIR No. 9/2014 for offences under Sections 354 and 509
RPC registered with Police Station, Shaheed Ganj, Srinagar is
withdrawn from the court of Chief Judicial Magistrate, Srinagar and is
transferred to the court of Chief Judicial Magistrate, Jammu. It is
however, directed that the petitioner shall bear diet and travel expenses
of all the prosecution witnesses, excepting those belonging to Police
department. The parties are directed to appear before the court of
Chief Judicial Magistrate, Jammu on 12.04.2023 by which date, Chief
Judicial Magistrate, Srinagar shall transfer the original record of the
file to the court of Chief Judicial Magistrate, Jammu. Copies of this
order be sent to both the Magistrates for information and compliance.
10.        Disposed of.