1.     By way of present application under Section 439 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 („Cr.P.C.‟), the present accused/applicant
Shoaib Alam seeks regular bail in case FIR bearing no. 114/2020,
registered at Police Station Khajuri Khas, New Delhi, under Sections
109/114/147/148/149/427/454/395/435/436/153A/505/120B/34 of the
2.     Briefly stated, the relevant facts of the present case are that an
FIR was lodged on 27.02.2020 pursuant to a complaint filed by Sh.
Karan, whereby it was alleged that on 25.02.2020, between 4:00 PM
to 05:00 PM, around 40-50 associates of one Tahir Hussain had looted
his godown situated at E-17, Khajuri Khas, Main Karawal Nagar
Road, Chand Bag Pulia. It has been alleged that during the incident,
valuable property of the complainant had been stolen, such as, spare
parts and important documents including original certificates of e-
rickshaw, certificates of spare parts from the year 2016, had been
burnt due to which the complainant had suffered loss of about Rs. 25-
3.     After registration of the FIR, investigation of the present case
had been carried out by Special Investigating Team (SIT), Crime
Branch. During investigation, it had been discovered that the place of
incident was situated at a distance of about 50-60 meters from
building bearing no. E-17, Khajuri Khas, Main Karawal Nagar Road,
Delhi which is owned by co-accused Tahir Hussain, which had been
used by rioters/miscreants including the present accused for throwing
bricks, stone pelting, pelting of petrol bombs, acid bombs etc. It is
alleged that some residue/remains of the debris as well as stones,
bricks, broken bottles and burnt articles had also been found lying on
the main Karawal Nagar road. It is stated that the said building was
four storied, including basement, and co-accused Tahir Hussain used
to run his office in the name of M/s Show Effect Advertisement Pvt.
Ltd. on the first floor, however, second floor and third floor of the
building were under construction.
4.     It is alleged that during further investigation, photographs of
various persons/suspects/ accused had been shown in riots related
cases to various public persons including eye witnesses of the incident
i.e. Sh. Pradeep Verma and Sh. Shamshad Pradhan. The said witnesses
had specifically identified the accused(s) including the present
applicant. One of the witnesses i.e. Pradeep Verma had also identified
co-accused Tahir Hussain, who was the Municipal Councillor of the
area at that point of time. It is alleged that statement of witnesses
regarding the identification of the rioters had been recorded.
5.     Chargesheet was filed after completion of investigation against
the present applicant and other accused persons for offences
punishable under Sections 109/114/147/148/149/427/454/395/435/
436/153A/505/120B/ 34 of IPC.
6.     Learned senior counsel for the applicant herein states that the
prosecution has filed the chargesheet with respect to the present
applicant without there being any evidence admissible in law. It is also
argued that the process adopted by the police regarding identification
of the applicant is flawed. It is also vehemently stated that the
applicant was not even present at the spot and neither there is any
material on record to establish connection of the present applicant with
co-accused Tahir Hussain, nor any specific role has been attributed to
the present applicant. It is also argued that the identification of the
applicant by the alleged eye witnesses had been recorded after an
inordinate delay which is not explained and, therefore, cannot be
relied upon. It is further stated that there is no electronic evidence such
as CCTV footage, videography and photographs on record, to
establish the presence of applicant at the spot. Learned senior counsel
has also pointed out several discrepancies in the statements of witness
i.e. Pradeep Kumar and absence of any direct evidence implicating the
applicant in the present offence. It is also stated that the statement
recorded by the police regarding seizure of phone, which is not
registered in the name of present applicant, also points out that he has
been falsely implicated in the present case. Learned Senior counsel
also states that the applicant is no more required for any investigation
and the CDR related to the applicant does not mention the tower
location, and the mere presence of the applicant in the vicinity of the
incident side cannot prove that the applicant was a part of the mob.
7.      Per Contra, learned SPP for the State, opposes the present
application and vehemently submits that the allegations against the
applicant are serious in nature, and veracity of the statements of
witnesses cannot be considered in depth at this stage when grant of
bail is being considered. Attention of this Court is also drawn to the
order passed on charge where the delay in carrying out investigation
and regarding the statement of witnesses has been discussed in detail.
It is also stated that when the present applicant/accused was enlarged
on interim bail on an earlier occasion, he had threatened the witnesses
even prior to being released on bail. It is further stated that one witness
has also lodged a complaint that the accused has been threatening him.
8.      In rebuttal, learned senior counsel for the applicant states that
despite such complaint being filed on record, learned Trial Court was
pleased to grant interim bail to the applicant. It is, however, argued on
behalf of the State that after carrying out threat assessment, the said
witness has been granted protection.
9.     The rival contentions of both the sides have been considered
and material on record has been perused.
10.    After hearing arguments and going through the case file, this
Court is of the opinion that in the instant case, the prosecution has
placed on record, at this stage, statement of two witnesses i.e. Pradeep
Kumar Verma recorded on 20.04.2020 and one Shamshad Pradhan
recorded on 03.04.2020, who are the eye witnesses of the incident in
question and have specifically stated that the present applicant was
involved in the present incident and he had instigated the mob on
communal lines. The beat officers of the area i.e. Head Constable
Rahul and Constable Parveen have categorically named and assigned
specific role to the applicant and acts committed by him in the offence
in question. For deciding a bail application, a reference can be made to
the precedents laid down by the Hon‟ble Apex Court in relation to
grant of bail.
11.    The Hon‟ble Supreme Court in Ramesh Bhavan Rathod v.
Vishanbhai Hirabhai Makwana (Koli) and Anr.(2021) 6 SCC 230,
“24. The principles governing the grant of bail were
reiterated by a two judge Bench in Prasanta Kumar
Sarkar v. Ashis Chatterjee, (2010) 14 SCC 496:
“9. ... It is trite that this Court does not, normally,
interfere with an order passed by the High Court
granting or rejecting bail to the accused. However, it
is equally incumbent upon the High Court to exercise
its discretion judiciously, cautiously and strictly in
compliance with the basic principles laid down in a
plethora of decisions of this Court on the point. It is
well settled that, among other circumstances, the
factors to be borne in mind while considering an
application for bail are:
(i) whether there is any prima facie or reasonable
ground to believe that the accused had committed the
(ii) nature and gravity of the accusation;
(iii) severity of the punishment in the event of
(iv) danger of the accused absconding or fleeing, if
(v) character, behaviour, means, position and standing
(vi) likelihood of the offence being repeated;
(vii) reasonable apprehension of the witnesses being
(viii) danger, of course, of justice being thwarted by
grant of bail.
39. Grant of bail under Section 439 of the Cr.P.C. is a
matter involving the exercise of judicial discretion.
Judicial discretion in granting or refusing bail - as in the
case of any other discretion which is vested in a court as a
judicial institution - is not unstructured..."
12.   Similarly, in Kamla Devi v. State of Rajasthan and Anr.(2022)
6 SCC 725, the Hon‟ble Supreme Court held that:
"25. This Court has, on several occasions has discussed the
factors to be considered by a Court while deciding a bail
application. The primary considerations which must be placed
at balance while deciding the grant of bail are: (i) the
seriousness of the offence; (ii) the likelihood of the accused
fleeing from justice;(iii) the impact of release of the accused on
the prosecution witnesses; (iv) likelihood of the accused
tampering with evidence. While such list is not exhaustive, it
may be stated that if a Court takes into account such factors in
deciding a bail application, it could be concluded that the
decision has resulted from a judicious exercise of its discretion,
vide Gudikanti      Narasimhulu       &      Ors.     v.      Public
Prosecutor; Prahlad Singh Bhati v. NCT of Delhi &Ors.; Anil
Kumar Yadav v. State (NCT of Delhi)”.
13.    As per settled law regarding grant of bail, the Court is expected
to take into account the allegations levelled against the accused as well
as the seriousness of the offence committed. Considering the fact that
the eye witnesses have given account of the specific role played by the
present applicant and the fact that threats are being extended in this
case to the witnesses, this Court does not find it a fit case for grant of
bail, at this stage, when the witnesses are yet to be examined before
the Trial Court. This Court also takes note of the fact that after threat
assessment of threat to the witness, the concerned authorities have
provided protection to witness, for threat being real.
14.    Accordingly, the present application stands dismissed.
15.    It is however, clarified that the observations made by this Court
are only for the purpose of deciding the present application and shall
have no bearing on the merits of the case during the trial.
16.    The order be uploaded on the website forthwith.