For the respondent: Mr. Nand Lal Thakur Addl. Advocate General, Mr. Ram
ou     Lal Thakur Deputy Advocate General, and Mr. Rajat
H           The petitioner, arraigned as accused in the FIR mentioned above, has come up
before this Court under Section 482, Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, for quashing
the proceedings on grounds that the investigations and the allegations do not make
out any case.
2.      Facts necessary to decide the present petition are that on 24.7.2019, a police
team, which was deputed to maintain law and order informed the aforesaid Police
Station about commission of cognizable offences, which led to registration of
aforesaid FIR. As per the said information, the Investigating Officer stated that on
24.7.2019 at about 2.00 p.m. a group of lawyers raising slogans, proceeded from the
Whether reporters of Local Papers may be allowed to see the judgment?
side of A.G office towards CTO, Shimla. These lawyers were raising slogans against
an order passed by this Court. Since the raising slogans against the order of this
Court was an offence under Sections 143 and 188, IPC, as such, the investigator
registered the FIR mentioned above.
The matter pertains to raising of slogans and the investigation does not reveal
the identification of any such lawyer by the investigator. It is not mentioned that
what was the language of slogans and against which order of this Court, the
Given this, the advocates, who are the saviour of
Freedom of Speech, the registration of FIR without any legally admissible evidence
would only dampen their spirits. Thus, there is no reason to continue the aforesaid
The law is almost settled by various pronouncements of the Hon'ble Supreme
Court that when the FIR and the investigation do not make out any case or the
prosecution is inherently and patently illegal, and the matters that fulfill the criteria
for quashing, the High Court resorting to S. 482 CrPC can quash such FIR and
consequent proceedings. In R.P. Kapur v State of Punjab, AIR 1960 SC 866, a
three-member Bench of Hon’ble Supreme Court holds, “[6]. ...It is well established
that the inherent jurisdiction of the High Court can be exercised to quash proceedings
in a proper case either to prevent the abuse of the process of any Court or otherwise
to secure the ends of justice. Ordinarily, criminal proceedings instituted against an
H   accused person must be tried under the provisions of the Code, and the High Court
would be reluctant to interfere with the said proceedings at an interlocutory stage. It
is not possible, desirable or expedient to lay down any inflexible rule which would
govern the exercise of this inherent jurisdiction. However, we may indicate some
categories of cases where the inherent jurisdiction can and should be exercised for
quashing the proceedings. There may be cases where it may be possible for the High
Court to take the view that the institution or continuance of criminal proceedings
against an accused person may amount to the abuse of the process of the Court or
that the quashing of the impugned proceedings would secure the ends of justice. If
the criminal proceeding in question is in respect of an offence alleged to have been
committed by an accused person and it manifestly appears that there is a legal bar
against the institution or continuance of the said proceeding, the High Court would
be justified in quashing the proceedings on that ground. Absence of the requisite
sanction may, for instance, furnish cases under this category. Cases may also arise
where the allegations in the First Information Report or the complaint, even if they
are taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety, do not constitute the
offence alleged; in such cases no question of appreciating evidence arises; it is a
matter merely of looking at the complaint or the First Information Report to decide
whether the offence alleged is disclosed or not. In such case, it would be legitimate
for the High Court to hold that it would be manifestly unjust to allow the process of
the criminal Court to be issued against the accused person. A third category of cases
in which the inherent jurisdiction of the High Court can be successfully invoked may
also arise. In cases falling under this category the allegations made against the
accused person do constitute an offence alleged but there is either no legal evidence
adduced in support of the case or evidence adduced clearly or manifestly fails to
prove the charge. In dealing with this class of cases, it is important to bear in mind
the distinction between a case where there is no legal evidence or where there is
evidence which is manifestly and clearly inconsistent with the accusation made and
cases where there is legal evidence which on its appreciation may or may not support
the accusation in question. In exercising its jurisdiction under S. 561-A, the High
Court would not embark upon an enquiry as to whether the evidence in question is
reliable or not. That is the function of the trial magistrate, and ordinarily it would not
be open to any party to invoke the High Court's inherent jurisdiction and contend that
H   on a reasonable appreciation of the evidence the accusation made against the accused
would not be sustained. Broadly stated that is the nature and scope of the inherent
jurisdiction of the High Court under S. 561-A in the matter of quashing criminal
proceedings, and that is the effect of the judicial decisions on the point (Vide : In Re:
Shripad G. Chandavarkar, AIR 1928 Bom 184, Jagat Chandra Mozumdar v. Queen
Empress, ILR 26 Cal 786, Dr. Shankar Singh v. State of Punjab, 56 Pun LR 54 :
(AIR 1954 Punj 193), NripendraBhusan Roy v. GobinaBandhu Majumdar, AIR 1924
Cal 1018 and Ramanathan Chettiyar v. SivaramaSubramania, ILR 47 Mad 722 :
5.    In Madhavrao Jiwaji Rao Scindia v Sambhajirao Chandrojirao Angre,
1988 (1) SCC 692, a three judges’ bench of the Hon’ble Supreme Court holds “[7].
The legal position is well-settled that when a prosecution at the initial stage is asked
to be quashed, the test to be applied by the court is as to whether the uncontroverted
allegations as made prima facie establish the offence. It is also for the court to take
into consideration any special features which appear in a particular case to consider
whether it is expedient and in the interest of justice to permit a prosecution to
continue. This is so on the basis that the court cannot be utilised for any oblique
purpose and where in the opinion of the court chances of an ultimate conviction is
bleak and, therefore, no useful purpose is likely to be served by allowing a criminal
prosecution to continue, the court may while taking into consideration the special
facts of a case also quash the proceeding even though it may be at a preliminary
This Court has inherent powers under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure to interfere in this kind of matter. Given the entirety of the case and
judicial precedents, I am of the considered opinion that the continuation of these
proceedings will not suffice any fruitful purpose whatsoever.
7.    In Himachal Pradesh Cricket Association v State of Himachal Pradesh,
2018 (4) Crimes 324, Hon’ble Supreme Court holds “[47]. As far as Writ Petition
(Criminal) No. 135 of 2017 is concerned, the appellants came to this Court
challenging the order of cognizance only because of the reason that matter was
H   already pending as the appellants had filed the Special Leave Petitions against the
order of the High Court rejecting their petition for quashing of the FIR/Chargesheet.
Having regard to these peculiar facts, writ petition has also been entertained. In any
case, once we hold that FIR needs to be quashed, order of cognizance would
automatically stands vitiated.”
8.    Given above, this is a fit case where the inherent jurisdiction of the High Court
under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure is invoked to quash the
proceedings mentioned above. The FIR mentioned above is quashed qua the
petitioner and all the consequential proceedings are also quashed and set aside qua
the petitioner. The bail bonds are accordingly discharged. All pending application(s),
if any, stand closed.
9.    In the facts and circumstances peculiar to this case, the petition is allowed in
the aforementioned terms.