for the petitioner.
Case is taken up for hearing through video conferencing.
Custody certificate dated 12.02.2022, by way of affidavit of
the Deputy Superintendent, Central Jail, Amritsar, has been filed through
email. Print out of the same is taken on record.
Through this petition, the petitioner seeks regular bail in
case bearing FIR No.125 dated 02.06.2020, registered at Police Station
Dina Nagar, District Gurdaspur, under Sections 21 and 29 NDPS Act,
As per the case of the prosecution, 19000 intoxicating
capsules 'RIDLEY' were recovered from the petitioner and the co-
Learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the alleged
recovery of intoxicating capsules was effected from an envelope lying in
a bag between the legs of the co-accused, near the back seat of the car
(bearing registration No.PB10CN-2574) occupied by him (co-accused).
Thus, it cannot be said that it was the petitioner, who was in conscious
possession of the intoxicating tablets. The petitioner has been in custody
for the last more than 08 months. In support of his contentions, learned
counsel relies upon the judgment dated 30.09.2021 rendered by a
Coordinate Bench in CRM-M-14523-2021, titled as 'Rupinder Singh Vs.
State of Punjab'.
On the other hand, learned State counsel, while opposing the
submissions made by the learned counsel for the petitioner for the grant
of bail, submits that when the petitioner alongwith co-accused was
travelling in the car, the alleged recovery of intoxicating tablets had been
effected; that the alleged recovery falls under the commercial quantity
and Section 37 NDPS Act bars the grant of bail to the accused in the
cases involving commercial quantity. In support of his contentions, he
relies upon the judgment rendered by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
Union of India through Narcotics Control Bureau, Lucknow Vs. Md.
Learned State counsel further submits that the petitioner is
also involved in one more case i.e. FIR No.161 dated 09.09.2017 under
Section 21 NDPS Act, Police Station Dina Nagar, wherein he stands
released on bail.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties.
No doubt, the recovery effected in the present case falls
under the commercial quantity. Section 37 NDPS Act bars the grant of
bail to the accused in the cases involving commercial quantity. The
petitioner is also involved in another case of similar nature, which shows
his tendency of committing repeated offence(s) of similar nature.
The State of Punjab which was known as one of the
prosperous States is now at the brink of drug-trafficking and in order to
curb this menace, the accused like the petitioner are to be dealt with
stringently even at the stage of granting her/him bail in NDPS Act cases
involving commercial quantity.
The petitioner cannot seek the concession of regular bail,
which of course, if granted would pave the way for his involvement in
other case of similar nature. Reference may be made to the judgment
rendered by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Md. Nawaz Khan (supra).
Therefore, finding no merit in the present petition, the same
is dismissed.
Nothing expressed hereinabove shall be construed as an
expression of opinion on the merits of the case.
parveen kumar                                          JUDGE
Whether reasoned/speaking?             Yes/No
Whether reportable?                    Yes/No