1            Heard learned counsel for the parties.
2            Rule. Rule is made returnable forthwith, with the consent
of the parties and is taken up for final disposal. Learned A.P.P waives
notice on behalf of the respondent No.1–State.        Mr. Yadav waives
notice on behalf of the respondent No.2.
3            By this petition, the petitioners seek quashing of the FIR
bearing C.R. No. 1242/2018 registered with the Hadapsar Police
Station, Pune, for the alleged offences punishable under Sections
498A, 323, 504 r/w 34 of the Indian Penal Code (`IPC’). Quashing is
sought on the premise, that the petitioners and the respondent No. 2
have amicably settled their dispute and have entered into consent
terms.
4            Perused the papers. The petitioner No. 1 is the husband of
respondent No.2 and petitioner Nos. 2 and 3 are the mother and
sister-in-law respectively of the respondent No. 2. Both, petitioner
No.1 and respondent No.2 are Engineers. It appears that the
petitioner No.1 and respondent No.2 got married at Vaduj, Khatav,
Satara, on 21st May 2010, as per Hindu rites and rituals.          After
marriage, the respondent No. 2 started residing in her matrimonial
home at Hadapsar, Pune. From the said wedlock, they have a child,
who is presently 9 years of age.
5            As there were marital issues and discord between the
parties, the respondent No. 2 lodged the aforesaid FIR bearing C.R.
No. 1242/2018 with the Hadapsar Police Station, Pune. After
investigation, charge-sheet was filed in the said case and the matter is
presently pending before the learned Judicial Magistrate First Class,
Pune, being Criminal Case No. 364/2019.
6            It appears that in the interregnum, the parties decided to
amicably settle their dispute.    The respondent No. 2 has filed her
consent affidavit dated 6th August 2022, which is at page 101 of the
petition.   The said consent affidavit is duly affirmed before the
Superintendent, District Court, Pune.        In the said affidavit, the
respondent No. 2 has stated that she has settled the dispute with the
petitioner and that consent terms have been filed before the learned
Judge, Family Court at Pune.
7           Today, learned counsel for the respondent No. 2 has
tendered a copy of the consent terms entered into between the parties
before the learned Judge, Family Court at Pune. According to the
terms of settlement, the respondent No. 2 will be given a sum of
Rs. 25,00,000/- by way of full and final settlement, out of which,
respondent No.2 has received Rs. 10,00,000/- till date and the balance
amount of Rs. 15,00,000/- would be paid to her on the date of decree
of divorce by mutual consent.
8           Respondent No. 2 is present in Court. Learned counsel for
the respondent No. 2 has tendered a self attested xerox copy of the
Aadhar Card of the respondent No. 2. The same is taken on record.
Learned counsel for the respondent No.2 identifies her. Learned A.P.P
has verified the original Aadhar Card of the respondent No.2.
9           On questioning, she re-iterates what is stated by her in the
consent affidavit and states that she has received Rs. 10,00,000/- till
now. The respondent No. 2 states that in view of the settlement, she
has no objection to the quashing of the FIR bearing C.R. No.
1242/2018 registered with the Hadapsar Police Station, Pune and
consequently, the proceeding arising therefrom.
10          Considering the nature of dispute, relations between the
parties, consent terms filed by the parties and having regard to the
judicial pronouncements of the Apex Court in Gian Singh vs. State of
Punjab & Anr.1 and Narinder Singh & Ors. vs. State of Punjab &
Anr.2, there is no impediment in allowing the petition.
11          The petition is accordingly allowed. The FIR bearing C.R.
No. 1242/2018 registered with the Hadapsar Police Station, Pune, the
charge-sheet and consequently the proceeding arising therefrom (i.e.
Criminal Case No. 3641/2019), pending before the learned Judicial
Magistrate First Class, are quashed and set-aside.
12          Rule is made absolute in the aforesaid terms. Petition is
disposed of accordingly.
13          Needless to state that the said quashing of proceedings is
subject to the respondent No.2 receiving the balance amount of
Rs. 15,00,000/- at the time of the decree of divorce by mutual
consent.
14          At this stage, we are constrained to observe that a large
number of petitions are filed daily in the High Court, seeking
quashing of Section 498A alongwith other compoundable offences,
having regard to the amicable settlement between the parties. Parties
are constrained to approach the High Court, as Section 498A is non-
compoundable and the only remedy to quash the case, by consent, is
by filing an application under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure (`Cr.P.C’).      It is immaterial, whether the parties have
reconciled or have amicably resolved their disputes and entered into
consent terms, the fact remains, that to quash the proceeding, parties
are required to file applications/Writ Petitions in this Court, are
required to remain present in this High Court, and to file affidavits
and give proof of their identity.
15           Considering the aforesaid, we requested the learned
Advocate General to assist the Court, on this issue.       The learned
Advocate General has rendered valuable assistance, by bringing to the
notice of this Court, the development/steps taken by the Government
of Maharashtra to make Section 498A compoundable. Learned
Advocate General informs that a bill was passed for amending the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 so as to make the offence u/s 498A
amongst other offences, a compoundable offence. The said bill was
passed in both the houses in the State Government.
16           The learned Advocate General submits that the said
amendment proposed in the L.A. BILL No. LVII OF 2018 was
introduced on July 17, 2018, and passed in both houses on July 20,
2018. Following is the reproduction of the suggested amendment:
“Amendment of Section 320 of Act 2 of 1974
21. In Section 320 of the said Code, in sub-section (2), in the
(2) after entry relating to Section 494, the following entry
shall be inserted, namely: -
“Cruelty to woman. 498-A The woman subjected to cruelty:
Provided that, the application for compounding shall be
supported by an affidavit of the woman subjected to cruelty
stating that the marital dispute has been amicably resolved
either by resumption of cohabitation with the husband or that
the said woman and the accused have worked out any other
mutually satisfactory disposition:
Provided further that, a minimum period of two months shall
elapse from the date of request or application for
compounding before a Court and the Court may accept the
request for compounding, if none of the parties withdraws
the consent for compounding in the intervening period.”;
17         He submits that the Bill was thereafter sent to the President
of India, for his assent. The learned AG further submitted the
President forwarded the Bill to the Ministry of Women and Child
Development      for its comments. After considering the Code of
Criminal Procedure (Maharashtra Amendment) Bill, 2018, the
Ministry of Women and Child Development; vide its Office
Memorandum OM No. CDN/105/2018-Coord dated 03.06.2020
noted that ‘The issue has been reconsidered and it is stated that
‘diluting of Section 498A of IPC will not be in the interest of the
victim’.
18         In light of the comments received from the Ministry of
Women and Child Development, dated 03.06.2020, the Ministry of
Home Affairs (J and PP Section, Judicial Wing), Government of India,
had written to the Government of Maharashtra vide letter F.
No.17/44/2018-Judl & PP dated 17.08.2021, seeking clarification to
the Ministry, so that the Bill could be processed further. In response
to the said communication, it appears that the Government of
Maharashtra forwarded a clarification in the form of a Clarification
Note on 26.10.2021.
19         In the said Clarification Note, the judgment of the Hon’ble
Supreme Court of India in Ramgopal & Anr. v. State of M.P. & Anr 3
was relied upon wherein the Apex Court made the following
“3. There are several offences under the IPC that are
currently non-compoundable. These include offences
punishable under Section 498-A, Section 326, etc. IPC.
Some of such offence can be made compoundable by
introducing a suitable amendment in the statute. We are of
the opinion that the Law Commission of India could
examine whether a suitable proposal can be sent to the
Union Government in this regard. Any such step would
not only relieve the courts of the burden of deciding cases
in which the aggrieved parties have themselves arrived at a
settlement, but may also encourage the process of re-
conciliation between them. We, accordingly, request the
Law Commission and the Government of India to
examine all these aspects and take such steps as may be
considered feasible.
20         In a detailed clarification note, sent by the Government of
Maharashtra, reliance was also placed on numerous Law Commission
reports namely, 243rd Report, 154th Report, and 237th Report where
there are clear recommendations to make the offence compoundable.
Alongwith the Law Commission reports, the Committee on Petitions
(Rajya Sabha) in the report presented on 07.09.2011, was also relied
on in the clarification note, wherein, the Committee recommended
the Central Government to consider whether the offence under
Section 498A, IPC can be made compoundable.
21         The clarification was sent by the Law and Judiciary
Department, Government of Maharashtra vide letter No. CRPC
1318/C.R.16/D-19 dated 26.10.2021 to the Ministry of Home
Affairs, Government of India. The said clarification is now pending
with the Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India.
22          It is not in dispute that, in the 154 th Report of the Law
Commission, there was a clear recommendation to make the
offence    compoundable.      The    recommendation      of  the    Law
Commission in the 154th Report regarding Section 498A was
reiterated in the 177 th Report (2001). Justice Mallimath Committee
on Criminal Justice Reform also recommended that it should be
made compoundable. The Ministry of Home Affairs in its 111 th
Report on the Criminal Law (Amendment) Bill 2003 (August
2005), observed thus :
“It is desirable to provide a chance to the estranged
spouses to come together and therefore it is proposed
to make the offence u/s 498A IPC, a compoundable
one by inserting this Section in the Table under sub-
section (2) of Section 320 of Cr.P.C.”
23           The 128th Report of the Standing Committee (2008) on
the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Bill, 2006 reiterated
the recommendation made in the 111 th Report. In the Committee
of Petitions (Rajya Sabha) Report presented on 7th September 2011
regarding this issue, following were the recommendations under
the heading “Making the offence under Section 498-A IPC
“The Committee notes that the offence under
Section 498A IPC is essentially a fallout of
strained matrimonial relationship for which
there might be various considerations. Since
there can be various causes leading to          an
offence under Section 498A IPC and parties to
the marriage could be responsible for the same
in varying degrees, it would be appropriate if
the remedy of compromise is kept open to
settle a matrimonial dispute. In this context, the
Committee feels that in case of any marital
discord which has reached the stage of a
complaint under Section 498A IPC, it would be
better if the parties have the option of a
compromise where after they can settle down in
their lives appropriately for a better future
rather than diverting their energies negatively
by     pursuing    litigation.    The     Committee
recommends to the Government to consider
whether the offence under Section 498A IPC
can be made compoundable.”
24          The 237th Law Commission Report also talks about making
498A a compoundable offences.        This recommendation was again
reiterated in the 243rd Report.
25          According to the National Crime Records                Bureau
(`NCRB’) 2020 report, a total of 111,549 cases were registered under
498A in 2020. Of these, 5,520 were closed by Police citing as false
and overall 16151 cases were closed by police either because they
were false or there was a mistake of fact or law or it was a civil dispute
etc. That is 14.4% of cases were closed by police for not finding merit
in the case. 96,497 men, 23,809 women were arrested under 498A,
making total arrests under this section 1,20,306. 18,967 cases were
tried in courts of which 14,340 led to acquittal and 3,425 led to
conviction. 498A cases pending trial at the end of 2020 are 651,404
with a pendency percentage of 96.2%.
26           This Court, in its one of the earliest judgment in Suresh
Nathmal Rathi and Ors. v. State of Maharashtra and Ors. 4, in 1992
made a strong suggestion to amend Section 320 of Cr.P.C, to include
Section 498A within that Section. The Court elaborately dealt with
the institution of marriage.  An amendment to Section 498A of the
IPC was suggested/proposed in the interest and welfare of the married
couple and society and the section should be made compoundable and
bailable. A copy of the judgment was directed to be forwarded to the
Government of Maharashtra, Law & Judiciary Department for
consideration. It was observed that the Government of Maharashtra
should persuade the Government of India to introduce necessary
amendments to Section 498A of the IPC and Section 320 of the Cr.P.C,
as suggested by various Bar Associations, since the issue was affecting
millions of people, involving their family and social lives ( Para 25 of
the said judgment).
27          Similarly, in Preeti Gupta & Ors. v. State of Jharkhand &
Anr.5, the Apex Court took a serious re-look at the said provision i.e.
The Law Commission Reports that were issued in the
upcoming years were an outcome of this judgment. The observations
made in this judgment were crucial for the legislature to step into, to
address the concerns raised by the bench. Following is the relevant
quote from the judgment which found its place in the Law
Commission Report on Section 498A.
“37.       Before parting with the case, we would like to
observe that a serious re-look of the entire provision is
warranted by the legislation. It is also a matter of
common knowledge that exaggerated versions of the
incident are reflected in a large number of complaints.
The tendency of over implication is also reflected in a
very large number of cases.”
The Hon’ble Supreme Court then made these observation :
“It is imperative for the legislature to take into
consideration the informed public opinion and the
pragmatic realities in consideration and make necessary
changes in the relevant provisions of law. We direct the
Registry to send copy of this judgment to the Law
Commission and to the Union Law Secretary,
Government of India who may place is before the
Hon’ble Minister for Law & Justice to take appropriate
steps in the larger interest of the society.”
Raising concerns over the rising number of matrimonial
litigations, the Court made certain observations. The relevant paras
are reproduced hereinunder :
“30. It is a matter of common knowledge that
unfortunately matrimonial litigation is rapidly increasing in
our country. All the courts in our country including this
court are flooded with matrimonial cases. This clearly
demonstrates discontent and unrest in the family life of a
large number of people of the society.”
“32. It is a matter of common experience that most of
these complaints under section 498-A IPC are filed in the
heat of the moment over trivial issues without proper
deliberations. We come across a large number of such
complaints which are not even bonafide and are filed with
oblique motive. At the same time, rapid increase in the
number of genuine cases of dowry harassment are also a
matter of serious concern.”
“34. Unfortunately, at the time of filing of the complaint
the implications and consequences are not properly
visualized by the complainant that such complaint can lead
to insurmountable harassment, agony and pain to the
complainant, accused and his close relations.”
“35. The ultimate object of justice is to find out the truth
and punish the guilty and protect the innocent. To find out
the truth is a herculean task in majority of these
complaints. The tendency of implicating husband and all
his immediate relations is also not uncommon. At times,
even after the conclusion of criminal trial, it is difficult to
ascertain the real truth. The courts have to be extremely
careful and cautious in dealing with these complaints and
must take pragmatic realities into consideration while
dealing with matrimonial cases. The allegations of
harassment of husband's close relations who had been
living in different cities and never visited or rarely visited
the place where the complainant resided would have an
entirely different complexion. The allegations of the
complaint are required to be scrutinized with great care
and circumspection. Experience reveals that long and
protracted criminal trials lead to rancour, acrimony and
bitterness in the relationship amongst the parties. It is also
a matter of common knowledge that in cases filed by the
complainant if the husband or the husband's relations had
to remain in jail even for a few days, it would ruin the
chances of amicable settlement altogether. The process of
suffering is extremely long and painful.”
28         Despite the same, Section 498A is still non-compoundable.
The importance of making the Section 498A compoundable with the
permission of the Court, can hardly be overlooked/understated.
29         It is pertinent to note, that during the pendency of the
above-mentioned Bill, this Court (Coram: Nitin Jamdar & Sarang V.
Kotwal, JJ.), in its order dated 21 st December 2021 passed in Criminal
Application Nos. 647/2021 and 27/2021, had made certain
observations with regard to making Section 498A compoundable with
the permission of the Court. The relevant para reads thus:
"11. The parties can save expenses, time and energy in
approaching the High Court. It will also free up the
already crowded docket of this court. Most of these
connected proceedings can be put to rest and the parties
can resume normal life. It would be in the interest of the
parties in such matters if the offence is made
compoundable with permission of the Court. Therefore,
we are of the opinion that the Government of Maharashtra
should consider this aspect and consider making the
offence under Section 498-A of IPC compoundable under
Section 320 of Cr.P.C., with permission of the Court, as
was done by the State of Andhra Pradesh.
30          The above-mentioned judgment has also been forwarded
by the Government of Maharashtra, (Law and Judiciary Department)
vide Letter No. CRPC 1318/C.R.16/D-19 dated 10.01.2022, to the
Government of India for their information and consideration.
31          We may note here, that everyday, we have a minimum of
10 petitions/applications seeking quashing of Section 498A by consent,
since 498A is non-compoundable.      Concerned parties, have to come
personally before the Court from wherever they are residing,
including from villages, thus incurring tremendous hardships for the
parties concerned, apart from travelling expenses, litigation expenses
and staying expenses in the city. Parties, if working, are required to
take a day off. Apart from the hardships caused to parties, if Section
498A is made compoundable with the permission of the Court,
precious time of the Court can be saved. Cases under Section 498A
are not such, that a Magistrate cannot compound the same, with the
permission of the said Court.
It is pertinent to note, that the State of Andhra Pradesh,
has made Section 498A compoundable with the permission of the
Court, way back as in 2003.
32          Considering what is stated above, we direct the Registry to
forward a copy of this order to the learned Additional Solicitor
General, for taking necessary steps/action and to enable him to take up
the issue before the concerned Ministry, at the earliest.
33          Petition is disposed of with the aforesaid observations.
Petition be listed under the caption `for direction’ on 19th December
34       All concerned to act on the authenticated copy of this
order.