The petitioner/husband is before this Court calling in question
order dated 28-09-2022 passed by the Principal Judge, Family
Court, Dakshina Kannada, Mangalore on I.A.No.V in M.C.No.208 of
2021 granting interim maintenance of Rs.30,000/- per month to be
paid to his wife/respondent.
2. Brief facts that lead the petitioner to this Court in the
subject petition, as borne out from the pleadings, are as follows:-
The petitioner and the respondent got married on 31-12-2018
and have no children from the wedlock. On 11-12-2020 alleging
harassment     by  the  petitioner and   his  family   members    the
respondent registers a crime in Crime No.32 of 2021 for offences
punishable under Sections 498A, 506, 313 and 34 of the IPC.
Thereafter, on 22-02-2021, the respondent files a petition under
Section 12 of the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act,
2005 (‘DV Act’ for short) in Criminal Miscellaneous Case No.32 of
2021    before   the  Civil Judge    and  JMFC,  Moodbidri  wherein
maintenance is also sought in the petition. Considering the interim
application seeking maintenance, an order comes to be passed by
the concerned Court, granting maintenance to the respondent/wife
at Rs.20,000/- per month. Alleging that the order was passed
without hearing the husband, the petitioner challenges the said
order before the learned II Additional District & Sessions Judge,
D.K., Mangalore in Criminal Appeal No.70 of 2021 which comes to
be dismissed. Aggrieved by both the proceedings, the petitioner
prefers a petition before this Court invoking Section 482 of the
Cr.P.C. in Criminal Petition No.8186 of 2021 and this Court by its
order dated 01-02-2022 grants an interim order of stay of all
further proceedings in Criminal Miscellaneous Case No.32 of 2021
filed invoking the provisions of the DV Act.
3. During the pendency of these proceedings, the petitioner
files a petition under Section 13(1)(i-a) of the Hindu Marriage Act,
1955 seeking dissolution of marriage in M.C.No.208 of 2021. After
the respondent entered appearance she sought permanent alimony
or maintenance to be granted. The concerned Court answering an
application filed under Section 24 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955
allows the claim of the wife by granting maintenance of Rs.30,000/-
per month from the date of filing the application i.e., 02-09-2021
which shall be inclusive of the maintenance awarded by the
concerned Court in Criminal Miscellaneous Case No.32 of 2021,
wherein the respondent had invoked the provisions of the DV Act.
It is this order that drives the petitioner to this Court in the subject
4. Heard Sri P.P.Hegde, learned senior counsel appearing for
the petitioner and Sri K.Anandarama, learned counsel appearing for
the respondent.
5. The learned senior counsel representing the petitioner
would contend with vehemence that the order of the concerned
Court directing payment of Rs.30,000/- is contrary to the guidelines
issued in the case of RAJNESH v. NEHA – (2021) 2 SCC 324
and also the fact that the wife was already in receipt of an order of
maintenance     in  a  proceeding    instituted under   the  DV   Act.
Therefore, the respondent would not be entitled to dual payment.
He would further, on merits of the matter, contend that the
petitioner has lost his job on account of pendency of the criminal
case that is instituted by the wife and, therefore, the order granting
maintenance ought to be interfered with.
6. On the other hand, the learned counsel representing the
respondent/wife would contend that there is no bar in law for the
respondent to seek maintenance under Section 24 of the Hindu
Marriage Act, 1955 after having sought maintenance under the DV
Act and would contend that the order granting maintenance under
Section 24 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 is not exclusive of the
maintenance under the DV Act but is inclusive. Therefore, it cannot
be said that there is overlapping jurisdiction or conflicting orders
passed or even successive maintenance claimed under different
statutes. He would contend that the Apex Court in the case of
RAJNESH (supra) has held that granting maintenance under the DV
Act is no bar to seek maintenance under the Hindu Marriage Act.
The only rider is that it shall be inclusive and not exclusive.
Therefore, he would submit that the petition be dismissed.
7. The afore-narrated facts are not in dispute. The parties to
the lis are before the Court in two proceedings one instituted by the
wife under the provisions of the DV Act and the other by the
husband under Section 13 of the Hindu Marriage Act seeking
dissolution of marriage. The other proceeding on the criminal side
that is instituted by the wife is for offences punishable under
Sections 498A, 506, 313 and 34 of the IPC. This Court has granted
an interim order of stay of the proceedings under the DV Act in
terms of the order dated 01-02-2022 and the proceedings instituted
under the provisions of the IPC. Insofar as proceedings instituted
for offences punishable under the IPC is concerned, this Court has
only granted stay qua the family members and not the husband in
terms of its order dated 12-04-2022. The husband therein is the
petitioner in the subject case.
8. The issue is not concerning the proceedings pending before
any judicial fora or even before this Court. In the proceedings
instituted  by   the  husband    in  M.C.No.208    of  2021     seeking
dissolution of marriage, the respondent files an application under
Section 24 of the Hindu Marriage Act which entitles the wife to seek
interim maintenance. It is not in dispute that the said application
comes to be filed after grant of maintenance in a proceeding
instituted under the provisions of the DV Act. Therefore, the issue is
whether the respondent can claim maintenance under two different
enactments, particularly after having been granted maintenance
under a particular statute.
9. The issue with regard to plurality of proceedings qua
maintenance need not detain this Court for long or delve deep in to
the matter. The Apex Court in the case of RAJNESH1(supra) has
clearly observed that in the light of overlapping of jurisdictions, the
grant of maintenance under Section 20(1)(d) of the DV Act would
be in addition to the maintenance granted under Section 125 of the
Cr.P.C. and also further holds that there is no bar to seek
maintenance both under the DV Act and under Section 125 of the
Cr.P.C. or under the Hindu Marriage Act or even under the Hindu
Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956. The only rider would be that
the amount would not overlap and it would be inclusive of
maintenance under each jurisdiction and not exclusive. Therefore,
there is no additional payment or overlapping payment made. The
Apex Court has held as follows:
“60. It is well settled that a wife can make a claim for
maintenance under different statutes. For instance, there is no bar
to seek maintenance both under the DV Act and Section 125 CrPC,
or under HMA. It would, however, be inequitable to direct the
husband to pay maintenance under each of the proceedings,
independent of the relief granted in a previous proceeding. If
maintenance is awarded to the wife in a previously instituted
proceeding, she is under a legal obligation to disclose the same in a
subsequent proceeding for maintenance, which may be filed under
another enactment. While deciding the quantum of
maintenance in the subsequent proceeding, the civil
court/Family Court shall take into account the maintenance
awarded in any previously instituted proceeding, and
determine the maintenance payable to the claimant.
61. To overcome the issue of overlapping jurisdiction,
and avoid conflicting orders being passed in different
proceedings, we direct that in a subsequent maintenance
proceeding, the applicant shall disclose the previous
maintenance proceeding, and the orders passed therein, so
that the court would take into consideration the
maintenance already awarded in the previous proceeding,
and grant an adjustment or set-off of the said amount. If the
order passed in the previous proceeding requires any
modification or variation, the party would be required to
move the court concerned in the previous proceeding. ”
(Emphasis supplied)
In the light of the judgment of the Apex Court in the case of
RAJNESH (supra), the jurisdictional issue that the learned senior
counsel would seek to contend, thus, would become unacceptable.
10. The learned senior counsel has also submitted with regard
to fact that the petitioner has lost his job and is not in a position to
maintain his wife that too for a sum of Rs.30,000/-. The Apex Court
in the case of RAJNESH (supra) has laid down guidelines for grant
of maintenance by Courts answering applications seeking such
maintenance. In terms of the guidelines, assets and liabilities of
both the husband and the wife are to be placed for perusal before
the Court before whom such proceedings are pending. A perusal at
the order impugned in the petition would clearly indicate that
liability statements were placed before the concerned Court and the
income of the husband is noticed and the fact that the wife has
resigned her job and is residing in Mangalore is also noticed in
addition to noticing that the petitioner continues to work in a
particular Company at Bangalore.          On noticing all these facts
maintenance is awarded. The ground that the wife has deliberately
resigned the job after initiation of divorce proceedings only to
harass the petitioner is also considered, as that would be a matter
of evidence and what is granted is interim maintenance.
11. The Apex Court in the case of ANJU GARG AND
ANOTHER v. DEEPAK KUMAR GARG2 has held as follows:
“8. The learned counsel for the appellants vehemently
submitted that the High Court had passed the impugned order in a
very perfunctory manner without appreciating the conduct of the
respondent during the proceedings before the Family Court. He
submitted that the version of the appellant-wife, who had stepped
into the witness box, as also the version of the other witnesses
examined by her had remained unchallenged, as the Family Court
had closed the right of the respondent to cross-examine the
witnesses and, therefore, there was no reason for the Family Court
not to believe the version of the appellant-wife which was stated by
her on oath. However, the Family Court accepted all the oral
submissions of the learned counsel for the respondent, without
there being any evidence on record adduced by the respondent,
and disallowed the Maintenance application qua the appellant-wife,
and the High Court also erroneously confirmed the said order
passed by the Family Court. The learned counsel for the
respondent however submitted that the appellant-wife had
left the matrimonial home along with the children without
any justifiable reason and had failed to prove that she was
unable to maintain herself. He further submitted that though
the respondent has a party plot, the same having been
closed, he has no source of income. According to him, the
concurrent findings of facts recorded by the two courts,
should not be interfered by this Court.
9. At the outset, it may be noted that Section 125 of
Cr.P.C. was conceived to ameliorate the agony, anguish and
financial suffering of a woman who is required to leave the
matrimonial home, so that some suitable arrangements
could be made to enable her to sustain herself and the
children, as observed by this Court in Bhuwan Mohan
Singh v. Meena1. This Court in the said case, after referring
to the earlier decisions, has reiterated the principle of law as
to how the proceedings under Section 125 Cr.P.C have to be
dealt with by the Court. It held as under:
“In Dukhtar Jahan v. Mohd. Farooq [(1987) 1 SCC
624 : 1987 SCC (Cri) 237] the Court opined that : (SCC
16. “… Proceedings under Section 125 [of the
Code], it must be remembered, are of a summary
nature and are intended to enable destitute wives and
children, the latter whether they are legitimate or
illegitimate, to get maintenance in a speedy manner.”
8. A three-Judge Bench in Vimala (K.) v.
442], while discussing about the basic purpose under
Section 125 of the Code, opined that : (SCC p. 378,
3. “Section 125 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure is meant to achieve a social purpose. The
object is to prevent vagrancy and destitution. It
provides a speedy remedy for the supply of food,
clothing, and shelter to the deserted wife.”
9.   A     two-Judge     Bench     in Kirtikant  D.
Vadodaria v. State of Gujarat [(1996) 4 SCC 479 : 1996
SCC (Cri) 762], while adverting to the dominant
purpose behind Section 125 of the Code, ruled that :
15. “… While dealing with the ambit and scope of
the provision contained in Section 125 of the Code, it
has to be borne in mind that the dominant and primary
object is to give social justice to the woman, child and
infirm parents, etc. and to prevent destitution and
vagrancy by compelling those who can support those
who are unable to support themselves but have a
moral claim for support. The provisions in Section 125
provide a speedy remedy to those women, children
and destitute parents who are in distress. The
provisions in Section 125 are intended to achieve this
special purpose. The dominant purpose behind the
benevolent provisions contained in Section 125 clearly
is that the wife, child and parents should not be left in
a helpless state of distress, destitution and
starvation.”
356], reiterating the legal position the Court held :
6. “… Section 125 CrPC is a measure of social
justice and is specially enacted to protect women and
children and as noted by this Court in Capt. Ramesh
Chander     Kaushal v. Veena   Kaushal [(1978)      4    SCC
70 : 1978 SCC (Cri) 508] falls within constitutional
sweep of Article 15(3) reinforced by Article 39 of the
Constitution of India. It is meant to achieve a social
purpose. The object is to prevent vagrancy and
destitution. It provides a speedy remedy for the supply
of food, clothing and shelter to the deserted wife. It
gives effect to fundamental rights and natural duties
of a man to maintain his wife, children and parents
when they are unable to maintain themselves. The
aforesaid    position     was   highlighted     in Savitaben
Somabhai Bhatiya v. State of Gujarat [(2005) 3 SCC
407 : (2015) 1 SCC (Civ) 346], it has been stated that
it is a piece of social legislation which provides for a
summary and speedy relief by way of maintenance to
a wife who is unable to maintain herself and her
children”.
10. This Court had made the above observations as the
Court felt that the Family Court in the said case had conducted the
proceedings without being alive to the objects and reasons, and the
spirit of the provisions under Section 125 of the Code. Such an
impression has also been gathered by this Court in the case on
hand. The Family Court had disregarded the basic canon of law that
it is the sacrosanct duty of the husband to provide financial support
to the wife and to the minor children. The husband is required to
earn money even by physical labour, if he is an able-bodied, and
could not avoid his obligation, except on the legally permissible
grounds mentioned in the statute. In Chaturbhuj v. Sita Bai, it has
been held that the object of maintenance proceedings is not to
punish a person for his past neglect, but to prevent vagrancy and
destitution of a deserted wife, by providing her food, clothing, and
shelter by a speedy remedy. As settled by this Court, Section 125
Cr.P.C. is a measure of social justice and is specially enacted to
protect women and children. It also falls within the Constitutional
sweep of Article 15(3), reinforced by Article 39 of the Constitution
11. The Family Court, in the instant case had not only over-
looked and disregarded the aforesaid settled legal position, but had
proceeded with the proceedings in absolutely pervert manner. The
very fact that the right of the respondent to cross-examine the
witnesses of the appellant-original applicant was closed, as he had
failed to appear before the Family Court despite the issuance of
warrants, clearly established that he had no regards for his own
family nor had any regards for the Court or for the law. The
allegations made by the appellant-wife in her evidence before the
Court had remained unchallenged and, therefore, there was no
reason for the Family Court to disbelieve her version, and to believe
the oral submissions made by the learned counsel appearing for the
respondent which had no basis. In absence of any evidence on
record adduced by the respondent disputing the evidence adduced
by the appellant, the Family Court could not have passed the order
believing the oral submissions of the learned counsel for the
respondent. She had clearly stated as to how she was harassed and
subjected to cruelty by the respondent, which had constrained her
to leave the matrimonial home along with her children, and as to
how the respondent had failed and neglected to maintain her and
her children. She had also proved by producing the documentary
evidence that her father had paid money to the respondent from
time to time to help the respondent for his business. Even if the
allegations of demand of dowry by the respondent were not
believed, there was enough evidence to believe that money was
being paid to the respondent by the father of the appellant-wife,
which substantiated her allegation that the respondent was
demanding money from her father and was subjecting her to
harassment. The errant respondent had also gone to the extent of
questioning her chastity alleging that Rachit was not his biological
son. There was nothing on record to substantiate his such baseless
allegations. His application for DNA test was also rejected by the
Family Court. Of course, the Family Court granted the Maintenance
petition so far as the appellant no. 2-son was concerned,
nonetheless had thoroughly mis-directed itself by not granting the
maintenance to the appellant-wife.
12. Such an erroneous and perverse order of Family Court
was unfortunately confirmed by the High Court by passing a very
perfunctory impugned order. The High Court, without assigning any
reasons, passed the impugned order in a very casual manner. This
Court would have remanded the matter back to the High Court for
considering it afresh, however considering the fact that the matter
has been pending before this Court since the last four years, and
remanding it back would further delay the proceedings, this Court
deemed it proper to pass this order.
13. Though it was sought to be submitted by the
learned counsel for the respondent, and by the respondent
himself that he has no source of income as his party
business has now been closed, the Court is neither
impressed by nor is ready to accept such submissions. The
respondent being an able-bodied, he is obliged to earn by
legitimate means and maintain his wife and the minor child.
Having regard to the evidence of the appellant-wife before
the Family Court, and having regard to the other evidence on
record, the Court has no hesitation in holding that though
the respondent had sufficient source of income and was
able-bodied, had failed and neglected to maintain the
appellants.      Considering     the   totality   of   facts    and
circumstances, we deem it proper to grant maintenance
allowance of Rs. 10,000/- per month to the appellant-wife,
over and above the maintenance allowance of Rs. 6,000/-
granted by the Family Court to the appellant no.2-son.
14. It is accordingly directed that the respondent shall pay
maintenance amount of Rs. 10,000/- per month to the appellant-
wife from the date of filing of her Maintenance Petition before the
Family Court. The entire amount of arrears shall be deposited by
the respondent in the Family Court within eight weeks from today,
after adjusting the amount, if any, already paid or deposited by
him.”
The Apex Court holds that if the husband is an able bodied man, it
is his duty to maintain his wife. If the judgment rendered by the
Apex Court in the case of ANJU GARG (supra) is considered qua
the facts obtaining in the case at hand, the petitioner continues to
work is what is not in dispute as is observed in the impugned order.
Therefore, it becomes necessary for the petitioner to maintain his
wife, by paying interim maintenance. No fault can be found with the
order passed by the concerned Court granting such maintenance to
the wife.
12. In the result, the petition lacking in merits stands