W.P.A. 10835 of 2021         [via video conference]
[Ramapada Basak & Anr. -Vs- The State of West Bengal & Ors.]
It is submitted by the learned advocate for the State and
the Officer-in-charge, Taherpur Police Station that the order
dated 12th July, 2021 has been carried out and the private
respondents have been escorted out of the premises of the writ
petitioners.
Learned counsel for the writ petitioners confirms the
same. There is also a letter in writing dated 20th July, 2021
issued by the writ petitioners to the Officer-in-charge, Taherpur
Police Station confirming the above.
It is now well settled that the children and their spouses
living in the senior citizen’s house are at best “licensees”. Such
licence comes to an end once the senior citizens are not
comfortable with their children and their families. This principle
has also been followed by the Delhi High Court in in WP(C)
decided on 13.03.2020 and the Punjab and Haryana High Court
in the cases of (a) Manmohan Singh Vs. U.T. Chandigarh and
Magistrate, U.T. Chandigarh (Case No. 2017 CWP 6365) and (c)
Gurpreet Singh Vs. State of Punjab (Case No. 2016(1) RCR
Two issues would come up for consideration. The first of
which is the availability of alternative remedy under the
provisions of the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents Senior
Citizens Act, 2007. The other is a right of a daughter-in-law of
residence to be provided by either the husband or the father-in-
law, if directed by a competent court under the provisions of the
The Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of S. Vanitha Vs.
Deputy Commissoner, Bangaluru Urban District and Ors.
reported in 2020 SCConline SC 1023 has said that since both,
the Senior Citizens Act, 2007 as also the Domestic Violence Act,
2005 are special legislations, the two must be construed
harmoniously and applied suitably by a writ court hearing a plea
of the senior citizens that they do not want their children to live
with them. At paragraphs 35-40 the Hon’ble Supreme Court has
elaborately dealt with the principle under the headline “E.
Harmonising competing reliefs under the PWDV Act
2005 and Senior Citizens Act 2007”. In particular at
paragraph 38 the Court held as follows:
38. The above extract indicates that a significant object of
the legislation is to provide for and recognize the rights of
women to secure housing and to recognize the right of a
woman to reside in a matrimonial home or a shared
household, whether or not she has any title or right in the
shared household. Allowing the Senior Citizens Act 2007 to
have an overriding force and effect in all situations,
irrespective of competing entitlements of a woman to a right
in a shared household within the meaning of the PWDV Act
2005, would defeat the object and purpose which the
Parliament sought to achieve in enacting the latter
legislation. The law protecting the interest of senior citizens is
intended to ensure that they are not left destitute, or at the
mercy of their children or relatives. Equally, the purpose of
the PWDV Act 2005 cannot be ignored by a sleight of
statutory interpretation. Both sets of legislations have to be
harmoniously construed. Hence the right of a woman to
secure a residence order in respect of a shared household
cannot be defeated by the simple expedient of securing an
order of eviction by adopting the summary procedure under
the Senior Citizens Act 2007.”
In the instant case, it is seen that no right of residence
has been sought under any Statute by the daughter-in-law.
Hence, this Court is of the view that there is no
impediment in allowing exclusive residentiary rights to the senior
citizens and to direct eviction of the son and daughter-in-law.
On the question of alternative remedy, this Court is
conscious of the principles laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme
Court in the case of Whirlpool Corporation Vs. Registrar of
Trademark reported in (1998) 8 SCC 1 and upheld recently in
the year 2021 in the case of Radha Krishan Industries Vs.
State of Himachal Pradesh and Ors. reported in 2021
However, the right of senior citizen to exclusively reside in
his own house, must be viewed from the prism of Article 21 of
the Constitution of India. To compel a senior citizen to approach
either a civil court (the jurisdiction of which is any way barred
under Section 27 of the 2007 Act) or take recourse to a special
Statute like the 2007 Act would in most cases be extremely
erroneous and painful for a person in the sunset days of life.
This Court is therefore of the view that the principle of alternative
remedy cannot be strictly applied to Senior Citizens and a Writ
Court must come to the aid of a Senior Citizen in a given case.
A nation that cannot take care of its aged, old and infirm
citizens cannot be regarded as having achieved complete
With the aforesaid observations, the writ petition is
disposed of.
All parties are to act on a server copy of this order duly
downloaded from the official website of this court.