Writ Petition No. 395 of 2017 (M/S)
Appellate Authority & others               .……Respondent
Writ Petition No. 396 of 2017 (M/S)
Appellate Authority & others               .……Respondents
Writ Petition No. 404 of 2017 (M/S)
Appellate Authority & others               .……Respondents
Writ Petition No. 416 of 2017 (M/S)
Appellate Authority & others               .……Respondents
Writ Petition No. 412 of 2017 (M/S)
Appellate Authority & others               .……Respondents
Writ Petition No. 424 of 2017 (M/S)
Appellate Authority & others               .……Respondents
Writ Petition No. 392 of 2017 (M/S)
Appellate Authority & others               .……Respondents
Writ Petition No. 393 of 2017 (M/S)
Appellate Authority & others               .……Respondents
Writ Petition No. 390 of 2017 (M/S)
Appellate Authority & others               .……Respondents
Writ Petition No. 415 of 2017 (M/S)
Appellate Authority & others               .……Respondents
Writ Petition No. 391 of 2017 (M/S)
Appellate Authority & others               .……Respondents
Writ Petition No. 410 of 2017 (M/S)
Appellate Authority & others               .……Respondents
Writ Petition No. 414 of 2017 (M/S)
Appellate Authority & others               .……Respondents
Writ Petition No. 388 of 2017 (M/S)
Appellate Authority & others               .……Respondents
Writ Petition No. 407 of 2017 (M/S)
Appellate Authority & others               .……Respondents
Writ Petition No. 389 of 2017 (M/S)
Appellate Authority & others               .……Respondents
Writ Petition No. 413 of 2017 (M/S)
Appellate Authority & others               .……Respondents
Writ Petition No. 409 of 2017 (M/S)
Appellate Authority & others               .……Respondents
Writ Petition No. 421 of 2017 (M/S)
Appellate Authority & others               .……Respondents
Writ Petition No. 405 of 2017 (M/S)
Appellate Authority & others               .……Respondents
Writ Petition No. 401 of 2017 (M/S)
Appellate Authority & others               .……Respondents
Writ Petition No. 394 of 2017 (M/S)
Appellate Authority & others               .……Respondents
Writ Petition No. 398 of 2017 (M/S)
Appellate Authority & others               .……Respondents
Writ Petition No. 397 of 2017 (M/S)
Appellate Authority & others               .……Respondents
Writ Petition No. 418 of 2017 (M/S)
Appellate Authority & others               .……Respondents
Writ Petition No. 402 of 2017 (M/S)
Appellate Authority & others                              .……Respondents
Writ Petition No. 419 of 2017 (M/S)
Appellate Authority & others                              .……Respondents
Writ Petition No. 403 of 2017 (M/S)
Appellate Authority & others                              .……Respondents
Mr. Rajendra Dobhal, Senior Advocate, assisted by Mr. Shubhang
Dobhal, Advocate for the petitioner.
Mr.R.C.Arya, Standing Counsel for respondent nos. 1 & 2.
Mr. T.A. Khan, Senior Advocate assisted by Mr. Aditya Kumar Arya,
Advocate for respondent no.3.
An interesting question which crops up for
consideration for this Court in this bunch of
petition is the precise scrutiny of the judgment
and orders dated 22.11.2016 passed under the
Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972, by the Appellate
Forum, while exercising powers under sub-
section (7) of Section 7 of the Act, as passed in
Appeal No. 01 of 2014, Vice Chancellor, G.B.Pant
University of Agriculture and Technology, Pant
Nagar vs. Controlling Authority, as well as, the
order dated 19.01.2013 passed by, the Controlling
Authority under the Payment of Gratuity Act,
1972 in Case No. 4 of 2006, (this case number has
to read independently in relation to other
connected petition which are too being decided
by the present judgment) Damodar Mathpal vs.
G.B.Pant      University      of Agriculture  and
Technology, Pantnagar, while exercising powers
under Section 4 of Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972
(a) Whether the benefit under the Payment
of Gratuity Act, 1972 would be available to
the employees of the petitioner/University?
(b) As to what would be the effect of there
being no exemption from applicability of
Act under Section 5 read with Section 14 of
(c) Up to which extent the beneficial legislation
could be enforced on the employees of the
2.    Under the statute of University framed
under the Act of 1958, age of the retirement of an
employee as it has been prescribed by the statute
is contained in it has been provided in sub-clause
(2) & (3) of Clause 6 of the Statute which reads as
(ii)     For those employee who are appointed before
1.1.84 and who in accordance with G.O. No.
1009/12.08.400-(19)/84 dated 10.09.84 and G.O.
No. 4026/12.08.400(19)/84 dated 19.12.84 opt for
the benefits of pension death-cum-retirement
gratuity family pension and general provident
fund, the age of superannuation shall be 58 years.
(iii)    For the employees who are appointed before 1.1.84
and who in accordance with G.O. No.
1009/12.08.400(19)/84 dated 10.09.84, and G.O.
No. 4026/12-08-400(19)/84 dated 19.12.84 opt for
the benefits of pension, family pension and
General Provident Fund, the age of
superannuation shall be 60 years.
3.   It provides that all those employees who
were appointed on or before 01.01.1984 and who
opted for the existing into service upto 60 years
University Contributory Fund, they would be
superannuating on attainment of the age of 60
years. In it’s sub-clause (2) of Clause 6, it
provides that employees who were appointed
prior to in accordance with the Government
Order      dated     10.09.1984,      as    well      as,   the
Government Order dated 19.12.1984, and who
opt for the benefit of pension would be opting
“pension death-cum- retirement gratuity family
pension and general provident fund, age of
superannuation shall be 58 years.”      It further
provides that in its sub-clause (3) of Clause 6
with which this bunch of petition relates to, is
that all those employees who opt for 60 years
retirement under the Government Order dated
19.12.1984 for the benefit of pension, family
pension and general provident fund, their age of
superannuation would be 60 years. This clause
did not speak about gratuity.
4.   The learned counsel for the petitioner has
drawn     attention   of   this  Court    towards
Government Order dated 19.12.1984 (as annexed
as Annexure-1 to the writ petition), wherein in
accordance with sub-clause (2) of Clause 2 the
provisions happens to be a para materia provision
of sub-clause (3) of Clause 6 of the Statute. The
resultant affect on an employee opting to retire at
the age of 60 years, according to the learned
counsel for the petitioner he contends would be
entitled for the pension, family pension and
general provident fund, what he endeavors to
convey to the Court is that by a logical
interpretation of sub-clause (2) of the clause 2 of
the Government Order dated 19.12.1984 and sub-
clause 3 of clause 6 of the Statute, would be that
such an employee who opts for under the
Government Order on 19.12.1984 and whose age
of retirement becomes 60 years would not be
entitled for the gratuity under the Payment of
5.   Another limb of argument of the learned
counsel for the petitioner is that in view of the
provisions contained under Chapter-19 of the
statute governing the service conditions in its
Clause 8 (r), it deals with the gratuity rules which
would govern the grant of gratuity to the
employees of the University. What he tries to
submit is that in view of the definition of
employees as given under Section 2(e) of the Act,
“[(e) “ employee” means any person (other than an
apprentice) who is employed for wages, whether the
terms of such employment are express or implied, in
any kind of work, manual or otherwise, in or in
connection with the work of a factory, mine, oilfield,
plantation, port, railway company, shop or other
establishment to which this Act applies, but does not
include any such person who holds a post under the
Central Government or a State Government and is
governed by any other Act or by any rules providing
for payment of gratuity;]”
6.   But what is to be seen is that Chapter XIX
which deals with conditions of payment of
Gratuity to the employees of University does not
deal with the condition of GO 19.12.1984, what he
submitted that since respondents do not fall in
purview of definition of employees under Section
2(e), their gratuity would be payable as per
provisions of Chapter 19 of the Statute and not as
per Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972, and they
would not fall in the ambit of employees given
under the definition. The case of the petitioner is
that employees of the university would not be
governed by the provisions of Payment of
Gratuity Act, in the light of the fact that their
conditions for the grant of gratuity and for the
purposes of determining their entitlement would
be governed by the definition of employees given
under the statute and the provisions contained
under Chapter 19 which deals with conditions of
payment of gratuity, which itself contains certain
riders, as would be apparent from provisions of
Chapter 19 of the Statute, reads as under:-
SECTION 28(r) 1.          Employees         of   the
University whose maximum salary is less than RS.
40 per mensem and who are not entitle to the benefits
of the University Provident Fund, may be granted
gratuity according to the following scales:
(a) no gratuity shall be paid to a servant of ten
(b) if a servant has served for more than ten years,
but has not served for more than twenty years, a
gratuity of one month’s pay for each completed year
of approved service may be paid to the servant
himself, if he has been permitted to retire from the
service of the University on account of his incapacity
to continue in its service; or may be paid to his family
if he dies while in the service of the University;
(c)    if a servant has served in the University for
more than twenty years, a gratuity at the rate of one
month’s pay for each of the first twenty completed
years of approved service and one and a half month’s
pay for each completed year of approved service in
excess thereof may be paid to the servant himself, if he
has been permitted to retire from the service of the
University on the ground of incapacity or may be
paid to his family if he dies while in the service of the
(d) no gratuity shall be paid to a servant or to his
family except in cases where the servant leaves the
service of the University with the permission of the
Board given on the ground that he is incapable of
continuing in the service of the University of where
the servant dies while still in the service of the
(e)    the expression “Family” means those person
who in the opinion of the Board were dependent on
the servant at the time when he died.
7.   This Court is not in agreement with the
argument extended by the learned counsel for the
petitioner the reason being that if he extends the
arguments that the definition under Section 2(e)
of the employees as given under the Act would
be attracted then in that event his argument with
regard to the applicability of the gratuity rules
provided under the statute becomes a wayward
argument, because if their statute provides the
applicability of gratuity under the certain pre-
existing conditions to the employee it means that
the gratuity has been made applicable, but only
subject to a rider attached to the conditions
provided under Chapter-19, may it be that it is
for the employees defined under the statute thus
the applicability of gratuity is not completely
ousted. Hence, the concept of employees given
under Payment of Gratuity Act would not be
completely eradicated.
8.   As already observed that the definition of
employees as was amended in the Statute given
under Clause 6 (2) and (3) refers to G.O. dated
10.09.1984 and 19.12.1984, which qualified the
definition of employees and has drawn a
distinction for the optees of 58 years and 60 years
and entitlement for certain benefits referred in it.
But apart from the fact, it does not out the
experience of benefit of payment of gratuity, but
since, Chapter XIX of the statute which deals
with the conditions for grant of gratuity does not
out the employees falling under Clause 6 (3) of
Statute, this Court feels that payment of gratuity
is not completely ousted from employees but it
only speaks of conditions.
9.   As per the Government Order passed by the
erstwhile    State   of    Uttar    Pradesh    being
dated 10.12.1984, the age of retirement of the
employee of the University was extended to sixty
years subject to the conditions of giving an
option. The argument extended in relation to the
applicability of the Act by borrowing the
definition of Section 2(e) of the Payment of
Gratuity Act, 1972, it is pertinent to point out that
both the authorities while considering the
controversy had decided the matter by the order
dated 19.01.2013 and 22.11.2016 holding thereof
that in view of the Notification issued by the
Government of India No. 5-42013/1/95-ss-II
dated 03.04.1997 the provision of the Payment of
Gratuity Act, 1972, confers the right to the
employees to be entitled for gratuity in relation to
the employees of the University. Both the courts
have rightly held under the provisions of Section
1 (3) of the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972. It is
always open to the Government of India to apply
the provisions of the Act by making declaration
under the Act. The Court held that in view of the
provisions contained under Section 4 (ii) of U.P.
Agriculture and Technology University Act,
1958, the Act would apply to the employees of
the University as it deals with all the branches of
the study particularly, agriculture, research etc.
The Hon’ble Apex Court while dealing with the
arguments pertaining to the application of
Section 2(e) on the educational institutions has
held in a judgment rendered and reported in
2004 (100 FLR ) page 606, Ahmedabad Private
Primary          Teachers’       Association       and
Administrative Officer and others, in its para
12, 13 and 16 that the provision of the said Act
would      be     applicable     on    the  education
institutions, subject it is provided by Statute.
Para 12, 13 and 16 of the judgment are quoted
“12. It is not disputed that by notification
dated 3rd April, 1997, issued in exercise of
powers under Section 1(3)(c) of the Payment of
Gratuity Act, 1972, the Gratuity Act is extended
to educational institutions in which ten or more
persons are employed or were employed on any
day preceding 12 months. The relevant part of
the notification reads as under :-
II. DATED 3RD APRIL, 1997.- In exercise of
the powers conferred by Clause (c) of Sub-clause
(3) of Section 1 of the Payment of Gratuity Act,
1972 (39 of 1972), the Central Government
hereby specifies the educational institutions in
which ten or more persons are employed or were
employed on any day preceding 12 months as a
class of establishment's to which the said Act
shall apply with effect from the date of
publication of this notification.
Provided that nothing contained in this
notification shall affect the operation of the
notification of the Ministry of Labour S.O. 239
13. An educational institution, therefore, is
an 'establishment' notified under Section 1(3)(c)
of the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972. On behalf
of the Municipal Corporation, it is contended
that the only beneficial effect of the Notification
issued under Section 1(3)(c) of the Act of 1972, is
that such non-teaching staff of educational
institutions as answer the description of any of
the employments contained in the definition
Clause 2(e), would be covered by the provisions
of the Act. The teaching staff being not covered
by the definition of 'employee' can get no
advantage merely because by notification
'educational institutions' as establishments are
covered by the provisions of the Act.
16. Our conclusion should not be
misunderstood that teachers although engaged in
very noble profession of educating our young
generation should not be given any gratuity
benefit. There are already in several States
separate statutes, rules and regulations granting
gratuity benefits to teachers in educational
institutions which are more or less beneficial
than the gratuity benefits provided under the
Act. It is for the Legislature to take cognizance of
situation of such teachers in various
establishments where gratuity benefits are not
available and think of a separate legislation for
them in this regard. That is the subject matter
solely of the Legislature to consider and decide.”
10.    In another judgment reported in 1975 (30
FLR) page 283 Sukhdev Singh vs. Bhagatram
Sardar Singh has held the life insurance company
through which is a creation of the statute, i.e.,
Life Insurance Corporation Act, the provisions of
Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972, would be
applicable. Another remarkable judgment which
has been rendered by the High Court of Andra
Pradesh, the Hon’ble High Court has held that
for the purpose of excluding the applicability of
the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972, from an
institution created under an Act would only be
when the applicability is made upon the
employees who fall within the definition of a
public civil post and thus other employees
appointed in any other organization or institution
created under an Act the provisions of Payment
of Gratuity Act, 1972, will apply. The said ratio
was based upon the fact that the special
provision will always prevail over the general
law, and that too particularly in the instant case
when it relates to the Payment of Gratuity Act,
1972, which is a social beneficial legislation it will
have precedence over local laws. The present cae
too the University has been created under the
Act, and it caters wide social responsibilities as
would be apparent from the object of the Act of
11. On scrutiny of the ratio as propounded by
the    various    judgments    pertaining    to    the
applicability to the Payment of Gratuity Act,
1972, it could be inferred that the employees of
Govind       Ballabh    Pant    Agricultural      and
Technological University, which is created under
the U.P. Agriculture and Technology University
Act, 1958, is an autonomous body and in view of
the provisions contained under Section 2(e) of the
Act, the Act of 1972 would apply.
12. The Controlling Authority in its impugned
decision dated 19.01.2013 has observed as under:-
“Application of the Payment of Gratuity, 1972,
42013/1/95-ss-II dated 3th April 1927-in exercise of
the power conferred by Cl.(c)of sub-clause (3) of
section 1 of the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972, (39 of
1972) the central Government hereby specifies the
education institution in which ten or more persons are
employed or were employed on any preceding 12
months as a class of establishments to which the said
Act shall apply whit effect from the date of Publication
of this notification.”
13. The issue could also be scrutinized from
another view point as to for what purpose the
University was established by an Act. It provides
for    extending      development     of    agriculture
education for the rural public. It further intended
to develop rural and agricultural industrial and
other    business      and   other   allied   activities
including the research work, particularly in the
field of agriculture, also conducting the field and
extension programmes. All those activities since
have been governed independently that too, by
an autonomous activity based on the exclusive
programmes floated by the University, its
employees will fall to be within the definition of
under Section 2 (e) of the Act of 1972.
14. The Hon’ble Apex Court held that while
considering the effect of the definition of
employees under Section 2(e) that in view of the
Notification      dated   13.04.1997    issued   under
Section (3) (c) of Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972,
it has extended the applicability of the Act to
educational institutions employing more than ten
15. Learned counsel for the petitioner has
placed reliance on a judgment rendered by Single
Judge of Allahabad High Court, as reported in
2009 (121) FLR page 438, State of U.P. and
another and Ram Chandra Ram and another .
Para 6 of the same judgment is quoted
“6. A perusal of the aforesaid definition of the word
employee clearly indicates that employee in an
establishment, factory, etc. will not include a person who
holds a post under a State Government and is governed by
any Act or by any Rules which provides for the payment of
gratuity. The amount of gratuity under the Act is
determined under Section 7 and only a person who is
eligible for payment of gratuity can file such an application.
Section 4 of the Act contemplates that gratuity shall be
payable to an employee on termination of his employment.
A conjoint reading of Section 4 read with Section 7 of the
said Act coupled with the definition clause of the word
'employee' as defined in Section 2(e) will make it absolutely
clear that a Government employee who is governed by
separate Act and Rules relating to payment of gratuity is
not entitled to file an application under the Payment of
Gratuity Act. Consequently, the impugned order passed by
the controlling authority cannot be sustained and is
quashed. The writ petition is allowed. Any amount
deposited by the petitioner, before the controlling authority,
is liable to be refunded to the petitioner.”
16. The judgment rendered by the Allahabad
High Court in the case of State of U.P. and
another Vs. Ram Chandra Ram (Supra) since
had not considered the impact of Section 5 read
with Section 14 of the Act pertaining to the
exemption being granted on the prior sanction by
the State Government from the applicability of
the Act, the said judgment will be of no relevance
so far as the petitioners’ case is concerned, as the
same was per incuriam without considering the
effect of Section 5 read with Section 14 of the Act.
17. The ouster from the benefit under the
Payment of Gratuity Act, as laid down by the
Allahabad High Court is that it applies to an
employee in an establishment or a factory and
view taken that     it will not include a person who
holds a post under a State and is governed by
any Act or by Rules which provides for the
payment of gratuity. The employees of the
petitioner’s University are the employees who
are appointed under the service conditions
framed under the Act of 1958. They would not be
treated as to be a person holding the post under
the State Government, are not public servant
holding a civil post though the State may be that
under the statute having a deep and pervasive
control    over   the   financial    aspects   of the
University. The said judgment was dealing with
the   maintainability      of   the   application  by
government       employee      whose    terms    of
appointing was governed by a separate acts and
rules relating to the payment of gratuity, and
were holding a civil post and were public
servant, which has disentitle the application
under Section 4 of the Act. Apart from the fact
that this is not an issue involved in the present
case it was not an issue which was argued or
pressed by the petitioner before both the
authorities either under Section 4 or under
Section   7   before   appellate   authority.   The
aforesaid proposition has to be taken into
consideration in the light of the provisions
contained under Section 5 of the Act which deals
with    the   power    of    exemption   from   the
applicability of the Act.
18. The ratio as propounded pertaining to the
interpretation of the word employee vis a vis its
relation pertaining to the applicability of the Act
of 1972, will not be attracted in the instant case
for the reason that since the petitioner has
already defined its employees on which they
themselves have extended the benefit of gratuity,
hence he cannot be permitted to borrow the
definition of the employees under the Act.
19. There is another aspect of the matter that
under the Payment of Gratuity Act and its rules
as contained therein, it partakes to be a social
beneficial legislation, as it intends to recognize
the efficient services which are rendered by an
employee to an organization and a benefit in lieu
thereof   is  paid    to  an   employee    on   his
superannuation or death, since being central
legislation and merely because an employee has
opted under the Government Order dated
19.12.1984, which are administrative in nature he
cannot be deprived of the benefit of the payment
of gratuity accruing under the central legislation,
because there is nothing on record placed by the
petitioner either before the court below or before
this   Court   that   any   exemption   from    the
applicability of the Payment of Gratuity Act has
been granted by the State Government as
contemplated under Section 5 of the Payment of
Gratuity Act, and, thus on an harmonious
reading of Section 14 of the Payment of Gratuity
Act read with Section 5 of the said act that
gratuity would be payable until and unless, it is
exempted after an approval by the State
Government, as per the procedure provided
under Section 5 of the Act of 1972. This aspect has
not been dealt by the judgment rendered by the
Allahabad High Court reported in the case of
State of U.P. and another Vs. Ram Chandra Ram
and another (Supra) 2009 (121) FLR 438
20. By reading of under Section 5 furthermore
there is another aspect of the matter. The Hon’ble
Apex Court has laid down that once a benefit is
extended under the statute, it continues to be
granted until and unless it is taken away or is
withdrawn in the mode and manner as provided
under the law itself, it cannot be inferred by
implication that the benefit granted under the
statute has been withdrawn until and unless
there happens to be a specific exemption granted
under the law. There is no such document
showing that any exemption is available to the
petitioner from the applicability of the Act, as
such, it would be deemed that the benefit of
payment of gratuity would continue to be
applied as the employees of University.
21. There is another argument of learned
counsel for the petitioner that the benefits
payable which are referred in the provisions of
Clause 6 of the Statute pertaining to the optees of
age of retirement and its extension to sixty years
is with a rider confining to certain benefits since
it does not oust the gratuity as per Section 5 read
with Section 14 of the Act, it would continued to
be paid since being admissible under law. It is
established proposition that something which is
not exempted by specific           terms continues to
operate and would be applicable.
22.   Learned counsel for the respondent has
placed reliance on a judgment reported in 2010
Volume2 SCC page 44 in the case of Allahabad
Bank and Another vs. All India Allahabad Bank
Retired    Employees       Association        which      his
Lordships of Hon’ble Apex Court have laid down
while interpreting the provisions of the Payment
of Gratuity Act, in its para -16 has laid down that
the Payment of Gratuity Act is a social welfare
legislation and liberal consideration has to be
given with regard to the directive principles of
the State Policy for the purpose of enforcement of
a welfare legislation. Para 14, 16 & 19 of the same
“14. A plain reading of the provisions referred to
hereinabove makes it abundantly clear that there is
no escape from payment of gratuity under the
provisions of the Act unless the establishment is
granted exemption from the operation of the
provisions of the Act by the appropriate Government.
16.     We shall proceed to examine the point urged
by the learned Counsel for the appellant. Remedial
statutes, in contradistinction to penal statutes, are
known as welfare, beneficent or social justice oriented
legislations. Such welfare statutes always receive a
liberal construction. They are required to be so
construed so as to secure the relief contemplated by
the statute. It is well settled and needs no restatement
at our hands that labour and welfare legislation have
to be broadly and liberally construed having due
regard to the directive principles of State Policy. The
Act with which we are concerned for the present is
undoubtedly one such welfare oriented legislation
meant to confer certain benefits upon the employees
working in various establishments in the country.
19. Gratuity payable to an employee on the
termination of his employment after rendering
continuous service for not less than 5 years and on
superannuation or retirement or resignation etc.
being a statutory right cannot be taken away except
in accordance with the provisions of the Act where
under an exemption from such payment may be
granted only by the appropriate Government under
Section 5 of the Act which itself is a conditional
power. No exemption could be granted by any
Government unless it is established that the
employees are in receipt of gratuity or pension
benefits which are more favourable than the benefits
conferred under the Act.
23. Further in its para 14 and 19 it has been
provided that no exemption of the Payment of
Gratuity Act could be granted until and unless it
has   been     exempted            by     the     appropriate
government, as the gratuity has been held to be a
statutory right, which cannot be taken away
except in accordance with the provisions of the
Act, whereunder statute itself contemplates the
grant of exemption if made as per the procedure
provided in it.
24.   There is nothing on record that the
exemption has been availed by the petitioner and
that too is in strict compliance of Section 5 of the
Act. The Hon’ble Apex Court has also considered
the impact of Section 14, which provides that
provision of the Act will continue to be enforced
and effect irrespective of anything contained in
consistent in any other statute, meaning thereby
since Section 14 contains a non-obstinate clause,
the   Act    would     continue  to   be   enforced
irrespective of the interpretation which has been
argued by the learned counsel for the petitioner
in the light of the provisions contained under
Chapter 19 of the statute and in the light of the
provisions contained under the Government
Order dated 19.12.1984.
25. Further another limb of the argument of
learned counsel for the petitioner is that once the
employee has opted to continue up to 60 years by
invoking the benefit of the Government Order
dated 19.12.1984 his action would be barred by
the principle of submission and acquiescence,
because once he has availed the benefit of
extension of service then he is simultaneously be
bound by the conditions of the benefit likely to be
extended in pursuance to the option exercised by
him. Although, the issue has been dealt to the
said effect in the earlier paragraphs of the
judgment, but still it is repeated that since in
pursuance to the exercise of benefit of extension
of 60 years of age of retirement, the Payment of
Gratuity under the Act of 1972, was not intended
to deprive gratuity to optees. Hence, exercising of
an option will not deprive the private respondent
of gratuity until and unless it has been made
exempted after a prior approval of the State
Government. In that view of the matter, I do not
find any error committed by both the courts
26. Since lastly an argument has been extended
by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the
respondent employee cannot take the advantage
of their own mistake as they on their own delay,
which has been caused by him while invoking of
Section 4 of the Payment of Gratuity Act, for the
payment of gratuity as such the interest @ 10%
each, which has been granted to him is on an
excessive side. The fact that logically respondent
cannot be permitted to take the benefit of his own
dereliction, hence taking a compassionate view
on an over all scrutiny of the controversy the
interest awarded @ 10% seems to be on higher
side that too petitioner has been harnessed on
account of respondents delayed approach, hence,
is reduced to @ 6%. The amount if any has been
deposited before the Appellate Tribunal under
Section 7 of sub-section (7) of the Act would be
remitted to the respondent no. 3 as a consequence
of this judgment when it is placed before the
27. Subject to the above observations, the writ
petition is dismissed. The judgments impugned
order dated 22.11.2016 as well as the order dated
19.01.2013 are affirmed.
28. No order as to costs.