2.       This  appeal   is  directed   against   the  judgment  and
order dated 17.02.2021 as passed by the High Court of
Jharkhand at Ranchi in Criminal Revision No. 910 of 2019
(with I.A. No. 6052 of 2020), whereby the High Court,
after taking note of the settlement between the parties,
who have resolved their marital discord and are leading a
happy conjugal life, has confirmed the conviction of the
appellant under Section 498-A of the Indian Penal Code,
1860 (‘IPC’) while reducing the sentence to the period of
imprisonment already undergone by the appellant.
taking note of the settlement of the parties resolving
their marital disputes, has erred in not setting aside the
order of conviction altogether. Having regard to the short
question involved, dilation on all the factual aspects is
not   necessary   and   only    a  brief  reference  for  the
background would suffice.
4.    The   appellant   joined    Indian  Army   as  Naik  on
12.09.2005. The appellant and the respondent No. 2 were
married on 25.05.2013. Certain disputes having arisen, the
respondent No. 2 lodged an FIR bearing No. 204 of 2014 at
Police Station, Sisai against the appellant and his family
members with the allegations of demand of dowry, mental
and physical torture etc. On 26.11.2014, the chargesheet
was filed for offences under Sections 498-A, 323, 417, 34
IPC against the accused persons and charges were framed
accordingly. After trial in GR Case No. 904 of 2014, the
learned Judicial Magistrate, First Class, Gumla, convicted
the appellant of the offence under Section 498-A IPC and
the other accused persons of the offence under Section 323
IPC. All the accused persons were acquitted of the charges
under  Sections   417,  34   IPC.  Except the  appellant, all
other accused persons were given the benefit of Probation
of Offenders Act, 1958 but, the appellant was sentenced to
undergo simple imprisonment of three years.
5.    The appeal preferred by the appellant, being Criminal
Appeal No. 10 of 2019, was dismissed by Sessions Judge,
Gumla on 30.05.2019. Thereafter, the appellant preferred a
revision petition before the High Court, being Criminal
Revision No. 910 of 2019. While the said revision petition
was pending, two significant events took place. The first
had been sanction of competent authority for dismissal of
the appellant from his military service w.e.f. 14.07.2020
for having been convicted of the offence under Section
498-A IPC. In the second relevant event, on 24.11.2020,
the appellant and the respondent No. 2 submitted a joint
application   before  the   High  Court,    inter  alia,  stating
that with the intervention and advice of family members,
common   relatives   and   friends,    they   had   entered  into
settlement    and  resolved    all   their    disputes.   It  was
submitted that upon the appellant approaching his wife for
settlement with assurance to keep her with full honour and
dignity, the proposal was accepted by the wife (respondent
No. 2) with some conditions, while also undertaking to
discharge her matrimonial duties. It was submitted that
the parties were residing together with love and affection
and  with   no  dispute   between   them.    It  was,  therefore,
jointly prayed that since the dispute was a family dispute
that arose due to miscommunication and misunderstanding,
now the revision petition may be disposed of in view of
the changed circumstances and the family status of the
parties. This application was registered as I.A. No. 6052
6.    The High Court took up the matter for consideration
on 17.02.2021 and, after taking note of the submissions of
the parties that they had resolved the marital discord and
were  residing   together  while   enjoying    a  happy   conjugal
life, indeed observed that continuance of the proceedings
might   lead   to   disharmony    but    then,   merely    ordered
modification   of  sentence   to  the   period   of   imprisonment
already   undergone  by  the   appellant   while    affirming  his
conviction. The High Court observed and directed as under:
“3. Heard.   Taking into account that the petitioner-
husband and the wife-opposite party No. 02 have
amicably settled and resolved the material discord and
are residing together and leading a happy conjugal
life, therefore the probability cannot be ruled out
that continuance of the proceeding might lead to
bitterness and disharmony in the conjugal life causing
bickering and acrimony between the husband and the
wife.
Thus, in the interest of justice and for ensuring that
both the parties continue to enjoy a happy conjugal
life, the judgment dated 30/05/2019, passed in
Criminal Appeal No. 10 of 2019 by the learned Sessions
Judge, Gumla and the judgment dated 31/01/2019, passed
by the court of learned Judicial Magistrate, First
Class, Gumla, in G.R. Case No. 904 of 2014 (T.R. No.
185 of 2018) are, hereby, affirmed with modification
of sentence. The petitioner is sentenced to the period
of custody already undergone by him.
4. In the result, I.A. No. 6052 of 2020 is, hereby,
disposed off with modification of the sentence as
indicated above accordingly the Criminal Revision is,
hereby, disposed off.”
7.   Having   examined   the   matter   in   its  totality,  it
appears  that  the   High   Court,  while    disposing  of  the
revision  petition   with   the   application    moved  by  the
parties, did not pause to consider that maintaining of
conviction of the appellant of the offence under Section
498-A IPC would not be securing the ends of justice and
with such conviction being maintained and the appellant
losing his job, the family would again land itself in
financial distress which may ultimately operate adverse to
the harmony and happy conjugal life of the parties. The
learned  counsel   appearing    for   the   appellant  and  the
respondent No. 2 both have reiterated their stand that
they have resolved their disputes and are living together
while leading a happy conjugal life.
8.   Taking note of the object of Section 498-A IPC, the
expected approach of the High Court in the event of bona
fide settlement of disputes had been duly exposited by
this Court in the case of B.S. Joshi and Others v. State
of Haryana and Another: (2003) 4 SCC 675, where this Court
has underscored the duty of the Court to encourage the
genuine  settlement  of   matrimonial    disputes  and said  as
“12. The special features in such matrimonial matters
are evident. It becomes the duty of the court to
encourage genuine settlements of matrimonial disputes.
13. The observations made by this Court, though in a
slightly different context, in G.V. Rao v. L.H.V.
Prasad, [(2000) 3 SCC 693 : 2000 SCC (Cri) 733] are
very apt for determining the approach required to be
kept in view in a matrimonial dispute by the courts.
It was said that there has been an outburst of
matrimonial disputes in recent times. Marriage is a
sacred ceremony, the main purpose of which is to
enable the young couple to settle down in life and
live peacefully. But little matrimonial skirmishes
suddenly erupt which often assume serious proportions
resulting in commission of heinous crimes in which
elders of the family are also involved with the result
that those who could have counselled and brought about
rapprochement are rendered helpless on their being
arrayed as accused in the criminal case. There are
many other reasons which need not be mentioned here
for not encouraging matrimonial litigation so that the
parties may ponder over their defaults and terminate
their disputes amicably by mutual agreement instead of
fighting it out in a court of law where it takes years
and years to conclude and in that process the parties
lose their “young” days in chasing their “cases” in
different courts.
14. There is no doubt that the object of introducing
Chapter XX-A containing Section 498-A in the Penal
Code, 1860 was to prevent torture to a woman by her
husband or by relatives of her husband. Section 498-A
was added with a view to punishing a husband and his
relatives who harass or torture the wife to coerce her
or her relatives to satisfy unlawful demands of dowry.
The hypertechnical view would be counterproductive and
would act against interests of women and against the
object for which this provision was added. There is
every likelihood that non-exercise of inherent power
to quash the proceedings to meet the ends of justice
would prevent women from settling earlier. That is not
the object of Chapter XX-A of the Penal Code, 1860.
15. In view of the above discussion, we hold that   the
High Court in exercise of its inherent powers       can
quash criminal proceedings or FIR or complaint      and
Section 320 of the Code does not limit or affect   the
powers under Section 482 of the Code.
16. For the foregoing reasons, we set aside the
impugned judgment and allow the appeal and quash the
FIR abovementioned.”
9.    The same view has been reiterated by this Court in
the case of Bitan Sengupta & Anr. v. State of West Bengal
10.   In the aforesaid view of the matter, and taking note
of the terms of settlement as stated in the application
moved before the High Court which include the undertaking
of  the    appellant    that   he   would    be   nominating    the
respondent No. 2 as the nominee in his service record; and
where the parties are said to be leading a happy conjugal
life,  we   are  clearly   of  the   view   that  the  High   Court
should have accepted the settlement and quashed all the
proceedings    with  annulment    of   the   orders   against   the
appellant.   The   High  Court   having    not  done  so,   we  are
inclined to adopt this course so as to secure the ends of
11.   Accordingly,    this    appeal    is   allowed    and   while
allowing I.A. No. 6052 of 2020 moved before the High Court
in Criminal Revision No. 910 of 2019, all the proceedings
arising out of the said FIR No. 204 of 2014 are quashed
qua the appellant. Obviously, the order of conviction of
the appellant is set aside.
Petition for Special Leave to Appeal (Crl.)     No. 6840/2021
(Arising out of impugned final judgment and order dated 17-02-2021
in CRR No.910/2019 passed by the High Court of Jharkhand at Ranchi)
Date : 03-01-2022 This matter was called on for hearing today.
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
Leave granted.
The appeal is allowed in terms of the signed reportable
All pending applications stand disposed of.
(Signed reportable Order is placed on the file)