01.          Heard finally with the consent of learned Counsels for the parties
at the admission stage.
02.          The applicant/accused is seeking quashing of FIR bearing Crime
No.514 of 2021, registered with Police Station Nanalpeth, Parbhani for the
offences punishable under sections 498(A), 323, 504, 506 of the Indian Penal
Code and also consequential charge-sheet bearing RCC No.178 of 2022,
pending before the Judicial Magistrate, First Class, Parbhani, on the ground
that the parties have arrived at amicable settlement.
03.         Learned Counsel for the applicant submits that applicant –
husband and respondent No.2 – wife got separated by mutual consent and
accordingly approached the Family Court, Parbhani for declaration of their
matrimonial status in terms of provisions of section 2 of the Muslim Personal
Law (Shariat) Application Act, 1937 read with section 7(1)(b) Explanation (b)
of the Family Courts Act, 1984. By judgment and order dated 09.03.2022
learned Judge of the Family Court at Parbhani had allowed the petition and
declared their status as they are no more husband and wife in terms of the
mutual agreement between them. It is further agreed between the parties
that the applicant-husband shall pay an amount of Rs.5 lakhs to respondent
No.2 as the amount for future maintenance in total. Learned Counsel for
respondent No.2 submits that respondent No.2 has filed consent affidavit-in-
reply and she also received said amount of Rs.5 lakhs. Learned Counsel for
respondent No.2 submits that respondent No.2 is not interested in prosecuting
the applicant in connection with aforesaid crime and continue with the
criminal proceedings arising out of said crime.
04.         We have heard learned APP for the respondent/State. Learned
APP Mr. Dande has placed before us a case of Madras High Court in C.R.P.
(NPD) No.161 of 2021, wherein the Madras High Court by referring the law
laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of Mst. Zohara Khatoon Vs.
Mohd. Ibrahim, (1981) 2 SCC 509, submits that mubarat is a form of extra-
judicial divorce based on mutual consent under Islamic Law and same is valid,
as it remains untouched by the Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act. The
Madras High Court in para No.17 of the judgment as made following
“17. Coming to the present case on hand, the learned Principal District
Munsif, Alandur has refused to entertain the petition in the light of provisions
under Order VII Rule 11(d) of CPC and the Judgment of High Court of
Karnataka in Miscellaneous First Appeal No.200834/2019(FC) [Zuber Vs.
Mahezabeen] and the same is challenged in the present revision. It appears
that the petitioner filed O.S. before the learned Principal District Munsif at
Alandur to declare that the Marriage solemnized between the petitioner and
respondent on 01.12.2018 to be dissolved in terms of MOU entered between
them. However, the same was returned several times for want of several
reasons and thereafter, the said petition was dismissed even without
numbering the petition. As already mentioned supra, the Hon’ble Division
Bench of High Court of Kerala at Ernakulaam, had categorically held that
‘mubaraat’ is a form of an extra-judicial divorce based on mutual consent
under Islamic law and same is valid, as it remains untouched by the
Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act. The court below, in such circumstances,
is neither called upon to adjudicate nor called upon to dissolve the marriage
by decree of divorce. On the other hand, the Family Court only has to declare
the maritial stauts by endorsing the mubaraat invoking jurisdiction under
Explanation (b) of Section 7(1) of the Family Courts Act. Once a declaration
of joint divorce invoking bubaraat is produced before the Family Court, the
Family Court has to pass a decree declaring the matrimonial status of the
parties. The inquiry in such cases is limited to the extent to find out whether
both parties have agreed upon to dissolve such marriage invoking mubaraat.
Once the Family Court is satisfied that mubaraat is executed by both the
parties, it shall declare the matrimonial status of such parties. Hence, this
Court is of the considered view that the Family Court is bound to entertain a
petition for declaration of the status based on mubaraat. In view of the
above, the order passed by the learned Principal District Munsif, Alandur in
O.S.Sr.No.744/2020 dated 28.09.2020 is set aside and the parties are at
liberty to approach the concerned Family Court with appropriate jurisdiction.
Thereafter, the concerned Family Court shall dispose of the matter, if both the
parties have filed petition and after making a formal inquiry without any
further delay treating it as an uncontested matter in the light of the guidelines
issued by the Hon’ble Division Bench, High Court of Kerala, Ernakulam in the
judgment in O.P.(FC) No.352/2020 and connected cases dated 23/3/2021
and the present Civil Revision Petition is allowed. No costs.
05.          We have carefully gone through the allegations made in the
complaint and also police papers. It appears that the parties have decided to
get separated by mutual consent and accordingly approached the Family Court
by filing a petition No. F No.28 of 2022 under section 2 of the Muslim
Personal Law (Shariat) Application Act, 1937 read with section 7 (1)(b) of the
Family Courts Act for declaration of status. It appears that the parties have
arrived at amicable settlement voluntarily.
06.          In the case of Gian Singh vs. State of Punjab and others, reported
in (2012) 10 SCC 303, the Supreme Court in para 48 has quoted para 21 of
the judgment of the five-Judge Bench of the Punjab and Haryana High Court
delivered in Kulwinder Singh v. State of Punjab (2007) 4 CTC 769 . A five-
Judge Bench of the Punjab and Haryana High Court, in para 21 of the
judgment, by placing reliance on the various judgments of the Supreme court,
has framed the guidelines for quashing of the criminal proceeding on the
ground of settlement. Para 21 of the said case of Kulwinder Singh’s judgment
is reproduced by the Supreme Court in para 48 of the judgment in Gian Singh.
Clause 21(a) which is relevant for the present discussion reads as under :-
(a) Cases arising from matrimonial discord, even if other offences
are introduced for aggravation of the case.”
The Supreme Court in paragraph no.61 of the judgment of Gian
“61. The position that emerges from the above discussion can be
summarised thus: the power of the High Court in quashing a criminal
proceeding or FIR or complaint in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is
distinct and different from the power given to a criminal court for
compounding the offences under Section 320 of the Code. Inherent power is
of wide plenitude with no statutory limitation but it has to be exercised in
accord with the guideline engrafted in such power viz; (i) to secure the ends
of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of the process of any Court. In what cases
power to quash the criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R may be
exercised where the offender and victim have settled their dispute would
depend on the facts and circumstances of each case and no category can be
prescribed. However, before exercise of such power, the High Court must have
due regard to the nature and gravity of the crime. Heinous and serious
offences of mental depravity or offences like murder, rape, dacoity, etc. cannot
be fittingly quashed even though the victim or victim’s family and the
offender have settled the dispute. Such offences are not private in nature and
have serious impact on society. Similarly, any compromise between the victim
and offender in relation to the offences under special statutes like Prevention
of Corruption Act or the offences committed by public servants while working
in that capacity etc; cannot provide for any basis for quashing criminal
proceedings involving such offences. But the criminal cases having
overwhelmingly and predominatingly civil flavour stand on different footing
for the purposes of quashing, particularly the offences arising from
commercial, financial, mercantile, civil, partnership or such like transactions
or the offences arising out of matrimony relating to dowry, etc. or the family
disputes where the wrong is basically private or personal in nature and the
parties have resolved their entire dispute. In this category of cases, High
Court may quash criminal proceedings if in its view, because of the
compromise between the offender and victim, the possibility of conviction is
remote and bleak and continuation of criminal case would put accused to
great oppression and prejudice and extreme injustice would be caused to him
by not quashing the criminal case despite full and complete settlement and
compromise with the victim. In other words, the High Court must consider
whether it would be unfair or contrary to the interest of justice to continue
with the criminal proceeding or continuation of the criminal proceeding
would tantamount to abuse of process of law despite settlement and
compromise between the victim and wrongdoer and whether to secure the
ends of justice, it is appropriate that criminal case is put to an end and if the
answer to the above question(s) is in affirmative, the High Court shall be well
within its jurisdiction to quash the criminal proceeding.
07.          In the instant case, in terms of provisions of section 2 of the
Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) Application Act, 1937, all the questions about
the property, marriage, dissolution of marriage including talaq, illa, zihar, lian,
khula and mubaraat, maintenance, dower, guardianship gifts, trusts and trust
properties and wakfs the rule of decision in cases where the parties are
Muslims shall be considered as per the provisions of Muslim Personal Law
(Shariat). It further appears from the bare reading of section 7 of Family
Courts Act, 1984, which prescribes jurisdiction, in terms of section 7(1),
Explanation (a) and (b), suit for a declaration as to the validity of a marriage
or as to the matrimonial status of any person can also be a subject matter
before the Family Court. Further, we have also gone through the law laid
down by the Supreme Court in the case of Mst. Zohara (supra), in para 22 of
the judgment, the Supreme Court has made following observations :-
“22.In these circumstances we are therefore, satisfied that the interpretation put by
the High Court on the second limb of clause (b) is not correct. This seems to be
borne out from the provisions of Mahomedan law itself. It would appear that under
the Mahomedan law there are three distinct modes in which a muslim marriage can
be dissolved and the relationship of the husband and the wife terminated so as to
result in an irrevocable divorce.
(1) Where the husband unilaterally gives a divorce according to any of the
forms approved by the Mahomedan law, viz, Talaq ahsan which consists of a
single pronouncement of divorce during tuhar (Period between
menstruations) followed by abstinence from sexual intercourse for the period
of iddat; or Talak hasan which consists of three pronouncement made during
the successive tuhrs, no intercourse taking place between three tuhrs; and
lastly Talak-ul-bidaat or talalk-i-badai which consists of three
pronouncements made during a single tuhr either in one sentence or in three
sentences signifying a clear intention to divorce the wife, for instance, the
husband saying 'I divorce thee irrevocably' or 'I divorce thee, I divorce thee,
I divorce thee'. The third form referred to above is however not recognised
by the Shiah law. In the instant case, we are concerned with the appellant
who appears to be a Sunni and governed by the Hanafi law (vide Mulla's
Principles of Mahomedan Law, Sec. 311, p. 297). A divorce or talaq may be
given orally or in writing and it becomes irrevocable if the period of iddat is
observed though it is not necessary that the woman divorced should come to
know of the fact that she has been divorced by her husband.
(2) By an agreement between the husband and the wife whereby a wife
obtains divorce by relinquishing either her entire or part of the dower. This
mode of divorce is called 'khula' or Mubarat. This form of divorce is initiated
by the wife and comes into existence if the husband gives consent to the
agreement and releases her from the marriage tie. Where, however, both
parties agree and desire a separation resulting in a divorce, it is called
mubarat. The gist of these mode is that it comes into existence with the
consent of both the parties particularly the husband because without his
consent this mode of divorce would be incapable of being enforced. A
divorce may also come into existence by virtue of an agreement either before
or after the marriage by which it is provided that the wife should be at liberty
to divorce herself in specified contingencies which are of a reasonable nature
and which again are agreed to by the husband. In such a case the wife can
repudiate herself in the exercise of the power and the divorce would be
deemed to have been pronounced by the husband. This mode of divorce is
called 'Tawfeez' (vide Mulla's Mohmedan Law, Sec. 314. p. 300. )
(3) By obtaining a decree from a civil court for dissolution of marriage under
s. 2 of the Act of 1939 which also amounts to a divorce (under the law)
obtained by the wife. For the purpose of maintenance, this mode is governed
not by clause (b) but by clause (c) of sub-section (3) of s. 127 of the 1973
Code; whereas the divorce given under modes (1) and (2) would be covered
by clause (b) of sub-section (3) of s. 127.”
08.                It thus appears that the learned Judge of the Family Court has
rightly applied the provisions of Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) Application
Act, 1937 to the parties before us and accordingly declared the status of
marriage as no more in existence by mutual consent.
09.                In view of above and the ratio laid down by the Supreme Court in
above cited cases, we proceed to pass following order :-
(i)    The Criminal Application is allowed in terms of prayer
clause (A-1).
(ii)   The Criminal Application is accordingly disposed of.