The Allahabad High Court has granted final anticipatory bail to Amazon Prime Video head Aparna Purohit who is facing an FIR registered in Lucknow, for allegedly depicting Hindu gods in a bad light in the web series Tandav.The Bench of Justice Krishan Pahal considered the overall facts and circumstances of the case and consequently, came to the conclusion that the applicant deserved to be... The Allahabad High Court has granted final anticipatory bail to Amazon Prime Video head Aparna Purohit who is facing an FIR registered in Lucknow, for allegedly depicting Hindu gods in a bad light in the web series Tandav. The Bench of Justice Krishan Pahal considered the overall facts and circumstances of the case and consequently, came to the conclusion that the applicant deserved to be granted anticipatory bail. Essentially, Purohit was seeking anticipatory bail in connection with FIR against her whereinunder she has been booked for alleged commission of offences under Sections 66 (Computer related offences), 66F (Punishment for cyber terrorism) and 67 (Transmitting obscene material) IT Act, 2008 (as amended) apart from Sections 153-A (Promoting enmity between different groups), 295 (Defiling place of worship with intent to insult the religion), 505(1)(b) (Public mischief), 505(2) (Statements promoting hatred between classes), 469 (Forgery for purpose of harming reputation) of IPC. As per the prosecution story, in the said web series, certain actors cast some scenes portraying 'God' in a very derogatory manner which hurts the sentiments of the public at large. It was the contention of the counsel for the applicant that she had not intended to hurt anyone's sentiment and there is no criminal history of the applicant. It was also argued that there is no possibility of the applicant to flee from justice, and, therefore, she is entitled for interim protection from this Court. In view of the submissions of the counsel for the applicant, the Court granted her bail by ordered thus:
"In the event of arrest of the applicant involved in aforesaid case shall be released on anticipatory bail till the submission of police report, if any, under section 173(2) Cr.P.C. before the competent Court on his/her furnishing a personal bond of Rs.50,000/- with two sureties each of the like amount to the satisfaction of the Station House Officer of the police station concerned." Recently, a Lucknow Court had allowed Purohit to travel abroad. Purohit had moved the Lucknow Court with her application seeking permission to travel abroad (Dubai) to meet her parents who were unwell. The application had been moved in view of Allahabad High Court's last year's order wherein she was asked to not leave the country without the permission of the Court. 