APPLICATION U/S 438 CR.P.C. No. - 1794 of 2021
Opposite Party :- State of U.P. and Another
Counsel for Applicant :- Purnendu Chakravarty,Anuuj
Heard Sri Jaideep Narayan Mathur, learned Senior Advocate
assisted by Sri Purnendu Chakravarty, learned counsel for the
applicant and Sri Santosh Mishra, learned Additional
Government Advocate for the State and also perused the
material available on record.
The applicant is seeking anticipatory bail in connection with
FIR/Case Crime No.0031 of 2021, under Sections 153-A, 295,
505(1)(b), 505(2), 469 IPC & Sections 66, 66-F & 67 of
Information Technology Act, 2008 (as amended), Police Station
As per the prosecution story, the applicant, who is the
Commercial Head of Amazon Prime Video, is said to have
purchased the rights of web series "Taandav". It has further
been alleged that in the said web series, certain actors cast some
scenes portraying 'God' in a very derogatory manner which
hurts the sentiments of the public at large.
It is the contention of the learned counsel for the applicant that
the applicant has not intended to hurt anyone's sentiment
although the entire episode of the said web series are based on
coincidental. There is no criminal history of the applicant.
There is no possibility of the applicant to flee from justice, and,
therefore, she is entitled for interim protection from this Court.
Sri Santosh Mishra, learned Additional Government Advocate
has opposed the prayer for anticipatory bail.
Considering the overall facts and circumstances of the case, this
Court is of the opinion that the applicant deserves to be granted
anticipatory bail in connection with the aforesaid case.
Accordingly, the anticipatory bail application is disposed of
with following directions:-
(A) In the event of arrest of the applicant involved in aforesaid
case shall be released on anticipatory bail till the submission of
police report, if any, under section 173(2) Cr.P.C. before the
competent Court on his/her furnishing a personal bond of
Rs.50,000/- with two sureties each of the like amount to the
satisfaction of the Station House Officer of the police station
(B) The applicant shall co-operate with the Investigating
Officer during investigation and shall report to the Investigating
Officer as and when required for the purpose of conducting
(C) The applicant shall not, directly or indirectly, make any
inducement, threat or promise to any person acquainted with the
facts of the case so as to dissuade them from disclosing such
facts to the Court or to any police officer; and
(D) The applicant shall not leave India without the previous
permission of the Court.
In default or misuse of any of the conditions, the Public
Prosecutor/ Investigating Officer/ first informant-complainant is
at liberty to file appropriate application for cancellation of
anticipatory bail granted to the applicant.
Location: High Court of Judicature at