438 CR.P.C. No. - 20138 of 2021
Counsel for Applicant :- Nabi Ullah
Heard learned counsel for the applicant, learned A.G.A. for the
State and perused the record.
The present application has been moved seeking anticipatory
bail in Case Crime no. 915/2019, under Sections 147, 148, 149,
188, 153A, 298, 304, 332, 353 I.P.C. and Section 7 of Criminal
Varanasi with the prayer that in the event of arrest, applicant
may be released on bail.
It has been argued by the learned counsel for the applicant that
applicant is innocent and he has an apprehension that he may be
arrested in the above-mentioned case, whereas there is no
credible evidence against him. It has further been submitted that
applicant has no criminal antecedents and that no coercive
process has been issued against the applicant so far. Learned
counsel has submitted that applicant is not named in FIR and
that the FIR was lodged against 16 named and some unknown
persons alleging that despite proclamation under Section 144
Cr.P.C., accused persons have tried to incite religious
sentiments by raising anti-national slogans. It was submitted
that applicant has been falsely implicated in this case during
investigation merely on the basis of suspicion and that no
specific role has been assigned to the applicant. It was
submitted that similarly placed co-accused Ashraf and Ashraf
Ali Khan have already been granted anticipatory bail by co-
ordinate Benches of this Court, copies of which are on record. It
was also submitted that applicant undertakes to co-operate
during investigation and trial and he would appear as and when
required by the investigating agency or Court. It has been stated
that in case, the applicant is granted anticipatory bail, he shall
not misuse the liberty of bail and will co-operate with the
investigation and would obey all conditions of bail.
Learned A.G.A. has opposed the application for anticipatory
It may be stated that in case of Siddharam Satlingappa
Mhetre v. State of Maharashtra, (2011) 1 SCC 694, it has
been held by Hon'ble Supreme Court that while deciding
anticipatory bail, Court must consider nature and gravity of
accusation, antecedent of accused, possibility of accused to flee
from justice and that Court must evaluate entire available
material against the accused carefully and that the exact role of
the accused has also to be taken into consideration.
In the instant case, considering the settled principle of law
regarding anticipatory bail, submissions of the learned counsel
for the parties, nature of accusation, role of applicant and all
attending facts and circumstances of the case, without
expressing any opinion on merit of the case, a case for
anticipatory bail is made out.
The anticipatory bail application is allowed.
In the event of arrest of the applicant- Mohammad Kaif
involved in the aforesaid case crime shall be released on
anticipatory bail on his furnishing a personal bond of Rs.
50,000/- with two sureties each in the like amount to the
satisfaction of the Station House Officer of the police station
concerned with the following conditions :-
(i) the
applicant shall make himself available for interrogation
by a police officer as and when required;
(ii) the applicant shall not directly or indirectly, make any
inducement, threat or promise to any person acquainted with the
facts of the case so as to dissuade him/her/them from disclosing
such facts to the Court or to any police officer;
(iii) the applicant would co-operate during investigation and
trial and would not misuse the liberty of bail.
In default of any of the conditions, the Investigating
Officer/prosecution shall be at liberty to file appropriate
application for cancellation of anticipatory bail granted to the
applicant.