This petition has been filed by the petitioner under
Section 439 Cr.P.C. to release him on bail in connection with FIR
Bail Appln. No. 30 of 2022
No.169(5)2017 under Section 302/449/120-B IPC on the file of
Imphal Police Station, who is under trial prisoner in Sessions Trial
(CAW) Case No.1 of 2018 pending on the file of the Additional
2.               The case of the prosecution is that on 30.5.2017 at
about 5.40 p.m., the complainant Soram Tomba Singh lodged a
written complaint with the Officer-in-Charge of Imphal Police
Station that on the same day at about 4.45 p.m., when he
returned home in his car he found the gate closed from inside
and despite horn, neither his wife nor his daughter came out to
open the main gate. Thereafter, he crossed the fencing wall by
climbing on the car parked near the gate and opened the main
gate. Then, he parked the car inside the campus and when he
tried to enter inside the house, he found both front doors were
fastened with bolt from inside.       So, he immediately moved
towards the rear door on the northern side found it to be open.
When he entered from the rear door, the complainant found his
wife Soram (O) Lakhipyari Devi lying in a pool of blood on the
floor. When he proceed to the next room, he found his daughter
Monica Soram, who was pregnant for 8 months, also found lying
on the floor in a pool of blood. Then, he opened the front door,
ran out of the house and shouted for help and he again went
Bail Appln. No. 30 of 2022
inside the house and checked their bodies. However, they were
found dead with grievous injuries on their bodies. Immediately,
he rushed to the police station and lodged the complaint. Based
on the written complaint, the Imphal police registered an FIR
No.169(5)2017 under Section 302/449/120-B IPC against
unknown person and investigated the case. During investigation,
on 2.6.2017, the investigating officer arrested the petitioner in
connection with the said FIR and sent him to judicial custody.
3.               Mr. A. Golly, the learned counsel for the petitioner
submitted that the petitioner has been falsely implicated as an
accused in this case and he was arrested by the respondent
police on 2.6.2017 after calling him and detaining at Imphal
Police Station in the name of suspicion of involving in the above
said FIR case.           He would submit that the main reason of
suspicion of the police is that the petitioner once had love affairs
with the victim namely Monica Devi before her marriage and her
mother was against the relationship of the petitioner with her
daughter and that the petitioner had been looking for opportunity
of eliminating his lover and her mother.
4.               The learned counsel further submitted that there are
no reasonable grounds for believing that the petitioner had
Bail Appln. No. 30 of 2022
committed the double murder as alleged by the prosecution. In
fact, the trial Court had framed charges against the petitioner way
back on 28.3.2018 and still the case is pending for examination
of prosecution side witnesses. Though so far 10-11 prosecution
side witnesses were examined, still the prosecution has to
examine 12-13 more witnesses which will take long years and
the prosecution is not co-operating with the trial Court for speedy
disposal of the case.
5.               The learned counsel for the petitioner urged that
there is no possibility of concluding the trial in near future and the
petitioner has been in judicial custody for more than 5 years and
has been suffering mental agony and had also been facing many
health problems inside the jail and, as such, detaining the
petitioner in jail to an indefinite period is deprived of his
fundamental rights provided under Article 21 of the Constitution
6.               The learned counsel then submitted that since
investigation completed and the trial is in progress, there is no
hurdle in enlarging the petitioner on bail and there will be no
question of influencing to the witnesses or hamper and tamper
on the prosecution case by the petitioner after his release from
Bail Appln. No. 30 of 2022
judicial custody. The petitioner is ready to comply with the
condition imposed upon by this Court while he is released on bail
and that the petitioner is also ready to furnish sufficient surety to
the satisfaction of the Court. Thus, a prayer has been made to
release the petitioner on bail. In support, the learned counsel for
the petitioner placed reliance upon the following decisions:
(i)     State of Kerala v. Raneef, (2011) 1
(ii)    Md. Abdul Kalam @ Md. Kalama v.
7.               Per contra, Mr. S. Niranjan, learned Additional
Public Prosecutor submitted that the Additional Sessions Judge
(FTC) Crime Against Women, Manipur, in its order dated
28.3.2018 passed in ST (CAW) No.1 of 2018, came to the
conclusion that there is prima facie evidence or suspicion against
the accused person for committing murder and causing death of
unborn child amounting to culpable homicide and, therefore, the
learned Sessions Judge framed charges against the petitioner.
8.               The learned Additional Public Prosecutor further
submitted that in view of Covid-19 pandemic, normal Court
proceedings have been put on hold since March, 2020 on
Bail Appln. No. 30 of 2022
account of the country wide lockdown and normal Court
proceedings/physical hearing have been restored only in March,
2022. In other words, the delay has been caused by forces
beyond the control of the trial Court and the respondent police.
9.               The learned Additional Public Prosecutor urged that
the decision in the case of State of Kerala v. Raneef, (2011) 1
SCC 784 relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioner is
not applicable to the case on hand, as the said decision was
delivered before Covid-19 pandemic. Further, in the facts and
circumstances of the instant case, the decision in the case of Md.
Abdul Kalam @ Md. Kalama v. Officer-in-Charge, Women
Police Station, 2021 (3) MnLJ 26 relied on by the learned
counsel for the petitioner is also not applicable to the case on
hand.       Since the investigation reveals involvement of the
petitioner into the crime and since best part of prosecution
witnesses have been examined before the trial Court, the
petitioner cannot be enlarged on bail. If the petitioner is released
on bail, he will definitely abscond. Thus, a prayer has been made
to dismiss the bail petition.
10.              This Court considered the rival submissions and
also perused the materials available on record.
Bail Appln. No. 30 of 2022
11.              The alleged crime said to be occurred on 30.5.2017.
On the same day, the complaint was lodged and the FIR has
been registered against unknown person. During investigation,
the petitioner was arrested on 2.6.2017 and upon committal,
charges were framed against the petitioner by the trial Court on
28.3.2018. According to the petitioner, out of 23 prosecution side
witnesses, 11 witnesses were examined by the prosecution and
the remaining witnesses are yet to be examined.
12.              Earlier, the petitioner has filed Cril. Misc. (Bail) Case
No.2 of 2019 before the Additional Sessions Judge (FTC) Crime
Against Women, Manipur. By the order dated 28.5.2019, the
said petition was dismissed.         Again, the petitioner has filed Cril.
Misc. (Bail) Case No.1 of 2020 before the trial Court on medical
grounds. By the order dated 24.3.2020, the trial Court dismissed
the petition.        However, directed the authorities to provide
necessary medical treatment to the petitioner to perform
Orthopaedic surgery. The petitioner has also filed Cril. Misc.
(Bail) Case No.3 of 2020 for grant of bail. By the order dated
14.12.2020, the said petition was dismissed by the trial Court.
Again, the petitioner has filed Cril. Misc. (B) Case No.1 of 2022
before the trial Court and by the order dated 6.8.2022, the said
petition was dismissed.
13.              Now the petitioner has filed the present petition for
bail contending that he has been in judicial custody for more than
5 years and he has been suffering mental agony and also facing
health issues inside the jail. According to the petitioner, there is
no possibility of concluding the trial in near future and detaining
the petitioner to an indefinite period would hit the fundamental
rights of the petitioner enshrined under Article 21 of the
Constitution of India.
14.              The tracking report of the case history regarding
S.T. (CAW) No.1 of 2018 produced by the respondent clearly
shows that the trial has started way back in the year 2018.
Though most part of the period covers Covid-19, the materials on
record would show that after lifting the lockdown and allowed the
Courts to conduct the trial of the cases in the year 2021, no
regular trial/day-to-day trial took place in the instant case. It is
not the case of the prosecution that the petitioner has delayed
the trial. On the other hand, the record reveals that due to failure
of the prosecution in bringing the witnesses, the trial stands
adjourned from time to time.
15.              The very involvement of the petitioner in the
commission of the alleged offence is disputed by the petitioner.
Bail Appln. No. 30 of 2022
However, the would be considered only after trial. Therefore, at
this stage, the merits of the crime cannot be gone into even
though the case involved double murder of two women and
unborn baby in the womb.
16.              It is settled law that the grant or refuse to grant bail
lies within the discretion of the Court. The grant or denial is
regulated to a large extent by the facts and circumstances of
each particular case. In the case on hand, as stated supra, the
petitioner seeks bail mainly on the ground of delay in the trial,
which started way back in the year 2018 itself. The pandemic
started during March, 2020 and in between 2018 and March
2020, no sufficient progress had been taken to conclude the trial.
17.              In State of Kerala v. Raneef, (2011) 1 SCC 784,
the Hon’ble Supreme Court held:
“15. In deciding bail applications an important
factor which should be certainly be taken into
consideration by the court is the delay in
concluding the trial. Often this takes several
years, and if the accused is denied bail but is
ultimately acquitted, who will restore so many
years of his life spent in custody? Is Article
21 of the Constitution, which is the most
basic of all the fundamental rights in our
Bail Appln. No. 30 of 2022
Constitution, not violated in such a case? Of
course this is not the only factor, but it is
certainly one of the important factors in
deciding whether to grant bail. In the present
case the respondent has already spent 66
days in custody (as stated in Para 2 of his
counter-affidavit), and we see no reason why
he should be denied bail.               A doctor
incarcerated for a long period may end up
like Dr.Manettee in Charles Dicken’s novel A
Tale of Two Cities, who forgot his profession
and even his name in the Bastille.”
18.              It is settled law that the grant of bail ought not to be
denied only on the perceived apprehension by the Court that the
accused, if restored to liberty, will tamper with the evidence.
There must be some prima facie evidence on record or
reasonable and justifiable grounds to believe that in case the
benefit of bail is extended to an accused, he is going to misuse
his liberty or he would create conditions which are not conducive
to hold a fair trial. The Hon’ble Supreme Court in various
judgments has confirmed that "bail is the rule and jail is an
exception. The object of bail is neither punitive nor preventive but
is meant to secure presence of the accused during the trial.
Bail Appln. No. 30 of 2022
19.              In a catena of decision, the Hon’ble Supreme Court
held that a procedure which keeps large number of people
behind bars without trial, for long, cannot be regarded as
"reasonable, just, fair" so as to be in conformity with the
provisions of Article 21 of the Constitution of India. Detaining the
under-trial prisoners in custody for an indefinite period is a gross
violation of Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
20.              In Sanjay Chandra v. CBI, reported in (2012) 1
SCC 40, the Hon’ble Supreme Court held:
“21. In bail applications, generally, it has
been laid down from the earliest times that
the object of bail is to secure the
appearance of the accused person at his
trial by reasonable amount of bail. The
object of bail is neither punitive nor
preventative. Deprivation of liberty must be
considered a punishment, unless it is
required to ensure that an accused person
will stand his trial when called upon. The
Courts owe more than verbal respect to the
principle that punishment begins after
conviction, and that every man is deemed
to be innocent until duly tried and duly found
guilty.”
21.              As stated supra, the Hon’ble Supreme Court as well
as this Court held that bail is the rule and committal to jail is an
exception. The Courts have also observed that refusal of bail is
a restriction on the personal liberty of an individual guaranteed
under Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
22.              The way in which the trial is conducted in the case
on hand clearly shows that the trial is not likely to be concluded
in near future. Therefore, as rightly argued by learned counsel for
the petitioner, keeping the petitioner in custody indefinitely till the
completion of trial would cause great hardship to him and also
hits personal liberty. When the under-trial prisoners are detained
in jail custody to an indefinite period, Article 21 of the Constitution
of India is violated. Therefore, the petitioner cannot be made to
languish behind bars for a longer period of time.
23.              The principles relating to grant or refusal of bail
have been stated in the case of Kalyan Chandra Sarkar v.
Rajesh Ranjan, reported at (2004) 7 SCC 528. In Kalyan
Chandra Sarkar, supra, the Hon’ble Supreme Court observed
that the Court granting bail should exercise its discretion in a
judicious manner and not as a matter of course. Though at the
stage of granting bail a detailed examination of evidence and
Bail Appln. No. 30 of 2022
elaborate documentation of merits of the case need not be
undertaken, there is a need to indicate in such orders reasons for
prima facie concluding why bail was being granted, particularly,
where the accused is charged of having committed a serious
offence. Any order devoid of such reasons would suffer from non-
application of mind. It is also necessary for the Court granting ball
to consider among other circumstances and the following facts
also before granting bail; they are:
conviction and the nature of supporting
evidence.
(b) Reasonable apprehension of tampering
with the witness or apprehension of
(c) Prima facie satisfaction of the Court in
support of the charge.
24.              In Dataram Singh v. State of Uttar Pradesh and
another, reported in (2018) 3 SCC 22, the Hon’ble Supreme
Court observed that a fundamental postulate of criminal
jurisprudence is the presumption of innocence, meaning thereby
that a person is believed to be innocent until found guilty.
Bail Appln. No. 30 of 2022
However, there are instances in our criminal law where a reverse
onus has been placed on an accused with regard to some
specific offences, but that is another matter and does not detract
from the fundamental postulate in respect of other offences. Yet
another important facet of our criminal jurisprudence is that the
grant of bail is the general rule and putting a person in jail or in a
prison or in a correctional home is an exception. Unfortunately,
some of these basic principles appear to have been lost sight of
with the result that more and more persons are being
incarcerated and for longer periods. This does not do any good
to our criminal jurisprudence or to our society.
25.              Thus, it is clear that grant or denial of bail is entirely
the discretion of the Judge considering the bail application, but
even so, the exercise of judicial discretion has been
circumscribed by a large number of decisions rendered by the
Hon’ble Supreme Court as well as by the High Courts in the
26.              To put it shortly, a humane attitude is required to be
adopted by a Judge while dealing with the ball application. Even
if the offence is a serious offence, requires a humane treatment
Bail Appln. No. 30 of 2022
by the Court, humane treatment to all including an accused is
requirement of law.
27.              The cardinal principles of law for granting bail will
not be affected when enlarging the petitioner on bail, inasmuch
as the investigation has already been completed. As stated
supra, the case is pending for examination of further prosecution
witnesses. Therefore, the question of influencing to the witnesses
or hamper and tamper of the prosecution case by the petitioner
after his release does not arise.
28.              In Union of India v. K.A.Najeeb, Criminal Appeal
No.98 of 2021, the Hon’ble Supreme Court observed that once
it was made obvious that a timely trial would not be possible and
that the accused has suffered incarceration for a significant
period of time, Courts would ordinarily be obligated to enlarge
them on bail.
29.              Though the allegation against the petitioner is very
serious in nature and he is alleged to have committed murder of
two women and an unborn child in the womb, taking note of the
fact that the petitioner is in jail since 2.6.2017 and also the trial of
the case has not concluded yet for one reason or the other, in the
interest of justice and in view of the undertaking given by the
Bail Appln. No. 30 of 2022
petitioner that he shall remain present in person before the trial
Court on the date fixed for the examination of the last prosecution
witness as well as till the stage of examination of him under
Section 313 Cr.P.C. and its final order, this Court is of the view
that the petitioner can be enlarged on bail in the given facts and
circumstances of the case, however, subject to certain
30.              Accordingly, Bail Application 30 of 2022 is allowed
and the petitioner is ordered to be enlarged on bail in connection
with the FIR No.169(5)2017 under Section 302/449/120-B IPC
on the file of Imphal Police Station, who is an under trial prisoner
in Sessions Trial (CAW) Case No.1 of 2018 pending on the file
of the Additional Sessions Judge (FTC) Crime Against Women,
Manipur, subject to the petitioner furnishing a personal bond in
the sum of Rs. 50,000/- (Rupees Fifty Thousand) with two local
sureties each in the like sum to the satisfaction of the learned
Manipur with the following conditions:
(i)    The petitioner shall not leave the place of
his residence without the permission of the
trial Court and shall ordinarily reside at a
Bail Appln. No. 30 of 2022
place of his residence and the complete
address of such place shall be furnished to
the learned Additional Sessions Judge
(FTC) Crime Against Women, Manipur at
the time of release.
(ii)   The petitioner shall appear before the
Against Women, Manipur weekly once i.e.
every Monday at 10.30 a.m., apart from all
hearing dates.
(iii) If the petitioner has passport, he shall also
surrender the same to the Additional
(iv) The petitioner shall not contact nor visit nor
threaten nor offer any inducement to any
of the prosecution witnesses, particularly
the complainant and his family members.
(v)    The petitioner shall not tamper with
evidence nor otherwise indulge in any act
Bail Appln. No. 30 of 2022
(vi) The petitioner is directed to co-operate the
trial Court for speedy disposal of the case.
(vii) It is clarified that if the petitioner misuses
the liberty or violate any of the conditions
imposed upon him, the prosecution shall
be free to move this Court for cancellation
of bail.
(viii) Any observations made hereinabove shall
not be construed to be a reflection on the
merits of the case and shall remain
confined to the disposal of the present bail
applications.
Crime Against Women, Manipur is directed
to expedite the trial and dispose of
Sessions Trial (CAW) Case No.1 of 2018
as early as possible, preferably within a
Bail Appln. No. 30 of 2022
period of three months from the date of
receipt of a copy of this order.
The Registry is directed to communicate this order to the
Manipur for speedy disposal of Sessions Trial (CAW) Case No.1
of 2018 and report before this Court.