Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Deepak Singh,L.B.Singh
Heard Sri Sudeep Seth, learned Senior Advocate assisted by Sri
Sridhar Awasthi, learned counsel for the petitioner, Sri Raghavendra
Singh, learned Advocate General for the official opposite parties, Sri
Upendra Nath Mishra, learned Senior Advocate for opposite party no.7,
Sri Mujtaba Kamal Sherwani, learned counsel for opposite party no.9 and
Sri Rakesh Kumar Chaudhary, learned counsel for opposite party no.10.
By means of this petition, the petitioners have challenged the
decision of the State Government dated 05.01.2022 by which they have
decided to issue an additional select list of 6800 (inadvertently referred as
6000 in the earlier order dated 25.01.2022) candidates by revisiting the
selection process based on which the appointments have already been
made against 69000 posts, and the consequential action in issuing a select
list of 6800 persons for appointment as Assistant Teacher.
On 25.01.2022, this Court had passed the following order:-
Five of the petitioners herein had appeared in the selection (A.T.R.E.
2019) for 69000 vacancies on the post of Assistant Teachers which were
advertised on 1.12.2018, but did not succeed. As per counsel for the
petitioners they are entitled to be considered for vacancies which had
not been advertised in 2018, but would be advertised subsequently. Out
of the petitioners petitioner nos. 2, 4, 5 and 6 belong to the 'Reserved
Contention of Sri Sudeep Seth, learned Senior Counsel appearing for
the petitioners is that as against 69000 posts advertised on 1.12.2018 all
the posts were filled up after selection as per the affidavit filed by the
Secretary, U.P. Basic Education Board filed in Writ Petition No. 1389
(SS) of 1991, Jawahar Lal v. State of U.P. on 12.7.2021. He also points
out that a writ petition was filed Hon'ble the Supreme Court seeking
relief that certain vacancies which had occurred subsequently could also
be filed up on the basis of the selection held in pursuance to the
advertisement dated 1.12.2018 which was in respect of the 69000 posts
referred hereinabove, however, this relief was declined by Hon'ble the
Supreme Court vide its judgment dated 11.2.2021 passed in Writ Petition
(Civil) No. 760 of 2020, Shivam Pandey & ors. v. State of U.P. & ors.
The said order reads as under :
"This petition filed under Article 32 of the Constitution of India prays
inter alia that 26944 unfilled posts from the Assistant Teachers
Recruitment Examination 2018 be directed to be filled through instant
It is a matter of record that 69000 posts were advertised to be filled
In the circumstances, no direction can be issued to the concerned
authorities to fill up posts in excess of 69000.
Pending applications, if any, also stand disposed of."
He also informs the court that in another writ proceedings the High
Court has already been informed the 6000 posts which are to be filled
from the 'Reserved Category' candidates are not part of the 68500
vacancies on the posts of Assistant Teacher which were advertised on
9.1.2018 (A.T.R.E. 2018). In this scenario counsel for the petitioners
says that these vacancies were neither advertised on 1.12.2018 nor on
9.1.2018 and, as such these 6000 vacancies allegedly meant for
'Reserved Category' candidates were never advertised and were not part
of selection referred hereinabove relating to A.T.R.E. 2018 and A.T.R.E.
2019, therefore, they cannot be filled up on the basis of the said
selection, as is apparent from what has been noticed hereinabove. He
says that, therefore, unless these vacancies are advertised and a fresh
recruitment exercise for recruitment is conducted, there is no way that
these 6000 vacancies can be filled up, but it seems that based on the
selection for the 69000 posts referred hereinabove these vacancies are
being filled up, which is clearly in the teeth of the decision of Hon'ble
the Supreme Court dated 11.2.2021 as also the law on the subject. He
says that the five petitioners who are not successful in A.T.R.E. 2019
could nevertheless be entitled to be considered for fresh appointment in
the subsequent vacancies which would include the 6000 vacancies
which are the subject matter of this writ petition, as petitioner nos. 2, 4,
5 and 6 belong to the Reserved Category from which these posts are to
be filled up. Moreover, he says that the determination of these reserved
vacancies itself is erroneous and, therefore, the other petitioners of the
General Category have also a locus standi in the matter. He further says
that out of the 6000 selectees opposite party nos. 6 to 10 have been
arrayed in representative capacity. He says that on 5.1.2022 a select-list
of 6000 reserved category candidates has been issued which is not
tenable in law and is liable to be stayed. The petitioner no. 6 had not
appeared in A.T.R.E. 2019 and is a prospective candidate for the
vacancies which had occurred after the advertisement dated 1.12.2018,
hence this petition by him.
Sri Ran Vijay Singh, learned counsel appearing for the opposite parties
says that learned Advocate General would argue the matter, hence some
short time be provided.
List/put up this case on 27.1.2022 as first case of the day."
Today, Sri Raghavendra Singh, learned Advocate General has put in
appearance on behalf of the official opposite parties and informed the
Court that certain reserved category candidates had filed petitions before
this Court, some of which are Writ -A. No.13156 of 2020 and Writ -A
No.8142 of 2020 wherein certain orders were passed by this Court based
on which, the State has revisited the implementation of reservation policy
as also the provisions of the Reservation Act, 1994 and the law on the
subject, according to which, such reserved category candidates who are
otherwise meritorious, meaning thereby, they have secured marks higher
than the cut-off for the general category are entitled to be considered and
selected for unreserved posts. Accordingly, the State Government after
revisiting the matter has taken a decision to issue a fresh select list
containing names of 6800 candidates who are those reserved category
persons who have secured higher marks than the cut-off for the
unreserved category and as this exercise is the result of orders passed by
this very Court, therefore, the Court should not interfere in the matter at
this stage.
Learned Advocate General also informs the Court that, in fact,
entire process of selection is informed by the State officials to the N.I.C.
and it is the latter which prepares the select list.
Learned Advocate General also submitted that as regards the order
of Hon'ble the Supreme Court quoted in the order of this Court dated
25.01.2022, the same is not applicable in the facts of this case, as already
clarified hereinabove.
However, on being asked as to how if 69000 posts have already
been filled up as noticed in the earlier order, these 6800 selectees would
be appointed, against which post they would be appointed, and whether
against one post two persons can work and get salary, the learned
Advocate General could not satisfy the Court on this count but stated that
State has not taken any decision to oust the already appointed candidates
who may have secured lesser marks than these 6800 candidates.
It is nobody's case certainly not that of the State that before issuing
the list of 6800 additional selected candidates, as referred hereinabove, an
equivalent number of candidates who have been appointed earlier have
been disengaged in accordance with law.
Sri Upendra Nath Mishra, learned Senior Counsel for opposite
party no.7 has invited attention of the Court to the orders passed by this
Court which are annexed at page no.144-145 of the writ petition which
have been referred by the learned Advocate General. He says that those
writ petitions should be heard on priority basis and he also says that
additional 6800 selectees are, in fact, entitled to be appointed and those
who are not entitled but have been appointed are liable to be ousted. He
agrees to the extent that persons cannot be appointed in excess of the
69000 vacancies which were advertised.
Sri Rakesh Kumar Chaudhary, learned counsel who has put in
appearance on behalf of opposite party no.10 adopts the arguments of Sri
Upendra Nath Mishra. In addition to it, he says that physically
handicapped candidates who have also filed writ petitions before this
Court, leading writ petition is Writ-A. No.13792 of 2020 wherein certain
orders have been passed by this Court for giving the benefit of the quota
prescribed for such persons and therefore, inclusion of these physically
handicapped persons in the impugned select list of 6800 persons is in
accordance with the orders of this Court and need not to be interfered
with, certainly not at the interim stage. However, on being asked as to
whether the opposite
physically handicapped, he submitted that no, he was not physically
handicapped but he is the counsel in Writ-A. No.13792 of 2020 and
connected matters, therefore, he has made the aforesaid statement.
At this stage, Sri Seth, learned Senior Advocate appearing for the
petitioners further submitted that if 69000 vacancies of Assistant Teachers
were advertised and all of them have been filled up as admitted by the
Principal Secretary to the Department in the affidavit filed before this
Court as already noticed in the earlier order dated 25.01.2022, then,
assuming for a moment that the State was entitled to revisit the selection
process and based on such exercise it found that there were 6800
candidates who had a better right of being selected and appointed based
on the marks obtained by them, then, at best the select list already
published ought to have been modified and an equivalent number of
candidates who have secured lesser marks than those 6800 candidates
should have been ousted from it in accordance with law and if they have
already been appointed, this should have been done after due and proper
notice to them, and these 6800 candidates should have been substituted in
their place but without undertaking such exercise the impugned action of
the State to induct 6800 additional selectees leads to a situation where the
69000 vacancies would be exceeded which is apparently illegal and
prejudices the rights of the petitioners to be considered against equivalent
number of vacancies (6800) which would otherwise be re-advertised and
the petitioner nos.1 to 5 would have a right of being considered for
selection against such vacancies irrespective of the fact that they have not
succeeded in the earlier selection. The petitioner no.6 in fact has not
appeared in the selection ARTE 2019 and is entitled to be considered
against such vacancies as and when they are advertised.
As regards Sri Chaudhary's contention that the petitioners do not
have locus to challenge the impugned action, the petitioner nos.1 to 5 who
belong to reserved category had appeared in the selection and the
contention of Sri
Sudeep Seth, learned Senior Advocate as already
recorded in the earlier order is that any vacancy other than 69000 will
have to be re-advertised and fresh selection will have to be held in this
regard in which the petitioner nos.1 to 5, even if, they have not succeeded
in the earlier selection, are entitled to appear, therefore, filling up of any
post in excess of 69000, without advertising these excess 6800 posts
apart from being violative of law declared by Hon'ble the Supreme Court
and the constitutional provisions, encroaches on the rights of the
petitioner nos.1 to 6 to appear in such selection. The petitioner no.6 did
not appear in the selection in question and therefore, he in any case, will
have a right to appear in future selection against these excess vacancies.
Prima facie, at this stage, Sri Seth, learned Senior Advocate appears to be
Considering the facts of the case as already noticed in the earlier
order dated 25.01.2022 which need not be reiterated and which, at least at
this stage, have not been rebutted satisfactorily, especially the order of
Hon'ble the Supreme Court dismissing a writ petition wherein it was the
case that vacancies in excess of 69000 which were not advertised on
01.12.2018 (A.T.R.E.-2019) should be allowed to be filled up on the basis
of the said selection advertised on 01.12.2018, as it has been dismissed
with specific observation that posts in excess of those advertised cannot
be allowed to be filled up based on the said selection, a piquant situation
has been created by the State by the impugned action, prima facie. No
doubt, there are orders of this Court passed in Writ - A. No.13156 of 2020
which are annexed at page no.144-145 of the writ petition which read as
Case :- SERVICE SINGLE No. - 13156 of 2020
Counsel for Petitioner :- Neel Kamal Mishra
Heard Shri Upendra Nath Mishra, learned Senior Advocate, assisted by
Shri Neel Kamal Mishra appearing for the petitioners, Shri P. K. Singh,
learned Additional Chief Standing Counsel representing the State-
respondents and Shri Ajay Kumar, learned counsel representing the
respondent nos.3 and 7.
Issue notice to respondent nos.5 and 6 returnable at an early date.
Connect with Writ Petition No.10122 (S/S) of 2020 and other similar
Let counter affidavit in this case be filed by the respondents within a
period of four weeks. Two weeks' time thereafter shall be available to
the learned counsel for the petitioners to file rejoinder affidavit.
List immediately after expiry of the aforesaid period.
It has been contended by the learned Senior Advocate that in fact rules
of reservation in the selection in question has wrongly been followed as
a result of which many deserving candidates have not been given
appointment. He has, however, drawn attention to the Court on various
orders passed earlier in similar matters requiring the respondents to file
counter affidavit, however, counter affidavit in the said matters has not
been filed.
In these circumstances, it is directed that a master counter affidavit in
this case shall be filed and while filing the counter affidavit in this case,
a copy of the same shall be furnished to the learned counsel
representing the other similar writ petitions. There will be no
requirement of separate counter affidavit to be filed on behalf of the
respondents in other matters and counter affidavit which may be filed in
this case shall be treated to be counter affidavit in other similar matters
as well.
The Court expects that all sincere endeavours shall be made to file the
counter affidavit on behalf of the respondents within the time being
stipulated in today's order.
Counsel for Petitioner :- Neel Kamal Mishra
The contention Shri Upendra Nath Mishra, learned Senior Counsel
appearing for the petitioners is that 28,000/- reserved category
candidates, who had secured more than 67.11 marks which was the cut
off for the general category, were not adjusted in the general category
select list but were maintained in the reserved list contrary to Section
3(6) of the Reservation Act, 1994 and the law laid down by the Supreme
Court by which a reserved category candidate, if otherwise meritorious
and entitled to be included in the general select list, should not be
treated as a reserved category candidate. Shri Mishra relies upon a
chart prepared by him a copy of which is annexed as Annexure No. SA-7
at Page 63 of the supplementary affidavit dated 27.01.2021 in this
regard.
On 03.02.2021 this Court had sought a response from the State
Authorities in this regard which has not been filed as yet.
Let the concerned official opposite parties file their response positively
within a period of one week.
As prayed on behalf of learned Advocate General, list/ put up on
12.04.2021 along with all connected matters except Writ Petition No.
9946(S/S) of 2020 which has been incorrectly connected and it shall
now be delinked from this Bunch of writ petitions.
It is made clear that no further opportunity shall be granted to the State
for filing response in this writ petition or in any other connected writ
petition in which the response had been called by the Court but has not
been filed and the matter shall be heard accordingly, as, matters
pertaining to selection and appointment should not be kept pending for
long. If they are kept pending for long they create complications for all
the stake holders.
But the Court had only asked the State to file counter affidavit in
the matter and the State was required to explain as to how the reservation
policy has been implemented. The appropriate course for the State
officials in these circumstances was to comply the said orders, revisit the
matter, find out the facts and errors, if any, and on noticing them, to place
the same before the Court either seeking its guidance or seeking
permission to rectify the select list which had already been implemented
or to modify the select list and disengage the persons already appointed, if
they were erroneously appointed, as per law, but, instead of doing it, the
State officials, for reasons best known to them, have hurried to issue a
select list of 6800 persons in addition to the 69000 appointments already
made by them without disengaging or cancelling the appointment of 6800
candidates already appointed if they had secured lesser marks.
Considering the fact that only 69000 posts were advertised, candidates in
excess of 69000 cannot be appointed and they already having been
appointed, one fails to understand as to what purpose the issuance of
select list of 6800 persons, who may otherwise have been entitled to
selection and appointment, seeks to achieve in the factual scenario created
by the State, as, in no circumstances, persons can be appointed in excess
of 69000 which were advertised.
Now, it is for the State to decide what it has to do in the matter as it
is the State which has created this situation but one thing is very clear that
persons beyond 69000 vacancies cannot be appointed against such posts.
Considering the discussion made hereinabove, it is provided that in
no circumstances, persons in excess of the 69000 vacancies which were
advertised on 01.12.2018 (A.T.R.E 2019), shall be appointed and
unadvertised vacancies shall not be filled-up without being advertised and
selection being held in respect thereof. It is ordered accordingly.
Let Dasti notice be issued for service upon opposite party nos.6 and
8. In addition to it, considering the large number of selectees which are
6800 and the complications which may be involved in getting them
impleaded individually and having notices served upon them, especially
as at this stage, they are only selectees and have not been appointed, the
ends of justice would suffice if a publication is made in two daily
newspaper, one of English and other of Hindi, having vide circulation in
the state, namely, 'the Times of India' and 'Dainik Jagaran' notifying the
selectees about the pendency of this petition so that they may, if they so
choose, join in these proceedings, otherwise, persons have been
impleaded in representative capacity. The Senior Registrar shall facilitate
adequate steps being taken for publication in the newspaper as aforesaid.
Pleadings be exchanged between the parties.
List this case along with other matters i.e. Writ - A. No.13156 of
2020, Writ -A No.8142 of 2020 and connected matters referred
hereinabove including Writ-A. No.13792 of 2020 and connected matters
wherein pleadings are said to be complete.
Considering the urgency in the matter as already noticed in one of
the orders quoted hereinabove as the fate of large number of selectees and
also those already appointed may be involved, therefore, list this case on
18.02.2022 along with the connected matters.