Can a Special Judge exercising jurisdiction under the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, direct the investigating agency
to obtain sanction under Section 19 to prosecute the accused
while ordering further investigation under Section 173 Cr.P.C? This
is the issue that arises for consideration in this petition filed under
Section 482 of the Code.
2.     The petitioners are arrayed as accused Nos. 1 to 3 in
VC-16/2016/EKM registered by the Ernakulam Unit of the Vigilance
and Anti-Corruption Bureau, alleging offences punishable under
Sections 465, 471 & 120-B of the Indian Penal Code and Section
13(1)(d) read with Section 13(2) of the Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988 [for short ‘the Act, 1988’].
3.     The prosecution case is that accused No.4 conspired
with the petitioners and obtained a bogus location sketch from
Arakkapady Village Office and a building permit from the local
authority.
4.     The Vigilance and Anti-Corruption Bureau (the VACB)
investigated the matter and submitted final report before the
Court of the Special Judge finding no material to support the
allegations in the First Information Report.
5.     After considering the report submitted by the VACB, the
Special Judge passed the following order
“Hence the final report is returned to the
investigating officer to conduct further investigation
as well as to obtain sanction under Section 19 of P.C.
Act to prosecute A1 to A3. Further final report shall
be submitted before this Court within three months”
6.     Heard      Sri.K.K.Dheerendrakrishanan,           the   learned
counsel for the petitioners, and Sri.Rajesh A., the learned Special
7.     The learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that
the impugned order is a positive direction to submit a charge
sheet against the petitioners. The learned counsel contended that
the direction to obtain sanction under Section 19 of the Act,1988,
in the impugned order indicates that the Special Judge, in fact
directed the investigating agency to submit a positive report
against the petitioners.
8.     The learned counsel for the petitioners relying on
Bhagwant Singh v. Commissioner of Police [(1985) 2 SCC 537]
and M.C.Abraham and another v. State of Maharashtra and
Crl.M.C.No.407 of 2023
Others [(2003) 2 SCC 649], contended that it is for the
investigating agency to submit a report to the Court concerned
after a full and complete investigation and the Special Judge
cannot direct the investigating agency to submit a report in
accordance with his view.
9.      When the report forwarded by the officer in charge of a
police station to the Magistrate under sub-section (2)(i) of S.173
Cr.P.C. comes up for consideration by the Magistrate, one of two
different situations may arise. The report may conclude that an
offence appears to have been committed by a particular person or
persons, and in such a case, the Magistrate may do one of three
things: (1) he may accept the report and take cognizance of the
offence and issue process or (2) he may disagree with the report
and drop the proceeding or (3) he may direct further investigation
under sub-section (3) of S.156 and require the police to make a
further report. The report may, on the other hand, state that, in
the opinion of the police, no offence appears to have been
committed, and where such a report has been made, the
Magistrate again has the option to adopt one of three courses: (1)
he may accept the report and drop the proceeding or (2) he may
disagree with the report and taking the view that there is
Crl.M.C.No.407 of 2023
sufficient ground for proceeding further, take cognizance of the
offence    and      issue    process     or   (3)  he   may     direct further
investigation to be made by the police under sub-section (3) of
S.156. [Vide: Bhagwant Singh v. Commissioner of Police
10.    It is the statutory duty and responsibility of the
investigating agency to fully investigate the matter and then
submit a report to the Court concerned, either finding the
allegation substantiated or finding no material to support the
allegation. It is not within the competence of the Court concerned
to issue a direction that the case should not only be investigated,
but also a report to the effect that the allegations have been
supported by the material collected be submitted.
11. It is profitable to extract the declaration of law by the
Apex Court in M.C.Abraham and another v. State of Maharashtra
and Others (supra). The Apex Court held thus:-
“17. The principle, therefore, is well settled that
it is for the investigating agency to submit a report
to the Magistrate after full and complete
investigation. The investigating agency may
submit      a    report   finding   the   allegations
substantiated. It is also open to the investigating
agency to submit a report finding no material to
support the allegations made in the first
information report. It is open to the Magistrate
concerned to accept the report or to order further
enquiry. But what is clear is that the Magistrate
cannot direct the investigating agency to submit a
Crl.M.C.No.407 of 2023
report that is in accord with his views. Even in a
case where a report is submitted by the
investigating agency finding that no case is made
out for prosecution, it is open to the Magistrate to
disagree with the report and to take cognizance,
but what he cannot do is to direct the investigating
agency to submit a report to the effect that the
allegations have been supported by the material
collected during the course of investigation.”
12.   In the instant case, the learned Special Judge not only
directed further investigation but also required the investigating
agency to obtain sanction under Section 19 of the Act, 1988, to
prosecute the petitioners/accused Nos.1 to 3, which would
necessarily indicate that the direction to the investigating agency
was to submit a positive report against them.
13.    The Special Judge, while ordering further investigation,
is not empowered to direct the investigating agency to obtain
sanction under Section 19 of the              Act, 1988 to prosecute the
accused.
14.   Therefore, I set aside the impugned order.
15.   However, the investigating agency is at liberty to take
all steps to conclude the investigation and submit its report as per
law, uninfluenced by the observations passed by the Special
Judge. It is open to the investigating agency to submit such report
as it considers appropriate.
16.   Having regard to the facts and circumstances of the
Crl.M.C.No.407 of 2023
case, it is made clear that the time limit stipulated by the Special
Judge is not binding on the investigating agency. After such a final
report is submitted by the investigating agency, the Special Judge,
concerned may proceed to deal with the matter in accordance
with the law without being influenced by any of the observations
made by this Court.