The Delhi High Court has restrained Narinder Dhruv Batra from discharging functions as President of Indian Olympic Association.
A vacation bench comprising of Justice Dinesh Kumar Sharma added that the Senior Vice President will take over the duties and responsibilities of the President and shall also perform any other tasks or functions as directed by the President, the Executive Council or the General Meeting.
"This Court considers that the functioning of Sports Federation should be above any kind of doubt. The purity in the functioning of such federations are much more important, than the individual who hold the positions," the Court observed. 
The Court was dealing with a plea filed by one Aslam Sher Khan seeking contempt proceedings against the various Respondents, for wilful disobedience and deliberate defiance of the Judgment dated May 25, 2022 passed by the Court. 
The counsel appearing for the petitioner submitted that Batra was removed from the position in National Sports Federation (NSF) by virtue of the said judgment. 
It was added that Batra had committed contempt of the court by continuing as President of Indian Olympic Association and could not be allowed to further perpetuate contempt. 
It was also submitted that other respondent authorities had also committed Contempt of Court by taking part in the proceedings conducted by Batra as President despite the judicial order. 
Court's attention was invited to para 16.2 of Rules and Regulations Of The Indian Olympic Association which provides that in the absence of the President, one of the Senior Vice Presidents approved by the Executive Council shall preside over the meetings.
While issuing notice on the plea, the Court observed:
"Whether Mr.Batra is appointed as President, lndian Olympic Association (lOA) only by virtue of being the Life Member of Hockey lndia or if he is holding the position by virtue of some other position in FIH or Associate Vice President in Hockey India is required to be seen in light of the judgment passed by this court in W.P (C) No. 5703 of 2020."
The matter will now be heard by a Roaster Bench on 3rd August, 2022.
Case Title: ASLAM SHER KHAN v. NARINDER DHRUV BATRA & ORS.



