Exemption allowed subject to all just exceptions.
Application stands disposed of.
The petition has been filed under Article 215 of the Constitution of
India read with Section 2 (c) and Section 10 of the Contempt of Courts Act,
1971 for initiating contempt proceedings against the Respondents, jointly
and severally, for wilful disobedience and deliberate defiance of the
Judgment dated 25.05.2022 passed by this Court in W.P (C) No. 5703 of
Mr.Mohit Mathur, Learned senior counsel for the Petitioner, at the
outset has submitted that he has instructions to pursue only the Civil
contempt and not the Criminal contempt.
Learned senior counsel has invited the attention of this court to Para
39 & 40 of the judgment dated 25.05.2022 passed by this court in W.P (C)
No. 5703 of 2020, which are being reproduced herein below :-
“39. It is not known what was the follow-up, if any
ensued. The age and tenure restrictions of the Sports
Code as well as the cooling-off period between
successive terms in the Managing Committee of a NSF,
coupled with the necessary 2/3rd votes for the second
term, are clear safeguards against permanent positions
in a NSF. What cannot be done "per directum” is not
permitted “per obliquum” meaning thereby, that,
whatever is prohibited by law cannot be effected by an
indirect or circuitous contrivance.
40. R-3 knew fully well that the post of Life President
and Life Member in a NSF is illegal. He had been
specifically intimated so by the Government of India. Yet
when Hockey India was registered as a Society under
the Societies Registration Act 1860, on 28.05.2009 and
was granted prompt recognition by the Govenment of
India within a couple of days thereof, R-3 went ahead
and had himself appointed as Life Member of Hockey
India. This smacks of brazen impertinence to the clear
mandate of law. It was a less than honest but futile
endeavour to institutionalize oneself in a body whose
legitimacy itself is contingent upon conformity with the
Sport Code and the law. What a paradox, to make
oneself permanent in an entity whose tenure itself is
impermanent. The illegal Post of Life President or Life
Member cannot be the stepping-stone for any other
position or benefit elsewhere, be it nationally (including
in the Indian Olympic Association) or in international
bodies. If R-3 has so benefitted, then such benefit or
position shall end right away. Let the CoA look into the
matter, so would the Government of India.”
Mr.Mohit Mathur, Senior learned counsel has submitted that the
proposed contemnor / respondent no. 1 has been removed from the position
held by him in National Sports Federation (NSF) by virtue of the judgment
dated 25.05.2022 of this court in W.P (C) No. 5703 of 2020. He submits
that the proposed contemnor / respondent no. 1 has committed contempt of
the court by continuing as President, IOA and cannot be allowed to further
perpetuate contempt. Learned senior counsel submitted that other
respondents have also committed Contempt of Court by taking part in the
proceedings conducted by him as President, IOA despite the order of this
Court Learned senior counsel submitted that continuance of respondent no.
1, on this position, for even a moment shall amount to continuance with
contempt of the order of this court.
Mr.Mohit Mathur, learned senior counsel has invited the attention of
the court to para 16.2 of Rules and Regulations Of The Indian Olympic
Association which provides that in the absence of the President, one of the
Senior Vice Presidents approved by the Executive Council shall preside over
the meetings.
Learned ASG submitted that such litigations are increasing day by
day, and in such proceedings the paramount consideration of the courts
should be to ensure excellence of the sports and sports persons. It has been
submitted that the courts while dealing with such petitions has to take into
account the overall sanctity, credibility and functioning of the such Sports
Issue notice to the respondent / proposed contemnor as to why the
proceedings of contempt be not initiated against them.
Ms.Shyel Trehan, Advocate accepts notice on behalf of respondent
no. 1.
Mr.Ruchir Mishra, Advocate on behalf of respondent no. 2 accepts
notice.
Mr.Chetan Sharma, learned ASG has appeared for R-3 and
Ms.Pratima N.Lakra for CGSC accepts notice.
Let the reply be filed within four weeks.
Whether Mr.Batra is appointed as President, lndian Olympic
Association (lOA) only by virtue of being the Life Member of Hockey lndia
or if he is holding the position by virtue of some other position in FIH or
Associate Vice President in Hockey India is required to be seen in light of
the judgment passed by this court in W.P (C) No. 5703 of 2020.
During proceedings, Mr.Ruchir Mihsra, Advocate for Indian
Olympics Association has invited the attention of the court to the
communication bearing IOA/IOC/V-I/2022/0886 dated 3rd June’2022,
whereby in pursuance of the judgment passed by this court in W.P (C) No.
5703 of 2020, the International Olympic Committee had been informed that
the position of Mr. Batra as President, IOA would end right away from
25.05.2022. It has been further informed that duties and responsibilities of
the President, IOA as per the Constitution of IOA has been taken over by Sr.
Vice President, IOA Mr.Anil Khanna. Learned counsel further submits that
IOA has already implemented the orders of this court.
This Court considers that the functioning of Sports Federation should
be above any kind of doubt.          The purity in the functioning of such
federations are much more important, than the individual who hold the
positions.
In view of the submissions of the Learned counsel for R-2, and the
orders passed by this Court in W.P (C) No. 5703/2020, the respondent no. 1
/ proposed contemnor is restrained to further discharge any function as
In view of the communication dated 3rd June’2022, Mr.Anil Khanna,
Senior Vice President will take over the duties and responsibilities of the
President. The Senior Vice President's shall also perform any other tasks/
functions as directed by the President, the Executive Council or the General
Let the matter be listed before Roaster Bench on 3rd August, 2022.