A brief backdrop of the case, leading to this
application under Section 397 read with Section 401 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, is that the Station House Officer of Naya
Ram Nagar Police Station, on the basis of his self statement,
registered Naya Ram Nagar P.S. Case No. 93 of 2012 on
26.07.2012 for offences under Section 414 of the Indian Penal
Code, Sections 10/13 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention)
Act, 1967 (hereinafter referred to as the “UAP Act”) and
Patna High Court CR. REV. No.14 of 2019 dt.22-03-2021
Sections 25(1-AA)/(1-AAA), 26(2) and 35 of the Arms Act,
2.     According to the prosecution case, accused
Kundan Mandal and other named persons were reported to be
moving in the area to supply arms and explosives to the Nuxals.
After making an entry in the station diary, the informant along
with the police team proceeded towards NH-80. Near Sweta
Bengal Sweets, the police put an ambush and noticed that a
vehicle was entering in the lane by the side of the aforesaid
Sweets shop. Looking at the police party, three persons from the
vehicle started fleeing and managed their escape. One of them
was identified as Kundan Mandal. One Dilip Kumar Sah and
Vishal Kumar were arrested by the police and they disclosed
that Kundan Mandal, Kundan Jha and another Vikash Kumar,
son of Kailash Tanti were the persons, who fled away. Nothing
was recovered from the physical possession of the arrested
persons. However, from the vehicle, a pistol along with other
accessories were recovered for which the arrested accused could
not show any paper. Besides that some Nuxal literature were
also seized from the vehicle and the arrested persons disclosed
that they used to supply arms to the Nuxals.
3.   A seizure of the seized vehicle on which the
Patna High Court CR. REV. No.14 of 2019 dt.22-03-2021
accused persons were travelling, the firearm and its accessories
and Nuxal literature was made. On the same day i.e. 26.07.2012,
the house of Kundan Mandal was searched from where laptop,
cash, ATM cards, Pan cards, 34 deposit bonds in Sahara India
Family, Pass Book of bank accounts in Punjab National Bank
and other banks including Gramin Bank were seized. On
26.08.2012, a third seizure was made in respect of the tractor
from the house of Kundan Mandal.
4.    By letter dated 21.08.2012, the Investigating
Officer sought for approval of the seizure from the Designated
Authority under Section 25 of the UAP Act, 1967. On the same
day i.e. 21.08.2012, the Superintendent of Police, Munger wrote
a letter to the Director General of Police, Bihar, Patna for ex
post facto approval of the seizure made above, though, Section
25 of the UAP Act requires prior approval of the Director
General of Police by the Investigating Officer making seizure.
The seizure was confirmed by order dated 17.10.2012 in Case
No. 05 of 2012 by the Designated Authority-cum-Principal
Secretary, Government of Bihar vide order at Annexure P/6.
5.    The petitioners challenged the aforesaid order
dated 17.10.2012 in Cr. Appeal No. 130 of 2012 filed under
Section 25(6) of the UAP Act before the learned Sessions Judge,
Patna High Court CR. REV. No.14 of 2019 dt.22-03-2021
Munger. The Appellate Court vide order dated 10.01.2013
dismissed the appeal on the ground that it has no jurisdiction to
entertain the appeal against the order of the Designated
Authority. Then the petitioners challenged the appellate court’s
order before this Court in Cr.W.J.C. No. 1197 of 2012. In the
writ application, vide order dated 24.09.2013, this Court
directed the learned Sessions Judge to re-hear and decide Cr.
Appeal No. 130 of 2012 on merit. Thereafter, the aforesaid
criminal appeal was re-registered as Cr. Appeal No. 130A of
2012 and the appeal was dismissed on merit by the impugned
order     dated     03.11.2018.        Hence, this criminal revision
application.
6.    Mr. Sandeep Kumar, learned counsel for the
petitioners contends that the entire exercise of action of seizure
from the house of accused Kundan Mandal and its confirmation
by the Designated Authority suffers from arbitrariness and
illegality. Section 25 of the UAP Act does not apply to offences
committed under Chapter III, rather it is specifically applicable
to offences committed under Chapter IV and Chapter VI of the
UAP Act. Chapter IV begins with Section 15 of the UAP Act
which defines Terrorist act and Chapter VI relates to Terrorist
Organizations. The learned Lower Appellate Court did not
Patna High Court CR. REV. No.14 of 2019 dt.22-03-2021
consider the legal issue correctly while dismissing the appeal of
the petitioners.
7. Learned counsel for the petitioners further submits
that the petitioners herein are parents, brother and wife of
accused Kundan Mandal of the aforesaid case. The personal
property of these petitioners have been seized from their house
and the petitioners had disclosed the source of purchase of the
seized properties in their show cause filed before the Designated
8.    Mr. Umanath Mishra, learned counsel for the
respondents contends that the order of the Designated Authority
would reveal that he was satisfied on the basis of material
available on the record that seizure was fit to be confirmed.
Hence, the Revisional Court cannot look into the sufficiency of
material      for such satisfaction. Therefore, this revision
application has got no merit.
9. For better appreciation of the rival contention of
the parties, it would be apt to reproduce Section 25 of the UAP
“25. Powers of investigating officer and Designated
Authority and appeal against order of Designated
Authority. — (1) If an officer investigating an offence
Patna High Court CR. REV. No.14 of 2019 dt.22-03-2021
committed under Chapter IV or Chapter VI, has
reason to believe that any property in relation to
which an investigation is being conducted, represents
proceeds of terrorism, he shall, with the prior
approval in writing of the Director General of the
Police of the State in which such property is situated,
make an order seizing such property and where it is
not practicable to seize such property, make an order
of attachment directing that such property shall not
be transferred or otherwise dealt with except with the
prior permission of the officer making such order, or
of the Designated Authority before whom the
property seized or attached is produced and a copy of
such order shall be served on the person concerned.
(2) The investigating officer shall duly inform the
Designated Authority within forty-eight hours of the
seizure or attachment of such property.
(3) The Designated Authority before whom the
seized or attached property is produced shall either
confirm or revoke the order of seizure or attachment
so issued within a period of sixty days from the date
Patna High Court CR. REV. No.14 of 2019 dt.22-03-2021
Provided that an opportunity of making a
representation by the person whose property is being
seized or attached shall be given.
(4) In the case of immovable property attached by
the investigating officer, it shall be deemed to have
been produced before the Designated Authority,
when the investigating officer notifies his report and
places it at the disposal of the Designated Authority.
(5) The investigating officer may seize and detain
any cash to which this Chapter applies if he has
reasonable grounds for suspecting that—
(a) it is intended to be used for the purposes of
(b) it forms the whole or part of the resources
Provided that the cash seized under this sub-
section by the investigating officer shall be released
within a period of forty-eight hours beginning with
the time when it is seized unless the matter involving
the cash is before the Designated Authority and such
Authority passes an order allowing its retention
beyond forty-eight hours.
Patna High Court CR. REV. No.14 of 2019 dt.22-03-2021
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-
1[(ca) credit or debit cards or cards that serve
(e) such other monetary instruments as the
Central Government or, as the case may be,
the State Government may specify by an
order made in writing.
(6) Any person aggrieved by an order made by
the Designated Authority may prefer an appeal to
the court within a period of thirty days from the
date of receipt of the order, and the court may
either confirm the order of attachment of property
or seizure so made or revoke such order and release
the property.”
10. It is evident that the Investigating Officer of the
case could exercise the power of seizure only if the offence
appears to have been committed as mentioned in Chapter IV or
Patna High Court CR. REV. No.14 of 2019 dt.22-03-2021
Chapter VI of the UAP Act. In this case, no offence under
Chapter IV or Chapter VI of the UAP Act is alleged against the
accused persons. Hence, the exercise entered into by the
Investigating Officer in making seizure of property from the
house of accused Kundan Mandal is wholly illegal and without
jurisdiction.
11. Furthermore, Section 25 of the UAP Act requires
that the Investigating Officer must have “reason to believe” that
any property in relation to which an investigation is being
conducted represents “proceeds of terrorism”. “The reason to
believe” must be on the basis of specific, reliable and relevant
information. The police report submitted in the case does not
show, specially, the evidence collected till the date of making of
the prayer for confirmation of seizure that any specific reliable
or relevant information was there to form a believe that the
property seized from the house of the accused were proceeds of
terrorism. In absence of any connection between the act alleged
and the property recovered, it cannot be assumed that those
properties were acquired by the terrorist act. Moreover, the
Investigating Officer has not assigned any reason to believe the
aforesaid fact nor the authority who confirmed the seizure
applied its mind that there was no material to substantiate that
Patna High Court CR. REV. No.14 of 2019 dt.22-03-2021
the seizure was consistent with the law contained in Section 25
of the UAP Act.
12. Therefore, the impugned order, evidently, suffers
from arbitrariness and illegality, hence, it cannot be sustained.
13.    To attract the mischief of penalty for being
member of an unlawful association under Section 10 of the UAP
Act, it must be established that the association was declared
unlawful by a notification issued under Section 3 of the UAP
Act. In the case on hand, there is no evidence that to which of
the unlawful association the accused were supplying the arms.
Hence, it cannot be ascertained whether that association was
declared unlawful association or not. Likewise, Section 13 of
the UAP Act which provides punishment for unlawful activities
is, prima facie, not attracted in absence of identity of the
unlawful association.
14.    The Investigating Officer has referred in the
request letter for confirmation of seizure that petitioner-Chandan
Kumar @ Chandan Mandal, who is full-brother of accused
Kundan Mandal, is an accused in connection with Sultanganj
P.S. Case No. 45 of 2011 registered under different sections of
the Indian Penal Code and the Arms Act as well as Sections
10/13 of the UAP Act. Even if it is assumed that Chandan
Patna High Court CR. REV. No.14 of 2019 dt.22-03-2021
Kumar was accused in that case, the provisions of Section 25 of
the UAP Act is still not attracted in the facts and circumstances
of this case.
15. Since the Investigating Officer exceeded the
jurisdiction of search under Section 25 of the UAP Act and the
Designated Authority without applying its mind confirmed the
said seizure against the law, their action is arbitrary and illegal
one. The learned Lower Appellate Court did not consider the
aforesaid legal issue in correct perspective. Therefore, impugned
order is not sustainable in law.
16. In the result, entire seizure of property made from
the house of the petitioners on 26.07.2012 and 26.08.2012 was
illegally made, hence, the entire seizure exercise and its
confirmation as well as the order of the learned Lower Appellate
Court stands hereby set aside and this revision application is
allowed.
17. Let the seized property be released in favour of the
petitioners at the earliest preferably within ten days, failing
which rupees ten thousand compensation would be paid to the
petitioners for each day delay.
Petitioners would be at liberty to initiate
proceeding for damages against the erring opposite parties for
Patna High Court CR. REV. No.14 of 2019 dt.22-03-2021
putting illegal seize over the property of the petitioners which
might have caused mental, physical and economic agony/loss to
the petitioners.