For the State                 : Mr. Saswata Gopal Mukherjee, Ld.PP
For the Union of India         : Ms. Chandreyi Alam
Heard on: 17.05.2022
This is an application challenging an order dated 19.03.2021
passed by the learned Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, Bongaon,
North 24 Parganas in connection with G.R. Case No. 3982 of 2017
under Sections 370, 371, 120B and 34 of the Indian Penal Code.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits as follows. The
petitioner is a victim of human trafficking. She is a Bangladeshi
national who was trafficked to India for the purpose of exploitation in
the flesh trade. In connection with the present case, she was recovered
on 09.12.2017. She was sent to Lilua Home at Howrah for safe
custody on 10.12.2017. Since then she is in the protective custody of
the said Home. In the meantime, a charge-sheet was submitted. But,
the Investigating Agency could not apprehend the accused. While the
accused are at large, the petitioner being the victim in this case, is
languishing in protective custody. She wants to return to her own
country. She had, accordingly, made an application for repatriation to
her own country. However, by an order dated 19.03.2021, the learned
Magistrate held that return of the victim girl at the stage would
damage the chances of the trial in this case. This cannot be a ground
to impair the liberty of the present petitioner.
Learned Public Prosecutor appearing on behalf of the State
relies on a report dated 10.05.2022 filed earlier and submits as
follows. The State would not come in the way if a direction is passed to
grant liberty for repatriation of the victim girl to her own country. She
can always come back with necessary documents to depose in the
Learned counsel for the Union of India also supports the
contention of the State and submits that the opposite party no.3
would not have any objection, if liberty is granted to have the victim
lady repatriated to her country.
I have heard the submissions of the learned counsels appearing
on behalf of the petitioner, the State and the Union of India and have
perused the revision petition.
It appears that the petitioner is the victim lady in a case under
Sections 370, 371, 120B, 34 of the Indian Penal Code and Sections 3,
4, 5, 7 of the Immoral Traffic Act. She was allegedly trafficked to India
for the purpose of commercial sexual exploitation. After her recovery
on 09.12.2017, she had been kept in protective custody in a Home. At
present, she wants to return to her own country.
Success in the trial cannot be a ground to stall repatriation of
the victim lady to her own country. Afterall, she is a victim in this case
and while the accused are at large, the victim is languishing in
protective custody.
In view of the above and in the interest of justice, I partly set
aside the order dated 19.03.2021 and direct that there shall be no
impediment in having victim repatriated to her own country.
Accordingly, necessary steps may be taken by the concerned
authorities. However, the petitioner shall be at liberty to return to
India upon carrying necessary travel documents and depose in the
trial in question.
With these observations, the revisional application is disposed
Urgent photostat certified copies of this order may be delivered
to the learned Advocates for the parties, if applied for, upon
compliance of all formalities.
The parties shall act on the basis of copy of the order
downloaded from the official website of this Court.
Let a copy of this order be sent down to the learned trial Court
at the earliest.