1.     By way of present Writ Petition under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India read with Section 482 of Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (“Cr.P.C.”), the petitioner, who is currently posted as
Deputy Commissioner of Police, North East Delhi, seeks quashing and
setting aside of orders dated 13.10.2022, 24.11.2022 and 07.12.2022,
passed by learned Additional Sessions Judge, North East, Karkardooma
Courts, Delhi, in Sessions Case No. 298/2019 titled “State Vs. Sunil @
Kallu & Ors.”, to the extent of observations and remarks made against
the petitioner herein and also to recall and cancel the Bailable Warrants
issued against the petitioner vide order dated 07.12.2022.
2.     The facts and circumstances, leading to the filing of present
petition, are that an FIR bearing no. 246/2019 was registered under
Sections 22/29 of NDPS Act, 1985, at Police Station Khajuri Khas,
wherein 5 accused persons were arrested. Chargesheet under Section
173(2) of Cr.P.C. was filed on 14.08.2019, and a supplementary report
was filed on 30.10.2019 to bring on record the FSL report, which
confirmed the seized contraband to be „Tramadol‟. By way of another
supplementary chargesheet filed on 15.09.2021, the FSL report with
respect to mobile phones and SIM cards of accused persons was placed
on record. During the investigation, it was felt necessary by the
Investigating Agency to take voice samples of the two accused persons
namely Ankit Kumar and Rupesh Kumar Gupta. Thereafter, third
supplementary chargesheet dated 15.01.2022 was filed before the
learned Trial Court whereby detailed report of contraband seized in the
present case was placed before the learned Trial Court, and the Court
was also informed that voice samples of accused would be taken on
25.01.2022. Voice samples of the accused persons were then sent to
FSL, Rohini on 20.05.2022 for examination. The learned Trial Court,
on 26.07.2022, directed the petitioner herein, for the first time, to make
efforts to obtain the FSL Report of voice samples. On 29.07.2022, the
petitioner in compliance of the said order of the learned Trial Court
issued a letter, apprising the Director, FSL, Rohini, regarding order
passed by the Court and requested the Director concerned to prepare the
report on priority basis. On 04.10.2022, a status report was filed and
these facts were placed before the learned Trial Court.
3.     On 13.10.2022, vide the first order impugned before this Court,
the learned Trial Court made certain remarks against the petitioner as
well as the IO, SHO and ACP concerned by using terms “negligent”
and “insensitive”. The relevant portion of order dated 13.10.2022 is
reproduced as under:
“The matter is fixed for consideration on charge and also
for filing of the report of FSL regarding voice sample of
accused Ankit and Rupesh, which is still pending, so, the
DCP, North-East was directed to make sincere efforts to
obtain the report of FLS. Copy of the last order was sent to
the DCP, North East for compliance. The DCP has written
a letter stating therein that DO letter was written on dated
29.07.2022, but, as this case was registered way back in
the year 2019, it appears to this court that the
IO/SHO/ACP/DCP are negligent persons, as, they are
not making sincere efforts for obtaining the report of the
FSL expeditiously. Since, accused Sunil @ Kallu and
Vicky @ Harminder are in judicial custody and these
police officials are insensitive enough...”
(Emphasis supplied)
4.     Thereafter, on 19.10.2022, again a communication was sent by
the petitioner to the Director, FSL, Rohini through Additional DCP
concerned regarding filing the FSL report of voice samples. On
16.11.2022, a special messenger was also sent to FSL, Rohini to collect
the result, however, the same was not ready, and thus, on 23.11.2022,
the learned Trial Court was informed regarding the same.
5.     On 24.11.2022, vide the second order impugned before this
Court, the learned Trial court again passed remarks against the
petitioner, wherein it was again mentioned that IO, SHO and the DCP,
North East (i.e. petitioner) are negligent persons. Vide this order itself,
the learned Trial Court was also pleased to summon in person, the
IO/ACP and DCP North-East. The relevant portion of order dated
24.11.2022 is reproduced as under:
“...Since, this case is registered way back in the year 2019
and two accused in this case, are behind bars since 2019,
but till date, the report of FSL regarding voice samples of
the accused Rupesh Kumar Gupta and Ankit Kumar has
not been filed. It appears to this court that the IO, SHO
and the DCP, North-East are negligent persons.”
(Emphasis supplied)
6.     The petitioner on 29.11.2022, got issued through the Additional
DCP concerned, another letter to the FSL informing them of the Court
order dated 24.11.2022 and requested them to expedite the preparation
of the report. On 02.12.2022, a special messenger was again sent to
Director, FSL and FSL had informed that the report of the voice
samples will be ready by 28.03.2023. On 06.12.2022, the response of
the Director, FSL dated 02.12.2022 was placed before the learned Trial
Court vide status report dated 06.12.2022 which was sent by the
petitioner herein. The petitioner had also sought exemption from
personal appearance on 07.12.2022 due to MCD election duty and
some urgent law and order situation.
7.     On 07.12.2022, vide third order impugned before this Court, the
learned Trial Court again passed certain remarks against the petitioner
and other police officers blaming them for the delay in filing of FSL
report and turned down the request for exemption from personal
appearance of the petitioner and ordered issuance of bailable warrants
against the petitioner. The relevant portion of order dated 07.12.2022 is
reproduced as under:
“...Since, the DCP(North-East) has failed to appear, so,
request of exemption from personal appearance is turned
down. So, DCP(North-East) is called upon through
bailable warrants in the sum of Rs. 5,000/- for the next
date of hearing. Bailable warrants are ordered to be
executed through Commissioner of Police (Delhi).
...Since, the request made by this court to the
Commissioner of Police (Delhi) is not considered and as
the Commissioner of Police (Delhi) also failed to do
anything fruitful for expediting the result of the FSL. As
today this court has received a letter from DCP (North-
East), which reveals that report of FSL would be ready on
23.03.2023, since, as two of the accused persons, namely,
Sunil @ Kallu and Vicky @ Harminder were arrested on
dated 17.05.2019 and since then they are behind bars and
this case is relating to the commercial quantity of the
contraband and in view of negligent conduct and
lackadaisical approach of the Police Officials, including
the Senior Police Officers, both of these accused are
behind bars for a considerable period that too without
framing of charges against them as the prosecution has
failed to file report of FSL and total weight of the
contraband alleged to have been recovered from the
accused. So, in the given circumstances, when the top cop
of Delhi Police failed to consider the request of this court,
so, in the given circumstances, Secretary (Home),
Government of India, New Delhi is requested to make
sincere efforts, so, that the report of FSL may be filed in
this court on or before the next date of hearing and the
total weight of contraband is brought on the record...”
(Emphasis supplied)
8.     The petitioner, aggrieved by the aforesaid, seeks indulgence of
this Court for setting aside the impugned orders to the extent of remarks
passed and the Bailable Warrants issued against him.
9.     Mr. Vikas Pahwa, learned senior counsel for the petitioner seeks
deletion of the remarks and terms, from the first impugned order as
mentioned in para 3 above and from the second impugned order as
mentioned in para 5 above, and seeks cancellation of bailable warrants
issued against the petitioner as mentioned in para 7 above. It is stated
that petitioner herein is a highly respected IPS officer currently posted
as the Deputy Commissioner of Police, North-East Delhi. As stated, the
petitioner has had an impeccable service record and has also been
conferred with various awards and accolades for his service, including
the “President Police Medal for Gallantry” Award.
10.    It is argued by Mr. Pahwa that the impugned observations/
remarks relate to purported delay in a report of the Forensic Science
Laboratory, Rohini with respect to voice samples in a case registered
under the NDPS Act, 1985 and the learned Trial Court failed to
appreciate that delay, if any, was on the part of the FSL and not the
police or the petitioner herein and that the FSL is not under the control
of the police. It is stated that petitioner had complied with all directions
passed by the learned Trial Court, and the police department had duly
followed up with the Director, FSL, by way of written communications
which were also placed before the learned Trial Court. It is also argued
that the observations of learned Trial Court that it was not being
informed about the total weight of seized contraband are also misplaced
because the supplementary chargesheet filed on 15.01.2022 had
complete details to this effect. It is further submitted that most
unfortunately, the learned Trial Court has made sweeping remarks
against the petitioner on multiple occasions and also taken coercive
steps by way of issuing bailable warrants, thereby impeaching the
credibility of a decorated police officer.
11.    Learned senior counsel for petitioner also contends that aforesaid
actions of the learned Trial Court, in the given facts and circumstances,
are totally impermissible in law, and reliance has been placed upon the
following case laws: (i) Dr. Dilip Kumar Deka and Anr. v. State of
Assam and Anr., (1996) 6 SCC 234, (ii) Ajit Kumar v. State (NCT of
Delhi) 2022 SCC OnLine Del 3945, (iii) Rakesh Chand v. State 2015
12.    Ms. Rupali Bandhopadhya, learned ASC for the State, submits
that the learned Trial Court appears to have overstepped its jurisdiction
and passed remarks and directions which were unwarranted in the given
set of facts.
13.    At the outset, before considering the facts of present case, it will
be appropriate to refer to the legal precedents and guiding principles in
such cases, wherein relief such as deletion of remarks passed by a Court
against police officers and investigating agencies was sought for.
14.    Section 6 of Chapter 1, Part H („The Judgment‟) of the Delhi
High Court Rules for “Practice in the Trial of Criminal Cases”
pertains to criticism on the conduct of Police and other officers and
warns against such an action by the Courts. The same is reproduced as
“6. Criticism on the conduct of Police and other
officers—It is undesirable for Courts to make remarks
censuring the action of police officers unless such remarks
are strictly relevant of the case. It is to be observed that the
Police have great difficulties to contend with in this
country, chiefly because they receive little sympathy or
assistance from the people in their efforts to detect crime.
Nothing can be more disheartening to them than to find
that, when they have worked up a case, they are regarded
with distrust by the Courts; that the smallest irregularity is
magnified into a grave misconduct and that every
allegation of ill-usage is readily accepted as true. That
such allegations may sometimes be true it is impossible to
deny but on a closer scrutiny they are generally found to
be far more often false. There should not be an over-
alacrity on the part of Judicial Officers to believe anything
and everything against the police; but if it be proved that
the police have manufactured evidence by extorting
confessions or tutoring witnesses they can hardly be too
severely punished. Whenever a Magistrate finds it
necessary to make any criticism on the work and
conduct of any Government servant, he should send a
copy of his judgment to the District Magistrate who
will forward a copy of it to the Registrar, High Court,
accompanied by a covering letter giving reference to
the Home Secretary‟s circular Letter No. 920-J-
36/14753, dated the 15th April, 1936.”
15.    The Hon‟ble Apex Court in Dr. Dilip Kumar Deka and Anr. v.
State of Assam and Anr. (1996) 6 SCC 234, while dealing with the
tests to be applied for deciding the question of expunction of
disparaging remarks against authorities, observed as under:
“6. The tests to be applied while dealing with the question
of expunction of disparaging remarks against a person or
authorities whose conduct comes in for consideration
before a court of law in cases to be decided by it were
succinctly laid down by this Court in State of U.P. v.
(1964) 2 SCR 363] . Those tests are:
(a) Whether the party whose conduct is in question is
before the court or has an opportunity of explaining or
(b) Whether there is evidence on record bearing on
that conduct justifying the remarks; and
(c) Whether it is necessary for the decision of the case,
as an integral part thereof, to animadvert on that
conduct.
7. We are surprised to find that in spite of the above catena
of decisions of this Court, the learned Judge did not,
before making the remarks, give any opportunity to the
appellants, who were admittedly not parties to the revision
petition, to defend themselves. It cannot be gainsaid that
the nature of remarks the learned Judge has made, has cast
a serious aspersion on the appellants affecting their
character and reputation and may, ultimately affect their
career also. Condemnation of the appellants without
giving them an opportunity of being heard was a complete
negation of the fundamental principle of natural justice.”
16.    In State of West Bengal v. Mir Mohammad Omar & Ors (2000) 8
SCC 382, the Hon‟ble Apex Court had directed the Courts to ordinarily
desist from castigating the investigation even while ordering acquittal.
The relevant observations read as under:
“41. Learned Judges of the Division Bench did not make
any reference to any particular omission or lacuna in the
investigation. Castigation of investigation unfortunately
seems to be a regular practice when the trial courts acquit
accused in criminal cases. In our perception it is almost
impossible to come across a single case wherein the
investigation was conducted completely flawless or
absolutely fool proof. The function of the criminal courts
should not be wasted in picking out the lapses in
investigation and by expressing unsavory criticism against
investigating officers. If offenders are acquitted only on
account of flaws or defects in investigation, the cause of
criminal justice becomes the victim. Effort should be
made by courts to see that criminal justice is salvaged
despite such defects in investigation. Courts should bear in
mind the time constraints of the police officers in the
present system, the ill-equipped machinery they have to
cope with, and the traditional apathy of respectable
persons to come forward for giving evidence in criminal
cases which are realities the police force have to confront
with while conducting investigation in almost every case.
Before an investigating officer is imputed with castigating
remarks the courts should not overlook the fact that
usually such an officer is not heard in respect of such
remarks made against them. In our view the court need
make such deprecatory remarks only when it is absolutely
necessary in a particular case, and that too by keeping in
mind the broad realities indicated above.”
17.    Stressing upon the need and importance of exercising judicial
restraint and discipline, the Hon‟ble Supreme Court in A.M. Mathur v.
Pramod Kumar Gupta (1990) 2 SCC 533, had observed as under:
“12. It is true that the judges are flesh and blood mortals
with individual personalities and with normal human
traits. Still what remains essential in judging, Justice Felix
"First and foremost, humility and an understanding of
the range of the problems and (one's) own inadequacy
in dealing with them, disinterestedness ... and
allegiance to nothing except the effort to find (that)
pass through precedent, through policy, through
history, through (one's) own gifts of insights to the
best judgment that a poor fallible creature can arrive at
in that most difficult of all tasks, the adjudication
between man and man, between man and state,
through reason called law.”
13. Judicial restraint and discipline are as necessary to the
orderly administration of justice as they are to the
effectiveness of the army. The duty of restraint, this
humility of function should be constant theme of our
judges. This quality in decision making is as much
necessary for judges to command respect as to protect the
independence of the judiciary. Judicial restraint in this
regard might better be called judicial respect, that is,
respect by the judiciary. Respect to those who come
before the court as well to other co-ordinate branches of
the State, the executive and the legislature. There must be
mutual respect. When these qualities fail or when litigants
and public believe that the judge has failed in these
qualities, it will be neither good for the judge nor for the
judicial process.”
18.    A co-ordinate Bench of this Court in Rakesh Chand v. State 2015
SCC OnLine Del 14193, had expressed its views regarding restraint to
be observed by the judges while passing comments on the conduct of
officers/authorities. The relevant observations are as under:
“2. While dealing with the task of administering justice, a
Judge, no doubt has to be acting judicially and giving
expression to his views but he ought to be circumspect
while commenting on the conduct of some. The line of
discretion is not to be overstepped. The calm and
sangfroid of a Judge should be reflected in every
judgment, every order; rather every part of any judgment
or order. The immunity which is enjoyed by a judicial
officer carries with it the duty of circumspection. A Judge
ought to know that any statement against any authority of
the Government or any organ of the Government or any
person incharge of investigation or discharging executive
functions can lacerate, slash and mutilate his reputation
into tatters and cause irreparable harm. It may
prejudicially affect the career of such persons. What is
required to be taken care of is that nobody ought to be
condemned without being heard. The prejudicial effect on
somebody against whom a stricture is passed cannot be
assessed only in terms of the immediate damage to him. It
has the potential of eroding the confidence of public on
such person or institution. A judge must be wary of such
cascading effect of any statement/stricture made by him
while delivering judgment.”
19.    After hearing the submissions made at Bar and having perused
the records, this Court notes that the present case i.e. FIR bearing no.
246/2019 registered at P.S. Khajuri Khas, under Sections 22/29 of
NDPS Act, 1985, pertains to the year 2019, however, charges against
the 05 accused persons have not been framed till date. A perusal of the
impugned orders reveal that the dissatisfaction of the learned Trial
Court was premised on the failure of prosecution to file the FSL report
of voice samples of 02 accused persons, for which the IO, SHO, ACP,
and DCP North East (i.e. petitioner herein) were termed as negligent
and insensitive persons. Secondly, the impugned orders also note the
displeasure of learned Trial Court on the inability of a police officer to
inform the Court about the exact weight of the contraband seized from
the accused persons. In view of this situation, the petitioner was
directed to personally appear on the next date of hearing and on his
non-appearance on the said date, Bailable Warrants were issued against
20.    The remarks passed against the petitioner in the impugned
orders, primarily relate to his “negligence” and “insensitivity” in not
ensuring that the FSL report of voice samples was filed on time, as
directed by the learned Trial Court.
20.1. In the present case, the record reveals that by way of
supplementary chargesheet filed on 15.01.2022, the learned Trial Court
was informed that the voice samples of the accused persons were to be
collected by the concerned official of FSL on 25.01.2022 and that FSL
report in respect of voice samples would be filed through another
supplementary chargesheet as per law. The learned Trial Court was,
therefore, aware that another supplementary chargesheet was yet to be
received in this case and permission to take voice samples and send
them to FSL would have been taken from the court itself since the
accused are in judicial custody. After collecting the voice samples of
the accused persons, the same were sent to FSL, Rohini on 20.05.2022,
and the learned Trial Court was also aware of the same as the said fact
has been recorded in its order dated 21.05.2022.
20.2. On 26.07.2022, the learned Trial Court had for the first time,
instructed the petitioner to make sincere efforts to obtain FSL report of
voice samples. In compliance of this as well as subsequent orders
passed by learned Trial Court, the petitioner had got letters issued to the
Director, FSL requesting expeditious preparation of FSL report. Even
special messengers were sent to FSL, Rohini for the said purpose. The
learned Trial Court was also informed about the tentative date for filing
of FSL report as per the communication received from Director, FSL.
20.3. Having said that, the learned Trial Court passed remarks against
the present petitioner as well as the IO, SHO and ACP in the orders
impugned before this Court considering non-filing of the FSL report of
voice samples to be negligence attributable to the petitioner herein. It is
important to note here that Forensic Science Laboratory, located at
Rohini, New Delhi, is an independent governmental agency which is
not under the direct control of the present petitioner or Delhi Police. As
per records, FSL, Delhi was approved during 8th Five Year Plan (1992-
97) in order to address the ever-increasing forensic needs of the Delhi
Police and was inaugurated on 18.02.1995. Though, initially the
administrative control of FSL, Delhi rested with the Delhi Police, the
same was transferred to Home Department, Government of NCT of
Delhi, on 21.12.1995 with Principal Secretary (Home) as its
Administrative Secretary. FSL, Delhi, vide notification dated
17.04.2018, was also notified as Examiner of Electronic Evidence
under Section 79A of the Information Technology Act, 2000 by
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, Government of
20.4. While the learned Trial Court went on to make observations
against the petitioner and stated that even the Commissioner of Police,
Delhi could not ensure filing of the report at an early date, it was
overlooked by the learned Trial Court that the Director, FSL was
neither under the control of Commissioner of Police nor the present
petitioner or any other police officer. It is difficult to believe that the
learned Trial Court had no knowledge of the fact that it was not in the
hands of Investigating Officer or present petitioner to have fixed any
date for taking the voice samples or to decide the time taken for
preparation of the report of the voice samples.FSL, being an
independent body, prepares reports according to its own rules and
regulations and the petitioner as the DCP of a particular district/zone of
Delhi can only write a request letter to the Director, FSL requesting for
preparation of report expeditiously. At best, the petitioner and the other
police officers against whom remarks have been passed, could have
communicated the urgency of the matter and at times displeasure of the
court concerned that the preparation of the report was being delayed.
20.5. The learned Trial Court, therefore, despite being apprised of the
fact that request letters and special messengers had been sent to FSL by
the petitioner, still considered it as negligence on his behalf that the
Director, FSL was not preparing or forwarding the report to the police.
The petitioner herein or the police officers could not have prepared or
filed the report, and in case that was possible as per law, the negligence
could have been attributed to them. The petitioner herein had informed
the Director, FSL regarding the orders passed by the learned Trial
Court which was the best he could do within the domain of his duties.
The learned Trial Court unfortunately overlooked the same. The role of
police and investigating agency or law enforcement agency works in a
particular parameter and their domain is separated from the FSL which
is an independent body.
20.6. Rather, in such circumstances, when the accused persons had
been in judicial custody for a long period of time, the learned Trial
Court, in the very first place, could have itself requested the FSL,
Rohini to expedite the preparation of report of voice samples. In fact,
after an application seeking such a direction was moved by the
Investigating Officer on 07.12.2022, the learned Trial Court issued a
direction to Director, FSL requesting to place the relevant FSL reports
before the Court expeditiously. The said order is reproduced as under:
“...Matter was adjourned for the pre lunch session
for 12.01.2023 for filing the report of FSL of voice
samples, for filing the exact weight of the contraband and
also for consideration on charge.
ACP has filed an application for seeking direction
to Director, FSL, Rohini, Delhi for early result of the
exhibits. Accordingly, Director, FSL, Rohini, Delhi is
directed to expedite the result of the FSL
20.05.2019) be filed in this court on or before the next
date of hearing i.e.12.01.2023.
In the above said terms, the application stands
disposed of.”
20.7. This is also reflective of the fact that the Court was aware that
the petitioner or other police officers had no control over the processes
of FSL, Delhi. Despite the same, the IO, SHO, ACP, DCP as well as
Commissioner of Police were termed as the persons responsible for the
delay in preparation of FSL report and further guilty of the delay in
framing of charges in the present case.
20.8. In fact, in the present case itself, previously, the learned Trial
Court vide order dated 20.09.2019 on a similar application filed by
prosecution had directed FSL, Rohini to expedite the preparation of
FSL report of sample of the seized contraband as well as of the mobile
phones of accused persons. Thereafter, in compliance of the directions
of the Court, the FSL, Rohini was pleased to prepare the said reports
within a short period of time and the same were forwarded to the police
for doing the needful. The learned Trial Court, could have perused the
orders of its own Court, passed by predecessor Judge, to get a fair idea
as to what best could have been done to get the FSL of voice samples
prepared on a priority basis.
20.9. Nevertheless, without going into the merits of the case, it is
noted that there was no material or occasion before the learned Trial
Court to hold the petitioner guilty for the delay in preparation of FSL
reports by repeatedly terming him as negligent and insensitive.
21.    The second reason for the displeasure of learned Trial Court was
the fact that the Court was not being apprised by the investigating
agencies as to what was the total weight of the contraband seized in the
present matter. In this regard, it was argued before this Court that all the
details regarding the contraband had already been filed before the
learned Trial Court on 15.01.2022 by way of supplementary
chargesheet. This Court has perused the said supplementary
chargesheet, which includes the weight of contraband in each capsule
and total weight of contraband in all the capsules seized from all the
accused persons.
21.1. As far as recovery from accused Ankit is concerned, a total of 07
cartons were recovered from him and the supplementary chargesheet
mentions the total weight of contraband in each carton as 4.73 kg, 11.28
kg, 11.28 kg, 4.73 kg, 4.73 kg, 1.57 kg and 1.51 kg. A mere addition of
these amounts would reveal the total weight of contraband seized from
accused Ankit. Furthermore, as far as recovery of 39,000 capsules from
accused Sunil and Vicky is concerned, the weight of contraband in each
capsule has been mentioned in the supplementary chargesheet as 19500
x 0.31 gm and 19500 x 0.31 gm, but the total weight by way of
multiplication has not been specifically mentioned. However, the same
was informed to the learned Trial Court, to be 12.09 kg (approx.) by the
learned APP for State which is recorded in the order dated 27.01.2022.
The Trial Court in its order dated 08.04.2022 further records that
certain clarifications with respect to weight of contraband and batch
numbers were sought and reports qua the same had already been filed.
However, this Court is compelled to take note of the fact that in the
order dated 21.05.2022 of learned Trial Court, it has been recorded that
the Investigating Officer had stated that he would be filing a report
clarifying the exact quantity of the contraband found in the capsules
which were seized from accused Sunil and Vicky. Thereafter, the order
dated 10.06.2022 records the submission of learned APP for State
where he had informed the Court about the total weight of the
contraband in the capsules, and even the learned Trial Court, while
dismissing the bail application of accused Vicky on 10.06.2022 had
observed that recovery from him was of 39,000 capsules weighing
around 12.9 kg. Thus, undoubtedly, the Court was aware of the total
weight of the contraband seized from these two accused persons also.
21.2. Therefore, the observations of learned Trial Court in this respect
seem to be misplaced and it is not clear as to when a detailed report
indicating the weight of contraband seized had already been placed
before the Court and when it was also made aware about the total
weights of the contraband on several occasions, as observed in
preceding paras, what more the Investigating Officer was supposed to
inform to the Court. The learned Trial Court mentions in order dated
07.12.2022 that the order on charge was being delayed due to non-
availability of the FSL report of voice samples. However, it is rather
unclear from the orders of learned Trial Court as to how the FSL report
regarding the voice samples was being considered as a hurdle in
hearing arguments on charge or passing order on charge once the FSL
report regarding the contraband recovered had already been filed before
the learned Trial Court. Nonetheless, this Court is not venturing much
into this direction, as the remarks against petitioner which are sought to
be expunged principally relate to delay in filing of FSL of voice
samples.
22.    Another relief sought by way of present petition is recalling or
cancellation of the Bailable Warrants issued by the learned Trial Court
to secure the presence of petitioner, as mentioned in para 7 above.
22.1. In this regard, it is noted that vide order dated 24.11.2022, the
petitioner had been called upon to appear in person on 07.12.2022 by
learned Trial Court, essentially on the ground that he was negligent in
not ensuring that FSL report of voice samples of accused persons was
placed on record, and further because the police officer who had
appeared before the Trial Court was not able to inform the Court
concerned of the total weight of the contraband recovered from
accused.
22.2. Firstly, as noted in the preceding discussion, petitioner does not
exercise authority over FSL, Delhi so as to direct the Director, FSL to
prepare the report expeditiously and place the same before the Court on
a fixed date. By way of letter dated 06.12.2022, petitioner had informed
the learned Trial Court that as per the communication received from
FSL, Rohini, the FSL report of voice samples of accused would be
made available on 28.03.2023 for collection. Secondly, considering the
details mentioned in the supplementary chargesheet filed on 15.01.2022
and various observations recorded in the orders dated 27.01.2022,
08.04.2022 and 10.06.2022, the learned Trial Court had already been
made aware of the weight of the contraband seized in the present
matter. Furthermore, an exemption application was moved on behalf of
the petitioner on 07.12.2022 on the ground that he was engaged in
duties relating to Elections of Municipal Corporation of Delhi and some
other urgent law and order situation. However, despite this, the learned
Trial Court did not allow the exemption application and proceeded to
take coercive steps and issue Bailable Warrants against the petitioner
herein. In the opinion of this Court, considering the peculiar facts and
circumstances of the case, this action of the learned Trial Court was
severe.
23.    Recently, this Bench on 22.11.2022 in Ajit Kumar v. State (NCT
of Delhi) 2022 SCC OnLine Del 3945, while dealing with a similar
case, had issued directions for exercise of judicial restraint and
observed that judicial officers should refrain from passing denigrating
remarks against police officials. A direction was also issued for the
circulation of the copy of judgment for the benefit of all Judicial
Officers. Some of the relevant portion of said judgment is reproduced
“...37. Every word forming part of a judicial order forms
permanent record. Use of denigrating remarks against
anyone, especially against police officials impeaching
their credibility and questioning their sense of dedication
towards duty, is not the best course adopted by a judicial
officer, that too when the same is not required for the
adjudication of the case before the Court. Such criticism
may have a devastating effect on the professional career of
an officer. It is also bound to have everlasting affect on the
reputation of a person. This Court is conscious of the fact
that police officers are expected to be at the desired place
and desired time with utmost efficiency, both by the
general public as well by the Courts. Though the police
officers are duty bound to discharge their responsibilities
with utmost conviction, the practical difficulties which are
faced by them cannot be overlooked and disregarded by
the Courts. At the same time, such regard by the courts
can not by any stretch of imagination or interpretation be
take to be lack of power of the court to pass order
regarding the power to point out any irregularity omission
or commission of any act as directed by the Court, or any
disobedience to obey the directions of the Court. This
Court rather vide this order wants to convey that judicial
strictures against anyone need to be passed with utmost
circumspection. The judicial power comes with utmost
responsibility to exercise adjudicatory liberty to express
oneself. Judicial strictures against a police officer to the
extent as expressed in the present case are problematic
though every disapproval expressed by exercise of
adjudicatory liberty of expression may not fall in the realm
of lack of judicial restraint.
38. The strictures as passed in the present case to the
extent of observing that the officer in question has no
sense of responsibility and devotion towards duty and
further directing the Commissioner of Police to take
corrective measures and take action against the police
official and further observing that the Commissioner of
Police, Delhi may take a call as to whether the petitioner is
fit for performing duties as SHO or not goes beyond the
mandate of law, judicial precedents and discipline of
judicial restraint. This does amount to over stepping
adjudicatory liberty of expression exercised by a judge.
Such observations have the effect of stigmatizing without
conviction, sentencing without inquiry and affect career in
future of an officer which had to be left to the internal
administrative vigilance and disciplinary proceedings to
be conducted by the parent department of the officer in
question.
39. This Court makes it clear once again that this order in
no way undermines the majesty of the Court or the fact
that the judicial directions need to be obeyed by the police
officials concerned and the power of the courts to pass
orders pointing out their disobedience or point out any
fault in investigation, etc, cannot be questioned, however,
in this regard, Section 6 of Chapter 1, Part H („The
Judgment‟) of the Delhi High Court Rules for “Practice in
the Trial of Criminal Cases” needs to be kept in mind and
also the judicial precedents of the Hon'ble Apex Court and
the High Court have to be kept in mind as guiding force
while passing such remarks which amount to strictures.
41. Judgments and orders passed by the courts are often
permanent in nature, so is at times the stigma attached to a
person suffered by virtue of an uncalled for remark
unwarranted in the facts and circumstances of a particular
case. As adjudicatory force of the country, judicial
restraint as warranted by law and judicial proceedings is
one of the qualities of a judicial officer...”
24.     Though the aforesaid judgment passed by this Bench was
circulated by learned Registrar General of this Court on 25.11.2022
vide letter bearing no. 46847/Crl. in all the District Courts of Delhi, it
appears that the learned Trial Court has failed to take note of the same.
However, this Court, after perusing the entire case file, does believe
that the anxiety of the Court was not wholly iniquitous, in view of the
fact that though the incident in question relates to the year 2019 and
two of the accused persons are still in judicial custody, even the
investigation is not entirely complete and charges have not been framed
till date. Further, when the petitioner on 07.12.2022 had placed a letter
on record seeking exemption from his personal appearance before the
Trial Court, he could have undertaken to make himself available before
the Court on some other day, considering the delay in the present trial
and to dispel the impression of Trial Court that it was due to the police
that FSL report was getting delayed. As held by Hon‟ble Apex Court in
catena of judgments, speedy trial is an essence of criminal justice
system and the same was also in the mind of learned Trial Court while
dealing with the case at hand. But for the reasons stated in the
preceding discussion, this Court is of the opinion that when the remarks
passed against the petitioner are weighed against the inaction attributed
to him on the scales of justice, the balance lies in favour of petitioner in
the given facts of the case.
25.     Although the Courts must ensure that trials are conducted
swiftly, fairly, and impartially, they must take into account the ground
realities and position of law. Whenever the judicial officers are inclined
to use harsh language against the investigating authorities and police
officers on their professional capabilities and devotion towards their
duty, more control and caution must be exercised, since passing such
comments may impair a person‟s confidence, in addition to having a
negative impact on his work and reputation. The loss of reputation
suffered by an officer may not get restored even if the remarks are
expunged by a higher court. Therefore, a thin wall that exists between
the adjudicatory liberty to point out the flaws in an investigation or on
part of authorities and the obligation to exhibit judicial restraint must be
kept in mind and perspective.
26.    Judicial utterances in the form of strictures are disapproval and
dissent in certain cases. At times, the strictures stigmatize the
concerned person without conviction. A recipient of stricture will have
no option other than to seek expunction of stricture by way of either a
judicial review or under the writ jurisdiction. Though no restriction can
be imposed upon judicial functioning except guidelines on judicial
strictures and judicial precedents, since doing so will be against the
independence of judiciary, however, a recipient of judicial stricture also
cannot remain devoid of any remedies of redressal. It is the self
regulation amongst the judges that maintains the institutional integrity
of the judiciary. Undoubtedly, judicial utterances on many occasions
have the power to meaningfully bring about social and procedural
changes for the welfare and betterment of the system. The judicial
officers, however, have to note the difference between judicial findings
and passing of strictures. While there can be no doubt about the
importance of judicial free speech, it being the hallmark of a free and
fair judiciar, judicial self-restraint is an obligation that judiciary
recognizes as created by and for themselves. The strictures have been
passed against an officer, as in the present case a police officer who has
been visited with judicial displeasure for want of carrying out burden of
good governance of justice by ensuring speedy trial to the accused
persons in judicial custody. The judicial officer had to remain conscious
of the fact that passion for the same solely should not have guided him
to pass such strictures to express judicial discontent more so since the
delay in filing FSL was beyond his control.
27.    This Court is also of the view that in this case, the strictures may
be negligent but are not mala fide in nature. It is not to be forgotten by
courts that though the remedy of expunction of strictures is available to
recipient of strictures, many a times, the strictures live on not only in
public memory but also the memory of the recipient itself. Social
memories tend to stigmatize the recipient, though the person passing
strictures will enjoy judicial immunity due to his adjudicatory freedom
of expression. In the present case, the learned Trial Court displeased
due to delay in trial, had passed the orders impugned before this Court
without realizing that the cause behind the delay was not the recipient
of the strictures herein but the reasons beyond his control.
28.    The Indian judiciary has always followed the self-imposed
judicial civility codes and have, through the judgments of Hon‟ble
Apex Court as well as High Courts, flagged the issue of unwarranted
judicial strictures which stigmatize and at times even penalize the
recipient of strictures.
29.    This Court should not be held to be trying to bring down the
majesty and power of the Court, as also observed by this Court in the
case of Ajit Kumar v. State (NCT) of Delhi (supra). This Court
remains conscious of the fact that the judicial words, utterances,
decisions help, ensure a society which follows rule of law. However, at
times, unwarranted judicial utterances can wound and at times
adversely affect or destroy the career and confidence of the recipient of
strictures.
30.    It is also made clear that by way of this Judgment, this Court is
not holding or laying down, as earlier expressed in case of Ajit Kumar
v. State (NCT) of Delhi (supra), that the courts are powerless to point
out disobedience of orders passed by the courts, but the judicial
utterances or orders passed regarding the conduct of police officers
have to be inconsonance with the misconduct, if any, after carefully
analyzing that such misconduct is, solely and without any doubt,
attributable to them. Nevertheless, Section 6 of Chapter 1, Part H („The
Judgment‟) of the Delhi High Court Rules for “Practice in the Trial of
Criminal Cases” provides guidance to the Trial Courts as to what can
be the appropriate procedure in cases where a Court is dissatisfied with
the manner in which investigation has been done by concerned
authorities and agencies. If the circumstances so warrant, the Courts
can also take recourse to the Delhi Police Act and relevant provisions
under appropriate laws and can issue notice and initiate appropriate
action. The Courts are not powerless to indicate any lapse or omission
on part of investigating agencies, or any disobedience of the directions
of the Court. The courts have to take recourse to the judicial precedents
and the High Court Rules instead of taking into their own hands the
duty of conducting enquiries, etc., and have to leave the same to the
parent department and disciplinary authority of the police officers
concerned.
31.    As also earlier directed in Ajit Kumar v. State (NCT of Delhi)
(supra), this Court once again, by way of abundant caution, directs all
the learned Judicial Officers to exercise utmost restraint and judicial
discipline while deciding the cases before them and refrain from
judging the credibility of police officers and passing scathing and
disparaging remarks against them, when the same are not required for
the adjudication of matters before them.
32.    In view of the aforesaid discussion, the remarks passed against
the petitioner herein, as reproduced in para no. 3 and 5 of this judgment
are hereby expunged/deleted from the impugned orders dated
13.10.2022 and 24.11.2022, and the Bailable Warrants issued against
him vide impugned order dated 07.12.2022, as reproduced in para no. 7
of this judgment are hereby cancelled/set aside.
33.    Accordingly, the present petition stands allowed in above terms.
34.    Learned Registrar General of this Court is directed to forward a
copy of this judgment to all the District and Sessions Judges of Delhi
who shall ensure the circulation of this judgment among all the Judicial
Officers in their Courts for sensitization of Judicial Officers on this
issue. A copy be also forwarded to Director (Academics), Delhi
Judicial Academy for taking note of its contents.