The petitioner was a temporary employee of the fifth respondent
cooperative bank. While so, on 20.05.1999, the following order was
“jh';fs;       br';Fwpr;rp         bjhlf;f
gzpahw;wpa m';fhofspd; ,Ug;g[ Fiwt[f;
fhuzkhf        nkw;go     bjhif       brYj;JkhW
W.P.No.25505 of 2009
2.Aggrieved by which, the petitioner approached the first respondent
by representation dated 07.09.2008. No action whatsoever was taken,
therefore, he filed a Writ Petition in W.P.No.13837 of 2009 before this
Court. By an order dated 22.07.2009, the following order was passed:-
“3.Considering the limited prayer and without
going into the merits of the petitioner's
representation dated 7.9.2008 this Court is
constrained to direct the first respondent to consider
the representation of the petitioner dated 7.9.2008
and pass orders on merits and in accordance with
law within a period of eight weeks from the date of
receipt of a copy of this order. It is also open to the
petitioner to furnish a copy of the representation
dated 7.9.2008 within a period of ten days from the
date of receipt of a copy of this order.
4.With the above direction, the writ petition is
disposed of. No costs.”
3.Pursuant thereto, the first respondent considered the said
representation and by the order impugned in this Writ Petition dated
12.09.2009 and thereby rejected the said representation.
4.Even though notices were served to the respondents 4 & 5, there is
no       appearance. A counter is filed on behalf of the second respondent
essentially contending that the petitioner had indulged in serious
W.P.No.25505 of 2009
malpractices. But, however, considering the fact, that he is only a temporary
employee, he was terminated from the service straight away.
5.Heard Mr. T. Deeraj, learned counsel for the petitioner and Ms. E.
Renganayaki, learned Additional Government Pleader appearing for the
respondents 1 to 3.
6.According to the learned counsel for the petitioner, even though he
may be a temporary employee, and a perusal of the impugned order which is
extracted above clearly indicates that he was terminated from the service for
misconduct and it causes stigma. Therefore, even in respect of a temporary
employee if the order causes stigma and if it is not a termination simpliciter,
then the respondents 4 & 5 were duty bound to conduct an enquiry in the
manner known to law by providing an opportunity to the petitioner to refute
the allegations against him. Therefore, according to him, the original order
of termination and the order impugned in this Writ Petition passed by the
Registrar, confirming the same, are not sustainable.
W.P.No.25505 of 2009
7.Per contra, the learned Additional Government Pleader appearing
for the first to third respondents would submit that though it is for the
concerned of the co-operative society to explain about the original order of
termination, but would submit that as against the order of termination, the
petitioner did not avail the statutory remedy viz., filing of revision under
Section 153 of the Tamil Nadu Cooperative Societies Act, within the
prescribed time limit and it is only a belated representation which is now
being rejected by the first respondent. Therefore, she would submit that
there is nothing to interfere in this Writ Petition.
8.I have considered the rival submissions made on behalf of both
sides and perused the material records of the case.
9.Even though the petitioner did not file a revision within the time
limit, however by an order dated 22.07.2009 of this Court in the earlier
Writ Petition in W.P.No.13837 of 2009 extracted above, this Court directed
to consider the representation thereof on merits and even extending the time
by 10 days to resubmit the representation. Therefore, the plea of non-filing
of revision within the time limit, now raised by the learned Additional
W.P.No.25505 of 2009
Government Pleader cannot be countenanced in this Writ Petition and as the
same was not raised when the orders were passed by directing them to
consider the same on merits in the earlier Writ Petition.
10.I find merits in the contention of the learned counsel for the
petitioner that it was not a case of termination simpliciter, but allegations
are mentioned so as to cause stigma on the petitioner. Therefore, even
though the employee may be a temporary employee the respondents were
duty bound to follow the procedure mandated by law, i.e., framing of
charge, giving an opportunity to the petitioner, conducting disciplinary
enquiry and thereafter, for deciding the issue.
11.There are two other factors that are to be noted. First, the
petitioner has almost reached the age of superannuation as it is mentioned in
the affidavit filed in support of the Writ Petition that he was 45 years at the
time of filing this writ petition. Secondly, after the termination in the year
1999, he invoked revisional jurisdiction only in the year 2008 by his
representation.
W.P.No.25505 of 2009
12. In view of the above, I am inclined to dispose of the Writ Petition
on the following terms:-
(i) The impugned order in the Writ Petition dated 12.09.2009 passed
by the first respondent and the impugned order dated 20.05.1999 passed by
the fifth respondent are hereby set aside;
(ii) The fifth respondent is entitled to proceed from the stage of
issuing a charge memo and conduct the enquiry afresh and take a decision
in accordance with law in the matter, either by permitting the petitioner to
rejoin duty or by placing him under suspension. In view of the efflux of
time, such an exercise to be carried on within a period of three months from
the date of receipt of the copy of the order ;
(iii) In view of the nature of allegations in the present case, the
petitioner is not awarded any backwages at this stage and the same will be
decided only after the outcome of the ultimate enquiry to be conducted by
the fifth respondent;
(iv)There shall be no order as to costs.
W.P.No.25505 of 2009
The Office of Registrar,
The Office of Tamil Nadu Co-operative Societies,
The Office of Tamil Nadu Co-operative Societies,
Sennkurchi post, Ullunthurpettai,
W.P.No.25505 of 2009