Delhi Jal Board has filed Writ Petition No.8 of
2021 seeking a direction to the State of Haryana to
ensure   cessation   of  discharge      of      pollutants    that
increase concentration of Ammonia into the Yamuna river
and for a further direction to the respondents to ensure
that   the    discharge    of    pollutants      that    increase
concentration   of  ammonia   in    the   river   waters   of  the
Yamuna, or any of the drains/channels feeding into it,
An  interim   direction     is   sought  in   the
Interlocutory Application to ensure that enough water is
supplied by the State of Haryana to the NCT of Delhi to
maintain the level of the Wazirabad barrage at 674.50
feet in terms of the order passed by this Court in Delhi
Water Supply & Sewage Disposal Undertaking v. State of
Haryana reported in (1996) 2 SCC 572 which will reduce
the high concentration of ammonia in the water.
Delhi Jal Board is complaining of the water level
in  Wazirabad   barrage   is  at    a   level   of   673.30   feet
instead of 674.50 feet.
Mr. Vikas Singh, learned senior counsel appearing
for the Delhi Jal Board submitted that the obstruction
of the flow of water by the State of Haryana has led to
increase   in  Ammonia  level    in   the   water   which   causes
serious health problems to the people of Delhi.                 He
further submitted that directions given in the judgment
of this Court in the matter of Delhi Water Supply &
Sewage   Disposal   Undertaking      (supra),     the   State   of
Haryana are being flouting continuously.
Mr. Vikas Singh, learned senior counsel states that
a Committee should be appointed by this Court to find
out the actual situation relating to release of water by
the State of Haryana.
Mr.   Purushaindra   Kaurav,   learned    senior    counsel
appearing for the State of Haryana urged that after the
judgment of this Court in Delhi Water Supply & Sewage
Disposal   Undertaking  (supra),    the   Upper  Yamuna    River
Board has conducted an inspection and has submitted its
report.    According to the report submitted in the year
2017, the Wazirabad Pond was inspected and the water
level at the time of inspection was 670.61 feet and it
is not less than that at present.
He also pointed out from the documents filed along
with  the   counter  affidavit   to   submit   that    there  is
diversion of water to the Water Treatment plants before
the water reaches the Wazirabad Tank.             He submitted
that   interlocutory   application    filed         in   matters
pending   before   the       National    Green   Tribunal    was
withdrawn   by  the  Delhi  Jal   Board   and,  therefore,    no
order should be passed in this writ petition.
We   have  heard  Ms.  Meenakshi     Arora,   the   learned
Amicus Curiae who has submitted that after a detailed
study,   certain  suggestions    were   issued   to    both  the
States by the Monitoring Committee.        It is necessary to
find out whether the States of Haryana and Delhi have
been   complying   with    the  recommendations    made   by   the
Central    Monitoring     Committee,    headed   by   Secretary,
Ministry   of  Jal   Shakti,    Government   of  India.        She
stated that at present, the Central Monitoring Committee
is looking into the matters relating to the adequate
water supply to Delhi through Yamuna River.
Ms. Aiswarya Bhati, learned ASG, submitted that if
this    court  is    appointing     a  Committee,    the    Union
Government    of  Delhi     and   Haryana   Government     to   be
appointed as members in the proposed Committee.
Without entering into the merits of the matter,
which will be taken up at the time of hearing of the
writ   petition,    we   deem   it   fit  and   proper    that   a
committee    should    be   appointed    to  conduct    a   local
inspection and report to this court within a period of
three days about the following aspects :
1) The quality and quantity of water released from the
2) The level of the Wazirabad Pond; and
3) Whether the Delhi Government is diverting its water
to the Water Treatment Plants at Okhla, Wazirabad 1,2
& 3 and Chandrawal before the Water reaches Wazirabad
pond.
(i)   Secretary, Ministry of Jal Shakti, Government of
(ii) A representative of Delhi Pollution Control Board;
(iii)      A representative of Delhi Jal Board;
(iv) A representative of Haryana Pollution Control
(v) A representative of Haryana Irrigation Department.
The Secretary, Ministry of Jal Shakti shall be the
Chairperson   of the  committee.   The report  shall  be
submitted to this Court within a period of three days in
view of the urgency of this matter.
List this matter on 23.04.2021.