1.      The well-known proverb “health is wealth” has deep and varying
connotations. Historically, it connoted physical health but in modern society
the word “health” would include physical, mental and emotional health of a
person. The plight of an extremely well to do mentally ill person
(hereinafter `Mr. DMP’) with a large family is the subject matter of the
present petition. Due to the sensitive nature of this case and the persons
involved, all the individuals are referred to by their abbreviated initials and
not by full name. The Petitioner is the wife of the mentally ill Mr. DMP. An
application has been moved by the Respondent no. 5 in respect of the
nomenclature used for the Petitioner which is dealt with below, before
proceeding further.
CM APPL. 21096/2021 (for modification of o/d 4th June, 2021)
2.      This application has been filed on behalf of Respondent No.5 seeking
partial modification of order dated 4th June, 2021, to the extent that it refers
to the Petitioner - Mrs. SD as the “wife of DMP”. During the course of
hearing, Respondent Nos.5 and 6 have repeatedly objected to Mrs. SD being
referred to as Mr. DMP’s wife.
3.      It is seen from the record that, Mrs. SD has been shown as the wife in
the election records of Mr. DMP since inception. She has also borne three
children with Mr. DMP. Mr. DMP himself has never challenged the fact that
she was his wife. The judgment of the Patna High Court in Civil Writ No.
22948/2011 titled Smt S.D.& Ors. v. Bihar State Housing Board & Ors.,
relating to a land dispute also clearly acknowledges that Mrs. SD is the wife
of Mr. DMP. The ld. Division Bench of this Court in W.P. (Crl.) 2255/2019
titled R.S. v. State & Ors. has also referred to Mrs. SD as the wife of Mr.
DMP repeatedly.
4.      Thus, the objections of Respondent Nos.5 and 6 are bereft of any
5.      With these observations, the application is dismissed.
24330/2021 (for interim arrangement), 24951/2021 (for adjudication on
maintainability), 36031-32/2021 (for directions), 36345/2021 (for
6.      The Petitioner – Mrs. SD is a 76 year-old lady and the wife of the
mentally ill individual who is referred to as Mr. DMP. He was diagnosed
with Fronto-temporal Dementia (hereinafter, ‘FTD’) in 2019, the details of
which shall be gone into hereinafter. He is a 7th term Member of Parliament
from Bihar and from the facts that have emerged in this case, he is a man of
means. Mr. DMP had three sons, one of whom has pre-deceased him. His
current family consists of his wife, his other two sons, their wives and their
children, as also the wife and children of his deceased son. Mr. DMP’s
younger son – Mr. RJS is Respondent No.3 in this petition and his older son
– Mr. RS is Respondent No.4 in this petition. He also has a younger brother
– Mr. US, who has filed an intervention application in this matter. Mr. DMP
has also been in the company of one Ms. UD, who is stated to have been
living with him for approximately 47 years, who also claims that she is the
wife. In so far as Ms. UD is concerned, this Court has not expressed any
opinion on the status of Ms. UD, though it appears to have been broadly
accepted that Ms. UD was the companion of Mr. DMP. Whether Ms. UD
was his wife or not is clearly not an issue which has been raised in the
present petition, for adjudication. Mr. DMP currently lives in his official
residence in New Delhi, along with Ms. UD and Mrs. KR i.e., his daughter-
in-law from the deceased son. Ms. UD is Respondent No.5 in this petition
and Mrs. KR is Respondent No.6 in this petition.
7.      Mr. DMP is the owner of various moveable and immoveable assets.
His assets, as have been declared before this Court, run into more than
Rs.3,000/- crores or even higher. He is a substantial investor in a
pharmaceutical company and its group companies. He also has other
investments such as shares, bonds, provident funds etc. Conflict has arisen
between the wife of Mr. DMP, his two sons and their families on the one
hand and his companion - Ms. UD, his brother – Mr. US and his daughter-
in-law from his deceased son – Mrs. KR, on the other hand. Owing to the
mental condition of Mr. DMP, his wife has filed the present petition praying
that this Court exercise its parens patriae jurisdiction to grant the following
“(a) Pass a writ, order or direction in the nature of
Declaration appointing the Petitioner as the sole Legal
guardian of Mr. DMP for the purpose of dealing with his
medical and mental disability and with regard to all
matters relating to his estate including immovable and
movable properties, control and management over Bank
Accounts ,financial affairs, investments such as shares,
investments, bonds, public provident fund, salary,
pensions etc, on such terms and conditions , if any, that
this Hon’ble Court deems appropriate while exercising
(b) Pass a further writ, order or direction in the nature of
Mandamus directing the Respondent No. 1 and /or any
such other authority/s as this Hon'ble Court deems
appropriate person or agency to ensure that the
Petitioner is facilitated in all respects to effectively
discharge her duties as the legal guardian of Mr. DMP
and in relation to his properties and financial assets until
further orders as mandated by Section 13 of the Right of
(c) Pass any other order (s) that this Hon’ble Court may
deem fit and proper in the facts and circumstances of the
case.”
8.      By the above prayers, the Petitioner prays that she be appointed as the
sole guardian of Mr. DMP, being his lawfully wedded wife and considering
his mental condition.
9.      In 2019, Mr. DMP’s younger son, Mr. RJS, filed a writ of habeas
corpus, being W.P. (Crl.) 2255/2019 titled R.S v. State & Ors., before a
Division Bench of this Court. The prayer in the said writ petition was for
production of his mother, Mrs. SD, who, according to him, was illegally
confined by Mr. DMP, Ms. UD and others acting on their behalf. Mr. RJS
also sought the custody of his mother. The facts which thereafter unfolded
before the ld. Division Bench revealed an extremely sorry state of affairs.
10.     On 14th August, 2019, when the writ petition was listed before the ld.
Division Bench, the Court directed Mrs. SD, Mr. DMP etc. to be personally
present on the next date. An attempt was made to seek exemption from their
appearance. However, on 19th August, 2019, Mrs. SD, Mr. DMP and their
son - Mr. RJS appeared before Court. After interacting with them in
“While Mrs. SD was hard of hearing and it was difficult
to communicate with her, we found that respondent no. 2
Mr. DMP did not recognize either the petitioner (his son)
or Mrs. SD (his wife). He, in fact, told us that Mrs. SD
was his mother and the petitioner’s name was Aradhya
and not Mr. RJS. Respondent no. 2 repeated ad nauseam
that he had travelled to all the countries of the world.
Enquiry from the staff who accompanied Mrs. SD and
respondent no. 2 revealed that respondent no. 2’s
younger brother was managing the business empire.”
The Court, thus, concluded that the situation is quite grave as Mr. DMP
could not even identify his own wife and son or give their correct names.
11.     The Division Bench, keeping in mind the allegations levelled in the
case, directed investigation by the Crime Branch and called for a status
report from the DCP on 27th August, 2019. The DCP filed two Status
Reports dated 3rd September, 2019 and 19th September, 2019.
12.     As per the first Status Report dated 3rd September, 2019, enquiry was
conducted by the DCP, Crime Branch. The police made enquiries from 15
persons, including Mrs. SD, Mr. DMP, Ms. UD, Mr. US, Mrs. RD - who is
the wife of Mr. US, Mr. RJS, various staff and employees and the domestic
help working at the residence of Mr. DMP. The conclusions of the said
enquiry proceedings as recorded in Status Report dated 3rd September, 2019
• As per the son - Mr. RJS, he was not allowed to meet his mother, Mrs.
SD, since 2013. He further alleged that in the year 2017, when his mother
was admitted in Fortis Escorts hospital, she was discharged one day
early, against medical advice, at the behest of Ms. UD.
• As per Mrs. SD, she was not allowed to meet her son - Mr. RJS.
Accordingly, the police arranged a meeting between Mr. RJS and Mrs.
SD, who, as per the report, were happy to meet each other. Mrs. RD, wife
of Mr. US i.e., the brother of Mr. DMP, was living in the same bedroom
as Mrs. SD. She expressed her desire to meet her son and her husband -
Mr. US. When asked as to whether they were illegally detained or beaten
up, both, Mrs. SD and Mrs. RD remained silent.
• Mr. DMP made a statement to the police that he had three sons, one of
whom had passed away. He claimed Ms. UD to be his wife but did not
deny that Mrs. SD was his wife. He further stated to the police that he
has disowned his son Mr. RJS and did not wish to meet him.
• During examination of Mr. DMP, the police found that Mr. DMP was
suffering from amnesia and was repeating his sentences again and again.
He was unable to recognize the police officers he had met on 30th
August, 2019, when they met for the second time on 2nd September,
• Ms. UD told the police that she met Mr. DMP in 1973 and they mutually
agreed to live together as husband and wife. She admitted that Mrs. SD is
the lawfully wedded wife of Mr. DMP. As per the report, Ms. UD had a
diplomatic passport where Mr. DMP was shown as her husband. She has
no children from Mr. DMP. During the examination, it was observed that
she was managing all the domestic affairs at Mr. DMP’s house.
• Mr. US, who is the younger brother of Mr. DMP and the husband of Mrs.
RD, was also examined. As per the report, he is the Managing Director of
M/s Aristo Pharmaceuticals Pvt. Ltd. He stated that he manages the
affairs of all the companies owned by his brother. The police observed
that Mr. US did not live with his wife Mrs. RD. Mrs. SD and Mrs. RD
live together in the house of Mr. DMP.
• An ex-employee, who had worked with Mr. DMP for 17 years, informed
the police that when Mrs. SD was unwell, she was admitted to Fortis
Escorts Hospital and her husband’s name was wrongly shown as Late Sh.
Mohan Sharma, at the behest of Ms. UD. Mrs. SD was also discharged
from the hospital one day early, contrary to medical advice, at the behest
of Ms. UD.
• Another ex-employee of Mr. DMP informed the police that both Mrs. SD
and Mrs. RD were kept in confinement under lock and key at Mr. DMP’s
official residence.
• Another domestic help, who was working as the butler, stated that Ms.
UD was the wife of Mr. DMP but she did not have any children with Mr.
DMP. He further stated that Mrs. SD had three sons with Mr. DMP,
however, due to old age, Mr. DMP frequently forgets. He denied any
physical torture or confinement of anyone in the house.
• Mr. T.R. Narayanan, the Private Secretary of Mr. DMP, who was
working with him since 1986, was also examined. He was initially under
the impression that Ms. UD was the wife of Mr. DMP. However, he later
came to know that Mr. DMP was married to Mrs. SD. He stated that Mrs.
SD, Ms. UD and Mrs. RD, as also Mr. DMP, lived in the official
residence.
• Two other employees of Mr. DMP denied confinement or physical
torture.
13.     On the basis of the evidence recorded, the police gave the following
In the enquiry conducted so far, the following issues have
emerged.
1. That Mrs. SD is the lawfully wedded wife of Mr.
D.M.P., whereas, Smt U.D. has been living with D.M.P.
as his wife since 1973. Smt. S.D. is an illiterate lady
while Smt. U.D. is a Science Graduate from Maitreyi
2. That Smt. S.D. and Smt. R.D. have been living together
since long. They were staying at …(farmhouse in New
Delhi) for about the past one year and had shifted to
…(Safdarjung house) about a month ago.
3. That Smt. S.D. had not been able to meet her son, Sh.
R.S. (petitioner) for quite some time. She desired to meet
her son R.S., her daughter in law G. and her grandson A.
4. That D.M.P. calls Smt. U.D. as his wife but does not
accord the same status to his lawfully wedded wife Smt.
5. That D.M.P. has disowned his son Sh. R.S. in the year
2016 and does not want to either talk to him or to let him
enter his house.
6. That Smt. U.D. holds a Diplomatic Passport stating
that she is D.M.P.’s wife.
7. That two ex-employees have stated that Smt. S.D. and
Smt. R.D. were kept in confinement and not allowed to go
8. That neither Smt. S.D. nor Smt. R.D. have stated that
they had been confined or beaten by anyone.
9. That none of the servants who are presently employed
with D.M.P. have corroborated the allegation of
confinement or physical torture.
During the enquiry conducted so far, it is apparent that
both Smt. S.D. and Smt. R.D. are estranged from their
husbands. They live together and are totally dependent
on D.M.P. and Smt. U.D. for everything. Due to old age,
D.M.P. is also suffering from some memory loss. During
enquiry, no female attendant was found to be looking
after the two ladies.”
14.     On the basis of the above Report, on 5th September, 2019, the ld.
Division Bench of this Court directed that Mrs. SD and Mrs. RD be shifted
to a flat owned by Mr. DMP in Vasant Vihar. Mr. DMP’s counsel also
volunteered to get Mr. DMP admitted in AIIMS. Accordingly, the Court
directed the constitution of a Medical Board for examining Mr. DMP and
filing a status report with respect to his medical condition.
15.     On 12th September, 2019, the Medical Board, consisting of a
Professor of Neurology and five other doctors from AIIMS, submitted its
report. The findings of the said Board are as under:
“Report: D.M.P., an existing Hon’ble M.P. (Rajya
Sabha) was examined in detail. His all available relevant
investigation reports were evaluated. The Medical Board
is of the opinion that D.M.P. is suffering from dementia
(fronto-temporal dementia).”
16.     Thus, the Medical Board diagnosed that Mr. DMP had ‘Fronto-
Temporal Dementia’. The police filed a fresh status report on 19th
September, 2019 wherein further persons were examined. The conclusions
in the said Status Report are summarized as under:
• The sister of Mr. DMP stated that Mrs. SD is the wife of Mr. DMP and
Ms. UD used to work with him but she never married him. She had not
been in touch with Mr. DMP for a very long time.
• An ex-employee of Mr. DMP’s company, who retired on 30th April, 2019
as Senior Vice-President, stated that Mr. DMP was suffering from
memory loss for the last two years. He gave some instances to support
his statement. He informed the police that Ms. UD had taken control of
the affairs of the company and had fired several employees. She
employed persons with whom she could take control of the company.
Shares of the company were transferred by getting signatures on blank
forms by Mr. DMP’s Private Secretary - Mr. T.R. Narayanan and the
• Another ex-employee of the company, who resigned as President,
Material and Planning, informed the police that Mr. T.R. Narayanan and
Mr. Shrinath Banerjee, who are the Personal Assistants of Mr. DMP used
to interfere in his work because of which he was forced to resign. He was
not given access to Mr. DMP, even though he was a distant cousin. He
also gave instances to show that Mr. DMP was having issues with
memory loss. He informed the police that Mr. DMP’s brother i.e., Mr.
US was only a silent spectator, and the affairs of the company were being
run by Ms. UD, who was earlier the Secretary of Mr. DMP.
• The nephew of Mrs. SD i.e., Mrs. SD’s sister’s son, who was working as
an AC plant operator, was also examined. He stated that he was almost
made to resign on 23rd August, 2019 at the behest of Ms. UD, however,
with the intervention of his cousin - Mr. RJS, he was transferred to
another plant. He claims that he was repeatedly ill-treated at this plant,
leading to his resignation in September, 2019.
• Mrs. SD was again examined. She informed the police that the Vasant
Vihar property and farmhouse were in her name. Though Ms. UD was
given some properties, she wanted more, and this resulted in a lot of
acrimony within the family. Her son - Mr. RJS was ousted from the
company due to Ms. UD, who was also responsible for causing tension
between her deceased son and his wife. She stated that Ms. UD has given
all the property to her nephew Mr. K. She further stated that she was
locked up by the servants at Ms. UD’s behest. She claimed that she was
subjected to physical torture by Ms. UD, who was responsible for
instigating Mr. DMP and creating disharmony in the family. She was
happy to live in the Vasant Vihar house.
• Mrs. RD was also examined. She claimed that her husband, Mr. US had
come to visit her sometime. She then lived with Mrs. SD at Mr. DMP’s
official residence and Ms. UD would beat them up. They were not
provided food on time. The servants used to lock them up in the same
room and make obscene gestures towards them. She claims that Ms. UD
told them that she was their malkin.
17.     On the basis of the above evidence, the police recorded the following
In the further enquiry conducted in the matter, the
following issues have emerged.
1. That Smt. S.D. and Smt. R.D. have alleged beating and
confinement by Smt. U.D. and some servants on her
behest. Both the ladies do not remember dates but shared
their experience as per incidents.
2. That Smt. S.D. and Smt. R.D. want to live at C-1/21,
3. That they do not want to meet D.M.P. and Smt. U.D.
but Smt. S.D. wants to meet her son R.S., her daughter in
law and her grandson. Smt. R.D. wants to meet and live
with her husband.
4. That Smt. R.D. has alleged that when she was living at
the farm house, one servant named S. used to make
obscene gestures at her and made fun of her. He would
also lock her up inside the bathroom and not let her come
outside and would keep standing outside the bathroom.
5. That Smt. R.D. has alleged that Smt. U.D. has taken
away all the gold items belonging to her and S.D.
6. That two ex-employees of the Company have stated that
D.M.P. has been having memory related issues and that
the company is now being controlled by his erstwhile
7. That Director, AIIMS had been directed by the Hon’ble
Court to constitute a Medical Board to examine and take
care of D.M.P. and file a Status Report in this regard a
day before the next date of hearing i.e. 19.9.19. Request in
this regard was sent to the Medical Superintendent,
AIIMS on 06.09.19.
1. During the enquiry conducted so far, both Smt. S.D.
and Smt. R.D. have alleged confinement and physical
abuse.
2. Smt. R.D. has alleged that a servant S. used to make
obscene gestures at her and used to lock her up in the
bathroom at the farm house.
3. Smt. R.D. has further alleged that Smt. U.D. has taken
away gold items belonging to her and Smt. S.D.
In view of the above submission made therein, the
undersigned is ready and willing to abide by any
directions of this Hon’ble Court.”
18.     On 19th September, 2019, the ld. Division Bench recorded that Ms.
UD denied the allegations made by Mrs. SD and the ex-employees of Mr.
DMP. She claimed that she is the legally wedded wife of Mr. DMP and has
been living with him for over 45 years. Mr. DMP could still not recollect the
names of any of his family members. On the next date, i.e., 20th September,
2019, the Court directed Mrs. SD and Mrs. RD to continue to live in the
Vasant Vihar property and to be taken care of by two lady nurses from
Apollo hospital at the expense of Mr. DMP. Mrs. SD was free to meet
anyone, including Mr. RJS. It was directed that the investigation headed by
the DCP, Crime Branch be concluded within four weeks. Mr. DMP was to
undergo a medical assessment by filing an appropriate application under
Section 102(1)(a) read with Sections 3, 4 and 5 of the Mental Healthcare
19.     In view of the serious allegations of theft, physical torture, illegal
confinement etc. against Ms. UD by Mrs. SD and Mrs. RD, Ms. UD was
directed to live separately from Mr. DMP for a period of four weeks. It was
directed that Mr. DMP’s daughter-in-law - Mrs. KR and two male nurses
take care of Mr. DMP in the meantime. The Court observed that there was
an attempt made to conceal the exact medical condition of Mr. DMP till it
was accidentally discovered by the Court on 19th August, 2019. Ms. UD and
Mr. US i.e., the brother of Mr. DMP, did not inform the Court as to the
serious ailment which he was suffering from. The Habeas Corpus petition
was accordingly disposed of in the above terms.
20.     Post the said order, an application was moved by Ms. UD for
modification of judgment dated 20th September, 2019. A status report was
also filed, as per which Ms. UD had temporarily shifted to a five-star hotel
near the residence of Mr. DMP. Ms. UD was, thereafter, arrested. The
application filed by Ms. UD was withdrawn on 17th October, 2019. It was
clarified that Ms. UD’s bail application would be decided uninfluenced by
judgment dated 20th September, 2019. On 17th October, 2019, the Court also
observed that Mr. RJS cannot permanently shift into the Vasant Vihar house.
An application was then moved by Mrs. SD, objecting to Ms. UD living
with Mr. DMP. The same was, however, withdrawn with costs being
imposed. Pursuant to the investigation directed by the ld. Division Bench, a
criminal case has been registered, in which chargesheet is stated to have
been filed but charges are yet to be framed.
Crl. M.C. 2182/2020 and Crl. M.C. 2184/2020
21.     Pursuant to judgment dated 20th September, 2019 in W.P. (Crl.)
2255/2019 titled R.S v. State & Ors., a petition was filed before the
Metropolitan Magistrate under Sections 101 read with 102(1)(a), 3, 4, 5 and
14(4)(b) of the MHA-2017. In the said petition, the background of the
matter was set out and the following directions were sought:
“A. Direct the petitioner herein to All India Institute of
Medical Sciences (AIIMS), New Delhi for further
assessment and treatment under the Mental Healthcare
Act, 2017 to ascertain as to when his mental illness
B. After the discharge from AIIMS, New Delhi transfer
the petitioner herein to …(farmhouse in New Delhi) so
that his family can ensure he gets the best care and
treatment.”
22.     This petition was, however, disposed of by the Metropolitan
Magistrate, vide order dated 30th January, 2020, with the following
“The Ld. Senior Counsel for the Petitioner in his
submissions has admitted that the petitioner’s ability to
take such informed decisions for self is not as adversely
affected as would require some external support for
facilitating his access to mental care facility. This is
affirmed by the factum of his presence in this proceedings
that had taken place before the Hon’ble High Court of
Delhi, when the order dated 20.9.2019 was passed and
he himself having given the necessary instructions to the
Ld. Senior Counsel for the purpose of the undertaking,
given on his behalf before the Hon’ble High Court, for
undergoing the necessary mental assessment. It is
equally noteworthy that during the pendency of the
habeas corpus petition, the petitioner had moved an
application for recall of the previous order to the extent
it recorded the conduct of the parties post the in-chamber
meeting, seeking to explain the petitioner’s speech and
dictation as inaccurate on account of his shot up thyroid
levels and depleted sodium levels. This Court clarifies
that the findings of AIIMS in Report dated 12.9.2019 to
the effect that the petitioner suffers from fronto temporal
dementia cannot be discredited. Yet, the Ld. Senior
Counsel for Petitioner’s submission to the effect that the
decision making capacity of the petitioner continues to
remain intact cannot be ignored. If such were the
condition of the Petitioner, the law rather encourages
him to approach the mental healthcare establishment
himself for assessment and proper diagnosis. The
argument of the Ld. Senior Counsel to the effect that the
recourse for assessment as would precede any admission
is not provided for under Section 85/86, fails to appeal to
reason, for Section 86 requires a preliminary
‘satisfaction’ of the medical officer or mental health
professional with respect to, inter-alia, severity of mental
illness as would necessitate admission in a mental health
facility. Even otherwise, once cannot contemplate any
admission without a prior assessment of the patient. If
voluntary exercise of discretion by the patient himself for
the purpose of admission is recognized by the law,
willingness for having self subjected to assessment, is
also covered under Sections 85 and 86.
In the light of the afore-discussed reason, there
being no statutory bar under the MHA-2017, the
petitioner is well within his rights to approach the
concerned mental health facility of his choice for abiding
by the undertaking given by him before the Hon’ble High
Court of Delhi. In a case such as at hand, the need and
occasion for judicial intervention would arise in the
event of the mental healthcare institution not entertaining
the request of the petitioner for assessment, admission
and mental healthcare. Recourse to Section 102 for
judicial directions against the existing backdrop of events
is not only pre-mature but unnecessary. Accordingly,
recognizing the liberty of the Petitioner to approach the
concerned mental health care establishment on his own
for assessment and further treatment, and giving to him
liberty to approach the Court for appropriate relief in the
event of his voluntary request being not entertained by
the concerned mental healthcare institution, the present
petition is disposed of.
Copy of order be given dasti to the counsel for
petitioner/petitioner/ caregiver. File be consigned to
Record Room as per rules.”
23.     Another petition was filed under Sections 101 read with 102(1)(a), 3,
4, 5 and 14(4)(b) of the MHA-2017, through the wife of Mr. DMP. It was
claimed that neither Mrs. SD nor her family had any idea about the earlier
petition filed under Sections 101 read with 102(1)(a), 3, 4, 5 and 14(4)(b) of
the MHA-2017 and the said petition was a collusive petition filed by Mrs.
KR i.e., the daughter-in-law of Mr. DMP. In the said petition, two
certificates dated 14th February, 2020 and 27th February, 2020, given by Dr.
Nand Kumar, Professor (Department of Psychiatry), AIIMS and Dr.
Kameshwar Prasad, Professor of Neurology, AIIMS were relied upon. On
the basis of the said two reports, it was found that recourse to Section 102 of
the MHA-2017 was not required. Accordingly, the petition was disposed of.
The finding of the Metropolitan Magistrate in order dated 28th October, 2020
“Thus, the fact that the petitioner had himself
undertaken to undergo voluntary assessment through
instructions to his counsel, before the Hon’ble High
Court, makes it apparent that he had the capacity to
understand the said information, before binding himself
with the said submission. Furthermore, as per the report
dated 27.02.2020 from Dr. Kameshwar Prasad,
Professor of Neurology at AIIMS, the petitioner herein, is
able to take decisions about his daily needs. The said
report thus supports the fact that the petitioner’s ability
to take such informed decision for self assessment is not
as affected which would require external support for
facilitating his assessment under the Act. The said report
given by an expert holds greater value, then any
examination which this court may undertake, in order to
assess the capacity of the petitioner under Section 4 of
the Act.
Also, the order dated 30.01.2020 of this court had
dismissed similar prayer under the Act, on the ground
that in view of Section 85 and 86 of the Act of 2017, the
petitioner was well within his rights to approach the
concerned Mental Health Facility of his choice, for
abiding the undertaking before the Hon’ble High Court
of Delhi. Nothing has been placed on record by the Ld.
Senior counsel for the petitioner, which would allow this
court to take a different view, then that taken by the Ld.
Hence, in view of the above discussion, this court
is of the opinion that recourse to Section 102 as prayed
for is not required as the petitioner is at liberty to
approach a mental health care establishment of his
choice for his assessment and treatment, under Section
85 of the Act. Accordingly, the prayer of the petitioner
seeking directions for assessment and treatment at
AIIMS, in order to ascertain as to when his mental illness
started is hereby declined. In view of the same, the
capacity of Mrs. S.D to be the nominated representative
of Sh. DMP, under the Act, need not be examined. The
second prayer in the present petition is hereby declined
being infructuous.
With this the present petition stands disposed of.
Copy of this order be given dasti to the counsel for the
petitioner.”
24.     Crl. M.C. 2184/2020 was filed challenging order dated 30th January,
2020 whereas Crl. M.C. 2182/2020 was filed challenging order dated 28th
October, 2020. The prayer in both was for quashing the impugned orders
and taking appropriate steps, in terms of the MHA-2017, in respect of Mr.
DMP. However, on 19th July, 2021, in view of the fact that the medical
assessment of Mr. DMP had already been conducted by a Medical Board of
AIIMS appointed in this Petition, both the Criminal Miscellaneous petitions
were disposed of. The relevant portion of order dated 19th July, 2021 reads
2. This petition has been filed challenging the impugned
order dated 28th October, 2020 by which an application/
petition which was filed by the Petitioner for assessment
of the DMP was declined by the Magistrate. A perusal of
the prayers made in the application shows that the relief
“A. Direct the petition herein to All India
Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), New
Delhi for further assessment and treatment
ascertain as to when his mental illness started
Delhi transfer the petitioner herein to Khasra
treatment. ”
3. Mr. Mohit Mathur, ld. Senior Counsel submits that the
assessment of the DMP in terms of the Mental
Healthcare Act, 2017 has been conducted, as directed
both by the ld. Division Bench and by this Court and
hence this petition would no longer survive.
4. Mr. Vikas Singh, ld. Senior Counsel concurs with this
submission. Accordingly, after perusing the two prayers
in the application and considering the fact that vide
order dated 5th September, 2019 passed by the ld.
Division Bench in R.S. versus STATE & ORS.
W.P.(CRL) 2255/2019 and vide order dated 4th June,
2021 passed by this Court, an assessment of the DMP
has already been conducted by a Board of the AIIMS,
nothing further survives in this petition and accordingly
the same is disposed of as having become infructuous.
CRL.M.C. 2184/2020 and CRL.M.A. 4741/2021
5. This petition arises out of the impugned order dated
application/petition filed by Ms. KR seeking medical
assessment of the DMP. In view of the order passed in
CRL.M.C.2182/2020, this petition would no longer
survive and is disposed of accordingly. All pending
applications are also disposed of.”
25.      Thus, the petitions under Section 102 of the MHA-2017 have
ultimately been disposed of, in view of the independent medical assessment
conducted by the Medical Board appointed by this Court.
26.     The present petition, seeking the reliefs as extracted above, has been
filed by Mrs. SD - the wife of Mr. DMP. Notice was issued in the petition on
4th February, 2020. On the next date of hearing i.e., 26th February, 2020, Ms.
UD and Mrs. KR made a categorical statement that they have never intended
to nor would they in any manner part with the possession of or create third
party interest in any of the movable or immovable properties of Mr. DMP.
They further undertook to not disturb the use and occupation of the Vasant
Vihar property by the Petitioner, in terms of orders dated 20th September,
2019 and 17th October, 2019 passed by the ld. Division Bench of this Court
in W.P. (Crl.) No.2255/2019 titled R.S. v. State & Ors. Ms. UD and Mrs.
KR also submitted that they would file a sealed cover affidavit disclosing
the operation of the bank accounts and investments of Mr. DMP since 1st
January, 2020, till the date of filing of the counter affidavit(s), including any
claim of the expenses made by them on his behalf. Thereafter, pleadings
were completed by the parties. The criminal miscellaneous petitions, being
Crl. M.C. 2182/2020 and Crl. M.C. 2184/2020, were listed along with the
present petition from time to time and were finally disposed of on 19th July
2021, in view of the report of the Medical Board. Medical reports submitted
by doctors from AIIMS, that had been kept in a sealed cover before the
predecessor bench, were called for vide order 28th January, 2021. Hearing
commenced on 8th February, 2021. On the said date, Mr. US i.e., the
younger brother of Mr. DMP, sought impleadment but the Court permitted
him to intervene and make submissions in the matter.
27.     On 19th May, 2021, parties were directed to file a complete list of
litigations, including criminal complaints and other proceedings. The list
revealed that there were more than 50 proceedings, mostly criminal cases
and criminal complaints which were filed/pending before the police
authorities, criminal courts, and offshoot petitions before the High Court. In
order to ascertain the actual condition of Mr. DMP, on 28th May, 2021, the
Court directed Mr. DMP, Ms. UD, Mrs. KR, Mrs. SD, Mr. RS and Mr. RJS
to join Court proceedings online. The Court also appointed a Local
Commissioner to be present at Mr. DMP’s official residence at the time of
the interaction and to place a report on record. On 2nd June, 2021, in the
presence of the Local Commissioner and the Assistant Court Master, who
had reached the residence of Mr. DMP, the Court interacted with Mr. DMP.
In the interaction with Mr. DMP, it was noticed that he was unable to
respond to any of the questions put by the Court. The interaction with Mr.
DMP on the said date, as recorded in order dated 2nd June, 2021, is set out
“3. Through the video conference link which was
generated by the Court Master, the Court has attempted
to interact with the DMP. However, the DMP is unable
to respond to any of the questions which have been put by
the Court. When asked as to with whom he is living, the
response of the DMP was that he is living with Bhagwan
and he is unable to answer any questions relating to his
daily routine. On being queried as to how many children
he has, he initially said 6 and then 5. He is also unable to
state as to whether his children are sons or daughters or
name them. When asked as to who is his wife, he said
that he has one wife and her name was initially stated to
be `Pani’ and thereafter he said `Madam’.”
28.     Interaction with Ms. UD, as recorded in the same order dated 2nd June,
“Mrs. UD also joined the hearing online in the presence
of the Court Commissioner. She was initially asked about
the daily routine of the DMP. She is fully aware of the
daily routine including the medicines being administered
to him on a daily basis. She has informed the Court about
the DMP’s daily routine. She states that the first time she
noticed a change in the behaviour of the DMP was in
May, 2018 when he was admitted in AIIMS. At that time,
though he was broadly okay, he used to repeat his
sentences. He is 81 plus and Dr. Kameshwar Prasad,
Neurologist, AIIMS, was consulted at that time. Since
then, there has been a change in behaviour. However, in
December, 2020, he suffered an asthmatic attack and
was again admitted in AIIMS. Subsequently, he was
admitted to Apollo Hospital, developed pain on the right
side and an angiography was conducted which revealed
some blockages in the heart. Open-heart surgery was
performed by Dr. Nanda. According to Mrs. UD, the
DMP’s physical and mental condition improved
substantially after the open-heart surgery and he started
walking also. In July, 2020, however he contracted Covid
and after his treatment of Covid, he seems to have lost a
substantial part of his memory. In October, 2020 he
again suffered an asthmatic attack. In February, 2021,
his oxygen levels were dropping and he was accordingly
admitted to Apollo hospital and after various tests were
conducted, he was discharged. The medicines to be given
to him were also confirmed by the doctors. Currently, he
is comfortably staying at home.
5. Mrs. UD confirms that apart from her, Mrs. KR also
lives in the same house. In her opinion, the two sons, Mr.
RS and Mr. RJS have been estranged from the DMP. The
DMP has a total of six grandsons, two each from each of
the sons. On the question of assets/properties of the
DMP, she makes a categorical assertion that she does
not need anything from the DMP’s assets and money and
that she only requires that he lives happily and family
does not disturb his comfortable living. She informs the
Court that the DMP may have executed a Will about ten
years ago.”
29.     Interaction with Mrs. KR, the daughter-in-law of Mr. DMP, revealed
that she had good relations with Mrs. SD. Mr. DMP had three sons, one of
whom, who was Mrs. KR’s husband, had passed away. Mr. DMP has six
grandsons. Mrs. KR was not aware as to who was operating the bank
accounts of Mr. DMP. She stated that the same would be in the knowledge
of Mr. DMP’s Secretary - Mr. T.R. Narayanan. From the interaction on the
said date, with the various individuals, it was clear that Ms. UD was
completely in charge of Mr. DMP and his residence. She was looking after
all the affairs in the house, as also his medical treatment, etc.
30.     The Court’s interaction with Mrs. SD and Mr. DMP’s two sons, Mr.
RS and Mr. RJS showed that Mr. RS was completely removed from the
family businesses from September, 2018. Mr. RS’s salary was stopped and
his shares were transferred, without his knowledge, first to his mother and
thereafter to Mrs. KR. He also had a joint bank account with his father. He
stated that Ms. UD was manipulating the whole family through his uncle -
Mr. US and eventually, all rights of signing cheques etc. were taken away
from him.
31.     Mrs. SD could comprehend and answer the questions of the Court
with the help of a lady nurse. She expressed that she was comfortable in the
Vasant Vihar flat. Her statement, as recorded in the order is relevant and is
“8. Mrs. SD has also joined the Court proceedings today.
Though the proceedings are online, she could
comprehend and could answer the questions of the Court,
with the help of the lady nurse who was present with her.
It appears that she does have some hearing impairment.
She stated that when she was married to the DMP her
father had given 4.5 kilos of gold, from which the DMP
started his business. She stated that she has three sons
and one son has died. She blames Ms. UD and Mrs. KR
for the death of her son. She used the words that her son
was ‘Hatta katta’ and she is quite upset that he had
passed away. She also answered the Court that she has
grandsons and she does not have a grand-daughter or
daughter. During the interaction with the Court, she
became emotional and also cried during the proceedings.
She stated that her husband used to respect her and all
the daughters-in-law. However, in Hindi she stated that
‘Abhi to main vyakul hoti hoon’. She stated that Ms. UD
‘Nakli dikhawa karti hai’. She is comfortable in the
Vasant Vihar flat where she is living. There are two
nurses who take care of her. She also informed that the
daughter-in-law (Bahu) - wife of Mr. RJS also takes care
of her. When queried as to when she last met her
husband, the DMP, she could not recall. She, however,
expressed that she would like to meet him.”
32.     Mr. RJS stated that till 2013, he was a joint Managing Director of M/s
Aristo Pharmaceuticals Pvt. Ltd. As per him, around 2014-15, the process of
transfer of money, shares and properties from Mrs. SD’s account to Mrs.
KR’s children began at the behest of Ms. UD. As on date, he submits that
the entire shareholding of Mrs. SD has been transferred to Mrs. KR. He was
not allowed to meet his father, which resulted in the filing of criminal
complaints. Mr. DMP had no difficulty with him or his brother - Mr. RS.
33.     After hearing the parties, this Court permitted Mrs. SD to meet Mr.
DMP with one lady nurse for 4-5 hours. The Local Commissioner was
directed to be present at that time. A prayer was also made for the sons and
grandsons to meet Mr. DMP, which was not granted at that stage as the
Court wished to examine the matter further. Since then, vide order dated 4th
June, 2021, Mrs. SD has been permitted to meet Mr. DMP along with one of
the daughter-in-law’s on five occasions. Status quo was directed to be
maintained in respect of the movable and immovable assets of Mr. DMP. A
Medical Board, consisting of three professors from AIIMS, was also
constituted to visit Mr. DMP’s house and submit a report. The constitution
i. Dr. M.V.Padma, Professor & HOD, Neurology, Chief –
vasanthapadma123@gmail.com (9810819167);
ii. Dr. Achal Srivastava, Professor Department of Neurology, AIIMS,
New Delhi. Email: achalsrivastava@hotmail.com (9811178784)
iii. Dr. Nitish Naik, Professor, Department of Cardiology, AIIMS,
New Delhi. Email: nitishnaik@yahoo.co.in (9810416170)
34.     Considering Mr. DMP’s financial position, that he was earning over
Rs. 200 crores every year through dividends, this Court directed payment of
Rs. 25,00,000/- per month from Mr. DMP’s account to Mrs. SD for her
everyday expenses, maintenance etc.
35.     The medical report was submitted by the Medical Board constituted
by the Court on the next date i.e., 19th July, 2021. Some videos were also
placed before the Court. On the said date, the two Crl. MC’s were disposed
of, as discussed above. This Court also directed the members of the Medical
Board to join the proceedings on the next date so that the Court could
interact with them. The Court interacted with the Medical Board on the next
date i.e., 23rd July, 2021 and recorded their statements. The right of Mrs. SD
to visit Mr. DMP was reiterated and a further arrangement was put in place
vide order dated 9th August, 2021. On 12th August, 2021, considering that
there was no objection amongst the parties on the release of Mr. DMP’s
medical reports, it was directed that the copies of the medical reports be
released to both the parties.
36.     LPAs challenging orders dated 4th June, 2021 and 19th June, were
filed by Respondent Nos. 5 and 6. Vide order dated 24th August, 2021 in
LPA 209/21, 219/21, 221/21, 223/21 and 224/21, the Ld. Division Bench
clarified that there was no stay on the proceedings in the present petition.
Accordingly, hearings in the matter continued. However, on the next date
i.e., 27th August, 2021, this Court was informed that an SLP, being SLP
(Civil) Diary No(s). 18022/2021 titled UD v. SD & Ors., has been filed
before the Supreme Court and that the Court has directed the hearing in the
present proceedings to be deferred. On 7th September, 2021, this Court was
informed that the SLP has been dismissed on 1st September, 2021, after a
lengthy hearing before the Supreme Court. The matter was accordingly
listed for completion of submissions.
37.     On 8th September, 2021, this matter was taken up on mentioning. The
Court was informed that Mr. DMP was admitted to Apollo Hospital the
night before and his physical condition had deteriorated. On the basis of the
diagnosis of Mr. DMP with FTD, the medical report submitted by the
Medical Board constituted by this Court, the Reports of the Local
Commissioner, as well as the Court’s own interactions with Mr. DMP, it
was found that Mr. DMP is not able to take any decisions in respect of either
his medical treatment or in respect of his movable and immovable assets.
Owing to the urgency expressed in the matter and the medical condition of
Mr. DMP, Justice Rajiv Sahai Endlaw (Retd.) was appointed as an Interim
Guardian to administer the movable/immovable assets of Mr. DMP. Insofar
as the medical treatment of Mr. DMP was concerned, Ms. UD, Mr. US and
Mrs. KR were tasked with taking joint decisions for the welfare of Mr.
DMP, with Mrs. SD and the Interim Guardian being kept updated regarding
the medical status of Mr. DMP. The operative portion of order dated 8th
“24. In view of the prevalent situation and keeping in
mind the physical and mental condition of the DMP, the
9717495002) is appointed as the interim guardian who
shall henceforth administer the movable/immovable
assets of the DMP, including all the bank accounts
(individual or joint), renewal of term deposits, property
leases, filing of returns, compliance of statutory
formalities etc., All decisions for securing and
preservation of the moveable and immoveable assets
shall be taken by the interim guardian. Reports shall be
filed initially on a monthly basis before this Court in
ii)     The interim guardian shall henceforth, inter alia:
expenses which are to be incurred for the medical
residence and expenses of persons living with the
including amounts lying in bank accounts, fixed
deposits, term deposits, shares, debentures, bonds,
c)     take all steps to secure the revenues of the
dividends from the various companies etc.,
compliance with order dated 4th June, 2021.
iii) The interim guardian shall be paid an honorarium
of Rs.3 lakhs per month exclusive of secretarial,
travelling and other expenses which shall be borne from
the DMP’s accounts.
iv) The interim guardian may appoint a Manager to
assist him in carrying out his functions and also fix a
reasonable remuneration of the said Manager.
(v) Insofar as the medical treatment of the DMP is
concerned, Ms. Uma Devi, Mr. Umesh Sharma and Ms.
Kanchana Rai shall be entitled to take joint decisions for
the welfare of the DMP. The interim guardian Justice
Endlaw (Retd) shall however be informed of his medical
condition on a daily basis during the DMP’s
hospitalisation and thereafter on a regular basis. Ms.
Satula Devi and the two sons of the DMP shall also be
similarly updated as to the medical status of the DMP.
vi)      Insofar as the request of the DMP’s family i.e.,
Mrs. Satula Devi, the two sons and their families, to visit
the Apollo Hospital to meet the DMP and be updated
about the health condition of the DMP is concerned, they
shall be permitted to visit the DMP at the hospital only
two persons at a time. Visits shall be strictly in terms of
the protocol of the Apollo Hospital, depending upon the
physical condition of the DMP. The family is also free to
contact Dr. Sandeep Guleria to enquire about the
(vii) Mr. Narayanan, Personal Secretary of the DMP
who is currently stated to be maintaining all the records
relating to the assets of the DMP as also all the financial
documents, bank statements, deposits etc., shall meet the
interim guardian on 10th September 2021, at 11.30 am
and extend all cooperation.
(viii) The sealed covers, which have been filed before this
Court which contain the details of the bank accounts,
fixed and term deposits, details of immoveable property,
details of shareholding etc., along with the bank
statements, etc. shall be transmitted by the
Registry/Court Master to the ld. interim guardian.
(ix) All parties shall render complete cooperation to
the interim guardian in discharge of his functions.
25.      The above directions shall be subject to the final
decision in this matter.”
38.     On 16th September, 2021, this Court directed the alleged Will of Mr.
DMP, as mentioned by Ms. UD in her interaction with the Court, to be
produced before this Court in a sealed cover. Pursuant to order dated 16th
September, 2021, photocopy of an alleged Will of Mr. DMP dated 18th July,
2011 was produced before the Court. However, Dr. Singhvi, ld. Sr. counsel
submitted that, he objected to the alleged Will being called for in these
proceedings as Mr. DMP is still alive and considering the assets of the DMP,
the copy may not be retained. Accordingly, the copy of the alleged Will was
perused and was returned to ld. Counsel for Respondent No.5.
39.     The Local Commissioner has submitted her reports from time to time.
Submissions have been heard on behalf of the parties over several hearings.
The Respondents challenged the maintainability of the Petition. Thus the
submissions have moved back and forth. However, in order to avoid any
confusion, the submissions of each of the counsels is recorded below in
seriatim, as per their position in the memo of parties.
40.     The submission of Mr. Vikas Singh, ld. Senior Counsel appearing on
behalf of Mrs. SD, is that Mr. DMP, is suffering from a severe mental
illness. Despite this, the Metropolitan Magistrate wrongly declared him to be
mentally fit, based on the false statement of his daughter-in-law – Mrs. KR.
Mr. DMP himself is being kept in confinement under the complete control
of Ms. UD, who claims to be his wife, and the Petitioner, who is his lawfully
wedded wife, has been separated from her husband and two sons/families
for the last two years. Considering the mental condition of Mr. DMP, it is
prayed that this Court appoint the Petitioner as the nominated representative
41.      Insofar as the status of Ms. UD is concerned, reference is made to
charge-sheet dated 31st October, 2019 to show that even as per the charge-
sheet, the passport authorities are of the view that Ms. UD falsely claimed to
be the wife of Mr. DMP. No evidence was led to prove a valid or legally
acceptable marriage with Ms. UD under Hindu Law. Thus, it is submitted
that the admitted position is that there has been no marriage which took
place between Mr. DMP and Ms. UD. Mrs. SD cannot therefore be expected
to seek any declaration in respect of the void nature of their marriage.
42.     Ld. Senior counsel thereafter recapitulates the entire life history of
Mr. DMP. He stresses on the fact that Mr. DMP initially worked in a school
and it was only from the jewellery which was given to him by Mrs. SD did
Mr. DMP start his business. It is submitted that Mr. DMP had first
incorporated a business in which 70% shareholding was of Mrs. SD and
their sons. The marriage between the Petitioner and Mr. DMP is stated to
have taken place in 1960. It is submitted that since 1960, Mr. DMP has
always shown Mrs. SD as his wife. The Petitioner is not very highly
educated and has studied only till the 5th standard. She is, however, fluent in
the regional dialect and can converse in Hindi.
43.     Ld. Senior counsel relies on photographs filed on record to explain the
chronology of events leading up to the present situation. His submission is
that the photographs exhibit the fact that Mr. DMP always lived with his
family, though Ms. UD was part of that family. Mr. DMP never lived alone
with Ms. UD and in fact, right up till 2018-19, when Mr. DMP’s mental
condition deteriorated, Mr. DMP was living with his wife, Ms. UD, his sons
and their families as one big family. Till 2018, both the sons were also part
of the company and businesses. Since then, the Petitioner has been
completely separated from her husband as well as both her sons. Mr. DMP’s
complete assets are under the control of Ms. UD. Mrs. KR i.e., Mr. DMP’s
daughter-in-law, has got documents signed by Mr. DMP, including the
affidavits of disownment of his sons, after the onset of his mental illness.
Ld. Senior counsel submits that thus, while the actual family of Mr. DMP
has been completely deprived of him and his company, Ms. UD has been in
control of his personal life as also his businesses.
44.     It is submitted that Mr. DMP was first diagnosed with mild atrophia
in the frontal lobe in 1997, which is clear from the brain report taken at
Lilavati Hospital, Mumbai. Thereafter, in 2019, during the proceedings
before the ld. Division Bench, he was diagnosed with FTD. In 2019 itself,
the Respondents had approached the Metropolitan Magistrate under the
MHA-2017 seeking a declaration regarding Mr. DMP’s mental health.
However, even before the Metropolitan Magistrate, the stand taken by Mrs.
KR was that Mr. DMP was instructing the lawyers in the proceedings before
the ld. Division Bench and that no medical assessment of Mr. DMP was
45.     Insofar as the legal position is concerned, reference is made to Section
14 (1) of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 (hereinafter,
‘RPWD-2016’) to argue that the statute applies only qua a person who has a
partial disability. Reference is made to Rule 7 of the Delhi Rights of Persons
enacted under the 2016 Act, to argue that the fact that the limited guardian
has to consult the person with the disability shows that the disability is one
of a limited nature and not a complete disability. It is further submitted that
RPWD-2016 deals only with limited guardianship, which, according to Mr.
Singh, leads to the conclusion that full guardianship could not be granted
under the RPWD-2016. Section 2(s) of RPWD-2016 and its Statement of
Objects and Reasons are relied upon to show that the purpose of the Act is to
provide benefits to persons with disabilities (hereinafter, ‘PwD’), in
education, jobs, reservation, etc.
46.     Coming to the MHA-2017, the argument of Mr. Singh is that under
the Mental Health Act, 1987 (hereinafter, ‘MHA-1987’), Sections 53 and 54
specifically provided for how the property of a mentally ill person was to be
dealt with. However, the MHA-2017 does not contain any provisions in this
regard. On the strength of various provisions of the Act, it is submitted that a
nominated representative is the person who is supposed to take care of the
mentally ill person. Under Section 2(a) read with Section 5, an advance
directive can be issued by a mentally ill person. In the present case, since no
Mental Health Review Board (hereinafter, ‘Board’) had been constituted in
Delhi, Mr. DMP did not give any advance directive. In the absence of an
advance directive, a nominated representative would be appointed under
Section 14. The order of precedence for appointing a nominated
representative is given in Sections 2 and 14, as per which the Petitioner
would clearly be put at a higher pedestal than a caregiver. Ld. counsel also
relies on the judgment in Indra Sarma v. V.K.V. Sarma, (2013) 15 SCC 755
to argue that a concubine can never be considered a relative.
47.     On the strength of Section 15 it is argued that a legal guardian can be
a nominated representative which itself shows that a nominated
representative plays the role of a guardian. It is further submitted that
Section 17, which sets out the duties of a nominated representative, would
take within its fold the best interests of Mr. DMP, which would include
management of the assets of Mr. DMP. Section 120 of MHA-2017 Act is
also relied upon to argue that MHA-2017 has an overriding effect, thus,
Section 14 of the RPWD-2016 would clearly be overridden.
48.     Ld. Senior Counsel places reliance on several judgments to inter alia
submit that under the parens patriae jurisdiction, which can be exercised by
a writ court in exceptional cases, the Court has to bear in mind the best
interests of Mr. DMP. The judgment in Suchita Srivastava v. Chandigarh
Admn., (2009) 9 SCC 1, is relied upon to argue that there are two different
tests i.e., the best interest test and the substituted judgment test which are
applied. Further, reliance is placed on the judgment of the Supreme Court in
Aruna Ramchandra Shanbaug v. Union of India, (2011) 4 SCC 454, in
which case, the Court, while considering whether or not to withdraw life
support, observed that the best interest of the person ought to be considered.
It is submitted that in the present case, the best interest test ought to be
applied by the Court.
49.     Ld. Senior Counsel submits that the following facts reflect Mr.
1.      The entire family always lived together. Mr. DMP was never
separated from his wife and children, though Respondent No. 5/Ms.
UD was also living with the family.
2.      The shareholding of Mr. DMP always vested in Mr. DMP himself. No
joint bank account was opened while Mr. DMP was in his full senses.
50.     Reliance is thereafter placed on the decision of the High Court of
Bombay in Rajni Hariom Sharma v. UOI, [W.P. (St.) 3883 of 2020,
decided on 27th August, 2020] to argue that the role of the wife is crucial
when the husband is suffering from a mental illness. The status of the wife is
superior to any other person and hence, the best person to be appointed as a
guardian is the wife. The said judgment was also relied upon by the Delhi
High Court in Vandana Tyagi & Anr. v. Govt. of NCT of Delhi & Ors.,
[W.P. (C.) 1103 of 2019, decided on 7th January, 2020] and the Allahabad
High Court in Uma Mittal & Ors v. UOI, [W.P. (C.) 40096 of 2019, decided
51.     The judgment of the Supreme Court in Indra Sarma (supra), which,
in the context of the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act,
2005, draws a distinction between a married person and a person in a
domestic relationship, is also relied on to argue that Ms. UD cannot be
treated as being married to Mr. DMP. Ld. Senior Counsel further submits
that Respondent No. 5 never objected to being referred to in the pleadings as
not his wife and there is no assertion or proof of a marriage having been
conducted. Reliance was placed on three judgments i.e., Gunwant Kaur v.
Corporation Ltd. v. Mahesh Datta & Ors., (2009) 8 SCC 339 and ABL
International Limited & Anr. v. Export Credit Guarantee Corporation &
Ors., (2004) 3 SCC 553 to argue that even a Writ Court can go into disputed
52.     It is argued that allegations of forum shopping are completely baseless
inasmuch as the family of Mr. DMP has taken steps to file a criminal
1.      The passport of Ms. UD was wrongly obtained; and
2.      The amount of approximately Rs. 34 crores, which was lying in
the Petitioner’s bank account was unauthorisedly transferred out of
her bank account by Mrs. KR.
53.     Insofar as the Respondents’ reliance on Order XXXIIA CPC is
concerned, it is argued that as per Section 116 of MHA-2017, in respect of
all decisions which the Board can take, the Civil Court’s jurisdiction is
54.     Insofar as the disownment affidavits are concerned, reliance is placed
on the judgment in Preeti Satija v. Raj Kumari and Anr., ILR (2014) 2 Del
1246, where the Court has observed that disownment would not take away
the right of the son to be an heir if the person dies intestate. It is therefore
submitted      that  unless   and    until  there  are  executed           deeds        of
relinquishment/formal deeds of partition/family settlements, disownment
affidavits would not have any legal effect.
55.     Reference is also made to two judgments from the United Kingdom
passed under the Mental Capacity Act, 2005 i.e., VAC v. JAD & Ors, [2010]
EWCOP 2159 and Re D (J), [1982] 2 All ER, to argue that during the
lifetime of a person who is mentally ill, the Court can implement a statutory
will. It is submitted that the alleged Will of Mr. DMP, despite the fact that it
was executed in 2011, cannot be justified in as much as after 2011, the
family has always stayed together and there was no ill-will between the
56.     Finally, Mr. Vikas Singh, ld. Senior Counsel submits that the Kerala
and Madras High Court judgments relied upon by Dr. Singhvi are consent
judgments and hence, would not act as precedents for the purposes of
deciding the present case.
57.     At the outset, Mr. K.K. Rai, ld. Sr. counsel appearing for Respondent
No.3 – Mr. RJS i.e., the youngest son of the Petitioner, submits that he
adopts the arguments made by Mr. Vikas Singh, ld. Sr. counsel and Mr.
Mahesh Jethmalani, ld. Sr. counsel.
58.     Insofar as the affidavits of disownment are concerned, a comparison
is made between the two affidavits to show how the language in the two
affidavits is the exact same. This, according to Mr. Rai, ld. Senior counsel,
establishes the fact that the affidavits are not genuine. The disownment
affidavits are also challenged on the ground that even as late as 2018, a lease
agreement has been entered into in favour of the second son by the DMP’s
company - M/s Aristo Pharmaceuticals Pvt. Ltd., which shows that there
was no ill-will between the father and sons.
59.     Insofar as the two enactments are concerned i.e., the RPWD-2016 and
the MHA-2017, it is his submission that both statutes are to be harmonised
and read together, however, if there is any conflict then the MHA-2017
would apply due to Section 120, as also due to the fact that it is a later
enactment which is a special statute.
60.     Ld. Senior Counsel also points out the difference in wording of the
preambles of the two acts. While the RPWD-2016 records that the intention
of the statute is to “implement the Convention”, the MHA-2017 records that
it has been enacted in order to “align and harmonise the existing laws with
the said Convention”.
61.     As per ld. Senior counsel, RPWD-2016 is meant to alleviate the
suffering of PwDs and specifies the role of the State in such alleviation.
However, MHA-2017 provides for the manner in which a mentally ill
person is to be cared for. He submits that the person and the property i.e., the
mentally ill person and his/her assets, are inseparable from each other and
are, in fact, integral to each other. Reference is made to the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, as per which the right to property is
recognized as a human right. The same has also been observed by the
Supreme Court in Indore Vikas Pradhikaran v. Pure Industrial Coke &
Chemicals Ltd., (2007) 8 SCC 705 and Rame Gowda v. M. Varadappa
Naidu, (2004) 1 SCC 769. Therefore, it is argued that the distinction
between the assets/property of the person and the person himself/herself
cannot be read into the statute. Thus, it is submitted that even if the MHA-
2017 does not contain any provision for the protection of a mentally ill
person’s property, the Court cannot be rendered helpless, especially while
exercising parens patriae jurisdiction.
62.     It is argued that even though in the UK, parens patriae jurisdiction is
no longer exercised, that does not mean that the same cannot be exercised by
Indian Courts. Reliance was placed upon A. Subash Babu v. State of A.P.,
(2011) 7 SCC 616 and M/s. Om Sai Cultural Recreation Association v.
State of Karnataka & Ors., 2015 SCC OnLine Kar 883 to argue that in
order to eliminate injustice there are no limits on the Courts. A judgment of
the Bombay High Court, being Vijay Ramachandra Salgaonkar v. State,
[W.P. 637 of 2021, decided on 17th July, 2021], where guardianship of the
wife, who is suffering from vascular dementia, has been given to her
husband, was also relied upon.
63.     On facts, it is submitted that so long as Mr. DMP was in control, he
did not disturb the institution of his family. However, when he was in
captivity, his mental condition deteriorated. The entire conspiracy was
unearthed during the proceedings in the writ of habeas corpus, being W.P.
(Crl.) 2255/2019 titled R.S v. State & Ors. It is submitted that a deliberate
attempt has been made to conceal Mr. DMP’s mental condition, which is
clear from a reading of the order of the Division Bench dated 19th August,
2019 and the order dated 20th September, 2019. The Division Bench was
given the impression that the reason why Mr. DMP could not recognise his
wife and his son was due to a change in his thyroid levels and depletion of
his sodium levels. Ld. Senior counsel submits that Mr. DMP was, in fact,
incapable of engaging a counsel on his behalf but in the proceedings before
the Division Bench, a counsel was engaged on his behalf. This shows that
the conduct of Ms. UD was not bonafide.
64.     It is submitted that in fact, attempts were made to avoid production of
Mrs. SD in Court. At that stage, the Court suspected that something was
amiss and directed the entire family to be present in Court. A shocking
observation made by the Court was that Mr. DMP did not recognize his own
wife and son.
65.     The pleadings of Ms. UD are also relied upon to argue that even the
stand of Ms. UD shows her poor conduct. On page 1440 of the pleadings, in
a reply filed by Ms. UD, it is denied that Mrs. SD is the wife of the DMP
and that the DMP is incapable of taking cogent and intelligent decisions,
which is contrary to what has been recorded by the Division Bench of this
66.     Ld. Senior counsel took the Court through Mr. DMP’s medical
records to argue that since 1997, the DMP has been detected with some
cognitive impairment, which has only worsened with time.
67.     Ld. Senior Counsel emphasizes upon the fact that Ms. UD, who is
described in different documents as Manager (Public Relations), Vice-
President (Public Relations) etc., was merely an employee who had come
into the household. It is the Petitioner who is Mr. DMP’s lawfully wedded
wife. He argued that the present case raises a question of public policy i.e.,
whether the Court can recognise an extra-marital affair? It is submitted that
Mr. DMP has repeatedly filed declarations in Parliament declaring Mrs. SD
as his wife. Even during the Court ordered investigation, Ms. UD has stated
that Mrs. SD is the wife of Mr. DMP. Ld. Senior counsel submits that if the
institution of marriage is being pitted against the role of Ms. UD, who, in his
words, is nothing but a “concubine”, public policy would require the Court
to side with the institution of marriage.
68.     It is further submitted that recognising Ms. UD as the wife of Mr.
DMP would also be contrary to Section 16 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955
and Section 18(2)(e) of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956.
The acceptance of any arrangement apart from marriage would also demean
the institution of marriage, which cannot be done as per the judgment of the
Madras High Court in Chinnammal and 8 Others v. Elumalai and 4
Others, 2000 (II) CTC 214 and the triple talaq judgment in Shayara Bano
69.     Finally, it is submitted that Mrs. SD is the most non-controversial
person against whom no allegations have been levelled by any of the parties.
Though Mrs. SD may be an illiterate person but it is not necessary that every
illiterate person does not understand the finer values which are enjoyed
within families. In any event, she is a good human being who has taken care
of the entire family and therefore, she is entitled to the guardianship of the
70.     Mr. Mahesh Jethmalani, ld. Senior Counsel appears on behalf of
Respondent No.4. It is the case of Mr. RS that he and his brother had a very
good relationship with their father. This is evident from the fact that one of
them stayed with Mr. DMP even in August, 2018. Their relationship turned
sour with the intervention of Ms. UD, who is taking advantage of Mr.
DMP’s mental condition.
71.     Ld. Senior Counsel challenges the validity of the affidavits of
disownment on the ground that they are completely unbecoming of any
father. It is submitted that the language used in the affidavits seems to be of
a third party and only the signatures have been obtained from Mr. DMP,
whose mental condition was degenerating. It is further submitted that no
mention was made of any disownment affidavit to the police and in fact,
even the statement of Mr. DMP to the police, that he did not want his son in
his house, was a tutored statement. Mr. Jethmalani emphasizes that the
affidavits may have been signed at an earlier point of time as the date of the
affidavits, as also the age of Mr. DMP, are not up to date.
72.     Ld. Senior counsel submits that from 2016 onwards, various financial
decisions have been taken, undermining Mr. DMP’s financial capacity, in
respect of shares, bank accounts, disownment of sons, etc., which clearly
shows that since the time Mr. DMP has been suffering from this condition,
Respondent No.5 has taken over his decision-making powers. It is further
submitted that the manner in which Respondent No.4’s shares and joint
accounts have been transferred without his signatures also shows that during
this period Mr. DMP did not take any decision on his own.
73.     Insofar as the conduct of Mr. US i.e., the younger brother of Mr. DMP
is concerned, ld. Senior Counsel claims that there is collusion and
conspiracy involving Mr. US, who is now controlling the company along
with Ms. UD. It is submitted that there can otherwise be no explanation as to
why Mr. US is not willing to acknowledge Mrs. SD as the wife of Mr. DMP.
Reliance was placed on a writ petition filed by Mrs. SD and Mr. US, as
Petitioner Nos.1 and 2 in Civil Writ No. 22948/2011 in the Patna High
Court. It is submitted that in the said writ petition, Mrs. SD has been
described as the wife of Mr. DMP and Mr. US is Petitioner No.2. Thus, in
judicial proceedings, Mr. US has admitted that Mrs. SD is the wife of Mr.
DMP. It is thus argued that Mr. US is guilty of suppresio veri and suggestio
74.     Insofar as the applicability of RPWD-2016 is concerned, Mr.
Jethmalani, ld. Senior Counsel submits that FTD would not be a disability as
defined under the RPWD-2016. Reliance is placed on Section 2(s), as per
which, a ‘person with disability’ would be a person with a partial
impairment. It is submitted that only those mental conditions which do not
completely destroy the person’s full and effective participation in society
would come under this definition. In the case of a person with FTD, such
participation is foreclosed, owing to the permanent nature of the condition
and the gradual degeneration it causes to the person’s senses. The aim of
RPWD-2016 is primarily to ensure that PwDs are duly empowered, in light
of the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and its
Optional Protocol published on 13th December, 2006 and entered into force
75.     It is submitted that Section 14 of RPWD-2016 provides for the
appointment of a limited guardian for a person who is unable to take legally
binding decisions. However, Section 14 itself postulates that a PwD is
enabled and empowered to take decisions in consultation with the limited
guardian. Specific reference is made to the language used in Section 14 -
‘full and effective participation’, ‘unable to take legally binding decisions’,
‘limited guardianship’, ‘system of joint decision’, ‘will of the person with
disability’. Thus, it is submitted that Section 14 cannot extend to persons
who are unable to take decisions in consultation with a guardian. RPWD-
2016 would therefore only extend to persons with partial impairments and
not to persons such as Mr. DMP.
76.     The language used in RPWD-2016 is contrasted with the language
used in Section 2(s) of MHA-2017, which uses terminology such as
‘substantial disorder’ and ‘grossly impairs’, to argue that in the case of a
person suffering from a condition such as FTD, RPWD-2016 would have no
77.     Reliance is also placed on Section 13, as per which a PwD can alter,
modify or dismantle the support provided to him/her, to argue that the intent
behind it is to empower a PwD to control his/her own financial affairs. It is
submitted that as per order dated 23rd July, 2021, it is clear that Mr. DMP
does not have any comprehension of or powers of decision making. Reliance
is placed upon the medical assessment of the DMP by both the Neurologists
- Dr. M.V. Padma, Professor and HOD, Neurology, Chief Neuroscience
Centre, AIIMS, New Delhi and Dr. Achal Srivastava, Professor, Department
of Neurology, AIIMS, New Delhi, as recorded in order dated 23rd July,
2021. Specific reliance is placed upon the fact that both doctors were
unanimous in their opinion that no major decisions can be taken by Mr.
78.     On the strength of Section 13(5), it is submitted that any person who
is providing support to a PwD ought not to exercise undue influence over
them. However, in the present case, the disownment affidavits have been
executed in 2016 and 2017, by which time FTD had already set in. Thus, it
is submitted that these disownment affidavits are not fully the acts of the
79.     Insofar as the parens patriae jurisdiction of this Court is concerned,
ld. Senior Counsel distinguishes the situation in the United Kingdom with
India. Reference is made to the judgment in In re F. (Mental Patients:
Sterilisation) to demonstrate the manner in which the parens patriae
jurisdiction of the Court was revoked in the United Kingdom. It is submitted
that even in the United Kingdom, the parens patriae jurisdiction, which
existed for several hundreds of years, was taken away only with the
enactment of the Mental Health Act, 1959 and the revocation of the Crown’s
Warrant, which was signed at the time when the Mental Health Act, 1959
was enacted. Reliance is also placed upon the judgment of the Supreme
Court of Canada in E v. Eve (1986) 2 SCR 388, where the Court cautioned
that this jurisdiction cannot be taken away unless and until it is removed by
a specific legislation.
80.     Ld. Senior counsel submit that in the Mental Health Act, 1959 of the
United Kingdom, specific provisions were enacted to deal with issues
relating to the financial affairs of patients. In the absence of such provisions
in India, it cannot be inferred that the parens patriae jurisdiction does not
exist. Reliance is placed upon the judgment of the Bombay High Court in
Ali Muntazir Abbas Lehry & Anr. v. Secretary, Department of Health and
Family Welfare, Mantralaya & Ors., [W.P. (L.) 2851 of 2018, decided on
25th October, 2018] wherein a person suffering from FTD was diagnosed by
a medical team and his son was appointed as his guardian. Reliance is also
placed on the judgment of the Supreme Court in Shafin Jahan (supra),
wherein the Court has cited with approval judgments from various
jurisdictions, to emphasize that the need for providing care for citizens under
this jurisdiction is now not restricted to persons who are mentally ill but it
extends to vulnerable adults who can be subjected to undue influence, duress
or any other coercive means.
81.     The submission of Dr. Singhvi, ld. Senior Counsel appearing for Ms.
UD is that the factual matrix of this case is different from what has been
projected by the Petitioner and the two sons of Mr. DMP. It is submitted that
Mr. DMP is comfortable with the persons with whom he is currently living
i.e., Ms. UD and Mrs. KR. Taking Mr. DMP away from them would put
enormous pressure on his entire wellbeing. Hence, the current arrangement
ought not to be disturbed.
82.     Insofar as the legal position with respect to the appointment of a
guardian is concerned, a chart is placed on record tracing the various
legislations in respect of persons with mental illnesses. After going through
the historical background leading up to the enactment of the RPWD-2016,
the following propositions are urged by Dr. Singhvi:
(i)     The MHA-1987 had vested the power of granting guardianship to
District Courts under Sections 50 to 55. However, the MHA-2017,
eliminates guardianship totally and completely.
(ii)    Guardianship jurisdiction exists exclusively with the District Court.
(iii)   Only limited guardianship is recognized under the RPWD-2016.
83.     The specific submission in respect of RPWD-2016 is that Section 2(s)
is quite wide and includes persons suffering from any kind of mental illness.
Reliance is placed on Bombay Anand Bhavan Restaurant v. ESI Corpn.,
2009 (9) SCC 61 and Edukanti Kistamma and Others v. S.Venkataraeddy
and others, 2010 (1) SCC 756 to argue that RPWD-2016 is a liberal Act and
the interpretation of such an Act has to be purposive. A narrow and pedantic
approach cannot be taken and the statute’s utility cannot be watered down in
any manner. It is thus submitted that the Court cannot cut down on the
applicability of RPWD-2016 in the manner in which the Petitioner and the
supporting Respondents are attempting to.
84.     It is submitted that the provisions of RPWD-2016 only provide for
limited guardianship under Section 14, read along with Rule 7 of the RPWD
(Delhi) Rules-2018. The said Act does not recognize plenary guardianship at
all and the entire jurisdiction for granting limited guardianship lies with the
District Court. Section 14(2) also makes it abundantly clear that any
guardian appointed under any law would be deemed to be a limited
85.     Reference is made to Clause 13(1) of the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities Bill, 2014, which recognized plenary guardianship under
extraordinary circumstances by way of a proviso. It is submitted that when
the final statute was passed, the said provision did not find its presence in
the Act. Thus, it is submitted that the guardianship that has been sought for
by the Petitioner in this case is not at all recognized in law and writ
jurisdiction cannot be exercised by this Court to grant a guardianship which
is legally unrecognizable.
86.     Coming to the MHA-2017, reference is made to the Statement of
Object and Reasons of the Act to show that it only deals with the healthcare
to be provided for mentally ill people and not with guardianship or
management of finances and property. The Chapter headings are also relied
upon to argue that nowhere in the MHA-2017 is there any mention of
appointment of a guardian. Reliance is placed on the judgments in Latha TB
v. UOI, (2021) 4 KLT 17 and Govindraj v. Vijaykumar [C.R.P.(PD) No.615
of 2020 & C.M.P.No.3229 of 2020, decided on 21st July, 2020], which
judgments specifically deal with Section 14 of the MHA-2017 and RPWD-
2016 to hold that the MHA-2017 does not provide for appointment of a
87.     On the issue of maintainability, Dr. Singhvi submits that as a matter
of law, the parens patriae jurisdiction cannot be invoked if a statute is
applicable. Reliance is placed upon the judgment of the House of Lords in
In re F. (Mental Patient: Sterilisation), [1990] 2 A.C. 1. Dr. Singhvi
submits that the RPWD-2016 does not exclude property from the enquiry by
the designated authority, which deals with the care of a mentally ill person.
It is submitted that all these issues are to be gone into by the designated
authority by adducing oral evidence and not in writ jurisdiction where
factual enquiry would not be permitted. Thereafter, reliance is placed upon
E. v. Eve, [1986] 2 S.C.R. 388 passed by the Canadian Supreme Court to
argue that the parens patriae jurisdiction cannot be exercised for the benefit
of a third party.
88.     It is further submitted that the exercise of parens patriae jurisdiction
cannot be contrary to the doctrine of privacy and the right to live with
dignity. Reliance is placed upon the judgments of the Supreme Court in
Anuj Garg & Ors. v. Hotel Association of India, (2008) 3 SCC 1 and
Subhash Jain v. Rajeshwari Shivam & Ors. [Civil Appeal No. 2848/2021,
decided on 20th July, 2021]. Reliance is also placed upon the judgment of
the Supreme Court in Shafin Jahan v. Ashokan K.M. & Ors., (2018) 16
SCC 368, wherein the Supreme Court recognizes the right of any person to
choose the partner of his choice, within or without marriage.
89.     Ld. Senior Counsel relies upon various international conventions to
emphasize that the changes in the law bear in mind the interests of the
mentally ill person. He submits that even people with lucid intervals need
not be confined to care institutions and should be allowed to live in familiar
surroundings. It is submitted that neither Mr. DMP nor the parties on behalf
of the Respondents have any objection to the regular visits by Mrs. SD,
accompanied by a nursing attendant and one family member. However, to
deprive Mr. DMP of the ecosystem to which he is used to i.e., living along
with Ms. UD and Mrs. KR, under the support of Mr. US, would be
completely violative of Mr. DMP’s right to privacy and dignity.
90.     Reliance is placed upon pages 1593, 1604, 1613 and 1616 to argue
that the contentions being raised today are the same as those raised in an
application filed before the ld. Division Bench, which was dismissed with
costs vide order dated 23rd October, 2020.
91.     Two judgments, being Minu Seth v. Binu Seth, AIR 2018 Delhi 54
and Avinash Chander Mookhy v. General Public & Ors., 2014(3) RCR
(Civil) 1031, are thereafter relied upon to emphasize that the conduct of the
person seeking appointment as a guardian would be extremely relevant
while exercising parens patriae jurisdiction.
92.     Insofar as Mrs. SD is concerned, it is submitted that she herself is a
person who is around 76 years of age and who has been using her thumb
impression to sign the pleadings before this Court. Her medical condition
does not entitle her to be appointed as the guardian of Mr. DMP by any
stretch of one’s imagination.
93.     Ld. Senior counsel highlights the fact that both the sons of Mr. DMP
were disowned by him. One was disowned in 2016 and the second in 2017,
which was a conscious act which Mr. DMP took prior to him having been
diagnosed with a mental illness. It is submitted that the factum of
disownment not being under challenge, judicial review of the two
disownment affidavits is not possible in this writ petition. One of the sons is
stated to have made completely unfounded allegations against Mr. DMP and
given media briefings with a view to embarrass him in public. It is submitted
that the mere fact that the language in the affidavits of disownment is
identical would not take away from the fact that Mr. DMP took a conscious
step in this regard.
94.     Insofar as the grandsons of Mr. DMP are concerned, videos were
relied upon by ld. Sr. counsel to show that their conduct towards Mr. DMP
is vicious as they have taken to the media to criticize their grandfather.
95.     It is submitted that the Petitioner’s side, including the sons of Mr.
DMP, have grossly abused the process of the Court and have sought the
same reliefs in multiple proceedings. Reliance is placed on a chart to
demonstrate that the intention of the Petitioner has been to keep approaching
different forums for the same relief.
96.     Various allegations which have been made against Ms. UD are
objected to by Dr. Singhvi on the ground that Ms. UD was, in fact, the
person who kept the family together and brought back Mrs. SD from Patna.
Reliance is placed upon various photographs to establish that Ms. UD was
not a stranger to the family. It is submitted that since 1981, the entire family
has been living together and Ms. UD has been accepted as the wife of Mr.
97.     It is submitted that Respondent No.5 has repeatedly asserted, as
recorded in order dated 2nd June, 2021, that she is not interested in the
money or estate of Mr. DMP. She has even filed an affidavit to this effect.
Ld. Senior counsel submits that if the intention of Respondent No.5 was to
siphon off the funds or the estate of Mr. DMP, she could have done so
earlier as she has been enjoying control over Mr. DMP’s assets, along with
the brother of Mr. DMP. The fact that the estate is well preserved shows that
Respondent No.5 has no such intentions.
98.     On a query put by the Court as to who would be the natural guardian
for a married person, the submission of Dr. Singhvi, ld. Sr. counsel is that
this question ought to be worded in the reverse i.e., whether there is any
inhibition in appointing a person, whose companionship Mr. DMP has
enjoyed for the last approximately 47 years, as his guardian? Reliance is
placed upon Rules 7(6) and 7(7) of the RPWD (Delhi) Rules-2018 to argue
that there are various relationships that are recognized in the said provisions
and the ultimate test would be as to what would be in the best interests of the
DMP. A view has to be taken not from the perspective of a third-party or in
the interest of a third-party but in the interest of Mr. DMP.
99.     It is submitted that irrespective of whether Respondent No.5 is the
wife of Mr. DMP or his companion/partner, unless and until there has been
any misdemeanour which she has exhibited qua Mr. DMP, any other
conduct of hers qua third parties would be irrelevant. If Mr. DMP expressed
his desire to live with Respondent No.5, this ought to be respected by the
Court and there is no prohibition on the Court appointing her only because
of her status as a companion. The Court is not concerned with a legally valid
relationship or a legally recognized relationship, such as a blood relative or a
spouse, but what is important is only the wish of Mr. DMP and the benefit of
100. A query was put to Dr. Singhvi as to when was the first time Mr. DMP
was diagnosed with FTD or any other mental illness and since when has he been
administered medicines in respect of any such illness. Dr. Singhvi responded by
referring to order dated 2nd June, 2021, wherein Mrs. SD is recorded as stating that
the first time she noticed changes in Mr. DMP’s behaviour was in May, 2018 and
he was formally diagnosed with FTD only in September, 2019. When he was
formally diagnosed with FTD, Mr. DMP was advised to continue with Tab.
Aricep. Later, he was advised to start Tab. Admenta by Dr. Kameshwar
Prasad and Dr. Nand Kumar, AIIMS from February, 2020.
101. However, it is submitted that the fact that fleeting symptoms
of memory loss may be there for a brief period, does not mean that Mr.
DMP had no consciousness while dealing with daily activities. In fact, from
1997 onwards, he has taken oath 5 times. Photographs of Mr. DMP from
Republic Day, where he is interacting with various dignitaries, are relied
upon. Mr. DMP is also stated to have travelled to 87 countries since 1997.
The doctors have also supported the fact that the medicines being
administered to the DMP are proper and no fault has been found with the
current care being given to the DMP.
102. The judgments cited by the Petitioner, as well as the supporting
Respondents, are distinguished on the ground that all the judgments deal
with comatose patients who do not have any lucid intervals and in which
cases there is no contest by any family member.
103. Mr. Harish Salve, ld. Senior counsel appears on behalf of Mrs. KR,
one of the daughters-in-law of Mr. DMP. He challenges the maintainability
of the present writ petition on the ground that the present petition has not
been filed in accordance with law.
104. Ld. Senior counsel submits that under the Guardians and Wards Act,
1890, which only applies to minors, Civil Courts have a right to administer
the estate on behalf of the minor who does not have any guardian or parent
etc. Even in the case of a mentally ill person, the matter would have to be
filed in properly constituted proceedings before the Civil Court and not in a
writ petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
105. After taking the Court through The Family Courts Act, 1984, as also
the RPWD-2016 it is submitted that both the statutes do not deal with
persons with mental disabilities. Accordingly, a petition can only be
entertained by a Court exercising original civil jurisdiction under the parens
patriae doctrine, which can be invoked under Section 9 of the CPC. The test
reports, if any, after due medical examination of Mr. DMP, would have to be
verified by cross-examination of the medical expert. Since the matter
involves the taking away of a person’s right to administer his own estate or
think of his own welfare, the short-cut writ jurisdiction cannot be invoked.
106. Reference is made to paragraphs 5-6 of the writ petition wherein the
Petitioner seeks to invoke Sections 53 and 54(4) of the MHA-1987.
Admittedly, the said Act is no longer in operation and there are no similar
provisions under the MHA-2017.
107. Mr. Gopal Subramanium, ld. Sr. counsel has also made submissions
on behalf of Respondent 6. Ld. Senior counsel raises the following major
i.      That in order for a writ petition to be maintainable, there has to be a
public law element involved in the petition. Since, in the present case, there
is no public law element involved and the issues are among private family
members, the appropriate remedy is a suit under Order XXXIIA CPC.
ii.     There are no judicially manageable standards in respect of how a writ
petition like this has to be dealt with, inasmuch as there are allegations made
which are factual in nature.
iii.    The Court has to bear in mind the dignity/privacy of the individual
i.e., Mr. DMP, as also Respondent Nos. 5 and 6 who are providing care to
iv.     The motive behind filing the present writ petition is completely
clouded inasmuch as in the earlier writ petition for habeas corpus, being
W.P. (Crl.) 2255/2019 titled R.S v. State & Ors., allegations were also made
against the mother. The Division Bench made an arrangement in respect of
the care to be given to the mother and the aunt. However, insofar as the
present writ petition is concerned, the mother herself not being in a very
stable medical condition, the averments being made on behalf of the mother
are in doubt.
108. Ld. Senior Counsel relies upon three medical reports which have been
placed on record by Senior Neurologists/Psychiatrics. The submission is that
Mr. DMP is not completely disorientated and in fact, has various moments
of lucidity and awareness. Therefore, he cannot be held to be a completely
disabled person who requires a guardian to be appointed.
109. Various photographs of Mr. DMP along with Respondent No. 5 and
other family members are relied upon to argue that Respondent No. 5 has
been recognized as a member of the family and is, in fact, publicly treated as
the wife of Mr. DMP. Mr. DMP is well looked after by Respondent Nos. 5
and 6 and therefore, the current arrangement ought not to be disturbed in any
manner whatsoever.
110. The documents which have been filed in a sealed cover, including the
bank statements of the joint accounts of Mr. DMP and Ms. UD and the list
of immovable properties and term deposits, are relied upon to show that Mr.
DMP has always held various assets jointly with Ms. UD. It is submitted
that there is no misuse of any assets of Mr. DMP in any manner whatsoever
and Mr. DMP is conducting his own business and is capable of doing so.
111. Reference is made to order dated 20th September, 2019 in W.P. (Crl.)
2255/2019 to submit that the said order passed by the ld. Division Bench
was a consensual arrangement wherein it was agreed that the Petitioner
could visit Mr. DMP whenever she wanted. However, since 2019, the
acrimony that has been created is extremely high and there are several
criminal complaints and cases being filed by the parties against each other.
This may have resulted in the arrangement recorded by the ld. Division
Bench not being fully implemented. However, the grant of any relief in this
writ petition would interfere with the arrangement put in place by the ld.
112. It is further submitted that the credentials of the Petitioner – Mrs. SD
are under severe doubt and it appears that the two sons who are estranged
from their father are using the name of Mrs. SD to file various proceedings
and make allegations against Respondent Nos.5 and 6. Reliance is placed on
a report filed by the police in a connected writ petition which shows that the
son of Mrs. SD is in fact living with her in Vasant Vihar, contrary to the
orders passed by the Division Bench.
113. Mr. Subramanium has taken this Court through various orders passed
by the Magistrate, as also by the Sessions Judge, to emphasise that the
criminal complaints being filed with various police stations are all mala fide
in nature inasmuch as the same allegations are being repeated across these
proceedings. Reference is made to the orders passed by the Division Bench
on 5th September, 2019 and 20th September, 2019 in the habeas corpus
petition, being W.P.(Crl.) 2255/2019 and I.A. 14889/2020 filed in
W.P.(Crl.) 2255/2019, which was withdrawn with Rs.10 lakhs being
imposed as costs.
114. Emphasis is also laid on the SDM’s order dated 27th October, 2020,
which directed production of Mr. DMP before the SDM with medical
assistance through Mrs. SD, which was challenged before the Sessions
Judge. The Sessions Judge clearly notes that wrongful confinement of Mr.
DMP was not established. Various suspicious circumstances surrounding the
record of the SDM were also noticed by the Sessions Judge. The conclusion
of the Sessions Judge, that the proceedings before the SDM were completely
mala fide, is relied on.
115. While conceding that the parens patriae jurisdiction exists with this
Court, Mr. Subramanium submits that the petition ought not to be
entertained owing to the conduct of the Petitioner and her two sons.
116. Mr. Mohit Mathur, ld. Senior Counsel has also appeared on behalf of
117. Ld. Senior Counsel submits that the Court has been sought to be
prejudiced by selective readings of the statements made to the police. Thus,
no credibility should be attached to such statements. It is submitted that
Respondent No.6 has been made a target by various family members in view
of an application moved by her seeking to evict the son of Mr. DMP from
the Vasant Vihar property where Mrs. SD is currently residing. It is denied
that she has siphoned off any funds. It is submitted that she has already
given an undertaking about funds, moveable and immovable property etc. It
is further submitted that the ld. Division Bench has directly interacted with
her and deemed it fit to appoint her as the care giver, which would itself
show that the Division Bench expressed confidence in her character and
118. As regards the conduct of the Petitioner and the supporting
respondents, it is submitted that the relationship between the son and Mr.
DMP was so strained that in the marriage of both his grandsons in 2018, Mr.
DMP was not even invited.
119. It is submitted that the medical report of 1997 was not filed with the
original writ petition and the credibility of those documents is not yet
proved. Thus, the same ought not to be considered.
120. In so far as the GPA dated 14th January, 2020, which was executed by
Mr. DMP, is concerned, it is submitted that the entire purpose of the said
GPA was to make various statutory compliances and to enter into leases etc.
There was no ill-intention and in fact, only three properties are covered in
121. On a query as to how Mrs. KR allowed Mrs. SD and Mr. US’s wife to
live at the residence in such an uncomfortable manner, it is submitted that
she was herself partly living in Delhi and partly living in Mumbai. Mr. DMP
was the man of the house and had an overbearing personality and therefore
she did not interfere in the manner in which the house was being run. It is
further stated that she is willing to take care of Mrs. SD, as her daughter in
law. Allegations as to confinement and physical abuse are denied, though
the same are contained in the status report. The denial is on the ground that
only the charge sheet has been filed but the charges are yet to be framed. It
is argued that the Court ought not to go into the allegations, apart from what
is recorded in the orders passed by the Division Bench, as the same would
affect the trial of the said proceedings.
122. On a query from the Court as to how Ms. UD came back to the
Safdarjung house after the order of the Division Bench, it is submitted that
the order of the Division Bench applied only for a period of four weeks.
Submissions on behalf of Mr. DMP’s brother
123. Mr. Sethi, ld. Sr. Counsel appearing for Mr. US submits that he is the
younger brother of Mr. DMP.
124. The father of Mr. US and Mr. DMP passed away when the brother of
Mr. DMP was two years old. Therefore, Mr. US considers Mr. DMP like a
father and he was treated by Mr. DMP like a son. Mr. US’s family consists
of his wife and five children i.e., four daughters and one son who are all
married. The family of Mr. US used to reside for long periods in Delhi along
with Mr. DMP and his family and they were treated as one homogenous
125. Ld. Senior counsel submits that Mr. DMP was always actively
involved in politics and therefore, the companies of Mr. DMP were
entrusted to Mr. US. It is submitted that Mr. US has been managing the
companies since 1979. The companies which are being looked after by him
have manufacturing facilities in Bhopal, Sikkim, Himachal Pradesh and a
corporate office in Mumbai. Mr. US does not own any shares and he
continues to manage all the companies at the pleasure of Mr. DMP.
126. It is submitted that no proceedings have been initiated in respect of
the management of these three companies. In so far as the shares of Mrs. SD
and the two sons are concerned, it is submitted that they did have
shareholdings, however, these have either been transferred or gifted. Though
a criminal complaint was filed by Mrs. SD on the ground that her signatures
were forged, the report submitted in those proceedings has found to the
127. Ld. Senior counsel further submits that all the three companies are
doing extremely well and their turn over and profits have grown by leaps
and bounds. In the last few years, the profit of the companies has increased
by 300%. There is no grievance by any of the family members that the
companies are being mis-managed or that the funds are being diverged/mis-
appropriated. None of the family members have approached the NCLT,
which would be the appropriate forum. Even if Mr. DMP’s mental condition
deteriorates, it would not make any difference as Mr. US has been running
the companies since the last 40 years.
128. Ld. Senior counsel then challenges the maintainability of the present
petition by relying upon a caselaw compilation containing the following
i.      Sahibzada v. State of MP, AIR 1960 SC 768 - This case is
relied on to argue that a writ court cannot appoint a guardian
even in respect of minors and the proper remedy is to file a suit.
ii.     Dhulabhai v. State of Madhya Pradesh, (1968) 3 SCR 662 –
This case is relied on to urge the proposition that exclusion of a
civil suit cannot be readily inferred by the Court. In the present
case, the appropriate remedy would be to relegate the party to a
civil suit under Section 9 CPC.
iv.     M. Govindaraj (supra)- This is a case under the Mental
Healthcare Act, 2017 where the district judge has been clearly
recognized as a competent authority to deal with mental health
disputes.
129. In response to a query put by the Court as to how the events which
transpired before the ld. Division Bench did not come to his notice prior to
the Division bench taking cognizance thereof, he submits that he cannot be
expected to control the adults living with Mr. DMP, so long as he is assured
that Mr. DMP is fully taken care of.
130. The petition is opposed on the ground that Mr. DMP is with the
people that he wished to be with i.e., Ms. UD and Mrs. KR. Any attempt by
the Court to vary the situation would negatively impact his mental condition.
There is no allegation by the Petitioner that the assets or estate of Mr. DMP
have been destroyed or wasted away. It is further submitted that Mrs. SD
herself has various ailments and would, therefore, not be a proper person to
be appointed as Mr. DMP’s guardian. The conduct of Mr. DMP’s sons is
also doubted. Reliance is placed on order dated 13thJanuary, 2021 passed in
Cont. Cas. (C) 892/2020 filed by Mrs. KR against one of the sons of Mr.
DMP for residing in the Vasant Kunj property of Mr. DMP under the guise
of visiting his ailing mother i.e., the Petitioner.
131. On the issue of the applicable law for appointing a guardian, Mr.
Sandeep Sethi, ld. Sr. counsel has submitted before the Court that the stand
of the Central Government in another matter involving a person who is
mentally ill is that in such cases, the RPWD-2016 would apply and not the
MHA-2017. He submits that he would email a copy of the said counter
affidavit to the Court.
132. Ld. Senior Counsel has thereafter sought to argue that the RPWD-
2016 is, in fact, the later enactment. The dates of introduction, passing and
notification of the two Acts are set out below:
Introduced in             19th August, 2013          24th February, 2014
Passed on                 8th August, 2016           16th December, 2016
Notified on               7th April, 2017            19th April, 2017
133. It is submitted that the RPWD-2016 is the only statute which deals
with the guardianship of a PwD. RPWD-2016 being the subsequent Act, all
other laws, including the MHA-2017, would be deemed to have been
examined. Reference is made to the judgment in Vandana Tyagi & Anr. v.
Govt. of NCTD & Ors. [W.P.(C)No.11003/2019, decided on 7th January,
2020] where the person was in a comatose condition and in that context the
ld. Single Judge held that a comatose person is not covered by the RPWD-
2016. Thus, it is submitted that it is only in the case of comatose patients
that the RPWD-2016 would not apply.
134. Countering Mr. Jethmalani’s argument that RPWD-2016 is not
applicable, he submits that there are various provisions in the Act which
show that different stages and measures of disability and impairment are
covered in the Act. Reference is made to Section 2(r) defining ‘persons with
bench march disability’, Section 2(s) defining ‘person with disability’,
Section 2(z)(c) defining ‘specified disability’, the explanation to Section 14,
the schedule to the Act as well as the Preamble to the Act.
135. Ld. Senior Counsel submits that the legislature was conscious of the
fact that some persons may not be competent to take legally binding
decisions. Despite this, a mechanism of consultation is provided for.
Reliance is placed on the definition of ‘mental behavior’ in the Schedule to
the RPWD-2016 in which substantial disorders are also covered. It is in this
background that Section 14 has to be considered. It is submitted that under
Section 14, the guardianship, even in the case of total disability, is limited in
nature. It is meant for a specific period, for a specific decision and for a
specific situation. The guardian would have to be guided by the will and
desire of the subject. If the mentally ill person cannot express his will, the
same would have to be determined by taking surrounding facts into
consideration, such as written documents or any other form of expression.
The guardianship cannot be plenary.
136. It is submitted that Mr. DMP is clearly covered by the RPWD-2016.
The Court can consider appointment of a limited guardian for the purposes
of handling the financial affairs, property etc. of Mr. DMP. Directions can
also be issued in respect of the place where Mr. DMP would be residing and
the kind of mental assistance to be granted. The will of Mr. DMP could be
ascertained from written documents and other forms of expressions. The
Court can continue to review the situation, however, no plenary power can
be given to the guardian.
137. On facts, Mr. Sethi contrasts the stand taken in the habeas corpus
petition in 2019 and the present petition. In the former, it was submitted that
Mr. DMP and Ms. UD have confined Mrs. SD. There is no allegation about
Mr. DMP’s mental capacity in the habeas corpus petition. However, in the
present petition, allegations have been made to the effect that there was a
pre-existing mental condition since 1997. These grounds have been taken by
way of various applications. If the date of 1997 is considered, it would be 21
years prior to the habeaus corpus petition. It is submitted that there can be
no explanation as to why the relatives did not deem it fit to approach the
Court about the mental condition of Mr. DMP earlier. This proves the
malafide conduct of the family of Mr. DMP.
138. Insofar as the differences between the UK Act and the Indian Acts on
mental health are concerned, ld. Senior counsel submits that this Court
cannot supplant the legislative intent with its own wisdom. The ld. Division
Bench of this Court in the habeas corpus petition could have appointed the
guardian but it did not.
139. Ld. Senior counsel ends his submissions by stating that his client is
willing to act as the guardian of Mr. DMP.
140. The facts of the present case are extremely stark. Mr. DMP is
mentally ill and is suffering from `Fronto Temporal Dementia’. He barely
has any understanding of the happenings around him. He has a large family
consisting of his wife, sons, daughters-in-law, grandchildren and his brother.
He also has a companion who claims to be his wife. The family of Mr.
DMP, including his companion, are split into two groups before this Court.
One group consists of Mr. DMP’s companion, his brother, his daughter-in-
law from his deceased son and her children. The second group consists of
Mr. DMP’s wife, his two sons and their wives as well as his four grandsons.
Mr. DMP himself is oblivious to the large scale of the disputes between the
two groups within his family, who have more than 50 cases, mostly
criminal, pending against each other. In the present petition, this Court is
• Who should take decisions relating to the medical treatment of Mr.
• Who should be given control of Mr. DMP’s movable and immovable
141. On behalf of the Petitioner and the supporting Respondents, the plea
is for invoking the parens patriae jurisdiction of this Court. The contesting
Respondents challenge the maintainability of this petition and argue that this
Court ought not to exercise parens patriae jurisdiction. It is their submission
that the prevalent arrangement ought not to be disturbed. Since there are
several aspects to be dealt with, this Court has broadly categorised them as
b) Legislative Framework for Mentally Ill Persons and Guardianship;
c) Interplay between the MHA-2017 and the RPWD-2016; and
d) Analysis on Guardianship.
The Court deals with each of these aspects hereinbelow:
142. There are various medical reports that have been placed on record.
The reports which were part of the Division Bench proceedings as also the
reports filed before this Court including the statements of the doctors as
recorded by this Court, are not in dispute. Other reports filed by parties
include reports from doctors/hospitals in Mumbai, reports from Apollo
hospital Delhi etc., Some of these reports have been challenged during
submissions, but owing to the reputation of these doctors and hospitals, for
the purposes of this petition, the same are being considered.
143. A perusal of the medical reports placed before this Court, the
submissions made by the doctors and the statements made by the various
family members reveals that Mr. DMP initially reported transient memory
loss in 1997. Mr. DMP has also been suffering transient ischaemic attacks
and small strokes since then. In 2013, as per one of the sons of Mr. DMP, he
was diagnosed with Encephalopathy. The MRI reports of Mr. DMP also
record that Encephalopathy existed since 2013. By 2019, when Mr. DMP
was admitted to AIIMS, according to Dr. MV Padma, as per the history
recorded therein, changes were noticed in Mr. DMP’s behaviour since 2017
i.e., two years before he was admitted to AIIMS. In 2019, Mr. DMP was
conclusively diagnosed with FTD by the medical board constituted by the
ld. Division Bench of this Court in W.P (Crl.) No.2255/2019. Since then, he
has been under medication for FTD. The separate reports: (i) report dated 5th
December, 2020, filed by a doctor at the Apollo Hospital; and (ii) report
dated 1st December, 2020, filed by a doctor at AIIMS, both before the
Metropolitan Magistrate, are sketchy and without any reasoning. These
reports issued by AIIMS and Apollo Hospital seem to suggest that there was
some improvement in his behaviour and he was able to manage some of his
daily activities. However, the reports of 2020 clearly record that Mr. DMP is
suffering from Major Cognitive Disorder.
144. In June, 2021, when this Court interacted with Mr. DMP, Mr. DMP
was clearly not able to comprehend most of his activities. He required
complete help, even for his daily activities. The Local Commissioner
appointed by this Court has confirmed this position after visiting Mr. DMP’s
residence on at least 6 to 7 occasions.
145. The Local Commissioner has submitted three reports i.e., on 3rd June,
2021, 16th July, 2021 and 28th August, 2021. The reports of the Local
Commissioner show that Mr. DMP could not answer any questions about his
surroundings or his daily routine. He could not recall the name of his wife or
children and did not recognise Mrs.SD. Mrs. SD had to time and again
introduce herself as his wife. He referred to his wife as bhagwan, madam or
pani. He repeated words such as bhagwan, pehalwan, paani and paisa
repeatedly, without context. He was not coherent in his speech. The
conversations were cordial and congenial. On one occasion, while walking
to the rest room, he sat on the floor and required help to get up.
146. The Local Commissioner has also filed various videos and
photographs, which were taken during her visits, which show that:
• Mr. DMP is very distressed in a video call stated to be made between
Mr. DMP and Ms. UD, during the four-week period in which Ms. UD
was asked to stay separately from Mr. DMP by the ld. Divison Bench
• Mr. DMP and Mrs. SD look comfortable holding hands
147. The Medical Board constituted by this Court on 4th June, 2021,
informed the Court on 23rd July, 2021 as under:
“4. Dr. M.V. Padma explained the nature of fronto-
temporal dementia to the Court and as per her, this
condition is worse than a condition of Alzheimer's and
would become worse over time. She stated that in 2019
when the DMP was admitted in the AIIMS, as per the
history recorded therein, the changes were noticed in
DMP’s behavior since 2017 i.e., two years before he was
admitted to AIIMS. He presently requires assistance in
most activities including visiting the bathroom, etc. At
that time, when the DMP was admitted in AIIMS, the
MRI of the brain and the PET-SCAN of the brain was
also conducted. According to her, the DMP is incapable
of taking any major decisions and this was the position
even in 2019. According to her, the same was recorded in
the discharge summary when the DMP was discharged
from AIIMS.
5. Dr. Achal Srivastava who is a Professor of Neurology
at AIIMS, informed the Court that he had examined the
DMP even in 2019. At that time, in 2019 the DMP was
capable of taking smaller decisions such as visiting
bathroom etc, however, according to him even then, the
DMP was incapable of taking any major decisions. He
also states that in comparison with the condition of the
DMP in 2019, the DMP’s condition has further
deteriorated and he requires support for even all the
basic activities much more than what it was in 2019.
6. Dr. Nitin Naik who is Professor of cardiology has
stated that the DMP had a history of chest pain and in
March, 2020 he had undergone angiography. He is
currently being given medical treatment in respect of his
heart problem which is satisfactory.”
148. From the above, it is clear that Mr. DMP is a mentally ill person
suffering from FTD who is no longer able to manage any of his affairs,
including his daily activities. Thus, all decisions on behalf of Mr. DMP were
being taken by Ms. US and Mrs. KR until order dated 8th September, 2021,
on which date this Court appointed an Interim Guardian.
b)      Legislative Framework for Mentally Ill Persons and Guardianship
149. The Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 (hereinafter, ‘GWA’) deals with
the appointment of guardians for minors. The guardian under the GWA is a
person who has the care of the minor and/or the minor’s property. As per
Section 5 read with Section 17 of the GWA, the Court can appoint a
guardian, guided by the welfare of a minor. Such Court is the District Court
having jurisdiction to entertain an application for appointment as guardian.
Section 12 of the GWA contemplates passing of interlocutory orders for
production of the minor, and for interim protection of person and property,
as the Court thinks proper. If the minor has several properties, Section 15 of
the GWA provides, that the Court can appoint separate guardians for any
one or more of the properties. While considering what is in the welfare of
the minor, the factors to be considered are – age, sex and religion of the
minor, character and capacity of the proposed guardian, his nearness of kin
to the minor, the wish of any deceased parent, and any existing or previous
relations of the proposed guardian with the minor or his property. The
preference of the minor, if the minor is capable of an intelligent preference,
may also be considered. No one can be appointed as a guardian against the
will of the minor. As per Section 20, the guardians stand in a fiduciary
relationship to the ward and cannot make any profit out of his office. Any
transactions concerning purchase of each other’s property, entered into
between the guardian and the minor, would also be within the ambit of the
fiduciary relationship. The guardian can be given such remuneration as the
Court thinks fit. The guardian has to take care of the minor’s support, the
minor’s health, and education. If the guardian is appointed qua property, the
guardian has to deal with it carefully as a man of ordinary prudence would,
as it were his own. All acts which are reasonable and proper for the
realization, protection or benefit of the property, may be done by the
guardian. Section 29 however, caveats that the guardian would not be
entitled to mortgage, charge, transfer, sale, gift, exchange or in any manner
part with the immovable property of the ward, without previous permission
of the Court. Similarly, without the Court’s permission, the guardian cannot
lease any part of the property for a term exceeding five years or one year
beyond the ward becoming a major. Section 31 further clarifies that this
permission of the Court would not be granted except in case of necessity or
for an evident advantage to the ward. Section 43 also provides that the Court
may make an order regulating the conduct or proceedings of the guardian.
150. The MHA-1987 was enacted as the law for treatment and care of
mentally ill persons, and for making better provisions with respect to their
property and affairs. While this statute has now been repealed, it would be
useful to peruse certain provisions of the same, for a better understanding of
the more recent enactments, as also considering the reliance placed upon
these provisions, in the submissions of the parties. The Preamble to the
“An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to
the treatment and care of mentally ill persons, to make
better provision with respect to their property and
affairs and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.”
151. As per Section 2(l) of this statute, any person who was in need of
treatment by reason of any mental disorder other than mental retardation,
was treated as a mentally ill person. For regulation, development, direction
and co-ordination with respect of mental health services, under Sections 3
and 4 of MHA-1987, the Central Government established the Central
Authority for mental health services and the State Governments established
the State Authority. Large scale creation of psychiatric hospitals and nursing
homes was also contemplated. The manner in which mentally ill persons
were to be treated by such organisations was also contemplated.
152. For the present purposes, Chapter VI of the MHA-1987 is most
relevant, which contemplated the following stage-wise custody and
management of the person and property of the mentally ill person.
153. Under Section 50, a judicial inquisition could be sought into the
mental condition of such person by any of the relatives or by certain public
functionaries. The District Court was to appoint two or more persons, as the
assessors. Once the inquisition was complete, the District Court was to
record its findings as to whether the persons were in fact, mentally ill or not,
and whether the person was incapable of taking care of himself and of
managing his property or incapable of managing property only. The District
Court after recording its findings could appoint a guardian to take care of the
mentally ill person and to be the manager for management of his property. If
the person was capable of taking care of himself but required only a
manager, then an order for appointment of a manager was to be passed. If
the Court deemed it fit, the same person could be appointed as a guardian
and as a manager under Sections 50 to 54.
154. Sections 58 to 60 prescribed the duties of the guardian and the
manager and the powers of the manager. The guardian or manager, was to
take care of the mentally ill person or his property or both, depending upon
the mandate assigned to them. As per Section 59, the manager of the
property would exercise the same powers as the mentally ill person would
have exercised as owner of the property, had he or she not been mentally ill.
The manager was also entitled to realize all claims due to the estate of the
mentally ill person and pay all debts and discharge all liabilities. However,
the manager had no power to mortgage, create any charge on or, transfer by
sale, gift, exchange or otherwise, any immovable property of the mentally ill
person or lease out any such property for a period exceeding 5 years,
without permission of the District Court. The District Court would also
adjudicate objections from any relatives or friends of the mentally ill
persons, if any, in such transactions. Regular inventory and accounts were to
be delivered by the manager to the appointing authority. Any relative of a
mentally ill person could sue and seek accounts from the manager.
Therefore, considerable safeguards were contained in the MHA-1987 for
rendering of accounts, performance of contracts, and execution of
conveyances by the manager/guardian. Section 69 also provided for removal
of managers and guardians “for sufficient cause”. The manner of disposal
and dissolution of a partnership or the property thereof, if a person became
mentally ill, was provided in Section 70. As per Sections 72 and 73, if a
mentally ill person owned stocks, securities or shares, the manager could
deal with the same as well and could also receive and pay over dividends in
respect of such shareholdings. Section 75 provided a further safeguard
whereby the District Court would order all actions taken under the MHA-
1987 to be set aside, if the mental illness was found to have ceased. Section
81 then recognized that mentally ill persons would be treated without
violation of human rights.
155. The UNCRPD, was signed amongst 164 member countries, published
on 13th December, 2006 and it entered into force on 3rd May, 2008. Article 1
of this convention covered physical and intellectual disabilities within the
broad definition of disabilities. It also gave primacy to the PwD, his or her
exercise of freedom of choice, and dignity. The opportunity for decision
making was to be vested with the PwD. It intended to promote their full and
effective participation in society on an equal basis. The UNCRPD imposes
various obligations on States to ensure protection of the human rights of
disabled persons and to enable disabled persons to realize and exercise their
complete freedoms. The UNCRPD recognizes in its Preamble as under:
“24. Convinced that the family is the natural and
fundamental group unit of society and is entitled to
protection by society and the State, and that persons with
disabilities and their family members should receive the
necessary protection and assistance to enable families to
contribute towards the full and equal enjoyment of the
rights of persons with disabilities,”
156. It has an expansive list of detailed provisions relating to PwDs.
Article 12 specifically deals with exercise of legal capacity of PwDs which
“Article 12 – Equal recognition before the law
1. States Parties reaffirm that persons with disabilities
have the right to recognition everywhere as persons
before the law.
2. States Parties shall recognize that persons with
disabilities enjoy legal capacity on an equal basis with
others in all aspects of life.
3. States Parties shall take appropriate measures to
provide access by persons with disabilities to the support
they may require in exercising their legal capacity.
4. States Parties shall ensure that all measures that
relate to the exercise of legal capacity provide for
appropriate and effective safeguards to prevent abuse in
accordance with international human rights law. Such
safeguards shall ensure that measures relating to the
exercise of legal capacity respect the rights, will and
preferences of the person, are free of conflict of interest
and undue influence, are proportional and tailored to the
person’s circumstances, apply for the shortest time
possible and are subject to regular review by a
competent, independent and impartial authority or
judicial body. The safeguards shall be proportional to the
degree to which such measures affect the person’s rights
and interests.
5. Subject to the provisions of this article, States Parties
shall take all appropriate and effective measures to
ensure the equal right of persons with disabilities to own
or inherit property, to control their own financial affairs
and to have equal access to bank loans, mortgages and
other forms of financial credit, and shall ensure that
persons with disabilities are not arbitrarily deprived of
their property.”
157. Article 13 further requires that PwDs are provided effective access to
justice. Article 14 requires States to ensure that PwDs enjoy the right to
liberty and security. Article 16 recognizes the right to PwDs of protection
from being exploited and obligates States to have safeguards to prevent the
same, with adequate support being provided to PWDs as well as their
families and caregivers. The mental and physical integrity of PwDs is to be
protected on an equal basis with others, under Article 17. Article 22
recognizes the respect for privacy of PwD and that there should not be
arbitrary or unlawful interference with the privacy, family, home or
correspondence of PwD. Various other measures to ensure adequate
education, employment, etc. for PwDs are enshrined in the convention.
158. The UNCRPD, which was a convention in respect of persons with all
kind of disabilities resulted in the enactment of two statutes in India,
a)      The Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016; and
b)      The Mental Healthcare Act, 2017.
(iv)    Scheme of Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016
159. The RPWD-2016 is stated to have been enacted to give effect to
India’s obligations under the UNCRPD. UNCRPD was ratified by India on
1st October, 2007. The statute contemplates various steps to be taken to
safeguard the rights of PwDs. As per the RWPDA, there are three categories
a)      Person with disability –defined under Section 2(s) of the
““person with disability” means a person with long
term physical, mental, intellectual or sensory
impairment which hinders his full and effective
participation in society equally with others;”
b)      Person with benchmark disability –defined under Section 2(r)
““person with benchmark disability” means a
person with not less than forty per cent. of a
specified disability where specified disability has not
been defined in measurable terms and includes a
person with disability where specified disability has
been defined in measurable terms, as certified by the
certifying authority;”
Notably, the description of various ‘specified disabilities’ is set
out in the Schedule to the RPWD-2016.
c)      Person with disability having high support needs –defined
under Section 2(t) of the RPWD-2016 as under:
““person with disability having high support needs”
means a person with benchmark disability certified
under clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 58 who
needs high support;”
160. The RPWD-2016 confers rights of equality, non-discrimination, right
to live as part of the community, protection from cruelty and inhuman
treatment, protection from abuse, violation and exploitation, and protection
in cases of armed conflicts/natural disasters/etc. under Section 3 to 8.
Interestingly, the National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) has an
obligation to ensure inclusion of PwDs while taking measures for safety and
protection of PwDs. In case of children with disability, primacy has been
given to the home and family of the child for their care. Reproductivity
rights of PwDs have also been recognized under Section 10. Rights of
PWDs for exercising universal adult franchise and accessibility to the same,
are recognized under Section 11.
161. Section 12 provides for measures to be taken for PwDs, to be able to
exercise their right of access to justice. Section 13 deals with the legal
capacity of PwDs and is meant to ensure that the appropriate Government
takes sufficient measures to enable PWDs to control their financial affairs.
Section 14 provides a mechanism for guardianship for PwDs, in specific
situations, while Section 15 designates authorities to support PwDs in
exercising their rights. Sections 12 to 15 are of enormous significance in
adjudicating the issues raised in the present petition, and are set out below:-
“12. Access to justice.—(1) The appropriate Government
shall ensure that persons with disabilities are able to
exercise the right to access any court, tribunal, authority,
commission or any other body having judicial or quasi-
judicial or investigative powers without discrimination
on the basis of disability.
(2) The appropriate Government shall take steps to put in
place suitable support measures for persons with
disabilities specially those living outside family and those
disabled requiring high support for exercising legal
rights.
(3) The National Legal Services Authority and the State
Legal Services Authorities constituted under the Legal
Services Authorities Act, 1987 (39 of 1987) shall make
provisions including reasonable accommodation to
ensure that persons with disabilities have access to any
scheme, programme, facility or service offered by them
equally with others.
(4) The appropriate Government shall take steps to—
(a) ensure that all their public documents are in
(b) ensure that the filing departments, registry or any
other office of records are supplied with necessary
equipment to enable filing, storing and referring to the
documents and evidence in accessible formats; and
(c) make available all necessary facilities and equipment
to facilitate recording of testimonies, arguments or
opinion given by persons with disabilities in their
preferred language and means of communication.
13. Legal capacity.—(1) The appropriate Government
shall ensure that the persons with disabilities have right,
equally with others, to own or inherit property, movable
or immovable, control their financial affairs and have
access to bank loans, mortgages and other forms of
financial credit.
(2) The appropriate Government shall ensure that the
persons with disabilities enjoy legal capacity on an equal
basis with others in all aspects of life and have the right
to equal recognition everywhere as any other person
before the law.
(3) When a conflict of interest arises between a person
providing support and a person with disability in a
particular financial, property or other economic
transaction, then such supporting person shall abstain
from providing support to the person with disability in
Provided that there shall not be a presumption of conflict
of interest just on the basis that the supporting person is
related to the person with disability by blood, affinity or
adoption.
(4) A person with disability may alter, modify or
dismantle any support arrangement and seek the support
Provided that such alteration, modification or
dismantling shall be prospective in nature and shall not
nullify any third party transaction entered into by the
person with disability with the aforesaid support
arrangement.
(5) Any person providing support to the person with
disability shall not exercise undue influence and shall
respect his or her autonomy, dignity and privacy.
14. Provision for guardianship.—(1) Notwithstanding
anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, on and from the date of commencement of this Act,
where a district court or any designated authority, as
notified by the State Government, finds that a person with
disability, who had been provided adequate and
appropriate support but is unable to take legally binding
decisions, may be provided further support of a limited
guardian to take legally binding decisions on his behalf
in consultation with such person, in such manner, as may
Provided that the District Court or the designated
authority, as the case may be, may grant total support to
the person with disability requiring such support or
where the limited guardianship is to be granted
repeatedly, in which case, the decision regarding the
support to be provided shall be reviewed by the Court or
the designated authority, as the case may be, to
determine the nature and manner of support to be
provided.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section,
“limited guardianship” means a system of joint decision
which operates on mutual understanding and trust
between the guardian and the person with disability,
which shall be limited to a specific period and for
specific decision and situation and shall operate in
accordance to the will of the person with disability.
(2) On and from the date of commencement of this Act,
every guardian appointed under any provision of any
other law for the time being in force, for a person with
disability shall be deemed to function as a limited
guardian.
(3) Any person with disability aggrieved by the decision
of the designated authority appointing a legal guardian
may prefer an appeal to such appellate authority, as may
be notified by the State Government for the purpose.
15. Designation of authorities to support.—(1) The
appropriate Government shall designate one or more
authorities to mobilise the community and create social
awareness to support persons with disabilities in exercise
of their legal capacity.
(2) The authority designated under sub-section (1) shall
take measures for setting up suitable support
arrangements to exercise legal capacity by persons with
disabilities living in institutions and those with high
support needs and any other measures as may be
required.”
162. The remaining chapters being, Chapters III, IV and V of the RPWD-
2016 deal with special provisions for PwDs, in education, skill development,
employment, social security, health, rehabilitation and recreation. Chapter
VI sets out various special provisions for persons with benchmark
disabilities, which includes free education for children, reservation in higher
education and institutions, special employment provisions, special schemes
and development programmes. Chapter VII deals with special provisions for
PwDs with high support needs. Certification of specified disabilities is
provided for in Chapter X.
163. Chapter VIII enshrines the duties and responsibilities of the
appropriate governments. Chapter IX further provides for the registration of
institutions for PwDs, and grants to such institutions. The constitution of
various committees at the central state and district level is also contemplated
in Chapter XI. The executive officials in the form of Chief Commissioner
and State Commissioner are to be appointed for the purposes of the RPWD-
2016, under Chapter XII. Offences and penalties are provided for in Chapter
XVI and Special Courts providing speedy trial to deal with such offences are
contemplated under Chapter XIII. Finally, a national fund for disabilities is
also provided for in Chapter XIV and state fund in Chapter XV.
(v)     Scheme of the Mental Healthcare Act, 2017
164. Unlike the MHA-1987, the MHA-2017 has the following Preamble:-
“An Act to provide for mental healthcare and services for
persons with mental illness and to protect, promote and
fulfil the rights of such persons during delivery of mental
healthcare and services and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
WHEREAS the Convention on Rights of Persons with
Disabilities and its Optional Protocol was adopted on the
13th December, 2006 at United Nations Headquarters in
New York and came into force on the 3rd May, 2008; AND
WHEREAS India has signed and ratified the said
Convention on the 1st day of October, 2007; AND
WHEREAS it is necessary to align and harmonise the
existing laws with the said Convention.”
165. Under this statute, mental illness is defined in Section 2(s), as under:-
“(s) “mental illness” means a substantial disorder of
thinking, mood, perception, orientation or memory that
grossly impairs judgment, behaviour, capacity to
recognise reality or ability to meet the ordinary demands
of life, mental conditions associated with the abuse of
alcohol and drugs, but does not include mental
retardation which is a condition of arrested or
incomplete development of mind of a person, specially
characterised by subnormality of intelligence;”
166. Under Chapter II, the MHA-2017 deals with mental illness and the
capacity to make decisions relating to healthcare and treatment. As per
Section 4, a person with mental illness, is deemed to have the capacity to
make decisions regarding his mental healthcare and treatment under certain
circumstances, i.e., if he can understand relevant information, appreciate
reasonably foreseeable consequences of a decision and communicate the
decision. Section 5 contemplates the right of the mentally ill person to make
an advance directive in writing, as to the manner in which the person wishes
to be cared for and treated for mental illness and the manner in which he
does not wish to be treated. The advance directive may also contain the
individual(s), in the order of precedence, who can be appointed as the
nominated representative under Section 14 of the MHA-2017. Such an
advance directive has to be invoked only once the person ceases to have the
capacity to make decisions. The advance directive so made, if any, has to be
in terms of the regulations made by the Central Mental Health Authority
constituted under the MHA-2017. Such advance directive shall, however,
not apply to emergency treatment, as per Section 9 of this statute.
167. Under Section 11, the advance directive can be reviewed, altered,
modified or cancelled, in case certain factors are established, such as lack of
free will of the mentally ill person, at the time of making the advance
directive. Section 14 permits the mentally ill person, who is not a minor, to
appoint a nominated representative. However, where a nominated
representative is not appointed under Section 14(4), the persons who would
be deemed to be the nominated representative in the order of precedence, is
“14. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause
(c) of sub-section (1) of section 5, every person who is
not a minor, shall have a right to appoint a nominated
representative.
(2) The nomination under sub-section (1) shall be made
in writing on plain paper with the person’s signature or
thumb impression of the person referred to in that sub-
section.
representative shall not be a minor, be competent to
discharge the duties or perform the functions assigned to
him under this Act, and give his consent in writing to the
mental health professional to discharge his duties and
perform the functions assigned to him under this Act.
(4) Where no nominated representative is appointed by a
person under sub-section (1), the following persons for
the purposes of this Act in the order of precedence shall
be deemed to be the nominated representative of a person
(a) the individual appointed as the nominated
representative in the advance directive under
clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 5; or
(b) a relative, or if not available or not willing to be
the nominated representative of such person; or
(c) a care-giver, or if not available or not willing to
be the nominated representative of such person; or
(d) a suitable person appointed as such by the
(e) if no such person is available to be appointed as
a nominated representative, the Board shall
appoint the Director, Department of Social
Welfare, or his designated representative, as the
nominated representative of the person with mental
Provided that a person representing an organisation
registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 or
any other law for the time being in force, working for
persons with mental illness, may temporarily be engaged
by the mental health professional to discharge the duties
of a nominated representative pending appointment of a
nominated representative by the concerned Board.
(5) The representative of the organisation, referred to in
the proviso to sub-section (4), may make a written
application to the medical officer in-charge of the mental
health establishment or the psychiatrist in-charge of the
person’s treatment, and such medical officer or
psychiatrist, as the case may be, shall accept him as the
temporary         nominated    representative,     pending
appointment of a nominated representative by the
concerned Board.
(6) A person who has appointed any person as his
nominated representative under this section may revoke
or alter such appointment at any time in accordance with
the procedure laid down for making an appointment of
nominated representative under sub-section (1).
(7) The Board may, if it is of the opinion that it is in the
interest of the person with mental illness to do so, revoke
an appointment made by it under this section, and
appoint a different representative under this section.
(8) The appointment of a nominated representative, or
the inability of a person with mental illness to appoint a
nominated representative, shall not be construed as the
lack of capacity of the person to take decisions about his
mental healthcare or treatment.
(9) All persons with mental illness shall have capacity to
make mental healthcare or treatment decisions but may
require varying levels of support from their nominated
representative to make decisions.”
168. Under Section 17, the nominated representative has various duties
“17. While fulfilling his duties under this Act, the
(a) consider the current and past wishes, the life history,
values, cultural background and the best interests of the
(b) give particular credence to the views of the person
with mental illness to the extent that the person
understands the nature of the decisions under
(c) provide support to the person with mental illness in
making treatment decisions under section 89 or section
(d) have right to seek information on diagnosis and
treatment to provide adequate support to the person with
(e) have access to the family or home-based
rehabilitation services as provided under clause (c) of
sub-section (4) of section 18 on behalf of and for the
benefit of the person with mental illness;
(f) be involved in discharge planning under section 98;
(g) apply to the mental health establishment for
admission under section 87 or section 89 or section 90;
(h) apply to the concerned Board on behalf of the person
with mental illness for discharge under section 87 or
(i) apply to the concerned Board against violation of
rights of the person with mental illness in a mental health
(j) appoint a suitable attendant under sub-section (5) or
(k) have the right to give or withhold consent for
research under circumstances mentioned under sub-
section (3) of section 99.”
169. Chapter V vests the mentally ill person with the right to access mental
healthcare, right to community living, right to protection from cruel,
inhuman and degrading treatment, right to equality, non-discrimination,
information and confidentiality and the right to personal contacts and
communication and to access medical records. Section 27 also entitles
mentally ill persons to receive free legal aid.
170. In the following chapters, various obligations of the central and state
authorities are enshrined. Chapter VI sets out the duties of the appropriate
government. Chapter VII and VIII contemplates the establishment of the
Central Mental Health Authority and State Mental Health Authority. The
establishment and regulation of mental health establishments is contained in
Chapter X. Mental Health Review Boards are to also be appointed by the
State Authorities in terms of Chapter XI and the manner in which persons
with mental illness would be admitted, treated and discharged from such
establishments is set out in Chapter XII. Section 99 permits research in
respect of mental illness, provided and free and informed consent of the
person with mental illness is obtained. Finally, Sections 100 to 102 casts
various duties on other agencies, such as police officers and Magistrates, in
respect of the protection of persons with mental illness. It is pertinent to note
that the MHA-2017 had repealed the MHA-1987.
(vi)    Concerns under the RPWD-2016 and MHA-2017
171. A reading of the UNCPRD along with the RPWD-2016 and the
MHA-2017, leaves no manner of doubt that the two statutes have been
enacted in the background of the UNCRPD. The UNCRPD marks a
paradigm shift in the manner in which mentally ill persons or PwDs are to
be treated. It gives primacy to the wishes of the PwD. It seeks to change
forced decision-making to voluntary decision-making, in respect of the care,
treatment and financial affairs concerning the property and assets of PwDs,
including mentally ill persons. This Court notes that the Committee on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities, highlights this shift as below:1
“21. Where, after significant efforts have been made, it is
not practicable to determine the will and preferences of
an individual, the “best interpretation of will and
preferences” must replace the “best interests”
determinations. This respects the rights, will and
preferences of the individual, in accordance with article
12, paragraph 4. The “best interests” principle is not a
safeguard which complies with article 12 in relation to
adults. The “will and preferences” paradigm must
replace the “best interests” paradigm to ensure that
persons with disabilities enjoy the right to legal capacity
on an equal basis with others.
22. All people risk being subject to “undue influence”,
yet this may be exacerbated for those who rely on the
support of others to make decisions. Undue influence is
characterized as occurring, where the quality of the
interaction between the support person and the person
being supported includes signs of fear, aggression,
threat, deception or manipulation. Safeguards for the
exercise of legal capacity must include protection against
undue influence; however, the protection must respect
the rights, will and preferences of the person, including
the right to take risks and make mistakes.”
172. Therefore, the crux of the provisions of the UNCRPD, which is
reflected in the two statutes as well, is that to the maximum extent possible,
the PwD or person with illness ought to be consulted.
UN Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, General Comment No.1,
Article 12: Equal Recognition before the law, CRPD/C/GC/1 (May 19, 2014) ¶¶ 21-22.
173. While both these recently enacted statutes reflect significant progress
in incorporating the crux of the UNCRPD, the statutes have raised several
other concerns. This was also expressed by legislators, when the bills of
these two statutes were still being debated and discussed in the Indian
Parliament. Illustratively, the said concerns were as under:-
a)      That the details regarding the guardianship of mentally ill
persons and management of their property were provided for
only in the MHA-1987, which would be repealed by the
enactment of the Mental Healthcare Bill, 2013 (hereinafter,
‘MHA Bill 2013’). Such guardianship provisions were absent in
the MHA Bill 2013 and were only provided for in the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities Bill, 2014 (hereinafter, ‘RPWD Bill’)
which was still being debated in the Parliament. If the MHA
Bill 2013, were passed without the guardianship provisions and
without enactment of the RPWD-2016, the MHA-1987 would
be repealed and consequently, there would be a legal vacuum
on the law of guardianship of mentally ill persons and their
property. Thus, the MHA Bill 2013 ought not to be enacted
b)      That the concept of nominated representatives was a western
concept. People with high illiteracy are unlikely to give
c)      That the Mental Healthcare Bill, 2016 ignores the role of
parents and families. However, considering the social context in
Shri. D. Raja, Rajya Sabha Debates on the Mental Healthcare Bill, 2013, on 8th August,
2016 (17 Sravana, 1983 (Saka)) in Vol. 240, No.16.
India, it is important to recognize the role of families and
parents, so that they can take decisions on behalf of the patient.
There are chances of mentally ill persons being defrauded by
d)      That the mentally ill person may be in denial and, therefore,
may not give advance directive; resultantly, the nominated
representative may not, in fact, be nominated. There is also a
possibility of the nomination being under duress or coercion;4
e)      That sufficient room has to be given for medical institutions
and family members to take actions on behalf of a patient,
which would then strike a balance between involuntary
174. In addition to these concerns, this Court also notes that the statutes are
recent and the various institutions contemplated under them are yet to be
completely established. From the submissions made in the present petition
by various ld. Sr. Counsels, it is not clear as to which of the establishments
under both these enactments have, in fact, been put in place.
175. Section 15 of the RPWD-2016 requires the designation of one or
more authorities to mobilize the community and create social awareness to
support PwDs in exercise of their legal capacity, especially for those with
Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab, Lok Sabha Debates on the Mental Healthcare Bill, 2016, on
27th March, 2017 (Chaitra 06, 1939 (Saka)) in Sixteenth Series, Vol. XXIII, Eleventh
Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Lok Sabha Debates on the Mental Healthcare Bill, 2016, on 24th
March, 2017 (Chaitra 03, 1939 (Saka)) in Sixteenth Series, Vol. XXIII, Eleventh Session,
high support needs. The authority concerned can also take any other
measures as may be required in providing suitable support arrangement.
Thus, Section 15 contemplates providing of sufficient infrastructure to
enable PwDs to have access to banking and financial institutions to deal
with their own assets.
176. At this stage, some limited guidance concerning the relevant
authorities under the RPWD-2016, may be obtained from the Government of
Delhi which has enacted the RPWD (Delhi) Rules-2018 under the RPWD-
2016, as of 27th December, 2018. These Rules contemplate notification of
the Certifying Authority pursuant to Section 57 of the RPWD-2016 and the
issuance of Certificate of Registration under Section 50 of the RPWD-2016.
In so far as the present dispute is concerned, Rules 7 to 9 of the RPWD
(Delhi) Rules-2018 are relevant and are set out below:-
“7. Limited Guardianship. - (1) A District Court on its
own, or on an application filed by the person with
disability, or through a blood relative or filed on behalf
of the person with disability through a Government
organization or a Registered organization under whose
care the person with disability is residing, shall grant the
support of a limited guardian to take a legally binding
decision on behalf of the person with disability in
consultation with such person.
(2) The District Court, before granting the support of a
limited guardian for the person with disability shall
satisfy itself that such a person is not in a position to take
legally binding decision on one’s own.
(3) The District Court shall hold hearings to determine
the legal capacity of the person with disabilities; During
such hearings, the person with disabilities shall be
present. If required, expert opinion shall be sought by the
court to determine the legal capacity of the person with
disabilities.
(4) The validity period for limited guardianship as
appointed under sub-rule (1) shall be initially for a
period of three years which can be further extended by
Provided that the District Court shall follow the same
procedure while extending the validity of the limited
guardianship as followed while granting the initial
guardianship.
(5) The District Court shall take a decision preferably
within a period of one month from the date of receipt of
anmapplication regarding grant of limited guardianship
or from the date of coming to its notice of the need of
Provided that the consent of the person to act as a limited
guardian shall also be obtained before grant of such
Provided that the District Court shall follow the same
procedure while extending the validity of the limited
guardianship as followed while granting the initial
guardianship.
(6) While granting the support of such limited
guardianship, the Court shall consider a suitable person
to be appointed as a limited guardian in the following
(a) The parents or adult children of the person with
(c) Other Blood relatives or care givers or prominent
(d) In case the family of the person with disability is not
known, Superintendent of the Government Institution or
In charge of the Registered organization under whose
care the person with disability is residing, may be
considered.
(7) Only those individuals who are over the age of 18
years and who have not been previously convicted of any
cognizable offence as defined in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (1 of 1974) shall be appointed as a
limited Guardian.
(8) The limited guardian appointed under sub-rule (1)
shall consult the person with disability in all matters
before taking any legally binding decisions on behalf of
the person with disability.
(9) The appointed limited guardian shall ensure that the
legally binding decisions taken on behalf of the person
with disability are in the interest of the person with
disability.
8. Appellate Authority. – The Appellate Auhtority to
appeal against any decision of the Distrct Court for
appointment of limited Guardian under ssub-rule (1) of
rule 7, shall be the High Court.
9. Designated authority. – The Dy. Commissioners of the
Department of Revenue, GNCT of Delhi shall be the
designated authority under sub-section (1) of section 15
of the Act to take measures for creating social awareness
to support persons with disabilities in exercising their
legal capacity.”
177. Therefore, the RPWD (Delhi) Rules-2018 only provide for a
designated authority for the purposes of limited guardianship or for creating
social awareness for PwDs to exercise their rights, including of access to
finance and assets.
c)      Interplay between the MHA-2017 and RPWD-2016
178. A conjoint reading of the provisions of the RPWD-2016, MHA-2017
and the RPWD (Delhi) Rules-2018 in the backdrop and spirit of the
UNCRPD, as also the concerns expressed during the Parliamentary debates,
shows that there is a clear delineation between the provisions of the RPWD-
2016 and the MHA-2017.
179. Unlike MHA-1987, the MHA-2017 makes a fundamental change in
respect of dealing with property and affairs of mentally ill persons.
180. In the opinion of this Court, the MHA-2017 has to be interpreted as
having been enacted only to deal with the delivery of mental healthcare, and
services and for connected matters. The deletion of provisions with respect
to property and affairs and the absence of any provisions in respect of
moveable or immovable assets, financial affairs, legal capacity, legal aid,
etc. in the said statute is clearly a conscious departure from the earlier
regime. Such issues are dealt with under the RPWD-2016. Various
submissions have been addressed by all parties in this petition, as to which is
the prior and which is the later enactment. However, for the present
purposes, the said issue does not require adjudication as it is clear that both
these statutes deal with mentally ill persons. It is in fact, the purpose and
scope of both these statutes, that is distinct and different. Thus, the debate as
to which is the earlier and the later enactment would be unnecessary.
181. Under the MHA-2017, the nominated representative can be decided
by the mentally ill person by giving an advance directive. However, in the
absence of an advance directive under Section 14(4) of the MHA-2017, the
order of precedence has been set out. As per the said order, a relative would
be the person who shall be deemed to be a nominated representative in order
to carry out the duties in accordance with under Section 17 of the MHA-
182. The nominated representative is responsible for providing support in
respect of decisions of treatment, and for taking all decisions in respect of
providing access to family, rehabilitation services, planning of admission,
planning of discharge, appointments of attendants, give or withhold consent
for research on behalf of the mentally ill persons. However, all these
decisions are to be taken considering the current and past wishes of the
person concerned, the life history, values, cultural background and the best
interest of the person. Credence has to be given to the views of the person
with mental illness to the extent that the person understands the nature of the
decisions. Thus, the treatment and healthcare to be given to the mentally ill
person has to be in the particular context of that person’s life history.
Further, the nominated representative has to ensure that timely treatment is
also given to the mentally ill person. In fact, access to mental healthcare is a
recognized right under Section 18 and Section 18(2) of the MHA-2017,
contemplates that the mental healthcare and treatment provided should be of
good quality and easily accessible. However, the provision also requires that
the same is provided in a manner that is acceptable to the person with mental
illness and to his/her family. Section 18 reads as under:-
“18. (1) Every person shall have a right to access mental
healthcare and treatment from mental health services run
or funded by the appropriate Government.
(2) The right to access mental healthcare and treatment
shall mean mental health services of affordable cost, of
good quality, available in sufficient quantity, accessible
geographically, without discrimination on the basis of
gender, sex, sexual orientation, religion, culture, caste,
social or political beliefs, class, disability or any other
basis and provided in a manner that is acceptable to
persons with mental illness and their families and care-
givers.”
183. Therefore, the nominated representative has to be a person who can
ensure that the rights of the mentally ill person are not in any manner
prejudiced, curtailed or harmed. In this background, it is notable that Section
14(4) of the MHA-2017, gives precedence to the ‘relative’ of a mentally ill
person over a care-giver, and such relative could be person related by blood,
marriage or adoption. The definition of ‘relative’ comes from Section 2(za)
“(za) “relative” means any person related to the person
with mental illness by blood, marriage or adoption;”
184. Thus, it is clear that under the MHA-2017, while appointing a
nominated representative, a relative by blood or marriage or adoption under
Section 14(4)(b), is given precedence over a care-giver under Section
14(4)(c). The measures taken qua the mentally ill person ought to be
acceptable to the family members, who cannot be ignored.
185. Having discussed the scope of the MHA-2017, this Court now turns to
the RPWD-2016. The first and most important right in the context of the
present case would be the right of access to justice and the right to legal
capacity, for PwDs. Some other important rights include the right of the
person to live in community, and to be protected against abuse, violation and
exploitation. It is relevant to note that under Section 13 of the RPWD-2016,
the right to legal capacity is to be ensured, which contemplates the right of
the PwD to take all decisions in respect of his or her financial affairs, and
own or inherit movable or immovable property, have access to bank loans,
etc. To protect this right further, Section 13(3) provides that if a conflict of
interest arises between the PwD and the person providing support in respect
of financial, property and other economic transactions, the conflicted
persons providing support shall abstain from providing support. Section
13(3) proviso clarifies that the mere fact that the person is related by blood,
affinity or adoption, would not lead to presumption of conflict of interest.
This therefore, leads to the conclusion that there has to be something more
than the existence of a relationship by blood/affinity/adoption, for such a
conflict to arise. Section 13(5) further protects PwDs from undue influence
and respect is to be accorded to their autonomy, dignity and privacy.
186. In so far as the question concerning appointment of guardian or
support arrangements under the RPWD-2016 is concerned, Section 14 of the
RPWD-2016 becomes relevant, in addition to Section 13. While a
nominated representative is contemplated under the MHA-2017 for
healthcare and treatment decisions, under the RPWD-2016, Section 14
stipulates the manner in which limited guardians can be appointed, to take
legally binding decisions on behalf of the PwD – only in consultation with
the PwD. If the PwD is unable to do so, despite the support already
provided, the power to appoint a guardian, vests with the District Court or
any designated authority. This provision has been considerably debated
during the course of arguments in the present case. The submission on
behalf of the Respondent Nos. 5 and 6 as also the Intervenor, is that only a
limited guardian can be appointed, as the RPWD-2016 has limited the scope
of all guardianship under law. There cannot be a plenary guardian unlike the
MHA-1987, as per Respondents 5 & 6. It is this submission that needs to be
tested while interpreting Section 14 of the RPWD-2016.
187. Section 14 contemplates provision of support by appointing a
guardian. Such a guardian is termed as a limited guardian, as it is presumed
under this provision that a PwD would have expressed or would be able to
express his or her desires to such a limited guardian. This is evident from
both from the language of Section 14 and from the definition and
categorization of disabilities under the RPWD-2016. There are certain
features of the guardianship contemplated under this provision.
188. First, the Explanation to Section 14(1) deals with limited guardianship
a)      It is a system of joint decision.
b)      It operates on mutual understanding and trust between the
guardian and the PWD.
c)      It is for a specific period.
d)      It is for specific decisions.
e)      It is for specific situations.
f)      It should operate as per the will of the person with disability.
189. All the above elements contemplate an inherent capacity in the person
with disability to express his or her will, which is the basis for operating on
“mutual understanding and trust”. If such will of the person is not capable
of being expressed or if a person is suffering from a mental condition which
can grossly impair his or her judgment, behaviour or capacity to even
understand the ordinary demands of life, such a person cannot be assisted by
a limited guardian. Consequently, Section 14 envisages limited guardianship
in the case of such PwDs, who have expressed their desires in the past or are
able to express their desires, going forward.
190. Second, the RPWD-2016 applies to persons with varying degrees of
disabilities, as the definition of disabilities is extremely wide. A person who
has low vision and hearing impairment or a physical disability is a PwD as
much as a person with a mental disability or blood disorder. The gamut of
disabilities thus covered under Section 2(s) of the RPWD-2016 is any long-
term physical, mental, intellectual or sensory impairment. Notably, while
specified disabilities are set out in the Schedule to the MHA-2017, general
disabilities are not. Thus, the kind of disabilities which a person can be
afflicted with in terms of Section 2(s) is broad, elastic and ever-changing. It
is not restricted to a disability that is currently known. As scientific advances
are made in the medical field, there could be disabilities which are unknown
today which may be identified in the future. Section 2(s) would then have to
cover disabilities which are even yet to be identified.
191. A perusal of the definitions shows that the categories of PwD are
broadly – simple PwD and persons with benchmark disabilities. In order to
determine who are the `persons with benchmark disabilities’, the statute
gives guidance through the Schedule, pursuant to Section 2(zc) of the
RPWD-2016. It includes persons with physical disability including visual
impairment, intellectual disability, mental behaviour disability, disability
due to chronic neurological conditions or blood disorders, or a combination
of the above disabilities, and any other categories notified as specified
disabilities by the Central Government. Section 2(r) of the RPWD-2016
further deals with a further sub-category that if a person has such specified
disability which is 40% or higher, it would be a person with ‘benchmark
disability’. Within persons with benchmark disabilities, a further sub-set,
namely, ‘persons with disability having high support needs’. Such persons
could be persons with mental illness whose judgment, behaviour and
capacity are grossly impaired or persons who have chronic neurological
conditions such as multiple sclerosis, Parkinson’s disease, blood disorders,
192. Keeping this scope of the RPWD-2016 in mind, it is clear that Section
14 could not restrict support to only appointment of a limited guardian,
which would cater merely to PwDs who would be able to participate in a
limited guardianship arrangement. This becomes clearer in view of the
proviso to Section 14(1) which recognizes the grant of ‘total support’ under
a)      In respect of PwDs requiring such support; or
b)      If the limited guardianship is to be granted repeatedly.
193. Since the RPWD-2016 deals with an extremely wide range of
disabilities, Section 14 is suitably crafted to take into consideration those
persons who are unable to express their will to the limited guardian. A PwD
having high support needs or a PwD requiring such support due to any other
factors, would be squarely covered as a PwD requiring total support under
194. It is interesting to note that the word used in the Proviso to Section 14
is ‘total support’ and not ‘plenary guardian’, as was contained in the RPWD
Bill, in the spirit of the UNCRPD which gives primacy to the PwD and to
his or her will, preference or consent. ‘Total support’ is also a terminology
which is used in contrast with ‘plenary guardian’, as it recognizes the
possibility of the PwD being treated or cured in a manner which would
enable him or her to take decisions in the future in which case, the nature
and manner of support could also be decreased. This is clear from a reading
of a proviso which contemplates that the provision of total support shall be
reviewed i.e., if the person with disability is treated, cared for and cured or
empowered to take decision, then the nature and manner of support could
also be decreased.
195. This is also confirmed by a perusal of the drafting history of the
UNCRPD, where during the discussion on Article 12 of the UNCRPD when
asked how supported decision making would be implemented in a situation
where the PwD was incapable of decision making. The relevant excerpt
“The Chair believed that paradigm shift of operating on
an assumption of competence rather than incompetence
exists already in Article 12, via the progression that
states begin with a premise of legal capacity, proceed to
supported decision making when required and move to
substitute decision making only as a matter of last resort.
Nonetheless, a number of states have asserted that,
because there will be cases that require substitute
decision making, or guardianship, it is better to provide
safeguards in these extreme cases rather than leaving it
open. The IDC’s position opposes mentioning
guardianship at all in the text. The Chair asked for
clarification regarding whether the IDC does accept that
there will be circumstances in which there will be a need
for substitute decision making.
The IDC stated that it expects the notion of guardianship
to be phased out.
The difference between supported and substitute
decision making is that, in a supported situation, the
person with a disability is at the center of the discourse.
The premise of supported decision making is that it
ranges from zero to 100% and is a dynamic concept. As
capacity increases, support decreases – a concept that is
not allowed in guardianship.
The Chair responded by referring to the IDC’s assertion
that the need for support ranges from zero to 100%, and
asked if 100% support is not the same as substitute
decision making. While he understood the support
UNCRPD AdHoc Committee, Daily Summary Record of the 7th Session, Vol. 8 (No.3)
(Jan. 18, 2006) (Statement of the Chair and IDC).
paradigm, he asserted that, whether it is referred to as
“100% support “substitute decision making” or
“guardianship”, the result is the same if the subject of
the decision does not participate in the decision. When
this does occur, states are arguing that it is better to
specify safeguards rather than leaving it open.
The IDC responded that the point regarding abuse and
the need to regulate are addressed by text proposed by
Canada and can also be taken care of in other articles.
The IDC goal is to not legitimize guardianship. The point
is that a need for 100% support percent will become 99%
and then 98% percent if we are talking about supported
decision making and this would not be possible in a
guardianship situation.
The Chair concluded the discussion of Article 12, with
There may be a way to frame the idea of substitution
within the context of support with some creative thinking
about the idea of the scale of support ranging from zero
to 100%.”
196. Based on this analysis, this Court is of the opinion that the intention of
the RPWD-2016, is to first, examine if the PwD is capable of expressing his
or her will or preferences, and second, under exceptional circumstances,
where consultation is not possible, enable the provision of total support.
197. In this determination of consultation, and will and preferences, it is
important to understand that the level of consultation required would also
vary on a case-to-case basis. Recently, in Latha TB (supra), the Kerala High
Court while dealing with consultation under Section 14 of the RPWD-2016
held that consultation required under Section 14 would depend on the
capacity of comprehension of the PwD. The observations of the Court are as
“It is pointed out across the bar that, appointment of a
guardian, in terms of Section 14 of the PwD Act, is to be
done by the authority in consultation with the ward, and
that, considering the degree of disability of the ward,
“consultation” as prescribed under the provision would
be a near impossibility. Here it is to be noticed that, the
process of consultation with a person with illness and its
efficacy, would in each case vary depending on the
comprehending capacity of the person with illness. It is
for the authority notified in terms of the Section to make
its endeavour to have the process of consultation done;
but it is to be noted that, the term “consultation”
occuring in Section 14 will necessarily have to be
understood and appreciated giving due regard to the
degree of disability of the person with illness, and his
capacity to comprehend and interact. Therefore, the term
“consultation” occuring in Section 14 has to be
understood in a practical way, that is, “consultation to
the extent possible in a given circumstance”.”
198. Therefore, the extent of consultation would depend upon the
capability of the person with mental illness to consult.
199. In the light of the above legal position, this Court proceeds to deal
with the issue of Maintainability and the issue of appointment of a Guardian.
200. The maintainability of this writ petition has been vehemently
contested by Respondent Nos.5 & 6. The following grounds have been
i)      That the exercise of writ jurisdiction would deprive Mr. DMP
of his right to privacy and dignity.
ii)     That the RPWD-2016 vests jurisdiction in the District Courts to
deal with such cases. When there is a clear statutory mechanism
provided, parens patriae jurisdiction cannot be invoked.
201. On the other hand, the stand of the Petitioner and the supporting
Respondents i.e., the sons of Mr. DMP, is that the present petition is
(i)     Mr. DMP is mentally ill and the present status as it prevails is
not in the interest of Mr. DMP as Respondents Nos.5 & 6 have
deliberately concealed his medical condition and, in fact, failed to
provide timely treatment.
ii)     There is a threat to Mr. DMP’s property and person.
iii)    The parens patriae jurisdiction of the Court has not been
ousted by the statute and has been exercised in respect of persons with
mental illnesses.
202. The question of maintainability has two aspects, one which is legal
and the second, which is factual. This Court will first discuss the legal aspect
of parens patriae jurisdiction. The doctrine of parens patriae traces its
origin back to the 13th Century. The term literally means ‘father of his
country’, which power vested in the Monarch. The doctrine of parens
patriae recognises the power and duty of the Monarch to extend protection
to such persons who are unable to care for themselves as also their property.
In democratic countries, the same power vests in the people and is exercised
by Courts. The said doctrine is elucidated in Corpus Juris Secundum (67A
“Parens Patriae- The words “parens patriae,” meaning
“father of his country,” were applied originally to the
king. Since, on this country’s achieving its independence,
the prerogatives of the crown devolved on the people of
the states, the state, as a sovereign, is the parens patriae.
The doctrine of parens patriae expresses the inherent
power and authority of the state to provide protection of
the person and property of a person non sui juris, and
under the doctrine the state has the sovereign power of
guardianship over persons of disability, and in the
execution of the doctrine the legislature is possessed of
inherent power to provide protection to persons non sui
juris and to make and enforce such rules and regulations
as it deems proper for the management of their
property.”
203. Under this jurisdiction, protection is extended to vulnerable sections
of the population, including minors, persons who are mentally ill and any
other category of persons who are considered vulnerable persons or persons
with a legal disability.
204. In the UK, under the parens patriae jurisdiction Courts would extend
protection to vulnerable persons or persons with legal disability in society.
Under this jurisdiction, directions can be passed in respect of safety and
security of persons, medical treatment, management of property and other
related matters, management of financial affairs etc. The said jurisdiction,
has been held to no longer survive in respect of mentally ill persons after the
enactment of the Mental Health Act of 1959, followed by the Mental
Capacity Act of 2005. The observations in In re F (supra) qua the parens
“I consider first the parens patriae jurisdiction. This is
an ancient prerogative jurisdiction of the Crown going
back as far perhaps as the 13th century. Under it the
Crown as parens patriae had both the power and the
duty to protect the persons and property of those unable
to do so for themselves, a category which included both
minors (formerly described as infants) and persons of
unsound mind (formerly described as lunatics or idiots).
While the history of that jurisdiction and the manner of
its exercise from its inception until the present day is of
the greatest interest, I do not consider that it would serve
any useful purpose to recount it here. I say that because
it was accepted by the Court of Appeal and not
challenged by any of the parties to be appeal before your
Lordships, that the present situation with regard to the
parens patriae jurisdiction was as follows. First, so much
of the parens patriae jurisdiction as related to minors
survives now in the form of the wardship jurisdiction of
the High Court, Family Division. Secondly, so much of
the parens patriae jurisdiction as related to persons of
unsound mind no longer exists. It ceased to exist as a
result of two events both of which took place on 1
November 1960. The first event was the coming into
force of the Mental Health Act 1959, section 1 of which
“Subject to the transitional provisions contained in this
Act, the Lunacy and Mental Treatment Acts, 1890 to
1930, and the Mental Deficiency Acts, 1913 to 1938,
shall cease to have effect, and the following provisions of
this Act shall have effect in lieu of those enactment with
respect to the reception, care and treatment of mentally
disordered patients, the management of their property,
and other matters related thereto.”
The second event was the revocation by Warrant under
the Sign Manual of the last Warrant dated 10 April 1956,
by which the jurisdiction of the Crown over the persons
and property of those found to be of unsound mind by
inquisition had been assigned to the Lord Chancellor and
the judges of the High Court, Chancery Division.
The effect of section 1 of the Act of 1959, together with
the Warrant of revocation referred to above, was to
sweep away the previous statutory and prerogative
jurisdiction in lunacy, leaving the law relating to persons
of unsound mind to be governed solely, so far as
statutory enactments are concerned, by the provisions of
that Act. So far as matters not governed by those
provisions are concerned, the common law relating to
persons of unsound mind continued to apply. It follows
that the parens patriae jurisdiction with respect to
persons of unsound mind is not now available to be
invoked in order to involve the court or a judge in the
decision about the sterilisation of F.”
205. The US Supreme Court recognizes this power, as is clear from Heller,
Secretary, Kentucky Cabinet for Human Resources v. DOE, by his mother
and next friend, 509 US 312 (1993), where the Court has held as under:
“We think that application of the Mathews v. Eldridge
factors compels the conclusion that participation as
parties by close relatives and legal guardians is not a
deprivation of due process. Even if parents, close family
members, or legal guardians can be said in certain
instances to have interests “adverse to [those of] the
person facing commitment,” 965 F. 2d, at 113, we simply
do not understand how their participation as formal
parties in the commitment proceedings increases “the
risk of an erroneous deprivation,” 424 U.S., at 335, of
respondents' liberty interest. Rather, for the reasons
explained, supra, at 329, these parties often will have
valuable information that, if placed before the court, will
increase the accuracy of the commitment decision.
Kentucky law, moreover, does not allow intervention by
persons who lack a personal stake in the outcome of the
adjudication. Guardians have a legal obligation to
further the interests of their wards, and parents and other
close relatives of a mentally retarded person, after living
with and caring for the individual for 18 years or more,
have an interest in his welfare that the State may
acknowledge. See Parham v. J.R., 442 U.S. 584, 602–603
(1979). For example, parents who for 18 years or longer
have cared for a retarded child can face changed
circumstances resulting from their own advancing age,
when the physical, emotional, and financial costs of
caring for the adult child may become too burdensome
for the child's best interests to be served by care in their
home. There is no support whatever in our cases or our
legal tradition for the “statist notion,” id., at 603, that
the State's expertise and concern in these matters is so
superior to that of parents and other close family
members that the State must slam the courthouse door
against those interested enough to intervene. Finally,
“the state has a legitimate interest under its parens
patriae powers in providing care to its citizens who are
unable … to care for themselves,” as well as “authority
under its police power to protect the community” from
any dangerous mentally retarded persons. Addington,
441 U.S., at 426.”
206. Especially in respect of insane persons, the legal position in the US is
well-captured in 44 C.J.S. Insane Persons § 37 (1945) as under:
Power to appoint a guardian for an incompetent is in the
sovereignty of the state. The purpose of the appointment
is to safeguard the rights of the incompetent, and whether
his welfare requires such appointment is a matter for the
sound discretion of the court.
While it is generally said that the power to appoint
guardians for insane persons is purely statutory, the
power in fact lies in the sovereignty of the state, and the
procedure only is statutory. The purpose of appointing a
guardian or committee is to safeguard the rights of the
incompetent by protecting his person and preserving his
property, and whether a guardian should be appointed
rests with the sound discretion of the court, the important
consideration being the best welfare of the incompetent.
The court should take into account the status of the estate
and whether it is of such nature that its management
requires considerable care and judgment, and, if the
prospective ward has sufficient mental capacity, his
wishes in the matter.”
207. In Heller (supra), the US Supreme Court was dealing with a
challenge to the law relating to the involuntary commitment of mentally
retarded and mentally ill persons to mental health institutions. The Supreme
Court highlights the distinction between mentally retarded persons and
mentally ill persons to hold that a lower standard of proof would be required
for the involuntary commitment of mentally retarded persons. However,
even while institutionalising such persons, the participation of close relatives
and guardians is encouraged as, in the opinion of the US Supreme Court,
parents and close relatives of a mentally retarded person, who have cared for
the said person would have his/her best interest and welfare in mind. The
Supreme Court rejected the submission of the State of Kentucky that the
State’s expertise and concern is superior to that of the parents and other
close family members, which it termed as the ‘statist notion’. The Supreme
Court held that the State does have a legitimate interest under its parens
patriae power to provide care to those citizens who are unable to care for
208. Insofar as India is concerned, the recent judgment of the Supreme
Court in Shafin Jahan (supra) has considered the scope of parens patriae
“39. Constitutional Courts in this country exercise
parens patriae jurisdiction in matters of child
custody treating the welfare of the child as the
paramount concern.        There are situations when the
Court can invoke the parens patriae principle and the
exceptional situations. We may like to give some
examples. For example, where a person is mentally ill
and is produced before the court in a writ of habeas
corpus, the court may invoke the aforesaid doctrine. On
certain other occasions, when a girl who is not a major
has eloped with a person and she is produced at the
behest of habeas corpus filed by her parents and she
expresses fear of life in the custody of her parents, the
court may exercise the jurisdiction to send her to an
appropriate home meant to give shelter to women where
her interest can be best taken care of till she becomes a
major.
41. The Supreme Court of Canada in E. (Mrs.) v. Eve
observed thus with regard to the doctrine of Parens
“The Parens Patriae jurisdiction for the care of
provincial superior courts.       Its exercise is
founded on necessity. The need to act for the
themselves.       The jurisdiction is broad. Its
scope cannot be defined. It applies to many and
varied situations, and a court can act not only if
injury has occurred but also if it is apprehended.
The jurisdiction is carefully guarded and the
courts will not assume that it has been removed by
legislation.
While the scope of the parens partiae jurisdiction
is unlimited, the jurisdiction must nonetheless
underlying principle.     The discretion given
under this jurisdiction is to be exercised for the
benefit of the person in need of protection and not
for the benefit of others. It must at all times be
exercised with great caution, a caution that must
increase with the seriousness of the matter. This
act would risk imposing an obviously heavy
burden on another person.”
44. Recently, the Supreme Court of New South Wales, in
the case of AC v. OC (a minor), has observed:-
“36. That jurisdiction, protective of those who
embraces (via different historical routes)
minors, the mentally ill and those who, though
not mentally ill, are unable to manage their own
affairs: Re Eve [1986] 2 SCR 388 at 407-417;
Court of Australia in Secretary, Department
[7]-[8], [40]-[42], [57]-[58] and [64]-[65].
jurisdiction is that it must be exercised, both in
for the benefit, and in the best interest, of the
person (such as a minor) in need of protection.”
45. Thus, the Constitutional Courts may also act as
Parens Patriae so as to meet the ends of justice. But the
said exercise of power is not without limitation. The
courts cannot in every and any case invoke the Parens
Patriae doctrine. The said doctrine has to be invoked
only in exceptional cases where the parties before it are
either mentally incompetent or have not come of age and
it is proved to the satisfaction of the court that the said
parties have either no parent/legal guardian or have an
abusive or negligent parent/legal guardian.
46. Mr. Shyam Divan, learned senior counsel for
the first respondent, has submitted that the said
doctrine has been expanded by the England and Wales
Court of Appeal in a case DL v. A Local Authority and
others. The case was in the context of "elder abuse"
wherein a man in his 50s behaved aggressively towards
his parents, physically and verbally, controlling access to
visitors and seeking to coerce his father into moving into
a care home against his wishes. While it was assumed
that the elderly parents did have capacity within
the meaning of the Mental Capacity Act, 2005 in
that neither was subject to "an impairment of, or a
disturbance in the functioning of the mind or brain", it
was found that the interference with the process of their
decision making arose from undue influence and duress
inflicted by their son. The Court of Appeal referred to the
judgment in Re: SA (Vulnerable Adult with Capacity :
Marriage) to find that the parens patriae jurisdiction of
the High Court existed in relation to "vulnerable if
'capacitous' adults". The cited decision of the
England and Wales High Court (Family Division)
affirmed the existence of a "great safety net" of the
inherent jurisdiction in relation to all vulnerable adults.
The term "great safety net" was coined by Lord
Donaldson in the Court of Appeal judgment which was
later quoted with approval by the House of Lords in In
Re F (Mental Patient: Sterilisation21. In paragraph
79 of Re: SA (Vulnerable Adult with Capacity :
“The inherent jurisdiction can be invoked
reasonably believed to be, for some reason
deprived of the capacity to make the relevant
choice, or incapacitated or disabled from
to the protection of the inherent jurisdiction if
constraint, coercion, undue influence or other
vitiating factors.”
209. The Supreme Court therefore held that in order to invoke the parens
patriae jurisdiction, exceptional circumstances have to exist. It quoted with
approval the observations of the Supreme Court of Canada in E v. Eve
(supra) that the said jurisdiction is carefully guarded and there shall be no
presumption that the parens patriae jurisdiction is removed by legislation.
The scope of parens patriae jurisdiction being unlimited, it has to be
exercised with great caution and with enormous seriousness. The Supreme
Court recognises that Constitutional Courts, including High Courts, can also
act under their parens patriae jurisdiction to “meet the ends of justice”.
Mental incompetency is listed as an exceptional circumstance which would
justify the exercise of this jurisdiction. If the Court is satisfied that the
person concerned is either being abused or neglected, parens patriae
jurisdiction can be exercised. Even vulnerable adults can be protected under
this jurisdiction if there are any factors that point towards undue influence,
coercion, constraint etc.
210. Under the RPWD-2016, the power to appoint guardians is vested both
in the District Court as well as the Designated Authority. Under the RPWD
(Delhi) Rules-2018, which are applicable to Delhi, the Designated Authority
has only been notified under Section 15(1) and not under Section 14. The
RPWD (Delhi) Rules-2018 itself show that the District Court is to proceed
with quickness and alacrity when a guardianship request is received by it. As
per Rule 7(5), a decision on limited guardianship has to be taken within one
month. In effect, this means that the District Court is not to conduct a
detailed trial before appointing a guardian. Depending upon the facts and
circumstances of the case, the Court has to merely consider the suitability of
the person in the order of preference as contained in Rule 7(6) and the PwD
has to be consulted. Rules 7 to 9 relating to limited guardianship, as
extracted above, become relevant.
211. A perusal of the said rules shows that the District Court has to take the
i)          It has to satisfy itself that the concerned PwD is not in a
position to take legally binding decisions.
ii)         Hearing would be held to determine the legal capacity of such a
person.
iii)        The Court may consult an expert to determine legal capacity.
iv)         The period of validity of the appointment would be three years,
which can be further extended. For such extension, the same
procedure as is required for appointment of a limited guardian
shall be followed.
v)          The decision has to preferably be taken within a period of one
month.
vi)         The consent of the limited guardian has to be obtained before
appointing him/her.
vii)        The order of preference for granting limited guardianship is as
(i) The parents or adult children of the person with disability;
(iii) Other Blood relatives or care givers or prominent
(iv) In case the family of the person with disability is not
known, Superintendent of the Government Institution or In
charge of the Registered organization under whose care the
person with disability is residing, may be considered.
212.         The RPWD (Delhi) Rules-2018 provide that the limited
guardian who has been appointed in terms of Section 7(1) would consult
the person in all matters before taking any legally binding decisions.
Interestingly, the rules do not stipulate any mechanism for providing total
support under the proviso to Section 14(1).
213.         The fact that the power under Section 14 of the RPWD-2016 is
vested with the District Courts and the Designated Authority and the
procedure itself does not involve recording of evidence or a trial shows
that the Court’s primary concern is with the timely appointment of the
guardian.
214.         Even under Order XXXIIA of the CPC, the Civil Court would
have jurisdiction to appoint guardians in respect of all persons with
disability, including a minor. Even in Rule 5 of Order XXXIIA, the
inquiry by the Court into facts is “so far it reasonably can”. Again, a
trial is not contemplated. The said provision reads as under:
“1. Application of the Order.—(1) The provisions of this
Order shall apply to suits or proceedings relating to
matters concerning the family.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality
of the provisions of sub-rule (1), the provisions of this
Order shall apply to the following suits or proceedings
(a) a suit or proceeding for matrimonial relief, including
a suit or proceedings for declaration as to the validity of
a marriage or as to the matrimonial status of any person;
(b) a suit or proceeding for a declaration as to legitimacy
(c) a suit or proceeding in relation to the guardianship of
the person or the custody of any minor or other member
(e) a suit or proceeding as to the validity or effect of an
(f) a suit or proceeding, instituted by a member of the
family, relating to wills, intestacy and succession;
(g) a suit or proceeding relating to any other matter
concerning the family in respect of which the parties are
subject to their personal law.
(3) So much of this Order as relates to a matter provided
for by a special law in respect of any suit or proceeding
shall not apply to that suit or proceeding.
5. Duty to inquire into facts.—In every suit or
proceeding to which this Order applies, it shall be the
duty of the Court to inquire, so far it reasonably can, into
the facts alleged by the plaintiff and into any facts
alleged by the defendant.”
215. While exercising power under Order XXXIIA CPC, the Court can
seek the assistance of a welfare expert. Even these provisions do not bar the
exercise of parens patriae jurisdiction.
216.     In any event, since the power under Section 14 of RPWD-2016 can
be exercised by a Designated Authority, such a Designated Authority would
fall within the overall superintendence of this Court exercising writ
jurisdiction. In the absence of a Designated Authority having been notified
under Section 14, this Court is also vested with the power to exercise
jurisdiction under the proviso to Section 14(1), as there is a clear legal
vacuum that has been created.
217. While exercising parens patriae jurisdiction, Courts used to apply the
principle of “best interest of the individual”. However, with the introduction
of the UNCRPD, “best interest” of the individual has to be in the light of
the “wills and preferences” of the individual. The same could be determined
by means of advance directives and in the absence of advance directives,
facts and circumstances which point towards the wishes/intent of the
concerned person. Thus, the “wills and preferences” of the mentally ill
person have to be considered by the Court in deciding the manner in which
care is to be given.
218. As noted in the concerns raised during the Parliamentary debates
concerning the MHA-2017 and also from the lack of designated authorities
explained above, there are gaps unaddressed by the legislations. The social
fabric of family structures in India ought to be considered. In the same vein,
the Court notes that the MHA-1987 had laid down certain standards and
factors to be considered while determining the “best interest” of the
mentally ill person. However, under RPWD-2016 and the MHA-2017, no
guidance exists as to what would constitute the “wills and preferences” of
the person. Under Section 14 of RPWD-2016, limited guardianship is for a
specific period, a specific decision and a specific situation, in accordance
with the will of the PwD. Even in the proviso to Section 14(1), the factors to
be considered for providing total support are conspicuously absent. The
MHA-2017 has no provision in respect of management of financial affairs,
appointment of guardians or the manner in which the moveable/immovable
property of the mentally ill person is to be taken care of. Thus, there is a
clear statutory vacuum.
219. On the issue of Maintainability therefore the following factors are
(i)     The RPWD-2016, the MHA-2017 or the RPWD (Delhi) Rules-
2018 do not create any embargo on the exercise of parens patriae
jurisdiction.
(ii)    Providing ‘total support’ is contemplated under Section 14 of
the RPWD-2016.
(iii)   However, the power under Section 14 of RPWD-2016 is to be
exercised by the District Court or the Designated Authority.
Currently, under the RPWD (Delhi) Rules-2018, no Designated
Authority has been appointed under Section 14.
(iv)     Under the proviso to Section 14(1) of RPWD, 2016, there is no
guidance as to the factors to be considered for providing total support.
(v)     The various institutions and establishments contemplated under
RPWD-2016 do not appear to be fully operational.
(vi)    There is a clear legal vacuum in respect of providing total
support to a person with disability who requires such support. No
precedent has been cited either under the RPWD-2016 or MHA-2017
in this regard.
(vii) There are several gaps and concerns in the two legislations, i.e.,
RPWD-2016 and MHA-2017. All the required institutions under these
statutes are not fully set up and functional.
(viii) In the present case, the condition of Mr. DMP is such that the
Court has to take a comprehensive view under both legislations on
(a) In respect of his medical care and treatment; and
(b) For management of his financial affairs, both movable and
immovable assets which are valued at more than Rs. 3000
crores.
(ix)    Above all, this Court is exercising jurisdiction under Article
226/227 of the Constitution of India, which is a jurisdiction conferred
by the Constitution of India and in various judgments of the ld.
Supreme Court, the parents patriae jurisdiction is clearly vested in
Constitutional Courts. The present case falls in the category of
exceptional circumstances, as held in Shafin Jahan (supra).
220. In any event, this Court is of the opinion that the solemn nature of the
said jurisdiction having been repeatedly recognised by the Supreme Court,
the question as to which Court has to exercise it and in what manner is one
of mere procedure. So long as the “wills and preferences” of the mentally ill
person and the other factors set out in the rules are borne in mind by the
Court exercising parens patriae jurisdiction, it cannot be held that the High
Court exercising power under Article 226 is denuded of power in view of
the provisions of the RPWD-2016 Act or the Rules thereunder.
221. Thus, both, while exercising jurisdiction under Article 226 and even
in terms of the proviso to Section 14(1) of the RPWD-2016 and under the
MHA-2017, this Court has the power to entertain the present petition
seeking appointment of a guardian.
(ii)    Who can be the guardian/nominated representative? (Legal
222. As discussed earlier, under Section 14(4) of the MHA-2017, the
nominated representative can be any person who may have been chosen by
an advance directive. In the absence of an advance directive, the nominated
representative can be a relative. It is only if a relative is not available or is
not willing to be the nominated representative, that in the order of
preference, a care-giver or thereafter a suitable person can be appointed. A
relative as defined under the MHA-2017, as extracted above, as a person
related to the person with mental illness by blood, marriage or adoption. On
the other hand, the RPWD-2016 does not define who can be a guardian.
While some institutional mechanisms are contemplated under the RPWD-
2016, the existence and the viability of such institutions has not been
addressed before this Court during the course of submissions by either party.
Under the RPWD (Delhi) Rules-2018, the preference of merit for
appointment as a limited guardian is contained in Rule 7(6). The preference
therein is to blood relatives, adult children, siblings, spouse, and it is only
thereafter that care givers or other personalities can be considered. There,
the common principle seems to be preference to relatives over caregivers or
other unrelated people.
223. In the opinion of this Court, the nominated representative or total
support arrangement or guardian need not always be an individual.
Guardianship could be exercised by even a guardianship committee,
depending upon the facts, as long as such a committee would be an
appropriate measure for enabling the person to exercise his legal capacity, as
per his will and preferences. If the mentally ill person requires complex
medical decisions to be taken, has an expanse of moveable/immovable
assets, and requires management of complex financial affairs, and the Court
is of the opinion that this entire function cannot be performed by one
individual, a committee can be appointed.
224. Judicial precedent in India on the appointment of a guardian has
usually related to cases where persons are in comatose condition or are
minors. In the case of a person with mental illness, usually the Courts have
been able to identify a single individual who could be appointed as a
guardian, and there have not been objections from other close relatives. For
a)      In Ali Muntazir (supra), the Bombay High Court appointed the
son of the mentally ill person as the guardian, which was also
supported by the other sons. In the said case, the person
concerned was suffering from advanced dementia, with
probable diagnosis of FTD.
b)      In Vandana Tyagi (supra), a single judge of this Court
appointed the sons of a comatose lady as her guardians, to
utilize her assets, including specifically her late husband’s PPF
account. The Court held that such a situation would not fall
under the MHA-2017 or the RPWD-2016 and therefore, in
absence of legislative guidance, relying upon the Kerala High
Court’s decision in Shobha Gopalakrishnan vs. State of
Kerala [W.P. (C). 37278 of 2018, decided on 20th February,
2019], the Court framed guidelines for appointment of
guardians for comatose persons in NCTD.
c)      In Uma Mittal (supra), the Allahabad High Court appointed the
wife of a person in comatose state, as his guardian, and framed
similar guidelines for the state of Uttar Pradesh, as the Kerela
High Court in Shobha Gopalakrishnan (supra).
d)      In Vijay Ramachandra Salgaonkar (supra), the Bombay High
Court appointed the husband of a woman with vascular
dementia (with diabetes mellitus and hypertension), as her
guardian. The Maharashtra State Legal Services Authority was
designated for monitoring the functioning of the guardian and
the guardian would submit monthly reports to the authority.
e)      In Rajni Hariom (supra), the Bombay High Court appointed
the wife as the guardian of a man, who was in coma. It was held
that this is not covered by the existing legislations concerning
mentally or physically challenged persons.
225. Notably, in none of these cases there was any contest made before the
Court as to who ought to be appointed as the guardian.
226. It is also the settled legal position that the conduct of the person being
considered for appointment as the guardian would be extremely important
and relevant. Persons with conflict or vested interest, naturally, ought not to
be appointed. Persons who may have engaged in conduct that is detrimental
to the mentally ill person or who have exercised undue influence, coercion,
duress ought not to be appointed. These factors have been considered by
Courts in various cases, especially under the MHA-1987. For instance:
a)      In Minu Seth (supra), which was a case under MHA-1987, the
wife had sought a judicial inquisition into the mental condition
of her husband Sh. Binu Seth and sought to be appointed as his
guardian. The mother and brother of the husband challenged the
contention that the person was suffering from mental illness.
The Trial Court’s dismissal of the petition was upheld by the
High Court. Basis a medical board review, it was held that the
person concerned was capable of taking care of himself
independently and it is only his property for which a manager
may have been required. Even so, the wife would not be a
suitable guardian as she had filed divorce proceedings and had
alleged cruelty against the husband, as also other civil
proceedings. Further, it was noticed that the mentally ill person
did not have any individual properties but only joint family
properties. Thus, the appeal was dismissed.
b)      In Avinash Chander Mookhy (supra), a family friend had
sought to be appointed as the guardian of a lady who was
alleged to be mentally ill. The question was whether the family
friend or the brother of the lady, ought to be appointed as the
guardian. In respect of one of the brothers who sought
guardianship, the Court noted that he was resident abroad and
only wanted legal guardianship, but not to discharge his moral
obligations. The only other application for guardianship was
made by the family friend, but the same could also not be
accepted, as under the MHA-1987, a stranger could not be
appointed as a guardian. Therefore, no one was fit enough to be
appointed as a guardian.
227. In this light, this Court must now consider the Petitioners’ submission
that the wife is the most suitable person to be a guardian for her
incapacitated husband. To further this submission, enormous reliance has
been placed on the decisions in Rajni Hariom Sharma (supra), Uma Mittal
(supra) and Vandana Tyagi (supra). Reliance is also placed on U. Suvetha
v. State, (2009) 6 SCC 757, and Indra Sarma (supra), to argue that the
concubine or friend of the mentally ill person cannot be considered as a
228. In Rajni Hariom Sharma (supra), the Bombay High Court made
extremely important observations in respect of the status of a wife. The said
“37. Before moving to Article 226 of the Constitution of
India, status of the petitioner who seeks to be the
guardian of Mr. Hariom Sharma, her husband, needs to
be elaborated upon and discussed a little more in detail.
In the present case, evidently the parties are Hindus;
parties not in any adversarial sense but in the context of
petitioner's claim to represent her husband as his
guardian, considering his medical condition. That brings
us to the question of status of wife in the Indian social,
philosophical, religious and legal context.
38. According to Hindu vedic philosophy, marriage is a
sanskar or a sacrament. What is essentially contemplated
is a union of two souls. The eternal being is composed of
two halves i.e., the man and the woman. Both the halves
are equal and one-half is incomplete without the other.
As long as the wife survives, one half of the husband
survives. Ancient Hindu tradition says that a man's life
can never be complete without a wife i.e., his Ardhangini
or his better half. They are considered to be equal
partners. Wife is not only considered to be Ardhangini
but is also referred to as ‘Sahadharmini’. Literal
meaning of the concept of Ardhangini is that a Hindu
woman is associated with her husband in the journey of
life for fulfillment and for attainment of all goals. She is
also referred to as Sahayogini co-operating with her
husband in all his activities as well as a Sahakarmini
which means having an equal share in the actions of her
husband. Together they are referred as Dampati. In
Manusmriti, Manu had declared the wife as not just
Patni but Dharmapatni meaning thereby that under
dharma she is under obligation to discharge and perform
all duties of her husband.
39. In Kollam Chandra Sekhar v. Kollam Padma Latha,
(2014) 1 SCC 225, Supreme Court was deciding an
appeal by the husband against the judgment of the High
Court setting aside judgment and decree of divorce
granted in favour of the appellant husband by the trial
Court. High Court had not only set aside the judgment
and decree of divorce but had also allowed the
application of respondent wife against the appellant by
granting restitution of conjugal rights. By the said
decision, Supreme Court dismissed the appeal of the
appellant husband and upheld the judgment of the High
Court. In that context, Supreme Court observed that
under Hindu Law, marriage is an institution and is
highly revered in India. Life is made up of good times
and bad, and the bad times can bring with it terrible
illnesses and extreme hardships. Partners in a marriage
must weather these storms.
40. In such circumstances, there can be no manner of
doubt that conceptually the wife can be said to be best-
suited to be the guardian of her husband who is under a
state of incapacity or disability on account of being in a
comatose condition or vegetative state.”
229. In Uma Mittal (supra) again, the Allahabad High Court exercising
parens patriae jurisdiction over a person in a comatose condition, appointed
his wife as the guardian, as stated above.
230. In U. Suvetha (supra), in the context of Section 498-A of the Indian
Penal Code, 1860, the Supreme Court categorically holds that a girlfriend
cannot be a relative. The relevant extract reads as under:
“18. By no stretch of imagination would a girlfriend or
even a concubine in an etymological sense be a
“relative”. The word “relative” brings within its purview
a status. Such a status must be conferred either by blood
or marriage or adoption. If no marriage has taken place,
the question of one being relative of another would not
arise.”
231.     In Indra Sarma (supra), again in the context of Protection of Women
from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 (hereinafter “PWDVA”), a married
person with two children had started living in a relationship with another
lady. The said lady claimed that she was in a “relationship in the nature of a
marriage” with the man and sought relief under the PWDVA. In the said
context, the Supreme Court recognised the sanctity of marriage and marital
24. Marriage is often described as one of the basic civil
rights of man/woman, which is voluntarily undertaken
by the parties in public in a formal way, and once
concluded, recognizes the parties as husband and wife.
Three elements of common law marriage are (1)
agreement to be married (2) living together as husband
and wife, (3) holding out to the public that they are
married. Sharing a common household and duty to live
together form part of the ‘Consortium Omnis Vitae”
which obliges spouses to live together, afford each other
reasonable marital privileges and rights and be honest
and faithful to each other. One of the most important
invariable consequences of marriage is the reciprocal
support and the responsibility of maintenance of the
common household, jointly and severally. Marriage as
an institution has great legal significance and various
obligations and duties flow out of marital relationship,
as per law, in the matter of inheritance of property,
successionship, etc. Marriage, therefore, involves legal
requirements of formality, publicity, exclusivity and all
the legal consequences flow out of that relationship.
25. Marriages in India take place either following the
personal Law of the Religion to which a party belongs
or following the provisions of the Special Marriage Act.
Marriage, as per the Common Law, constitutes a
contract between a man and a woman, in which the
parties undertake to live together and support each
other. Marriage, as a concept, is also nationally and
internationally recognized. O’Regan, J., in Dawood and
Another v. Minister of Home Affairs and Others 2000
“Marriage and the family are social institutions of vital
importance. Entering into and sustaining a marriage is
a matter of intense private significance to the parties to
that marriage for they make a promise to one another to
establish and maintain an intimate relationship for the
rest of their lives which they acknowledge obliges them
to support one another, to live together and to be faithful
to one another. Such relationships are of profound
significance to the individuals concerned. But such
relationships have more than personal significance at
least in part because human beings are social beings
whose humanity is expressed through their relationships
with others. Entering into marriage therefore is to enter
into a relationship that has public significance as well.
The institutions of marriage and the family are
important social institutions that provide for the
security, support and companionship of members of our
society and bear an important role in the rearing of
children. The celebration of a marriage gives rise to
moral and legal obligations, particularly the reciprocal
duty of support placed upon spouses and their joint
responsibility for supporting and raising children born
of the marriage. These legal obligations perform an
important social function. This importance is
symbolically acknowledged in part by the fact that
marriage is celebrated generally in a public ceremony,
often before family and close friends....”
232. In the said judgment, the Supreme Court holds that the status of a
person – in a live-in a relationship with a married person whose spouse was
alive and who had children –would be that of concubine.
“57. The Appellant, admittedly, entered into a live-in-
relationship with the respondent knowing that he was
married person, with wife and two children, hence, the
generic proposition laid down by the Privy Council in
Liyanapatabendage Balshamy, AIR 1927 PC 185, that
where a man and a woman are proved to have lived
together as husband and wife, the law presumes that they
are living together in consequence of a valid marriage
will not apply and, hence, the relationship between the
appellant and the respondent was not a relationship in
the nature of a marriage, and the status of the appellant
was that of a concubine. A concubine cannot maintain a
relationship in the nature of marriage because such a
relationship will not have exclusivity and will not be
monogamous in character. Reference may also be made
to the judgments of this Court in Badri Prasad v.
Director of Consolidation 1978 (3) SCC 527 and Tulsa v.
65. We may now consider whether the tests, we have laid
down, have been satisfied in the instant case. We have
found that the appellant was not ignorant of the fact that
the respondent was a married person with wife and two
children, hence, was party to an adulterous and
bigamous relationship. Admittedly, the relationship
between the appellant and respondent was opposed by
the wife of the respondent, so also by the parents of the
appellant and her brother and sister and they knew that
they could not have entered into a legal marriage or
maintained a relationship in the nature of marriage.
Parties never entertained any intention to rear children
and on three occasions the pregnancy was terminated.
Having children is a strong circumstance to indicate a
relationship in the nature of marriage. No evidence has
been adduced to show that the parties gave each other
mutual support and companionship. No material has
been produced to show that the parties have ever
projected or conducted themselves as husband and wife
and treated by friends, relatives and others, as if they are
a married couple. On the other hand, it is the specific
case of the appellant that the respondent had never held
out to the public that she was his wife. No evidence of
socialization in public has been produced. There is
nothing to show that there was pooling of resources or
financial arrangements between them. On the other hand,
it is the specific case of the appellant that the respondent
had never opened any joint account or executed any
document in the joint name. Further, it was also
submitted that the respondent never permitted to suffix
his name after the name of the appellant. No evidence is
forthcoming, in this case, to show that the respondent
had caused any harm or injuries or endangered the
health, safely, life, limb or well- being, or caused any
physical or sexual abuse on the appellant, except that he
did not maintain her or continued with the relationship.”
233. The Court expressed a hope, that such relationships would not
constitutes marriage.
“67. Marriage and family are social institutions of vital
importance. Alienation of affection, in that context, is an
intentional tort, as held by this Court in Pinakin
Mahipatray Rawal case (supra), which gives a cause of
action to the wife and children of the respondent to sue
the appellant for alienating the husband/father from the
company of his wife/children, knowing fully well they are
legally wedded wife/children of the respondent..
68.. We are, therefore, of the view that the appellant,
having been fully aware of the fact that the respondent
was a married person, could not have entered into a live-
in relationship in the nature of marriage. All live-in-
relationships are not relationships in the nature of
marriage. Appellant’s and the respondent’s relationship
is, therefore, not a “relationship in the nature of
marriage” because it has no inherent or essential
characteristic of a marriage, but a relationship other
than “in the nature of marriage” and the appellant’s
status is lower than the status of a wife and that
relationship would not fall within the definition of
“domestic relationship” under Section 2(f) of the DV Act.
If we hold that the relationship between the appellant and
the respondent is a relationship in the nature of a
marriage, we will be doing an injustice to the legally
wedded wife and children who opposed that relationship.
Consequently, any act, omission or commission or
conduct of the respondent in connection with that type of
relationship, would not amount to “domestic violence”
under Section 3 of the DV Act.”
234. The Supreme Court clearly concludes that if a person in a live-in
relationship, is recognised as a wife, it would do injustice to the legally
wedded wife and children.
235. From the above discussion on the statutory provisions under the
RPWD (Delhi) Rules-2018, and the MHA-2017, as also through judicial
precedents under different factual contexts, it is clear that in the case of
(i)     primacy and preference is given while appointing guardians, to
family and relatives, namely, parents, siblings, children, spouse and it
is only in circumstances when such persons are not available or do not
give consent to be appointed as guardians, other persons are to be
(ii)    Conflicts of interest and conduct of any proposed guardian, are
(iii)   Even under Section 18 of MHA-2017, for the purposes of
treatment, the manner has to be acceptable to the mentally ill persons
as also their families and caregivers.
(iii)   Who can be the guardian/nominated representative? (Factual
236. Before answering the above question, some facts surrounding Mr.
DMP need to be noticed. Mr. DMP is a 7th Term Member of Parliament who
lives in the Lutyens Bungalow zone in Delhi. He is a man who has built an
enormous empire and an entrepreneur who has set up an extremely
successful business. He owns moveable and immovable assets, including
immovable property in Delhi and Mumbai, bank deposits in various banks,
shares/debentures in four companies forming part of the Aristo
Pharmaceuticals Group etc.
237. A perusal of the record reveals that Mr. DMP was a family man. He
hails from Bihar and has extended family in Bihar. However, his immediate
family consists of the following persons:
iv)     Daughter-in-law from deceased son – Mrs. KR
vi)     Brother – Mr. US, who is currently the Managing Director of
238. Apart from the above, Ms. UD i.e., Respondent No.5 claims that she
is the wife of Mr. DMP on the basis of certain documents.
239. In the petition seeking guardianship filed by the wife of Mr. DMP, the
two sons and their families have supported their mother. Ms. UD on the
other hand, who also claims to be the wife of Mr. DMP is supported by the
wife of the deceased son of Mr. DMP - Mrs. KR and by the younger brother
240. The vexed question before this Court is as to who ought to be
appointed as the guardian of Mr. DMP, for taking decisions relating to his
health care and his financial affairs/properties. All the persons who have
appeared before this Court have consented to being appointed as guardians.
241. From the documents placed on record, certain facts would be required
to be noticed. Mr. DMP was married to Mrs. SD in the year 1960, through
whom he had three sons. One son passed away in 2011. There were
indications of mental illness in Mr. DMP since 1997, as is clear from the
report of Lilavati Hospital in Mumbai. Mr. DMP always lived with his wife
and children in the company of Ms. UD in the same house. Mr. DMP did not
divorce or legally separate himself from his wife – Mrs. SD. Photographs
on record show Mr. DMP along with his children, grandchildren, daughters-
in-law, Mrs. SD and Ms. UD all living in the same house. The photographs
also show that the sons were involved in the business of Mr. DMP and were
travelling for conferences etc. within India till 2013-2014. An apartment was
taken on rent in 2018 for one of the sons – Mr. RS, which was paid for by
Mr. DMP’s company – M/s Aristo Pharmaceuticals Pvt. Ltd. Mrs. SD
owned a large number of shares in the company which have, however, been
transferred and now stand in the name of Mrs.KR. As on date, neither Mrs.
SD nor Mr. DMP’s children own any shareholding in any of Mr. DMP’s
242. Respondent No.5 i.e., Ms. UD has placed on record a passport of Mr.
DMP from the year 2000, wherein Ms. UD has been shown as his wife.
However, in most of the election related documents, the Petitioner i.e., Mrs.
SD is clearly mentioned as Mr. DMP’s wife.
243. Several criminal complaints have been filed by the parties against one
another. It is Ms. UD’s case that Mr. DMP has disowned both his sons.
Affidavits dated 5th July, 2016 and 17th October, 2017 are relied upon.
However, in response to these affidavits, it is argued that the language of
these affidavits is identical and hence, not genuine. Secondly, the genuinity
of the affidavit disowning Mr. RS is contested on the ground that the same
was never placed before or mentioned in the Habeas Corpus proceedings
before the ld. Division Bench. Thus, the disownment affidavits are disputed
244. The case of the Petitioner and her sons is that Respondent No.5
prevented the family from meeting Mr. DMP, which led to the filing of the
Habeas Corpus petition. The said petition was filed by Mr. RJS, seeking the
production of his mother Mrs. SD. The proceedings and the status report
filed in the said writ petition by the police show that Mrs. SD and Mr. US’s
wife – Mrs. RD were living under confinement. This led the Division Bench
to take extremely serious note of the facts revealed in the status reports,
which resulted in the Court directing a medical assessment of Mr. DMP. As
recorded in the orders passed by the ld. Division Bench, the Court had met
Mr. DMP, his wife and his son – Mr. RJS and noticed that Mr. DMP was
incoherent and could not recognise his own family members. These facts
had never been disclosed to the family of Mr. DMP i.e. his wife and
children. The fact that Mr. DMP was suffering from FTD was revealed
during the course of the proceedings in the Habeas Corpus petition. The
Division Bench had directed investigation into the manner and for four
weeks Respondent No.5 was directed to live outside the Bungalow.
However, after the expiry of four weeks, Respondent No.5 has moved back
into the Bungalow.
245. The present petition has been filed by the wife of Mr. DMP i.e., Mrs.
SD, who had, since being moved by the ld. Division Bench to the property
in Vasant Vihar, not met her husband. During the pendency of this writ
petition, Mrs. SD has met Mr. DMP on a few occasions for a limited time.
The said meetings have been extremely cordial and there has been no breach
of tranquillity or peace. Mr. DMP has enjoyed the company of Mrs. SD, as
is evident from the Local Commissioner’s Reports, though he does not
remember her name. This Court has also interacted with Mr. DMP, Mrs. SD,
the three daughters-in-law, the two sons and Ms. UD. Decisions relating to
the medical treatment of Mr. DMP, during the period when Mr. DMP was
estranged from his family members, are being taken by Ms. UD. The two
secretaries of Mr. DMP i.e., Mr. T.R. Narayanan and Mr. Shrinath Banerjee,
work under the directions of Ms. UD. The entire household is run by Ms.
UD. There are various bank accounts in which Ms. UD is a joint account
holder. All the shares which were in the name of Mrs. SD now stand in the
name of Mrs. KR. Mrs.KR is also stated to have appointed her brother as a
Director in M/s Mapra Labs.
246. Since 2016-2017, family’s access to Mr. DMP has been completely
blocked. A General Power of Attorney is stated to have been executed in
January, 2020 in favour of Mrs. KR to manage three properties of Mr. DMP.
A lease agreement has also been entered into by Mrs. KR as the GPA holder
with M/s Aristo Pharmaceuticals Private Limited in January, 2020, renting
out the property in Vasant Vihar, where, pursuant to the ld. Division
Bench’s order, Mrs. SD is presently living. The said lease has been executed
by Mrs. KR on behalf of Mr. DMP.
247. In the background of the above facts, the status of the various
248. Insofar as Mrs. SD is concerned, the only submission against her
being appointed as the guardian is that she is illiterate and may not be
capable of taking decisions for Mr. DMP. It is also alleged that she is under
the control of her sons who have influenced her into filing various litigations
against Ms. UD and Mrs. KR.
249. The status of Mrs. SD as the wife of Mr. DMP cannot be questioned
as it has been repeatedly reflected in various public records, including a
decision of the Patna High Court in Civil Writ No. 22948/2011
where Mr. US was one of the Petitioners and where Mrs. SD has been
described as the wife of Mr. DMP. Mrs. SD has borne children through Mr.
DMP and has cordial relations with both her sons, daughters-in-law and
250. The Court has interacted with her and finds her to be a simple lady
who is a housemaker who has lived in the company of Mr. DMP. She is
visible in various photographs which have been placed on record, along with
other family members. Even Mrs. KR, in her statement to the Court, has
submitted that she respects Mrs. SD and refers to her as ‘Maa-ji’ and has no
dispute with Mrs. SD. The Court asked Mrs. SD some questions through the
virtual platform which she was able to answer, though she did experience
some issues hearing. Thus, in effect, there are no serious allegations against
251. In respect of this son, it is argued that he is of very aggressive
behaviour and has publicly made statements against his father – Mr. DMP,
who is stated to have been extremely hurt by his conduct and disowned him
vide affidavit dated 6th July, 2016. The video of Mr. RJS speaking in public
has been placed on record and has been viewed by the Court. There are
certain allegations that he, in violation of the order of the ld. Division
Bench, started to live with his mother in the Vasant Vihar property after she
had moved there by virtue of the ld. Division Bench’s order.
252. Ld. Counsel for Mr. RJS has, however, placed on record documents to
show that Mr. RJS’s rent for the year 2018-19 and his car parking charges
for the year 2017 were being paid by M/s Aristo Pharmaceuticals Pvt. Ltd.
i.e., Mr. DMP’s flagship company. It is submitted that Mr. RJS has travelled
with Mr. DMP for conferences in 2013 and 2015 and unlike his brothers,
who were only made Directors, he was made the Joint Managing Director of
M/s Aristo Pharmaceuticals Pvt. Ltd. It has also been claimed that till about
September, 2019, the employees of M/s Aristo Pharmaceuticals Pvt. Ltd.
were reporting to Mr. RJS. It is submitted that the allegations against Mr.
RJS are baseless and in response to him taking a stand against Ms. UD and
others by filing the habeas corpus petition before the ld. Division Bench.
253. In respect of this son, the only allegation is that he was also disowned
by Mr. DMP in 2017. However, the said affidavit has been placed before the
Court for the first time in this writ petition and was not even pleaded in the
Habeas Corpus petition which was heard by the ld. Division Bench in 2019.
Apart from the affidavit of disownment, there is no other allegation raised
against Mr. RS. As held in Preeti Satija (supra) disownment affidavits
would not break all legally relevant family ties and would not have a
dispositive legal effect. The Court held therein:
“The facts of this case contain the classic elements of a
husband seeking to evade his responsibilities upon
marital discord breaking out. He allegedly disappeared
and was "disowned" by his mother. The appellant's
mother-in law then instituted the suit, to dispossess the
daughter in law and her grand-children, claiming that
she no longer has any relationship with her son or her
daughter in law. She based her claim to ownership of the
suit property on a will. The daughter in law has not
admitted the will. Nor has it been proved in RFA (OS)
24/2012 Page 23 probate proceedings. Often, sons move
out, or transfer properties or ownership rights, or shares
in immovable properties, at the hint of trouble or discord
with their wives, in favour of their relatives. Likewise, the
parents of the husband often in such cases "disown" them
after the son moves out from the common or "joint"
premises owned by either or both his parents, when there
is outbreak of marital discord. Courts have to be
cautious in their approach, while entertaining and short
circuiting suits for possession, which are in effect
directed against the plaintiffs' daughter-in law, or else
the right of residence in shared households would be a
mere chimera, a teasing illusion which the law grandly
promises, but is seldom, if ever, able to enforce. In fact,
the strategy of "disowning" sons, through public notices
or advertisement, is not to be taken lightly. For example,
even if a son is disowned by either parent, the death of
that parent would, if intestate, still lead to devolution of
property upon that son. Indeed, a mere proclamation
does not have a dispositive legal effect, breaking all
legally relevant familial ties. Thus, absent a deed of
relinquishment or other formal deed of partition of the
family or separation between the members, the Court
must be cautious in denying statutory rights to wives, as
against members of the husband's family, on the basis of
such tentative facts. To the contrary, if the Court is to
place reliance on such acts, benefits enacted by the 2005
Act in favour of the wife would be bypassed on account of
alleged, and possibly fleeting, discords between the
husband and his family. Indeed, such an approach is
neither legally tenable, nor viable given the scheme of
the Act.”
254. There are no allegations made against the wives of Mr. RJS or Mr. RS
or any of the grandchildren, except one son of Mr. RS – Mr. CS, who is
stated to have produced a rap song criticising his grandfather. A viewing of
the rap song shows that the said grandson of Mr. DMP is a well-known
rapper who has expressed some sadness about how he was always treated as
a rich boy born into a rich family but had to find his own way to earn
money. In this process, he expresses displeasure in a very creative manner
about how Mr. DMP, who was known as ‘Raja’, has sometimes not treated
his family very well and has demeaned himself with his conduct. In the
opinion of this Court, a rap song produced by a grandson would, at worst, be
considered an act of naivety rather than one intended to cause any harm or
255. Mr. US is the brother of Mr. DMP, who has been involved in the
business of Mr. DMP, right from its inception. Not many details about the
brother have been put forth before this Court. Allegations have been made
by the Petitioner and the supporting Respondents that he has supported Ms.
UD and turned a blind eye to the ill-treatment of Mrs. SD and his own wife
– Mrs. RD, at the hands of Ms. UD. It is further alleged that Mr. US has
illegally become the Director of M/s Aristo Pharmaceuticals Pvt. Ltd. on 1st
January, 2021 when Mr. DMP, who is the largest shareholder, was not in a
position to appoint a Director of the Company. Reliance has been placed on
order dated 20th September, 2019 of the ld. Division Bench in W.P.(Crl.)
2255/2019, to submit that both, Ms. UD and Mr. US concealed the medical
condition of Mr. DMP from the Court. It is alleged that due to the
concealment of Mr. DMP’s mental condition from the Management of
Apollo Hospital, Sarita Vihar, the condition of Mr. DMP deteriorated and he
developed metabolic encephalopathy. Mr. US continues to deny that Mr.
DMP is incapable of taking cogent decisions, as is evident from his reply to
256. The manner in which the businesses and the companies are being run
by him has not been placed before the Court. However, the fact that he has
been involved in the business almost since inception shows that Mr. DMP
trusted him immensely, especially while he himself was involved in political
257. From the submissions made before this Court, it is clear that he
supports Ms. UD. Insofar as this Court is concerned, some suspicion does
arise qua the brother as he does not readily accept Mrs. SD as Mr. DMP’s
wife, though the same is part of public record. It is also unclear as to how he
would have not objected to the condition in which Mrs. SD and his own wife
– Mrs. RD were found when the ld. Division Bench intervened in this
258. Mrs. KR is the widow of the deceased son of Mr. DMP and Mrs. SD.
She lives in the official Bungalow of Mr. DMP. It is her case that prior to
2019 she was partly living in Delhi and partly in Mumbai. She has two sons.
She was directed to take care of Mr. DMP during the time when
investigation against Ms. UD was directed by the ld. Division Bench. She is
not highly educated, though she appears to know more than what she
informed the Court during her interactions as she is continuously living with
259. The fact that all the shareholdings belonging to Mrs. SD are now in
the name of Mrs. KR leads to some suspicion. Further, the execution of the
GPA in her favour and her exercising rights on behalf of Mr. DMP as the
GPA holder casts some doubt as to her bonafide. There is also an allegation
that when Mr. RS was removed from the Directorship of the company, her
brother was made the Director. There is also no explanation as to why she
did not object to the treatment meted out to Mrs. SD and Mrs. RD, while she
was living in the official Bungalow.
260. Moreover, in 2019, when it was noticed that Mr. DMP’s mental
condition has considerably deteriorated, she appears to have not taken any
steps to provide proper medical care or treatment to Mr. DMP, or reveal this
condition to other family members, until the intervention of the ld. Division
261. The documents placed on record point to the fact that Ms. UD has
been in the company of Mr. DMP and his family for more than 40 years.
The photographs as also the other documents placed on record go to show
that while Mr. DMP lived in her company, he continued to live with his
family members, including his wife - Mrs. SD. In that sense, Mr. DMP had
not separated himself from his wife, children and grandchildren. It is evident
from the photographs on record that he attended all social occasions,
including marriages, birthdays and anniversaries. It is only since 2016/2017,
when Mr. DMP’s medical condition, especially his mental condition
deteriorated, that his family members appear to have been completely
alienated from him. With the progressive mental disorder of Mr. DMP, Ms.
UD has clearly taken over the running of the household as also the
businesses of Mr. DMP.
262. Ms. UD’s companionship with Mr. DMP may not have been objected
to by Mrs. SD. Considering the educational qualifications of Mrs. SD, as
also the social context of the family, neither Mrs. SD nor the family
members may have had a say in the companionship of Mr. DMP with Ms.
UD. Ms. UD is not merely in charge of the household and Mr. DMP’s
businesses but also controls all the assets of Mr. DMP, which is evident
from the fact that both the secretaries of Mr. DMP operate from the official
residence and work under her directions. Ms. UD also became the joint
account holder of the bank accounts of Mr. DMP after Mr. DMP was
diagnosed with FTD during the proceedings before the ld. Division Bench.
The manner in which the Banks may have permitted her to become a joint
account holder after Mr. DMP’s diagnosis would require to be enquired into
in appropriate proceedings as it is not clear as to what documentation was
supplied to the Banks to make her a joint account holder in this manner.
263. Even in respect of the medical treatment of Mr. DMP, it was only per
chance that Mr. DMP was diagnosed with FTD during the proceedings
before the ld. Division Bench. Until then, it seems that none of the family
members were informed of his mental condition and no care or treatment in
respect of FTD was provided to him. This may have been due to various
apprehensions in respect of his official position as a Member of Parliament.
However, since Ms. UD and Mrs. KR were exclusively living with Mr.
DMP since 2016-2017, the non-disclosure of his mental condition and non-
administration of required medicines shows that Mr. DMP was clearly
deprived of proper medical treatment for his mental condition, until his FTD
diagnosis in 2019.
264. The blame for not providing proper and timely medical treatment to
Mr. DMP prior to 2019 clearly lies on Ms. UD and Mrs. KR. The filing of
the habeas corpus and the deplorable condition in which Mrs. SD and Mrs.
RD were found in the residence of Mr. DMP also shows that Ms. UD had
over-powered Mrs. SD and the others in the family, while taking control of
the household affairs of Mr. DMP.
265. The continued exclusive control of Ms. UD over Mr. DMP is clearly
not in the interest of Mr. DMP. The photographs on record prior to his
mental illness i.e., prior to 2016-2017, reveal a person who is extremely
happy with his family members. Disputes between the father and children,
brothers or other family members are natural, and cannot by themselves
result in permanent deprivation of each other’s company. Such disputes are
usually resolved within the family. However, in the present case, such an
opportunity does not appear to have arisen, at least in the last four or five
years, owing to the exclusive control exercised by Ms. UD over Mr. DMP,
in the backdrop of his deteriorating mental condition.
266. In conclusion, qua the various persons belonging to the family of Mr.
DMP, Mrs.SD, being the wife of Mr. DMP is related to him by marriage.
There are no allegations against her except the fact that she may not be fully
qualified to act as Mr. DMP’s guardian, owing to her educational
qualification and lack of exposure. This Court is of the opinion that the role
of the wife/spouse is of prime importance. Merely because the spouse is
illiterate does not mean that she cannot take care of her husband who is
mentally ill. Her visits to meet Mr. DMP have been very amicable and
congenial. She speaks to Mr. DMP in her own native language and enjoys
the confidence of both her sons, daughters-in-law, and grandchildren. She is
also involved in the preparations for the marriage of one of the grandsons.
These facts show that the position of Mrs. SD, as the wife of Mr. DMP and
the primary caregiver deserves to be recognised.
267. Secondly, there is an allegation against Mr. RJS, i.e., the youngest son
of Mr. DMP. In so far as Mr. RS i.e., Mr. DMP’s oldest son is concerned,
except the disownment affidavit of 2017, there are no major allegations
against him. Even the said disownment affidavit is under a serious cloud as
the same was neither mentioned in the proceedings before the ld. Division
Bench or by Mr. DMP to the police when the ld. Division Bench sought a
status report. Further, Mr.RS was active in Mr. DMP’s business for an
extremely long time, even as late as September, 2018. Ms. UD is also stated
to have approached Mr.RS to explore the possibility of a resolution of
disputes after the proceedings before the ld. Division Bench.
268. Thirdly, Mr. US, i.e., the younger brother of Mr. DMP has been
actively involved in the running of his businesses since inception i.e., for
more than 45 years. Though doubts have been expressed as to his credibility,
including an allegation that he concealed the mental health condition of Mr.
DMP, considering his long association with the businesses of Mr. DMP and
the fact that the businesses are still extremely successful, Mr. US is being
considered by this Court for the purposes of being appointed to a
Guardianship Committee. Moreover, in the order of preference, both under
the MHA-2017, as also the RPWD (Delhi) Rules-2018, relatives by blood
and marriage get precedence over others, in the absence of an advance
269. In the present case, admittedly, there is no advance directive by Mr.
DMP. The will and preference of Mr. DMP has been deciphered on the basis
of the documents that have been placed on record, including photographs
etc., as also the interaction of the Court with Mr. DMP and other parties,
including the Local Commissioner.
270. Thus, this Court is of the opinion that there is a clear need to change
the status quo as it exists today. Mr. DMP ought to be permitted to live in a
happy and congenial atmosphere with his wife, children and grandchildren.
He should also be allowed to enjoy the company of his siblings and
extended family, without pressure from any quarter. Ms. UD can continue to
live in the residence of Mr. DMP, however, she cannot be given exclusive
control of Mr. DMP, as is the position currently. There is an imminent and
urgent need for the family to start living together as a family, while
maintaining peace and tranquillity in the residence and providing a happy
atmosphere for Mr. DMP. A person suffering from ‘Fronto-Temporal
Dementia’ also requires a comfortable, vibrant and congenial atmosphere,
which does not necessarily mean the company of a limited number of
persons. Mr. DMP, having been a family man all along, a public figure, as
also an entrepreneur, is used to living in an expanded social network, of
which he has been deprived of in the last four to five years. Thus, this Court
is of the opinion that the exclusive control and association of Mr. DMP
cannot be continued – to the exclusion of the wife, children, siblings and
other family members – solely with Ms. UD/Mrs. KR.
271. In the above legal and factual background, this Court holds that the
present case is one which reveals exceptional circumstances for exercise of
parens patriae jurisdiction as also jurisdiction under the RPWD-2016 and
MHA-2017. Under Section 14(1) proviso of the RPWD-2016, total support
would have to be provided considering that Mr. DMP is unable to take any
decisions for his own welfare whatsoever. Under the MHA-2017, nominated
representative has to also be appointed for taking decisions for medical care
and treatment of Mr. DMP.
272. Moreover, the nominated representative or the guardian need not
always be a single individual. Especially in the present case, the movable
and immovable assets and financial affairs of Mr. DMP are vast; it would be
physically impossible for any particular individual to be able to exercise
control and judgment, or to take proper decisions in respect of Mr. DMP’s
healthcare. Accordingly, this Court is of the opinion that a Guardianship
Committee would deserve to be appointed for the purpose of taking care of
Mr. DMP and his financial affairs. In the above circumstances, the following
a)      A Guardianship Committee of Mrs. SD, Mr. RS and Mr. US,
i.e. the wife, son and brother, related by blood and marriage (as
given in the order of precedence under both the MHA-2017 and
RPWD-2016), is constituted for the purposes for acting both as
a nominated representative committee under the MHA-2017
and for providing total support under the RPWD-2016. The
said Committee shall take unanimous decisions in respect of all
affairs of Mr. DMP including medical treatment, healthcare
decisions qua daily living, financial affairs dealing with
movable and immovable assets, decisions qua the shareholding
of Mr. DMP etc. The said Guardianship Committee shall
consult with Mr. DMP to the extent possible. The said
Guardianship Committee shall also be entitled to operate the
bank accounts and deal with the investments of Mr. DMP.
However, all decisions of the Guardianship Committee have to
be unanimous.
b)      If a unanimous decision is not possible on any aspect and there
is disagreement among members of the Guardianship
Committee, such aspects shall be referred to Justice Rajiv Sahai
Endlaw (Retd.), who was already appointed as the interim
guardian vide order of this Court dated 8th September, 2021,
who shall now act as the `Supervising Guardian’. On such
aspects, where there is divergence or disagreement, the
decisions of the Supervising Guardian, shall be final and
binding on all parties.
c)      All banks, financial institutions, companies, hospitals, doctors,
etc. shall be bound by and shall give effect to the directions
issued in paragraphs (a) and (b) above.
d)      Insofar as medical treatment and daily living is concerned, Ms.
UD      and    Mrs.   KR     can  give   their    suggestions             and
recommendations to the Guardianship Committee. However, it
would be for the Committee to take the final decision.
e)      Mr. DMP shall continue to reside in his official residence. Mrs.
SD and any one female family member i.e., Mr. DMP’s
daughter-in-law, are entitled to and are accordingly, permitted
to reside in the official residence of Mr. DMP, if they choose to.
The residence of Mr. DMP, shall be an ‘open house’ for free
ingress and egress of all close family members including both
his sons, daughters-in-law, grandchildren and their families,
brothers and his family and any other close relatives, as may be
permitted by the Committee.
f)      Ms. UD can continue to live in the official residence, if she so
chooses, but shall not prevent any family member, as directed
above, from visiting or residing in the said residence of Mr.
g)      It is also directed that the DCP (Crime Branch), Mr. Joy Tirkey,
who had earlier conducted the investigation pursuant to orders
of the Ld. Division Bench in the Habeas Corpus petition, shall
pay periodic visits at least once a week, to ensure Mr. DMP is
comfortable at the residence, in the company of his family
members. Any family member who causes any breach of peace
and tranquillity can be barred, by the Committee by unanimous
decision from visiting the residence of Mr. DMP. If the
Supervising Guardian receives any complaint from any family
member or Ms. UD or Mrs. KR regarding any commotion or
breach of peace, at the residence, he would also be empowered
to pass orders barring entry of any individual into the official
residence.
h)      The Guardianship Committee shall have access to all
documents and records relating to the finances, properties,
shareholding, investments, etc., of Mr. DMP to enable the
Committee to take decisions, keeping in mind the will and
preferences of Mr. DMP. To this end, access shall be provided
by both Mr. T.R. Narayanan and Mr. Shrinath Banerjee–
Secretaries of Mr. DMP, to the accounts and all records of Mr.
i)      The Medical Board constituted by this Court consisting of
i. Dr. M.V. Padma, Professor & HOD, Neurology, Chief –
vasanthapadma123@gmail.com (9810819167);
ii. Dr. Achal Srivastava, Professor Department of
achalsrivastava@hotmail.com (9811178784); and
iii. Dr. Nitish Naik, Professor, Department of Cardiology,
AIIMS, New Delhi. Email: nitishnaik@yahoo.co.in
would examine Mr. DMP every month at least once a month,
which shall be facilitated by the Guardianship Committee. The
chair of this Medical Board shall continue to be Dr. M.V.
Padma. The monthly reports, after examination, shall be
submitted to the Supervising Guardian. If any emergency
medical decision is to be taken and all members of the
Committee are not available, any one of the members of the
Guardianship Committee would be entitled to take the decision
of hospitalization, in consultation with the above doctor, which
shall then be telephonically communicated to the other two
members of the Committee.
j)      The Committee would also be empowered to delegate everyday
chores in the household to a person whom the Committee trusts,
for a specific purpose, but who shall be accountable to the
Guardianship Committee. The decisions taken                       by the
Guardianship Committee shall be continuously informed to the
Supervising Guardian - Justice Rajiv Sahai Endlaw (Retd.), on
a fortnightly basis. The above arrangement at this stage, shall
continue at least, for a period of three years, which is also the
time period contemplated under the RPWD (Delhi) Rules-2018,
for limited guardianship. A status report shall be submitted at
the end of every six months, by the Supervising Guardian to the
Court, to review the present arrangement of guardianship, if
required. If there is any improvement of Mr. DMP’s health
condition, including his mental condition, modification of the
above arrangement can be sought by moving an application in
the present petition.
k)      There are various videos and photographs etc., filed by the
parties and by the Local Commissioner. All this electronic data
shall be preserved and saved, along with the electronic record
of this petition with a #hash value so that it is not tampered
with, in any manner and is available for future reference. The IT
Department, High Court of Delhi shall take requisite steps in
this regard.
273. During the course of these hearings, in order to avoid further
multiplicity of proceedings, in addition to the already pending over 50
proceedings, ld. Senior counsels had agreed to not proceed with the various
criminal complaints and other cases pending before Courts and other
authorities. The pendency of these cases amongst the family members is not
in the interest of Mr. DMP. While exercising parens patriae jurisdiction,
this Court has to be conscious of the fact that resolution of the disputes
amongst the family members would be required for maintenance of peace
and harmony within the family which would be as per the will and
preferences of Mr. DMP. Under these circumstances the following
a)      The District and Sessions Judge in the Patiala House Courts
shall consolidate all the criminal cases in one Court so as to
avoid multiplicity of proceedings, as also wastage of judicial
time. The list of cases shall be forwarded by the Registrar
(Writs) of this Court to the Principal District and Sessions
b)      Insofar as the complaints which have been filed before various
police stations are concerned, the parties are permitted to
approach Supervising Guardian, if they wish to seek mediation
amongst themselves. If such a request is made, the Supervising
Guardian is permitted to mediate the disputes which form the
subject matter of these complaints.
274. Remuneration of the Supervising Guardian - Justice Rajiv Sahai
Endlaw (Retd.) is fixed in terms of order dated 8th September, 2021 in the
“iii) The interim guardian shall be paid an honorarium
of Rs.3 lakhs per month exclusive of secretarial,
travelling and other expenses which shall be borne from
the DMP’s accounts.
iv)    The interim guardian may appoint a Manager to
assist him in carrying out his functions and also fix a
reasonable remuneration of the said Manager.”
275. The petition is disposed of in the above terms along with all pending
applications. In view of direction (h) above, no further orders are called for
in CM APPL. 36031/2021. List for receiving and consideration of the status
report of the Supervising Guardian - Justice Rajiv Sahai Endlaw (Retd.) on
276. The digitally signed copy of this judgment, duly uploaded on the
official website of the Delhi High Court, www.delhihighcourt.nic.in, shall
be treated as the certified copy of the judgment for the purpose of ensuring
compliance. No physical copy of the judgment shall be insisted upon by any
authority/entity or litigant.