Case :- CRIMINAL REVISION No. - 1154 of 2021
Opposite Party :- State of U.P. and Another
Counsel for Revisionist :- Amit Krishna
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.,Siddharth Khare
1.     This criminal revision is directed against the judgment
and order dated 4.3.2021 passed by Additional Special
Judge, Family Court, Gautam Budh Nagar in Criminal Misc.
Case No. 653 of 2013 Smt. Sneha Vs. Tarun Pandit. By the
impugned order the learned court below has allowed the
maintenance application U/s 125 Cr.P.C. of O.P. No. 2 Smt.
Sneha Pandit and has awarded Rs. 25,000/- per month as
maintenance to her from the date of filing of the application.
2.     In brief the facts are that O.P. No. 2 Smt. Sneha
Pandit moved an application for maintenance U/s 125
Cr.P.C. against revisionist Tarun Pandit with the allegations
that her marriage was solemnized with opposite party on
22.11.2009 and she performed her marital obligations after
the marriage. After sometime of the marriage the behaviour
of opposite party was not cordial with her and he started to
mentally and physically torture her. Making certain other
allegations it was further stated that opposite party has left
her at her maternal house and since 30.11.2013 she is
living with her father. The opposite party is ignoring her and
not maintaining her and is not ready to keep her with him
and has deserted her. She has no source of income while
opposite party is Squadron Leader in Air Force and his
salary is Rs. 80,000/- per month. On the aforesaid ground
Rs. 40,000/- as maintenance allowance per month was
claimed by O.P. No. 2.
The revisionist (opposite party) filed his reply in which
he admitted the marriage but denied rest of the allegations
and further submitted that the applicant herself without any
just cause is living separately from her husband and it is
she who has deserted the opposite party.             Revisionist
(opposite party) has also made certain allegations against
the applicant and stated that she is responsible for the
whole affairs and she does not want to live with opposite
party. It is further alleged that applicant has falsely shown
her address of NOIDA Gautam Budh Nagar.                   In fact
applicant and her parents live at house no. D-84 Saket
Colony, District Meerut and that is their permanent address.
The address mentioned in the application is false.           The
applicant has filed the application with false facts concealing
the real facts and has not come with clean hands. The
learned court below after taking evidence and hearing
arguments of the parties by the impugned judgment and
order has allowed the application and awarded the
maintenance allowance.
3.     One of the grounds on which the impugned judgment
and order has been challenged is that the revisionist
(opposite party) has taken specific objections regarding
jurisdiction of the court at Gautam Budh Nagar but the court
below has not recorded any finding regarding jurisdiction of
the court at Gautam Budh Nagar. The learned counsel for
the revisionist contended that in para 11 and 12 of the
objections filed by the opposite party there are specific
objections and it is alleged that O.P. No. 2 was living with
her parents in their house at 84 D, Saket Colony, Meerut
and not at Gautam Budh Nagar. This objection has also
found support from the order dated 29.8.2016 passed by
the Additional Principal Judge, Family Court, Meerut in
proceeding U/s 24 of the Hindu Marriage Act filed by the
O.P. No. 2. The court below recorded the specific finding
that O.P. No. 2 was residing at 84 D, Saket Colony, Meerut
and not at Gautam Budh Nagar. The said finding has never
been challenged by the O.P. No. 2 before any higher
authority and the same has attained the finality. Therefore,
the court at Gautam Budh Nagar has no jurisdiction to
entertain the petition U/s 125 Cr.P.C. and the judgment and
order is without jurisdiction, illegal and deserves to be set-
aside. Learned counsel also contended that entire criminal
proceedings were also initiated by O.P. No. 2 at Meerut and
not at Gautam Budh Nagar. This clearly shows that O.P.
No. 2 was residing permanently at Meerut and not at
Gautam Budh Nagar but just to harass and pressurize the
revisionist and his family members proceeding U/s 125
Cr.P.C. was deliberately initiated at Gautam Budh Nagar.
Learned counsel for the O.P. No. 2 submitted that a
perusal of the objections filed by the revisionist against the
application U/s 125 Cr.P.C. would reflect that no precise
objection was taken before the court below that the
application U/s 125 Cr.P.C. is not maintainable at District
Gautam Budh Nagar as it lacks jurisdiction. In para 11 it is
stated that opposite party has deliberately filed the
application U/s 125 Cr.P.C. at District Gautam Budh Nagar
only in order to harass the revisionist, however, in fact, she
is resident of District Meerut. Therefore, there was no
occasion for the court below to deal with the objection of the
jurisdiction before it.   Learned counsel further contended
that in para 10 of the counter affidavit the respondent has
mentioned in detail and brought on record the material to
demonstrate that she has been residing at district Gautam
Budh Nagar.      In fact, the respondent was undergoing a
course in J.P. Institute of Information Technology at District
Gautam Budh Nagar. Learned counsel further submitted
that the finding of the trial court in proceeding U/s 24 of the
Hindu Marriage Act dated 29.8.2016 is based on medical
certificate issued by the doctor in District Meerut. In fact, on
a visit to District Meerut for a date in the case the
respondent fell ill and she has to consult a doctor there. On
the basis of the same the court mentioned about her
residence which is un-consequential.           There was no
occasion to arrive to a conclusion that the respondent was
residing in District Meerut and the respondent has already
brought on record a number of documents to demonstrate
From the perusal of the objections of revisionist
(opposite party) filed against the application U/s 125 Cr.P.C.
it appears that there is no specific plea that the court at
Gautam Budh Nagar lacks jurisdiction.           In para 11 of
objections only it has been alleged that address mentioned
in the application is false and applicant does not reside
there.    She and her parents are permanent resident of
District Meerut and application has been moved at Gautam
Budh Nagar to harass the opposite party and her family. It
also appears that point of jurisdiction has not been sincerely
raised before the trial court and due to this the trial court
has not dealt with it. Further an application U/s 125 Cr.P.C.
can be moved at a place where applicant is temporarily
residing.    It has been alleged in counter affidavit that
applicant is temporarily residing at Gautam Budh Nagar and
pursuing a course in J.P. Institute of Information Technology
at Gautam Budh Nagar.          So the ground that court at
Gautam Budh Nagar lacks jurisdiction has no force.
4.    Another ground on which the impugned judgement
and order has been challenged is that Family Court, Meerut
which is the competent court in divorce petition U/s 13 of
Hindu Marriage Act has granted divorce decree in favour of
the revisionist and has also awarded Rs. 25 lacs as
permanent alimony U/s 25 of the Hindu Marriage Act while
passing the decree of divorce and hence, no maintenance
U/s 125 Cr.P.C. can be awarded and application is not
maintainable.       Learned    counsel    for the   revisionist
vehemently contended that in divorce petition no. 1614 of
2013 U/s 13 of Hindu Marriage Act the competent court has
passed the divorce decree dated 21.2.2016 and while
passing the decree has also awarded permanent alimony of
Rs. 25 lacs, which has duly been deposited by the
revisionist in the court on 20.3.2018. Thus, O.P. No. 2 has
Rs. 25 lacs at her disposal and can not be said to without
financial resources and her condition is not of a destitute.
There is no question of non sustenance. The court below
has not considered it. Though the appeal against divorce
decree is pending but the said order has not been stayed.
The court below lost its sight in not considering the legal
preposition that a divorced wife can claim maintenance U/s
25 of the Hindu Marriage Act and not U/s 125 Cr.P.C. When
a divorce decree U/s 13 of the Hindu Marriage Act is passed
the wife of such annulled married can claim maintenance
U/s 25 of Hindu Marriage Act. It is only such court which
passed the divorce decree who is alone competent to grant
maintenance U/s 25 of the Hindu Marriage Act. Hence, the
impugned order is absolutely illegal, arbitrary and against
the said principal of law. Learned counsel placed reliance
2.    Palla Shanti Kiran Vs. State of Andhra Pradesh 2020
3.    Sudhir Kumar Vs. State of Rajasthan 1996 Cri.L.R.
4.    Rajnesh Vs. Neha Criminal Appeal No. 730 of 2020
Appeal No. 70 of 2020 decided on 30.9.2021
Court and another 2004 AIR (Rajasthan) 257
8.    Nirmal Kumar Vs. State of U.P. 2000 (41) A Cr.C. 661
5.    Learned counsel for the O.P. No. 2 contended that
respondent is entitled to maintenance U/s 125 Cr.P.C.
despite the fact that competent court granted divorce and
has also given permanent alimony of Rs. 25 lacs U/s 25 of
the Hindu Marriage Act because the judgment dated
21.2.2018 granting divorce has not attained finality.
Respondent has filed an appeal which is pending and will
be considered proceeding in continuation.            Further
respondent has not accepted the amount of alimony and
same is lying in the court below. There is no occasion to
accept the alimony as it would amount to accepting the
decree of divorce. It is also contended that respondent has
never requested or filed an application U/s 25 of the Hindu
Marriage Act to claim permanent alimony and the court has
granted it on its own volition.    Learned counsel further
contended that even a divorced wife is entitled for
maintenance U/s 125 Cr.P.C. and cited Rohtas Singh Vs.
Ramendri (Smt.) and another (2000) 3 SCC 180 and
Swapan Kumar Banerjee Vs. State of West Bengal and
others AIR 2019 SC 4748.            Learned counsel also
contended that the case law of Palla Shanti Kiran Vs. State
of Andhra Pradesh (Supra) and Rakesh Malhotra Vs. Kiran
Malhotra (Supra) relied on by the counsel of the revisionist
do not apply on the present case. In case of Palla Shanti
Kiran (Supra) the marriage was declared void/annulled U/s
14 of Hindu Marriage Act and once marriage has been
declared void there was no occasion to consider the
contesting parties to have been married at all and in that
circumstances it was held that the applicant was not
entitled for maintenance U/s 125 Cr.P.C. as there was no
husband and wife relationship while in Rakesh Malhotra
(Supra) the wife therein had accepted the amount of
permanent alimony, hence, it was held that she is not
entitled for maintenance. Learned counsel contended that
in the present case respondent has never accepted the
amount of permanent alimony.
6.     It is undisputed that petition U/s 13 of Hindu Marriage
Act for divorce was filed by the revisionist and it is being
contested by the O.P. No. 2. The trial court has allowed the
petition, passed the decree of divorce and has also
awarded permanent alimony of Rs. 25 lacs. The revisionist
has deposited the amount in the court below but the O.P.
No. 2 has not accepted the decree or permanent alimony
and has filed an appeal against it and has also not
withdrawn the amount of permanent alimony. The amount
of permanent alimony is lying deposited with the court
below. In the case of Rakesh Malhotra (Supra) the Hon’ble
Supreme Court in para 9, 11, 16 and 17 has made the
“9.    The basic issue that arises for consideration is
whether after grant of permanent alimony under section 25
of the Act, a prayer can be made before the Magistrate
under Section 125 of the Code for maintenance over and
above what has been granted by the Court while exercising
power under Section 25 of the Act.
11.    At the stage of passing a decree for dissolution of
marriage, the Court thus considers not only the earning
capacity of the respective parties, the status of the parties
as well as various other issues. The determination so made
by the Court has an element of permanency involved in the
matter.     However, the Parliament has designedly kept a
window open in the form of subsections (2) and (3) in that,
in case there be any change in circumstances, the
aggrieved party can approach the Court under sub-section
(2) or (3) and ask for variation/modification.
16.    Since the Parliament has empowered the Court under
Section 25(2) of the Act and kept a remedy intact and made
available to the concerned party seeking modification, the
logical sequitur would be that the remedy so prescribed
ought to be exercised rather than creating multiple channels
of remedy seeking maintenance. One can understand the
situation where considering the exigencies of the situation
and urgency in the matter, a wife initially prefers an
application under section 125 of the Code to secure
maintenance in order to sustain herself. In such matters
the wife would certainly be entitled to have a full-fledged
adjudication in the form of any challenge raised before a
Competent Court either under the Act or similar such
enactments. But the reverse cannot be the accepted norm.
17.    In the circumstances, we allow these appeals, set
aside the view taken by the High Court and direct that the
application preferred under Section 125 of the Code shall
be treated and considered as one preferred under Section
25(2) of the Act.”
7.     There is fine distinction between the facts of the two
cases. In the case of Rakesh Malhotra it was the wife who
has filed petition of dissolution of marriage under Section 13
of Hindu Marriage Act and on her petition a decree was
passed and while passing the decree the court also
awarded permanent alimony, which was accepted by the
wife. While in the present case divorce petition has been
filed by the husband. It is being contested by the wife who
has preferred an appeal and also has not accepted the
permanent alimony which is lying deposited in the court
8.     In the case of Rajnesh Vs. Neha on the issue of
overlapping of jurisdiction in grant of maintenance the
Hon’ble Supreme Court has held as Under:
(a)    Issue of overlapping jurisdiction
To overcome the issue of overlapping jurisdiction, and avoid
conflicting orders being passed in different proceedings, it
has become necessary to issue directions in this regard, so
that there is uniformity in the practice followed by the Family
Courts/District Courts/Magistrate Courts throughout the
(i)    where successive claims for maintenance are made
by a party under different statutes, the Court would consider
an adjustment or set-off, of the amount awarded in the
previous proceeding/s, while determining whether any
further amount is to be awarded in the subsequent
(ii)   it is made mandatory for the applicant to disclose the
previous proceeding and the orders passed therein, in the
(iii)  if the order passed in the previous proceeding/s
requires any modification or variation, it would be required
to be done in the same proceeding.”
The Hon’ble Apex Court has thus held that a wife can
make a claim for maintenance under different statutes.
There is no bar to seek maintenance both under the
protection of Women against Domestic Violence Act, 2005
and Section 125 of the Cr.P.C., or under Hindu Marriage
rulings relied on by the learned counsel for the revisionist a
Division Bench of Allahabad High Court has followed the
aforesaid principle laiddown by Hon’ble Apex Court and has
held that the court would consider an adjustment or set of
the amount awarded in previous proceedings.
So there is no bar to seek maintenance both U/s 125
Cr.P.C. or Hindu Marriage Act but the court will have to
adjust or set of the amount awarded in previous
Court and another (Supra) it has been held that pendency
of appeal does not preclude wife from filing of application U/
s 25 of the Hindu Marriage Act. While in Har Charan Singh
Vs. Kamal Preet Kaur (Supra) it has been held that court
can grant maintenance and permanent alimony to wife
without specific application. In Nirmal Kumar Vs. State of
U.P. (Supra) it has been held that recovery of maintenance
under both the sections U/s 125 Cr.P.C. and 24 of Hindu
Marriage Act shall not be allowed.
In this case the O.P. No. 2 (wife) has not withdrawn
the amount of permanent alimony awarded under section
25 of the Hindu Marriage Act, hence, there is no question of
any adjustment or recovery under both the orders.
11.    In Rohtash Singh Vs. Ramendri (Supra) it has been
“Claim for maintenance under the first part of Section
125 Cr.P.C. is based on the subsistence of marriage while
claim for maintenance of a divorced wife is based on the
foundation provided by Explanation (b) to sub-section (1) of
Section 125 Cr.P.C.       If the divorced wife is unable to
maintain herself and if she has not remarried, she will be
entitled to maintenance allowance.
A woman has two distinct rights for maintenance. As
a wife, she is entitled to maintenance unless she suffers
from any of the disabilities indicated in Section 125(4). In
another capacity, namely, as a divorced woman, she is
again entitled to claim maintenance from the person of
whom she was once the wife.           A woman after divorce
becomes a destitute.       If she cannot maintain herself or
remains unmarried, the man who was once her husband
continues to be under a statutory duty and obligation to
provide maintenance to her.”
12.    Applying the aforesaid preposition of law on the
present set of facts it is clear that as O.P. No. 2 (wife) has
not accepted the amount of alimony as she has challenged
the divorce decree in appeal and appeal is pending and in
that circumstances she can not accept the amount of
alimony. So it can not be said that she has sufficient
financial resources as permanent alimony has been
awarded to her. At present she has no source of income
and financial support to maintain her and comes in the
category of destitute. The learned trial court has dealt with
the aforesaid point in its judgment and has categorically
recorded the finding that applicant (O.P. No. 2) has no
source of income and unable to maintain herself and has
awarded the maintenance allowance. Hence, the impugned
order does not suffer from any illegality or infirmity. There is
no perversity in the impugned order.
13.    Another ground on the basis of which the impugned
order has been challenged is that the court below has
directed the revisionist to pay maintenance from the date of
filing of application i.e. since 30.10.2013. In doing so the
court below has completely lost its sight to the admitted fact
that O.P. No. 2 had been paid Rs. 18,900/- as maintenance
from the salary of revisionist by his department, the Indian
Air Force. Learned counsel contended that the court below
has not given any reason for award of maintenance from
the date of filing of application. Once the O.P. No. 2 had
been paid maintenance @ Rs. 18,900/- per month from the
salary of revisionist up to March, 2018 there was no
justification for the court below to award maintenance from
the date of application i.e. since 30.10.2013.          Learned
counsel submitted that on this ground the order of court
below is perverse, illegal and not sustainable.
14.    This argument has also no force. In the impugned
order it is provided that if any amount of maintenance has
been paid by the opposite party to the applicant the same
shall be adjusted and rest amount will be paid in two
months. It is undisputed that O.P. No. 2 has been paid Rs.
18,900/- as maintenance from the salary of revisionist up to
March, 2018. After passing of divorce decree the revisionist
has deposited the amount of permanent alimony in the trial
court and amount of maintenance which was being paid
from the salary of the revisionist, has been stopped. The
O.P. No. 2 has not withdrawn the amount of alimony and it
is lying deposited in the court below as the O.P. No. 2 has
challenged the decree of divorce in appeal which is
pending. After March, 2018 no amount of maintenance is
being paid by the revisionist. The trial court has already
made provision of adjustment of the amount of maintenance
earlier paid. So there is no illegality or infirmity on this count
also.
15.    From the above discussion it is clear that the
impugned order does not suffer from any infirmity or
illegality. It is also not perverse.     There is no sufficient
ground to set-aside the impugned order. The revision is
liable to be dismissed.
16.    Accordingly, the Criminal Revision is dismissed.