1.     Vindhya Gurukul College [hereinafter “the College”] is aggrieved by
the decision taken by Northern Regional Committee [hereinafter “NRC”] of
NCTE in its 266th meeting held on 21st - 24th March, 2017 wherein it was
granted recognition for only 50 seats (one basic unit) of B.Ed. course, as
opposed to the original decision taken in the meeting dated 20th May, 2016,
wherein recognition was granted with an annual intake of 100 seats (two
basic units). The Petitioners, inter alia, seek a direction to restore the
recognition in terms of the above-said original decision dated 20th May,
2016 or in the alternative, a direction to the Respondents to decide it’s
Digitally Signed           W.P.(C) 8393/2022                                               Page 1 of 4
2.     The genesis of this petition arises from the NRC meeting held on 20th
May, 2016, whereby the College claims that recognition was given for B.Ed.
course with intake of 100 students (two basic units) for the academic year
2017-18. Petitioners contend that NRC could not have suo moto reviewed
the above-said decision vide subsequent Order dated 17th April, 2017 and
reduced the intake of the College from 100 seats (two basic units) to 50 seats
(one basic unit), without specifying any reason for the same.
3.     At the outset, the Court has queried the counsel about the gross delay
on part of the Petitioners in impugning the afore-said orders. In response
thereto, Mr. Amitesh Kumar, counsel for the Petitioners states that several
representations were made by the Petitioners against the said decisions
which not been considered by the Respondents. Mr. Kumar further submits
that the subsequent Order dated 17th April, 2017 is contrary to law since
NRC has no suo moto powers to re-open and review its own decisions.
4.     Per contra, Mr. Animesh Kumar, counsel for the Respondents
contends that the minutes of NRC in its meeting dated 20th May, 2016 were
only published on the website and there was no formal communication
issued for the recognition as contended by the Petitioners. He further states
that prior to Order dated 17th April, 2017, a show cause notice dated 31st
January, 2017 was issued to the College.
5.     The Court has heard the submissions advanced by counsel for the
Digitally Signed           W.P.(C) 8393/2022                                             Page 2 of 4
6.     The subsequent Order dated 17th April, 2017 was well-within the
knowledge of the Petitioners and has been passed after affording an
opportunity of hearing. Therefore, if the Petitioners had any grievance, it
ought to have exercised its remedies, in accordance with law and in time.
The College has concededly restricted its intake all throughout to 50 seats.
Merely by making representations, the Petitioners cannot extend the cause of
action. In fact, on a query of the Court, counsel for the Petitioner admits that
there is no statutory provisions/ mechanism under the Act for making such
representations. Therefore, pendency of the representations cannot be a
ground to explain the delay. Petitioners should have impugned the
subsequent Order dated 17th April, 2017 expeditiously and within
reasonable time, by approaching a court of law, if no statutory remedy was
available, as contended by the Petitioners. Filing multiple representations
cannot be considered a ground for ignoring the gross delay on their part in
approaching the Court. Petitioners have also made an alternate prayer for
issuance of direction(s) to NRC to decide representations, however, the
Court finds no reason to issue such a direction. Since the Petitioners are
guilty of delay and laches, the petition deserves to be rejected at the
threshold. By seeking the alternate prayer, Petitioners are seeking an
opportunity to subsequently contend that rejection of the representation has
given a fresh cause of action. This cannot be permitted in the facts of the
case discussed. In fact, such a practice of filing representations, in an
attempt to extend the cause of action as a ground to overcome the delay,
should be discouraged.
Digitally Signed           W.P.(C) 8393/2022                                                Page 3 of 4
7.     Thus, in absence of any satisfactory explanation for the gross delay,
the Court is not inclined to entertain the present petition.
8.     Dismissed. The pending application is also dismissed.
Digitally Signed           W.P.(C) 8393/2022                                            Page 4 of 4