Petitioner, wife of Mr.Abdul Shabeer stated to be
resident of Pookilath House, Chavakkad Taluk, Thrissur
District, is aggrieved of the notice Ext.P1 issued by the
Kerala State Electricity Board Limited calling for an
explanation to show the ownership of the property on
receipt of the complaint submitted by one Mr.Pookilath
2.    The contention of the petitioner is that the
alleged complainant had already filed a civil suit bearing
O.S.No.1116 of 2016 pending before the Court of Munsiff
at Chavakkad, wherein vide order dated 31.10.2016 an
injunction has been granted in respect of schedule
property B, a motorable way, till the final disposal of the
suit. Since the said person is having an animosity and
rancour against the petitioner’s husband, who is his
brother,    submitted  a   malicious  complaint    to   the
Electricity department in respect of drawing a five
hundred(500) meter wire to the borewell alleged to be
used    illegally.     It   is   contended    that   Electricity
department      without    verifying   the   veracity   of  the
complaint or the file of the electric connection allotted to
the   petitioner,     called     upon   the   petitioner   vide
communication dated 22.11.2022 Ext.P1 with the details
of the ownership.          A detailed reply Ext.P3 dated
01.12.2022 has been submitted on the ground that the
complainant is the brother of first amongst them and the
disputed property is in possession and title of the first
among them and one Mr.Abdul Shemeer who is also a
brother. It is a private pathway in the joint possession by
virtue    of   the   deed     rather  the   complainant     has
encroached the property and civil dispute is pending.
The allegations raised in the complaint were absolutely
wrong.       But the fact remains that the Electricity
department       could    not    have  sent    this  impugned
communication, once civil court is seized of the matter.
3.     Issue   notice     before    admission.    Learned
Standing Counsel for the Electricity Board accepts
notice.    No harm and prejudice will be caused if the
petitioner is give an opportunity of hearing in respect of
the complaint and urged this Court for dismissal of the
writ petition.
4.   I have heard learned counsel for the parties
and appraised the paper book.
5.   In the civil suit aforementioned trial court vide
order dated 31.10.2016 injuncted the defendants i.e.,
Mr.Abdul     Shebeer,      husband      of  the    petitioner and
petitioner in the following manner:
“8.Point No.2:- In view of the finding on point
No.1 the petitioner/plaintiff is entitled to get an
ad interim prohibitory injunction as prayed for.
In the result, the petition is allowed and
the respondents or anybody under them are
hereby restrained from obstructing the user of
the plaint B schedule motorable way by the
petitioner/plaintiff in any manner till the final
disposal of the suit.”
6.   Once the civil suit is pending there was no
occasion for the respondents to lodge a complaint as an
act of disgruntlement. The contents of the notice dated
22.11.2022 Ext.P1 of the Assistant Engineer Electrical
Section calling the explanation regarding the ownership
of the land of the petitioner’s husband is as under:
(Incorporated under the Indian Companies Act,
Web site:www.kseb.in.CIN:U40100KL2011SGC027424
Office of Assistant Engineer Electrical Section
email address:-aevktg@gmail.com
Subject: Complaint given by Abdul Shukur
According     to  the  complaint  given  by
Mr.Pokakillat Abdul Shukur, 500mtr wire has
been drawn from your house to the borewell
and is being used illegally.     Therefore, it is
necessary to know the ownership of the above
mentioned place.    If you have any clarification
on the above matter, It must be communicated
in writing within 7 days of receipt of this letter,
Otherwise legal action will be taken.
Yours sincerely
(Seal and Sd/-)
I am of the view that the said notice is wholly
uncalled for and arbitrary much less illegal and without
jurisdiction. Electricity department has no business to
check the veracity of the ownership. Once the matter is
pending before the civil court, Electricity Department
should be circumspect in entertaining the complaint until
and unless there is gross violation of provisions of the
Act.   The impugned notice Ext.P1 is wholly aberrative,
without jurisdiction and illegal, hereby quashed.            Writ
petition stands allowed.