When a man abandons his wife and children, roving
vultures wait to prey on not only the abandoned woman, but
also   the   helpless  children.   In  this  case  we have  a
'poojari'/'komaram' (priest/oracle in a temple) taking the
abandoned woman and the three children under his wing, only
to repeatedly molest the elder girl child, that too in the
presence of her siblings. We wonder which God would accept
the obeisance and offerings of such a priest or make him a
2. We have heard learned Counsel Sri.K.M.Firoz for
the appellant/accused and Smt.Sheeba Thomas, learned Public
Prosecutor for the State.
3. Sri.Firoz took us through the charge to point
out that there is a misjoinder of charges. The Protection
of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 ['POCSO Act' for
brevity] was brought into effect from 14.11.2012 and the
incident on which the first charge is levelled is prior to
the POCSO Act and requires a committal proceeding under the
Cr.P.C. This is unlike the later allegation, which raises a
charge under the POCSO Act, where the Special Court could
take cognizance of it under Section 33 of the POCSO Act. It
is  also   pointed   out  that  clubbing    of  the  charges  has
resulted in grave prejudice to the accused, since the POCSO
Act by Sections 29 and 30 raises a presumption against the
accused. The rigour of a defence under the POCSO Act, which
casts  a   reverse   burden  on   the   accused,  prejudices  him
insofar as the charge under the IPC with respect to the
sole incident alleged prior to the POCSO Act. It is argued
from the evidence of PW1, the prosecutrix and PWs.6 and 10,
the two house owners, that there is no question of the
offences   being   committed   in   the   respective  residential
buildings as alleged, for reason of the inconsistent facts
brought   forth  in   the  evidence   of   these  witnesses.  The
deposition of PW1 does not specify the date and only speaks
of having joined the accused after the final exams of the
academic year 2012. Hence there could not have been such an
incident on 16.02.2012, before the close of the academic
year. PW6 also says that the accused had taken the house on
rent in 2012 and the victim joined him after six months.
4. There is also no allegation of a rape, i.e., a
penetrative sexual assault, having been committed in the
second house, even as per the deposition of PW1. PW1's
evidence   is   not   believable   and  she   is  not   a  credible
witness. She admitted that she falsely stated the names of
her parents to the police when they were first picked up by
the police. The inconsistencies in her evidence as to how
the sexual assault was committed also require the evidence
to  be   treated   with    abundant  caution.     The   doctor  has
deposed in tune with the medical certificate, Ext.P1, that
the examination was in 2012. The time shown in Ext.P1 is
not  clear   and   if   it   is 11.45  a.m,   the   very  story  of
initiation of the crime would fall apart since PW15 is said
to have been informed of the wandering woman and children
at 4.15 p.m. The dress of the accused was seized and sent
for medical examination; but no report has been produced
nor was the dress brought in evidence, which requires this
Court to take an adverse inference since the child was
apprehended on the next day of the last alleged sexual act.
There   are   glaring    inconsistencies    in   the  Section   164
statement of PW1 and that is relevant under Section 11 of
the Evidence Act. Last but not the least the mother was not
examined, despite her        presence in Court at the time of
5. The learned Prosecutor relied heavily on the
evidence of PW1, the prosecutrix; fully corroborated by
PW7. The medical evidence as available in Ext.P1 further
corroborates the testimony of the prosecutrix. As against
the anomaly of date and time, the learned Prosecutor points
out the crime number shown in Ext.P1 and the time when the
FIR was registered. The 164 statement of the victim and
deposition of PW1 are not date specific and the allegation
is of the assault having been committed on several dates
and several times. Chitharanjandas v. State of West Bengal
[AIR 1963 SC 1696] is relied on to argue that no date need
be  specified.    As   to   the   contradiction   in Section 164
statement, it was never confronted to the victim. The only
inconsistency is insofar as Section 164 statement having
recorded   sexual    assault    by   two  other  persons  at the
instigation of the accused. PW1 in her deposition clearly
stated that she did not say so. The learned Prosecutor also
submits   that  there    is   no  prejudice   caused due  to the
absence of committal proceedings. In the teeth of the clear
evidence of PWs.1 and 7, the presumption under the POCSO
Act need not be invoked. There is also no evidence led by
the defence to claim prejudice in discharging the reverse
burden. In addition, it is pointed out that the accused has
made a total denial, of even the joint residence with the
mother and children, under Section 313. The deposition of
PWs 6 & 10, the house owners specifically established that
fact.   This   is   an   additional   circumstance    against   the
accused,   since   he  has   stated  a  deliberate   falsehood,   a
clear sign of a guilty mind. The mother of the children was
not examined, though present in Court, since she showed
signs of mental disturbance and the prosecution did not
want her to mount the box in such a condition.
6. The ground of absence of committal proceedings
as  against   the   offence   alleged  on   16.02.2012  cannot   be
sustained. The learned Counsel has pointed out a number of
decisions of which we only refer to the relevant. Moly v.
State of Kerala (2004) 4 SCC 584 is a case in which the
enactment   under   which   the  offence   was  alleged,  did   not
have a provision similar to Section 33 of the POCSO Act.
This was the reason why, despite a designation as Special
Court  under    that   enactment,   the   Hon'ble   Supreme   Court
interfered   with   the   proceedings.   The   finding  was   that,
though designated a Special Court, as per the statute, the
designation can only be of a Court of Session. In that
circumstance the provisions under the Cr.P.C would have to
be scrupulously followed. Even applying the dictum, we find
the same not applicable to trial of offences alleged under
the  POCSO   Act.    By  Section   33,  'a  Special  Court   was
empowered to take cognizance of any offence, without the
accused being committed to it for trial, upon receiving a
complaint of facts which constitute such offence, or upon a
police report on such facts' (sic). The other ground of
prejudice having been caused for clubbing of charges, also
cannot   be  sustained.  First   of  all,  merely  by  alleging
prejudice, without anything stated as to how such prejudice
was caused, the accused cannot seek for a reversal of the
conviction. Then, in any event Section 28(2) takes care of
the specific ground; which is extracted hereunder:
“28(2) While trying an offence under this Act,
a Special Court shall also try an offence other
than the offence referred to in sub-section (1),
with  which  the  accused   may,  under  the  Code  of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), be charged at
the same trial”.
We say this, despite, Moly (supra) being found per incuriam
by a three judge bench on reference made, in Rattiram v.
State of M.P   (2012)4 SCC 516. The larger bench held:
“66. Judged from these spectrums and analysed on
the aforesaid premises, we come to the irresistible
conclusion that the objection relating to non-
compliance with Section 193 of the Code, which
eventually has resulted in directly entertaining
and taking cognizance by the Special Judge under
the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes
(Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989, does not
vitiate the trial and on the said ground alone, the
conviction cannot be set aside or there cannot be a
direction of retrial and, therefore, the decision
rendered in State of M.P. v. Bhooraji (2001) 7 SCC
679 lays down the correct law inasmuch as there is
no failure of justice or no prejudice is caused to
the accused”.
The  POCSO  Act   enables  such  other  offences  to  be  tried
without committal proceedings if it is to be tried in the
same trial. The grounds of prejudice urged fails also for
the reason that it is merely imaginary. We reject it at the
outset on the above reasoning and also on the appellant
having merely 'cried foul' without the particular prejudice
caused  or  the   specific  failure  of  justice,  having  been
stated or substantiated.
7. Now we venture to deal with the evidence on
merits. On 01.03.2013 at about 4.15 p.m, Circle Inspector
of  Police   (PW15),  Vanitha   (Women)  Cell,  Malappuram  was
informed by a Child-line personnel that a woman and four
children were wandering at a place called Kunnummel. PW15,
along with two Woman Civil Police Officers (WCPOs); one of
whom was examined as PW13, went to the spot and brought
them to the Vanitha Cell. On enquiry it was revealed that
the woman rescued, showed signs of acute mental illness and
displayed    violent    tendencies.    The    elder   child    was
questioned   when   she   revealed   that   the  woman   was   her
mother's sister and that they were staying along with the
accused who was a 'komaram' (Oracle) in a temple.              The
child also revealed that the accused who was living along
with the woman, had sexually molested her for the last one
year. Immediately the child was taken to the Manjeri Police
Station and produced before the Station House Officer with
a  report  marked   as  Ext.P10.   PW9,   the  Sub  Inspector   of
Police, based on Ext.P10 report, registered Ext.P9 FIR. The
woman turned out to be the biological mother of the three
children and showed signs of mental illness. On the orders
of the CJM, Manjeri, she was taken to the Mental Health
Centre at Kuthiravattom, Kozhikode along with the youngest
child.  The   other  children,   on   directions   of  the   Child
Welfare Committee (CWC), were admitted to the Government
Juvenile Home at Vellimadukunnu. The evidence of PW15 was
fully corroborated by the evidence of PW13, who also heard
the victim speaking about the allegations of sexual assault
on her, by the accused.
8. PW1 is the victim, who speaks of having stayed
along with her two siblings and mother, with the accused
and  his  son.  Her  parents  were  estranged and the  three
children   were   staying  with   the  mother  in  a  rented
accommodation. Her mother developed a relationship with one
Reji, who put her and her sister in an Orphanage, from
where they were attending school. Her brother was staying
with their mother. After the final examination of the 6 th
Standard, both the girl children were taken out of the
Orphanage, by the accused and brought to a house rented out
from PW6. When the two girl children reached the house,
their mother and brother were found to be residing there
with the boy child of the accused. It is when they were
staying in the house of PW6, that the atrocities against
PW1 commenced.
9. The accused along with his child and the mother
of PW1 used to sleep upstairs, while the three siblings
slept in a room downstairs. The accused at that time was a
priest in a temple and usually came home drunk in the
night. He used to regularly assault the mother and children
and also used to sexually molest PW1. She categorically
stated that she was sexually molested numerous times. In
the night, the accused used to knock on their door; which,
her brother used to open out of fear, since otherwise the
accused created a ruckus. Inside the room, the accused used
to stifle her cries with a cloth pushed into her mouth and
immobilize her, by tying her hands on the back. Then he
used to tear off her dress and do obscene things to her.
She specifically stated, he used to lie on her breasts and
insert   his  genitals into   hers.  The  accused  used  to
repeatedly do it each night and also on several nights. If
she does not comply, he used to beat her with a stick. She
complained to her mother, who merely asked her to suffer,
since the accused comes home drunk. Then, they shifted to
another house, a single storeyed one, where the atrocities
continued. They stayed there only for a few days. Later,
when the mother and children were waiting at the bus stop
for the accused to arrive, the Police accosted them and
took them to the Police Station. She specifically stated
that the names of her parents were wrongly stated on the
specific instruction of the accused. She deposed that she
informed the Malappuram Police about the sexual harassment,
she was subjected to, by the accused at the house of PW6
10.   She  not   only   withstood  searching  cross-
examination but resisted the suggestions with an uncanny
resilience; probably arising only out of the abject ravage
her body was subjected to. In cross-examination she said
that she was not molested on the first day, when she was
brought to the house of PW6. Then a specific question was
put by the defence as to 'after how many days the accused
molested her', to which she replied 'after one week'. She
resisted an attempt to elicit a specific date or time,
which is only natural since during that time she was not
even going to school. When she was questioned whether she
had spoken to anybody else, she stoutly denied it and added
that the accused had threatened to kill her if she divulged
what she is subjected to. She also said that she suffered
injuries and when she was questioned as to why she did not
approach a doctor, she answered that it was out of fear of
the  accused.    Again,  the   defence  questioned  the  girl,
whether anybody saw her being sexually assaulted to which
she categorically stated that her brother witnessed it. PW7
is the brother, who spoke in tandem with the evidence of
PW1. The instances of, the accused knocking on the door,
entering inside, stifling his sister with a cloth pushed
into her mouth, tearing of her clothes and committing the
sexual act while the two siblings cowered in fear, at the
corner of the room, was spoken of by the brother (PW7) too,
another minor child. The other sibling who too might have
witnessed the act is a still younger child.   PW1 also spoke
of herself, the other children and the mother being picked
up from the roadside by the Police and she admitted to have
not only wrongly stated her parents' name but also about
her native place; for fear of the accused.
11. PW2 is the doctor who examined the prosecutrix
and Ext.P1 is the report of medical examination. In Ext.P1
and the deposition, the date of examination was stated to
be 01.03.2012; an obvious mistake. Ext.P1 shows the crime
No.201/13 which establishes the year. Further, as pointed
out by the learned Prosecutor, the woman and children were
picked up at 4.15 p.m, as per the deposition of PW13 and
PW15. The FIR at Ext.P9 was registered at 9.00 p.m (21.00
hours)  and  the  report of  medical  examination was  after
that,  at   11.45   p.m.   The   time  noted   in Ext.P1   is   also
11.45  p.m   and   there   is   nothing   anomalous  in   the   time
recorded. The doctor categorically spoke of the genitalia
of the victim admitting two fingers and the hymen having
been torn irregularly. The opinion was clearly that the
victim showed evidence of sexual acts.
12. PW3 verified the potency of the accused and
found   that   there   was   nothing   to   suggest  that   he   was
incapable   of   performing    the  sexual   act.  PW4,  H.M   of  a
school produced the certified copy of the extract of the
Admission Register of PW1, which showed the date of birth
of PW1 to be 23.08.1998. PW5 is the Secretary of the Grama
Panchayat, who proved the ownership of the two residential
houses where the alleged offences were committed. Ext.P4 is
the ownership certificate of PW6 and Ext.P5, the ownership
certificate of PW10. PW6 deposed that he is known by the
name 'Kunjanikakka', which was the reference made by PW1.
He stated that a tiled two storeyed building was rented out
to the accused in 2012. The accused standing in the dock
was identified and it was his statement that the accused
lived there, with his wife and children for one year. The
neighbours used to tell him about frequent quarrels arising
from the rented house for which reason he forced vacation
of the same. He also said that there were two girl children
living in the house and they came there after about six
months from the commencement of the rental arrangement.
PW10 is the owner of the second house. He deposed that the
house,  having   an  asbestos   roof,  was  rented  out  to the
accused, identified to be one standing in the dock; who
stayed there for about a week along with two girl children
and two boys.
13.  PW8  prepared   the  sketch  plans  of  both the
houses, marked as Ext.P7 and P8. PW9 is the Sub Inspector
of Police, who registered the FIR. PW11 is the victim's
biological father who admitted that the three children were
born to him in his marriage with their mother. He also
vouched that he was estranged from his wife and after that
the  children   were  staying   with  their  mother.  Strangely
enough, the prosecution did not elicit the date of birth
from the father. This lapse is one we encounter daily and
we have today raised a suo motu case on this aspect of the
indifference and incompetence displayed by the Prosecutors
resulting in the offenders going scot free. PW12 is the
WCPO who took the victim's statement from the Juvenile Home
and PW14, the Magistrate who took the 164 statement of           PW1
and 7, respectively marked as Ext.P11 and P12. PW16 was a
witness    to    the    scene    mahazar    (Ext.P13)     and   PW17
re-registered    the   FIR  (Ext.P1).    PW18   and   PW19  are  the
14. The first question to be considered is whether
the age of the victim has been proved. A Division Bench of
this Court in Rajan v. State of Kerala, 2021 (4) KLT 274
has  held    that   certified    copy   of   the   extract   of  the
Admission Register of a school cannot be valid proof of
date of birth. The learned Prosecutor points out that as
per the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection) Act, 2015
there is only requirement of a Birth Certificate issued
from  the   school   for   proving   the   age  of   a  juvenile  in
conflict with law which can be adopted for the victim in a
rape case as held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Jarnail
Singh v. State of Haryana [2013) 7 SCC 263]. We have to
notice that the offence herein was committed long before
the  JJ  Act,    2015  came   into   force.   As  on   the  date  of
commission    of   the  offence,    Juvenile   Justice    (Care  and
Protection of Children) Rules 2007 under the repealed Act
was in force. As per the Rules existing then, inter alia
the Birth Certificate of the school first attended was held
to be valid proof in Jarnail Singh. In Alex v. State of
Kerala 2021 (4) KLT 480 it was held that since the POCSO
Act does not contain a provision to determine the age of a
victim, the proof has necessarily to be in accordance with
the rigour of the requirement as insisted by the earlier JJ
Act  and   Rules, which  were  adopted by  the  decision in
Jernail Singh. Para 20 of Alex(supra)     is extracted here
“20. Though under the Act of 2015, there is no
requirement of the certificate to be from the
School first attended, the Hon'ble Supreme Court
has specifically referred to the Rules of 2007 and
imported the same procedure in the case of minor
victims as in the case of minor children in
conflict with law. A Division Bench of this Court
in Crl.Appeal No.50 of 2017 [Rajan K.C. v. State of
Kerala] after referring to the Rules of 2007 and
the Act of 2015, held: “ we would think that the
said rigour (in the Rules of 2007) has to be
applied in cases where the determination of the age
of a minor victim arises; so as to not prejudice
the accused" (sic). The rigour noticed is of the
requirement of the extract of the School Register
to be from the school first attended. The    Act of
2015 is one intended for the protection of the
juveniles in conflict with law, just as the
criminal justice system ensures no prejudice being
caused to the accused. The rigorous requirement
made by the Hon'ble Supreme Court, while importing
the requirement of the Rules of 2007, specifically
of the date of birth of even a victim being
determined with the certificate from the school
first attended has to survive the repeal of the
Rules of 2007 and we cannot be diluting the
requirement. This also is in consonance with the
principle of 'ante litem motam'.”
The certified copy of the extract of the admission register
falls short of proving the date of birth of the victim
since it is not one issued by the school first attended.
15. We have already held there was no prejudice
caused to the accused for reason of clubbing an offence
under Section 376(2) with an offence under the POCSO Act,
going by the specific provision in Section 28(2) of the
POCSO Act. In fact, the offence of rape committed on a
minor aged below 12 years would attract Section 376 of the
IPC   and  the    provisions  of the   POCSO Act.  In   that
circumstance, when the offences, which arise from the very
same act, are tried together and the age of the victim is
not proved, it is not as if the offence under the IPC
charged against the accused would fall to the ground since
no committal proceedings have been carried out under the
Cr.P.C. Ordinarily, the offence under Section 376 IPC would
have to be subjected to committal proceedings under the
Cr.P.C. When taking cognizance of a charge under the POCSO
Act, the designated Special Court is empowered to try any
offence, charged at the same trial. Otherwise, every trial
under the POCSO Act will have to wait till the committal
proceeding is over and that would defeat the very purpose
of the enactment which envisages speedy disposal of the
cases. It cannot also be the position that once the age is
not proved, the offence under Section 376 would fail for
reason of no committal proceedings having been taken under
16. The charge speaks of an instance on 16.02.2012
and several, between 16.02.2013 to 28.02.2013. In fact, the
very first report made by PW15, Ext.P10, on the basis of
which FIR was registered, speaks of continuous physical and
sexual assault for a period of one year; without specifying
any dates. Section 164 statement and the deposition of the
prosecutrix,   PW1,   is  also  to  the  said   effect.  The
prosecutrix at no time specified any dates. The prosecutrix
spoke of the sexual assault having commenced in the house
rented out from PW6 and continued in the house rented out
from   PW10;   occupied  only   for  a  short   period.  The
prosecutrix was also specific insofar as she having been
taken out from the Orphanage after her final exams in the
6th Standard, which can be safely inferred to be in the
middle of 2012. The evidence of PW6 is that he gave the
house on rent to the accused in 2012 and after about six
months, the two girl children joined the family residing in
that house. PW10's evidence is also to the effect that the
family of the accused stayed in his house for about a week
by  the  end  of  February.   Though   the  charge  specifically
speaks of certain dates, we do not see such dates having
been   stated   by   anybody.    The   defence   has   also   not
cross-examined any of the witnesses, including the I.O on
the dates specified in the charge. The charge, though with
specified dates, is explicit and is of continued sexual
assault   of  the  penetrative    kind  on  the  victim   by  the
accused, who is in the status of her guardian. Analysing
Section 221(2) of the earlier Code, which in pari materia
provision is available in Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
as   Section    212(1),   the    Hon'ble    Supreme   Court    in
“It is true that sub-section (2) specifically
deals with two kinds of offences and makes a
provision in respect of them, but that is not to
say that in every other case the time must be so
specifically mentioned as to indicate precisely
the date and the time at which the offence was
committed”.
Mere irregularity in charge does not prejudice the accused
so  long   as  he  was  aware   of   what  was  expected   to  be
defended. We quote from the decision of a Division Bench of
this Court in Surendran v. State [2021 (3) KLT 205]:
“22. A4 raised the allegation specifically
relying on Vinubhai R Patel [2018 (2) KLT OnLine
3123 (SC) = (2018) 7 SCC 743]. In Dalbir Singh v.
State of U.P [2004 (1) KLT OnLine 1300 (SC) =
2004 (5) SCC 334] which was relied on in the
cited decision, a three Judge Bench resolved the
conflict between two Division Bench decisions of
the Hon'ble Supreme Court. In 1994 considering an
appeal against conviction under S.302, it was
concluded that the charge was not established.
Examining the question whether conviction could
be under S.306 for which no charge was framed; it
was held that having regard to the evidence
adduced by the prosecution, the cross-examination
of witnesses as well as the questions put under
S.313 Cr.PC, it was established that the accused
had enough notice of the allegations which could
form the basis of the conviction under S.306.
Later in 1997 on the identical issue, referring
to S.322 it was found that the two offences are
of   distinct   and   different   categories;    ie:
homicidal death and abatement of suicidal death.
The three Judge Bench approved the earlier
decision in Lakhjit Singh v. State of Karnataka
173], referring to Chapter XXXV of Cr.PC which
deals   with   irregular  proceedings    and   their
effect. S.464 was noticed to find that any error,
omission or irregularity in the charge including
any misjoinder of charges shall not result in
invalidating the conclusion or order of a
competent    Court   unless   the    appellate    or
revisional Court finds a failure of justice
having been occasioned thereby. What is 'relevant
to be examined is whether the accused was aware
of the basic ingredients of the offence for which
he is being convicted and whether the same facts
sought to be established against him were
explained to him clearly and whether he got a
fair chance to defend himself' (sic. Para 17)”.
17. One other contention raised by the learned
Counsel for the appellant is that at least in the second
house, there is no specific statement by PW1, as to a
penetrative sexual assault having been committed on her. We
immediately   reject   the  contention  since  the  victim  had
spoken of the repeated acts committed on her in graphic
detail. She also speaks of herself being subjected to such
acts repeatedly on a day and      continuously on several days
in both the rented premises. We do not think that at every
point, when repeated penetrative sexual assault is alleged,
there should be a graphic description by the victim, in
Court, of the details of such assault. In addition to the
trauma of being subjected to a penetrative assault, that
too by a person far older in age and having the status of a
guardian, the Courts cannot but insist on the trauma being
re-visited when examined in Court for the purpose of a
successful prosecution. However, that cannot lead to an
insistence that when continuous and repeated sexual assault
forms the gravamen of the accusation; the witness should be
called upon to state every detail of each of such traumatic
instances   of    abject   depravity.   We  cannot,   at   all,
countenance the ground raised on that count by the learned
Counsel for the appellant.
18.    The learned Counsel for the appellant has a
further   contention   regarding    the   omissions,    pointed  out
from  the   statement   of   the  prosecutrix,    recorded    by the
Magistrate under Sec. 164 of Cr.P.C. It is the contention
that   the   omission    of    important    facts   affecting    the
probability of the case, is a relevant fact under Sec.11 of
the Evidence Act to judge the veracity of the accusations.
The   learned    Counsel    relies    on   Laxman    v.   State   of
Maharashtra, 1974 3 SCC 704; Ram Kumar Pande v. State of
M.P., (1975) 3 SCC 815 and Sujit Biswas v. State of Assam,
(2013) 12 SCC 406 to counter the argument raised by the
learned Prosecutor that the prosecutrix, in the box, was
never confronted with the statement. It is submitted that
the procedure under Sec.145 of the Evidence Act even if not
complied   with,   the   court    has   a  duty   to   examine   the
omissions and inconsistencies pointed out.
19.   Laxman (supra) was a case in which, omissions
were pointed out in previous statements made before the
Executive Magistrate and in the enquiry during committal
proceedings.    There,   the    omission    was   insofar    as  the
inculpatory circumstance against one of the accused not
having been mentioned by the eye witness in the previous
statements. The court considered the issue as to extent to
which the eye witness had seen the incident and how much
can be reasonably attributed to conjecture, surmises or
imagination on his part. The learned Judges specifically
referred   to the observation of Prof.Munsterberg in a book
titled,   'On   The   Witness   Stand',   based   on   experiments
conducted of unexpected pre-planned episodes being enacted
before  persons    who  were  then   asked   to  recount  it.  The
result   in   recantation,     was   that   there   were   actions
attributed   to   the   participants   of   which   not  even  the
slightest   trace    existed   and   the  essential    parts  were
completely eliminated from memory. The Professor concluded
“We never know whether we remember, perceive, or
imagine”. Witnesses cannot, therefore, be branded
as liars in toto and their testimony rejected
outright even if parts of their statements are
demonstrably incorrect or doubtful. The astute
Judge can separate the grains of acceptable truth
from the chaff of exaggerations and improbabilities
which cannot be safely or prudently accepted and
acted upon. It is sound common-sense to refuse to
apply mechanically, in assessing the worth of
necessarily imperfect human testimony, the maxim
“falsus in uno falsus in omnibus”.
20.     Ram  Kumar   Pande  and   Sujit  Biswas  (both
supra) were cases in which a crucial fact was not mentioned
in the FIR. FIR, was noticed to be a previous statement
which   can   strictly   be   used   only   to   contradict  or
corroborate the maker. In Ram Kumar Pande, the father of
the murdered boy made a first information statement and an
important fact regarding the occurrence was omitted, which
was held to be affecting the probability of the case and
relevant under Sec.11 in judging the veracity of the case.
Sujit Biswas followed Ram Kumar Pande. A statement recorded
under   Sec.164    can   be   used    for   corroboration   and
contradiction. It has to be noticed that the defence did
not confront the prosecutrix with any of the statements,
but one. That one statement, was the sexual molestation by
two others, brought by the accused, which was denied by the
victim. PW14, the Magistrate who recorded it, having marked
the statement at Ext.P11, we looked into the same. The
first statement made before the police and the deposition
before   court  of   the  victim   does   not  reveal  such  an
allegation.   The  prosecutrix   also   denied  making  such  a
statement before the Magistrate. We do not think that this
is an omission which could lead to the very veracity of the
accusation being doubted. Falsus in Uno Falsus in Omnibus
is a principle which is not accepted in India and as the
learned    Professor   observed      'the    astute     judge   in
considering,   the  necessarily    imperfect    human   testimony,
sifts the grains of truth from the       chaff of exaggerations
and   improbabilities,   to    decide   on   what   is   prudently
21.  The victim admits that she disclosed incorrect
details of parents before the police, which is explained to
be out of sheer fear of the accused. As to two others
having   molested   her,   she    denied   the    statement.   The
Magistrate also was not questioned on this aspect and even
if we assume the statement was made; it could only have
been due to an over anxiety on the part of the victim, who
was subjected to repeated sexual acts of abject depravity
by a person more than twice her age and who was in the
status of a guardian; with no aid received from the mother,
who  was  indifferent  to   the   protest   raised   by   the poor
victim. The essentials of repeated sexual molestation and
the   manner   in  which    it   was   carried     out   has  been
consistently stated by the victim at the initial stage to
the police, who rescued her from the streets and then to
the Doctor and the Magistrate; which also has been deposed
before court. There is no question of any adverse inference
being   drawn    since   absence   of   scientific  evidence,    as
revealed from the dress, cannot by that alone result in the
acquittal of the accused. We find no reason to accept the
contention raised by the appellant based on Section 11 of
the Evidence Act since we find the victim to be a credible
witness and the slight deviation in previous statement to
be   not    significant    enough   to   discredit   her   or   her
22.  PW1,   prosecutrix,    was  picked   up  from   the
street with her two siblings and the son of the accused;
shepherded by an almost insane mother. The mental state of
the mother, a shame on society, is quite understandable
from   the   stress   of   having  been   abandoned,   with   three
children and no means of food or shelter; for which alone
the children were subjected to physical, mental and sexual
torture.     No   mother    can   remain    sane   in   the    said
circumstances. We also do not find any reason to fault the
prosecution for having not examined the mother in Court;
grossly unnecessary in the teeth of the evidence of PW1 and
PW7. The graphic description of PW1 is fully corroborated
by PW7, her brother, who unfortunately witnessed rape on
his sister, that too repeatedly and by their guardian.
23. The medical evidence also does not aid the defence. Had
the   medical   examination  proved   the   virginity  of the
prosecutrix,   then   definitely  it   would  have  aided the
accused. However, the examination having revealed that the
prosecutrix had been habituated to sexual act, definitely
it corroborates the testimony given by her. In addition, as
rightly   pointed   out   by  the   learned   Prosecutor, the
deliberate falsehood stated by the accused under Section
313, points to his complicity and reveals the guilty mind.
The accused said that he does not know the mother of the
prosecutrix while there was overwhelming evidence as to the
accused residing with the mother and children and his own
child, as a family. We find no reason to accept any of the
contentions of the appellant. We find that the evidence
establish that the victim was subjected to repeated rape by
the accused, that too of the penetrative kind. Though the
age of the victim was not proved, she was a school going
child, temporarily kept away from her studies. She, along
with her mother and siblings, was sheltered by the accused,
who stands in the status of her guardian. On the question
of the charge, under the POCSO Act, the age of the victim
having not been proved, the accused has to be acquitted of
the   charges   under   the   POCSO   Act.   There    cannot  be  a
conviction   also   under   Section   376(2)   IPC   for  the  same
reason. However, the offence of rape having been proved,
the accused is liable to be convicted under Section 376(1).
Considering the special relationship the accused had with
the victim and the status of a guardian, we are of the
opinion   that  the   maximum    sentence  of   life   imprisonment
would have to be imposed on the appellant. We hence partly
allow the appeal, acquitting him of the charges under the
POCSO Act and under Section 376(2) IPC; but convict him
under   Section   376(1)    IPC   and  sentence    him   with  life
imprisonment. Ordered accordingly.