This    writ  petition     is   virtually   in  the
nature     of   a  sequel     to   WP(C)No.22812/2020,
earlier     filed    by   the    2nd  pet0itioner    the
Council of CBSE Schools, Kerala (hereinafter
referred to as “Council”) - in which Ext.P2
judgment had been delivered by this Court.
2.   The “Council”, along with two others,
had approached this Court as above, seeking
directions to the competent Deputy Director of
Education     (DDE)   of  the    State   of  Kerala,  to
issue     to    them    “Formal     Prior   Recognition
Letter” in Form No.II, appended to the Kerala
Right    of    Children    to   Free    and   Compulsory
Education Rules, 2011 (hereinafter referred to
as the “RTE Rules” for short), so as to enable
them    to   seek    application        with    the    Central
Board of Secondary Education (CBSE); and this
Court had delivered Ext.P2 judgment with the
following directions:
“a)   Declaring    that,    as   per   the
provisions     of   the    Kerala    Right    of
Children to Free and Compulsory Rules,
2011, and the Right to Information Act
-   any   application     made   by   a  School
seeking an “Order of Prior Recognition”
under the terms of Rule 14 of the said
Rules shall be issued by the concerned
Deputy Directors of Education only in
Form No.II of the Rules and in no other
manner,    after   following    due   procedure
and     after     making     such     necessary
inspections as are warranted under it.
b)   To    ensure     that    the    afore
directions    are   properly    complied    with
and since none of the Deputy Directors
of Education are on the party array, I
direct the 2nd respondent - Director of
General Education to issue a circular
to all such officers informing them the
contents      of     this      judgment      and
instructing them to act implicitly by
c)   This   shall   be    done   by  the   2nd
respondent - Director of Education, as
expeditiously    as   is   possible   but  not
later than two weeks from the date on
which   the   copy   of   this   judgment   is
received.”
3.   It    transpires        that     “Formal     Prior
Recognition Letters” are being thus, issued to
various Schools, on the strength of which they
obtained     affiliation       from    the    CBSE;   but   a
question     has   now   arisen,      touching     upon   the
continuation       of   such     affiliation,       after   a
period of five years.
4.   The    petitioners        assert     that,    even
though     no   further     or     fresh    “Formal    Prior
Recognition Letter” is required to be obtained
by them, or by the Member Schools of the 3rd
petitioner,         to     seek        continuation        of
affiliation from the CBSE, the Government has
now    issued    Ext.P5   Order  dated    09.11.2022,
virtually     mandating   that  such   is  necessary;
and    that,    for   issuing   it,   the   competent
Authority will charge Rs.10,000/- as expenses,
with incremental increase every year.
5.   The petitioners challenge this order as
being     unnecessary     and   untenable    on   the
assertion that, going by the “RTE Rules” and
the    applicable    affiliation   Bye-Laws   of  the
CBSE, no “Formal Prior Recognition Letter” is
required to be obtained by them, or by various
other      affiliated     Schools,     for    seeking
continuation of affiliation from the CBSE.
6.   Smt.Dhanya P.Ashokan – learned counsel
appearing     for   the  petitioners,    pointed  out
that, going by the “RTE Rules” applicable to
Kerala, the “Formal Prior Recognition Letter”
is not confined to any period, but it is shown
to be effective from the date on which it is
issued. She predicated that, therefore, under
the Affiliation Bye-Laws of the CBSE, of the
year    2018,    (hereinafter   referred   to   as  the
“Affiliation Bye-Laws”) when the Schools are
to apply for continuation of affiliation with
them, all which they are required to do is to
submit a self attested certificate, prepared
in the format which is available in Appendix
III thereof of the year 2018; without having
to    have    it   certified    by   the   Educational
Authority     of   the   State.  She   asserted   that,
however,    misinterpreting     this   provision,   the
competent     State    Educational   Authorities    are
now insisting that each such School apply for
a new “ Formal Prior Recognition Letter”; and
thus payed that Ext.P5 be set aside.
7.   Smt.Nisha      Bose    –   learned     Senior
Government      Pleader,     on   the   other    hand,
submitted     that   even  if   no   “  Formal   Prior
Recognition Letter” is required to be obtained
by the Schools to seek continuation of their
affiliation with the CBSE every five years, it
is, concededly, a mandatory requirement that
they obtain a certificate from the District
Educational Officer, or such other competent
Educational Authority, with respect to their
infrastructural       and   other   facilities.    She
pointed out that, going by Appendix - III of
the 2018 “Affiliation Bye-Laws,” the District
Educational Officer, or such other authorised
Educational Authority, is to certify certain
general     information     with   respect    to   the
School, as also those regarding its land and
ownership,       along    with    essential     safety
requirements.      She  pointed   out  that  this   is
possible only if the Authority is to visit the
Schools and cause necessary investigation, for
which, a fee becomes imperative. She argued
that Ext.P5 Government Order only fixes such
fees and nothing more; and thus prayed that
this writ petition be dismissed.
8.   Pertinently,      Sri.S.Nirmal      –   learned
Standing Counsel for the CBSE, affirmed that,
as    per    Form    No.II     of   the    “RTE    Rules”
applicable      to    Kerala,     the    “Formal    Prior
Recognition         Letter”       issued       by     the
jurisdictional Deputy Director of Education is
not    confined    in   its    life   to   a  particular
period, but is shown to take effect from the
date on which it is issued. He submitted that,
therefore,     in   such   circumstances,       the  CBSE
does    not   insist   on   the   Schools    to   produce
another “Formal Prior Recognition Letter”, as
mentioned     in   the    impugned     Ext.P5   Government
Order,     for     it    to    be    eligible    to    seek
continuation        of     the     affiliation      already
granted.     He   however,      added    that,   for   this
purpose,      the     Schools      have    to   submit    a
certificate as per the format in Appendix -
III   of   the   “Affiliation       Bye-Laws”,    wherein,
they need to vouch for their infrastructural
facilities,       as    also     the    availability     of
essential       safety       requirements,        as    are
mandated.     He    submitted      that,   therefore,    as
long as the original “Formal Prior Recognition
Letter”    issued     by   the    competent    Educational
Officer is not confined to a specific period,
Ext.P5 - to the extent to which it inflexibly
mandates       that      a     fresh      “Formal     Prior
Recognition       Letter”       be    obtained     by   the
affiliated       Schools       for     the    purpose    of
continuing their affiliation from the CBSE -
does not appear to be necessary or tenable.
9.   Very interestingly, after submitting as
afore, Sri.Nirmal then added that, going by
the latest “Handbook” published by his client,
the    schools    are   also    having   an   option   to
produce        a       “System       Generated       Self
Certificate”,       with    respect   to   the    aspects
mentioned in Appendix-III of the “Affiliation
Bye-Laws”; and that the CBSE will act upon it,
while      processing       their    application      for
continuation       of    affiliation.     He   explained
that,    however,    if    the  CBSE  is   to   find  any
discrepancy      in   the   said  certificate     and  if
they are to feel that a physical inspection by
the    Educational      Officer    of   the    State   is
necessary,       they     will   inform     the    School
appositely; consequent          to which, they will
have    to   obtain   the   necessary   certification
from     it,     as   per    Appendix-III    of   the
10. The afore stand of the CBSE renders the
position ineluctably clear that, the schools
now have the option of approaching them for
continuing     their   self   affiliation   based  on
their own certification or a System Generated
Certification; and it is only if the same is
found    to  be   insufficient    and  they being  so
informed by the CBSE, would they then require
to apply for and obtain the certificate as per
Appendix - III of the “Affiliation Bye-Laws”,
from the Educational Authority.
11. Axiomatically, Exhibit P5 order would
have relevance only if any school is required
to     approach      the     competent    Educational
Authority      of   the    State,     for   the   afore
certification, on being so asked to do by the
CBSE.        Apodictically,         therefore,      the
petitioners need not now harbour any grievance
against this order, since it would apply to
them only if they are constrained by the CBSE
to   seek    certification     from   the   Educational
Authority, and not otherwise.
12. Such being the scenario, I cannot find
the imposition of a charge for inspection by
the Government, in Ext.P5, to be illegal or
unfair    because,   the   school/s     certainly  will
have to defray the expenses for such purpose,
including      for    the     verification     of   the
infrastructural      and    safety    imperatives,   as
stipulated     by  the   “Affiliation     Bye-laws”  of
the CBSE.
13.     Obviously hence, the plea of the
petitioners to quash Exhibits P4 and P5, as
being inconsistent to the provisions contained
in the Right to Information Act, 2009 and the
Right to Information Rules, 2011, would not be
necessary for this Court to consider; and I
leave    open   such   contentions,  if   it   becomes
required to be considered in future.
This writ petition is thus allowed.
This matter has been listed today at the
request     of   Smt.Dhanya   P.  Ashokan    –   learned
counsel     for    the  petitioners,   who   voiced   an
apprehension that, when Exts.P4 and P5 have been
left     uninterdicted      by    this    Court,     the
Educational       Authority      of   the    State   may
misinterpret it to mean that, when approached by
a   School,     they   will   only     issue  a  “Formal
2. I think this apprehension is           justified
because, Exts.P4 and P5 have been issued by the
Government, as I have already said above, under
a wrong notion that the CBSE would require a
“Formal Letter of Recognition” for even renewal.
Since this Court has clarified that all which
the Schools may have to do, if called upon by
the   CBSE,   is   to   obtain   a  certification  under
Appendix III of the ‘Affiliation Bye-laws’, I
deem it appropriate to clarify that Exts.P4 and
P5    will     be    read    down    to   such   effect.
Consequently,      should   the   Schools  approach  the
jurisdictional Educational Authority, they will
only     be     competent     to    issue    the   afore
certification      and not    a  “Formal   Recognition
Letter”, for continuing the affiliation.