1.      Ms. Samriddhi Khandelwal, the Petitioner herein, aspiring to gain
admission to the bachelor of design course of Resondent - National Institute
of Fashion Technology [‘NIFT’], appeared as a candidate for the online
invigilated / remote proctored NIFT Entrance Exam, 2022 [hereinafter,
‘Exam’]. This Exam was divided into two parts – a written exam which was
held on 06th February 2022 and a Situation Test which was to be held from
2nd April 2022 onwards. The written test was further divided into two parts -
the Creative Aptitude Test (CAT) for 180 minutes and the General Aptitude
Test (GAT) for 120 minutes. The candidate appeared for the online exam on
06th February 2022 from her residence, as per specifications mentioned in
the Admit Card, complying with Rules and Regulations for Online
Invigilated / Remote Proctored NIFT Entrance Exam for Admissions 2022.
2.      She was declared as “disqualified” in respect of the CAT exam, in the
declaration of result dated 9th March, 2022. Aggrieved, she has approached
this Court seeking following prayers:
“A.     Issue a writ/ order or direction in the nature of Mandamus or any
other appropriate writ/direction to direct the Respondent to
publish and declare the result of the Petitioner in pursuance of
the entrance exam conducted/ held by the Respondent on
06.02.2022 for admission to bachelor of design course taught by
the Respondent and the same being attended / attempted by the
B.      Issue a writ/order or direction in the nature of Mandamus or any
other appropriate writ/direction to direct the Respondent to allow
the Petitioner to participate in Situation Test (second round) to
be held on 02.04.2022.
C.      Award the cost of this petition to the Petitioner.”
3.      NIFT has filed a counter-affidavit, contesting the petition. It is
contended that the Petitioner has been rightly disqualified as she has
disclosed the identity of the institute from which she was taking coaching
for the exam, as is clearly visible from the PDF answer sheets uploaded by
her to the online portal. Therefore, it is a case of her identity being disclosed
in the examination, which is in violation of Rule 12 printed on the Admit
Card. As a sample, two pages of the PDF answer sheets of the candidate are
appended with the counter-affidavit. Mr. Anil Soni, Standing Counsel for
NIFT, has strongly objected to the petition, saying that it would set-up a
wrong precedent. He has strenuously argued that the Petitioner’s intent
should not be a factor to persuade the Court and that there are a handful of
other candidates who too have been disqualified for similar reasons.
4.      On 31st March 2022, after taking a prima facie view on the matter,
this Court directed the Respondent to permit the Petitioner to appear in the
Situation Test, which was scheduled to be held from 2nd April, 2022
onwards. It was further directed that the result of the Petitioner would be
submitted to the Court in a sealed cover. In compliance thereof, the
Petitioner appeared for the Situation Test, and as per the result shown to the
Court, which Mr. Anil Soni has also perused, Petitioner is eligible for
counselling.
5.      The petition is now taken up for final disposal, as counselling is
underway.
6.      First and foremost, the condition relied upon by the Respondent to
disqualify the Petitioner needs to be analyzed. Rule 12 printed on the Admit
Card reads as follows:
“12. Candidates needs to take note that for the CAT examination you will
be required to see the questions and then draw/ write A4 White sheets.
Subsequently you will have to upload the same by following the step-by-step
process suggested on your guide. Candidates who try to disclose their
identity by writing any personal details other than in the space provided for
the cover page or place any identification mark, on the Question-cum-Answer
Booklet shall be considered “DISQUALIFIED’ candidate shall not be
declared.”
7.      The afore-noted condition stipulates that candidate who try to disclose
their identity “by writing personal details other then in the space provided
for the same”, shall be “considered as disqualified and the result of such
candidate shall not be declared.” The purpose of this condition is quite
evident. Anonymity is to be maintained to ensure that the examiner is not
privy to the identity of the candidate, for the sake of uniformity in checking.
8.      In this case, breach has occurred whist the Petitioner took a picture of
the answer sheets. Those answer sheets were put on a clip-board which had
the name of the institute from which the Petitioner was taking coaching for
the exam. The same would become clear by looking at the picture itself,
9.    Though the afore-noted pictures reveal the name of the coaching institute,
however, they do not indicate the identity of the candidate. This
identification mark does not seem to violate condition no. 12 of the Admit
Card, and for this reason alone, the Court is inclined to give the benefit of
the doubt to the Petitioner. Surely, the identification of a candidate can also
be revealed by giving a hint or a suggestion, but that can occur if there is a
nexus between the candidate and the examiner. However, such a case is not
canvassed by the Respondent.
10.     It has also been pointed out that the online exam was for a period of
three hours and the Petitioner was required to take her examinations under
two cameras. There is no allegation against the Petitioner of any malpractice
or use of unfair means. The Petitioner was required to analyze the question
and draw her answers on the questions-cum-answer sheets. She was then
required to click pictures thereof, stitch them together into PDF files, and
upload them on the portal, all within the stipulated time. It cannot be
forgotten that the Petitioner is just a teenager, and given the enormity of
appearing for an entrance exam which decides her career, coupled with the
obligations of a new-format online system, it could have taken a toll on the
Petitioner who was in a pinch of time. It is therefore plausible that due to
paucity of time, towards the fag end of the exam, the Petitioner panicked and
did not crop or properly click photographs of her answer sheets and
hurriedly uploaded the same to conform with the deadline. While the Court
cannot enter the mind of the Petitioner to establish her bona fides, however,
it is satisfied that she has come with clean hands and has repeatedly admitted
to the lapse on her part while clicking photos and uploading the PDFs. The
Court is also mindful of the fact that due to the advent of COVID-19
pandemic, the structure of examinations has certainly undergone a
monumental change, rendering both students and educational institutions
alike, struggling to cope-up with the challenges posed by a complete shift to
the virtual world. The consequences of such an upheaval have deep
implications, and the instant petition is just one of the many issues that have
been flagged as a by-product of this shift.
11.     As regards Mr. Soni’s apprehension of the instant case opening a
flood-gate of petitions at the instance of similarly-placed students, the Court
would like to observe that each case will turn on its on facts. In the instant
case, as already discussed above, the photographs perused by the court do
not divulge the identity of the Petitioner. Further, in the counter-affidavit,
the Respondent has not shown what adverse consequence did/would the
same entail, nor has any such circumstance been shown which could
indicate to the Court that through the identification of the coaching institute,
the Petitioner received any unfair advantage.
12.     In view of the foregoing, the Court is of the view that a momentary
lapse on the part of the candidate must not be met with such a severe
punitive action, which would cause grave and irreparable prejudice and
affect the Petitioner’s future perversely.
13.     Taking the above into consideration and keeping in view that the
Petitioner has thereafter cleared the third round of examination and is now
ready for counselling, which shows her merit and dedication towards her
desire to become a professional in the field of fashion technology, the Court
deems it fit to allow the present petition.
14.     The present petition is allowed and Respondent is directed to allow
the Petitioner to join the counselling on the basis of her results of the
examinations which was permitted under court directions. The Respondent
shall thereafter proceed to declare the result. Needless to say, the
observations made hereinabove, are taking into account the peculiar facts
and circumstances of the case, as noted above.
15.     The petition is allowed in the above terms.