with Mr. Sajjan Singh and Mr. Sunil Hooda, Advocates
for the appellant.
Mr. Anurag Goel, Advocate for respondent No. 7
Mr. Salil Sabhlok, Advocate,for respondent No. 5-UGC
1.           The instant appeal, under clause X of Letters Patent of this
Court, is directed against order dated 11.5.2017 passed by learned Single
Judge of this Court in CWP No. 4727 of 2013 whereby learned Single Judge
has allowed the writ petition and set aside the appointment of
appellant/respondent No. 5 therein, who was appointed as Lecturer in
Political Science. As appointment of Yudhvir has been set aside by learned
LPA-982 of 2017 (O&M)                                         -2-
Single Judge, he has filed present Letters Patent appeal. Yudhvir (appellant
herein) was arrayed as respondent No. 5, University Grants Commission
(for short “UCG”) was arrayed as respondent No. 2 and Kurukshetra
University, Kurukshetra (for short “KUK”) was arrayed as respondent No. 3
before the writ Court. The writ petition was filed by Reena daughter of Sh.
Azad Singh, Ramesh Kumar son of Sh. Hawa Singh and Vinod Kumar son
of Sh. Jaipal. All the petitioners have been arrayed as respondents in the
present appeal. Reena is the main contesting respondent and she has been
arrayed as respondent No. 1 (for short “Respondent”). The UGC has been
arrayed as respondent No. 5 and KUK as respondent No. 6.
2.           The brief facts, which are necessary to have a hang over the
issue involved, are that       KUK vide advertisement dated 11.7.2012
(Annexure     P-1) invited applications for different posts of teaching and
non-teaching staff on regular basis. Assistant Professor in Political Science
was one of posts of teaching staff. The qualification prescribed for the said
“1. Good academic record with at least 55% marks at
master's degree level in relevant subject or an
equivalent grade of B in the 7 points scale with letter
grades O, A. B. C, D, E and F. Relaxation in age and
marks as per Haryana Govt. Rules for S.C./S.T.
Differently-abled Physically handicapped.
2.    NET or similar test accredited by the UGC shall
remain compulsory. However candidates having Ph.D
Degree in the Concerned Subject or enrolled for Ph.D up
to 31.05.2009 shall be eligible.
The appellant is not having Master's Degree in Political
Science, however, he is having Master's Degree in Public Administration.
He has also cleared National Eligibility Test (for short “NET”) conducted by
UGC.     The respondent (Reena) is having Master's Degree in Political
Science. 15 candidates applied for the post of Lecturer in Political Science.
The appellant as well as six other candidates were holding Master's Degree
in Public Administration whereas eight candidates were having Master's
Degree in Political Science. The Selection Committee in its proceedings
held on 19.10.2012 recommended three candidates namely Yudhvir
(appellant), Reena (respondent) and Sunita Devi in order of preference. The
nominee of Vice Chancellor of KUK in his comments pointed out that
candidates at Sr. Nos. 1 and 3 i.e. Yudhvir and Sunita Devi did not possess
Master's Degree in the relevant subject i.e. Political Science.           Vice
Chancellor's nominee further observed that letter of Haryana Government
dated 9.10.2012 supplied to him does not clarify whether Master's Degree in
the relevant subject is equal to Public Administration and this fact should be
got clarified from the authority concerned before clearing the case. Inspite
of reservation expressed by nominee of Vice Chancellor, the official
respondent issued appointment letter dated 22.10.2012 (Annexure P-4) to
Yudhvir (appellant). In the appointment letter it was pointed out that
candidate may join duty immediately but not later than 15.11.2012.
3.           The respondent and other candidates feeling aggrieved from
appointment of appellant as Lecture in Political Science inspite of the fact
that he was not holding Master's Degree in Political Science, preferred CWP
No. 4727 of 2013 before this Court which came up for consideration before
LPA-982 of 2017 (O&M)                                            -4-
learned Single Judge who vide the impugned order dated 11.5.2017 set
aside appointment letter dated 22.10.2012 issued to appellant Yudhvir.
Learned Single Judge further directed selection/appointing authority to
consider petitioners' name in accordance with rules if they fulfill requisite
qualification for the post of Assistant Professor in Political Science.
Contention of the appellant
4.           Learned counsel for the appellant contended that learned Single
Judge has wrongly relied upon UGC communication wherein UGC has
clarified that Master's Degree courses are offered separately in Political
Science and Public Administration by Indian Universities, hence, candidates
having Master's Degree in Political Science were advised to appear in NET
in the subject of Political Science. Similarly candidates having Master's
Degree in Public Administration were advised to appear in NET in Public
Administration. The UGC had also issued communication qua eligibility to
appear in NET. There is no dispute that a candidate having Master's Degree
in Public Administration is supposed to appear in Political Science in NET.
However, communication of UGC is not relevant while determining the
question of eligibility for appointment of Lecturer in Political Science. A
two judge Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Rajbir Singh Dalal vs.
Chaudhari Devi Lal University, Sirsa and another (2008) 9 SCC 284
has held that Master's Degree in Political Science and Master's Degree in
Public Administration are inter-changeable. The judgment of Hon'ble
Supreme Court was based upon letter dated 5.3.1992 written by UGC to the
Registrar, M.D. University, Rohtak. Relying upon judgment of the Hon'ble
Supreme Court, a Single Judge Bench of this Court in CWP No. 13816 of
LPA-982 of 2017 (O&M)                                           -5-
2017 decided on 2.8.2018, a Single Judge Bench of Orissa High Court in
W.P.(C)No. 12947 of 2010 decided on 25.4.2019, a Single Judge Bench of
Manipur High Court in WP(C)No. 841 of 2017 decided on 17.9.2018 and a
Division Bench of Uttrakhand High Court in Writ Petitin (S/B) No. 67 of
2020 decided on 13.5.2021, have held that a candidate having Master's
Degree in Public Administration is eligible to be considered for the post of
Lecturer in Political Science.
Learned counsel further contended that there are various
communications in the form of clarification issued by UGC, KUK, MD
University, Rohtak CDLU, Sirsa as well as State Government which are
categoric on the subject. Thus, matter stands settled beyond iota of doubt
still learned Single Judge has wrongly relied upon a clarification of UGC
which is not even remotely connected with the issue involved.
Contention of the respondent (Reena)
5.            Learned counsel for respondent supporting findings of learned
Single Judge pointed that judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Rajbir
Singh Dalal (supra) is founded upon fraud committed by petitioners
therein. There was connivance between University and candidates and
accordingly forged documents in the form of communication dated 5.3.1992
was placed before the Hon'ble Supreme Court which passed judgment
relying upon the aforesaid communication. The UGC was directed by this
court to clarify its position qua letter dated 5.3.1992, however, UGC has
filed its affidavit which is nothing more than an eye wash and attempt to
mislead this Court. The advertisement was unambiguous and the candidate
having Master's Degree in Public Administration cannot be treated at par
LPA-982 of 2017 (O&M)                                          -6-
with a candidate having Master's Degree in Political Science. If the
intention of University was to treat Master's Degree in Political Science and
Public Administration at par, there was nothing which prevented University
to clarify in the advertisement that candidates having Master's Degree in
Public Administration can also apply like candidates having Master's
Degree in Political Science. The University had no authority to change
rules midway i.e. after advertisement till the completion of selection
process. However, University with intent to favour appellant has ignored
the writ petitioners who were holding Master's Degree in Political Science
and issued appointment letter in favour of the appellant. The nominee of
Vice Chancellor was expert of the subject and he specifically expressed his
reservation, still appointment letter was issued to the appellant.        The
advertisement was just like a piece of delegated legislation and its content
especially basic qualification could not be changed by letters or
communications or circulars. The essential qualification prescribed in the
advertisement was sacrosanct and it could not be changed by way of
communication between two authorities. The instructions issued by UGC
and relied upon by learned Single Judge are certainly applicable and these
instructions were issued after taking note of judgment of Hon'ble Supreme
Court in Rajbir Singh Dalal (supra). The UGC while conducting NET
assigns different Codes to different subjects and Code No. 2 has been
assigned to Political Science and 14 to Public Administration.
In support of his contention, learned counsel for the
respondent-writ petitioner has cited judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court in
Ganapath Singh Gangaram Singh Rajput vs. Gulbarga University
LPA-982 of 2017 (O&M)                                           -7-
represented by its Registrar (2014)3 SCC 767. Learned counsel
contended that Hon'ble Supreme court has dismissed appeal with costs of
Rs. 50,000/- and facts of present case are identical with the facts of
judgment of Hon'ble the Supreme Court in Ganapath Singh Gangaram
Singh Rajput (supra) in which post advertised was of Lecturer in MCA
whereas appellant was having Master's Degree in Mathematics. In
paragraph 17, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that in Rajbir Singh
Dalal (supra), this court did not say that Political Science is the relevant
subject for appointment as Lecturer in Public Administration.
6.           Learned counsel for UGC would contend that appointment in
question was made in 2012 and at that point of time, UGC Regulations on
Minimum Qualifications for Appointment of Teachers and other Academic
Staff in Universities and Colleges and Measures for the Maintenance of
Standards in Higher Education, 2010 (for short “2010 Regulations”) were in
vogue. Thus, present case is covered by 2010 Regulations. In Regulation
4.0, the qualification for the post of Assistant Professor has been prescribed.
The learned Single Judge has relied upon communication of UGC which is
confined to eligibility to appear in NET. The eligibility prescribed for NET
cannot be considered for the appointment of a Lecturer.              UGC has
repeatedly opined that it is prerogative of the University to prescribe
relevant subject for the post of a Lecturer. UGC has prescribed minimum
qualification under Regulation 4.4 and as soon as a person fulfills minimum
qualification prescribed under Regulation 4.4, he becomes eligible for the
post of Lecturer and it is upto University to consider relevant subject. The
LPA-982 of 2017 (O&M)                                                      -8-
UGC time and again has issued instructions indicating that it is prerogative
of the University to consider a candidate for the post of Lecturer in Political
Science even though he is holding Master's Degree in Public Administration
provided he has already cleared NET. The basic requirement to be eligible
for the post of Lecturer is Master's Degree and clearance of NET.
The Regulation 4.4 as cited by learned counsel for UGC is
reproduced as below:-
Languages, Law, Journalism and Mass Communication
i. Good academic record as defined by the concerned university with at
least 55% marks (or an equivalent grade in a point scale wherever
grading system is followed) at the Master's Degree level in a relevant
subject from an Indian University, or an equivalent degree from an
accredited foreign university.
ii. Besides fulfilling the above qualifications, the candidate must have
cleared the National Eligibility Test (NET) conducted by the UGC,
CSIR or similar test accredited by the UGC like SLET/SET.
iii. Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-clauses (i) and (ii) to this
Clause 4.4.1. candidates, who are, or have been awarded a Ph. D.
Degree in accordance with the University Grants Commission
(Minimum Standards and Procedure for Award of Ph.D. Degree)
Regulations, 2009, shall be exempted from the requirement of the
minimum eligibility condition of NET/SLET/SET for recruitment and
appointment of Assistant Professor or equivalent positions in
iv. NET/SLET/SET shall also not be required for such Masters
Programmes in disciplines for which NET/SLET/SET is not conducted.
i. Good academic record with at least 55% marks (or an equivalent
grade in a point scale wherever grading system is followed) at the
Master's Degree level, in the relevant subject or an equivalent
LPA-982 of 2017 (O&M)                                                        -9-
ii. Besides fulfilling the above qualifications, candidates must have
cleared the National Eligibility Test (NET) for lecturers
conducted by the UGC, CSIR, or similar test accredited by the
UGC. Notwithstanding anything contained in the sub-clauses (i)
and (ii) to this Clause 4.4.2.1, candidates, who are, or have been
awarded Ph. D. Degree in accordance with the University Grants
Commission (Minimum Standards and Procedure for Award of
Ph.D. Degree) Regulations, 2009, shall be exempted from the
requirement      of   the   minimum     eligibility    condition of
NET/SLET/SET for recruitment and appointment of Assistant
Professor or equivalent positions in Universities / Colleges /
7.            We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the
record with their able assistance.
8.            From the conspectus of record and arguments of both sides, we
find that following questions arise for our consideration:-
(i)      Whether appellant having Master's Degree in Public
Administration can be appointed as Lecturer in Political
(ii)    Whether appointment of appellant amounts to change of
rules after publication of advertisement?
(iii)    Whether it would be just and fair to quash appointment
9.            Before adverting with the aforestated questions, it would be
appropriate to look into different judgments on issue and communications
between different authorities.
9.1           The Hon'ble Supreme Court in Rajbir Singh Dalal (supra)
LPA-982 of 2017 (O&M)                                         -10-
“31. It may be mentioned that on a clarification sought
from the UGC whether a candidate who possesses a
Master's degree in Public Administration is eligible for
the post of Lecturer in Political Science and vice-versa,
the UGC wrote a letter dated 5.3.1992 to the Registrar
M.D. University, Rohtak stating that the subject of
Political Science and Public Administration are inter-
changeable and inter-related, and a candidate who
possesses Master's degree in Public Administration is
eligible as Lecturer in Political Science and vice-versa.
Thus, this is the view of the UGC, which is an expert in
academic matters, and the Court should not sit in appeal
over this opinion and take a contrary view.
32. Learned counsel for the appellant has also pointed
out that a large number of universities in this country
have a single department for both the subjects of
Political Science and Public Administration, and this
also demonstrates that the subjects Political Science and
Public Administration are inter-changeable and inter-
related. Political Science is the mother subject and
Public Administration is the offshoot of the same.
33. We agree with Mr. Patwalia, learned counsel, that it
is not appropriate for this Court to sit in appeal over the
opinion of the experts who are of the view that Political
Science and Public Administration are inter-related and
inter-changeable subjects, and hence a candidate who
possesses Master's degree in Public Administration is
eligible for the post of Lecturer in Political Science and
vice-versa. We are told that a large number of persons
having qualifications in the inter-changeable/inter-
related       subjects      have      been        appointed
Readers/Professors/Lecturers and are continuing as such
in various colleges and universities in the State.”
LPA-982 of 2017 (O&M)                                         -11-
9.2         Learned Single Judge of this Court in CWP No. 13816 of 2017
titled as “Anil and others vs. State of Haryana and others” has held:-
“This petition is disposed of and the petitioners are
being held eligible as per the clarification. Learned
counsel for respondents No. 2 and 3 is being directed to
declare the result forthwith. It is also clarified that all
similarly situated candidates who have applied for the
post of Assistant Professors in Political\Science having
the Masters Degree/ NET/PHD in Public Administration
shall be considered eligible.”
9.3         Learned Single Judge of Manipur High Court in Md. Farid
Khan vs. the State of Manipur and another (WP(C)No. 841 of 2017
while dealing with an identical controversy has held:-
“As has been stated hereinabove, the meaning of the
expression “in the relevant subject”has not been
interpreted by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the above
cases. This expression “in the relevant subject’ appears
to have been borrowed from the UGC Regulations as is
evident from Dr. Bhanu Prasad Panda case and it further
appears to have not been defined in the UGC
Regulations, because of which the present controversy or
any other similar controversy has arisen. It is the UGC
which is the appropriate authority to explain the
meaning thereof and in its absence, it is not clear to this
court as to why the word “relevant’ is being used as a
prefix to the word “subject”. What is the purpose or for
that   matter, the aim and object of using the word
“relevant” is not known to this court. According to the
Dictionary, the word “relevant” is synonymous with the
word “connection” which is quite different from the
word “same” as a result of which many experts in
different Universities in the country have given their
LPA-982 of 2017 (O&M)                                        -12-
different opinions. This sort of controversies in respect of
various subjects in different universities will continue to
arise, as long as the expression “relevant subject” is not
defined by the UGC. In the interest of general public and
in order to obviate such controversy, it is the right time
for the UGC to do the needful. The expert from Manipur
University has opined that the subjects of Political
Science and Public Administration are different, while
the Choudhary Devi Lal University has treated both the
subjects as one discipline. Even in the instant writ
petition, it has been alleged that candidates possessing
Master degree in Politics and International Relations,
have been selected for appointment to the post of
Assistant Professor in Political Science. If it is the
intention of the UGC that for appointment to the post of
Assistant professor in Political Science, one must
possess Master degree in the subject of Political Science
only, nothing prevented it from using the expression “in
the same subject”, rather than the expression “in the
relevant subject”. The present controversy has arisen
because of this ambiguous expression which remains
unexplained by the UGC. In Dr.Bhanu Prasad Panda
case, it has been held that Political Science and Public
Administration are distinct and separate subjects . The
Hon’ble Supreme Court in Rajbir Singh Dalal (Dr) has
observed that the decision in Dr. Bhanu Prasad Panda
cannot be said to be a precedent for the reason that it
was rendered on a concession and no reason was given
for it. In Rajbir Singh Dalal (Dr.), the Hon’ble Supreme
Court has not interfered with the clarification given by
the UGC vide its letter dated 05-03-1992 addressed to
the Registrar, M.D University that the subjects of
Political    Science     and Public Administration      are
interchangeable and interrelated and this court is bound
LPA-982 of 2017 (O&M)                                            -13-
by it. So far as the issue relating to the subjects of
Political    Science       and Public   Administration     is
concerned, the opinion given by the UGC can be said to
be final. Moreover, the Hon’ble Supreme Court in
Ganapath Singh Gangaran Singh Rajput case has not
overruled the decision in Rajbir Singh Dalal (Dr) case
but has distinguished it on facts by observing that the
plea taken in Rajbir Singh Dalal (Dr) case was not taken
therein. In view of the above, this court is of the view that
in the present case, the decision rendered in Rajbir Singh
Dalal (Dr) case will have application because of the
stand taken by the UGC that the subjects of Political
Science and Public Administration are interchangeable
and interrelated. No one appears to have questioned it
so far. It is indubitably the UGC which has framed the
Regulations which are to be followed invariably by all
the Universities and the Institutions. There is no material
on record to show that the UGC has subsequently
changed its stand.”
9.4          A Single Bench of Orissa High Court in Dr. Pratima Sarangi
vs. Commissioner-cum-Secretary to Govt. of Orissa, Department of
Education, W.P.(C) No.12947 of 2010, while noticing judgment of Hon'ble
Supreme Court in Rajbir Singh Dalal (supra) as well as other judgments
on the issue has held:-
“ 19. Review Petition (C) No. 59 of 2009 in Civil Appeal No.
4908 of 2008 was filed for review of the judgment passed in
Rajbir Singh Dalal (supra), but the same has been dismissed
by the apex Court vide order dated 12.02.2009. In that view of
the matter, the law laid down by the apex Court in Rajbir
Singh Dalal (supra) has been confirmed pursuant to dismissal
of the review application filed by Dr. Raj Kumar Siwach.
20.    In view of such position, this Court cannot take a
LPA-982 of 2017 (O&M)                                        -14-
different view than that of the decision taken by the apex Court
in Rajbir Singh Dalal (supra) and comes to hold that the
subjects    or   department       of Public    Administration  is
interchangeable to department of Political Science. Therefore,
candidates having requisite qualification in both the subjects
can apply for appointment of Lecturer, Reader and professor of
the respective subjects.
27.    In view of the fact and legal matrix discussed above, this
Court is of the considered view that the claim of the petitioner
that Public Administration and Political Science are two
distinct and separate subjects, cannot sustain in the eye of law
in view of law laid down by the apex Court in Rajbir Singh
Dalal (supra) and as such, the petitioner having participated
in the process of selection and having not come out successful,
cannot turn around and challenge the same in the present case.
Therefore, this Court does not find any merits in the case.”
9.5        A two Judge Bench of Uttrakhand High Court in Minakshi
Sharma vs. State of Uttrakhand and others Writ Petition (S/B) No. 67 of
“8. Admittedly, the petitioner has completed her M.A. In
Public Administration. Undoubtedly, according to the
UGC guidelines issued on 04.07.2018, a degree of M.A.
in Public Administration is equivalent to a degree of
M.A. in Political Science. Therefore, according the UGC,
the petitioner would be deemed to be equipped with a
degree of M.A. in Political Science. Moreover, according
to the petitioner, she has already completed her Ph.D. in
Political Science. Lastly, according to the result
submitted by the Commission before this Court, the
petitioner has already qualified the entire examination.
Therefore, she has a right to be considered for
appointment on the post of Assistant Professor (Political
LPA-982 of 2017 (O&M)                                            -15-
9. Hence, this Court directs the respondent no. 3,the
Commission, to consider the petitioner’s case for the
post of Assistant Professor (Political Science), if she is
found to be eligible and suitable for the said post.”
From the reading of above cited judgments, it is evident that
there is no scope for doubt. The findings recorded by Hon'ble Supreme
Court as well different High Courts are categoric and there is no reason to
form a different opinion. It stands settled that Master's Degree in Public
Administration is inter-changeable with Master's Degree              in Political
10.          Besides enunciation of law by the Hon'ble Supreme Court as
well different High Courts, there are various         communications between
different authorities which need to be considered. Director General Higher
Education, Haryana vide letter dated 9.10.2012 (Annexure R/1) has
informed Registrar, KUK that State has decided that candidates holding
Ph.D/NET in Public Administration be considered for the post of Assistant
Professor in Political Science and vice-versa. A similar letter dated 9.3.2012
(Annexure R/2) was communicated to the Secretary, HPSC, Panchkula. The
relevant extracts of letter dated 9.10.2012 read as:-
“In the subject matter it is informed that the State Govt. after
consideration of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India's Judgment
dated 6.8.2008 in the case of Rajbir Singh vs. Chaudhary Devi
lal University, Sirsa and another, the State Govt. has decided
that the candidate holding the Ph.D/NET in Public
Administration is to be considered for the post of Asstt.
Professor in Political Science and vice-versa.”
LPA-982 of 2017 (O&M)                                           -16-
M.D. University vide letter dated 14.7.2011 (Annexure R/5)
informed the Higher Education Commissioner that M.A. in Public
Administration may be considered for the post of Lecturer in Political
Science. M.D. University, Rohtak has passed resolution           No. 56. The
Executive Council's meeting held on 29.3.2019 has resolved that
instructions of UGC mentioned in public notice dated 4.7.2018 be adopted
in principle. The UGC in its public notice dated 4.7.2018 has clarified that
subjects of Political Science and Public Administration can be considered
inter-changeable for the purpose of appointment of Assistant Professor.
The Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra, which in the present
case is the appointing authority vide letter dated 19.7.2020 has accepted
UGC's public notice dated 4.7.2018.
The Director Higher Education, Haryana vide Memo dated
5.4.2019 communicated public notice dated 4.7.2018 of UGC to all the
State Universities as well Private Universities in the State of Haryana.
From the public notice dated 4.7.2018 issued by UGC and
letters issued by different Universities as well State Government, it comes
out that UGC has accepted that Master's Degree in Political Science and
Public Administration are inter-changeable and it is up to the concerned
Higher Education        Institute to    consider   candidates   with  Master's
Degree/NET in Political Science for the post of Lecturer in Public
Administration and vice versa.
11.          The conceded position emerging from record, judgments cited
and communications made between different Universities is (i) the Hon'ble
Supreme Court has held in Rajbir Singh Dalal (supra) that Political
LPA-982 of 2017 (O&M)                                          -17-
Science and Public Administration are inter-changeable; (ii) different High
Courts have followed judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme court in Rajbir
Singh Dalal (supra) and held that Political Science and Public
Administration are inter-changeable subjects; (iii) MDU vide its
communication dated 14.7.2011 has informed the Higher Education
Commissioner, Panchkula that Master's Degree in Public Administration
may be considered for the post of Lecturer in Political Science; (iv) CLDU,
Sirsa, vide communication dated 15.7.2011 has informed Assistant Director
Colleges-II that Master's degree in Public Administration may be considered
for the post of Lecturer in Political Science (v) Communication by Director
General Higher Education, Haryana vide letter dated 9.10.2012 (vi) UGC
has issued public notice dated 4.7.2018 wherein it has been declared that
candidates with Master's Degree/NET either in Political Science or Public
Administration may be considered for faculty position in Political Science
as well as Public Administration depending upon the requirement of
expertise in the concerned Higher Education Institution; (vii) MDU has
resolved to adopt public notice dated 4.7.2018 of UGC; (viii) KUK has
ordered to endorse         UGC letter dated 4.7.2018; (ix) KUK vide
communication dated 26.8.2011 has written to Director General Education,
Haryana that UGC is conducting separate NET in Public Administration and
Political Science, however, there are letters from M.D. University, Rohtak,
CDLU, Sirsa and the decision of Hon'ble Apex Court that Master's Degree
in Public Administration      may be considered for Lecturer in Political
Science and; (x) communications made by MDU and CLDU indicate that
their opinion regarding inter-changeability of Political Science and Public
LPA-982 of 2017 (O&M)                                          -18-
Administration was same prior to 2012 as well post 2012.
12.          In view of the above judgments, Regulations of UGC and
communications of different Universities, State Government as well as
UGC, we advert to answer the above framed questions.
(i)Whether appellant having Master's Degree in Public
Administration can be appointed as Lecturer in Political Science?
12.1         The advertisement in question was issued on 11.7.2012 and
Hon'ble Supreme Court delivered its judgment in Rajbir Singh Dalal
(supra) on 6.8.2008. A review petition was filed before Hon'ble Supreme
Court seeking review of its judgment dated 6.8.2008 which came to be
dismissed.    A curative petition was also filed which also came to be
dismissed vide order dated 19.11.2009. Sheet anchor of respondent is that
judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Rajbir Singh Dalal (supra) is based
upon letter dated 5.3.1992 and it is a forged document. A review petition
was filed seeking review of aforesaid judgment. Hon'ble Supreme Court
not only dismissed the review petition but also the curative petition. Thus,
it is not appropriate at least for us to return a finding that letter dated
5.3.1992 is a forged or genuine document.
12.2         There is another aspect of the argument. On an earlier occasion
at the instance of respondent-writ petitioner vide order dated 25.2.2019
clarification was sought from UGC which has filed affidavit dated
6.12.2019 wherein it has been disclosed that letters in question pertain to a
period of 27 years ago and file is not traceable. In the affidavit, it has been
further averred that a committee was constituted to consider whether
subjects of Political Science and Public Administration can be considered as
inter-changeable for the purpose of appointment of Assistant Professor. The
LPA-982 of 2017 (O&M)                                           -19-
Committee held three meetings and in the final meeting dated 15.5.2018, it
was resolved that subjects are inter-dependent yet discerningly distinct in
nature. The candidates with Master's Degree/NET either in Political Science
as well as Public Administration may be considered for faculty position in
Political Science as well as Public Administration, depending upon the
requirement of expertise in the concerned Higher Education Institution
which may be decided by the concerned            Institution.  The minutes of
meeting of the Committee were put up before the Chairman UGC who had
approved the same on 17.6.2018. In furtherance of the same, a public notice
dated 4.7.2018 has been issued. Thus, in view of stand of the UGC and
dismissal of review as well curative petition, we cannot make roving
enquiry to find out whether letter dated 5.3.1992 written by UGC to
Registrar of M.D. University is a genuine or forged document.
12.3         In view of judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Rajbir
Singh Dalal (supra) and clarifications issued by UGC as well different
Universities, we have no option except to hold that Master's Degree in
Public Administration is inter-changeable with Master's Degree in Political
Science. It is prerogative of the University to consider degree of Public
Administration for the appointment of Lecturer in Political Science. In the
case in hand, in the advertisement, it was not clarified whether a candidate
having Master's Degree in Public Administration and having cleared NET
may apply for the post of Lecturer in Political Science. Thus, there are all
possibilities that many candidates possessing requisite qualification may
have not applied under the impression that only those candidates who are
possessing degree in Political Science can apply. As University has not
LPA-982 of 2017 (O&M)                                            -20-
clarified whether candidates having Master's Degree with NET in Public
Administration can apply, the appropriate course especially when nominee
of the University has expressed reservation was to re-advertise the post and
make it clear in the advertisement itself that post of Lecturer in Political
Science is inter-changeable with Master's Degree in Public Administration.
Nonetheless, the factual position is that there are 15 candidates who applied
for the post and 7 out of 15 were having Master's Degree with NET in
Public Administration. Therefore, it is difficult to conclude that there was
connivance between candidates and University. Thus, contention of learned
counsel for the writ petitioner-respondent even though is sustainable to the
extent that University was supposed to clarify its position in the
advertisement, however, we do not find any prejudice to respondent because
she was having Master's degree in Political Science and she participated in
the process. Her grouse could be sustainable, had she been holding degree
in Public Administration and abstained from participating just because post
advertised was of Political Science. 7 candidates having Master's Degree in
Public Administration had participated, therefore, it is further difficult to
conclude that candidates having Master's Degree in Public Administration
were unaware about the fact that whether they can or cannot apply. The
appellant is working as Lecturer since 2012 and has already performed his
duties for last about 10 years. Thus, at this belated stage, it would neither be
in the interest of University nor justice to anyone to set aside the appointent
of the appellant. The setting aside of appointment of appellant would not
make respondent eligible for appointment because if we hold that
advertisement was ambiguous, we would have to set aside the
LPA-982 of 2017 (O&M)                                           -21-
advertisement. We cannot direct University to appoint the respondent as has
been directed by learned Single Judge.
12.4         The reliance upon judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court in
Ganapath Singh Gangaram Singh Rajput (supra) as placed by learned
counsel in the present case was placed before different High Courts. In the
above cited judgments, the opinion of all the High Courts is identical. The
Courts have consistently held that Hon'ble Supreme Court in Ganapath
Singh Gangaram Singh Rajput (supra) has not overruled its earlier
judgment in Rajbir Singh Dalal (supra). Thus, ratio laid down in Rajbir
Singh Dalal (supra) still holds the field. The High Courts are bound by
judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
12.5         In view of the above cited judgments, regulations and letters of
different authorities, we are of the considered opinion that it was well within
domain of appointing authority to appoint appellant as Lecturer in Political
Science, though he was holding Master's Degree in Public Administration.
The question is answered in favour of the appellant.
Question No. (ii)Whether appointment of appellant amounts to change
of rules after publication of advertisement?
Learned counsel for the respondent vehemently contended that
appointment of appellant amounts to change of rules of advertisement. In
view of the judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Mohd. Sohrab Khan
vs. Aligarh Muslim University and others 2009 (4) SCC 555, the
respondent-university was debarred from making appointment of appellant
because as per advertisement, candidates having degree in Political Science
were eligible for the post of Lecturer in Political Science. The appointment
LPA-982 of 2017 (O&M)                                            -22-
of appellant amounts to change of rules and it is settled proposition of law
that after advertisement and till the conclusion of selection process, the rules
prescribing essential qualification cannot be changed.            The selection
authority to complete the process of appointment can change rules which do
not prejudice anyone. The change in rules must be inevitable. Hon'ble
Supreme Court in Mohd. Sohrab Khan (supra) held that rules midstream
cannot be changed. The Hon'ble Court was dealing with a case where post
advertised was Lecturer in Chemistry whereas a person belonging to
Industrial Chemistry was appointed. The Court found that the post was
meant for candidates having degree in pure Chemistry and candidates
having degree in Industrial Chemistry could not be appointed. Findings of
Hon'ble Supreme Court read as:-
“19. According to us, the Selection Committee as also the
University changed the rule in the midstream which was not
permissible. The University can always have a person as a
Lecturer in a particular discipline that it desires to have, but
the same must be specifically stated in the advertisement itself,
so that there is no confusion and all persons who could be
intending candidates, should know as to what is the subject
which the person is required to teach and what essential
qualification the person must possess to be suitable for making
application for filling up the said post.
20.We are not disputing the fact that in the matter of selection
of candidates, opinion of the Selection Committee should be
final, but at the same time, the Selection Committee cannot act
arbitrarily and cannot change the criteria/qualification in the
selection process during its midstream. Merajuddin Ahmad did
not possess a degree in pure Chemistry and therefore, it was
rightly held by the High Court that he did not possess the
minimum qualification required for filling up the post of
LPA-982 of 2017 (O&M)                                           -23-
Lecturer Chemistry, for pure Chemistry and Industrial
Chemistry are two different subjects.”
12.6          We are at one with learned counsel for respondent when he
contends that the rules after advertisement till completion of selection
process cannot be altered. In the case in hand, the Appointing Authority has
not altered the rules whereas Appointing Authority has considered and
implemented mandate of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Rajbir Singh Dalal
(supra) and various instructions issued by Government, UGC and different
universities. Thus, it would be hypothetical and contrary to mandate of
Hon'ble Supreme Court if it is concluded that the respondent University has
altered midway the rules regarding eligibility for the post of Lecturer in
Political Science. As observed earlier, there is lapse on the part of
respondent University while drafting advertisement because there was
nothing which prevented the Appointing Authority to clear that candidates
having Master's Degree in Public Administration are equally competent to
apply for the post of Lecturer in Political Science. Though, there is lapse on
the part of the respondent University, nonetheless, we find ourselves unable
to hold and conclude that act of Appointing Authority amounted to change
of rules prior to completion of selection process. We are not oblivious of the
fact that there were seven candidates out of 15, who were holding Master's
Degree in Public Administration. The ratio of candidates having Master's
Degree in Public Administration is substantial in comparison to total
candidates. Had one out of 15 or in the form of percentage less than 10%
candidates having Master's Degree in Public Administration applied, we
could think otherwise. However, percentage of candidates having Master's
Degree in Public Administration is almost 50%, thus it cannot be held that
LPA-982 of 2017 (O&M)                                           -24-
there is prejudice to respondent-Reena. The rules though midway cannot be
altered yet if there is no prejudice to a candidate who is one of the aspirants
cannot claim that rules have been altered. The respondent was having
degree in Political Science and she had participated in the selection process,
thus, she cannot claim that rules were altered to her prejudice.
In view of the above findings, we are of the considered opinion
that there was no change in rules after advertisement and prior to
completion of selection process. The authorities have simply implemented
judgments of Hon'ble Supreme Court as well regulations/instructions of
UGC and different instructions issued by State Government as well different
universities. Accordingly, question is answered in negative and argument of
respondent-Reena is turned down.
Question No.3: Whether it would be just and fair to quash appointment
12.7          The appellant was appointed on 22.10.2012 and his
appointment was set aside by the learned Single Judge on 11.05.2017. This
Court vide interim order dated 02nd June, 2017 stayed implementation of
judgment of learned Single Judge. On account of stay granted by a co-
ordinate Bench of this Court, the appellant is still continuing in service. The
appellant joined service in 2012 and we are passing through 2022 meaning
thereby appellant had already worked for almost 10 years. There is nothing
on record to indicate that there was connivance between the appellant and
Appointing Authority. The question of arbitrariness and bias was wiped out
as soon as 7 candidates having Master's Degree in Public Administration
LPA-982 of 2017 (O&M)                                          -25-
applied for the post. Had appellant been sole candidate and Appointing
Authority had confirmed his appointment inspite of availability of other
candidates having Master's Degree in Political Science coupled with NET,
the situation, could be different. The judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court in
Rajbir Singh Dalal (supra) and different judgments of different High
Courts are holding the field. The UGC by its different communications had
already confirmed that Master's Degree in Public Administration is inter-
changeable with Master's Degree in Political Science. The UGC which is a
premier agency and Controlling Authority of all the universities has left to
the discretion of Appointing Authority to appoint a candidate having
Master's Degree in Public Administration against post of Lecturer of
Political Science. MD University, Rohtak, CDLU, Sirsa and State
Government are also of the opinion that Public Administration and Political
Science are inter-changeable subjects and a candidate having Master's
Degree in Public Administration, who fulfills other conditions prescribed by
UGC can be appointed for the post of Lecturer in Political Science.
Having regard to length of service and judgments of different
High Courts which are based upon judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court in
Rajbir Singh Dalal (supra), we do not deem it appropriate to set aside
appointment of appellant at least at this belated stage. Accordingly, question
is answered in negative and claim of appellant is upheld.
13.          In view of our above findings, we are of the considered opinion
that judgment of learned Single Judge cannot be sustained. Accordingly, the
instant Letters Patent Appeal is allowed and the impugned judgment dated
LPA-982 of 2017 (O&M)                                         -26-
11.05.2017 passed by learned Single Judge of this Court in Writ Petition
No.4727 of 2013 is set aside.
Pending miscellaneous application(s), if any, shall stand
disposed of.