This revision is filed aggrieved by the order of the Court of
Sessions, Chennai (Special Court under SC/ST (Prevention of Atrocities)
Act), dated 09.06.2022, in Crl.M.P.Sr.No.18115/2021, in and by which,
the prayer of the petitioner to refer his complaint, dated 26.07.2021, for
investigation by the respondent police under Section 156 (3) Cr.P.C. was
rejected by the learned Judge.
2.The learned counsel for the petitioner would submit that this is a
case where the petitioner has suffered injustice in the matter of registration
of complaint itself. He would submit that he filed the present petition on
30.09.2022 before the Trial Court. Strangely, the petition has not even
been numbered and was returned with some queries. While representing,
the petitioner had also filed the requisite affidavit and appropriate
Judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court. However, a strange procedure
of recording sworn statement was resorted to by the Trial Court and after
recording the sworn statement without even numbering the petition, the
Trial Court rejected the petition. The reasons given by the Trial Court that
the complaint has been filed in a routine manner to harass the proposed
accused is without any basis. The Trial Court has also given an erroneous
Crl.R.C.No.1165 of 2022
finding that the complainant did not file the affidavit. Therefore, he would
submit that this is a case for interference by this Court.
3.Taking further through the complaint filed by the petitioner dated
26.07.2021 in this case, he would submit that the proposed accused,
namely, Dr.Rita John had clearly and categorically made an allegation as if
the petitioner misbehaved with the women students and he had written bad
words on the whiteboard. The proposed accused knows the caste of the
petitioner. Only because the petitioner belongs to Schedule caste she made
such allegations against the petitioner.        From the very fact that the
University did not take any action against the petitioner, it is proved that
there was no mistake on the part of the petitioner. Once the complaint is
said to be a false complaint, offences under Sections 3 (1) (u) and 3(1) (zb)
are made out. Therefore, when the complaint of the petitioner discloses
prima facie cognizable offences, the Trial Court ought to have referred the
same for investigation under Section 156 (3) Cr.P.C.
4.Per contra, the learned Government Advocate (Criminal side)
would submit that this is a case in which the petitioner being a Professor
had misbehaved with the women students. The said conduct on his part
Crl.R.C.No.1165 of 2022
was reported to the higher authority by way of a complaint. Therefore, as a
counterblast this complaint is made. He would submit that as a Head of
the Department, it was the duty of the proposed accused to bring it to the
knowledge of the superior officer and she has only done the same. If FIR
has to be registered even in respect of the said conduct, then the same
would be beyond the scope and ambit of the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989. He would submit
that the veracity of the complaint, whether the University had taken action
or not is not known at this stage. Therefore, he would submit that there are
no merits in the revision.
5.I have considered the rival submissions made on either side and
perused the material records in this case. At the outset, I am in agreement
with the learned counsel for the petitioner that the procedure adopted by
the Trial Court, in this case, is not in accordance with the law laid down in
Lalitha Kumari's case1. The complainant eventhough had not initially
filed the affidavit as directed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court, in the case of
Priyanka Srivastava & Another Vs. State of U.P. & Ors2, while
representing, the complainant has filed the affidavit. Therefore, the Trial
Court ought to have numbered the petition and heard the learned counsel.
If the Trial Court had found that there are prima facie cognizable offences,
the Trial Court ought to have referred the complaint under Section 156 (3)
Cr.P.C. with an appropriate direction to register the FIR straightaway or to
conduct primary enquiry. If the Trial Court had decided to take the case as
a private complaint and conduct the enquiry under Sections 200 and 203
Cr.P.C., even then, the criminal miscellaneous petition ought to have been
numbered and the procedures have to be taken into a logical conclusion.
In this case, the Trial Court recorded the sworn statement in a petition but
did not take the enquiry to a logical conclusion and passed an order under
Section 203 Cr.P.C. Therefore, to that extent, I am in agreement with the
learned Counsel for the petitioner.
6.But, thereafter, the prayer of the petitioner is to refer to the
complaint dated 26.07.2021 for investigation. On a perusal of the said
complaint, the gravamen of the allegations is that the proposed accused,
namely, Dr.Rita John had sent a complaint to the Registrar of University
wherein she had complained as follows:-
“When M.Sc male students were made to stand
on the chair for 45 minutes, women students were
Crl.R.C.No.1165 of 2022
asked to stand outside the class for more than an
hour saying “women are always unworthy and not
to be trusted” When he wrote “bad words on the
whiteboard and asked students to read as the form of
punishment, When students were asked to come
during odd hours like 5:30 am for sky observation
(for no proper purpose) and class at 8:00 am
(students and parents complained which I could not
disclose to him on their request), When he asked
students to do whatever he says including standing
facing one direction and repeating what he says -
otherwise some evil including death will happen in
their family. (For a period of time he was putting up
the attire of a priest with long beard and claimed
respect as he had supernatural power. When I asked
him to stop such practices in the department he even
“warned” me that my husband will die in six months
if I oppose him.).”
On a reading of the same, it is seen that it is not a case of any public
notice or insulting the petitioner in public. The complaint is given to the
appropriate authority about the alleged acts of the misdeed. The learned
counsel would submit that the allegations would amount to an offence
under Section 3 (1) (u) of the Act. It is useful to extract Section 3 (1) (u).
3.(1)(u) by words either written or spoken or by
Crl.R.C.No.1165 of 2022
signs or by visible representation or otherwise
promotes or attempts to promote feelings of
enmity, hatred or ill-will against the members of
the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes;
7.A careful reading of Sections 3 (1) (r) and 3 (1) (s) shows that the
legislature has carefully used the words that when 'a member' of a
Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe is humiliated with an intent, then
the offences under Sections 3 (1) (r) and 3(1) (s) come into play. As far as
Section 3 (1) (u) the word used is the 'members of Scheduled caste' and on
a clear reading of entire Section 3 (1) (u), it would be clear that when
against the members of the Scheduled Caste or Schedule Tribe, as a group
if any person is trying to promote ill feeling or enmity, then only the said
offence will come to play. Therefore, I am of the view that Section 3 (1)
(u) is not made out.
8.In this regard, it is relevant to extract the dictum of the Hon'ble
Supreme Court of India in R. Kalyani v. Janak C. Mehta3, more
specifically paragraphs 36 to 40 which is as under :
“36.Although the legal principle that a penal statute
must receive strict construction, it is not in doubt or
Crl.R.C.No.1165 of 2022
dispute, we may notice some authorities in this
behalf. In Section 263 of Francis Bennion's
Statutory Interpretation it is stated:“A principle of
statutory interpretation embodies the policy of the
law, which is in turn based on public policy. The
court presumes, unless the contrary intention
appears, that the legislator intended to conform to
this legal policy. A principle of statutory
interpretation can therefore be described as a
principle of legal policy formulated as a guide to
legislative intention.”(emphasis supplied)
37.Maxwell in The Interpretation of Statutes(12th
Edn.) says: “The strict construction of penal
statutes seems to manifest itself in four ways: in the
requirement of express language for the creation of
an offence; in interpreting strictly words setting out
the elements of an offence; in requiring the
fulfilment to the letter of statutory conditions
precedent to the infliction of punishment; and in
insisting on the strict observance of technical
provisions concerning criminal procedure and
jurisdiction.”
38.In Craies Statute Law (7th Edn. at p. 529) it is
said that penal statutes must be construed strictly.
At p. 530 of the said treatise, referring to
(1820)] it is observed, thus: “The distinction
between a strict construction and a more free one
has, no doubt, in modern times almost disappeared,
and the question now is, what is the true
construction of the statute? I should say that in a
criminal statute you must be quite sure that the
offence charged is within the letter of the law. This
rule is said to be founded on the tenderness of the
law for the rights of individuals, and on the plain
principle that the power of punishment is vested in
the legislature, and not in the judicial department,
Crl.R.C.No.1165 of 2022
for it is the legislature, not the court, which is to
define a crime and ordain its punishment.”
(CA)] , which is followed in London and Country
it is stated: “We must be very careful in construing
that section, because it imposes a penalty. If there is
a reasonable interpretation, which will avoid the
penalty in any particular case, we must adopt that
construction. Unless penalties are imposed in clear
terms they are not enforceable. Also where various
interpretations of a section are admissible it is a
strong reason against adopting a particular
interpretation if it shall appear that the result would
be      unreasonable      or    oppressive.”(emphasis
40.Blackburn, J. inWillisv.Thorp[(1875) LR 10 QB
383] observed:“When the legislature imposes a
penalty, the words imposing it must be clear and
distinct.”
9.The proposed accused in her complaint had claimed that the
petitioner had supernatural powers and that she had warned her that the
proposed accused and her husband will die in six months. He would
submit that the same categorically amounts to Section 3 (1) (zb) in this
regard. Section 3 (1) (zb) is extracted as follows:
“3.(1) (zb) causes physical harm or mental agony of a
member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe on the
allegation of practicing witchcraft or being a witch;”
Crl.R.C.No.1165 of 2022
10.The allegations, in this case, is that the proposed accused only
submitted the complaint and it cannot be an act of physical harm or mental
agony on the petitioner by allegations of practicing witchcraft. Therefore,
I am of the view that the allegations mentioned in the complaint does not
prima facie constitute criminal offences under Section 3 (1) (u) or 3 (1)
(zb) of the Act and accordingly, I am unable to persuade myself to refer the
complaint for investigation by the respondent police. Therefore,
eventhough I am in agreement in part with the learned counsel for the
petitioner that the procedure adopted by Trial Court is incorrect, still this
revision will not succeed and I find nothing in this complaint to refer the
same to investigation to the respondent police. Accordingly, this revision
is dismissed.
1.The Special Judge for SC & ST Cases/Judicial Principal Sessions Judge,
2.The Assistant Commissioner of Police,
3.The Inspector of Police,