Mr. Rohan Savant with Ms. Sneha Marjadi i/b. Jay Vakil for Petitioner.
Mr. Zain Mukhi with Mr. Smit Nagda for Respondent No.1-Society.
Mr. Shanay Shah with Mr. Z. A. Jariwala and Mr. Ganesh Ambekar i/b.
M/s. MDP Partners for Respondent No.2.
Mr. Kunal R. Kumbhat i/b. Dhawal Sangani for Respondent No.3.
1.     This is a petition filed under Section 9 of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996 (for short, “the Act”) whereby the petitioner is
before the Court praying for interim reliefs pending the arbitral
proceedings.
2.     The need for the petitioner to initiate the present proceeding has
arisen under the Redevelopment Agreement dated 06 July, 2021 entered
by the petitioner with the respondent no.1-society (for short ‘the
society’). The said agreement concerns the premises of the society which
are now subject matter of redevelopment to be undertaken by the
petitioner. The existing building comprised of 12 flats belonging to 12
members of the society. It is petitioner’s case that in respect of the flat
which is stated to be occupied by respondent no.3, situated on the
ground floor, and on the front side of the building being flat no.1, there
is a dispute between respondent no.2 and respondent no.3. Respondent
no.2 has filed a suit in this Court (Suit No.337 of 2016) in which
respondent no.2 has contended that respondent no.3 is a trespasser ,
Respondent No.2 is seeking a relief in the suit that respondent no.3 be
removed from the said flat and the possession of the flat being handed
over to respondent no.2. Such suit is pending, also so far, there are no
interim orders passed in the suit. The suit is stated to be at the stage of
recording evidence.
3.     Be that as it may, the concern of the petitioner in the present
proceedings is that in view of the inter se disputes between respondent
no.2 and respondent no.3, flat no.1 is not being vacated by respondent
no.3 though all other 11 members have vacated their respective
flats/tenements. The petitioner contends that the building is required to
be demolished which is already in a dilapidated condition.
4.     It is in these circumstances, the prayers are made in the present
proceedings that directions be issued to the respondents not to cause
any obstruction in the redevelopment process, and that vacant
possession of the said ground floor flat, which is in possession of
respondent no.3, be handed over to the petitioner/society, so that the
redevelopment process can proceed further. It is submitted on behalf of
the petitioner that respondent No.3 by not not vacating the said flat is
causing serious prejudice in the redevelopment work.
5.     I have heard learned counsel for the parties, as also I have
perused the record. At the outset it needs to be noted that, it is quite
settled that the minority members of the society cannot take a position
contrary to the will of the majority members of the society.        In the
present case, the society has taken a decision to redevelop its building
which is already in a dilapidated condition which is now required to be
demolished. As per the agreement in question, respondent no.3 has
agreed to appoint the petitioner as a developer. It appears to be not in
dispute that there are 12 members out of which, 11 members have
vacated their respective premises, except for respondent No.3 who is not
vacating his flat, as a result of an inter se dispute between him and
respondent no.3. Thus, both these respondents are causing obstruction
to the redevelopment.
6.     In such circumstances, in my opinion, the petitioner has certainly
made out a prima facie case for grant of interim measures pending the
arbitral proceedings.      However, after some deliberation on the
proceedings, learned counsel for respondent nos.2 and 3 have taken a fair
stand. They state and agree that the disputes inter se between respondent
no.2 and respondent no.3 are already subjudice in Suit No.337 of 2016
filed before this Court and that the rights of these parties would be
determined in the proceedings of such suit. They would also state and
agree that being parties to the suit they have a right to file appropriate
interim proceedings/application as the situation may arise and seek such
appropriate interim orders. Learned counsel for respondent no.2 and
respondent no.3 also would not dispute that the redevelopment process
cannot be stalled in view of the pending suit between these parties.
7.      Mr. Kumbhat, learned counsel for respondent no.3 submits that
his client is not averse to hand over possession of the said premises/flat
to the petitioner-society, so that the redevelopment can proceed. He
fairly submits that such handing over of the possession of the said flat,
would be subject to the outcome of the pending suit as instituted by
respondent no.2 against his client respondent no.3. Mr. Kumbhat,
however, submits that as respondent No.3 is in possession of the said
flat, respondent no.3 would be entitled to the transit rent as also to be
put in possession in the permanent alternate accommodation after the
redevelopment is complete and which shall be subject to the outcome of
the pending suit and the orders to be passed therein.
8.     Mr. Shanay Shah, learned counsel for respondent no.2 submits
that, in the event respondent no.2 has some better rights and if
respondent No.2 is to take a position that, the benefit of the transit rent
and entitlement of the redeveloped flat needs to come to respondent
No.2 in that event, it would be open to respondent No.2 to seek such
appropriate reliefs in the pending suit. Mr. Shah’s contention in my
opinoin, is fair and correct as in the present proceedings, it is not
possible for this Court to determine any rights either of respondent nos.2
and 3 qua the flat in question, as such rights are already subject matter
of the pending suit.
9.     The fact remains that as respondent no.3 is in possession of the
tenement in question and would now be handing over possession of
such tenement to the petitioner/society. Hence considering the
consistent view taken by this Court in Heritage Lifestyles and Developers
Pvt. Ltd. vs. Amar-Villa Co-Operative Housing Society and others 1 and in
the party who is dispossessed, would be entitled to the transit rent as it
is such party who is put to hardship.
10.    In the above circumstances, in my opinion, respondent no.3 would
be entitled for payment of transit rent by the petitioner.                         However,
2 Commercial Arbitration Petition (L.) No.1097 of 2022 decided on 18.01.2022
certainly this shall be subject to the rights of respondent no.2 to make
such appropriate claims in the pending suit in the event some better
rights are being asserted by respondent no.2, and which shall purely be
a subject matter of consideration in the pending Suit. Keeping such
rights of the parties open to be asserted in the pending suit, in my
opinion, the present proceeding would not warrant any further
adjudication. Also there is a statement made by learned counsel for
respondent no.3 that his client would hand over the possession of the
flat in question within three weeks from today which stands accepted.
The petition is accordingly disposed of by the following order:-
i.     Respondent no.3 shall hand over the possession of the premises/
flat which is in his possession, to the petitioner within three weeks from
ii.    Handing over of the possession shall be subject to the outcome of
the pending suit filed by respondent no.2 against respondent no.3 and
the orders which may be passed on such suit.
iii.   Respondent no.3 is entitled to the transit rent by the petitioner-
society as being paid to the other members of the society, which shall
also be subject to any order which respondent no.2 may obtain in the
pending suit. All contentions of both these respondents on any such
issue are expressly kept open.
iv.    The advance transit rent and any other amounts payable, as being
paid and as applicable to the other members of the society shall be paid
to respondent no.3 on the day the possession is being handed over by
respondent no.3 to the petitioner-society.
v.     In   so   far   as  the   agreement     for  permanent     alternate
accommodation is concerned, respondent No.2 and 3 are at liberty to
seek appropriate orders in that regard in the pending suit. All
contentions of both these respondents on any issue are expressly kept
vi.    Disposed of in the aforesaid terms. No costs.
vii.   Needless to observe that in the event the inter se rights between
respondent nos. 2 and 3 are not decided in the pending suit between
these parties, on the day the construction of the building is complete
and possession of the redevelopment premises is to be handed over, in
such event, as respondent no.3 shall be handing over the possession of
the flat in question, the petitioner/society shall hand over possession of
the redeveloped premises to respondent no.3, which shall be subject to
the final orders which may be passed in the pending suit.
viii.  Disposed of in the above terms. No costs.