Present:     Mr. Karanjit Singh, Advocate for the petitioner.
1.     Aggrieved of the order dated 24.11.2020 of the learned Additional
Sessions Judge, Amritsar, directing the petitioner to give voice sample, the
present revision petition is filed.
2.      The facts in brief are that FIR No. 10 dated 9.5.2019 was registered
under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 against Dr. Lakhbir Singh
Bhaghowalia and Sajan Kumar, who allegedly used to take illegal
gratification from Managers and owners of the hotels and shops etc. In the
investigation, it   revealed    that present petitioner along with other co-
accused were also involved alongwith Dr. Lakhbir Singh Bhaghowalia and
Sajan Kumar in collecting gratification from owners or managers of the
hotels. Their telephone conversation with Dr. Lakhbir Singh Bhaghowalia,
and Sajan Kumar was taken into possession by the police. An application
was filed by the prosecution for taking voice sample.
3.            Learned counsel for the petitioner argues that the impugned
order is in violation of Article 20(3) of the Constitution of India and
infringes the right of privacy.
4.            As per Article 20(3) of the Constitution of India, “No person
can be compelled to be a witness against himself”.
5.            The issue raised by counsel for the petitioner is no longer res-
integra. The Supreme Court in “Ritesh Sinha vs. State of Uttar Pradesh;
2019 (8) SCC 1, held that the directions to take voice sample does not
infringe Article 20(3) of the Constitution of India.
6.             The Supreme Court while dealing with the question “Whether
Article 20(3) of the Constitution of India, which protects a person accused
of an offence from being compelled to be a witness against himself, extends
to protecting such an accused from being compelled to give his voice
sample during the course of investigation into an offence” considering the
earlier decision in “State of Bombay vs. Kathi Kalu Oghad; AIR 1961 SC
“9. Despite unanimity amongst the learned Judges hearing the appeal
on the first question on which the learned counsel for the appellant
has also not laid much stress it would be appropriate to make the
discussions complete to answer the question on the strength of the
test laid down by this Court in State of Bombay v. Kathi Kalu
Oghad (supra). Speaking on behalf of the majority the then learned
Chief Justice B.P. Sinha was of the view that the prohibition
contemplated by the constitutional provision contained in Article
20(3) would come in only in cases of testimony of an accused which
are self-incriminatory or of a character which has the tendency of
incriminating the accused himself. The issue in the case was with
regard to specimen writings taken from the accused for comparison
with other writings in order to determine the culpability of the
accused and whether such a course of action was prohibited under
Article 20(3) of the Constitution. The following observations of the
then Chief Justice B.P. Sinha would be apt for recollection as the
same conclusively determines the first question arising. The same,
therefore, is extracted below:
"(11)..........It is well-established that clause (3) of Article 20 is
directed against self-incrimination by an accused person. Self-
Incrimination must mean conveying information based upon
the personal knowledge of the person giving the information
and cannot include merely the mechanical process of producing
documents in court which may throw a light on any of the
points in controversy, but which do not contain any statement
of the accused based on his personal knowledge..........
(12) In order that a testimony by an accused person may be
said to have been self-incriminatory, the compulsion of which
comes within the prohibition of the constitutional provision, it
must be of such a character that by itself it should have the
tendency of incriminating the accused, if not also of actually
doing so. In other words, it should be a statement which makes
the case against the accused person at least probable,
considered by itself. A specimen handwriting or signature or
finger impressions by themselves are no testimony at all, being
wholly innocuous, because they are unchangeable; except, in
rare cases where the ridges of the fingers or the style of writing
have been tampered with. They are only materials for
comparison in order to lend assurance to the Court that its
inference based on other pieces of evidence is reliable. They
are neither oral nor documentary evidence but belong to the
third category of material evidence which is outside the limit of
7.          Whether compelling to give voice samples infringes Right to
Privacy was an issue in Ritesh Sinha's case (supra) and the Supreme Court
“24. Would a judicial order compelling a person to give a
sample of his voice violate the fundamental right to privacy
under Article 20 (3) of the Constitution, is the next question.
The issue is interesting and debatable but not having been
argued before us it will suffice to note that in view of the
opinion rendered by this Court in Modern Dental College and
Research Centre and others v. State of Madhya Pradesh and
others, 2016(3) S.C.T. 35 : (2016) 7 SCC 353, Gobind v. State
of Madhya Pradesh and another, (1975) 2 SCC 148 and the
Nine Judge's Bench of this Court in K.S. Puttaswamy and
another v. Union of India and others, 2018(1) RCR (Civil)
398 : (2017) 10 SCC 1 the fundamental right to privacy cannot
be construed as absolute and but must bow down to
compelling public interest. We refrain from any further
discussion and consider it appropriate not to record any
further observation on an issue not specifically raised before
8.           The nine Judges Bench of the Supreme Court in “Justice
K.S.Puttaswamy (Retd.), and Anr vs. Union of India and Ors; 2017 (10)
SCC 1, held that right to privacy is protected as an intrinsic part of the right
to life and personal liberty under Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
However, right is not an absolute right. The Court had not given exhaustive
enumerations covered under right to privacy. Relevant paras are quoted
“324. This Court has not embarked upon an exhaustive
enumeration or a catalogue of entitlements or interests
comprised in the right to privacy. The Constitution must evolve
with the felt necessities of time to meet the challenges thrown
up in a democratic order governed by the Rule of Law. The
meaning of the Constitution cannot be frozen on the
perspectives present when it was adopted. Technological
change has given rise to concerns which were not present
seven decades ago and the rapid growth of technology may
render obsolescent many notions of the present. Hence the
interpretation of the Constitution must be resilient and flexible
to allow future generations to adapt its content bearing in
mind its basic or essential features.
325. Like other rights which form part of the fundamental
freedoms protected by Part III, including the right to life and
personal liberty under Article 21, privacy is not an absolute
right. A law which encroaches upon privacy will have to
withstand the touchstone of permissible restrictions on
fundamental rights. In the context of Article 21 an invasion of
privacy must be justified on the basis of a law which stipulates
a procedure which is fair, just and reasonable. The law must
also be valid with reference to the encroachment on life and
personal liberty under Article 21. An invasion of life or
personal liberty must meet the threefold requirement of (i)
legality, which postulates the existence of law; (ii) need,
defined in terms of a legitimate State aim; and (iii)
proportionality which ensures a rational nexus between the
objects and the means adopted to achieve them.
326. Privacy has both positive and negative content. The
negative content restrains the State from committing an
intrusion upon the life and personal liberty of a citizen. Its
positive content imposes an obligation on the State to take all
necessary measures to protect the privacy of the individual.”
9.          Voice sample in a sense resemble finger prints and hand
writing, each person has a distinctive voice with characteristic features
dictated by vocal cavities and articulates. The samples are collected after
having permission in accordance with law. The sample taken itself would
not be an evidence, rather they are for comparing the evidence already
10.         The Law Commission of India in its 87th report dealt with the
issue, same was taken notice by the Supreme Court in Ritesh Sinha's case
(Supra). The extract are quoted:-
“13. A voice print is a visual recording of voice. It mainly
depends on the position of "formants". These are concentrates
of sound energy at a given frequency. It is stated that their
position in the "frequency domain" is unique to each speaker.
Voice prints resemble finger prints, in that each person has a
distinctive voice with characteristic features dictated by vocal
cavities and articulates.
Voice-print Identification seems to have a number of practical
uses. In England, in November 1967, at the Winchester
Magistrate's Court, a man was accused of making malicious
telephone calls. Voice-print Identification (spectrograph) was
used and the accused was found guilty."
"Often, it becomes desirable to have an accused person speak
for the purposes of giving to the police an opportunity to hear
his voice and try to identify it as that of the criminal offender.
A comparison may even be desired between the voice of an
accused person and the recorded voice of a criminal which has
been obtained by, say, telephone tapping. To facilitate proof of
the crime the police may like that the accused should be
compelle to speak,- and even that his voice as recorded may be
converted into a "voice print"
However, if the accused refuses to furnish such voice, there is
no legal sanction for compelling him to do so, and the use of
force for that purpose would be illegal."
"The scope of Section 5 needs to be expanded in another
aspect. The general power of investigation given to the police
under the Criminal Procedure Code may not imply the power to
require the accused to furnish a specimen of his voice. Cases in
which the voice of the accused was obtained for comparison
with the voice of the criminal offender are known but the
question whether the accused can be compelled to do so does
not seem to have been debated so far in India There is no
specific statutory provision in India which expressly gives
power to a police officer or a court to require an accused
person to furnish a specimen of his voice."
11.          The infringement of Fundamental Right to Privacy cannot be
raised to create a bubble to scuttle the investigation nullifying the evidence
collected by merely denying that the voice in recording is not of the
petitioner and there being no comparison.
12.          With the advancement of technology, the modes of
communication are changing. To keep pace with the change, new
technology is required to be used for collecting and comparing evidence.
One method being tapping of communication devices but after compliance
of the procedure laid down. It is in that context that taking of voice samples
are necessitated. The samples collected are not evidence in itself, rather are
tools for comparison the voice recording.
13.          The question considered was “Assuming that there is no
violation of Article 20(3) of the Constitution of India, whether in the
absence of any provision in the Code, can a Magistrate authorize the
investigating agency to record the voice sample of the person accused of an
14.          The Supreme Court in exercising the powers under Article 142
of the Constitution of India till there is a specific provision in the Cr.P.C.
for taking voice samples conceded powers to the Judicial Magistrate to
order giving of voice samples. The relevant portion is quoted below:-
“25. In the light of the above discussions, we unhesitatingly
take the view that until explicit provisions are engrafted in the
Code of Criminal Procedure by Parliament, a Judicial
Magistrate must be conceded the power to order a person to
give a sample of his voice for the purpose of investigation of a
crime. Such power has to be conferred on a Magistrate by a
process of judicial interpretation and in exercise of
jurisdiction vested in this Court under Article 142 of the
Constitution of India. We order accordingly and consequently
dispose the appeals in terms of the above.
15.          In view of above discussion, the contentions raised by learned
counsel for the petitioners are rejected. Impugned order is upheld.
16.          The petition is dismissed.