.        Being aggrieved and dissatisfed by the judgment and
order passed by the Member, Motor Accident Claims
Tribunal, Latur (for short, ‘the Tribunal’), appellants – original
claimants         preferred  this  appeal   for   enhancement               of
compensation.
2.       Brief facts of the case are as under :
On     09.10.2009    at  about   10:00      p.m.      deceased
Mohanrao           Narharrao  Salunke  was     proceeding          on      his
motorcycle towards his village Bardapur, Tq. Ambejogai,
Dist. Latur. When he reached near Kaushik Dhaba on Latur-
Ambejogai road at Renapur, Dist. Latur, gave dash to the
stationary motor tempo bearing No. MT-B-6994 (for short,
‘offending tempo’) which was standing on the road. Due to
the accidental injuries Mohanrao Salunke died during the
treatment. Offence was registered against the tempo driver.
3.       The      claimants     fled    Claim   Petition      for      getting
compensation before the Tribunal. The Tribunal has awarded
compensation. Against said judgment and order this appeal.
4.       It is contention of learned Counsel for appellants that,
the Tribunal has considered 50% contributory negligence of
the deceased which is improper. Learned Counsel further
submits that, the offending tempo was stationed in the
middle of the road. It was darkness. No tail lamp and the
indicators of the stationary offending tempo were put on. No
proper precaution was taken by the driver of the offending
tempo, for indication to the other vehicles that, offending
tempo was stationed in the middle of the road. Due to
darkness deceased could not see offending tempo and
dashed against it, but this fact is not considered by the
Tribunal and has wrongly held that, there was 50%
contributory negligence of the deceased.
5.       Learned           Counsel   further     submits        that,         no
compensation awarded under the non-pecuniary heads. No
compensation awarded under the heads of future prospects
and consortium. Hence, requested to allow the appeal.
6.       It is contention of learned Counsel for respondents
that,      deceased         was   driving  motorcycle        in   high       and
excessive speed. There was headlight on the motorcycle. In
that headlight the deceased could have seen the stationed
offending tempo but due to high speed of motorcycle
deceased dashed to the offending tempo. The indicators
and parking lights of the offending tempo were in on
condition,         the     proper   precaution    was     taken       by      the
respondents when offending tempo was stationed on the
road. It was stationed on the left side of the road. The
Tribunal has rightly considered contributory negligence of
the deceased while awarding compensation. The Tribunal
has      considered         all the    aspects    and    on     that       basis
compensation is awarded. Hence, requested to dismiss the
appeal.
7.       I have heard both the learned Counsel. Perused
judgment and order passed by the Tribunal.
8.       The issues involved in this appeal are in accident
whether there was contributory negligence of the deceased
and entitlement of compensation amount under future
prospects. Admittedly, the accident is occurred at 10:00
p.m. the deceased gave dash to stationary offending tempo
from back side. The Tribunal has observed that, deceased
could not notice the offending tempo under headlight of
motorcycle and as such, given dash to the offending tempo
therefore, vehicular accident occurred. The Tribunal has held
50% contributory negligence of the deceased.
9.       I am unable to understand fndings given by the
Tribunal regarding contributory negligence of the deceased
when it has come on record that, no tail lamps or the
indicators of offending tempo were put on or no proper
precautions were taken by the driver of the offending
tempo, to give signal to the other vehicles to show that, the
offending tempo was stationed on the road.
10.      After the incident of accident Mohini Salunke, CW-1,
widow of deceased and CW-3 Govind Suryawanshi have
seen the place of accident while going to Civil Hospital,
Latur where deceased was admitted after accident. They
noticed that, offending tempo was stationed in the middle of
road and its tail lamp or indicators were not on. It has come
in the evidence of CW-4 Laxman Jadhav who runs Dhabha
by name ‘Kaushik’ near the place of accident, that after
hearing sound he went to the accident spot. He found that
deceased was lying on the road and stationary offending
tempo. He further stated that, indicators or tail lamp of the
offending tempo were not on. It was stationed in the middle
of the road. From the evidence of three witnesses it reveals
that, offending tempo was stationed in the middle of road.
No tail lamp or indicators of offending tempo were on.
11.      It is signifcant to note that, driver of the offending
tempo has not examined any witness to prove that, he had
put on the tail lamp or indicators of the offending tempo.
Latur Ambejogai road is highway. The accident is happened
at 10:00 p.m. when offending tempo was stationed in
middle of the road. It was duty of the driver of the offending
tempo to put indicators or parking light of the offending
tempo in on condition, so other vehicles could know about
stationed tempo but it has come on record that, no such
precautions were taken by driver of the offending tempo.
When any vehicle stationed on the road at night time, as
per Rule 109 of the Central Motor Vehicles rules, 1989
proper precautions are necessary to be taken. It reads thus :
[109. Parking light :
[[Every construction equipment vehicle, combine
harvester and motor vehicle] and every motor vehicle
other than motor cycles and three wheeled invalid
carriages shall be provided with one white or amber
parking light on each side in the front. In addition to
the front lights, two red parking lights one on each
side in the rear shall be provided. The front and rear
parking lights shall remain lit even when the vehicle is
kept stationary on the road:
Provided that these rear lamps can be the same
as the rear lamps referred to in rule 105 sub-rule (2):
[Provided also that construction equipment
vehicles [and combined harvesters], which are
installed with food light lamps or sport lights at the
front, rear or side of the vehicle for their off–highway
or construction operations, shall have separate control
for such lamps or lights and these shall be
permanently switched off when the vehicle is
travelling on the road.]
This rule states that, front and rear parking lights shall
remain lit when the vehicle is kept stationary on the road.
12.      It has come on record that, no such parking lights were
put on the offending tempo, so liability of contributory
accident cannot be fastened on the deceased by holding
that, he should have seen the stationed tempo under the
headlight of motorcycle. When there is specifc rule in
respect of taking precautions by stationary vehicle, if such
precautions are not taken by the driver/owner of stationary
vehicle then liability cannot be shifted on motorcycle rider.
Hence, I am setting aside the observations of the Tribunal
that,     there was         50%   contributory    negligence         of     the
deceased in the said accident and I am holding that, driver
of the offending tempo is sole responsible for the occurred
accident. The Tribunal has considered salary income of
deceased             at    Rs.31,563/-    while      calculating            the
compensation. The Tribunal has deducted 20% income tax.
No reasons given by the Tribunal for said deduction. The
yearly salary income of deceased was below Rs.5,00,000/-
then deduction of income tax should be 10%. Hence, I am
considering it 10% deduction for income tax.
13.      The Tribunal has not awarded future prospects. As per
view of Hon’ble Apex Court in the case of National
Insurance Company Ltd., Pranay Sethi and Others
reported in (2017) 16 SCC 680, the appellant is entitle for
30% future prospects as age of deceased was 46 years and
he was in government service. The appellants are entitle for
funeral and transportation expenses at Rs.15,000/-.
14.      In view of the above calculations, appellants are
entitle for following compensation :
7.      + 30% future prospects              +Rs.8,80,674/-
Appellants are entitled            Rs.25,59,320/-
15.      The Tribunal has awarded amount of Rs.13,91,936/-, if
it deducts from amount of Rs.39,51,256/- compensation
awarded          by     this  Court   it  comes      to    Rs.25,59,320/-.
Appellants are entitle for this amount. In view of the above,
I pass the following order :-
(b)     Appellants are entitle for enhanced amount of
Rs.25,59,320/- along-with @ 6% interest thereon
from the date of fling of Claim Petition till its
realisation.
(c)     Respondents shall deposit the enhanced amount
along-with accrued interest thereon within eight
(08) weeks before the Tribunal, Latur.
(d)     Appellants are permitted to withdraw deposited
amount along-with accrued interest thereon.
(e)     Appeal is disposed of, accordingly.
(f)     Civil Application, if any, same stands disposed of.