Counsel for Petitioner :- Asim Kumar Singh
Counsel for Respondent :- Gaurav Mehrotra,C.S.C.
1. Heard Ms. Akansha Rajpoot, Advocate holding brief of Sri
Asim Kumar Singh, the learned counsel for the petitioner as
also Sri Gaurav Mehrotra, the learned counsel for the
respondent, Sri Anand Kumar Singh, the learned counsel for the
State-respondent and perused the records.
2. By means of the instant writ petition the petitioner has
challenged the final select-list dated 12.9.2022 issued in
furtherance     of    Uttar  Pradesh    Higher    Judicial     Service
Examination 2020 and has prayed for issuing a direction for
conducting the interviews again in accordance with the
statutory mandate, stipulation in the advertisement and various
judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India.
3. Briefly stated, the facts of the case are that on 17.12.2020 the
High Court of Judicature at Allahabad had issued a notification
for making selections for filling up 98 vacancies of Addl.
District Judges/Addl. Sessions Judges in Uttar Pradesh Higher
Judicial Services. The petitioner had applied in pursuance of the
aforesaid notification and she was declared successful in the
Preliminary Examination as also in the Main Examination.
4. In the Main Examination only 50 candidates were declared to
be successful, whereas the number of vacancies was '91'. On
15.7.2022 call-letters were issued to the candidates for
appearing for interviews, which were scheduled to be held on
1.8.2022 and 2.8.2022 and the candidates were required to
report at 08.15 a.m., which time was subsequently changed to
11.30 a.m. through a notice issued on 31.7.2022.
5. Ms. Akansha Rajpoot, the learned counsel for the petitioner
has submitted that as per the Schedule, 25 candidates were to be
interviewed on 1.8.2022 and the remaining 25 candidates were
to be interviewed on 2.8.2022, however, on 1.8.2022 only 15
candidates could be interviewed. The petitioner has alleged that
each candidate was given only 3-7 minutes for the interview.
6. The petitioner has submitted that Rule 18 of the Uttar
referred to as 'Rules of 1975') provides as follows:
"Rule 18. Procedure of Selection-(1) The selection Committee
referred to in Rule 16 shall scrutinize the applications received and
shall thereafter hold a written examination as prescribed in
Appendix (G) for judging the suitability of the candidates. The
Committee shall call for interview such of the applicants who in its
opinion have qualified for interview after scrutiny and written
(1.A) The Selection Committee may hold a preliminary examination
for judging the suitability of the candidates to be admitted in the
written examination as referred in sub-rule (1). The preliminary
examination shall consist of one paper consisting of 100 marks of
two hours duration from the syllabus prescribed for the written
examination in Appendix "G" of the Rules:
Provided that only those candidates shall be treated to be eligible
for the main written examination who secure minimum 45% marks
in the preliminary examination subject to 20 times of the number of
vacancies category-wise i.e. General, Scheduled Castes, Scheduled
Tribes and Other Backward Classes.
(2) In assessing the merits of a candidate the Selection Committee
shall have due regard to his professional ability, character,
personality and health.
(3) The Selection Committee shall make a preliminary selection and
submit the record of all candidates to the Chief Justice and
recommend the names of the candidates in order of merit who, in its
opinion, are suitable for appointment to the Service.
(4) The Court shall examine the recommendations of the Selection
Committee and having regard to the number of direct recruits to be
taken, prepare a list of selected candidates in order of merit and
forward the same to the Governor."
7. Appendix-G appended to the aforesaid Rules mentions that
the suitability of the candidate for employment in the Uttar
Pradesh Higher Judicial Service will be tested with reference to
his merit, giving due regard to his ability, character, personality
and physique.
8. A note inserted at the foot of Appendix-G mentions that:-
"(i) The candidates securing minimum aggregate 45% marks in the
written examination shall be called to appear in the interview
subject to maximum thrice the number of vacancies category-wise.
The interview shall be in a thorough and scientific manner and shall
take any thing between 25 and 30 minutes for each candidates.
(ii) The candidates securing minimum 40% marks in the interview
shall only be eligible to be included in the select list. The marks
obtained in the interview will be added to the marks obtained in the
written papers and the candidate's place in the select list will depend
on the aggregate of both."
9. Ms. Akansha Rajpoot, the learned counsel for the petitioner
has also submitted that as against 25-30 minutes contemplated
for conducting interview of each of the candidates, they were
interviewed for 3-7 minutes only, which vitiates the selection
held in furtherance of the interviews.
10. Per contra, Sri Gaurav Mehrotra, the learned counsel for
the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad has opposed the writ
petition on three counts. Firstly, he has submitted that the
interviews were held on 1.8.2022 and 2.8.2022 and the instant
petition has been filed on 19.1.2023, after the final result was
published on 12.9.2022. His submission is that the writ petition
has been filed after an unreasonable delay and the same is liable
to be dismissed on the ground of latches. Secondly, he has
submitted that the appointment-letters have already been issued
to the selected candidates, whose names find place in the final
result published on 2.9.2022 and in case the writ petition is
allowed and the final select-list is quashed, it will affect the
appointed persons adversely. In such circumstances, the
selected candidates are necessary parties to the writ-petition and
as all the selected candidates have not been impleaded as
opposite parties, the writ petition suffers from the defect of non-
joinder of necessary parties. The third submission of Sri
Mehrotra is that the petitioner has made a bald assertion that
candidates were not interviewed for sufficient length of time,
without any particulars to substantiate her case and to establish
as to what prejudice was caused to the petitioner by the duration
of her interview.
11. We have considered the aforesaid facts and circumstances of
the case and submissions made by the learned counsel for the
12. As is evident from the facts stated in the writ petition itself,
the petitioner appeared for the interview on 1.8.2022 and
immediately after being interviewed she came to know that she
had been interviewed for a duration which, as per her, was not
as per the provisions contained in the Rules of 1975, yet she
elected not to challenge the interview process, rather she waited
for declaration of the final result of selection, apparently under
a hope that the result of the interview would be favourable to
her. The final select-list was published on 12.9.2022, which did
not contain the name of the petitioner and it is only thereafter,
that she filed the writ petition on 18.1.2023.
13. It appears that although the petitioner was aware that the
interview was not conducted in accordance with the Rules, as
alleged by her, the petitioner took a calculated chance of her
being successful in the interview and chose not to challenge the
selection process till after issuance of the final select list.
Having taken such a chance and having elected not to challenge
the process of interview before issuance of the final select-list,
the petitioner cannot be allowed to turn around and challenge
the selection process after publication of the final select list by
alleging that the interviews were not held in accordance with
14. In Madan Lal v. State of J&K, (1995) 3 SCC 486, the Hon’ble
Supreme Court held that: -
“9…..Thus the petitioners took a chance to get themselves selected
at the said oral interview. Only because they did not find
themselves to have emerged successful as a result of their
combined performance both at written test and oral interview, they
have filed this petition. It is now well settled that if a candidate
takes a calculated chance and appears at the interview, then, only
because the result of the interview is not palatable to him, he
cannot turn round and subsequently contend that the process of
interview was unfair or the Selection Committee was not properly
15. In Union of India v. S. Vinodh Kumar, (2007) 8 SCC 100,
the Hon’ble Supreme Court held that: -
“19. In Chandra Prakash Tiwari v. Shakuntala Shukla, it was held:
“32. In conclusion, this Court recorded that the issue of estoppel by
conduct can only be said to be available in the event of there being a
precise and unambiguous representation and it is on that score a
further question arises as to whether there was any unequivocal
assurance prompting the assured to alter his position or status — the
situation, however, presently does not warrant such a conclusion
and we are thus not in a position to lend concurrence to the
contention of Dr. Dhavan pertaining to the doctrine of estoppel by
conduct. It is to be noticed at this juncture that while the doctrine of
estoppel by conduct may not have any application but that does not
bar a contention as regards the right to challenge an appointment
upon due participation at the interview/selection. It is a remedy
which stands barred and it is in this perspective in Om Prakash
Shukla v. Akhilesh Kumar Shukla a three-Judge Bench of this Court
laid down in no uncertain terms that when a candidate appears at
the examination without protest and subsequently found to be not
successful in the examination, question of entertaining a petition
challenging the said examination would not arise.”
It was further observed: (SCC p. 149, para 34)
“34. There is thus no doubt that while question of any estoppel by
conduct would not arise in the contextual facts but the law seem to
be well settled that in the event a candidate appears at the interview
and participates therein, only because the result of the interview is
not ‘palatable’ to him, he cannot turn round and subsequently
contend that the process of interview was unfair or there was some
lacuna in the process.”
16. The final select-list was issued on 12.9.2022 and
appointment-letters in furtherance of the final select-list have
already been issued and posting orders have also been issued.
The selected candidates having been appointed would have
joined their duties. The writ petition filed seeking quashing of
the select-list, without impleading all the selected persons who
have thereafter been appointed and have joined their duties,
certainly suffers from the defect of non-joinder of necessary
17. In Rashmi Mishra v. M.P. Public Service Commission
and ors., (2006) 12 SCC 724, where 17 candidates had been
selected and only two candidates had been impleaded
purportedly in the representative capacity, the Hon'ble Supreme
"15. In the aforementioned situation, all the seventeen selected
candidates were necessary parties in the writ petition. The number
of selected candidates was not large. There was no difficulty for the
appellant to implead them as parties in the said proceeding. The
result of the writ petition could have affected the appointees. They
were, thus, necessary and/or in any event proper parties."
18. The Hon'ble Supreme Court concluded that as all the
selected candidates were not impleaded as parties in the writ
petition, no relief can be granted to the appellant.
19. Examining the facts in the present case, in the light of the
law laid down by Hon’ble the Supreme Court it is apparent that
the interviews were held on 1.8.2022 and 2.8.2022, whereas the
final select-list was published on 12.9.2022. Thereafter, the
selected candidates have already joined their duties. The writ
petition has been filed without impleading the selected
candidates. Till issuance of the final select-list the petitioner did
not make a challenge to the selection process alleging that she
was not given sufficient time during the interview, although this
became known to her immediately after she appeared in the
interview. Apparently the petitioner waited till publication of
final select-list in a hope that she would get selected. Thus, the
petitioner took a calculated chance of being successful in the
interview, but when the result was not favourable to her, she has
challenged the select-list. Apparently till issuance of the final
select-list the petitioner was not aggrieved by having given
insufficient time in the interview and she has acquiesced with
the aforesaid situation.
20. In view of the aforesaid discussion we do not find any
reason to entertain the writ petition filed by the petitioner
challenging the select-list issued on 12.09.2022.
21. The writ petition is accordingly dismissed. There will be no
order as to costs.