These MAT Appeals arise from a common judgment dated
15.02.2021 of the Family Court Ernakulam in O.P.Nos.675/2019,
2662/2019 and M.C.No. 297/2019. The OP’s and MC were preferred
by Smt. A.Sajani against her husband Dr. B. Kalam Pasha, a serving
judicial officer in the State of Kerala. While the prayer in the OP’s
were for a declaration that the talaq pronounced against her by her
husband was void and invalid, and for a consequential decree for
restitution of conjugal rights, the prayer in the MC was for
maintenance in terms of Section 125 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure [hereinafter referred to as the 'Cr.PC'] on the premise
that the marriage continued to subsist in the eyes of law. The court
below, by the common judgment aforementioned, dismissed the
OP’s and consequently the MC as well. While the two appeals
preferred by the appellant before us are against the common
judgment of the Family Court in the OP’s mentioned above, for
reasons best known to the appellant, no appeal/revision has been
carried against the common judgment insofar as it dismisses the MC
filed for maintenance.
2. The case pleaded by the appellant in O.P.No.675/2019 was
that    her      marriage      with  the  respondent     was  solemnised  at
Ernakulam on 05.04.2009 and they stayed together as husband and
wife at various places where her husband was posted as a judicial
officer. At the time of her marriage with the respondent, he was a
widower with two children from his first marriage. The appellant
stated that, while there were no issues born to her from the
marriage         with     the  respondent,   she    took good   care of  the
respondent’s daughters from his earlier marriage and their life
together was cordial in nature. While so, in September, 2016, while
they were residing in their house at Ernakulam, the respondent took
her to her home in Kollam and left her there and told her not to
return to their matrimonial home or contact him any more. Later
she received a Talaqnama dated 01.03.2017 (the year is mistakenly
shown as '2018' in the document), to which she preferred a reply
dated 09.03.2017 denying the existence of circumstances that
would permit a pronouncement of talaq against her. To the said
letter, the respondent sent a reply to her dated 09.03.2017. She
later came to know that the respondent had contracted another
marriage with a younger girl, impleaded as the second respondent
in the OP, and that he had kept the said fact a secret owing to his
position as a judicial officer. On the said factual pleadings, the
appellant contended that the talaqnama was not a valid one in law
since (i) it was post dated and the date was corrected by the
respondent only subsequently through his letter dated 09.03.2017
and the said correction was not attested by any witness, (ii) there
was only a single pronouncement of talaq and it was made
irrevocable thereby rendering it illegal and void going by the law
laid down in Shayara Bano v. Union of India – [(2017) 9 SCC 1]
(iii) that no valid grounds had been established by the respondent
that would have enabled him to divorce her. The prayer in the OP
was for a declaration that the talaq pronounced by the respondent
was illegal and void, that she continued to be the sole living wife of
the respondent and that the second respondent was not the legally
wedded wife of the respondent.
3. O.P.No.2662/2019 was preferred, invoking Section 9 of the
Family Courts Act, based on substantially the same factual
pleadings as above to claim a decree of restitution of conjugal rights
on the contention that there was no valid talaq pronounced by the
respondent that had the effect of dissolution of their marriage.
M.C.No.297/2019 was filed under Section 125 of the Cr.PC claiming
maintenance from the respondent on the contention that, in the
absence of a valid talaq, the petitioner continued to be the legally
wedded wife of the respondent, whom he had deserted since
September, 2016. Taking into account the income of the respondent
and the amount required to meet her living expenses, she claimed
maintenance @ Rs.1 Lakh per month from the respondent.
4.      In his objections to the OP’s and MC above, the
respondent alleged that he had married the petitioner pursuant to a
matrimonial advertisement that showed her age as 38 years when,
in fact, she was 48 years at the time of their marriage. He continued
with the marital relationship, however, for the sake of his family.
That right from the beginning, the petitioner exhibited behavioural
defects and she was forever suspecting his fidelity. She also took a
hostile attitude towards his children from his first marriage as also
towards his late wife’s mother. Owing to this, he was forced to shift
the latter to another place. To address her behavioural issues, he
had taken her to a Psychiatrist in Trivandrum at the instance of her
own sister but she refused to cooperate with the treatment. On
account of her hostility towards his daughters, he was forced to
admit his younger daughter in a boarding school in Trichur and also
get his older daughter married when she was still a student in the
Engineering college. On account of her hostile attitude as also
suspicious nature, their marital life suffered greatly and he found it
extremely difficult to lead a normal family life with the petitioner.
Further, even despite serious and genuine attempts at mediation
and reconciliation, at the instance of family elders of both the
parties, on 01.10.2016 and 25.11.2016, the petitioner was not
willing to change her attitude towards him and his family. It was
thus, when left with no other option, that he chose to pronounce the
talaq on 01.03.2017 in the presence of two witnesses with a view to
dissolve        the     marriage with the      petitioner. The fact  of
pronouncement of talaq was intimated to the petitioner through the
talaqnama dated 01.03.2017, accompanied by a payment of
Rs.30,000/- into her mother’s bank account towards maintenance
for the Iddat period. That on discovering that the date mentioned in
the talaqnama was mistakenly typed as 01.03.2018, he intimated
her of the typographical mistake through another letter dated
09.03.2017. That while the petitioner accepted the payment of
Rs.30,000/- by withdrawing the said amount from the bank account,
she subsequently questioned the validity of the talaq with the sole
intention of harassing him. The respondent maintained that what he
had pronounced was a ‘Talaq Ahsan’ and the use of the word
‘irrevocably’ was only to alert the petitioner of the seriousness of
the decision and to indicate that it was not to be taken lightly. It is
stated that notwithstanding the pronouncement of talaq, the
respondent was ready and willing to revoke the talaq if the
petitioner was willing to amicably resolve the issues between them,
and this is evidenced by the reconciliatory talks that took place in
the presence of mediators on 18.05.2017. The petitioner, on the
other hand, treated the marriage as dissolved and, through a letter
dated 14.07.2017 demanded a huge amount from him towards
maintenance on the understanding that the talaq had already taken
effect by then. It was contended by the respondent that inasmuch as
the talaq dated 01.03.2017 had effectively dissolved his marriage
with the petitioner on the expiry of the Iddat period, he married the
2nd respondent on 25.02.2018.
5. After considering the oral testimony of the witnesses, as
also the documents marked in evidence before it, the court below
framed as many as ten issues in the matter, six of which were in
relation to the validity of the talaq pronounced by the respondent.
The other issues framed were in relation to the claim for restitution
of conjugal rights and maintenance. The preliminary contention
raised as regards the alleged discrepancy in the date mentioned in
the talaqnama was rejected on the finding that it was merely a
typographical mistake and the subsequent correspondence between
the parties itself indicated that it was inconsequential. The talaq
was found to have been pronounced on 01.03.2017. Dealing with
the contention of the petitioner that the talaq was invalid insofar as
there was only one pronouncement made, and that too ‘irrevocably’,
the learned judge found that the denouncement by the supreme
court of the practice of triple talaq, applied as such only to talaqs
effected through three pronouncements all made together. As in the
case before it, there had been only a single pronouncement, it had
to be seen as a Talaq Ahsan, notwithstanding the express use of the
word ‘irrevocably’ in the talaqnama. It was also found significant
that there had been reconciliation attempts, at the instance of elder
family members of either party on 01.10.2016 and 25.11.2016,
before the pronouncement of talaq on 01.03.2017 and thereafter on
18.05.2017 as well. These attempts at reconciliation clearly
suggested that the pre-requisites for a valid talaq were complied
with and, further, that notwithstanding the use of the term
‘irrevocably’ in the talaqnama, the respondent had attempted a
reconciliation with the petitioner in order to keep the marriage
alive. The learned judge then referred to the depositions of the
petitioner during cross-examination and her subsequent conduct in
court     during arguments       to observe    that her psychotic and
suspicious behaviour was sufficient to establish that the marital
bond between the petitioner and the respondent was irretrievably
broken and beyond reconciliation. The talaq was accordingly held to
be a talaq ahsan and valid and the prayer for restitution of conjugal
rights was denied. Further, in view of the finding that the talaq
pronounced was a valid one, the prayer for maintenance in terms of
Section 125 of the Cr.PC was rejected and the petitioner relegated
to her remedy of preferring a claim under Section 3 of the Muslim
Women (Protection of Rights on Divorce) Act, 1986.
6.      Before we examine the law on the subject and its
application to the facts presented before us, we may observe that on
a perusal of the appeal memoranda we found that it was very poorly
drafted and did not contain all the grounds that could have been
taken in a challenge against the judgment of the Family Court. That
apart, the petitioner –Smt.Sajini – sought to appear in person before
us to argue the appeals. While the petitioner is stated to be a law
graduate in her own right, we were given to understand that she did
not have any active practice before the subordinate courts and
further, we noticed that the court below had recorded its
exasperation           with    her through    observations regarding her
immaturity, emotional instability and improper conduct in court.
Taking note of the above, we thought it fit to arrange for her legal
representation and, accordingly, the services of Smt. Vanaja
Ramaswamy legal aid counsel, was arranged for her. Considering
the seriousness of the issue, and with a view to ensuring the
complete safeguarding of her rights in these proceedings, we also
requested Sri. Krishnan Unni, a learned Senior Advocate of this
court, who has many years of experience in dealing with such
matters, to assist the court as amicus curiae. It was only thereafter
that we proceeded to hear Smt. Vanaja Ramaswamy, learned
counsel for the appellant, Sri. Babu Karukapadath, the learned
counsel       for    the     respondent and    the  learned amicus curiae
in extenso on the various issues that arise for consideration. We
might observe that while we have had the benefit of hearing some
erudite submissions from learned counsel on either side, we would
be failing in our duty if we do not acknowledge and express our
gratitude to the learned senior counsel for the invaluable assistance
rendered to this court.
7. A five judge bench of the Supreme Court in Shayara Bano
v. Union of India – [(2017) 9 SCC 1] considered the question as
to whether Section 2 of the Muslim Personal Law (Shariat)
Application Act, 1937 (hereinafter referred to as the “Shariat Act,
1937”), to the extent it recognised and enforced Triple Talaq was
unconstitutional and void? The final order of the court, signed by all
the five judges, states the majority view of the court as holding that
‘the practice of “Talaq-e-Biddat” – Triple Talaq is set aside.’ The
reasons contained in the different opinions recorded in the case to
reach the above conclusion are, however, different. What is
important to note for the purposes of the instant case, however, is
the nature and characteristic features of a triple talaq or talaq-ul-
biddat that was found objectionable by the court and which led the
court to hold the practice as bad in law. Referring to Mulla,
Principles of Mahomedan Law (20th Edn), the court noticed the
forms of divorce recognised in Islamic Law as under:
“311. Different modes of talak. – A talak may be effected in any
(1) Talak ahsan. – This consists of a single pronouncement of
divorce made during a tuhr (period between menstruations) followed
by abstinence from sexual intercourse for the period of iddat .
When the marriage has not been consummated, a talak in the
ahsan form may be pronounced even if the wife is in her
menstruation.
Where the wife has passed the age of periods of menstruation
the requirement of a declaration during a tuhr is inapplicable;
furthermore, this requirement only applies to a oral divorce and not a
divorce in writing.
Talak Ahsan is based on the following verses of Holy Quran:
“and the divorced woman should keep themselves in waiting for
three courses.” (II:228).
“And those of your woman who despair of menstruation,
if you have a doubt, their prescribed time is three months, and of
those too, who have not had their courses.” (LXV: 4).
(2) Talak hasan- This consists of three pronouncements
made during successive tuhrs, no intercourse taking place during any
of the three tuhrs.
The first pronouncement should be made during a tuhr, the
second during the next tuhr, and the third during the succeeding
tuhr.
Talak Hasan is based on the following Quranic injunctions:
“Divorce may be pronounced twice, then keep them in good
fellowship or let (them) go kindness.” (II: 229).
“So if he (the husband) divorces her (third time) she shall not
be lawful to him afterward until she marries another person.” (II:
(3) Talak-ul-bidaat or talak-i-badai.- This consists of –
(i) Three pronouncements made during a single tuhr either in
one sentence, e.g., “I divorce thee thrice,” - or in separate sentences
e.g., “I divorce thee, I divorce thee, I divorce thee”, or
(ii) a single pronouncement made during a tuhr clearly
indicating an intention irrevocably to dissolve the marriage, e.g., “I
divorce thee irrevocably.”
Talak-us-sunnat and talak-ul-biddat:-           The Hanafis
recognized two kinds of talak, namely, (1) talak-us-sunnat, that is,
talak according to the rules laid down in the sunnat (traditions) of
the Prophet; and (2) talak-ul-biddat, that is, new or irregular talak.
Talak-ul-biddat was introduced by the Omeyyade monarchs in the
second century of the Mahomedan era. Talak-ul-sunnat is of two
kinds, namely, (1) ahsan, that is, most proper, and (2) hasan, that is,
proper. The talak-ul-biddat or heretical divorce is good in law,
though bad in theology and it is the most common and prevalent
mode of divorce in this country, including Oudh. In the case of talak
ahsan and talak hasan, the husband has an opportunity of
reconsidering his decision, for the talak in both these cases does not
become absolute until a certain period has elapsed (Section 312), and
the husband has the option to revoke it before then. But the talak-ul-
biddat becomes irrevocable immediately it is pronounced (S.312).
The essential feature of a talak-ul-biddat is its irrevocability. One of
tests of irrevocability is the repetition three times of the formula of
divorce within one tuhr. But the triple repetition is not a necessary
condition of talak-ul-biddat, and the intention to render a talak
irrevocable may be expressed even by a single declaration. Thus if a
man says “I have divorced you by a talak-ul-bain (irrevocable
divorce)”, the talak is talak-ul-biddat or talak-i-badai and it will
take effect immediately it is pronounced, though it may be
pronounced but once. Here the use of the expression “bain”
(irrevocable) manifests of itself the intention to effect an irrevocable
What was found objectionable and illegal by the majority on the
bench, as regards the practice of triple talaq or talaq-ul-biddat, was
its instant irrevocability that rendered the practice ‘manifestly
arbitrary’ in the sense that the marital tie can be broken
capriciously and whimsically by a Muslim man without any attempt
at reconciliation so as to save it (Nariman & Lalit JJ) and ‘anti-
quaranic and bad in theology’ (Kurian Joseph J).
8. In our view, the feature of instant irrevocability takes in
two independent features – instantaneousness and irrevocability -
both of which contribute to making the practice legally odious. The
Supreme Court in Shamim Ara v. State of UP – [(2002) 7 SCC
518], while endorsing the views taken in two decisions of the
Gauhati High Court, spelt out the requirements of a valid talaq as (i)
that the talaq must be for a reasonable cause; and (ii) that it must be
preceded by attempts at reconciliation between the husband and the
wife by two arbiters – one chosen by the wife from her family and
the other by the husband from his family. If their attempts fail, talaq
can be effected. A division bench of this court in Kunhimohammed
v. Ayishakutty – [2010 (2) KLT 71], went further to clarify that if
an attempt for reconciliation by two arbiters has taken place, and
they have not succeeded in bringing about a reconciliation, it can be
held that there is a reasonable cause for pronouncement of talaq,
and the specific reason for divorce need not be established before
the court and further, the specific reason will not be justiciable also.
The court reasoned that Muslim law – either through Quaranic
injunctions or through the Sunnahs or Ahadis - did not enumerate
causes for          divorce that are reasonable or       causes   that   are
unreasonable. It was found that Islamic Law did not obligate a man
to give reasons for the divorce or satisfy anyone else of such
reasons. As regards the non-justiciability of the reasons, it was
observed that if courts were to look into the reasonableness of the
cause for divorce, there would be as many interpretations about the
reasonableness of the cause for divorce as there are judges, making
the law of divorce in Muslim law uncertain, vague and confusing.
Thus, the test for ruling out the vice of instantaneousness is to see
whether there were genuine attempts at reconciliation between the
husband and the wife, by two arbiters – one chosen by the wife from
her family and the other by the husband from his family. If such
reconciliation          attempts   have  in     fact taken   place,    then,
notwithstanding              that such  attempts     proved    futile,   the
pronouncement of talaq must be seen as valid and for a reasonable
cause. That, however, is just one aspect of the matter.
9. As noticed above, the talaq must also be free of the other
feature viz. irrevocability. The valid forms of talaq recognised in
Islamic Law viz. the Talaq Ahsan and Talaq Hasan, both contemplate
a period, immediately after the pronouncement of talaq, whether
such pronouncement is only once, or thrice over three successive
lunar months, when the husband can revoke the talaq. This
procedure, in our view, is intended to give the husband an
opportunity to reflect upon his action (of having pronounced the
talaq) and to try and restore the marital relationship if possible,
while at the same time affording the wife a further opportunity to
convince her husband that their marriage can still be saved. Such
instances may arise for eg. If the wife discovers that she is pregnant
during the three-month period aforementioned. There may be
myriad other reasons that could prompt a husband to reconsider his
decision, and it is for enabling the husband to undo his action, and
to ensure that it is not one taken irrationally, that the procedure
prescribed         for    a    valid talaq has    an in-built component of
introspection, that postpones the stage of irrevocability of the talaq
to a period after three lunar months. We are of the view that this
aspect of a pronouncement of talaq is also of great significance and
purpose and a non-adherence to it could render the pronouncement
10.      As regards the right of a divorced Muslim wife to get
maintenance from her husband, the division bench of this court in
Kunhimohammed (Supra) observed that the provisions of Section
125 of the Cr.PC must be interpreted in the light of the fact that the
Muslim husband, unlike the husbands in any other religion, has a
unilateral right to divorce his wife without intervention of the court.
It was considering the vulnerability of such a wife that the Muslim
Women (Protection of Rights on Divorce) Act, 1986 was enacted to
confer on the divorced Muslim wife higher and superior rights than
her counterparts in other religions. Accordingly, a larger and
superior right is available to the Muslim wife who faces the
vulnerability of arbitrary and unilateral divorce at the hands of her
husband without intervention of any court. Even when she is able to
maintain herself, she can claim capitalised amounts under Section 3
of the Act. It is also significant that the rights of the divorced woman
under Section 125 of the Cr.PC do not get extinguished on account
of the larger rights conferred under Section 3 of the Act. If the
divorced Muslim woman chooses to claim amounts under Section 3
of the Act, only on such payments being actually made either
voluntarily or in response to an order of the court does Section 127
(3)(b) of the Cr.PC get attracted to extinguish the liability of the
husband under the Cr.PC. Till then, or till she remains a divorced
Muslim wife, she will be entitled to claim maintenance from her
divorced husband. Death, remarriage or actual payment of the
amounts payable under Section 3 of the Act alone shall extinguish
her right under Section 125 Cr.PC to claim maintenance.
11. When we apply the law as enumerated above to the facts
in the appeals before us, we cannot but notice that inasmuch as
there is no dispute that reconciliation efforts were pursued at the
instance of two arbiters one chosen from the side of the appellant’s
family and one chosen from the side of the respondents family, and
the meetings on 01.10.2016 and 25.11.2016 failed to result in any
reconciliation, the pre-requisites for the pronouncement of a valid
talaq were fulfilled in this case. This would be the finding that flows
from     the      decision     of the division      bench of this court in
Kunhimohammed v. Ayishakutty – [2010 (2) KLT 71], that went
further to clarify that if an attempt for reconciliation by two arbiters
has taken place, and they have not succeeded in bringing about a
reconciliation, it can also be held that there is a reasonable cause
for pronouncement of talaq, and that the specific reason for divorce
need not be established before the court since the same would not
be justiciable. The talaq in the instant case has to be taken as
pronounced after due consideration and not instantaneousness
owing to the reconciliation efforts pursued by the parties before its
12.      The question then arises as to whether, even if valid
grounds for its pronouncement existed, the pronouncement of the
talaq satisfied the feature of revocability for a period of three lunar
months immediately following the pronouncement? As already
noticed, this is the sheet anchor of the appellant’s contention – that
the use of the word ‘irrevocably’ in the talaqnama rendered the
pronouncement of talaq illegal since it clearly evidenced the
intention of the respondent that he was not ready to reconsider his
decision during the period of three lunar months that were to follow.
Here we find that the use of the word ‘irrevocably’ in the talaqnama
is certainly suggestive of            an intimation by the respondent to the
appellant, that he was not ready to reconsider his decision. We have
to bear in mind that the choice of words is that of the respondent
who is a serving judicial officer of the State and it cannot be
presumed          that     he   had   used   the     word   'irrevocably'   without
understanding its significance.              Had it not been for subsequent
events       that      unfolded,     we    would      have   certainly   held   the
pronouncement of talaq as illegal on this ground.                    However, we
notice      from       the     evidence   before      us  that,   even  after   the
pronouncement of talaq, there were in fact, efforts at reconciliation,
albeit unsuccessful, that were pursued on 18.05.2017, in which
family members of either party participated. The conduct of the
parties suggest that they never considered the talaq pronounced on
01.03.2017 as irrevocable from that date onwards. We also find that
within a year after the pronouncement of talaq, the respondent
married        another        woman     on  25.02.2018.          Under    the  said
circumstances, therefore, we feel that the ends of justice would be
served by treating the lapse on the part of the respondent as a mere
irregularity in the mode of pronouncement of the talaq, that could
be regularised by postponing the effective date of dissolution of
marriage by the period of three lunar months required in the case of
a Talaq Ahsan. We hold therefore that, notwithstanding the use of
the word ‘irrevocably’ in the talaqnama, the respondent must be
seen as having pronounced a talaq ahsan, that became irrevocable
only on the expiry of the period of three lunar months immediately
following the single pronouncement of the talaq.
13.       While our findings as above would have sufficed to
dismiss the appeals preferred by the appellant, we felt that
notwithstanding that there was no claim for maintenance in terms of
Section 3 of the Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Divorce)
Act, 1986, we would permit the appellant to claim a fair and
reasonable amount from the respondent in the spirit of settlement,
and subject to the condition that on payment of the said amounts to
her, she would accept the same in full and final settlement of all
claims, present and future, against the respondent. Towards this
end, we asked both parties and their counsel, along with the learned
amicus curiae, to hold discussions to try and arrive at a settlement
figure that could then be communicated to us. In the in camera
proceedings that followed, we also interacted with the appellant for
about two hours to try and convince her that a settlement of the
nature suggested above would be in her best interest. The appellant,
however, was not amenable to any settlement unless the settlement
amount was fixed at Rs.1.20 crores, the basis of computation of
which figure she was not able to show us. As against the above, the
figure that we had arrived at, based on various factors such as the
present age of the appellant, the probability of her remarrying, the
standard of living that she was used to when she was the
respondent’s wife, her future expenses and the income and average
expenses of the respondent, was Rs.12 Lakhs {Rs.10,000/- per
month x 120 months (ten years)} with interest @ 9% per annum for
the period from 01.03.2017 till date of payment. This amount would
have been payable to the appellant after reducing therefrom, the
Rs.30,000/- already paid to her by the respondent for the iddat
period. We might clarify that in arriving at the said computation we
were guided by the observations of the Supreme Court in Danial
Latifi v. Union of India – [(2001) 7 SCC 740] – that “the purpose
of the Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Divorce) Act, 1986
appears to be to allow the Muslim husband to retain his freedom of
avoiding payment of maintenance to his erstwhile wife after divorce
and the period of iddat. However a careful reading of the provisions
of the Act would indicate that a divorced woman is entitled to a
reasonable and fair provision for maintenance. Parliament seems to
intend that the divorced woman gets sufficient means of livelihood
after the divorce, and therefore, the word “provision” indicates that
something is provided in advance for meeting some needs. In other
words, at the time of divorce the Muslim husband is required to
contemplate the future needs and make preparatory arrangements
in advance for meeting those needs. Reasonable and fair provision
may include provisions for her residence, her food, her clothes and
other articles.”
As already noticed above, the appellant was not ready to
accept the amounts offered to her and insisted that she would not
settle for any amount less than Rs.1.20 crores.           Under the
circumstances, we are left with no other alternative than to dismiss
the appeals as devoid of merit. We do so, but not without a tinge of
despair at the unfortunate turn of events.