Muzaffar Ahmad Dar @ 19 @ Gaznavi @ Mohd. Ali and Mushtaq
Ahmad Lone @ Mushtaq.Aalam stand convicted for various offences.
2.                This case was lodged with allegations that Hizb-ul-
Mujahideen (HM), one of the most active terrorist outfit in J&K, had
been regularly receiving funds originating from neighbouring
countries for carrying out terrorist activities in India and that in the
garb of an organization namely, Jammu Kashmir Affectees Relief
Trust (JKART), the said terrorist outfit is actively involved in
furthering the terrorist activities in India.
3.                On 27.09.2021, following charges were framed against
Page No. 2 of 32                              ASJ­03/NDD/PHC: 05.03.2021.
1 Mohd. Shafi Shah @                 17 UAPA and 40 UAPA/
11 Muzzafar Ahmad Dar                17 UAPA and 40 UAPA/
section 38 UAPA.
4.               On 27.09.2021, all the above named convicts, after duly
understanding the charges and after having legal advise, pleaded
guilty to all the charges.
5.               Vide judgment dated 04.10.2021, above named convicts
Page No. 3 of 32                             ASJ­03/NDD/PHC: 05.03.2021.
section 38 UAPA.
Page No. 4 of 32              ASJ­03/NDD/PHC: 05.03.2021.
6.1.             Ld. Sr. PP for NIA has contended that the offence is of
very serious in nature. All the convicts had facilitated in transfer of
funds and arms and ammunition for carrying out terrorist activities in
India and the role of convict Mohd. Shafi Shah and Muzzafar Ahmad
Dar is large. He has thus contended that all the convicts should be
given maximum punishment.
6.2              Per contra, ld. Counsel for convict Mohd. Shafi Shah has
contended that the convict has voluntarily pleaded guilty to the
charges. This shows his intention to reformation. It is further
submitted that the convict was merely involved in distribution of
funds and he was never involved in any bomb blast or killings. The
convict has been running in custody since the year 2011. He has
further contended that the convict may be given a chance to reform.
He therefore prays that the convict may be sentenced for the period
Page No. 5 of 32                              ASJ­03/NDD/PHC: 05.03.2021.
already undergone by him.
6.3              Convict Mohd. Shafi Shah has filed written submissions
for being lenient towards him. He has submitted that at the time of
offence, he was immature and was in his early age. The environment
around him too cause a great effect on his mistakes and he was unable
to decide about his future and thus has fallen in this offence. He has
prayed that leniency be shown towards him and he will not be
involved in any unlawful acts again.
6.4              Ld. Counsel for convict Talib Lali @ Waseem @ Abu
Umer has contended that the convict has pleaded guilty to the charges
framed against him and has promised that he will never indulge in any
criminal activity henceforth. The convict belongs to a very poor
family and has his family i.e. his wife and two minor daughters to look
after. It is further submitted that the convict has lost his parents
because of lack of medical treatment. The convict has spent more than
08 years in jail and further punishment would cause great prejudice to
his wife and minor daughters. The convict is the sole bread earner of
his family.
6.5              Ld. Counsel for convict Muzzafar Ahmad Dar has
contended that the convict has been running in custody since the year
2009 though not in this case. It is further submitted that since the time
in custody, there is no complaint against the convict. The convict has
Page No. 6 of 32                           ASJ­03/NDD/PHC: 05.03.2021.
voluntarily pleaded guilty to the charges framed against him which
shows his chances of reformation. It is further submitted that the
convict has been educating himself in the custody. This points towards
his intention to reformation. It is thus prayed that the convict may be
sentenced for the period already undergone by them.
6.6              Convict Muazzafar Ahmad Dar has filed written
submissions submitting that the long years of imprisonment have
badly shattered his family life and economic life and has also affected
the psychological health of his old aged and ailing parents. He has
further submitted that he has old aged parents who need someone at
home to look after them. There is no other male member in his family.
Both his parents are suffering from multiple ailments including heart
conditions, ortho neural and respiratory issues. He has a minor
daughter to look after. Convict himself suffers from multiple diseases.
The documents of his ailments have been attached with the writen
submissions. He further submits that his inclination towards non
violence is even supported by certain supplementary and additional
documents filed by the NIA where he had urged the militant leaders to
shun violence and enter into negotiations with the government. He
further submitted that during his stay at Central Jail Srinagar, he had
motivated and persuaded many ex-militants not to get recycled and
adopt normal social life. He further submits that during his jail period,
Page No. 7 of 32                           ASJ­03/NDD/PHC: 05.03.2021.
he remained engaged in academic activities for most of the time. He
was in final semester of his LL.B – 3 years degree course. He has
completed his Masters in Political Science while being lodged at Tihar
Jail. He regrets and feel remorseful for the unlawful acts or omissions
he remained indulged in past and undertakes to work for peace and
prosperity of his society.
6.7              Ld. Counsel for convict Mushtaq Ahmad Lone has
contended that as per the allegations, this convict was merely an
overground worker. There were only 2/3 bank receipts which had the
signatures of this convict. The convict was never involved in any
direct violence. Even the money allegedly transferred by the convict
was never used for any arms and ammunition. The convict has
voluntarily pleaded guilty to the charges framed against him which
shows his chances of reformation. It is thus prayed that the convict
may be sentenced for the period already undergone by them.
6.8              Convict Mushtaq Ahmad Lone has also filed written
submissions praying a lenient view towards him. He has submitted
that he was arrested in some FIRs in February 2011 and after sustained
counselling, he was admitted on bail. He did not indulge in any
unlawful activities since 2011. He further submitted that during the
long detention, his family suffered a lot. His wife suffers from
depression. His father in law, with whom his wife was residing, has
Page No. 8 of 32                          ASJ­03/NDD/PHC: 05.03.2021.
been diagnosed with food pipe cancer. His parents suffers from
various ailments. His younger brother is mentally unfit. He further
submits that he is remorseful and regret for his acts of omission and
for commission of unlawful acts.
7.1              In view of the judgment of Hon'ble Delhi High Court in
Vishal Yadav v. State of Govt of UP in Crl. A. 910/2008, socio
economic reports of the convicts were called for. Reports regarding
the conduct of the convicts and their inclination towards reformation
were also called from the concerned jail authorities.
7.2              The socio economic report of convict Mohd. Shafi Shah
shows that the family of the convict has two members i.e. his brother
and his wife. However, the economic and social status of the family of
the convict is stable.
7.3              The socio economic report of convict Talib Lali reflects
that the family of convict is living in a joint single storey house. The
family of convict has inherited a land measuring 12 marlas and 05
kanals. Out of this 1/4th share has been inherited by the convict. The
economic and social status of the family of the convict is stable and
they are running their livelihood through agricultural resources.
7.4              The socio economic report of convict Muzzafar Ahmad
Dar shows that the convict had crossed LOC in the year 1990 for
Page No. 9 of 32                            ASJ­03/NDD/PHC: 05.03.2021.
obtaining illegal arms/ ammunition training and he was active with
proscribed outfit HM. The convict was arrested in the year 1993 and
was released in the year 1996. Thereafter, the convict again joined the
proscribed terrorist outfit HM and was arrested in the year 2009. The
convict is unmarried. His father is a pensioner of PDD Department.
The convict has two brothers and two sisters and all of them are
married. Family of convict possesses 04 kanals of agricultural land
and 12 kanals of orchard land. The family of the convict is a lower
middle class family.
7.5               The socio economic report of convict Mushaq Ahmad
Lone shows that the family of the convict is a joint family having 06
members. The family of convict is residing in a two storeyed semi
concrete tin roofed ancestral house. The family of convict is having 10
kanals of land. Out of which 04 kanals are under agriculture
cultivation and 06 kanals are under apple orchard and this is the main
source of income of the family. Further the family members of the
convict are not involved in any subversive activities.
7.6               In order to further find the chances of reformation of
convicts, I had summoned their conduct report from the concerned
7.7               In the conduct report of convict Mohd. Shafi Shah, it is
submitted that during his stay in jail no. 15, nothing adverse has been
Page No. 10 of 32                            ASJ­03/NDD/PHC: 05.03.2021.
recorded against him. However, during his stay in jail no. 4, an FIR
no. 390/17 was lodged against him u/s 186/353/332/120B/341 IPC at
PS Hari Nagar. His overall conduct is unsatisfactory.
7.8               In the conduct report of convict Talib Lali, it is submitted
that the conduct of the convict has been unsatisfactory. He has been
punished thrice in the jail as once he was trying to damage the CCTV
camera lens installed in his barrack and two times, mobile phone, sim
card, improvised mobile charger, mobile data cable etc. were
recovered from him. It is further submitted that in an interaction with
convict, it was revealed that he had inclination to reform.
7.9               In the conduct report of convict Muzzafar Ahmad Dar, it
is submitted that the conduct of the convict has not been satisfactory
and he was given punishment in jail for shouting, hooting and abusing
on provocation of co-inmates against jail administration. It is further
submitted that in an interaction with convict, it was revealed that he
had inclination to reform.
7.10              In the conduct report of convict Mushtaq Ahmad Lone, it
is submitted that as per the jail records, the conduct of the convict is
unsatisfactory due to punishment tickets issued against him in the jail.
The punishment tickets are enclosed with the conduct report.
8.                I have considered the rival submission and weighed the
mitigating and aggravating circumstances.
Page No. 11 of 32                             ASJ­03/NDD/PHC: 05.03.2021.
8.1               Before proceeding to sentence the accused principles
upon which these convicts are to be sentenced need to be culled out
and guidance in this regard is being drawn from various judicial
8.2               It is now a well settled law that the punishment should be
commensurate to the crime. Hon’ble Supreme Court in Soman v.
State of Kerala, (2013) 11 SCC 382, has held as under:-
17. In a proportionality analysis, it is necessary to assess the
seriousness of an offence in order to determine the commen-
surate punishment for the offender. The seriousness of an
offence depends, apart from other things, also upon its
harmfulness. The question is whether the consequences of
the offence can be taken as the measure for determining its
harmfulness? In addition, quite apart from the seriousness of
the offence, can the consequences of an offence be a legiti-
mate aggravating (as opposed to mitigating) factor while
awarding a sentence. Thus, to understand the relevance of
consequences of criminal conduct from a Sentencing stand-
point, one must examine: (1) whether such consequences
enhanced the harmfulness of the offence; and (2) whether
they are an aggravating factor that need to be taken into ac-
count by the courts while deciding on the sentence.
8.3.              Further Hon’ble Supreme Court in Soman’s case (supra)
after considering the earlier pronoucements of the Apex Court had
27. From the above, one may conclude that:
Page No. 12 of 32                                        ASJ­03/NDD/PHC: 05.03.2021.
1. Courts ought to base sentencing decisions on various
different rationales – most prominent amongst which would
be proportionality and deterrence.
2. The question of consequences of criminal action can be
relevant from both a proportionality and deterrence
standpoint.
3. Insofar as proportionality is concerned, the sentence must
be commensurate with the seriousness or gravity of the
offence.
4. One of the factors relevant for judging seriousness of the
offence is the consequences resulting from it.
5. Unintended consequences/harm may still be properly
attributed to the offender if they were reasonably
foreseeable. In case of illicit and underground manufacture
of liquor, the chances of toxicity are so high that not only its
manufacturer but the distributor and the retail vendor would
know its likely risks to the consumer. Hence, even though
any harm to the consumer might not be directly intended,
some aggravated culpability must attach if the consumer
suffers some grievous hurt or dies as result of consuming
the spurious liquor.
8.4               Further, Hon’ble Supreme Court in State of M.P v.
Mehtab, Crl. Appeal No. 270/2015 dated 13.02.2015 had observed :
We find force in the submission. It is the duty of the
Court to award just sentence to a convict against whom
charge is proved. While every mitigating or aggravating
circumstance may be given due weight, mechanical
reduction of sentence to the period already undergone
cannot be appreciated. Sentence has to be fair not only to
the accused but also to the victim and the society.
8.5        Further, Hon’ble Supreme Court in Alister Anthony Pareira
v. State of Maharashtra, AIR (2012) SC 3802 had held:-
Sentencing is an important task in the matters of crime.
One of the prime objectives of the criminal law is
imposition of appropriate, adequate, just and
proportionate sentence commensurate with the nature and
Page No. 13 of 32                                       ASJ­03/NDD/PHC: 05.03.2021.
gravity of crime and the manner in which the crime is
done. There is no straitjacket formula for
sentencing…….. The courts have evolved certain
principles: twin objective of the sentencing policy is
deterrence and correction. What sentence would meet the
ends of justice depends on the facts and circumstances of
each case and the court must keep in mind the gravity of
the crime, motive for the crime, nature of the offence and
all other attendant circumstances. The principle of
proportionality in sentencing a crime doer is well
entrenched in criminal jurisprudence. As a matter of law,
proportion between crime and punishment bears most
relevant influence in determination of sentencing the
crime doer. The court has to take into consideration all
aspects including social interest and consciousness of the
society for award of appropriate sentence.
8.6               In Ankush Maruti Shinde v. State of Maharashtra,
AIR 2009 SC 2609, Hon’ble Supreme Court had held as under:-
17. Proportion between crime and punishment is a goal
respected in principle, and in spite of errant notions, it
remains a strong influence in the determination of
sentences. The practice of punishing all serious crimes
with equal severity is now unknown in civilized societies,
but such a radical departure from the principle of
proportionality has disappeared from the law only in
recent times. Even now for a single grave infraction
drastic sentences are imposed. Anything less than a
penalty of greatest severity for any serious crime is
thought then to be a measure of toleration that is
unwarranted and unwise. But in fact, quite apart from
those considerations that make punishment unjustifiable
when it is out of proportion to the crime, uniformly
disproportionate punishment has some very undesirable
practical consequences.
20. Imposition of sentence without considering its effect
on the social order in many cases may be in reality a
futile exercise. The social impact of the crime, e.g. where
it relates to offences against women, dacoity, kidnapping,
Page No. 14 of 32                                      ASJ­03/NDD/PHC: 05.03.2021.
misappropriation of public money, treason and other
offences involving moral turpitude or moral delinquency
which have great impact on social order, and public
interest, cannot be lost sight of and per se require
exemplary treatment. Any liberal attitude by imposing
meager sentences or taking too sympathetic view merely
on account of lapse of time in respect of such offences
will be result-wise counter productive in the long run and
against societal interest which needs to be cared for and
strengthened by string of deterrence inbuilt in the
sentencing system.
9.                In view of the aforesaid pronouncements of the
Hon’ble Apex Court, following principles of sentencing emerge:-
(a) The punishment inflicted for the crime should be proportional
(b) What is the proportional punishment is to be decided on the
basis of consequences of the criminal action and that what those
(c) While sentencing the punishment, especially in heinous cases,
which have larger effect on the society such as terrorism, should
(d) The convicts should be given an opportunity to reform and
while awarding the punishment, chances of reformation of the
(e) Aggravating and mitigating circumstances should be balanced
to reach at a conclusion that what should be the just punishment in
an individual case based on the facts and circumstances of the
Page No. 15 of 32                                     ASJ­03/NDD/PHC: 05.03.2021.
(f) For the crimes which have greater social impact and which are
against larger public interest, the punishment awarded has to be
exemplary in nature so as to serve as a deterrent.
10.        The convicts have been convicted for conspiring to commit
terror activities in India and of conspiracy of waging war against the
Government of India. In furtherance of this conspiracy, the convicts
had engaged in the activities of terror financing.
11.               It has been argued on behalf of the convicts that there is
no case against the convicts where they have actively participated in
any terror activities which resulted in loss of life and property and
therefore, a lenient view needs to be taken as their actions have not
resulted in loss of life or property. On the face of it, this argument
seems very powerful. However, I find that the hand which provides
the gun or the motivation to take up the gun is equally liable as the
hand which ultimately fires that gun. The convicts, in this case, may
not have been charged and convicted for any direct terror act leading
to loss of life or property however, the proxy war in the State of J&K
which has been raging since decades has resulted in loss of numerous
lives and destruction of State property.
12.               The convicts who have primarily been convicted for
terror financing have provided funds for the activities of HM and said
Page No. 16 of 32                            ASJ­03/NDD/PHC: 05.03.2021.
funds have been used for the destruction of property and taking human
lives. Thus, merely because, in the present case, the convicts were not
directly responsible for loss of life and property, it cannot be accepted
that they were not responsible for loss of life and destruction of
property because of the terrorist activities of HM. On the contrary, I
find that the funding network run by these convicts on the instructions
of their handlers sitting in Pakistan had a greater responsibility for the
terror acts committed by HM as in absence of such funding, which
financed the cadres of HM and provided logistic support, it would not
have been possible to commit those terror activities. Thus, I find that
the terror funding has to be kept in the same category as that of actual
terror acts if not in a higher category. Thus the crimes for which the
convicts have been convicted are of very serious nature as they had
hatched a conspiracy to strike at the core of this nation and actions
were taken to execute that conspiracy. This being said, the principals
of sentencing as detailed above are to be applied to each convict in
order to award a just and adequate punishment.
13.1              This convict has been found guilty for entering into a
criminal conspiracy of waging war against the government of
India, for conspiring to commit terror activities and in pursuance
to that conspiracy of raising funds for and funding terror activities
Page No. 17 of 32                            ASJ­03/NDD/PHC: 05.03.2021.
as well as being a member / divisional commander of proscribed
terrorist organization HM. The crime for which the convict has
been found guilty is an act of treason and there can be no greater
crime which affects the social order than this crime.
13.2              Thus, the convict deserves to be punished severely
but at the same time, while deciding the punishment to be
awarded, the aggravating and mitigating circumstances, as is the
mandate of law, are to be considered by the court to arrive at a
just and fair punishment.
13.3              The mitigating circumstances which the convict has
(a) The convict has voluntarily pleaded guilty to the charges and
therefore, remorseful of his acts and in view of the same, leniency
should be shown to him.
(b) Convict was merely involved in distribution of funds and was
never involved in any kind of blast or killings
(c) Convict has been in custody since the year 2011 and should be
(d) At the time of commission of offence, he was immature and
the environment around him caused great effect on his mistakes
and he was unable to decide his future which led him to commit
the offences.
Page No. 18 of 32                           ASJ­03/NDD/PHC: 05.03.2021.
13.4              I have carefully considered the aggravating and
mitigating circumstances.
13.5              It is correct that usually in general crimes, the stress
while awarding the punishment has to be on reformative aspect of
the theory of sentencing. However, in crimes such as terrorism,
the punishment awarded not only has to be proportional to the
crime committed but has to be exemplary enough to serve as a
deterrent. Convict may have joined the terrorist organization HM
at a young age but he continued with his membership with this
organization and rose to higher ranks of this proscribed
organization and it cannot be accepted that during this long
period, he was still an immature person who was not knowing the
consequences of his acts or that the funds which he was receiving,
generating or distributing for terror activities, were leading to
destruction of life and property.
13.6              It is correct that the convict has voluntarily pleaded
guilty to the charges and due weightage should be given for this
conduct but merely because the convict has pleaded guilty, the
court cannot be too lenient so as not to award punishment which
is not proportional to the gravest of the crimes committed.
13.7              I accordingly find that the mitigating circumstances
put forth by the convict can only have an effect that maximum
Page No. 19 of 32                               ASJ­03/NDD/PHC: 05.03.2021.
sentence provided for the offences for which he has been
convicted may not be awarded but at the same time, these
mitigating circumstances are also not of the nature which would
call for the minimum sentence to be awarded as prayed for by the
13.8              I accordingly find that ends of justice shall be served
by sentencing convict Mohd. Shafi Shah as under:-
i.      The convict is sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for
ii.     A fine of Rs.15,000/- is also imposed upon the convict. In
default of payment of fine, the convict shall undergo simple
imprisonment for a period of six months.
i.      The convict is sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for
ii.     A fine of Rs.15,000/- is also imposed upon the convict. In
default of payment of fine, the convict shall undergo simple
imprisonment for a period of six months.
i.      The convict is sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for
Page No. 20 of 32                             ASJ­03/NDD/PHC: 05.03.2021.
ii.     A fine of Rs.5,000/- is also imposed upon the convict. In default
of payment of fine, the convict shall undergo simple imprisonment for
a period of three months.
i.      The convict is sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for
ii.     A fine of Rs.15,000/- is also imposed upon the convict. In
default of payment of fine, the convict shall undergo simple
imprisonment for a period of six months.
i.      The convict is sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for
ii.     A fine of Rs.15,000/- is also imposed upon the convict. In
default of payment of fine, the convict shall undergo simple
imprisonment for a period of six months.
All the sentences shall run concurrently. Benefit of
section 428 Cr.P.C shall be given to the convict.
14.1              The aggravating circumstances which have emerged
from the case are, the gravity of offence where conspiracy was
entered to wage war against the government of India, the
Page No. 21 of 32                           ASJ­03/NDD/PHC: 05.03.2021.
conspiracy to commit terror actively and consequent funding of
terror activities. These circumstances make the offence very grave
and call for punishment which should be proportionate to this
crime and exemplary enough to serve as a deterrent.
14.2              The mitigating circumstances which the convict has
(a) The convict has voluntarily pleaded guilty to the charges and
promised that he will never indulge in any criminal activity.
(b) The convict belongs to a very poor family and has his family
i.e. his wife and two minor daughters to look after.
(c) The convict has spent more than 08 years in jail and further
punishment would cause great prejudice to his wife and minor
(d) The convict is the sole bread earner of his family.
14.3              I have carefully considered the aggravating and
mitigating circumstances.
14.4              The mitigating circumstances which have been put
forth by the convict on the basis of which lesser sentence has been
sought need to be considered and one positive aspect which has to
be kept in mind is that the convict has voluntarily pleaded guilty
to the charges framed against him. However, as already discussed,
pleading guilty alone and the financial or social condition of the
Page No. 22 of 32                           ASJ­03/NDD/PHC: 05.03.2021.
convict would not call for a sentence which would be completely
inadequate and disproportionate to the crime committed by the
convict and thus, the prayer of the convict for awarding minimum
sentence cannot be accepted. At the same time, the prayer of the
prosecution for awarding maximum punishment for the offence
for which he had pleaded guilty cannot be accepted. It is also to be
kept in mind that the convict was a lower functionary in the
organizational structure of HM.
14.5              I accordingly find that ends of justice shall be served
by sentencing convict Talib Lali as under:-
i.      The convict is sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for
ii.     A fine of Rs.10,000/- is also imposed upon the convict. In
default of payment of fine, the convict shall undergo simple
imprisonment for a period of six months.
i.      The convict is sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for
ii.     A fine of Rs.10,000/- is also imposed upon the convict. In
default of payment of fine, the convict shall undergo simple
imprisonment for a period of six months.
Page No. 23 of 32                             ASJ­03/NDD/PHC: 05.03.2021.
i.      The convict is sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for
ii.     A fine of Rs.10,000/- is also imposed upon the convict. In
default of payment of fine, the convict shall undergo simple
imprisonment for a period of six months.
i.      The convict is sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for
ii.     A fine of Rs.10,000/- is also imposed upon the convict. In
default of payment of fine, the convict shall undergo simple
imprisonment for a period of six months.
i.      The convict is sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for
ii.     A fine of Rs.5,000/- is also imposed upon the convict. In default
of payment of fine, the convict shall undergo simple imprisonment for
a period of three months.
i.      The convict is sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for
ii.     A fine of Rs.10,000/- is also imposed upon the convict. In
Page No. 24 of 32                          ASJ­03/NDD/PHC: 05.03.2021.
default of payment of fine, the convict shall undergo simple
imprisonment for a period of six months.
i.      The convict is sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for
ii.     A fine of Rs.10,000/- is also imposed upon the convict. In
default of payment of fine, the convict shall undergo simple
imprisonment for a period of six months.
All the sentences shall run concurrently. Benefit of
section 428 Cr.P.C shall be given to the convict.
15.1              The aggravating circumstances which have emerged from
the case are, the gravity of offence which has already been discussed.
15.2              The mitigating circumstances which the convict has
(a) The convict has been running in custody since the year 2009 and
since the time in custody, there is no complaint against the convict.
(b) The convict has voluntarily pleaded guilty to the charges framed
against him which shows his chances of reformation.
(c) The convict has been educating himself in the custody and this
points towards his intention to reformation.
15.3              In his written submissions, he has pleaded that long years
Page No. 25 of 32                              ASJ­03/NDD/PHC: 05.03.2021.
of imprisonment has badly shattered his family life and economic life
and has also affected the psychological health of his old aged and
ailing parents. He has further submitted that he has old aged parents
who need someone at home to look after them. There is no other male
member in his family. Both his parents are suffering from multiple
ailments including heart conditions, ortho neural and respiratory
issues. He has a minor daughter to look after. Convict himself suffers
from multiple diseases. He further submitted that he has already
shown inclination towards non violence when he had urged the
militant leaders to shun violence and enter into negotiations with the
15.4              I have carefully considered the aggravating and
mitigating circumstances.
15.5              The convict has claimed certain mitigating circumstances.
However, there are no mitigating circumstances which may have led
him to commit the offence and which would mitigate the gravity of
offence, have been put forth.
15.6              The convict has been convicted of terror activities, being
a member of proscribed terrorist organization and not only has he been
a member of HM but he was one of the highest functionaries of HM
and thus, he is responsible for loss of great many lives and destruction
of property.
Page No. 26 of 32                            ASJ­03/NDD/PHC: 05.03.2021.
15.7              The fact that convict has voluntarily pleaded guilty to the
charges can be a mitigating circumstance, however, at the same time,
the contention of the convict that there is no one to look after the
parents of the convict cannot be accepted as a mitigating circumstance
especially in view of the fact, that as per the socio economic report,
the convict has two more brothers namely G.H. Mohd. Dar and Irfan
Ahmad Dar. Not only this, it is reported that the younger brother of
convict is taking care of his parents and is residing with them.
15.8              Therefore, considering the fact that convict had
committed a crime most foul, the mitigating circumstances as have
been put forth by the convict are not of the nature which would call
for the minimum sentence as prescribed as it would defeat the ends of
15.9              I accordingly find that ends of justice shall be served by
sentencing convict Muzzfar Ahmad Dar as under:-
i.      The convict is sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for
ii.     A fine of Rs.15,000/- is also imposed upon the convict. In
default of payment of fine, the convict shall undergo simple
imprisonment for a period of six months.
Page No. 27 of 32                             ASJ­03/NDD/PHC: 05.03.2021.
i.      The convict is sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for
ii.     A fine of Rs.15,000/- is also imposed upon the convict. In
default of payment of fine, the convict shall undergo simple
imprisonment for a period of six months.
i.      The convict is sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for
ii.     A fine of Rs.5,000/- is also imposed upon the convict. In default
of payment of fine, the convict shall undergo simple imprisonment for
a period of three months.
i.      The convict is sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for
ii.     A fine of Rs.15,000/- is also imposed upon the convict. In
default of payment of fine, the convict shall undergo simple
imprisonment for a period of six months.
i.      The convict is sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for
ii.     A fine of Rs.15,000/- is also imposed upon the convict. In
default of payment of fine, the convict shall undergo simple
Page No. 28 of 32                          ASJ­03/NDD/PHC: 05.03.2021.
imprisonment for a period of six months.
All the sentences shall run concurrently. Benefit of
section 428 Cr.P.C shall be given to the convict.
16.1              The aggravating circumstances which have emerged from
the case are the gravity of offence as discussed already.
16.2              The mitigating circumstances which the convict has
(a) He was merely an over ground worker.
(b) He was never involved in any direct violence and the money
transferred by the convict was never used for any arms and
(c) He voluntarily pleaded guilty to the charges.
(d) He was arrested in some FIR in the year 2011 and after
sustained counseling, he was admitted on bail. He did not indulge
in any unlawful activities since 2011.
(e) During the long detention, his family suffered a lot. His wife
suffers from depression. His father in law, with whom his wife
was residing, has been diagnosed with food pipe cancer.
(f) His younger brother is mentally unfit.
(g) He is remorseful and regret for his acts of omission and for
commission of unlawful acts.
Page No. 29 of 32                           ASJ­03/NDD/PHC: 05.03.2021.
16.3              I have carefully considered the aggravating and
mitigating circumstances.
16.4              It is correct that this convict is admittedly was an
over ground worker who was transferring funds on the directions
of his handlers/ superiors. Therefore, his case has to be treated a
differently from the other two convicts namely Mohd. Shafi Shah
and Muzzafar Ahmad Dar who were senior functionaries of HM.
However, the fact is that it is the over ground workers who
maintain the supply chain of terror funds which finally result in
terror activities can not be lost sight of. At the same time, as it has
not been disputed by NIA that after his initial arrest in the year
2011 in some other FIR where was working as over ground
worker, he had not committed any criminal activity till his arrest
in this case and thus, I do not find it a fit case to award maximum
punishment to this convict.
16.5              I accordingly find that ends of justice shall be served by
sentencing convict Mushtaq Ahmad Lone as under:-
i.      The convict is sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for
ii.     A fine of Rs.10,000/- is also imposed upon the convict. In
default of payment of fine, the convict shall undergo simple
Page No. 30 of 32                             ASJ­03/NDD/PHC: 05.03.2021.
imprisonment for a period of six months.
i.      The convict is sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for
ii.     A fine of Rs.10,000/- is also imposed upon the convict. In
default of payment of fine, the convict shall undergo simple
imprisonment for a period of six months.
i.      The convict is sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for
ii.     A fine of Rs.5,000/- is also imposed upon the convict. In default
of payment of fine, the convict shall undergo simple imprisonment for
a period of three months.
i.      The convict is sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for
ii.     A fine of Rs.10,000/- is also imposed upon the convict. In
default of payment of fine, the convict shall undergo simple
imprisonment for a period of six months.
i.      The convict is sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for
Page No. 31 of 32                          ASJ­03/NDD/PHC: 05.03.2021.
ii.     A fine of Rs.10,000/- is also imposed upon the convict. In
default of payment of fine, the convict shall undergo simple
imprisonment for a period of six months.
17.               All the sentences shall run concurrently. Benefit of
section 428 Cr.P.C shall be given to the convict.
18.               Copy of order on sentence be given to the convicts free of
today on 25.10.2021.                             (Parveen Singh)
(This order contains 32 pages             ASJ­03, New Delhi Distt.,
and each page bears my signatures.)    Patiala House Court, N. Delhi.
Page No. 32 of 32                            ASJ­03/NDD/PHC: 05.03.2021.