Dated this the 7th day of October, 2022.
The petitioner was allotted the 2nd respondent -
"Ilaha College of Arts and Science" (College) by the 1 st
(M.G.University) for admission to the B.A.Economics
Course, as is evident from Ext.P3.
2.     The petitioner alleges that, however, even
though he presented Ext.P3 before the Principal of the
College on 28.09.2022, he was not allowed admission;
and that this has put him a piquant predicament because
the next allotment was completed on 03.10.2022 by the
University. He, therefore, prays that the 2 nd respondent -
College be directed to admit him on the strength of
Ext.P3 forthwith, so that he can continue and pursue his
W.P.(C) No. 31373 of 2022.
3.     The afore submissions of Sri.Chacko Mathews
K. - learned counsel for the petitioner, were answered by
Sri.P.M.Saneer          -  learned Standing Counsel  for   the
College, saying that the facts involved in this case would
indicate that the attempt of the petitioner is not to
secure admission but to "wreck vengeance" on his client.
He explained that the petitioner had earlier approached
his client to obtain admission in the Management quota,
but that since he did not have merit he was denied
admission.           He added that, thereafter, the petitioner
appears to have approached the University for allotment
showing only his client as the college to which he
intended to obtain admission, and that this is clearly
malafide because when he was denied admission in the
Management quota, as stated above, he had created a
W.P.(C) No. 31373 of 2022.
ruckus in the college, which led to Ext.R2(b) complaint
being       preferred       against   him.     He   submitted  that
therefore,        his    client  legitimately   believes  that  the
petitioner will disrupt the discipline in the college and
therefore, that they have addressed Ext.R2(c) letter to
the M.G.University on 06.10.2022, seeking that the
allotment be reconsidered.
4.     Sri.Surin      George    Ipe  -   learned   Standing
Counsel for the M.G.University, in response, submitted
that the attempt of the College is to wriggle out of their
statutory obligation as per Ext.P3 and that they have
approached the University only on 06.10.2022, even
when the admission ought to have been completed by
the end of September, 2022.               He added that since the
next allotment is also now over, the action of the College
in refusing admission to the petitioner will have to be
W.P.(C) No. 31373 of 2022.
5.     When        I evaluate  and consider the afore
submissions, it is evident that the College is refusing
admission to the petitioner based on certain speculative
reasons. It may be true that there was an incident in the
past, which led to a police complaint being filed against
the petitioner, but this does not ipso facto mean that his
attempt is to "wreck vengeance", as has been now
suggested by Sri.P.M.Saneer.
6.     That apart, when Ext.P3 allotment was issued
by the University in the last week of September, 2022, if
the College had any objection as stated above, they
ought to have approached its competent Authority at
least before the next allotment was completed. This, not
having been done, and Ext.R3(c) being preferred only on
06.10.2022, pending this lis, I am certain that this Court
W.P.(C) No. 31373 of 2022.
will not be justified in denying relief to the petitioner.
In the afore circumstances, I order this writ petition
and direct the College to admit the petitioner, based on
Ext.P3, forthwith; however with full liberty being reserved
to them to pursue Ext.R3(c) before the University, which
Authority will consider it, after hearing both sides and
take an apposite decision thereon as per law.
Needless to say, the afore relief has been granted to
the petitioner on his express undertaking - made through
his learned counsel - that he will act in strict compliance
of the discipline of the College and will not exhibit any
conduct in breach thereof.