The short question that arises for consideration is whether the 1st
respondent who has admittedly submitted a fake/ false certificate as
belonging to Scheduled Caste (SC) Community, though the 1st respondent
admittedly belonged to Back ward Class (BC) and thereby enjoying
relaxation by 5 years of the upper age limit in terms of the advertisement
calling for applications for appointment as Trainee in Bhabha Atomic
Research Centre (hereinafter referred to as "BARC") under the In-plant
Training Programme vitiates and renders entire process of appointment as
void.
2. In 1986, BARC issued an advertisement inviting applications for in
In-plant Training, the 1st respondent submitted his application indicating
his caste as "Adi Dravidar" and submitted a certificate bearing number CA
13257/84 A2 dated 30.07.1986 issued by Special Duty Tahsildar
(Certificate) Saidapet. The attestation form dated 08.04.1987 submitted by
the 1st respondent consequent to his selection had indicated "Adi Dravidar"
against the column regarding caste.
3. It may be relevant to note that the advertisement calling for
applications to the post of Trainee in BARC prescribed that the age limit of
the applicant should not be less than 18 years and not more than 20 years as
on 01.07.1986. However, an exception was made to Scheduled Caste /
Scheduled Tribe candidates and upper age limit was relaxed by 5 years. The
date of birth of the 1st respondent is 24.04.1962. Thus, in terms of the age
limit prescribed therein, the 1st respondent may not be eligible for
appointment. But, for the relaxation by 5 years in the case of SC/ST
candidates, inasmuch as the 1st respondent was 24 years old on the date of
application to the post.
4. The 1st respondent upon successful completion of the training
programme was appointed as Tradesman/C in BARC, Mumbai with effect
from 31.03.1989, thereafter he was promoted to the post of Tradesman/D
and was transferred on his own request to Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic
Research Centre, Kalpakkam (hereinafter referred to as "IGCAR") and
joined on 12.10.1992. Upon further promotion under the merit promotion
scheme was promoted as Scientific Assistant/D. While so, on the basis of
the complaint lodged by the General Secretary, SC/ST Association of
Department of Atomic Energy (hereinafter referred to as "DAE") against the
1st respondent vide FIR No.343/2012 on 21.10.2012 under Sections 420,
468, 471 of IPC on the charge of gaining Government Employment by
submitting fake certificate. The 1st respondent was initially arrested and
was placed under deemed suspension. Thereafter, was released on bail on
02.11.2012 and the suspension was revoked.
5. On verification by the Competent Authority, it was found by the
Kancheepuram that the 1st respondent belongs to Hindu Thuluva Vellalar,
which is listed as Backward Community (BC). Consequently, a charge
memo was issued on the premise that the 1st respondent has while applying
for the post of Stipendiary Trainee in BARC, Trombay, Mumbai submitted a
fake community certificate claiming that he belongs to Schedule Caste (SC)
Community and secured Central Government Employment reserved for
Scheduled Caste candidate availing relaxation of age under the order on
reservation.
6. The 1st respondent submitted his explanation to the charge memo
wherein he had admitted that he belonged to Backward Class (BC)
Community           and   not  Schedule    Caste/  Schedule     Tribe  (SC/ST).
Subsequently, a representation was submitted by the 1st respondent dated
31.05.2013 by seeking to defer the departmental action till the final disposal
of Criminal Case which was rejected to by the petitioner against which an
Original Application was filed before the Central Administrative Tribunal
the simultaneously proceedings should not be allowed. The learned Tribunal
held that the appointment had completed close to 26 years of service and
earned as many as 5 promotions on merit basis which is not under dispute
and that the respondent had not claimed any benefit of reservation at the
time of initial recruitment wherein he was selected for the Open Category
upon category. Though, the respondent was given age relaxation but there is
no denial that the appointment / selection on the basis of the merit. The
respondent has also received certificate of merit by the Prime Minister of
India as well as the Government of India. It was further found that the order
posted by the District Level Vigilance Committee was cryptic and not based
on any documentary evidence. Importantly, the Tribunal found inasmuch
the Criminal case is pending on the order same set of facts, the disciplinary
proceedings ought to be got in abeyance until a finality is reached in the
criminal proceedings.
7. The submission of the petitioner was that the disciplinary
proceedings and criminal proceedings can be proceeded simultaneously/
independently was rejected on the premise that the criminal case which is
pending is also on the very same set of facts. In this regard, reliance was
placed on the following decisions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court:
i) Noida Entrepreneurs Association vs. Noida and others reported in
"13. There can be no straitjacket formula as to in which
case the departmental proceedings are to be stayed. There may
be cases where the trial of the case gets prolonged by the
dilatory method adopted by delinquent official. He cannot be
permitted to, on one hand, prolong criminal case and at the
same time contend that the departmental proceedings should
be stayed on the ground that the criminal case is pending.
16. The standard of proof required in departmental
proceedings is not the same as required to prove a criminal
charge and even if there is an acquittal in the criminal
proceedings the same does not bar departmental proceedings.
That being so, the order of the State Government deciding not
to continue the departmental proceedings is clearly untenable
and is quashed. The departmental proceedings shall continue."
ii) M. Paul Anthony v. Bharat Gold Mines Ltd., reported in (1999)
"22.......(v) If the criminal case does not proceed or its
disposal is being unduly delayed, the departmental
proceedings, even if they were stayed on account of the
pendency of the criminal case, can be resumed and proceeded
with so as to conclude them at an early date, so that if the
employee is found not guilty his honour may be vindicated and
in case he is found guilty, the administration may get rid of
him at the earliest."
iii) Addl. GM-Human Resource, Bharat Heavy Electricals
Ltd. vs. Suresh Ramkrishna Burde reported in (2007) 5 SCC 336:
"6. Respondent 1 employee obtained appointment in the
service on the basis that he belonged to a Scheduled Tribe.
When the clear finding of the Scrutiny Committee is that he did
not belong to the Scheduled Tribe, the very foundation of his
appointment collapses and his appointment is no appointment
in the eye of the law. There is absolutely no justification for his
claim in respect of the post he usurped, as the same was meant
for a reserved candidate."
8. It was concluded by the Tribunal that the disciplinary proceedings
ought to be kept in abeyance till the finality is reached in the criminal
proceedings initiated against the petitioner. It was against this order of the
Tribunal, the petitioner further filed this writ petition on the premise that the
petitioner having admitted to the fact that a fake certificate belonging to SC
Community has been submitted at the time of appointment/ selection. The
Tribunal erred in keeping the disciplinary proceedings in abeyance. The
Tribunal ought to have seen that once a fabricated Community Certificate is
furnished, the initial employment/ appointment itself is questionable as
being void ab initio, in the circumstances, the Tribunal ought to have seen
that, but for the fake Community Certificate, the petitioner would have been
eligible to be considered for the post as he had crossed the upper age limit
and it is only in view of the fake/ bogus Community Certificate, the
petitioner was eligible for the benefit of age relaxation which enabled him
to participate in this selection process. In this regard, it may be relevant to
refer to the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of State of
Odisha vs. Sulekh Chandra reported in (2022) SCC Online SC 476,
wherein it was held that it is trite law and the appointment made in
contravention of the statutory proceedings are void ab initio, the relevant
portions of the order reads as under:
"32. It is not in dispute that the appointment of all the
applicants/respondents/teachers have been made directly by
the respective Management without following the procedure as
prescribed under the Rules/Statute. It is a trite law that the
appointments made in contravention of the statutory provisions
are void ab initio. Reference in this respect could be made to
the judgments of this Court in the cases of Ayurvidya Prasarak
Mandal v. Geeta Bhaskar Pendse (Mrs) J&K Public Service
Commission v. Dr.             Narinder          Mohan, Official
Liquidator v. Dayanand, and Union of India v. Raghuwar Pal
8.1 It may also be relevant to refer to the decision of the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in the case of Lillykutty v. Scrutiny Committee, SC & ST,
reported in (2005) 8 SCC 283, wherein it was held as under:
"28. Any action by the authorities or by the people
claiming a right/privilege under the Constitution which
subverts the constitutional purpose must be treated as a fraud
on the Constitution. The Constitution does not postulate
conferment of any special benefit on those who do not belong
to the category of people for whom the provision was made.
29. The fraud committed by the appellant for obtaining
unlawful gain has been found as of fact by a statutory
committee. The said finding of fact has not been interfered with
by the High Court. No case has been made out for us to take a
different view."
9. It is submitted that submission of a false Community Certificate
and taking advantage on the basis of such bogus certificate is wholly
unacceptable. Reservations and relaxation on the basis of community are
made with social objective and that cannot be frustrated by submission of
fraudulent certificates. In this regard, it may be relevant to refer to the
following decisions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court:
i) Shrisht Dhawan (Smt) v. Shaw Bros. reported in (1992) 1 SCC
534 wherein the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that fraud would vitiate the
most solemn proceedings, which reads as under:
“20. Fraud and collusion vitiate even the most solemn
proceedings in any civilised system of jurisprudence....."
ii) Food Corporation of India vs. Jagdish Balaram Bahira reported
"48. .....However, it is important to notice that even
before the State Legislature stepped in to confer a statutory
form to the directions which were issued by this Court
in Madhuri        Patil [Madhuri     Patil v. Commr.,      Tribal
Development, (1994) 6 SCC 241 : 1994 SCC (L&S) 1349] the
regime, as it then obtained prior to the enactment of the law,
also envisaged consequences upon a caste or tribe claim being
found to be false upon a verification by the Scrutiny
Committee. The cancellation of a certificate would, as a
necessary consequence, involve the invalidation of the
appointment to a post or admission to an educational
institution. Where a candidate had been appointed to a
reserved post on the basis of the claim that he or she was a
member of the group for which the reservation is intended, the
invalidation of the claim to belong to that group would, as a
necessary consequence, render the appointment void ab initio.
The rationale for this is that a candidate who would otherwise
have to compete for a post in the general pool of unreserved
seats had secured appointment in a more restricted
competition confined to the reserved category and usurped a
benefit meant for a designated caste, tribe or class. Once it
was found that the candidate had obtained admission upon a
false representation to belong to the reserved category, the
appointment would be vitiated by fraud and would be void ab
initio. The falsity of the claim lies in a representation that the
candidate belongs to a category of persons for whom the
reservation is intended whereas in fact the candidate does not
so belong. The reason for depriving the candidate of the
benefit which she or he has obtained on the strength of such a
claim, is that a person cannot retain the fruits of a false claim
on the basis of which a scarce public resource is
obtained............The withdrawal of benefits, either in terms of
the revocation of employment or the termination of an
admission was hence a necessary corollary of the invalidation
of the claim on the basis of which the appointment or
admission was obtained. The withdrawal of the benefit was not
based on mens rea or the intent underlying the assertion of a
false claim. In the case of a criminal prosecution, intent would
be necessary. On the other hand, the withdrawal of civil
benefits flowed as a logical result of the invalidation of a claim
to belong to a group or category for whom the reservation is
intended. This was the position under the regime which
prevailed following the decision in Madhuri Patil [Madhuri
Patil v. Commr., Tribal Development, (1994) 6 SCC 241 :
10. It is well-settled that fraud vitiates the most solemn proceedings
and though the petitioner was appointed only under the OC category and as
a matter of fact, the subsequent promotions were also on the basis of merit
and not on the basis of reservation overlooks the facts that the petitioner
may not have even been eligible to apply in terms of the advertisement but
for the fact that he had submitted a SC certificate, which enabled him to
obtain the relaxation of the upper age limit by 5 years inasmuch as the
petitioner had crossed the upper age limit.
11. The Applicant before the Tribunal / 1st Respondent herein has
entered the job clandestinely (jpUl;Lj;jdkhf) by production of fake
certificate and is going to retire from service. This is a classic example
where Court should be blamed, as the departmental proceedings have been
stayed, thereby allowing the departmental proceedings to be continued after
completion of the criminal case. Such act of the Court has resulted in paying
benefits to an undeserving person, as the entry into service itself is void ab
initio. Of course, the Applicant, during the period of service, has received
Presidential Award. Though it has been contended by Mr.L.Chandrakumar,
learned counsel for R1 that in case the Writ Petition is going to be
dismissed, no enquiry can be proceeded with, as he is going to attain
superannuation and therefore, compulsory retirement alone is sufficient. The
punishment that is going to be imposed just few days prior to the date of
superannuation is nothing, but making mockery of the system, as an
undeserved candidate has entered the job, bypassing all other eligible SC/ST
candidates, who were on the roll.
12. From the records, it could be seen that the Applicant was born on
24.04.1962 and he applied for the post of Fitter, pursuant to the
Advertisement No.3/86(R-II). In the application, he had stated that he
belongs to Adi Dravida SC/ST and in proof, he had put a tick in the row
(5.2) of the check list annexed along with the application, in order to be
doubly sure that he had attached the SC/ST Certificate. A glance at the
advertisement annexed in the typeset of papers unravels that the age limit is
mentioned as not less than 18 years and not more than 20 years as on July 1,
1986, by granting relaxation of 5 years in the case of SC/ST candidates and
2 years in the case of FTA staff on BARC rolls. For the sake of brevity, the
relevant portion of the Advertisement is extracted hereunder:
Application are invited for in-plant training in the following workshop
trades in Central Workshops:-
EDUCATIONALQUALIFICATIONS:           SSC Passed or equivalent (10 years of school)
with Science and Mathematics plus ITI
certificate of not less than 2 years duration in
the respective trades. (For trades for which the
duration of the ITI course is less than 2 years,
the candidate should have at least one year's
experience after completion of the course
AGE                                   Not less than 18 years and not more than 20
years as on July 1, 1986
13. The Applicant was 24 years old at the time of applying for the
post and hence, was not eligible to compete under BC category. In view of
that, he had suppressed the community and submitted the application as if
he belongs to SC/ST Community, availed the benefit of 5 years and entered
the job. Thus, it is clear that the Applicant was overage and did not fall
within the eligibility criteria and therefore, the initial appointment obtained
on the basis of relaxation of age itself is bad, which is a clear ground to
deprive the entire benefits due to the Applicant. However, on account of the
fault of the Department in not proceeding with the matter, more so, not
questioning the order of the Tribunal passed in O.A.No.754 of 2013 and
that there was a delay of 7 years, the Writ Petition needs to be dismissed.
But, on technicalities, a meritorious case cannot be thrown out, especially in
the case of this nature, where fraudulent entry into service has been made.
That apart, attention was drawn to the application for admission in the
school in respect of the Applicant's daughter, wherein it has been stated that
she belongs to Thuluva Vellalar (BC).
14. As on date, no enquiry proceedings have been completed and that
there is a fault on the part of the Department / Writ Petitioner in
approaching the Court, challenging the order of the Tribunal belatedly.
However, the mistake committed by the Department cannot be taken
advantage of by the Applicant and he cannot be let off scot-free on
technicalities, as moral value will have to prevail over legal values and it is
adjudged based on moral values, as held by the Supreme Court that it must
be remembered that we are living in a democratic society governed by the
Rule of Law and every Government, which claims to be inspired by ethical
or moral values must do what is fair and just, regardless of legal
technicalities. Further, in the absence of society with moral values, there
would be no social order. For this, the following judgments may be referred
i) Hindustan Sugar Mills vs. State of Rajasthan and others, reported
ii) Aruna Roy and others vs. Union of India and others, reported in
There was admission by the Applicant himself before the Tribunal and
before this Court that he had entered the job, by production of fake
community certificate, as if he belongs to SC community, as, otherwise, he
would not have been inducted into service and he would have been
disqualified on various reasons, such as overage, etc.
15. It is needless to mention that both criminal proceedings as well as
departmental proceedings can go on simultaneously, as there is no
hindrance on the part of the employer to proceed with the departmental
proceedings, if the Criminal Proceedings are not initiated or concluded
within one year from the date of FIR (not from the date of filing of Charge
Sheet, as filing of Charge Sheet in the Criminal Court is a herculean task
and will take years together), in view of the fact that the criminal case
should be proved beyond reasonable doubt by adducing oral and
documentary evidence, whereas charges in the departmental proceedings
should be established on the basis of preponderance of probabilities.
16. The Department is also to be blamed, as they have kept quiet for
nearly 7 years in challenging the order of the Tribunal, which is purely a
fault committed by the inefficient Officer in not questioning the order of the
Tribunal within time, thereby allowed an undeserving / unscrupulous
element to continue in the job and receive salary all these years. As there is
a clear material available about the fake certificate that has been admitted in
the Original Application as well as in the Writ Petition, the Applicant
cannot be allowed to get the benefits on technical ground and he cannot get
a premium or bounty, as, in the light of the judgment of the Apex Court
(supra), the initial appointment itself is void ab initio. However, taking note
of the fact that he had received Presidential Award, a sympathetic view is
taken, by granting only 40% of the pensionary benefits, in exercise of the
powers of this Court.
17. In the result, this Writ Petition is disposed of. The Applicant / 1st
Respondent is imposed with the punishment of Compulsory Retirement,
which will take effect from today. The Applicant / 1st Respondent is entitled
to only 40% of the pensionary benefits. Though an order of Compulsory
Retirement is passed, it cannot be construed as a punishment, as he will be
enjoying the benefit of pension to which he is not at all entitled to. This
Court ought not to have granted even this relief to the Applicant, had the
Department approached the Court well within time. It is made clear that the
Applicant / 1st Respondent is not eligible for any other terminal benefits,
such as gratuity, DCRG and the like, excluding the PF contribution, if any
made by the Applicant. The Government should also think of amending the
Rules to enable the Department to proceed against the employee even after
retirement   /   superannuation.  No    costs.  Consequently,    connected
Miscellaneous Petition is closed.