A short but interesting question emerging for consideration in
this writ petition is whether a joint locker hirer is liable to secure a
letter of administration or succession in order to operate the locker
in the event of the death of one of the hirers.
2. Brief material facts for the disposal of the writ petition are
summarised as follows:
The first petitioner is the wife of late Sasidharan Pillai and
petitioners 2 and 3 are their daughter and son. The first petitioner
along with late Sasidharan Pillai, have hired a locker jointly with
locker No.26 in the State Bank of India, Chadayamangalam Branch,
Kollam District. It is the case of the petitioners that the hirers are
keeping their valuables/gold ornaments in the said locker.           Sri.
Sasidharan Pillai died on 31.07.2022, evident from Exhibit P1 death
certificate dated 08.08.2022. According to the petitioners, the death
of Sasidharan Pillai was intimated to the Bank on time; and the sole
legal heirs of Sasidharan Pillai are the petitioners.
3.   Anyhow, after the death of Sasidharan Pillai, the first
petitioner approached the Bank to permit her to operate or open the
locker.    However, the request was declined.         Later, the first
petitioner was intimated, as per Exhibit P3 letter dated 04.01.2023
by the Branch Manager, respondent No.3, that she has to secure
necessary proof of legal representation in the form of Probate or
Letters of Administration.
4. The case of the petitioners is that since the first petitioner
is a joint hirer to operate the locker, the stand adopted by
respondent Nos. 2 and 3 are illegal and arbitrary. It is also the case
of the petitioner that during the lifetime of Sasidharan Pillai, the
joint hirers were permitted to operate the locker independently and
there is no requirement at all under the contract executed by and
between the parties that the locker could be operated jointly only.
5. It is further pointed out that this question was considered
by this Court in Shobha Gopalakrishnan v. State of Kerala
[2019 (1) KLT 801], wherein one of the joint hirers of a locker, on
production of a death certificate, was directed to permit to operate
the locker.    It is also contended that the stand adopted by the
respondent Bank is against the settled principles of law and the
policies and guidelines issued by the Reserve Bank of India.
6. On the other hand, respondent Nos. 2 and 3 have filed a
joint counter affidavit, justifying the stand adopted in Exhibit P3
letter dated 04.01.2023.      Along with the same, a circular and
revised guidelines are also produced as Exhibits R2(a) and R2(b)
dated 18.08.2021 and 20.01.2022 respectively, and relying upon
the same, the learned Standing Counsel has advanced arguments
that the Bank was right in insisting for Probate or letter of
administration from the petitioner.
7. It is further pointed out that by virtue of Section 29 of the
Administrators-General Act, 1963, the petitioner is at liberty to
secure necessary letter of administration or to resort to the
provisions of the Indian Succession Act and secure necessary
decree for succession to the property of the deceased Sasidharan
8.  I have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner Sri.
Praveen K. Joy and the learned Standing Counsel for the Bank Sri.
Jawahar Jose, and perused the pleadings and material on record.
9. In my considered opinion, when the first petitioner and her
husband were joint hirers of a locker and they were permitted to
operate the locker independently during the lifetime of the husband;
the first petitioner is entitled, as of right, to operate the locker, after
the death of her husband. It is equally important to note that the
first petitioner as well as her husband were permitted to operate the
joint locker independent of each other during the lifetime of
Sasidharan Pillai, and the same legal position continued after the
death of Sasidharan Pillai.
10. However, the learned Standing Counsel for the Bank has
invited my attention to Exhibit R2(a) circular dated 18.08.2021
issued by the Reserve Bank of India dealing with locker allotment;
infrastructure      and    securities   standards;       locker   operations;
nomination facility and settlement of claims etc. On a perusal of
Exhibit R2(a), I find that the said circular only deals with nomination
facility as per clause 5.1, which reads thus:
5.1.1 The banks shall offer nomination facility in case of safe
deposit lockers and safe custody of articles, in accordance with the
provisions of section 45-ZC to 45-ZF of the Banking Regulation Act,
1949 and Banking Companies (Nomination) Rules, 1985/Co-
operative Banks (Nomination) Rules, 1985. In case the nominee is a
minor, the same procedure as prescribed for the bank accounts
shall be followed by the banks. A passport size photo of the
nominee attested by the customer may be obtained from the
customers, at his/her option and preserved in the records.
5.1.2 For the various Forms (Forms SC1, SC2 and SC3 for Articles
left in Safe Custody and Forms SL1, SL1A, SL2, SL3 and SL3A for
Safety Lockers) prescribed under Banking Companies (Nomination)
Rules, 1985/Co-operative Banks (Nomination) Rules, 1985, only
Thumb-impression(s) shall be required to be attested by two
witnesses. Signatures of the account holders need not be attested
by witnesses.
5.1.3 Banks shall have appropriate systems and procedures in place
to register the nomination, cancellation and / or variation of the
nomination, in their books, made by the locker hirers.
5.1.4 Banks shall devise a proper system of acknowledging the
receipt of duly completed form of nomination, cancellation and / or
variation of the nomination. Such acknowledgement shall be given
to all the customers irrespective of whether the same is demanded
by the customers or not.”
11. Clause 5.2 of the circular deals with ‘Settlement of Claims
in case of death of a Customer’. Clause 5.2.3 specifies that in order
to ensure that the articles left in safe custody and contents of
lockers are returned to the genuine nominee, as also to verify the
proof of death, banks shall devise their own claim formats, in terms
of applicable laws and regulatory guidelines.
12.    Clause 5.2.4 makes the situation more clear that a
timeline is issued for tackling the situation of a nominee operating a
locker, which states that the Banks shall settle the claims in respect
of deceased locker hirers and shall release contents of the locker to
survivor(s) nominee(s), as the case may be, within a period not
exceeding 15 days from the date of receipt of the claim subject to
the production of proof of death of the depositor and suitable
identification of the claimant(s) with reference to nomination, to the
bank's satisfaction.
13. Therefore, in my considered opinion, the said provisions
contained under the circular is dealing with a situation only where
the locker is permitted to be operated by a nominee after the death
of the hirers.     Anyhow, clause 5.3.6 of the said circular specifies
that in cases where the deceased locker hirer had not made any
nomination or where the joint hirers had not given any mandate
that the access may be given to one or more of the survivors by a
clear survivorship clause, banks shall adopt a Board approved policy
to facilitate access to legal heir(s)/legal representative of the
deceased locker hirer, and in such cases, the banks were directed to
take note of the instructions contained under para 5.3.2. dealing
with the instructions regarding due care and caution in establishing
the identity of the survivor(s)/nominee(s).
14.   Therefore, it can be seen that the contention advanced
by the learned Standing Counsel for the Bank, relying upon the said
circular, has no basis or foundation to arrive at a conclusion that a
joint locker hirer is also to follow the procedure prescribed for
tackling a situation of granting permission to the nominee of the
hirer or joint hirer of a locker.
15. The learned Standing Counsel for the Bank has also relied
upon Exhibit R2(b) guidelines issued by the Bank.              Clause 10.1
deals with access to Safe Deposit Lockers/Return of Safe Custody
Articles to Nominee(s)/Survivor(s), which reads thus:
10.1 Access to Safe Deposit Lockers/Return of Safe
Custody Articles to Nominee(s)/ Survivor(s):
a) If the sole locker hirer nominates a person, in the event of the
death of the sole locker hirer, branch shall allow access of the
locker and liberty to remove the contents of the locker to such
nominee after verification of the death certificate, satisfying the
identity and genuineness of such individual and after taking an
inventory in the prescribed manner.
b) In case the locker was hired jointly with instructions to operate it
under joint signatures and the locker hirers nominate one or more
person(s) as nominee(s), in the event of death of any of the locker
hirers, the branch shall permit access to the locker and the liberty
to remove the contents jointly to the survivor(s) and the
nominee(s) after taking an inventory in the prescribed manner.
c) In case the locker was hired jointly with survivorship clause and
the hirers instructed that access to the locker should be given over
to 'either or survivor' anyone or Survivor’, former or survivor or
according to any other survivorship clause permissible under the
provisions of Banking Regulation Act, 1949 branch shall follow the
mandate in the event of the death of one or more of the joint
locker hirers.
d) However, Branch should take the following precautions before
handing over the contents:
I) Branch should exercise due care and caution in establishing 1he
identity of the suvivor(s) nominee(s) and the fact of death of the
locker hirer by obtaining appropriate documentary evidence. The
genuineness of documents must be ensured.
ii) Branch should make diligent efforts to find out if there is any
order from a competent court restraining the branch from giving
access to the locker of the deceased, and
iii) Branch should make it clear to the survivor(s)/nominjee(s) that
access to locker/ safe custody articles is given to them only as a
trustệe of the legal heirs of the deceased locker hirer i.e., such
access given to them shall not affect the rights or claims which any
person may have against, the survivor(s)/nominee(s) to whom the
access is given.
v) Branch shall ensure that the contents of locker, when sought to
be removed on behalf of a minor nominee, are handed over to a
person who is, in law, competent to receive the articles on behalf
of such minor. Further Branch shall prepare an inventory of the
articles in the presence of two independent witnesses, one officer
of the bank who is not custodian of locker facility or safe deposit
articles and the Claimant (s), who may be a nominee or an
individual receiving the articles, on behalf of the minor.
v) A Separate ştatement from nominee or the person competent to
receive articles on behalf of minor as the case may be, that all the
contents in the locker or in the safe custody of the bank, as the
case may be, are received and the locker is empty, and they have
no objection to allotment of the locker to any other customer as
per norms.
vi) While giving access to the survivor(s) I nominee(s) of the
deceased locker hirer /depositor of the safe custody article,
Branch may avoid insisting on the production of Succession
certificate. letter of administration or probate etc., or obtaining
any bond of indemnity or surety from the survivor(s)/nomineè(s),
unless there is any discrepancy in nomination.
vii) Branches are not required to open sealed/closed packets left
with them for safe custody or found in locker while releasing them
to thệ nominee(s) and surviving locker hirers/ depositor of safe
custody article.
16.     Even though that being the situation, the learned
Standing Counsel for the Bank placed heavy reliance on clause
10.2. Sub-clause (a) thereto specifies that in case where deceased
locker hirer had not made any nomination or where the joint hirers
had not given any mandate that the access may be given to one or
more of the survivors by a clear survivorship clause, the procedures
prescribed thereunder may be adopted.            However, sub-clause (b)
thereto makes it undoubted that the said situation also deals with a
case where there is no nomination by the sole locker hirer; which
specifies that in case of death of a sole locker hirer (where there is
no nomination) and there is a valid will, probate may be obtained,
and access may be given to the executor/administrator; in other
cases, access may be given to the legal representative of the
deceased; and in such cases, death certificate and proof of the legal
representation should be obtained and the legal representation
would be in the form of probate or Letters of Administration.
17.     In my considered view, none of the circumstances
contained under Exhibit R2(a) circular and Exhibit R2(b) guidelines
issued by the State Bank of India would come into play insofar as a
joint locker hirer is concerned even after the death of one of the
18.    The issue was considered by a Division Bench of the
Madras High Court in Hepzibah Annathai Rengachari v. R.
Mad 342 = (1975) ILR 1 Mad 385] and held that monies in bank
either or survivor or joint accounts, letters of administration is not
necessary for claiming the same, and it is held thus in paragraphs 2
2 . Normally, when Letters of Administration are applied for, as
envisaged by the provisions of Chapter II of the Indian Succession
Act, the entirety of the assets of the deceased should be disclosed in
the affidavit of assets which will count for valuation for purposes of
court-fee. That this is so, was held in Parthasarathi Naidu In re,
MANU/TN/0170/1955 : AIR1955Mad411 . As pointed out in that
decision, the rule has exceptions as provided by Sections 254 to 257.
Though the appellant sought to invoke Section 254(1), in our
opinion, the real exception applicable to this case is what is
contained in Section 255. Where it is a case of joint account in a Bank
and the amount is payable to either or survivor, the nature of the
case requires that it is treated as an exception to the general rule we
mentioned. This is because, though the will in this case devised the
entire assets of the deceased testator in favour of the appellant,
inasmuch as the account was joint and the amount standing to its
credit was payable to either or survivor, the appellant, as between
the Bank and herself would be entitled to draw the same in her own
right. On that view, it may not even be necessary to obtain Letters of
Administration, for, there is in that case little to administer, and, as
we mentioned, her right to draw the amount can be independently
of the will. In the case of payment of the death benefit, that again, as
we take it, was payable to the wife and though it may not stand on
the same footing as the joint account aforesaid, still her right to
draw the money as death benefit would likewise arise even
independent of the will. That being so, we are inclined to think that
this is a case where Letters of Administration are totally unnecessary
for the appellant so far as the above two items are concerned.
3 . It is, however, strenuously contended before us that, even
on the footing of the amount payable to either or survivor, since
there is no presumption in favour of the wife, all that could be said is
that there would be a resulting trust in favour of the surviving wife,
and that, as the respondent is the senior wife of the deceased, she
would be entitled to share that amount. This argument, as we think,
is mixed up with the real issue, namely, whether the appellant could
invoke any of the exceptions to the general rule. That question does
not involve consideration and disposal of the rights of the contesting
claimants in respect of the two amounts. From the stand point of
administration and the requirement of mentioning the items the
deceased left in the affidavit of assets, which will eventually bear on
court-fee, we are of opinion that at this stage substantive, rights of
the contending claimants do not fall to be decided. All that we are
concerned is to see whether the nature of the case requires
application of the exception contained in Section 255. We think that,
in this case, the nature of the case being such, namely, a joint
account payable to either or survivor, the surviving wife is entitled to
draw the money in her own right. Apart from that, she is not obliged
even to apply for Letters of Administration.”...
19. In the instant case, the petitioner is a joint hirer of the
locker and was free to operate the locker during the lifetime of her
husband Sasidharan Pillai and thereafter also. Anyhow, the learned
counsel for the respondent Bank has invited my attention to Section
218 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 dealing with ‘to whom
administration may be granted, where the deceased is a Hindu,
Muhammadan, Budhist, Sikh, Jaina or exempted person’.                     Sub-
Section (1) thereto clearly specifies that if the deceased has died
intestate and was a Hindu, Muhammadan, Buddhist, Sikh or Jaina
or an exempted person, administration of his estate may be granted
to any person who, according to the rules for the distribution of the
estate applicable in the case of such deceased, would be entitled to
the whole or any part of such deceased's estate.
20.    In my considered opinion, Section 218 of the Indian
Succession Act, 1925 stipulates the manner in which administration
of  estate is to be     granted by a court of law, in cases where a
person has died intestate. This is a case where the first petitioner,
who is the joint owner of a locker hired from the Bank, was
prevented by the Bank from operating the locker.              To put it
otherwise, in my considered view, Section 218 of the Act, 1925 has
no application, since the petitioner is the joint owner, who is
entitled, as of right, to operate the same, even according to the
Bank, independent of the other joint hirer of the locker.      There is
also no requirement to secure any letters of administration under
Section 29 of the Administrators-General Act, 1963. There is also
no case for the respondent Bank that there is any litigation
instituted by anyone in the matter of assets left by the deceased
Upshot of the above discussion is that the petitioner is entitled
to succeed. The writ petition is allowed and consequently it is
declared that the first petitioner is entitled, as of right, to operate
the locker in question. Accordingly, there will be a direction to the
respondent Nos. 2 and 3 to permit the first petitioner to operate
locker No.26 held by the first petitioner with the State Bank of
sd/- SHAJI P. CHALY, JUDGE.