The petitioners are before this Court calling in question
entire proceedings in Criminal Miscellaneous No.01 of 2018
which later become C.C.No.39 of 2018 registered for an offence
punishable under Section 27(d) of the Drugs and Cosmetics
Act, 1940 (‘the Act’ for short).
2. Shorn of unnecessary details, facts in brief that are
germane for consideration of the issue in the lis, are as follows:
The 1st petitioner is M/s Emcure Pharmaceuticals Limited,
a drug manufacturing company engaged in the manufacture
and sale of drugs (hereinafter referred to as ‘the Company’ for
short). Petitioner Nos.2 and 3 who are accused Nos.2 ad 3 are
the Managing Director and Director respectively of the said
Company. The petitioners are in C.C.No.39 of 2018. The facts
that led to the registration of crime are that on 5-01-2012, the
Drugs Inspector, Bangalore visits M/s Tulasi Pharma and takes
a legal sample of the drug manufactured by the Company,
prepares Form No.17, issues it to the proprietor of M/s Tulasi
Pharma and sends the sample so collected for test/analysis
under the acknowledgment of the proprietor as required under
Section 23 of the Act. On 6.01.2012, the sealed portion of the
drug reaches Government Analyst          at the    Drugs Testing
Laboratory, Bengaluru. The procedure stipulated under the Act
was followed for drawing up and sending the sample.
3. On 21-07-2012, the Drugs Inspector who had sent the
sample for its test receives the report of the drug in terms of
CRL.P No. 6919 of 2022
Form No.13 from the Government Analyst, Drugs Testing
Laboratory, Bengaluru and the report was that “Not of
Standard Quality” with respect to “Assay for Folic Acid”. On
24-07-2012, a notice was served upon M/s Tulasi Pharma
under Section 18A and 18B of the Act along with original
report. On the very day, the proprietor of M/s Tulasi Pharma
gives a statement disclosing that it had purchased the said
drug from the Company.      It is here the Company comes into
the picture.
4. On 30-07-2012, the Drugs Inspector served another
copy of the test report on the Company in terms of Section
23(4)(iii) of the Act. The Company responds to the said notice.
On 2-08-2012, the Drugs Inspector addresses a letter to the
Managing Director of the Company, the 2nd petitioner herein
seeking certain information with regard to the report which had
observed that the drug manufactured by it was not of standard
quality. This was replied to by the Company on 5-09-2012
denying the fact that the sample was "Not of standard quality"
with respect of "Assay for Folic Acid".
CRL.P No. 6919 of 2022
5. On 8.10.2013, the Drugs Inspector submitted details of
investigation    to   the    Drugs     Controller  seeking    his
permission/sanction to prosecute the Company and the other
petitioners herein under the provisions of the Act. Four years
and 2 months after submission of the said requisition seeking
sanction, the Drugs Controller permits institution of prosecution
against the petitioners in terms of his communication dated
8-12-2017. On receipt of the said sanction, the Drugs Inspector
registers a private complaint invoking Section 200 of the
Cr.P.C. against the petitioners alleging contravention of Section
18(a)(1) which is punishable under Section 27(d) of the Act.
Along with the complaint, an application seeking condonation of
delay under Section 473 of the Cr.P.C. read with Section 5 of
the Limitation Act was also filed. On 20th March, 2018, the
concerned Court i.e., the Special Court for Economic Offences
condoned the delay of 4 years and 10 months and takes
cognizance of the offence.
6. Being aggrieved by the order taking cognizance and
issuing of summons to the petitioners, the petitioners knocked
CRL.P No. 6919 of 2022
the doors of the Sessions Court in Criminal Revision Petition
No.323 of 2018 on both i.e., against allowing the application
seeking condonation of delay and taking of cognizance. The
revision was partly allowed by accepting the application for
condonation of delay and rejecting the order taking cognizance
with a further direction to the trial Court to proceed in
accordance with law. It is this order of the learned Sessions
Judge and the order which condoned the delay are called in
question in the present proceedings. In effect, the entire
proceedings in C.C.No.39 of 2018 are called in question.
7. Heard Sri Pramod Nair,        learned Senior    counsel
appearing for the petitioners and Smt. K.P.Yashodha, learned
High Court Government Pleader for the respondent.
8. The learned senior counsel Sri Pramod Nair would
contend that the fact of condoning delay or taking cognizance
or even the order of the learned Sessions Judge permitting trial
are all acts without jurisdiction, as the limitation in terms of
Section 468 Cr.P.C. was long over in the case at hand.      The
offence alleged is under Section 27(d) of the Act which
CRL.P No. 6919 of 2022
mandates punishment for a maximum term of imprisonment of
two years, and the limitation would run from the date on which
the Drugs Inspector receives the sample from the Laboratory,
which was on 21-07-2012. The complaint being registered on
2-01-2018 is close to 5 years and 7 months after such receipt
and would, therefore, contend that the entire proceedings are
vitiated on the ground of it being without jurisdiction.
9. On the other hand, the learned High Court Government
Pleader would seek to justify the action of registering the
complaint after 5 years and 7 months from 21.07.2012 on the
ground that the Drugs Inspector was awaiting sanction from
the hands of the Drugs Controller as obtaining under Section
33M of the Act and would submit that the issue stands covered
by the judgments rendered by the Apex Court in the cases of
UDAI SHANKAR AWASTHI v. STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH
AND ANOTHER – Criminal Appeal No.61 of 2013 decided
on    9-01-2013     and  RAKESH     KUMAR      JAIN    v. STATE
CRL.P No. 6919 of 2022
10. Contra to the said submission, the learned senior
counsel appearing for the petitioners takes this Court through
the Act to contend that sanction/permission would become
necessary only in certain circumstances as obtaining sanction
under Section 33M of the Act is not necessary in every
11. I have given my anxious consideration to the
submissions made by the respective learned counsel and
perused the material on record. In furtherance whereof, the
only issue that falls for my consideration is whether the
impugned proceedings are hit by Section 468 of the Cr.P.C.
12. The afore-narrated facts are not in dispute. The link
in the chain of events, narrated hereinbefore, are also not in
dispute and are, therefore, not reiterated. To begin with, the
receipt of report of sample from the Drugs Testing Laboratory
would suffice. The sample was sent to the Laboratory by the
Drugs Inspector on 5-01-2012. 6 months thereafter i.e., on
21.07.2012 the report of the Laboratory is received at the
hands of the Drugs Inspector terming it to be “not of
CRL.P No. 6919 of 2022
standard quality” for “Assay for Folic Acid”. On receipt of
the report, the complaint ought to have been registered by the
Drugs Inspector, but he chose to seek sanction/permission for
registration of crime that too after about a year of receipt of
sample i.e., on 8-10-2013. The authority which was competent
to   sanction    i.e.,   the   Drugs     Controller    accorded     such
sanction/permission on 8-12-2017. By then it was 5 years and
5 months after receipt of the sample from the hands of the
Laboratory. The Drugs Inspector registers the crime invoking
Section 200 of Cr.P.C. on 2-01-2018 which is 5 years and 6
months after receipt of the sample for offence punishable under
Section 27(d) of the Act.
13. Section 27 of the Act reads as follows:
“27. Penalty for manufacture, sale, etc., of drugs in
contravention of this Chapter.—Whoever, himself or by any
other person on his behalf, manufactures for sale or for
distribution, or sells, or stocks or exhibits or offers for sale or
(a)    any drug deemed to be adulterated under Section 17-A
or spurious under Section 17-B and which when used by
any person for or in the diagnosis, treatment,
mitigation, or prevention of any disease or disorder is
likely to cause his death or is likely to cause such harm
on his body as would amount to grievous hurt within the
meaning of Section 320 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of
1860), solely on account of such drug being adulterated
CRL.P No. 6919 of 2022
or spurious or not of standard quality, as the case may
be, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than ten years but which may
extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable
to fine which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees or
three times value of the drugs confiscated, whichever is
Provided that the fine imposed on and released from,
the person convicted under this clause shall be paid, by
way of compensation, to the person who had used the
adulterated or spurious drugs referred to in this clause:
Provided further that where the use of the adulterated
or spurious drugs referred to in this clause has caused
the death of a person who used such drugs, the fine
imposed on and realised from, the person convicted
under this clause, shall be paid to the relative of the
person who had died due to the use of the adulterated
or spurious drugs referred to in this clause.
Explanation.—For the purposes of the second proviso,
the expression “relative” means—
(i)    spouse of the deceased person; or
(ii)   a minor legitimate son, and unmarried legitimate
daughter and a widowed mother; or
(iv)   if wholly dependent on the earnings of the
deceased person at the time of his death, a son or
a daughter who has attained the age of eighteen
(v)    any person, if wholly or in part, dependent on the
earnings of the deceased person at the time of his
(a)   the parent; or
(b)   a minor brother or an unmarried sister; or
(c)   a widowed daughter-in-law; or
(e)   a minor child of a pre-deceased son; or
(f)    a minor child of a pre-deceased daughter
where no parent of the child is alive; or
(g)    the paternal grandparent if no parent of the
CRL.P No. 6919 of 2022
(i)     deemed to be adulterated under Section 17-A,
but not being a drug referred to in clause (a), or
(ii)    without a valid licence as required under clause
(c) of Section 18,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
shall not be less than three years but which may extend
to five years and with fine which shall not be less than
one lakh rupees or three times the value of the drugs
confiscated, whichever is more:
Provided that the Court may, for any adequate and
special reasons to be recorded in the judgment, impose
a sentence of imprisonment for a term of [less than
three years and of fine of less than one lakh rupees;
(c) any drug deemed to be spurious under Section 17-B, but
not being a drug referred to in clause (a) shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not
less than seven years but which may extend to
imprisonment for life and with fine which shall not be
(sic less than) three lakh rupees or three times the
value of the drugs confiscated, whichever is more:
Provided that the Court may, for any adequate and
special reasons, to be recorded in the judgment, impose
a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than
seven years but not less than three years and of fine of
less than one lakh rupees;
(d) any drug, other than a drug referred to in clause
(a) or clause (b) or clause (c), in contravention of
any other provision of this Chapter or any rule
made thereunder, shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less
than one year but which may extend to two
years and with fine which shall not be less than
twenty thousand rupees:
Provided that the Court may for any adequate
and special reasons to be recorded in the
CRL.P No. 6919 of 2022
judgment impose a sentence of imprisonment for
a term of less than one year.”
The offence that is made punishable is under Section 27(d) of
the Act. Section 27(d) of the Act mandates that contravention
of any other provision of this chapter or any rule made there
under shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
shall not be less than one year but which may extend to 2
years. Therefore, the maximum punishment that would become
imposable upon one being proved guilty of offence under
Section 27(d) of the Act would be for a period of two years. It
is now germane to notice Section 468 of the Cr.P.C., it runs as
“468. Bar to taking cognizance after lapse of the
period of limitation.—(1) Except as otherwise provided
elsewhere in this Code, no Court shall take cognizance of an
offence of the category specified in sub-section (2), after the
expiry of the period of limitation.
(2) The period of limitation shall be—
(a)    six months, if the offence is punishable with fine
(b)    one year, if the offence is punishable with
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one
(c)    three years, if the offence is punishable with
imprisonment for a term exceeding one year
but not exceeding three years.
(3) For the purposes of this section, the period of
limitation, in relation to offences which may be tried together,
shall be determined with reference to the offence which is
punishable with the more severe punishment or, as the case
may be, the most severe punishment.”
(emphasis supplied)
Section 468 of the Cr.P.C. bars the concerned Court from
taking cognizance after lapse of the period of limitation and the
period of limitation is mandated to be one year if the offence is
punishable with imprisonment for a term not exceeding one
year and three years if the offence is punishable with
imprisonment for a term exceeding one year but not exceeding
three years. Therefore, the case would fall within Section 468
of the Cr.P.C.     In the teeth of the afore-quoted provisions of
both the Act and the Cr.P.C. the facts are to be considered. The
report of the Laboratory comes to the hands of the Drugs
Inspector on 21-07-2012, the limitation according to Section
27(d) of the Act would expire on 20-07-2014. The complaint is
registered on 2-01-2018, 3 years and 8 months after the period
of limitation was over. Cognizance was taken by the learned
Magistrate on 20-03-2018 by condoning the delay in registering
CRL.P No. 6919 of 2022
the crime, notwithstanding the fact that such an order would
run counter to Section 468 of the Cr.P.C.
14.   The ground on which condonation of delay was
sought was that that the Drugs Inspector who was to register
the complaint was awaiting sanction/permission from the hands
of the Drugs Controller for registration of the crime and it is in
the process of seeking sanction/permission 5 years and 7
months     had  passed  by   and,     therefore, the   delay  was
condonable. While submitting justification for condonation of
delay, the learned High Court Government Pleader seeks to
take support of Section 33M of the Act. It therefore becomes
germane to notice Section 33M of the Act. Section 33M of the
Act forms a part of Chapter IV-A of the Act. The applicability
under Chapter IV-A of the Act and Section 33M of the Act read
CRL.P No. 6919 of 2022
33-B. Application of Chapter IV-A.—This Chapter
shall apply only to 255[Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs].
“33-M.      Cognizance       of      offences.—(1)       No
prosecution under this Chapter shall be instituted
except by an Inspector with the previous sanction of the
authority specified under sub-section (4) of Section 33-
(2) No Court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate
or of a Judicial Magistrate of the first class shall try an offence
punishable under this Chapter.”
Section 33B of the Act makes Chapter IV-A applicable to certain
drugs which are Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani.             Section 33M of
the Act deals with taking of cognizance of offences which
mandates that no prosecution under this Chapter shall be
instituted except by an Inspector with the previous sanction of
the authority specified under sub-section (4) of Section 33G of
the Act. Section 33M of the Act comes under Chapter-IVA.
Chapter IVA exclusively deals with the provisions relating to
Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs.            Section 33M of the Act
forms part of Chapter IVA which deals with the aforesaid drugs.
Therefore, Section 33M of the Act cannot but be read to be for
the purpose of those drugs enumerated in the said Chapter.
CRL.P No. 6919 of 2022
Sanction under Section 33G of the Act for registration of the
crime or cognizance by the concerned court under Section 33M
of the Act would only be for enumerated drugs in Chapter IVA.
Section 33B of the Act makes entire Chapter IVA to become
applicable only to Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs. An
unmistakable inference that would flow from a perusal of the
provisions    extracted  hereinabove   would  be   that  for    a
prosecution to be initiated under Section 27(d) of the Act,
sanction would be required only if the drugs would be either
Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani. Section 33M of the Act mandates
so only if the drugs are those which come within the Chapter.
15. The drugs in the case at hand are not the ones which
are either Ayurvedic, Siddha or Unani. They are allopathic
drugs and therefore, Section 33M of the Act on the face of it, is
inapplicable to the fact situation. The sheet anchor of the
learned High Court Government Pleader to lend support to the
enormous delay in registering the complaint taking recourse of
Section 33M of the Act would thus tumble down. There was
absolutely no necessity to await sanction/permission from the
CRL.P No. 6919 of 2022
Drugs Controller to register the complaint as the legal sample
of the drug that was drawn was not of either Ayurvedic, Siddha
or Unani. If the Drugs Inspector has by taking recourse to a
wrong provision of law sought sanction from the hands of the
Drugs Controller to register prosecution, it cannot be said to be
condonable as it was a question of jurisdiction. The statutory
bar that kicks in terms of Section 468 of the Cr.P.C. could not
have been condoned by both the Courts as it gets at the root of
the matter.
16. It is not the date on which the Court takes cognizance
of the offence, that would become applicable for the rigours of
Section 468 of the Cr.P.C. to operate, but the date on which
the crime comes to be registered. In the case at hand, the
crime itself is registered after 5 years and 7 months of receipt
of report of the sample from the hands of the Laboratory.
Therefore, such delay which generates statutory bar could not
have been condoned on the specious plea of the prosecution
awaiting unnecessary sanction or permission on a misreading of
the statute. Therefore, the entire proceedings right from
registration of the crime are rendered unsustainable for they
CRL.P No. 6919 of 2022
are all without jurisdiction, only in the teeth of Section 468 of
17. In so far as the judgments relied on by the learned
High Court Government Pleader are concerned, they are all
distinguishable on facts of those cases without much ado. The
Apex Court in the case of Udai Shankar Awasthi (supra) has
no doubt held that in exceptional circumstances, the Court can
condone the delay. The Apex Court was not considering or
interpreting the statutory provision akin to or even Section 468
Cr.P.C. The other judgment also follows suit. The issue in the
case at hand is to be considered on the bedrock of the statutes
which have not been interpreted by the Apex Court in the
aforesaid judgments. Therefore, those judgments would lend
no assistance to the learned High Court Government Pleader.
18.   For  the   reasons     rendered  supra,  it  becomes
necessary to direct the competent authority to register the
crime in such cases, in quick succession and not resort to red
tapism and let the alleged guilty go scot-free on the plea of
CRL.P No. 6919 of 2022
limitation. The Authority should also necessarily peruse and
understand the statute for registration of crimes in such
matters, as delay will defeat the very object of penal action
under the statute and it is always said that “procrastination
is the thief of time”
19. For the aforesaid reasons, the following:
I. The Criminal Petition is allowed.
II. The order dated 31st March, 2022 passed by
the Principal City Civil and Sessions Judge at
Bangalore in Criminal Revision Petition No.323
of 2018 as also the order dated 20th March,
2018 passed by the Presiding Officer, Special
Court for Economic Offices, Bangalore in
Criminal Miscellaneous No.1 of 2018 stands
quashed.