The petitioner is the accused in Crime No.59/2023
of the Ottapalam Police Station. The offences alleged
against the petitioner are under Section 75 of the
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children)
Act, 2015 and Sections 7,8,10,9(l),9(m),9(n) of the
Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012
2.     The victim in the said case is none other
than the son of the petitioner herein, who is aged
ten years. The allegation against the petitioner is
that while the petitioner was given interim custody
of the child as per the order passed by the Family
Court, Ottapalam and when he was interacting with the
child by sitting in his car parked in front of the
Family       Court,  the petitioner allegedly shown nude
photographs of the victim, which were taken while he
was a small kid and also touched inappropriately with
sexual intent on the private parts of the victim.
This application for Anticipatory Bail is submitted
B.A. No.1193 of 2023                 3
by     the      petitioner     in   such   circumstances      as  he
apprehends arrest.
3.     Heard Sri. S. Rajeev, the learned counsel for
the     petitioner       and   Sri.Sreejith    V.S.,    the  learned
Public Prosecutor of the State.
4.     The      specific    contention     of    the   learned
counsel        for    the  petitioner    is   that   this   case  is
falsely foisted against the petitioner to deprive him
of the opportunity to interact with the child. It is
pointed        out    that   certain   litigations      between  the
petitioner and his wife are pending before the Family
Court,       Ottapalam,      for  dissolution     of  the   marriage
between        them    and  regarding    custody    of   the  child.
According to him, even though various orders were
passed       by     the  learned   Judge   of   the   Family   Court
granting permission to interact with the child and
also giving overnight custody of the child with the
petitioner for a short period, none of the aforesaid
orders was complied with. The petitions submitted at
the      instance       of    the   petitioner     for    initiating
B.A. No.1193 of 2023                 4
appropriate            proceedings      against    his    wife   for
violating such orders are pending before the Family
Court. The present crime was registered with false
allegations,             much     belatedly,       when     coercive
proceedings against the wife of the petitioner for
violating          the   orders   passed    by   the  Family   Court
became imminent.
5.     On      the   other    hand,    the   learned    Public
Prosecutor would oppose the aforesaid contentions by
relying        on    the   contents    of  the   First  Information
Statement and the statement of the victim recorded
under Section 164 of the Cr.PC. It was pointed out
that      there        are   specific     allegations    of   sexual
assault, which would attract the offences alleged in
the F.I.R. The matter is now under investigation, and
therefore if the petitioner is granted anticipatory
bail, it would adversely affect the progress of the
investigation,            and   the     dismissal    of   the   bail
application           was    sought     by   the   learned    Public
Prosecutor in such circumstances.
B.A. No.1193 of 2023                 5
6.     After going through the materials placed on
record and hearing the contentions raised from either
side, I am of the view that, before going into the
rival contentions of the parties, it is necessary to
examine the sequence of events which ultimately led
to the registration of the FIR.
7.     The petitioner and his wife are Engineering
graduates and IT professionals. The marriage between
them was solemnized on 25.12.2010, and in the said
wedlock, a boy child was born, who is now aged ten
years.       It    appears   that   with   the    passage   of   time,
there      occurred      certain   matrimonial      discord   between
the     husband       and   the   wife,   and    according    to   the
petitioner, his wife was reluctant to come and reside
along       with      the   petitioner,     who    was   working    at
Banglore.          In   such    circumstances,      the   petitioner
submitted         OP   No.308/2017     before   the   Family   Court,
Ottapalam, for restitution of conjugal rights. The
aforesaid          OP   was   ultimately    disposed     of   as   per
Annexure-II judgment based on the settlement between
the parties. The terms of the settlement were to the
B.A. No.1193 of 2023                 6
effect that, as soon as the academic year is over,
the wife of the petitioner shall join the petitioner
in Bangalore after obtaining the transfer certificate
of the boy from the school from which he was studying
at the relevant time.
8.         However,    even    though   the  said   original
petition         was   disposed   of   based  on  such  terms  and
conditions of settlement, the same was never complied
with. The petitioner was even deprived of interaction
with the child. In such circumstances, the petitioner
submitted OP No.668/2022 for dissolution of marriage
before       the     Family   Court,   Ottapalam,   which  is  now
pending        consideration.      As   the  petitioner   was  not
given custody of the child and even the interaction
with the child was denied, the petitioner submitted
another              original      petition       numbered      as
OP(G&W)No.726/2022 before the Family Court, Ottapalam
seeking custody of the minor child. Along with the
said Original Petition, I.A.No.2/2022 was filed for
passing an interim order to grant interim custody of
the minor child for two days on alternate weekends of
B.A. No.1193 of 2023                 7
every      month,      five   days   during   Onam   and   Christmas
holidays         and    one   month    during   mid-summer    school
9.     While considering the aforesaid application,
on    14.11.2022,         an  order   was   passed  by   the  Family
Court in IA No.2/2022 permitting the petitioner to
have interaction with the child on 26.11.2022 and
3.12.2022 from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. To have such an
interaction, the wife was directed to produce the
child before the Family Court on those dates, with a
direction to hand over the child to the petitioner.
In compliance with the said direction, the child was
produced,          and   the   petitioner    interacted    with  the
child while sitting in his car parked in front of the
10. While        so,   the   petitioner's    wife   agreed  to
give overnight custody of the child for three days
during        Christmas       vacation.     Based   on    the   said
understanding,           the    hearing    of   I.A.No.2/2022    was
advanced. Thereupon the Family Court passed an order
B.A. No.1193 of 2023                 8
on 29.12.2022. Taking note of the arrangements agreed
between         the     parties,    the   Family    Court    granted
overnight custody of the child from 31.12.2022 at
10.30 a.m. to 4 p.m. on 2.1.2023. Annexure-VI is the
order      passed      by   the  learned   Judge   wherein   it  was
observed by the learned Judge that the interaction
between the petitioner and the child on 26.11.2022,
3.12.2022, 10.12.2022 and 17.12.2022 were conducted
smoothly          and    without   any   complaints.     The   court
granted overnight custody of the child by taking note
of the above facts. However, the petitioner's wife
did not produce the child as ordered in the Annexure-
VI    order       on   29.12.2022.    Thereupon,    the  petitioner
submitted          Annexure-VII    application     for   issuing   a
warrant        against     the   respondent    for   violating   the
order dated 29.12.2022. Consequently, the Annexure-X
order is seen passed in I.A.No.2/2022 by the learned
Judge on 12.01.2023. It is discernible from Annexure-
X order that, on that day, i.e. on 12.1.2023, the
child       was      produced    before    the   court,    and   the
Counsellor was directed to conduct counselling with
B.A. No.1193 of 2023                 9
the child on that day itself and file a report in
compliance with the same. Accordingly, counselling of
the child was conducted, and the Counsellor submitted
a report in that regard before the learned Judge.
11. In the Annexure-X order passed, the contents
of    the     report     of   the  Counsellor    are   referred   to,
which       would       indicate    that    the   child     was   not
interested          in  going   with   his  father,    but   yet  the
Counsellor opined that the child should be provided
with ample opportunity to interact with the other
people including the relatives or biological father.
Taking note of the above aspects, the learned Judge
in Annexure-X order directed that the petitioner and
his wife shall attend counselling on 17.01.2023, and
the child shall also be produced on that day. This
order      was       passed   with   the   intention     to   conduct
counselling            with    interactive     sessions      of   the
petitioner,           his   wife,   and   his   child.    Again,   on
19.1.2023, a further order was passed by the learned
Judge       granting       permission    to   the    petitioner    to
interact with the child on 28.1.2023 from 10 a.m. to
B.A. No.1193 of 2023                10
1 p.m. However, even though the petitioner's wife
brought the child to the Family Court that day, she
did not permit the petitioner to interact with the
child and took the child back. In connection with the
same,          the       petitioner     submitted     Annexure-XI
application for appropriate action against the wife
of the petitioner for willfully violating the order
passed by the Family Court on 19.1.2023, which is
also pending consideration.
12. Meanwhile, the Counsel who was appearing for
the petitioner's wife relinquished her vakkalath, and
in his place, a new counsel appeared. Thereafter,
Annexure-VII            objection     was   submitted    by   the
petitioner's wife on 2.2.2023. Annexure-VII contended
that the non-production of the child on 31.12.2022
before the Family Court in compliance with Annexure-
VI order passed by the Family Court dated 29.12.2022
was not willful. According to her, she noticed some
disturbance in the child's behaviour and therefore,
the     child       was   taken to   P.K.  Das  Medical   Science
Hospital,           Vaniamkulam    where   they    consulted   Dr
B.A. No.1193 of 2023               11
P.M.Dhanya,           Assistant    Professor,     Department    of
Psychiatry. It is stated that, during the course of
interaction with the doctor, the child stated that
while the petitioner had interaction with the child
as per the orders of the Family Court, the petitioner
had shown nude photographs of the child, which were
taken      when      he  was  a  small   kid   and  also   touched
inappropriately on the private parts of the child.
According          to   the  petitioner's    wife,    the   Doctor
advised          her    not  to   leave    the    child   in   the
petitioner's          custody.  It   is  also   stated   that  the
child was admitted to the hospital for treatment. It
is pointed out that it was due to the fact that the
child was undergoing treatment during the said dates
she could not produce the child before the Family
Court as ordered in Annexure-VI order.
13. In the said objection, it was also stated
that, in connection with the aforesaid allegations, a
crime      had      been  registered   by  the   police   for  the
offences mentioned above, and an investigation is now
ongoing. This application for anticipatory bail is
B.A. No.1193 of 2023                  12
submitted by the petitioner as he apprehends arrest
in    connection         with   the   crime    referred   to   in  the
aforesaid objection.
14. On going through the sequence of events as
revealed from the documents referred to above, I find
some     force       in  the   contentions     put   forward   by  the
learned         counsel     for   the    petitioner.    The    crucial
aspect to be noticed is that, as per the FIR, the
victim       was      subjected   to    sexual   assault    while  the
petitioner           interacted    with    the   child   as   per  the
orders passed by the Family Court. It is evident from
the records that the petitioner had interacted with
the child as per the various orders of the Family
Court       on       26.11.2022,     3.12.2022,     10.12.2022     and
17.12.2022. In Annexure-VI order passed by the Family
Court      on     29.12.2022,     it   is   categorically     observed
that      the     aforesaid     interactions      occurred    smoothly
without        any     complaints.     This   would   indicate    that
nobody has raised any complaints as to any sexual
assault from the part of the petitioner.
B.A. No.1193 of 2023                13
15. The mother of the victim indeed has a case
that      she     came    to know    about  the    sexual   assault
committed on her child when the child was taken to a
Psychiatrist and during such consultation with the
doctor. Annexure-IX is the report of the said doctor
pertaining to the interaction which she had with the
child and his mother. On perusal of the same, it can
be seen that there is no indication of any revelation
made by the child regarding any sexual assault by the
petitioner           herein.  Another    crucial    aspect   to  be
noticed in the report is that the child was admitted
on 31.12.2022 for further evaluation. After two days
after      the      admission,   the   mother   and  the   maternal
grandfather requested his discharge. Even though the
doctor was of the opinion that the treatment of the
child as an inpatient is necessary for a complete
assessment and psychotherapy sessions, the child was
discharged          against  the   medical    advice   due  to  the
compulsion           of  the   mother    of  the    victim.   While
considering this aspect, the crucial aspect about the
same is the timing of such admission and discharge.
B.A. No.1193 of 2023               14
As per Annexure-VI order passed by the Family Court,
the child was to be given to the custody of the
petitioner from 31.12.2022 to 3.1.2023. The child got
admitted on 31.12.2022 and got discharged against the
medical advice after two days, i.e. at the time of
the expiry of the period during which the child was
required to be given in custody of the petitioner.
Besides the same, the reason for the disturbance of
the child, as recorded in Annexure-IX, is reported to
be the ongoing legal issues in the family which got
aggravated          when  the  child  was  asked  to   meet  his
father.         No    allegation  or   information   of   sexual
assault committed by the father of the victim is seen
referred to in the aforesaid document, even though
the mother of the victim has a specific case in her
objection that it was the doctor who advised not to
allow the child with the father of the child upon
being informed of about sexual assault.
16. There is yet another aspect which creates a
shadow of doubt over the veracity of the allegations
against        the    petitioner.  Admittedly,  the   child  was
B.A. No.1193 of 2023              15
produced before the Family Court, and the petitioner
interacted with the child on various occasions during
November and December, 2022. In the Annexure-X order
passed by the Family Court, a reference was made by
the learned Judge as to the counselling of the child
conducted by the Counsellor and the report submitted
in    this       regard.   It  is   evident  that   before  the
Counsellor also, the child did not mention any sexual
atrocities committed by the petitioner.            Had such an
allegation been made, the counsellor would not have
opined that the child should have more opportunities
to     interact       with    his   biological   father.   This
counselling was conducted on 12.01.2023, whereas the
sexual assaults were allegedly committed on the dates
much before that. When taking into account all these
aspects, I am of the view that there is a shadow of
doubt with regard to the allegations raised in the
17. Apart from the above, on going through the
statements of the victim, one of the allegations is
that the petitioner had shown nude photographs of the
B.A. No.1193 of 2023                16
child himself, which were taken while he was very .
It is highly doubtful whether the said act by itself
would attract any offences under the POCSO Act. This
is because there is no allegation that the petitioner
had shown nude photographs of other persons. It is
also      true      that,   there  is   an   allegation    that  the
petitioner had touched on the private parts of the
child      with      sexual   intent.   At   the   moment,  what  is
available is a statement of the victim only, and in
the     facts       and   circumstances     of   this   case,  those
statement          is   doubtful.   When    all   the   sequence  of
events        which      led   to   the    FIR    are   taken   into
consideration, I am of the view that the denial of
anticipatory bail to the petitioner merely based on
such       a      doubtful     statement     is    not   safe.   The
possibility of tutoring the child cannot be ruled
18. The         learned    counsel     for    the   petitioner
brought          the    attention    of    this     Court   to   the
observations made by the Division Bench of this Court
in Suhara and Others v. Muhammed Jaleel [2019(2)KHC
B.A. No.1193 of 2023             17
596] [2019 (2) KLT 960] wherein it was observed as
“28. In our opinion, mere registration of a
crime under the provisions of the POCSO Act
against the parent of the ward is no
assurance to a Family Court that allegation
of sexual abuse made against him is nothing
but true. The allegation made against the
biological father could be true in rare
cases, but could be wholly false also. The
Family Court, before which such registration
of crime is proved must necessarily apply
its mind and endeavour to find out the true
circumstances     which    activised     the
registration rather than being allured by
the mere fact of registration. Unless a very
cautious approach is adopted by the Family
Court to ensure that information on which
crime was registered is not frivolous and
vexatious, many a innocent parent fighting
for custody of his own ward would be victim
of false implication of crimes under the
POCSO Act. There is a growing tendency in
the recent years to foist false crimes
against    the biological   father  alleging
sexual abuse of own child misusing the
provisions of the POCSO Act when serious
fight for custody of ward is pending
resolution before the Family Courts. The
Family Courts to whose notice registration
of crime under the POCSO Act is brought owe
an onerous responsibility to ensure that the
registration of crime against the parent is
not a ruse for defeating his legitimate
claim for custody of the ward. The Family
Courts ought to examine the outcome of
investigation of the crime placed before the
court and also take into consideration all
relevant facts and circumstances which would
B.A. No.1193 of 2023             18
help the Judge form a prima facie opinion as
to whether the allegation of sexual abuse of
the ward is baseless or not. Each case
requires to be approached and evaluated on
its own facts and we realise that no hard
and fast approach could be laid in this
respect at all. We do not mean to say that
Family Courts should disregard the materials
collected by the investigating agency in the
crime and hold a total independent enquiry
in order to get at the truth or veracity of
the allegation. We make it clear that unless
there are reliable materials capable enough
to convince the allegation of sexual abuse
to be well founded, mere registration of
crime shall not be reckoned as a ground for
rejecting the claim of the parent for
custody of the child.”
19. In         the aforesaid   decision,    this Court
highlighted the growing tendency of foisting false
cases against the biological father alleging sexual
abuse misusing the provisions of the POCSO Act. This
Court alerted the Family Courts by emphasizing the
necessity to adopt a conscious approach while dealing
with the allegation of offences under the POCSO Act
in cases where the custody of the child is under
serious litigation. The courts, while dealing with
the applications for bail, involving the offences of
the POCSO Act, allegedly committed by the accused
B.A. No.1193 of 2023                19
against their children, should take a very cautious
approach, particularly when the custody of the child
is under serious litigation between the parents. In
such      cases,      when  the   materials    placed   before   the
court evoke a reasonable suspicion as to the veracity
of the allegations, the courts should not hesitate to
invoke the powers under section 438 of the Cr.P.C.
What      is     at   stake   is   someone’s    personal    liberty,
integrity, dignity and sometimes, the life itself.
The power under section 438 is an important tool for
the     court      to  protect   the    personal   liberty   of  the
persons,         which   is   one   of   the   fundamental    rights
guaranteed under the Constitution of India.
20.         On perusal of the records, I am of the
view     that      there   is  some   possibility    of   this  case
coming under the said category.                  However, a final
conclusion cannot be arrived at this stage as the
matter is under investigation. The impression that
could       be     gathered    from    the   sequence    of   events
referred to above compels this court to take the view
that an order to protect the personal liberty of the
B.A. No.1193 of 2023                  20
petitioner is absolutely necessary. This Court cannot
ignore        the      trauma,    loss    of   dignity   and   other
difficulties which the petitioner, who is an educated
person without any criminal antecedents, has to face
if    he    is     compelled    to   undergo   detention   based  on
allegations which are under the shadow of a doubt.
If it is ultimately turned out that the allegations
are false, nobody can compensate for the loss that
may occur to a person due to such detention. As far
as the investigation of the case is concerned, the
effectiveness            can   be    ensured    by   directing   the
petitioner           to   surrender     before   the  Investigating
Officer        with     appropriate     conditions   to  ensure  his
cooperation with the same.
In such circumstances, this Bail Application is
disposed of with the following directions:
i)     The      petitioner    shall    surrender  before   the
Investigating Officer, within a period of two weeks
from today, for subjecting himself to interrogation;
ii) After interrogation, the petitioner shall be
B.A. No.1193 of 2023               21
released on bail on the very same day of surrender
upon      the       petitioner   executing   a   bond   for   Rs.
1,00,000/- (Rupees One Lakh only) with two sureties
each for the like sum, to the satisfaction of the
iii) The petitioner shall fully cooperate with
the     investigation,       including   subjecting   himself  to
the deemed police custody for recovery, if any, as
and when demanded;
iv) The         petitioner   shall   appear   before    the
Investigating Officer between 10.00 a.m and 11.00 a.m
every Saturday until the filing of the final report;
v)     The      petitioner   shall   appear   before    the
Investigating Officer as and when required;
vi) The petitioner shall not commit any offence
of similar nature while on bail.
vii) The petitioner shall not attempt to tamper
with the evidence or influence any witnesses or other
persons related to the investigation.
viii)         The   petitioner   shall   not    leave   the
country without the permission of the Jurisdictional
B.A. No.1193 of 2023               22
In      case     of  violation  of   any  of  the   above
conditions,           the   jurisdictional   Court   shall   be
empowered            to   consider    the    application    for
cancellation of bail, if any, and pass appropriate
orders in accordance with the law.