Counsel for Petitioner :- Varadraj Shreedutt Ojha,Purusottam Awasthi
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Gaurav Mehrotra
1.     Heard Sri Sandeep Dixit and Sri. Sanjay Bhasin, Senior Advo-
cates assisted by Sri V. S. Ojha, Sri. Amarjeet Singh Yadav and Sri Pu-
rushottam Advocates, the learned Counsel for the petitioners, Sri. Ra-
jesh Tiwari, the learned Additional Chief Standing Counsel for the
State-respondent and Sri Gaurav Mehrotra, the learned Counsel for
the opposite party no. 2, i.e. High Court of Judicature at Allahabad.
2.     The instant writ petition has been filed by the U. P. Judicial Ser-
vices Association and 39 others. Briefly stated, the petitioners case is
that presently the petitioner nos. 2 to 40 are working on the post of
Chief Judicial Magistrate. The year of recruitment of each of the peti-
tioners, the dates of their promotion on the post of Civil Judge (Senior
Division) and the respective places of their present posting has been
given in the petition in a tabular form. It has further been stated in the
writ petition that the services of petitioner nos. 2 to 40 were confirmed
3.     On 17.12.2020, this Court had issued an advertisement inviting
applications for filling up 98 vacancies of the Higher Judicial Service
for the recruitment year 2020 through direct recruitment from
amongst the eligible Advocates under 25% quota provided in Rule 6
(ii) of the U.P. Higher Judicial Service Rule 1975 (which will here-
inafter referred to as the ‘Rules of 1975’), out of which 87 were cur-
rent vacancies and 11 were unfilled vacancies of reserved category of
previous recruitment year. The petitioners have stated that as the quota
of direct recruitment as provided in Rule 6 (ii) of the Rules of 1975 is
25%, a total of 348 vacancies would be available in the recruitment
year 2020 for U. P. Higher Judicial Services and, therefore, after de-
ducting 11 posts of backlog quota from 65% of posts i.e. 226 posts, a
total of 215 posts out of 348 vacancies of Higher Judicial Services,
which occurred in the recruitment year 2020, are to be filled up by
promotion from amongst the Civil Judges (Senior Division).
4.     The U.P. Judicial Services Association (the petitioner no.1)
claims to have submitted a representation on 21.01.2021 to the Regis-
trar (Selection and Appointment) of this High Court stating that the
Judicial Officers in the Civil Judge (Senior Division) Cadre falling in
the Zone of consideration (three times of number of vacancies adver-
tised) who have completed more than two years of service in the Civil
Judge (Senior Division) Cadre, be permitted to appear in the suitabil-
ity test for promotion to the Higher Judicial Service Cadre to maintain
the quota for promotion as per the Rules of 1975 and to fill the current
vacancies, which will increase by the year 2022 due to retirements in
5.     On 30.05.2022, a notice has been issued by this Court stating
that the suitability test – 2020 for promotion of officers in U.P. Nyayik
Seva to U.P. Higher Judicial Services will be held on 11.06.2022. The
admit cards of suitability tests may be downloaded by the officers –
candidates. A list of 150 officers, who have completed three years’
service as on 31.12.2021 in the cadre of Civil Judge (Senior Division),
including the names of the officers who are working as Additional
District Judge (FTC), and are eligible to appear in the suitability test
2020 under Rule 22 (3) of the Rules of 1975 has been annexed with
the aforesaid notice. The petitioners have stated that there are 215 va-
cancies in the Higher Judicial Service for the recruitment year 2020
available for being filled up by promotion of Civil Judges (Senior Di-
vision) under Rule 5 (a) of the Rules of 1975 but the list issued on
30.05.2022 contains the names of only 150 eligible officers, which is
not in consonance with the provisions of Rule 20 (2) of the Rules of
1975. As per the petitioners, the fixation of the cut of date as
31.12.2021 and imposition of the condition of having completed three
years’ service as on 31.12.2021 in the cadre of Civil Judge (Senior Di-
vision) for eligibility to appear in the U. P. Higher Judicial Service
Suitability Test 2020 violates Rule 5 (a) of the Rules of 1975, as the
condition of having completed three years’ service in the cadre of
Civil Judge (Senior Division) has not been provided as an eligibility
condition in the aforesaid Rule. The promotions are to be made from
amongst the Civil Judges (Senior Division) on the basis of merit –
cum – seniority and passing the suitability test under Rule-5 (a) of the
Rules of 1975, without any reference to the length of their service.
6.     The petitioners have further stated that on 18.05.1985, a Full
Court Resolution had been passed by this Court providing that “no of-
ficer of the Nyayik Seva shall be appointed to any post in any capacity
in the Higher Judicial Service unless he has held the post of Civil
Judge / Chief Judicial Magistrate at least for three years and his work
and conduct has been satisfactory in all respect.” The petitioners have
submitted that at the time of passing of the aforesaid Resolution on
18.05.1985, there were only two sources of recruitment of Higher Ju-
dicial Service; (I) 15% direct recruitment from amongst the Advocates
and (II) 85% by promotion and no suitability test was provided for
promotion of any service candidates. As per the petitioners, this Reso-
lution has lost its efficacy and applicability since the Rules of 1975
were amended in the year 2007 and the aforesaid Resolution violates
of Rule 5 (a) of the Rules of 1975.
7.     The petitioners have further submitted that they have completed
more three years’ service as Civil Judges (Senior Division) as on
30.05.2022 and they have wrongly been left out from the list pub-
lished on 30.05.2022 against the provision contained in Rule 20 (2) of
the Rules of 1975 as the number of officers to be included in the list
for suitability test ought to have been four times of the number of va-
cancies earmarked for being filled up by promotion from the officers
of U. P. Nyayik Seva. As per the petitioners, the eligibility list pub-
lished on 30.05.2022 should consist of 860 candidates in view of Rule
20 (2) of Rules of 1975.
8.     The petitioners have prayed for quashing of the aforesaid Reso-
lution No. 2-B passed in the meeting of the Full Court held on
18.05.1985 as also quashing of the Resolution, if any, passed by the
Selection and Appointment Committee of this Court to the extent of
holding the petitioners no. 2 to 40 to be ineligible for being considered
for promotion under rule 22 (1) of the Rules of 1975 for the reason
that they have not completed three years of service on the post of
Civil Judge (Senior Division) as on 31.12.2021 and they have prayed
for a direction to the opposite parties to hold all the remaining Civil
Judges (Senior Division), including the petitioners, as eligible for ap-
pearing in U. P. Higher Judicial Service Suitability Test 2020. The pe-
titioners have further prayed for issuance of a direction to the opposite
parties to modify the notification dated 30.05.2022 so as to include the
names of the petitioners no. 2 to 40 as suitable for appearing for U.P.
9.     Per contra, Sri Gaurav Mehrotra, the learned counsel appearing
for the opposite party no. 2 – the Hon’ble High Court of Judicature at
Allahabad, has raised three-fold preliminary objections against the
maintainability of the writ petition. The first objection raised by Sri
Mehrotra is that the petitioner no.1 is an Association and the writ peti-
tion filed by an Association seeking relief for its members is not main-
tainable. To fortify his submission, he has placed reliance on a Full
Bench decision of this Court in the case of Umesh Chand Vinod Ku-
mar and others vs. Krishi Utpadan Mandi Samiti, Bharthana and
another, AIR 1984 All 46 wherein the question “whether an Associa-
tion or persons, registered or unregistered, can maintain a petition un-
der Article 226 of the Constitution of India for the enforcement of the
rights of its members as distinguished from the enforcement of its
own rights,” was answered in the following words: -
“The position appears to be that an association of persons, regis
tered or unregistered, can file a petition under Article 226 for
enforcement of the rights of its members as distinguished from
the enforcement of its own rights—
(1) In case members of such an association are themselves unable to
approach the court by reason of poverty, disability or socially or
economically disadvantaged position (“little Indians”).
(2) In case of a public injury leading to public interest litigation;
provided the association has some concern deeper than that of a
wayfarer or a busybody, i.e., it has a special interest in the subject-
matter.
(3) Where the rules or regulations of the association specifically au-
thorise it to take legal proceedings on behalf of its members, so that
any order passed by the court in such proceedings will be binding on
the members.
In other cases an association, whether registered or unregistered,
cannot maintain a petition under Article 226 for the enforcement or
protection of the rights of its members, as distinguished from the
enforcement of its own rights.”
9.     Sri Mehrotra submits that in the entire writ petition, there is no
pleading as to what is the legal character of the petitioner no. 1 Asso-
ciation indicating whether it is a juristic person or not; there is no plea
indicating that members of the petitioner no.1 – Association are un-
able to approach this Court themselves by reason of poverty, disability
or socially or economically disadvantageous position; on the contrary
the members of the petitioner no.1- Association are holding the post of
Civil Judges (Senior Division) and they cannot claim to fall in any
disadvantageous position. Sri Mehrotra submits that it is not a case in
which there is any allegation of a public injury. Neither the Rules or
Regulations of the Association have been brought on record nor is
there any pleading to the effect that the Rules or Regulations of the
Association authorize it to take legal proceedings on behalf of its
members. Sri Mehrotra has submitted that as per the Full Bench deci-
sion in the case of Umesh Chand Vinod Kumar (supra), the peti-
tioner no. 1 Association cannot maintain a petition under Article 226
of the Constitution of India for enforcement or protection of any of the
alleged rights of its members.
10.    Sri Sandeep Dixit, the learned Senior Advocate appearing for
the petitioners could not rebut the aforesaid submission of Sri Mehro-
tra and he proceeded to make submissions regarding the merits of the
claim of the petitioners.
11.     Keeping in view the law laid down by the Full Bench of this
Court in the case of Umesh Chand Vinod Kumar (supra), we are of
the considered opinion that the petitioner no.1 – Association has no
right to maintain the writ petition which has been filed for ventilating
the grievances of a class of its members.
12.    However, as there are 39 other petitioners also, who have ap-
proached this Court by joining in filing of the writ petition, we pro-
ceed to consider the other submissions made by the contesting parties.
13.    Sri Gaurav Mehrotra has raised the second preliminary objec-
tion against maintainability of the writ petition on the ground that it
seeks issuance of a writ of Mandamus directing the opposite parties to
hold all the remaining Civil Judges (Senior Division), including the
petitioners, as eligible to appear in U.P. Higher Judicial Services Suit-
ability Test 2020. The learned counsel representing the High Court has
submitted that only the petitioner no. 2 to 40 have approached this
Court for redressal of their grievances and the remaining Civil Judges
(Senior Division) have not joined in filing the writ petition and, there-
fore, the writ petition so far as the same relates to the other Civil
Judge (Senior Division), who have not approached this Court by filing
the writ petition, is not maintainable.
14.    We find substance in this objection as the petitioner numbers 2
to 40 cannot represent the remaining Civil Judges (Senior Division),
who have chosen not to file a Writ Petition and the petitioner numbers
2 to 40 have rightly not filed this Writ Petition in a representative ca-
pacity. Therefore, no relief can be sought in this Writ Petition on be-
half of the remaining Civil Judges (Senior Division), who have chosen
not to file a Writ Petition.
15.    A further preliminary objection of Sri Mehrotra is that the writ
petition seeking issuance of a writ of mandamus in respect of the peti-
tioner nos. 2 to 40 is also not maintainable for the reason that for
maintaining a petition for issuance of a writ of mandamus, it is a pre-
condition that the person seeking issuance of a writ should have first
approached the authority concerned by making a demand of redressal
of his grievances by submitting a suitable representation and he can
approach this Court only after the demand is refused or no decision is
taken in respect of the demand. As the petitioner nos. 2 to 40 have ap-
proached this Court directly by filing a writ petition under Article 226
of the Constitution of India for seeking issuance of a writ of man-
damus without submitting any representation for redressal of their
grievances, the writ petition filed by them, is not maintainable.
16.    Refuting this preliminary objection, Sri. Sandeep Dixit, the
learned Senior Advocate representing the petitioners, has submitted
that the petitioners have prayed for issuance of a Writ of Certiorari
quashing the Resolution No. 2-B passed in the meeting of the Full
Court held on 18.05.1985 as also quashing of the Resolution, if any,
passed by the Selection and Appointment Committee of this Court to
the extent of holding the petitioners no. 2 to 40 to be ineligible for be-
ing considered for promotion under rule 22 (1) of the Rules of 1975
for the reason that they have not completed three years of service on
the post of Civil Judge (Senior Division) as on 31.12.2021 and they
have sought issuance of a Writ of Mandamus to the opposite parties to
hold all the remaining Civil Judges (Senior Division), including the
petitioners, as eligible for appearing in U. P. Higher Judicial Service
Suitability Test 2020 only as a consequence of issuance of the Writ of
Certiorari and in such circumstances, the bar pleaded by the learned
Counsel for the High Court would not apply.
17.    We find force in the aforesaid submission of Sri. Dixit and this
preliminary objection raised by Sri. Mehrotra that the Writ Petition for
the relief of issuance of a writ of Mandamus is not maintainable for
the reason that the petitioner numbers 2 to 40 have not first ap-
proached the authority concerned by making a representation, cannot
be accepted. A Writ of Mandamus can be claimed as a consequential
relief to issuance of a Writ of Certiorari and absence of a prior de-
mand and its refusal by the authority concerned would not be a bar
against the maintainability of the Writ Petition in such circumstances.
18.    Now we proceed to examine the further submissions made by
the learned Counsel for the petitioners. Sri. Sandeep Dixit has submit-
ted that originally Rule 5 of the Rules of 1975 provided as follows: -
5. Sources of recruitment – The recruitment to the service shall be
(a) by direct recruitment of pleaders and advocates of not less than
seven years’ standing on the first day of January next following the
year in which the notice inviting applications is published;
(b) by promotion of confirmed members of the Uttar Pradesh Nyayik
Sewa (hereinafter referred to as the Nyayik Sewa), who have put in
not less than seven years service to be computed on the first day of
January next following the year in which the notice inviting applica-
tion is published…….
19.    In the case of All India Judges’ Association and others vs.
Union of India and others, (2002) 4 SCC 247, the Hon’ble Supreme
Court had issued the following directions for recruitment to the
Higher Judicial Service i.e. the cadre of District Judges: -
“28. As a result of the aforesaid, to recapitulate, we direct that re-
cruitment to the Higher Judicial Service i.e. the cadre of District
(1)(a) 50 per cent by promotion from amongst the Civil Judges (Se-
nior Division) on the basis of principle of merit-cum-seniority and
passing a suitability test;
(b) 25 per cent by promotion strictly on the basis of merit through
limited competitive examination of Civil Judges (Senior Division)
having not less than five years’ qualifying service; and
(c) 25 per cent of the posts shall be filled by direct recruitment from
amongst the eligible advocates on the basis of the written and viva
voce test conducted by respective High Courts.
(2) Appropriate rules shall be framed as above by the High Courts
as early as possible.”
20.    Sri. Dixit has submitted that the Rules of 1975 were amended
after passing of the aforesaid judgment in All India Judges Association
case by means of a notification dated 09.01.2007 so as to provide as
5. Source of recruitment- The recruitment to the service shall be
made (a) by promotion from amongst the Civil Judges (Senior Divi-
sion) on the basis of principle of merit-cum-seniority and passing a
suitability test.
(b) by promotion strictly on the basis of merit through limited com-
petitive examination of Civil Judges (Senior Division) having not
less than five years qualifying service;
(c) by direct recruitment from amongst the Advocates of not less
than seven years standing as on the last date fixed for the submis-
sion of application forms.
21.    He has submitted that although Sub-rule (b) and (c) of Rule-5 of
the Rules of 1975 make a reference to a minimum period of experi-
ence as an eligibility condition, Sub-rule (a) which contains the provi-
sion for making recruitment by promotion from amongst the Civil
Judges (Senior Division) on the basis of merit cum seniority and pass-
ing a suitability test, does not contain any reference to any number of
years put in service as an eligibility condition and he has further sub-
mitted that after the amendment made in Rule 5, the Resolution dated
18.05.1985 passed by the Full Court providing that no officer of the
Nyayik Seva shall be appointed to any post in any capacity in Higher
Judicial Service unless he has held the post of Civil Judge / Chief Ju-
dicial Magistrate at least for three years, has lost its efficacy as the
same runs contrary to the provision contained in Rule 5 (a) of Rules of
22.    On the contrary Sri Gaurav Mehrotra has submitted that Sub-
rule (3) of Rule 20 of the Rules of 1975 provides that “the Selection
Committee shall, after examining the record of the officers included in
the list prepared under Sub-rule (2) of the Rules of 1975 make a pre-
liminary selection of the Officers who in its opinion are fit to be
appointed on the basis of merit-cum-seniority. In assessing the
merit of a candidate the Selection Committee have due regard to his
service record, ability, character and seniority…………”. (Emphasis
23.    On the basis of written instructions received, Sri. Gaurav
Mehrotra has submitted that the Hon'ble Selection and Appointment
Committee of this Court in its meeting held on 30.05.2022 has been
pleased to resolve as under: -
".....in light of earlier resolution dated 18.05.1985 of Full Court re-
solved to fix the cut off date for determining the qualifying service as
31.12.2021. The Committee deliberated over the matter and is of the
view that since the determination of vacancies for recruitment of
U.P. H.J.S.-2020 accounts for vacancies occurring from 01.01.2020
to 31.12.2021, there is no occasion to go beyond that date to fix any
date to determine the qualifying service in Civil Judge (Senior Divi-
sion) cadre for consideration of their promotion to Higher Judicial
cadre. Moreover, any relaxation in the determination of qualifying
service of three years would result in higher number of vacancies in
the Civil Judge (Senior Division) who possess the requisite qualifi-
cation qualifying service in that cadre to be considered for promo-
tion to the cadre of Civil Judge (Senior Division). Such a scenario
would bring about a situation where the cadre of Civil Judge (Senior
Division) will collapse owing to huge number of vacant Courts.
Thus, the Committee resolves to reject the request made in the repre-
sentation."
24.     Sri. Mehrotra has further submitted that in paragraph 40 of the
judgment in the case of All India Judges’ Association (Supra), the
Hon’ble Supreme Court categorically directed that: -
“40. Any clarification that may be required in respect of any matter
arising out of this decision will be sought only from this Court. The
proceedings, if any, for implementation of the directions given in this
judgment shall be filed only in this Court and no other court shall en-
tertain them.”
25.    The scope of interference by this Court while deciding the peti-
tion for issuance of Certiorari is limited to examining the decision
making process by examining as to whether the decision making
process suffers from any illegality or infirmity. The correctness of the
decision cannot be examined by this Court while deciding a petition
for issuance of a writ of Certiorari. The decision can only be examined
on the touchstone of reasonableness and arbitrariness but the suffi-
ciency or correctness of the reasons cannot be gone into by this Court.
A writ of Certiorari cannot be issued where there can be two opinions
about the correctness of the decision.
27.    After giving a careful consideration to submissions advanced on
behalf of the contesting parties, we find that the list of only those Civil
Judges (Senior Division) who have completed three years' service has
been prepared treating them eligible to appear in the Suitability Test
2022 under Rule 22 (3) in furtherance of decision of the Selection and
Appointment Committee which has formed a reasoned opinion in ex-
ercise of its power under Rule 20 (3) that only those officers are fit to
be considered for appointment on the basis of merit-cum-seniority
who have completed a minimum period of three years on the post of
Civil Judge (Senior Division). This decision has been taken by the Se-
lection and Appointment Committee keeping into consideration that
the vacancies had occurring up to 31.12.2021 and it was felt not to be
proper to go beyond that date to fix any date to determine the qualify-
ing service in Civil Judge (Senior Division) cadre for consideration of
their promotion to Higher Judicial cadre. The Committee was also of
the opinion that by inclusion of Civil Judges (Senior Division) who
have not completed three years on the said post would result in higher
number of the Courts of Civil Judge (Senior Division) falling vacant
and this would create a situation where the cadre of Civil Judge (Se-
nior Division) will collapse owing to huge number of vacant Courts.
Therefore, the list of officers prepared under Rule 22 (3) of the Rules
of 1975 consequent to the aforesaid decision, needs no interference by
this Court in exercise of its Writ jurisdiction.
28.    Moreover, so far as the submission of the petitioners that the de-
cision is violative of Rule 5A of the Rules 1975 which was framed in
furtherance of the judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case
of All India Judges Association (supra), it is significant to mention
that in the same judgment, the Hon'ble Supreme Court had directed
“any clarification that may be required in respect of any matter
arising out of this decision will be sought only from this Court. The
proceeding if any for implementation of the directions given in this
judgment shall be filed only in this Court and no other Court shall
entertain them.”
29.    The petitioners are in effect seeking implementation of the di-
rections issued by the Hon'ble Supreme Court contained in paragraph
28 (1) (a) of the judgment in the case of All India Judges Association
(supra). In view of the prohibition contained in paragraph 40 of the
aforesaid judgment, this Court has been restrained from entertaining
the proceedings for implementation of directions given in the judg-
ment and, therefore, we are of the considered opinion that this Court
cannot entertain the present writ petition.
30.    Accordingly, the writ petition is not maintainable before this
Court and is dismissed as such. However, there shall no order as to
costs.