We have heard the elaborate submissions on the basic plea of
bail.               We may notice that in terms of what had been stated earlier,
the supplementary charge sheet was to be filed in March, 2020.                    The
present bail application arose because that supplementary charge
sheet was not filed and the appellant has remained in custody for
over two years.
On   18.12.2020,   we  had  heard   the   learned  counsel  for  the
parties               at  some   length  and   noted   the   submissions  of  learned
Solicitor General that further three months’ time is required in
the same conspectus for which time had earlier been granted upto
March, 2020. The development now is that the said supplementary
charge sheet has been filed.
Learned Solicitor General strongly opposes the grant of bail
on the principles of a triple test.                    His submission is that prima
case   is  made  out  against   the   appellant,  the  amounts  in
question have not been brought back by the appellant, some of the
co-accused               are   absconding   and  there   is   a  possibility  of  the
appellant   fleeing   from   justice   in  view   of  his  strong  connects
outside the country.
Learned senior counsel appearing for the complainants have
also strongly opposed the grant of bail and in the alternative have
suggested that the appellant must bring in some money and the
affidavit filed in pursuance to the last order about the assets in
his custody is not a fair disclosure of the assets.
On the other hand, learned senior counsel for the appellant
contends that the appellant has really no assets in his control and
other   people   are    absconding,     that  cannot    be   a   reason  to
indefinitely keep the appellant in custody. It is her submission
that the appellant is being made a scapegoat arising from what
appeared in public domain in pursuance to what has been called
“paradise papers” where the conduct of the management was being
called   into  question    in   respect   of  mobilization    of  resources
through offshore entities.
On a Court question, it is accepted that whatever is alleged
against the appellant was continuing for almost 4-5 years but the
reason given by the counsel for the complainants is that he was a
man of trust and he has betrayed that trust.
We   may  notice   that   the  endeavor   of   the  learned  Solicitor
General who submits that the attempt is to bring the appellant to
accountability but then in the present case it cannot be disputed
that it was not one of public money being involved but monies of
the concerned corporate entities which are in question.
We have given a thought to the matter in issue and in view of
the investigation being complete and supplementary charge sheet
being filed, we are inclined to grant bail to the appellant who has
been in custody for over two years subject to certain terms and
conditions.   We would not like to further comment on the merits of
the  controversy   as  that  has  the  propensity  to   affect  trial.
Suffice to say that that the assets in the country of the appellant
are attached, his passport is stated to be with the complainant
company which shall be deposited in Court and no public money is
involved.   The fact that the appellant is being called to trial for
criminal offences is a matter which would be adjudicated during the
criminal trial and the only endeavour can be is to ensure that the
appellant remains within the country to face the trial.
We thus, grant bail to the appellant on terms and conditions
to  the  satisfaction   of  the  trial Court  which   will  keep  into
conspectus the aforesaid parameters which we have set forth.
The appeal is allowed in the aforesaid terms leaving parties
to bear their own costs.
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Crl.)     No(s).  5183/2020
(Arising out of impugned final judgment and order dated 25-09-2020
in CRLP No. 3179/2020 passed by the High Court Of Karnataka At
Date : 18-01-2021 This   petition was called on for hearing today.
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
Leave granted.
The appeal is allowed in terms of the signed order.
Pending application, if any, stands disposed of.
[Signed order is placed on the file]