2.                The short question that arises for consideration in this case
is whether a minority educational institution in the State of
Madhya Pradesh is required to get the fees charged by it fixed by
the Admission and Fee Regulatory Committee under the provisions of
the Madhya Pradesh Niji Vyavsayik Shikshan Sanstha (Pravesh Ka
Viniyaman Avam Shulk Ka Nirdharan) Adhiniyam, 2007 (for short,
3.   This issue is no longer res integra as the contours and import
of the Act of 2007, including the question aforestated, were dealt
with and decided by a Constitution Bench in Modern Dental College
and Research Centre and others Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh and
others [(2016) 7 SCC 353]. However, failure of the parties in
properly understanding the ratio decidendi of the above decision
led to the present litigation.
4.   Icon Education Society, the appellant herein, maintains and
manages   two  unaided   educational    institutions   at  Indore,   viz.,
Indore Institute of Law and Indore Nursing College. Both these
institutions qualify as ‘minority educational institutions’ under
Section 2(g) of the National Commission for Minority Educational
Institutions Act, 2004.      While so, by letter dated 08.07.2019, the
Admission and Fee Regulatory Committee (for short, ‘the AFRC’),
constituted under Section 4 of the Act of 2007, called upon the
Indore Institute of Law to submit its proposal for regulation of
the  fees   pertaining    to   law  courses  offered   by  it.   This  was
followed up by a reminder on 24.07.2019, which was addressed to
all  private   law  colleges    in  the  State of   Madhya   Pradesh.  The
appellant society addressed reply dated 31.07.2019, stating that
the  AFRC   was  not  empowered     to  regulate  the   fees   charged  by
minority educational institutions and requesting that the notices
issued may be withdrawn or cancelled. The AFRC responded, vide
letter dated 14.11.2019, stating that a decision had been taken in
the   meeting   held   on    08.11.2019   that  the   fees    of  minority
institutions should be fixed by the AFRC. The appellant society
was  accordingly    informed   that  its   request   for   relaxation   from
getting the fees fixed by the AFRC was rejected.
5.   Aggrieved thereby, the appellant society preferred an appeal
under  Section    10   of  the   Act   of  2007   before    the   designated
authority. The appeal was dismissed by the appellate authority, by
order   dated     10.01.2020,     holding     that    the    procedure    of
regulating/fixing of fee was common to both minority and non-
minority institutions. The review/recall petition preferred by the
appellant   society   was   dismissed    with   costs   by   the   appellate
authority on 06.03.2020.
6.   Thereupon, the appellant society filed WP No. 9690 of 2020
before the Indore Bench of the Madhya Pradesh High Court. Its
prayer therein was to declare Sections 4 and 9 of the Act of 2007
ultra  vires   as   these   provisions    did   not   distinguish    between
minority    educational      institutions      and     other     educational
institutions    and,    in  consequence,     did    not   exempt    minority
educational institutions from fee-fixation. A further direction
was  sought   to  exempt   the   appellant   society,    being   a  minority
educational institution, from the application of Section 9 of the
Act of 2007, thereby permitting it to fix its own fees.
7.   By order dated 19.11.2020, a Division Bench of the Madhya
Pradesh High Court at Indore dismissed the writ petition. The
Division Bench noted that the validity of the Act of 2007 had
already been upheld in Modern Dental College and Research Centre
(supra).  The High   Court then   relied upon    Sk. Md.   Rafique Vs.
Managing  Committee,   Contai  Rahamania  High   Madrasah   and  others
[(2020) 1 SCT 627(SC)], wherein this Court referred to its earlier
edict in Ahmedabad Saint Xaviers College Society and another Vs.
State of Gujarat and another [(1974) 1 SCC 717] that the right
under Article 30(1) of the Constitution is not absolute or above
other provisions of law and the essence of Article 30(1) was to
ensure equal treatment between majority and minority institutions.
It was further held that the laws of the land, including rules and
regulations, must apply equally to majority institutions as well
as minority institutions. In his concurring opinion, H.R.Khanna J
had held that a balance must be kept between the two objectives –
one, to ensure the standard of excellence of the institution and
the other, preserving the right of minorities to establish and
administer educational institutions. In the light of Modern Dental
College and Research Centre (supra) and Sk. Md. Rafique (supra),
the  High  Court   concluded  that   no  grounds   were   made  out  to
interfere with the orders passed by the AFRC.
8.   Heard   Mr.Dama   Seshadri   Naidu,   learned    senior   counsel,
appearing  for   the  appellant   society;   and   Mr.P.V.Yogeshwaran,
learned AAG, appearing for the State of Madhya Pradesh.
9.   Section 4 in Chapter 2 of the Act of 2007 deals with the
constitution and establishment of the AFRC. Section 4(1) provides
that the State Government shall, by notification in the official
gazette, constitute a committee to be called the ‘Admission and
Fee Regulatory Committee’, for the supervision and guidance of the
admission process and for the fixation of fees to be charged from
candidates seeking admission in a private professional educational
institution. Section 4(8) provides that the AFRC may require a
private aided or unaided professional educational institution or a
deemed university to furnish, by the prescribed date, information
as may be necessary for enabling the AFRC to determine the fees
that  may   be   charged    by   the   institution   in  respect     of  each
professional course and the fees so determined shall be valid for
such period as may be notified by the State Government.
10.  Chapter 4 of the Act of 2007 deals with fixation of fees.
Section 9(1) therein provides that, having regard to the location
of the private unaided professional educational institution; the
nature  of   the   professional    course;   the   cost  of   the   land  and
building;   the   available     infrastructure,    teaching,    non-teaching
staff  and    equipment;     the   expenditure    on   administration     and
maintenance;    the   reasonable     surplus   required   for    growth   and
development    of   the    professional    institution;    and    any   other
relevant   factor,     the    AFRC   shall   determine,    in    the   manner
prescribed,    the   fees    to  be   charged   by   the  private     unaided
professional educational institution. Section 9(2) provides that
the AFRC shall give the institution an opportunity of being heard
before fixing any fees. The proviso thereunder states that no such
fees, as may be fixed by the AFRC, shall amount to profiteering or
commercialization of education.
11.  Significantly, in the 11-Judges Bench decision of this Court
in T.M.A. Pai Foundation and others Vs. State of Karnataka and
others   [(2002)    8  SCC   481],   the    majority    opinion   voiced  by
B.N.Kirpal CJ, speaking for himself and five other learned Judges,
answered    the   question    as   to    whether     statutory    provisions
regulating    facets   of   administration     of   educational    agencies,
including regulation of fees, would interfere with the right of
administration by minorities in the negative, but held that such
regulatory   measures   should   be   minimal    in  the   case  of  unaided
minority   educational    institutions.     As  regards    the  fees  to  be
charged by unaided institutions, it was held that the same could
not be regulated but no institution should charge capitation fee.
It was emphasized that, inasmuch as the occupation of education
is, in a sense, regarded as charitable, the Government can provide
regulations    that   will   ensure    excellence    in   education,   while
forbidding the charging of capitation fee and profiteering by the
institution.    Since   the   object    of   setting   up   an   educational
institution is by definition "charitable", it was held to be clear
that an educational institution cannot charge such a fee as is not
required for the purpose of fulfilling that object. To put it
differently,    per   the   majority,     in   the   establishment    of  an
educational institution, the object should not be to make a profit
inasmuch as education is essentially charitable in nature, but
there could, however, be a reasonable revenue surplus, which may
be generated by the educational institution for the purpose of
development of education and expansion of the institution.                  The
partly-concurring opinion of S.N.Variava J, speaking for himself
and   Ashok  Bhan   J,  was   to   the    effect  that   there   could   be  an
appropriate mechanism to ensure that no capitation fee is charged
and profiteering is not resorted to, but the extent of regulation
would not be the same for aided and unaided institutions.
12.   Thereafter, in the 7-Judges Bench decision of this Court in
P.A.   Inamdar   and   others   Vs.    State   of   Maharashtra    and   others
[(2005) 6 SCC 537], this Court unanimously held that, as per the
law   declared   in  T.M.A.    Pai    Foundation    (supra),   setting    up  a
reasonable   fee   structure    is   also    a component   of   the  right   to
establish and administer an institution, within the meaning of
Article 30(1) of the Constitution, and every institution is free
to devise its own fee structure subject to the limitation that
there can be no profiteering and no capitation fee can be charged
directly or indirectly or in any form. It was further held that it
is   permissible    to   regulate     admission    and  fee    structure    for
achieving that purpose. The question whether guidelines could have
been   issued  in   the   matter    of    regulating   the  fee    payable   by
students to educational institutions was, therefore, answered in
the   affirmative   by   holding    that    every  institution    is   free  to
devise its own fee structure but the same can be regulated in the
interest of preventing profiteering and capitation fees.
13.  As stated hereinbefore, the Act of 2007 fell for consideration
before a Constitution Bench in Modern Dental College and Research
Centre (supra) in the context of regulation of unaided educational
institutions in the State of Madhya Pradesh. Significantly, the
validity/vires of various provisions of the Act of 2007, including
provisions pertaining to fixation of fees, was also under attack.
The issue was as to whether provisions relating to fixation of
fees  were  violative of  Article  19(1)(g)  or whether  they  were
regulatory in nature and were permissible under Article 19(6) of
the Constitution. Keeping in mind the fact that the State has the
power to regulate fixation of fees in the interest of preventing
profiteering and such fixation of fees has to be regulated and
controlled at the initial stage itself, this Court observed that
the parameters laid down in Section 9(1) of the Act of 2007, which
have to be kept in mind while fixing the fees were, in fact, the
ones enunciated in earlier judgments of this Court. This Court,
therefore, held that analysis of the provisions of the Act of 2007
by the Madhya Pradesh High Court in Association of Private Dental
and Medical Colleges Vs. State of MP [(2009) SCC Online MP 760],
from which the appeal arose, was perfectly in order. Reference was
made to the observations contained therein to the effect that each
professional educational institution can furnish information with
regard to the fees that it proposes to charge from the candidates,
taking into account the cost of components, the reasonable surplus
required for growth and development and other factors relevant to
impart professional education as mentioned in Section 9(1) of the
Act of 2007, and that the function of the AFRC is only to find
out, after giving due opportunity of hearing to the institution,
whether  the   fees  proposed   by  the   institution  is   based  on  the
factors mentioned in Section 9(1) of the Act of 2007 and did not
amount  to  profiteering   and   commercialization    of  education.   The
High Court had further observed that the AFRC, while determining
the fees, only gives final approval to the proposed fees to be
charged, after being satisfied that it was based on the factors
mentioned in Section 9(1), and that there was no profiteering or
commercialization    of   education.     The   High   Court   accordingly
concluded that the provisions of Sections 4(1), 4(8) and 9 of the
Act of 2007, in substance, empowered the AFRC to be only satisfied
that   the   fee   proposed   by   private     professional   educational
institutions did not amount to profiteering or commercialization
of education and was based on the factors mentioned in Section
9(1) of the Act of 2007 and held that the Act of 2007, therefore,
did not violate the right of the private professional educational
institution    to   charge    its    own    fee.   Accepting    the   said
interpretation, this Court observed that the AFRC which is set up
for that purpose is discharging only a regulatory function, as the
fee which a particular educational institution seeks to charge
from its students has to be suggested by the said educational
institution itself and the AFRC is empowered to satisfy itself
that  the  fee  proposed   by   the   educational   institution  did  not
amount to profiteering or commercialization of education and was
based on the intelligible factors mentioned in Section 9(1) of the
Act of 2007. This Court, therefore, concluded that it was only a
regulatory   measure   and  did    not   take  away   the  power  of  the
educational institutions to fix their own fees.
14.  The supplementing opinion of R. Banumathi J noted that, though
Section 9 of the Act of 2007 empowered the AFRC to determine the
fees, the High Court had read down Sections 4(1), 4(8) and 9 of
Act  of  2007,   by  holding   that    those  provisions   "in  substance
empower the committee to be only satisfied that the fee proposed
by a private professional educational institution did not amount
to profiteering or commercialization of education and was based on
the factors mentioned in Section 9(1) of the Act 2007...". The
learned Judge accordingly held that the State had the legislative
competence to enact the Act of 2007 and regulation of fixation of
the fees was to protect the right of the students in having access
to higher education without being subjected to exploitation in the
form  of   profiteering.   The    learned    Judge  concurred   with  the
majority   view   in   upholding     the   validity    of  the   impugned
legislation and affirmed the decision of the High Court.
15.  It  is,  therefore,   too   late   in  the  day   for the  appellant
society to again seek to challenge the validity of the Act of
2007, as the provisions of this enactment have already been read
down by this Court to mean that the AFRC would have the power only
to regulate the fee once the same is proposed by the educational
institution itself, keeping in mind the parameters encapsulated in
Section 9(1) thereof.
16.   Therefore,    as    matters    stand,   the   Act   of   2007   has    been
interpreted        to      mean       that     the      AFRC,       constituted
thereunder, exercises only the power of ‘regulation’ in respect of
the   fees    proposed     by    the   institution,     conditioned      by   the
parameters in Section 9(1) of the Act of 2007. In effect, the
liberty given to unaided institutions to propose the fees that
they   wish  to   charge,     keeping   in  mind   the   factors    set   out  in
Section 9(1) of the Act of 2007, stands protected and it is only
by way of regulating the fees so proposed that the AFRC would
exercise the power of reviewing the proposed fees, after giving
due   opportunity      of    hearing    to   the   educational      institution
concerned. The contrary stand taken by the AFRC, as is evident
from its communications to the appellant society, therefore cannot
be   countenanced.      It   is   not   open   to   the    AFRC   to    seek   to
unilaterally fix the fees to be charged by the appellant society
for   the   professional      courses   offered   through     its   educational
institutions. At the same time, it is not open to the appellant
society to claim complete immunity in undertaking this exercise
and   seek   exemption     from    any   interference     by   the   AFRC.    The
appellant society must necessarily submit the fees proposed by it
in   respect    of   the    professional    courses    offered     through    its
institutions to the AFRC for the purpose of review and regulation,
as per the provisions of Section 9 of the Act of 2007 and the
principles laid down by this Court in the decisions referred to
hereinabove. Making this position clear, the appeal is disposed of