2. Mr.Kurven Desai learned AGP waives service of
notice of Rule on behalf of the respondent nos.1
and 2 and Ms.Vidhi Bhatt learned advocate
waives service of notice of Rule on behalf of the
respondent no.3.
3. Present petitions are taken up for final hearing
with the consent of the learned Advocates for the
respective parties as a neat interpretation of law
is involved.
5. In Special Civil Application No.1672 of 2022 the
Petitioner holds the qualification of B.A., LL.B.
He         was enrolled       as  an      Advocate                on
20.6.2010.The Petitioner was appointed as an
assistant Charity Commissioner on 21.12.2019.
(“GPSC” for short) issued an Advertisement
inviting applications for one post of Joint Charity
Commissioner,        Class-I in        the General State
Service,      in  the  Charity        Organization,Gujarat
State under the Legal Department. The last date
of submitting the Applications was 17.2.2021.
The Petitioner applied for the post, appeared in
the Preliminary Examinations and the exercise of
verification of documents was undergone.
7. On 30.10.2021 the GPSC published a list of
ineligible candidates wherein the name of the
present petitioner and the Petitioner of Special
Civil Application No.9933 of 2022 figured with a
remark “Not possessing the requisite experience
as Advocate as per Recruitment Rules”.
8. This communication is impugned in both the
9. Facts of Special Civil Application No.9933 of
2022 are different only to the extent of details of
date of enrollment and date of joining. The
Petitioner therein was enrolled as an Advocate
on 23.2.1998 but the relevant date for our
purposes as per the judgement of the Supreme
Court in the case of V.Sudeer vs Bar Council Of
India is considered as 29.1.1997.
10.The          Petitioner was       appointed      as      Assistant
Charity Commissioner on 21.06.2007.
11.The          Petitioner of    Special     Civil      Application
No.1672 of 2022, as per the reply of the GPSC is
not possessing the requisite experience as an
Advocate as according to the GPSC he has
practiced as Advocate for 9 years and 6 months
only i.e. not the required minimum of 10 years
and the Petitioner of Special Civil Application
No.9933 of 2022 has the requisite experience of
9 years and 3 months which also is less than 10
years as required by the Recruitment Rules.
12.Mr.K.B.Pujara        learned        Advocate           for         the
Petitioner of Special Civil Application No.1672 of
2022 would make the following submissions.
12.1     The Petitioner is fully qualified and
eligible for the post in question and the
objections raised by the GPSC are wholly
illegal.
12.2     As per the provisions of the Gujarat
Public Trusts Act, 1950 and particularly Section
4 thereof the qualifications for the post of
Charity Commissioner as well as Joint Charity
Commissioner provide amongst others that a
person should have been for not less than 10
years enrolled as an advocate. The Petitioner
whose     date   of    enrollment        is     20.06.2010
therefore   on   the      date   of    the      Application
i.e.17.2.2021 had been enrolled as an Advocate
for more than 10 years.
12.3     Mr.Pujara would further submit that
even as per the Recruitment Rules namely the
Recruitment Rules, 2017 in order to be eligible
for direct selection to the post of Joint Charity
Commissioner, Class-I the candidate shall have
not less than ten years as an advocate enrolled
under the Advocates Act, 1961.                   Admittedly
therefore even according to the Recruitment
Rules the Petitioner was qualified for the post
in question.
12.4    Reliance    was        also    placed         on        the
relevant provisions of the Advocates Act, 1961
as well as the Bar Council Of India Rules to
submit   that  the     Petitioner         was      qualified.
Section 2(1)(a) of the Advocates Act, 1961
defines that “advocate” means an advocate
entered in any roll under the provisions of the
Act. Section 24 provides for a person who may
be admitted on the rolls. Section 17 provides
for the State Bar councils to maintain roll of
advocates and Section 26(A) provides for a
contingency of removal from the State rolls.
Section 35 of the Advocates Act, 1961 would
provide   for  suspension         of     the     advocates.
Section 49(a) would provide for conditions for
the right to practice and in exercise of this
powers in the Bar Council Of India Rules the
Chapter on Restrictions on Employment would
provide that when the advocate is employed he
ceases to practice and his name in suspended
till his employed.
12.5      These provisions are placed to support
the submission that the enrollment of the
Advocate continues until his name is removed
from the roll of Advocates and when he takes
up employment he ceases to practice but the
enrollment continues. In other words, since the
requirement of the Recruitment Rules and the
Trust Act provide that the       Advocate must be
enrolled for 10 years is satisfied and merely
because he is employed him enrollment as an
Advocate wouldn't cease to make his ineligible
because of his being appointed as an Assistant
Charity      Commissioner.       The          enrollment
continues even if he is employed as his name
from the rolls is not removed but only kept
under suspension.
12.6       In support of his submissions Mr.Pujara
would rely upon a decision of the Kerala High
Court annexed to the Petition in the case of
R.Sreekanth        and       Others       versus         Kerala
Public Service Commission rendered in Writ
Petition no.31585 of 2009 vide judgement
dated 6.7.2010.
12.7       Mr.Pujara would submit based on the
decision that merely being employed would not
result in ceasing of enrollment as an Advocate
as defined under the Advocates Act, 1961. He
would rely on paras 4 to 8 and 12 to 15 of the
said decision which read as under:
“4. While the petitioners are thus continuing
in    Government           Service,      by           Ext.P1
notification, Public Service Commission
invited applications for appointment to the
post of Legal Assistant Gr-II in the Law
Department of the Government of Kerala.
Ext.P14 is the Special Rules, viz., the Kerala
which prescribes the qualification for the
post of Legal Assistant Gr.II. Ext.P1 vacancy
notification incorporates the qualification
prescribed, which is extracted below for
reference.
(1) Degree in Law of any recognized
University (2) Pass in the Bar Council
Examination OR Enrollment as an
Note:-(i) A Pass in the 'Apprentice
Examination' of the Madras High Court
or the possession of the Enrollment
Certificate of Mysore High Court will be
considered as equivalent to a pass in the
(ii)  Candidates        belonging           to        the
scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes (in
the absence of qualified persons, from
among them) shall not be required to
possess the qualifications prescribed in
(2) above."
5. In response to Ext.P1 notification, the
petitioners WP(C) No.28144, 29672, 31585
of 2009 & 7164 of 2010 submitted their
applications. They appeared for the written
test held on 10/01/2009. In the meantime,
the PSC issued Ext.P15 to the Government
of Kerala stating that a doubt has arisen
whether a candidate, who was enrolled once
as an Advocate and later has taken up an
employment under the Government with or
without getting the enrollment suspended or
has engaged in any other profession or
calling, is eligible to be considered for the
post. The Government was requested to
examine the issue and clarify the doubt.
Accordingly, the Government considered the
matter and issued Ext.P16 dated 04/07/2008
clarifying that a candidate, who was
enrolled once as an Advocate and later
taken up employment with or without
suspending practice continues in the roll of
advocates and as such, is eligible to be
considered for appointment to the post of
Legal Assistant Grade-II. Despite the
clarification issued by the Government, the
PSC passed Ext.P18(a) resolution dated
17/11/2008 which reads as under:-
"As on the last date for receipt of
application, the candidate should have
enrollment with the Bar Council.
Candidates having an employment in
Govt. service as on the date will not be
considered as having enrollment with the
6. Subsequently, the petitioners were issued
Exts.P8 to P10 WP(C) No.28144, 29672,
31585 of 2009 & 7164 of 2010 memos dated
15/09/2009 requiring them to produce the
documents mentioned therein, with a note
to the effect that candidates, who were
employed in Government Service at the time
of submission of their applications, will not
be treated as having enrollment with the
Bar     Council.        Thereupon,          petitioners
submitted Exts.P11 to P13 representations
to the PSC against the note incorporated in
Exts.P8 to P10 memos, which had the effect
of rendering them ineligible for the post.
Response was not forthcoming. Therefore,
this writ petition was filed on 15/11/2009
seeking     mainly        to quash         Ext.P18(a)
resolution of the PSC and the note added to
Exts.P8 to P10 memos and to declare that
the decision of the PSC to treat them
ineligible to be considered for the post of
Legal Assistant Gr.II is illegal.
7. Pursuant to the interim orders passed by
this Court, the petitioners were permitted to
appear for the interview. However, when
ranked list was published on 07/06/2010,
their results were withheld. Contention
raised by the learned Senior counsel for the
petitioners is that in view of the provisions
contained in the Advocates Act, 1961
(hereinafter referred to as the Act for short),
and the Rules, an Advocate, who takes up
any employment, shall WP(C) No.28144,
29672, 31585 of 2009 & 7164 of 2010
intimate the fact to the Bar Council on
whose roll his name appears and that
thereupon, he shall only cease to practice as
an Advocate so long as he continues to be in
employment. It is stated that an Advocate
whose right to practice is suspended,
desires to resume practice, he has only to
apply to the Secretary of the Bar Council for
resumption of practice in compliance with
the provisions of the Rules and that
thereupon the Enrollment Committee is to
take a decision in the matter and return the
certificates surrendered by the Advocate
concerned. It is stated that suspension
contemplated by the Act and the Rules is
only suspension of the right to practice and
the suspension does not amount to
suspension of the enrollment itself.
8. It is contended that since the qualification
prescribed in Ext.P14 Special Rules, which
is also incorporated in Ext.P1 vacancy
notification, only requires "enrollment as an
Advocate" and as the petitioners still
continue to be enrolled on the rolls of the
Bar Council of Kerala, they are eligible
candidates and are entitled to be included in
the ranked list that was published by the
PSC on 07/06/2010. Learned Senior Counsel
also contended that in response to Ext.P15
clarification sought for by the PSC, the
WP(C) No.28144, 29672, 31585 of 2009 &
7164 of 2010 Government, the appointing
authority,    clarified      by      Ext.P16              that
candidates like the petitioners are eligible in
terms of the Special Rules and that in such
circumstances, the PSC should not have
resolved that they are ineligible in terms of
the provisions contained in the Special
12. The main issue that arises for
consideration is the legality of Ext.P18(a)
resolution, where the PSC has decided that
employees in Government Service like the
petitioners are ineligible to be candidates in
response to Ext.P1 notification. Ext.P1
notification incorporates the provisions
contained in Ext.P14 Special Rules, and the
qualifications prescribed, insofar as it is
relevant, are a Degree of Law of any
recognised University, a pass in the Bar
Council Examination or enrollment as an
13. The validity of Ext.P18 (a) resolution of
the PSC will depend upon the answer to the
question whether, in the light of the
provisions of the Act and the Rules, the
petitioners      are          candidates               having
enrollment as Advocates. Admittedly, all the
petitioners have enrolled themselves on the
rolls of the Bar Council of Kerala in terms of
the provisions contained in the Act and the
Rules referred to above.
14. These Rules are framed by the Bar
Council of India in terms of the provisions
contained in Section 49 of the Act. In terms
of the provisions contained in the Act and
the Rules, Advocate means a person whose
name has been entered on the rolls under
the provisions of the Act. Rule 49 of Part-VI
of the Rules reads as under.
"49. An advocate shall not be a full-time
salaried employee of any person,
government,          firm,     corporation                or
concern, so long as he continues to
practice, and shall, on taking up any
employment, intimate the fact to the Bar
Council on whose roll his name appears,
and shall thereupon cease to practice as
an advocate so long as he continues in
such employment." (emphasis supplied)
Rule 5 of Chapter III of Part-VI of the Rules,
which is of relevance, also reads as under:-
"5(1) : An advocate who voluntarily
suspends his practice for any reason
whatsoever, shall intimate by registered
post to the State Bar Council on the rolls
of which his name is entered, of such
suspension together with his certificate
of enrollment in original. (2) Whenever
any such advocate who has suspended
his practice desires to resume his
practice, he shall apply to the Secretary
of the State Bar Council for resumption
of practice, along with an affidavit
stating whether he has incurred any of
the disqualifications under Section 24A,
Chapter III of the Act during the period
of suspension.
(3) The Enrollment Committee of the
State Bar Council may order the
resumption of his practice and return the
certificate to him with necessary
endorsement.             If   the         Enrollment
Committee is of the view that the
advocate has incurred any of the
disqualifications the Committee shall
refer the matter under proviso to Section
26(1) of the Act.
(4) On suspension and resumption of
practice the Secretary shall act in terms
of rule 24 of Part IX." (emphasis
15. A reading of Rules 49 and 5, which have
been extracted above, show that if an
Advocate accepts employment as a full time
salaried employee, he shall intimate the fact
to the Bar Council concerned and shall
thereupon "cease to practice as an Advocate
so long as he continues in employment".
When he is desirous of resuming practice,
he has to make an application as per Rule 5
extracted above and on receipt of the
application, the Enrollment Committee of
the Bar Council is to consider the matter
and pass order of resumption and return the
enrollment certificate surrendered by him in
terms of Rule 5(1). Therefore, on accepting
employment when an application is made to
the Bar Council, what is suspended is not
the enrollment as such, but only the right of
the Advocate concerned to practice as
Advocate and he does not cease to have his
enrollment on the rolls of the Bar Council.
In terms of Rule 5(3), when an application
for resumption of practice is made, all that
is required is that the Enrollment
Committee should decide as to whether the
Advocate is entitled to resume his practice
and if the decision is favourable to him,
without anything further, the Bar Council
has to return the certificate to the candidate
concerned. The Rules do not contemplate
any fresh enrollment for resumption of
practice. If that be the effect of Rules 49 & 5
extracted above, the fact that the
petitioners have accepted employment in
the Government Service and that their right
to practice is suspended, does not result in
depriving them of their enrollment as
Advocates on the rolls of the Bar Council.”
13.Mr.Pujara Learned Advocate would submit that
after     the   opinion     sought     from       the         Legal
Department is read what is evident is that it is an
accepted fact that there is no express provision
in the Rules that a candidate should be a
practicing advocate for not less than 10 years
and therefore the stand of the GPSC to bring in
the criteria of experience cannot be read into the
rules when the prescription is only enrollment.
NO.9933 of 2022
14.Mr.Chintan Gandhi Learned Advocate appearing
for the Petitioner of Special Civil Application
No.9933 of 2022 in addition to the submissions
made by Mr Pujara would submit that the
certificate     of  the     Bar     Council       specifically
provided       the   date      as      21.09.1997           and          in
accordance with the decision of the Supreme
Court in the case of V.Sudeer vs Bar Council
Of India reported in 1999 (3) SCC 176 the
Petitioner has admittedly completed 10 years of
enrollment and is entitled to be considered for
appointment        to   the       post    of     Joint       Charity
15.Ms.Vidhi J Bhatt has appeared for the GPSC in
both       the  Petitions      and      made        submissions
justifying the overlooking of the case of the
Petitioners for the appointment on the ground
that      the   Petitioners        on   the      date        of       the
Application excluding their service period were
enrolled as advocates for a period of 9 years and
6 months and 9 years and 3 months respectively
and       therefore    were         not    eligible         as        the
requirement        was     10        years     of     enrollment.
Enrollment as an advocate is a must for 10 years.
As per the Recruitment Rules especially Rule
3(b)(ii) a candidate for recruitment to the post is
required to have not less than 10 years as an
advocate enrolled under the Advocates Act,1961.
Though the rules do not provide that a candidate
should be an advocate practicing law for not less
than 10 years, the rules have to be construed in
a purposive manner as only then the purpose and
intention can be achieved.
16.She would submit that the post of the Joint
Charity Commissioner is a very important post
and therefore a person to be appointed should be
one who has been not less than 10 years as an
advocate enrolled meaning thereby that before
the relevant date he should have the requisite
experience of practicing as an advocate for 10
years.
17.Ms Bhatt reading the provisions of the Advocates
Act,1961 especially the definition of the term
“advocate” would submit that the said definition
was under consideration before the Supreme
Court in the case of Deepak Aggarwal versus
Keshav Kaushik and Others reported in 2013
(5) SCC 277.     She would extensively read out
several paragraphs of the Judgement to submit
that enrollment as an advocate essentially means
an advocate one who is actually practicing before
Courts and if he is employed and not acting or
pleading   in  terms       of    his     engagement                 in
employment but does other kinds of work then
he becomes a mere employee and not an
“advocate” as the expression as defined under
the Advocates Act,1961.
18.She would rely upon Paras 52, 57, 58, 61, 62, 66
to 68, 70, 89, 91, 92, 94, 96, 98, 99 and 102 of
the decision in the case of Deepak Aggarwal
19.Ms.Bhatt would distinguish the judgement of the
Kerala High Court in the case of R.Sreekanth
(supra) and submit that the qualifications therein
did not prescribe for any minimum experience
and therefore the question of experience as
decided        by    the        Supreme         Court             was
distinguished. When the Recruitment Rules of
the present case is considered there is a specific
stipulation of minimum of 10 years.
Pleader would submit that the Legal Department
had       opined  clearly      that  though        the        literal
meaning of the rule requires only enrollment as
an advocate looking to the nature of the post of
Joint Charity Commissioner and the duties that
need to be performed the provision has to be
construed that a person has to be practicing as
an advocate for 10 years in order to be eligible
for appointment.
21.Considered       the   submissions        made         by        the
Learned Advocates for the respective parties.
22.Before getting into the aspect of considering the
question of interpretations as canvassed it would
be in the fitness of things to reproduce the
relevant provisions of Rules and Sections of the
Act,1950, Advocates Act, 1961 and the Bar
Council of India Rules.
23.Section 4 of the Gujarat Public Trusts Act, 1950
reads as under:
5. Qualifications for appointment of Charity
Commissioner                  and           Joint             Charity
Commissioner.- (1) A person to be appointed as
the Charity Commissioner shall be one -
(b) who has been for not less than ten years
(i)an advocate enrolled under Indian Bar
Councils Act, 1926 (XXXVIII of 1926)
(ii)an attorney of the High Court, or
(iii) a pleader enrolled under the Bombay
Pleaders Act, 1920 (Bom. XVII of 1920)
24.Rule 2 (b) and Rule 3 (b) of the Joint Charity
Commissioner            Class,         I,  in      the        Charity
Organization, Gujarat State reads as under:
2. Definitions.―[(1)] In this Act, unless the
context otherwise requires,―
(a) “advocate” means an advocate entered in
any roll under the provisions of this Act;
(b) “appointed day”, in relation to any
provision of this Act, means the day on
which that provision comes into force;
(d) “Bar Council” means a Bar Council
constituted under this Act;
(e) “Bar Council of India” means the Bar
Council constituted under section 4 for the
territories to which this Act extends; 2
(g) “High Court”, except in sub-section (1) 3
[and sub-section (1A)] of section 34 and in
sections 42 and 43, does not include a court
of the Judicial Commissioner, and, in
relation to a State Bar Council, means,--
(i) in the case of a Bar Council constituted
for a State or for a State and one or more
Union territories, the High Court for the
(ii) in the case of the Bar Council constituted
for Delhi, 4 [the High Court of Delhi];
(h) “law graduate” means a person who has
obtained a bachelor's degree in law from
any University established by law in India;
(i) “legal practitioner” means an advocate 5
[or vakil] of any High Court, a pleader,
mukhtar or revenue agent;
(j) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules
made under this Act;
(k) “roll” means a roll of advocates prepared
and maintained under this Act;
(l) “State”     does        not  include        a       Union
(m) “State Bar Council” means a Bar Council
constituted under section 3;
(n) “State roll” means a roll of advocates
prepared and maintained by a State Bar
Council under section 17.
Section 17. State Bar Councils to maintain
roll of advocates.―
(1) Every State Bar Council shall prepare
and maintain a roll of advocates in which
shall be entered the names and addresses of
(a) all persons who were entered as
advocates on the roll of any High Court
under the Indian Bar Councils Act,
1926 (38 of 1926), immediately before
the appointed day 5 [including persons,
being citizens citizens of India, who
before the 15th day of August, 1947,
were enrolled as advocates under the
said Act in any area which before the
said date was comprised within India as
defined in the Government of India Act,
1935 and who at any time] express an
intention in the prescribed manner to
practise within the jurisdiction of the
(b) all other persons who are admitted
to be advocates on the roll of the State
Bar Council under this Act on or after
the appointed day.
(2) Each such roll of advocates shall consist
of two parts, the first part containing the
names of senior advocates and the second
part, the names of other advocates.
(3) Entries in each part of the roll of
advocates prepared and maintained by a
State Bar Council under this section shall be
in the order of seniority, 1 [and, subject to
any rule that may be made by the Bar
Council of India in this behalf, such seniority
shall be determined] as follows:―
(a) the seniority of an advocate referred
to in clause (a) of sub-section (1) shall
be determined in accordance with his
date of enrollment under the Indian Bar
Councils Act, 1926 (38 of 1926);
(b) the seniority of any person who was
a senior advocate of the Supreme Court
immediately before the appointed day
shall, for the purposes of the first part
of the State roll, be determined in
accordance with such principles as the
Bar Council of India may specify; 2
(d) the seniority of any other person
who, on or after the appointed day, is
enrolled as a senior advocate or is
admitted as an advocate shall be
determined by the date of such
enrollment or admission, as the case
may be.
[(e) notwithstanding anything contained
in clause (a), the seniority of an
attorney enrolled [whether before or
after the commencement of the
of 1980)] as an advocate shall be
determined in accordance with the date
of his enrollment as an attorney.]
(4) No person shall be enrolled as an
advocate on the roll of more than one State
24. Persons who may be admitted as
advocates on a State roll.―(1) Subject to the
provisions of this Act, and the rules made
thereunder, a person shall be qualified to be
admitted as an advocate on a State roll, if he
fulfills the following conditions, namely:―
(a) he is a citizen of India: Provided that
subject to the other provisions contained in
this Act, a national of any other country may
be admitted as an advocate on a State roll, if
citizens of India, duly qualified, are
permitted to practise law in that other
(b) he has completed the age of twenty-one
(c) he has obtained a degree in law—
(i) before the 1 [12th day of March, 1967],
from any University in the territory of India;
(ii) before the 15th day of August, 1947,
from any University in any area which was
comprised before that date within India as
defined by the Government of India Act,
[(iii) after the 12th day of March, 1967, save
as provided in sub-clause
(iiia), after undergoing a three-year course
of study in law from any University in India
which is recognised for the purposes of this
Act by the Bar Council of India; or
(iiia) after undergoing a course of study in
law, the duration of which is not less than
two academic years commencing from the
academic year 1967-68 or any earlier
academic year from any University in India
which is recognised for the purposes of this
Act by the Bar Council of India; or] 3
[(iv) in any other case, from any University
outside the territory of India, if the degree is
recognised for the purposes of this Act by
the Bar Council of India; or]
[he is a barrister and is called to the Bar on
or before the 31st day of December, 1976; 5
[or has passed passed the article clerk's
examination or any other examination
specified by the High Court at Bombay or
Calcutta for enrollment as an attorney of
that High Court;] or has obtained such other
foreign qualification in law as is recognised
by the Bar Council of India for the purpose
of admission as an advocate under this Act];
(e) he fulfills such other conditions as may
be specified in the rules made by the State
Bar Council under this Chapter;
[(f) he has paid, in respect of the enrollment,
stamp duty, if any, chargeable under the
Indian Stamp Act, 1899 (2 of 1899), and an
enrollment fee payable to the State Bar
Council of 8 [six hundred rupees and to the
Bar Council of India, one hundred and fifty
rupees by way of a bank draft drawn in
favour of that Council:]
Provided that where such person is a
member of the Scheduled Castes or the
Scheduled Tribes and produces a certificate
to that effect from such authority as may be
prescribed, the enrollment fee payable by
him to the State Bar Council shall be 1 [one
hundred rupees and to the Bar Council of
India, twenty-five rupees.]
[Explanation.―For the purposes of this sub-
section, a person shall be deemed to have
obtained a degree in law from a University
in India on the date on which the results of
the examination for that degree are
published by the University on its notice
board or otherwise declaring him to have
passed that examination.]
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section (1), [a vakil or a pleader who is a
law graduate] may be admitted as an
advocate on a State roll if he—
(a) makes an application for such enrollment
in accordance with the provisions of this
Act, not later than two years from the
appointed day; and
(b) fulfills the conditions specified in clauses
(a), (b), (e) and (f) of sub-section (1).
[(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section (1) a person who—
(a) 5 *** has, for at least three years, been a
vakil or a pleader or a mukhtar, or was
entitled at any time time to be enrolled
under any law 6 *** as an advocate of a High
Court (including a High Court of a former
Part B State) or of a Court of Judicial
Commissioner in any Union territory; or 7
[(aa) before the 1st day of December, 1961,
was entitled otherwise than as an advocate
to practise the the profession of law
(whether by way of pleading or acting or
both) by virtue of the provisions of any law,
or who would have been so entitled had he
not been in public service on the said date;
(c) before the 1st day of April, 1937, has
been an advocate of any High Court in any
area which was comprised within Burma as
defined in the Government of India Act,
1935 (25 & 26 Geo. 5 C 42); or
(d) is entitled to be enrolled as an advocate
under any rule made by the Bar Council of
India in this behalf, may be admitted as an
advocate on a State roll if he—
(i)    makes an application for such
enrollment in accordance with the
provisions of this Act; and
(ii)   fulfills the conditions specified in
clauses (a), (b), (e) and (f) of sub-
section (1).]
26. Disposal of applications for admission
as an advocate.―
(1) A State Bar Council shall refer every
application for admission as an
advocate to its enrollment committee,
and subject to the provisions of sub-
sections (2) and (3) 3 [and to any
direction that may be given in writing
by the State Bar Council in this behalf],
such committee shall dispose of the
application in the prescribed manner: 4
[Provided that the Bar Council of India
may, if satisfied, either on a reference
made to it in this behalf or otherwise,
that any person has got his name
entered on the roll of advocates by
misrepresentation as to an essential
fact or by fraud or undue influence,
remove the name of such person from
the roll of advocates after giving him an
opportunity of being heard.]
(2) Where the enrollment committee of
a State Bar Council proposes to refuse
any such application, it shall refer the
application for opinion to the Bar
Council of India and every such
reference shall be accompanied by a
statement of the grounds in support of
the refusal of the application.
(3) The enrollment committee of a State
Bar Council shall dispose of any
application referred to the Bar Council
of India under sub-section (2) in
conformity with the opinion of the Bar
Council of India.
[(4) Where the enrollment committee of
a State Bar Council has refused any
application for admission as an
advocate on its roll, the State Bar
Council shall, as soon as may be, send
intimation to all other State Bar
Councils about such refusal stating the
name, address and qualifications of the
person whose application was refused
and the grounds for the refusal.]
35.   Punishment             of     advocates                 for
misconduct.―
(1) Where on receipt of a complaint or
otherwise a State Bar Council has
reason to believe that any advocate on
its roll has been guilty of professional
or other misconduct, it shall refer the
case for disposal to its disciplinary
committee.
[(1A) The State Bar Council may, either
of its own motion or on application
made to it by any person interested,
withdraw a proceeding pending before
its disciplinary committee and direct
the inquiry to be made by any other
disciplinary committee of that State Bar
(2) The disciplinary committee of a
State Bar Council 4 *** shall fix a date
for the hearing of the case and shall
cause a notice thereof to be given to the
advocate      concerned           and         to        the
Advocate-General of the State.
(3) The disciplinary committee of a
State Bar Council after giving the
advocate concerned and the Advocate-
General an opportunity of being heard,
may make any of the following orders,
(a) dismiss the complaint or, where the
proceedings were initiated at the
instance of the State Bar Council, direct
that the proceedings be filed;
(b) reprimand the advocate;
(c) suspend the advocate from practice
for such period as it may deem fit;
(d) remove the name of the advocate
from the State roll of advocates.
(4) Where an advocate is suspended
from practice under clause (c) of sub-
section (3), he shall, during the period
of suspension, be debarred from
practicing in any court or before any
authority or person in India.
(5) Where any notice is issued to the
Advocate-General under sub-section
(2), the Advocate-General may appear
before the disciplinary committee of the
State Bar Council either in person or
through any advocate appearing on his
behalf.
[Explanation.―In        this       section,              3
[section 37 and section 38], the
expressions “Advocate-General” and
“Advocate-General of the State” shall,
in relation to the Union territory of
Delhi, mean the Additional Solicitor
General of India.]
PART VI Standard of                 Professional
Conduct and Etiquette
25.Construction and interpretation of the term
“enrolled as an Advocate” is relevant for our
purposes.
26.Reading the term in context of the Recruitment
Rules would indicate that in order to be eligible
to be considered for appointment as a Joint
Charity Commissioner the requirement is that a
candidate has to have not less than ten years as
an      Advocate enrolled         under    the      Advocates
27.The definition of the term Advocate means an
advocate entered in any roll under the provisions
of the Act. The submission of the learned
advocates for the Petitioners that whilst in
employment the person only ceases to practice
and the enrollment does remain but is suspended
and therefore for the entire period even when in
employment is “ enrollment as an advocate” for
the purposes of eligibility is to be considered in
light of the decision of the Kerala High Court in
the case of R.Sreekanth (supra)                       and the
decision of the Supreme Court in the case of
28.Before the Kerala High Court the petitioners
were enrolled as Advocates on the rolls of the
Bar Council of Kerala and while practicing as
Advocates they were appointed in different
departments. They therefore had surrendered
their right to practise and their certificates. The
Kerala    Public   Service        Commission              invited
applications for appointment to the post of Legal
Assistant Gr.II in the Law Department Of the
Government      of    Kerala.       The        qualification
prescribed    was   a     Degree      in    Law         of       any
recognised University; Pass in the Bar Council
Examination OR Enrollment as an Advocate. The
government      issued      a     clarification          that         a
candidate who was enrolled as an advocate but
had later taken an employment was eligible as he
continues to be on the rolls of the advocates. The
Commission opined otherwise holding that those
in employment on the date of application were
not eligible. The submission on behalf of the
Petitioners was that suspension as a result of
surrender of certificate of practice was only
suspension of right to practice and does not
amount to suspension of enrollment itself.
29.It is based on this which was considered and the
Court     held  what    is     suspended         during           the
employment of the advocate in service is not
enrollment because suspension of certificate of
practice does not cease to have his enrollment on
the rolls of the Bar Council.
30.This according to the present Petitioners would
be of a help in as much as though the Petitioners
are working as Assistant Charity Commissioners
and irrespective of whether they have or have
not surrendered their certificate to practice their
enrollment as Advocate on the rolls does not
cease and therefore they having continued to be
enrolled at the Bar for more then 10 years as
their names are not struck off or removed would
not make them ineligible for appointment. As the
Recruitment Rules and the provisions of the
Gujarat Public Trusts Act, 1950 only provide for
10 years’ enrollment which they satisfy,the
concept of “not practicing as advocate for 10
years” is beyond the Rules and can’t make them
ineligible.
31.Before I go to the judgement of the Supreme
Court in the case of Deepak Aggarwal (supra)
what is required to be noticed in the judgement
of the Kerala High Court is that the rules only
required enrollment as an Advocate. There was
no minimum stipulation of number of years of
such enrollment as an Advocate was provided
for. Ms.Bhatt is therefore right in her submission
that the Court had given the decision in light of
the qualification as required in the rule under
consideration which was only enrollment.
32.In the decision of the Supreme Court in the case
of Deepak Aggarwal (supra) what was under
consideration before the Supreme Court was
what is meant by “advocate” or “pleader” under
Article 233(2) of the Constitution Of India. The
question was in context of a challenge to the
appointments as District Judges where whether
District Attorneys or Government Advocates who
were in full time employment of Government
could be considered for appointment as District
33.The Rule that was considered for interpretation
was one which prescribed qualification                     that a
candidate must have been duly enrolled as an
advocate and has practiced for a period of not
less than seven years. One of the submissions on
behalf of the successful petitioners before the
Delhi High Court had submitted that the term “
must have been as an advocate for at least seven
years” must be read to mean seven years
immediately preceding the appointment and it
cannot mean seven years in any time past.
34.The          question  was          whether         a         Public
Prosecutor/Assistant Public Prosecutor who is in
full time employment ceases to be an advocate
within the meaning of Article 233(2) of the
Constitution Of India. Considering the decision of
the Supreme Court in the case of Sushma Suri v
Govt.(NCT of Delhi), 1999 (1) SCC 330, and Para
6 thereof the Court held that if a person on being
enrolled as an advocate ceases to practise and
takes up employment,such a person can by no
stretch   of  imagination        be   termed               as      an
advocate.
35.Rule 49 of the Bar Council of India Rules were
also considered and it was observed that if an
Advocate by virtue of taking up employment does
not plead or act as a pleader then as per the
terms of his engagement that he becomes a mere
employee and therefore the Bar Council has
understood the expression “advocate” as one
who is actually practicing before courts.
36.In Para 67 of the decision in the case of Deepak
Aggarwal (supra) the Court considered other
decisions wherein Section 2(a) of the Advocates
Act was interpreted and it was held that no
doubt,Section 2(a) of the Advocates Act,1961
provides that “an advocate” means an advocate
entered in any roll under the provisions of
Advocates Act. That does not mean the advocate
who has surrendered the certificate of practice
to the State Bar Council and who has suspended
practice also can be treated as an advocate or as
a practicing advocate. The Court drew support
from the provisions of sub-section(4) of Section
35 of the Act wherein it is provided that where
an Advocate is suspended from practice,during
the period of suspension he is debarred from
practicing in any court and therefore if the object
of      surrendering   certificate     of     practise             is
considered then during such a period such a
person ceases to be an advocate.
37.The continuance of his name on the rolls of the
Bar Council is of no consequence as far as his
right to practice is considered and such a person
cannot designate himself as an advocate.
38.Relevant paragraphs of the judgment in case of
Deepak Aggarwal (supra) read as under:
“52.The question that has been raised before us
is whether a Public Prosecutor/Assistant
Advocate General, who is in full time employ
of the Government, ceases to be an
advocate or pleader within the meaning of
Article 233(2) of the Constitution.
57.In Sushma Suri6, a three-Judge Bench of
this Court considered the meaning of the
expression “advocate” occurring in Article
233 (2) of the Constitution and unamended
Rule 49 of the BCI Rules. In paragraph 6 of
the Report (Pg. 335) this Court held as
“6. If a person on being enrolled as an
advocate ceases to practise law and
takes up an employment, such a person
can by no stretch of imagination be
termed as an advocate. However, if a
person who is on the rolls of any Bar
Council     is         engaged         either             by
employment or otherwise of the Union or
the State or any corporate body or
person practices before a court as an
advocate for and on behalf of such
Government, corporation or authority or
person, the question is whether such a
person also answers the description of
an advocate under the Act. That is the
precise    question         arising         for         our
consideration in this case.”
58.Then in paragraph 8 of the Report, this
Court observed that for the purposes of the
1961 Act and the BCI Rules, a law officer
(Public Prosecutor or Government Pleader)
would continue to be an advocate. Not
accepting the view of Delhi High Court in
Oma       Shanker            Sharma          v.          Delhi
Administration case (C.W.P. No. 1961 of
1987), this Court having regard to the
object of recruitment under Article 233(2)
held in paragraph 9 (Pg.336):
“9. ………To restrict it to advocates who
are not engaged in the manner stated by
us earlier in this order is too narrow a
view, for the object of recruitment is to
get persons of necessary qualification,
experience and knowledge of life. A
Government Counsel may be a Public
Prosecutor or Government Advocate or a
Government Pleader. He too gets
experience in handling various types of
cases apart from dealing with the
officers of the Government. Experience
gained by such persons who fall in this
description cannot be stated to be
irrelevant nor detrimental to selection to
the posts of the Higher Judicial Service.
The expression “members of the Bar” in
the relevant Rule would only mean that
particular class of persons who are
actually practicing in courts of law as
pleaders or advocates. In a very general
sense an advocate is a person who acts
or pleads for another in a court and if a
Public Prosecutor or a Government
Counsel is on the rolls of the Bar Council
and is entitled to practise under the Act,
he answers the description of an
advocate.”
61. In Satish Kumar Sharma, the facts were
these : the appellant was initially appointed
as Assistant (Legal) by the Himachal
Pradesh State Electricity Board (for short,
‘Board’); the said post was re-designated as
Law Officer Grade-II. Later on, the appellant
was allowed to act as an advocate of the
Board and, accordingly, his application
seeking enrollment was sent by the Board to
the Bar Council of Himachal Pradesh. The
Bar    Council        of     Himachal            Pradesh
communicated to the Board that the
appellant did not meet the requirements of
the Rules; he should be first designated as
Law Officer and the order of appointment
and the terms of such appointment be
communicated.           Consequent           on           the
communication received from the Bar
Council of Himachal Pradesh, the Board
designated the appellant as Law Officer.
The Bar Council of Himachal Pradesh issued
a certificate of enrollment dated 9.7.1984 to
the appellant. Subsequently, the appellant
was given ad hoc promotion to the post of
and then promoted as Under Secretary,
(Legal)-cum-Law Officer on officiating basis.
Bar Council of Himachal Pradesh issued a
notice to the appellant to show cause why
his enrollment be not withdrawn. The
appellant responded to the said notice. In
the meanwhile, appellant was also promoted
as    Deputy     Secretary       (Legal)-cum-Law
Officer on ad hoc basis. On 12.5.1996, the
Bar Council of Himachal Pradesh passed an
order withdrawing the enrollment of the
appellant with immediate effect and
directed him to surrender the enrollment
certificate within 15 days therefrom. It was
this resolution which was challenged by the
appellant before the Himachal Pradesh High
Court. However, he was unsuccessful before
the High Court and he approached this
Court. This Court referred to Sections 24,
28 and 49 of the 1961 Act and Rule 49 of
the BCI Rules.
62. This Court also considered the terms of
appointment, nature of duties and service
conditions relating to the appellant and in
paragraph 17 (Pg. 377) of the Report noted
“17. Looking to the various appointment/
promotion orders issued by the Board to
the appellant and regulation of business
relating to Legal Cell of the Board
aforementioned, we can gather that:
(1) the appellant was a full-time salaried
employee at the time of his enrollment as
an advocate and continues to be so,
getting fixed scales of pay;
(2) he is governed by the conditions of
service applicable to the employees of
the     Board          including         disciplinary
proceedings. When asked by us, the
learned counsel for the appellant also
confirmed the same;
(3) he joined the services of the Board as
a temporary Assistant (Legal) and
continues to head the Legal Cell after
promotions, a wing in the Secretariat of
(4) his duties were/are not exclusively or
mostly to act or plead in courts; and
(5) promotions were given from time to
time in higher pay scales as is done in
case of other employees of the Board on
the    basis       of     recommendation                    of
66. The Karnataka High Court in Mallaraddi
H. Itagi and Others v. The High Court of
Karnataka, Bangalore and Another[17] was,
inter alia, concerned with the question
whether the petitioners, who were working
as either Assistant Public Prosecutors or
Senior Assistant Public Prosecutors or
Public Prosecutors, were eligible to be
considered for appointment as District
Judges under Article 233(2) of the
Constitution and Rule 2 of Karnataka
(for short, ‘Karnataka Recruitment Rules’).
The Division Bench of the High Court
considered the relevant provisions and the
decisions of this Court in Sushma Suri6 and
Satya Narain Singh5. The High Court held
that having regard to the provisions in the
Karnataka       Recruitment           Rules,               the
petitioners were civil servants in the
employment of the State Government and
could not be treated as practicing advocates
from the date they were appointed to the
post of Assistant Public Prosecutors. The
High Court took into consideration Rule 49
of the BCI Rules and held as under: (Pg. 86-
“11. ...The petitioners 1 to 9 came to be
appointed         as    Assistant                Public
Prosecutors/Public Prosecutors in terms
of the Recruitment Rules framed by the
State Government. Therefore, in terms of
the main provision contained in Rule 49
of the Bar Council of India Rules, the
petitioners on their appointment as
Assistant Public Prosecutors ceased to
be practicing Advocates. Further, as
noticed by us earlier, when once the
petitioners      had    surrendered                their
Certificate of Practice and suspended
their practice in terms of Rule 5 of the
Bar Council of India Rules, it is not
possible to take the view that they still
continue to be practicing Advocates. The
rules which prescribe the qualification
for appointment to the post of District
Judges by direct recruitment provides
that an applicant must be practicing on
the last date fixed for submission of
application, as an Advocate and must
have so practiced for not less than 7
years as on such date. The case of
Sushma Suri, supra, does not deal with
the situation where the Law Officers had
surrendered the Certificate of Practice
and suspended their practice. The facts
of that case indicates that the Hon'ble
Supreme Court proceeded on the basis
that the exception provided to Rule 49 of
the Rules applies to the Law Officers in
that case inasmuch as the Law Officers
in those cases were designated by terms
of their appointment as Law Officers for
the purpose of appearing before the
Courts on behalf of their employers.
Therefore, facts of those cases are
different from the facts of the case of
petitioners 1 to 9. The rule similar to the
one before us which provides that an
Advocate must be a practicing Advocate
on the date of the submission of the
application did not fall for consideration
before the Hon'ble Supreme Court. The
1970 did not provide that an Advocate
should be a practicing Advocate on the
date of submission of his application.
Under these circumstances, in our
considered view, the observation made
by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the
case of Sushma Suri, supra, at
paragraph 8 of the judgment which is
strongly relied upon by the learned
Counsel for the petitioners wherein it is
stated that:
"8. for purposes of the Advocates
Act and the Rules framed thereunder
the Law Officer (Public Prosecutor or
Government Counsel) will continue to
be an Advocate. The intention of the
relevant rules is that a candidate
eligible for appointment to the higher
judicial service should be a person
who regularly, practices before the
Court or Tribunal appearing for a
has no application to the facts of the
present case. As noticed by us, the
qualification prescribed for Assistant
Public Prosecutor is three years of
practice as an Advocate on the date of
submission           of  application.                The
qualification prescribed for recruitment
to the post of Munsiff, i.e., Civil Judge
(Junior Division) is that an applicant, on
the last date fixed for submission of
application, must be a practicing
Advocate and must have practiced for
not less than four years on the date of
application; or who is working as an
Assistant Public Prosecutor or as a
Public Prosecutor in the Department of
Prosecutions and must have so worked
for not less than 4 years as on the date of
application. Therefore, the Assistant
Prosecutor are made eligible for
appointment only to the post of Munsiffs
Civil Judge (Junior Division) under the
Recruitment Rules. But, they are not
made eligible under the Rules for
appointment           as  District            Judges.
Therefore, when the Rule making
Authority itself has not made the
Prosecutor as eligible for appointment to
the post of District Judges, it is not
permissible to treat the Assistant Public
Prosecutor/Public          Prosecutor                   as
practicing       Advocates        by          judicial
interpretation and by giving extended
meaning to make them eligible for
appointment to the post of District
67. With reference to the decision of this
Court in Satya Narain Singh5 , the
Karnataka High Court held as under (Pg. 88-
“11. ...The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the
case of Satya Narain Singh v. High Court
of Judicature at Allahabad and Ors.,
1985 (1) SCC 225, while interpreting
Sub-clause (2) of Article 233of the
Constitution of India has taken the view
that "a person not already in service of
Union or of the State" shall mean only
officers in judicial service and the
Judicial Officers who are already in
service are not eligible for appointment
in respect of the post reserved for direct
recruitment under Sub-clause (2) of
Article 233 of the Constitution of India.
Therefore, the Judicial Officers who are
in the State services are ineligible for
appointment in respect of direct
recruitment vacancies. However, if the
argument of the learned Counsel for
petitioners is accepted as correct, the
Assistant Public Prosecutor and Senior
Assistant Public Prosecutor who are only
made eligible under the Recruitment
Rules to the post of Munsiffs which is the
lowest cadre in the District Judiciary
would be eligible for appointment to the
post of District Judges in respect of the
posts reserved for direct recruitment
vacancies. In our view, the acceptance of
such    a    position     would          lead           to
discrimination between the officers of
the State who are in judicial services on
the one hand and Assistant Public
Prosecutors and Public Prosecutors on
the other. While considering the
contention of the learned Counsel for the
petitioners that the Assistant Public
Prosecutor/Public Prosecutors should be
treated as practicing Advocates, this
Court cannot ignore the consequence of
resultant incongruous situation, if such
an argument is accepted. We are also
unable to accede to the submission of
the learned Counsel for the petitioners
that so long as the names of the
petitioners 1 to 9 are not removed from
the Rolls of State Bar Council, the said
petitioners         would       be        practicing
Advocates. In our view, there is no merit
in this submission. No doubt, Section
2(a) of the Advocates Act (hereinafter
referred to as the "Act") provides that
"an 'Advocate' means an Advocate
entered in any roll under the provisions
of Advocates Act". That does not mean
the Advocate who has surrendered the
Certificate of Practice to the State Bar
Council and who has suspended his
practice also can be treated either as an
Advocate or as a practicing Advocate.
May be that once a Law graduate enrolls
himself as an Advocate, his name finds a
place in the Rolls of the State Bar
Council till it is removed from the Rolls
of the State Bar Council in terms of
Clause (d) of Sub-section (3) of Section
35 of the Act. But, that does not mean a
person who has suspended his practice
on securing a full time appointment can
still be considered as a practicing
Advocate. This conclusion of ours gets
support from the Sub-section (4) of
Section 35 of the Act wherein it is
provided that where an Advocate is
suspended from practice, during the
period of suspension he is debarred from
practicing in any Court or before any
authority or person in India. Therefore, if
the object of surrendering Certificate of
Practice and suspending the practice is
to give up the right to practice before
the Court; the petitioners 1 to 9 who
were     required        to      surrender              the
Certificate of Practice and who have so
suspended their practice, cannot in our
view, be held either as Advocates or as
practicing Advocates. In our view, during
the period of suspension of practice,
such a person ceases to be an Advocate;
and continuance of his name on the Rolls
of Bar Council is of no consequence so
far as his right to practice is concerned
and such a person cannot designate
himself as an Advocate. Therefore, we
are of the view that the petitioners 1 to 9
not being practicing Advocates on the
date of submission of their applications,
they are not eligible for appointment as
District Judges in terms of the
qualification prescribed. Therefore, the
Selection Committee has, in our view,
rightly rejected the claim of the
petitioners 1 to 9 for appointment as
District Judges and they were rightly not
called for interview. The petitioners
cannot have any grievance on that
account.”
68. The judgment of the Karnataka High Court in
Mallaraddi H. Itagi17 was challenged before this
Court. This Court dismissed the appeals on
18.05.2009[18] and, upholding the judgment of
the High Court, observed as follows:
“8. On that basis the Court came to the
conclusion that the appellant therein was not
liable to be considered as he was holding a
regular post. In paragraph 19 it was
“19....These orders clearly show that the
appellant was required to work in the
Legal Cell of the Secretariat of the Board;
was given different pay scales; rules of
seniority were applicable; promotions
were given to him on the basis of the
recommendations of the Departmental
Promotion Committee; was amenable to
disciplinary proceedings, etc. Further
looking to the nature of duties of Legal
Cell as stated in the regulation of business
of the Board extracted above, the
appellant being a full-time salaried
employee had/has to attend to so many
duties which appear to be substantial and
predominant. In short and substance we
find that the appellant was/is a full-time
salaried employee and his work was not
mainly or exclusively to act or plead in
court. Further, there may be various
challenges in courts of law assailing or
relating to the decisions/actions taken by
the appellant himself such as challenge to
issue of statutory regulation, notification,
the    institution/      withdrawal           of        any
prosecution or other legal/quasi-legal
proceedings etc. In a given situation the
appellant may be amenable to disciplinary
jurisdiction of his employer and/or to the
disciplinary jurisdiction of the Bar Council.
There could be conflict of duties and
interest. In such an event, the appellant
would be in an embarrassing position to
plead and conduct a case in a court of law.
Moreover, mere occasional appearances
in some courts on behalf of the Board even
if they be, in our opinion, could not bring
the appellant with the meaning of “Law
Officer” in terms of para 3 of Rule 49.”
and has also taken a view that in a situation                     like
this the decision in Sushma Suri case is                           not
applicable. We have no reason to take                             any
different view, as had already been taken by                      this
court, as the situation is not different. It is
already considered before the High Court that
the appellants were holding a regular post they
were having the regular pay scale, they were
considered for promotion, they were employed
by the State Government Rules and therefore
they were actually the Government servants
when they made applications for the posts of
39.In Paragraphs 90 to 102 in the case of Deepak
Aggarwal (supra) the Supreme Court considered
the Advocates Act and the Bar Council Rules and
held that once the terms of employment do not
require such an advocate to plead and appear
before       Courts   then         the   period         of        such
employment cannot be termed as being “an
advocate” because he is not practicing as one.
Association13, this Court stated that though
the lawyers of the Government or a public
body on the full-time rolls of the government
and the public bodies are described as their
law officers, but nevertheless they are
professional practitioners. It is for this
reason, the Court said that the Bar Council
of India in Rule 49 of the BCI Rules (in its
original form) in the saving clause waived
the prohibition imposed by the said rule
against the acceptance by a lawyer of a full-
time employment.
91. In Sushma Suri6, a three-Judge Bench
of this Court while considering the meaning
of the expression advocate in Article 233(2)
of the Constitution and unamended Rule 49
of the BCI Rules held that if a person was on
the rolls of any Bar Council and is engaged
either by employment or otherwise by the
Union or State and practises before a court
as an advocate for and on behalf of such
Government, such person does not cease to
be an advocate. This Court went on to say
that a Public Prosecutor or a Government
Counsel on the rolls of the Bar Council is
entitled to practice. It was laid down that
test was not whether such person is
engaged on terms of salary or by payment of
remuneration but whether he is engaged to
act or plead on its behalf in a court of law as
an advocate. The terms of engagement do
not matter at all and what matters is as to
what such law officer engaged by the
Government does whether he acts or pleads
in court on behalf of his employer or
otherwise. If he is not acting or pleading on
behalf of his employer then he ceases to be
an advocate; if the terms of engagement are
such that he does not have to act or plead
but does other kinds of work then he
becomes      a    mere       employee            of        the
Government or the body corporate. The
functions which the law officer discharges
on his engagement by the Government were
held decisive. We are in full agreement with
the above view in Sushma Suri6.
92. While referring to unamended Rule 49,
this Court in Sushma Suri6 said that Bar
Council of India had understood the
expression advocate as one who is actually
practising before courts which expression
would include even those who are law
officers   employed          as      such         by         the
Government or a body corporate.
93. Have the two subsequent decisions in
Satish Kumar Sharma and Mallaraddi H.
Itagi18 differed from Sushma Suri? Is there
any conflict or inconsistency in the three
94. Satish Kumar Sharma and Mallaraddi
H. Itagi18 are the two decisions on which
very heavy reliance has been placed on
behalf of the successful writ-petitioners
which has been elaborately noted in the
earlier part of the judgment, this Court
found from the appointment/promotion
orders in respect of the appellant therein
that he was required to work in the legal
cell of the Secretariat of the Board. Central
to the entire reasoning in Satish Kumar
Sharma is that being a full-time salaried
employee he had/has to attend many duties
and his work was not mainly and exclusively
to act or plead in court. Mere occasional
appearances on behalf of the Board in some
courts were not held to be sufficient to bring
him within the meaning of expression Law
Officer. In the backdrop of nature of the
office that the appellant therein held and
the duties he was required to perform and
in the absence of any rules framed by the
State Bar Council with regard to enrolment
of a full time salaried Law Officer, he was
held to be not entitled for enrolment and the
exception set out in paragraphs 2 and 3 of
unamended Rule 49 of the BCI Rules was
not found to be attracted. In Satish Kumar
Sharma7, this Court did apply the test that
was enunciated in Sushma Suri6 viz.,
whether a person is engaged to act and/or
plead in a court of law to find out whether
he is an advocate. In Satish Kumar Sharma
when this Court observed with reference to
Chapter II of the BCI Rules that an advocate
has a duty to the court, duty to the client,
duty to the opponent and duty to the
colleagues unlike a full time salaried
employee whose duties are specific and
confined to his employment, the Court had
in mind such full-time employment which
was inconsistent with practice in law. In
para 23 of the judgment in Satish Kumar
Sharma7, pertinently this Court observed
that the employment of appellant therein as
a head of legal cell in the Secretariat of the
Board was different from the work of the
Prosecutors and Government Pleaders in
relation to acting and pleading in Court. On
principle of law, thus, it cannot be said that
there is any departure in Satish Kumar
Sharma from Sushma Suri6.
95. In Mallaraddi H. Itagi18, the appellants
were actually found to be government
servants when they made applications for
the post of District Judges. The High Court
in its judgment in Mallaraddi H. Itagi17 had
noticed that the appellants had surrendered
their certificate of practice and suspended
their practice on their appointment as
Prosecutors      in       terms      of      Karnakata
Recruitment Rules. It was on this basis that
Karnataka High Court held that Sushma
Suri6 was not applicable to the case of the
appellants. There is consonancy and
congruity with the decisions of this Court in
Sushma Suri6, Satish Kumar Sharma and
Mallaraddi H. Itagi18 and, in our opinion,
there is no conflict or inconsistency on the
principle of law.
96. In none of the other decisions viz.,
Mundrika Prasad Sinha1, Mukul Dalal2 and
Kumari Shrilekha Vidyarthi3, it has been
held that a Government Pleader or a Public
Prosecutor or a District Government
Counsel, on his appointment as a full-time
salaried employee subject to the disciplinary
control of the Government, ceases to be a
legal practitioner. In Kumari Shrilekha
Vidyarthi3 while dealing with the office of
District Government Counsel, it was held
that the Government Counsel in the district
were law officers of the State which were
holders of an office or post but it was
clarified that a District Government Counsel
was not to be equated with post under the
government in strict sense. In Ramesh
Chandra Sharma21, this Court reiterated
that the appointment of any legal
practitioner as a District Government
Counsel is only a professional engagement.
97. However, much emphasis was placed
on behalf of the contesting respondents on
Rule 49 of the BCI Rules which provides
that an advocate shall not be a full time
salaried     employee        of      any          person,
government, firm, corporation or concern so
long as he continues to practice, and shall,
on taking up any such employment, intimate
the fact to the Bar Council on whose roll his
name appears, and shall thereupon cease to
practice as an advocate so long as he
continues in such employment. It was
submitted that earlier in Rule 49 an
exception was carved out that a Law Officer
of the Central Government or of a State or
of a body corporate who is entitled to be
enrolled under the rules of State Bar
Council shall not be affected by the main
provision of Rule 49 despite his being a full
time salaried employee but by Resolution
dated 22.6.2001 which was published in the
Gazette on 13.10.2001, the Bar Council of
India has deleted the said provision and
hence on and from that date a full time
salaried employee, be he Public Prosecutor
or Government Pleader, cannot be an
advocate under the 1961 Act.
98. Admittedly, by the above resolution of
the Bar Council of India, the second and
third para of Rule 49 have been deleted but
we have to see the effect of such deletion.
What Rule 49 of the BCI Rules provides is
that an advocate shall not be a full time
salaried     employee        of      any          person,
government, firm, corporation or concern so
long as he continues to practice. The
employment spoken of in Rule 49 does not
cover the employment of an advocate who
has been solely or, in any case,
predominantly employed to act and/or plead
on behalf of his client in courts of law. If a
person has been engaged to act and/or
plead in court of law as an advocate
although by way of employment on terms of
salary and other service conditions, such
employment is not what is covered by Rule
49 as he continues to practice law but, on
the other hand, if he is employed not mainly
to act and/or plead in a court of law, but to
do other kinds of legal work, the prohibition
in Rule 49 immediately comes into play and
then he becomes a mere employee and
ceases to be an advocate. The bar contained
in Rule 49 applies to an employment for
work other than conduct of cases in courts
as an advocate. In this view of the matter,
the deletion of second and third para by the
Resolution    dated          22.6.2001          has          not
materially altered the position insofar as
advocates who have been employed by the
State    Government            or       the         Central
Government to conduct civil and criminal
cases on their behalf in the courts are
concerned.
99. What we have said above gets fortified
by Rule 43 of the BCI Rules. Rule 43
provides that an advocate, who has taken a
full-time service or part-time service
inconsistent with his practising as an
advocate, shall send a declaration to that
effect to the respective State Bar Council
within time specified therein and any
default in that regard may entail suspension
of the right to practice. In other words, if
full-time service or part-time service taken
by an advocate is consistent with his
practising as an advocate, no such
declaration is necessary. The factum of
employment is not material but the key
aspect is whether such employment is
consistent with his practising as an
advocate or, in other words, whether
pursuant to such employment, he continues
to act and/or plead in the courts. If the
answer is yes, then despite employment he
continues to be an advocate. On the other
hand, if the answer is in negative, he ceases
to be an advocate.
100. An advocate has a two-fold duty: (1) to
protect the interest of his client and pursue
the case briefed to him with the best of his
ability, and (2) as an officer of the Court.
Whether full-time employment creates any
conflict of duty or interest for a Public
do not think so. As noticed above, and that
has been consistently stated by this Court, a
Public Prosecutor is not a mouth- piece of
the investigating agency. In our opinion,
even though Public Prosecutor/Assistant
Public Prosecutor is in full-time employ with
the    government           and     is     subject             to
disciplinary control of the employer, but
once he appears in the court for conduct of
a case or prosecution, he is guided by the
norms consistent with the interest of justice.
His acts always remain to serve and protect
the public interest. He has to discharge his
functions fairly, objectively and within the
framework of the legal provisions. It may,
therefore, not be correct to say that an
Assistant Public Prosecutor is not an officer
of the court. The view in Samarendra Das22
to the extent it holds that an Assistant
Public Prosecutor is not an officer of the
Court is not a correct view.
101. The Division Bench has in respect of all
the five private appellants Assistant District
Attorney, Public Prosecutor and Deputy
Advocate General recorded undisputed
factual position that they were appearing on
behalf of their respective States primarily in
criminal/civil cases and their appointments
were basically under the C.P.C. or Cr.P.C.
That means their job has been to conduct
cases     on      behalf         of        the            State
Government/C.B.I. in courts. Each one of
them continued to be enrolled with the
respective State Bar Council. In view of this
factual position and the legal position that
we have discussed above, can it be said that
these    appellants          were      ineligible             for
appointment to the office of Additional
District and Sessions Judge? Our answer is
in the negative. The Division Bench
committed two fundamental errors, first, the
Division Bench erred in holding that since
these    appellants           were       in        full-time
employment               of           the                 State
Government/Central             Government,                  they
ceased to be advocate under the 1961 Act
and the BCI Rules, and second, that being a
member of service, the first essential
requirement under Article 233(2) of the
Constitution that such person should not be
in any service under the Union or the State
was attracted. In our view, none of the five
private appellants, on their appointment as
ceased to be advocate and since each one of
them continued to be advocate, they cannot
be considered to be in the service of the
Union or the State within the meaning of
Article 233(2). The view of the Division
Bench is clearly erroneous and cannot be
sustained.
102. As regards construction of the
expression, if he has been for not less than
seven years an advocate in Article 233(2) of
the Constitution, we think Mr. Prashant
Bhushan was right in his submission that
this expression means seven years as an
advocate     immediately           preceding                the
application and not seven years any time in
the past. This is clear by use of has been.
The present perfect continuous tense is
used for a position which began at some
time in the past and is still continuing.
Therefore, one of the essential requirements
articulated by the above expression in
Article 233(2) is that such person must with
requisite period be continuing as an
advocate on the date of application. 89. Rule
11 of the HSJS Rules provides for
qualifications for direct recruits in Haryana
Superior Judicial Service. Clause (b) of this
rule provides that the applicant must have
been duly enrolled as an advocate and has
practised for a period not less than seven
years. Since we have already held that these
five private appellants did not cease to be
advocate while working as Assistant District
General, the period during which they have
been working as such has to be considered
as the period practising law. Seen thus, all
of them have been advocates for not less
than seven years and were enrolled as
advocates and were continuing as advocates
on the date of the application. 90. We,
accordingly, hold that the five private
appellants (Respondent Nos. 9,12,13,15 and
18 in CWP No. 9157/2008 before the High
Court) fulfilled the eligibility under Article
233(2) of the Constitution and Rule 11(b) of
the HSJS Rules on the date of application.
The impugned judgment as regards them is
liable to be set aside and is set aside. 91.
Appeals are allowed as above with no order
as to costs.”
40.What is therefore evident from this Judgement of
the Supreme Court is that even if an advocate
during his employment is enrolled on the rolls of
the Bar Council and but he is not practicing as
an advocate and suspension of practice though
would lead to he continuing to be enrolled but he
ceases to and advocate actually and continuance
of his name on the rolls of the Bar Council is of
no consequence so far as his right to practice is
concerned and such a person cannot designate
himself as an advocate.
41.The stand of the GPSC as backed by the advice of
the Legal Department as evident from the letter
dated 23.3.2022 cannot be faulted and does not
amount to reading something that is not in the
rules.
42.The term “an advocate” has been interpreted as
one where mere enrollment at the Bar Council
would not by itself entitle the Petitioners to claim
to have the requisite qualification as the as the
same has been interpreted by the Supreme Court
in the case of Deepak Aggarwal (supra)                               as
being actually pleading and appearing before the
Courts which the Petitioners have not after being
appointed as Assistant Charity Commissioners on
the       respective dates         and     therefore            their
experience as advocates practicing falls short of
ten years of enrollment as advocate as defined
under the Rules and the decision of rejecting of
their eligibility by the communication of the
GPSC dated 31.10.2021 cannot be faulted.
43.Both the Petitions are accordingly dismissed.
Rule discharged with no order as to costs.
44.In view of disposal of the main petition, Civil
Application    No.1    of     2022   in    Special            Civil
Application No.9933 of 2022 will not survive and
hence the same is also disposed of.