In the matter between
State of Maharashtra & Ors                                …Respondents
Ms Fereshte Sethna, with Abhishek Tilak, Praprti Kedia, Shivani
Dutta, i/b DMD Associates, for the Petitioner.
Digitally signed by
Dr Birendra Saraf, Advocate General, with PP Kakade, GP & AA
Alaspurkar, AGP, for the Respondent-State.
Ms Gayatri Singh, Senior Advocate, with Ronita Bhattacharya &
VG Sreeran, for the Applicant in IAST/1043/2023.
Mr Akshay Deshmukh,with Pratik Wakade, for the Applicant in
Mr Babaji Kambale, Applicant is present.
Mr Anand Tambe, Applicant is present.
1.     We have heard the matter at some length. Dr Saraf has
tendered some material, which we will need to consider. He also
mentions that a special committee has been constituted urgently in
the last day or so to examine the terms and conditions to be made
applicable to a ‘bike taxi’ aggregator service, and even if such a
service ought to be permitted at all. The committee needs time to
consider the material and take advice.
2.     Ms Sethna has a further Affidavit. It is to be filed in the
Registry. We have briefly considered this Affidavit. We have also
considered some of her submissions, namely, that the Petitioner is
offering its two wheeler bike taxi aggregator service in a hundred
cities across the country and actually has a license in at least two
states and provisional license in two more. We do not know the
terms of those licenses. We will require them to be produced on the
next occasion. These are also to be placed in a second further
Affidavit which is to be filed and served by Tuesday, 17th January
3.     We list the matter first on the supplementary board on 20th
January 2023. Both sides are put to notice that we will endeavour to
dispose of the Petition on that date at the stage of admission.
4.     The concern is about ongoing services being offered by the
Petitioner in Maharashtra.
5.     On instructions Ms Sethna makes a statement that all services
of the Petitioner in Maharashtra will be suspended and made
unavailable until the end of the day on 20th January 2023. She fairly
states that the Petitioner offers, in addition to bike taxi aggregator
services, delivery services and auto rickshaws where the Petitioner
does not have licenses from the State Government for any of these
services as yet. However, there are pending applications for one or
more of these services. There also some rejections.
6.     We accept the statement made by Ms Sethna on instructions.
All contentions are expressly kept open. The statement is accepted
as one made on a without prejudice basis. However, having regard to
the nature of the services and the fact that they are offered on a
mobile phone app, we do not want any misunderstandings or
complications. We will, therefore, require that the app’s availability
in Maharashtra has to be suspended immediately. It is not to await
the transcription and uploading of this order. A representative of the
Petitioner is present in Court to instruct Ms Sethna. After speaking
with him Ms Sethna confirms that the app will be suspended for all
services of the Petitioner in Maharashtra by 1.00 pm today. We
accept the statement. We require a confirmation and will have the
matter called out at 1.15 pm.
7.     List the matter first on board on the supplementary board of
At 1.15 pm.
8.     Ms Sethna confirms that the Petitioner’s app is now
inoperative for Maharashtra in compliance with the previous
9.     For the convenience of customers and consumers who may
have already booked or engaged services before 1.00 pm today, the
Petitioner may fulfil those obligations. However, it will not accept
any further bookings after 1 pm today. This exception is only for the
convenience of consumers.