1.        This petition, under Article 227 of the Constitution of India, assails
order dated 6th June 2022, passed by the learned District Judge
(Commercial Court) in CS(COMM) 220/2019 (Rajesh Kathpal v. M/s
2.        The impugned order rejects the application, filed by the plaintiff,
under the proviso to Order V Rule 11 and the proviso to Order VIII Rule
Provided further that where the defendant fails to file the written statement within the said period of thirty days,
he shall be allowed to file the written statement on such other day, as may be specified by the Court, for reasons to
be recorded in writing and on payment of such costs as the Court deems fit, but which shall not be later than one
hundred twenty days from the date of service of summons and on expiry of one hundred twenty days from the date
of service of summons, the defendant shall forfeit the right to file the written statement and the Court shall not
allow the written statement to be taken on record.
12 of the CPC, read with Section 151 thereof, to strike off the defence of
the respondent-defendant.
3.        The issue in controversy being only whether the written statement
filed by the respondent was filed within the time, so as to allow it to be
retained on record, it is not necessary to enter into the specifics of the
dispute between the parties.
4.        The impugned order dated 6th June 2022 discloses that summons,
on the suit instituted by the petitioner, were issued to the respondent on
29th July 2019. On 4th December 2019, the respondent contended that it
had not received a complete set of the plaint with its annexures. The
petitioner undertook to provide a copy of the plaint along with the
annexures to learned Counsel for the respondent during the course of the
day and, therefore, the respondent was granted 30 days’ time from the
day when a complete copy of the plaint with annexures was provided by
the petitioner, to file written statement.
5.        As per the averments in the application of the petitioner, which
stands disposed of by the impugned order, the plaint along with all
Provided that where the defendant fails to file the written statement within the said period of thirty days, he shall
be allowed to file the written statement on such other day, as may be specified by the Court, for reasons to be
recorded in writing and on payment of such costs as the Court deems fit, but which shall not be later than one
hundred twenty days from the date of service of summons and on expiry of one hundred twenty days from the date
of service of summons, the defendant shall forfeit the right to file the written statement and the Court shall not
allow the written statement to be taken on record.
documents annexed therewith was supplied by the petitioner to the
respondent “for the fifth time” on 13th March 2020. There is, however, no
material forthcoming on the record of the present petition to indicate that,
at any time, after issuance of summons but prior to 13th March 2020, the
plaint along with all documents was ever supplied by the petitioner to the
respondent.
6.     The only endorsement of receipt of the plaint along with
documents, by a counsel purportedly on behalf of the respondent, is on
15th July 2019. That endorsement, quite obviously, can be of no relevance
in the present case, and of no use to the petitioner, as the time for filing
written statement commences only after receipt of service of summons
on the suit.
7.     Service of summons in a suit, in order to constitute a starting point
for the time available for filing of a written statement, has to be
meaningful service. In other words, the time for filing written statement
would commence from the date when the suit along with the documents
is provided to the defendant. That, as per the record, even as the present
petition filed by the petitioner before this Court, took place only on 13th
8.     Reckoned from 13th March 2020, 30 days for filing the written
statement would expire in April 2020. The respondent, thereby, became
entitled to the benefit of the order passed by the Supreme Court in Re:
Cognizance for Extension of Limitation Suo Motu Writ Petition (C)
3/20203 read with the judgments of the Supreme Court in Prakash
Corporates v. Dee Vee Projects Ltd4, Centaur Pharmaceuticals Pvt. Ltd.
v. Stanford Laboratories Pvt. Ltd.5 and Babasaheb Raosaheb Kobarne v
Pyrotek India Private Limited6 all of which have been dealt with by this
Court in its recent decision in Anita Chhabra v. Surender Kumar7,
which clearly hold that, where the time period for filing pleadings
expired after 15th March 2020, the time stood extended by operation of
the orders passed by the Supreme Court in Re: Cognizance for
Extension of Limitation Suo Motu Writ Petition (C) 3/20201 till 28th
February 2022. So long as the pleadings were filed prior to 28th February
2022, therefore, they cannot be treated as belated and no occasion arose
even for the respondent to tender any application for condoning the delay
in filing the written statement.
9.        Inasmuch as the written statement was filed prior to 28th February
2022, it has to be treated as having been filed within time, applying the
judgment of the Supreme Court in the aforenoted decisions.
10.       In that view of the matter, no exception can be taken to the
decision of the learned Commercial Court to reject the petitioner’s
application to strike off the written statement of the respondent from the
record.
11.   This petition is accordingly completely devoid of merits and is
dismissed in limine with no order as to costs.