Counsel for Respondent:- R.B. Sahai, Mohd. Ishraque Farooqui,
1.     Heard Sri Ratan Singh, learned AGA appearing for the
appellant-State of UP, Sri Pradeep Kumar, learned counsel appearing
for the accused-respondent and perused the record.
2.     Present government appeal has been preferred against the
judgment and order dated 26.07.1983 passed by the Learned Special
Judge, Fatehpur in Session Trial No. 104 of 1983 (State vs. Ram
Autar Kori), arising out of Case Crimes No. 172/1982, under Section
3.     Prosecution story, in brief, is that on 07.12.1982 the
complainant- Shiv Saran Singh along with his brother Babu Singh
went to their Gram field situated the western side of the village and
at about 1:00 pm (noon), they saw the mother and sister of the
accused Ram Autar were plucking Gram leaves in their field. Babu
Singh asked them not to pluck the same as the plants were too small
but they did not listen and continued to plucking out the gram leaves.
On this, Babu Singh inflicted two slaps to the sister of accused-Ram
Autar and banished her from his field. On this the mother and sister
of the accused returned to their house abusing him. After taking
round of the field while Shiv Saran Singh and Babu Singh were
coming back to their house for taking bath and meals, when they
reached near the house of Ram Autar, accused Ram Autar surrounded
them and asked Babu Singh as to why he slapped his sister and took
out country made pistol from his waist and fired on the chest of Babu
Singh. The alleged incident was witnessed by neighbours Dasrath,
Shiv Mohan, Govardhan and others. Ram Raj and Ram Ballaiya also
saw the occurrence. When they tried to catch hold the accused, he
reloaded the country made pistol, threatened the witnesses and ran
away towards west. On receiving gun shot injury, complainant
brother Babu Singh fell on the ground and thereafter the injured was
placed on the Chabutara of Goverdhan where he died. The accused
shot complainant’s brother at 2.00 pm. Thereafter, a first information
report of the incident was lodged at police station -Khakreu on the
same day at 3.00 pm. in the presence of Investigating Officer, who
recorded the statement of the complainant under Section 161 Cr.P.C.
The investigating Officer proceeded to place of occurrence and
inspected the dead body and sealed the same. Site plan was prepared
and after completing investigation a charge-sheet under section 302
IPC was submitted against the accused Ram Autar.
4.     In support of prosecution case, PW-1-Shiv Saran Singh, PW-2-
Dashrath, PW-3-Station House Officer-Madan Singh and PW-4 Dr.
Satish Chandra Srivastava were produced and examined before the
Court below.
5.     Apart from other formal documents, site plan is Ext. Ka-9,
recovery memo of bloodstained and plain earth is Ext. Ka-10,
recovery memo recovering one empty cartridge recovered from the
place of occurrence is Ex. Ka-11, charge-sheet is Ext. Ka-13 and
Post mortem report is Ex. Ka-14.
6.     PW-1-Shiv Sharan Singh, who was the eye witness of the
incident, in his statement had stated that he works in Maya Press,
Allahabad and used to do the same job during the days of the
incident and he had come home on leave. He further stated that
deceased Babu Singh was his younger brother and at the time of
incident he was working as Constable in the Police Department and
was posted in Allahabad and was also on leave during those days. He
further deposed that his house and the accused’s house is on the same
road and when we come from our field, the accused house comes
first and thereafter we would reach to his own house. He further
stated that the residence of Ram Autar was in front of the house of
Dashrath Dhobi and thereafter there is residence of Goverdhan.
While narrating the incident he stated that on 07.12.1982 at about
11.30 am when he and his younger brother Babu Singh had gone to
their field they found that the mother and sister of the accused Ram
Autar were plucking gram leaves, which was objected to by his
brother and when they did not stop, his brother Babu Singh twice
slapped the sister of Ram Autar and banished her from his field. On
this the mother and sister of the accused returned to their house
abusing him. After some time when they were returning home at
about 1.45-2.00 pm and when they reached near the house of Ram
Autar, Ram Autar came out and stood in front of his brother and said
that since you have slapped my sister, I will teach you a lesson and
took out a country made pistol from his waist and fired on the chest
of Babu Singh. Babu Singh fell on the ground. He further stated that
when he tried to move forward and started shouting then villagers
Goverdhan, Dasrath, Shiv Mohan, Layak Singh and Ram Raj came
to the spot, who have seen the incident and when they tried to catch
hold the accused, he reloaded the country made pistol, threatened the
witnesses and ran away towards west. He further deposed that after
the incident the injured lay down on the Chabutara of Goverdhan,
where he died.
7.     PW.2-Dashrath in his statement had stated that it is six months
from today that Babu Singh was killed. On that date he was sitting at
his door. It was the day time around 1.30 am. He saw Babu Singh
alongwith his brother Shiv Sharan coming from West. When Babu
Singh reached near the house of Ram Autar, the accused Ram Autar
came out of his house and told Babu Singh that why did you slap my
sister and took out a country made pistol from his waist and fired at
Babu Singh. Thereafter Babu Singh fell on the ground. Seeing this
incident Goverdhan and he, sitting on the Chabutara in front of his
house, ran towards the spot. The other villagers Ram Raj, Layak
Singh also came to spot and they have also witnessed the incident.
We all tried to catch hold the accused but he reloaded the country
made pistol, threatened us and ran away towards west first and
thereafter ran towards south. When the Investigating Officer came to
the spot then he recovered the empty cartridge lying on the ground.
He also told the Investigating Officer about the incident. After the
incident Shiv Sharan Singh, brother of deceased- Babu Singh lifted
the deceased from the way and laid down him in the Chabutara of
Goverdhan, where he died. Then Shiv Sharan Singh went to lodge
the report. He further deposed that on the date of occurrence, he was
at home as he could not go to work on account of illness. He stated
that he heard that Ram Autar was saying why do you slap my sister
and that I do not know other things. The mother and sister of accused
were present at home but they did not come outside the door. He
further deposed that the deceased Babu Singh was empty hand and
he wore an underwear only. Ram Autar was sitting on his Chabutara
but when his mother and sister came then he went inside the house
and after 10 to 15 minutes he again came outside and sat on
Chabutara. He further deposed that the accused was sitting on his
Chabutara earlier and when he saw Babu Singh coming he rushed
towards him. Accused asked Babu Singh repeatedly why did you
slap my sister but Babu Singh did not reply. After murder he did not
ask anyone why did this murder took place. When Ram Autar
stopped Babu Singh then he was towards east of Ram Autar. He
further deposed that Babu Singh was aged about 25 years and not
married but his conduct was not bad and it would be wrong to say
that his murder took place on account of illicit relationship.
8.     PW-3-Station House Officer-Madan Singh has stated on oath
that he was posted as Station House Officer in Police Station
Khakrau from 07.12.1982 to 17.12.1982 and this incident was
reported in front of him. Head Constable Bindravan Sharma has also
worked with him. he recognize his writing and signature. He further
stated that on the basis of the written complaint, he prepared Chick
FIR and G.D, on which Ex.A-2 was inserted. He further stated on
oath that he started the investigation of this case and recorded the
statement of appellant at the police station and then went to the place
of occurrence where he found the dead body of Babu Singh lying on
Chabutara of Goverdhan Kori. Panchayatnama was prepared. He
further stated on oath that he inspected the place of occurrence and
site plan was also prepared. He also recovered plain earth and
bloodstained earth from the spot and prepared the fard report by
filling it in different boxes, on which Ex.A-10 was inserted. He
further stated that he recovered an empty cartridge from the spot and
sealed the same, on which Ex.A-11 was inserted. Thereafter PW-3
searched the accused house. Accused was not found there. Illegal
cartridges were recovered from the accused house and he had
prepared the fard report and sealed the same. Thereafter PW-3 took
the statements of Goverdhan and Dashrath Kori and a police team
was sent to search for the accused. On 08.12.1982 he took the
statements of other witnesses. The accused kept on running and
could not be arrested. On the same day PW-3 gave the report of
Section 82-83 Cr.P.C. and after receiving the warrant from the court
he attached the goods of accused and on 14.12.1982 he has prepared
a fard report. PW-3 further stated on oath that latter the accused
appeared before the Court and Investigating Officer gave the
chargesheet before the Court, which is Ex.A-13. He further stated
that during the investigation he could not find the sister and mother
of the accused nor did he try to find them. He found the dead body at
the same place where the deceased was shot and he took the blood
from the Chabutara of Goverdhan where the dead body was lying. In
the site map he has shown the place of occurrence as “A”. No blood
was found on that place. It is wrong to say that investigation was not
done properly.
9.      PW-4 Dr. Satish Chandra Srivastava has stated on oath that on
08.12.1982 he was posted as Medical Officer in Sadar Hospital,
Fatehpur and on this day he did the post mortem of the deceased
Babu Singh. He stated that the deceased died a day before; he was
about 26 years old; rigor mortis was present; the legs were swollen
and the eyes were half open. PW.4 found two scratches measuring ¾
x ¾ cm on the left side in front of the chest and both were present at
the distance of ¼ cm. He also found gun shot wound ¾ x ¾ x to the
depth of the chest on the left side and blackening was present; the
direction of pallet was from left to right. PW.4 has further stated that
he conducted the internal examination of the dead body and found
first and second ribs on the left side were fractured and torn; Pluria
was also torn; right and left lungs and heart were also punctured and
torn; collected blood was found on the chest; half digested food was
found in the stomach; small intestine was empty and large intestine
was full; no injury was found on the stomach; a big pallet was found
inside the chest, which was sealed in an envelop and sent to S.P.
Fatehpur. He further stated on oath that the deceased died of shock
and bleeding due to above mentioned injuries. He further stated that
the death of the deceased was possible on 07.12.1982 at 2.00 pm due
to fire arm injury; scratches can also come from falling on the
ground. He next stated that looking at the direction of the bullet
injury, it appears that the deceased was fired from the left side; there
should be a difference of 4-6 hours in the time of death.
10.    The judgment of acquittal was passed on the ground that it is
alleged that PW-1-Shiv Sharan Singh, real brother of the deceased
Babu Singh was accompanying the deceased while coming back
from his field and when the deceased fired upon by accused Ram
Autar several persons have also gathered on the spot but no one
including the PW-1-Shiv Sharan Singh tried to stop the accused from
running away, therefore, he had acted contrary to the natural reaction
which makes his presence doubtful as had he being there he would
have chased the accused and would have gone to the house of the
accused and would have caught hold of him. Presumption was raised
that since the informant side and his brother are the owner of the
agricultural field whereas the accused belonging to labour class
therefore, it is not understandable that the deceased Babu Singh
slapped only the sister of the accused, who was aged about 9-10
years and why he has not slapped the mother of the accused,
therefore, on these very ground the Trial Court has drawn the
presumption that it appear that the informant was not present on the
spot. It was further recorded that the gram plants were too small to be
plucked and therefore, the allegation of plucking gram plants does
not appear to be correct. By drawing inference from the statement of
PW-2-Dashrath, who is also an eye witness that when the accused
Ram Autar was scolding and was repeatedly asking the deceased
why he slapped his sister but he did not reply and that he did not try
to snatch countrymade pistol from the accused hands and at that
point of time some other witnesses, namely, Ram Raj, Layak Singh
and Goverdhan including some other persons have gathered on the
spot, therefore, as he has not mentioned the name of informant-PW-
1- Shiv Sharan Singh alongwith names of other persons, who have
seen the incident establishes that PW-2-Dashrath has admitted that
the informant was not present on the spot. Further inference from the
statement of PW-2 Dashrath was drawn that as the deceased was
wearing only underwear and was not wearing any other cloth on his
body, therefore, there is a presumption of his bad character as
alleged, which could be the motive of being fired upon, otherwise he
would have wearing shirt, banyan or paijama etc. while he was going
to or coming from his field, moreso, when he was in police and was a
reputed person of the village. As such a conclusion was drawn by the
trial court that the incident has not taken place in the manner as
alleged. The place of incident was also found to be doubtful on the
ground that the Investigating Officer did not collect any blood from
the spot and that blood was found only on the Chabutara of
Goverdhan where the dead body was lying and it is from there only
the blood stained and plain soil was collected. The Trial Court further
observed that the Investigating Officer has not visited the gram field
and has not shown the same in the site plan and nothing has been
written about the aforesaid field in the case diary. The Trial Court
further recorded that the Investigating Officer did not meet the
mother and sister of the accused or any other family members of the
accused during investigation and made no enquiry from them and
that he did not find any blood on the spot and has also not recovered
any empty cartridge on the spot. It was further found that although
allegation is that the deceased was fired from the front side, however,
he had suffered firearm injuries on the left side and the post mortem
report reflected that semi digested food was present in the stomach
which proves that he must have eaten something about two hours
before he was fired upon. Therefore, the Trial Court found that the
informant and deceased has gone out to visit their agricultural field is
not convincing, as they usually visit their field only in the morning
hours and usually villagers take their lunch by 10-11 am and relax
thereafter, therefore, prosecution story of informant and deceased
visiting agricultural field at about 12.00-1.00 in the noon, is not
correct. The Trial Court has further observed that there were no
special circumstances for which accused could have murdered the
deceased and the reason of plucking gram plants is false. The
deceased could have treated the sister of the accused softly and send
her back to her home. It was further observed that it appears that
when the informant and his family members started suspecting about
the murder of the deceased, therefore, for this reason the entire
family of the accused including the accused-Ram Autar escaped from
their house and for this reason the Investigating Officer did not find
them at their home which indicates that the accused was not present
on the spot or he had left the place and nobody has seen the incident.
On these grounds the trial court has passed the judgment of acquittal.
11.    Challenging the impugned judgment, Sri Ratan Singh, learned
AGA submits that there was cogent evidence to convict the accused
herein. He next submits that PW-1-Shiv Sharan Singh who is the
informant and real brother of the deceased and is eye witness of the
incident, narrated the entire incident with all clarity and details. He
further submitted that PW-2-Dashrath is the independent witness
near whose house murder had taken place and he has clearly spelled
tout the reasons as to how he was present on the spot. It is next
submitted that both the eye witnesses have withstood their cross
examination and nothing adverse came out from their testimonies
creating any doubt about the manner, time, place and spot of the
murder and that the accused Ram Autar had committed cold blooded
murder. By drawing attention to the site plan, learned A.G.A. has
submitted that there is no dispute about the spot where the murder
had taken place and in the site plan all directions have been shown
including the directions from where the informant deceased were
coming, from where the eye witnesses have seen the incident, the
spot where the dead body was lying. He has further pointed out that
in the site plan spot ‘H’ has been shown where the empty cartridge
was recovered. He further submitted that merely because blood was
not found on the spot where the deceased was fired upon would not
be sufficient to grant any benefit of doubt to the accused herein. He
further submitted that even the Trial Court has recorded a finding
that oral as well as documentary evidence available on records
clearly establishes that the incident had taken place at the spot, time
and date as alleged. He further argued that PW-1-Shiv Sharan Singh
is the real brother of the deceased and his presence on the spot is
quite natural as they both were returning from the field. He further
submitted that PW-2-Dashrath is the independent eye witness and in
his statement he has clearly stated that PW-1-Shiv Sharan Singh and
his brother-deceased-Babu Singh were coming together from their
field. He submitted that the post mortem report clearly support the
prosecution version. He next submitted that the empty cartridge was
recovered from the spot and recovery memo of empty cartridge is
Ex.Ka.11, therefore, finding of the Trial Court that no cartridge was
found from the record is contrary to record. He further submitted that
the bloodstained soil and plain soil was collected from the spot
which was made Ex.Ka.10. He further submitted that PW-4- Dr.
Satish Chandra Srivastava, who has conducted the post mortem has
proved the post mortem report, had clearly stated and proved that a
big size pallet was found inside the body of the deceased. He
submitted that there was only one entry wound and further the
deceased was immediately put on the Chabutara of Goverdhan from
where the blood stained soil was collected, therefore, his blood was
not found in the passage (Rasta). It is further submitted that no
benefit of defective investigation can be extended to the accused in a
case of direct evidence, therefore, in such a case of direct evidence
absence of blood on the passage would not go in favour of the
accused person. Learned AGA further submitted that the findings
given by the Trial Court to the effect that why the informant and
PW.2 did not chase the accused is absolutely perverse inasmuch as
eye witnesses have categorically stated that the accused Ram Autar
has re-loaded the country made pistol and threatened the persons
present on the spot that he would kill them also. Learned AGA
further submitted that allegation of bad character of the deceased is
neither here nor there as nothing was placed on record to prove the
same and this presumption is wholly perverse. He further submitted
that the presumption that on such a small thing the murder could not
have taken place is neither here nor there as in the case of direct
evidence motive is irrelevant. He further pointed out that the accused
in his statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C. has mentioned at one
place that he was falsely implicated in the present case due to
‘enmity’ and at an other place he has stated that he was falsely
implicated due to ‘old enmity’, however, he has not disclosed on
what was the ‘enmity’ or ‘old enmity’. Further submission of the
learned AGA is that there was a prompt FIR as the incident had taken
place at 2.00 pm and the FIR was lodged at 3.00 pm. Submission,
therefore, is that the prosecution has proved his case beyond any
shadow of doubt and the impugned judgment based purely on
presumption is highly perverse and therefore, the same is liable to be
reversed and accused is liable to be convicted for the offence under
12.    Per contra, Sri Pradeep Kumar, learned counsel for the accused
respondents submitted that no blood was found at the spot ‘A’ where
the deceased was allegedly fired upon by the accused. He further
submitted that PW-1 himself has stated that the deceased was fired
upon in the passage but no blood was found therefrom and the
Investigating Officer has collected the bloodstained and plain soil
from the Chabutara of Goverdhan from spot ‘X’ , therefore, the Trial
Court has rightly disbelieved the manner and the spot where the
crime was committed and rightly found that the same was not
committed by the accused respondent-Ram Autar. He submits that
therefrom, it is clear that the memo of recovery is false and place of
occurrence is highly doubtful. It is further submitted that PW-3,
Station House Officer had stated in his statement that he had
recovered one empty cartridge from the spot and he has also stated
that thereafter he had recovered illegal cartridges and empty
cartridges from the house of the accused, this clearly shows that the
recovery memo of empty cartridges from the spot is not worth
believed. He further submitted that as per alleged eye witness
account the shot was fired from the front side but as per the post
mortem report the fire has hit the deceased on the left side, therefore,
post mortem report does not support the prosecution version and
therefore, eye witness account is false. He further submitted that in
the statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C. the accused has clearly
stated that he was falsely implicated due to enmity. He submitted that
as the deceased was wearing underwear only, therefore, presumption
of his bad character has been correctly raised by the Trial Court to
hold that murder may have been committed by someone and not the
13.    We have considered the submissions and have perused the
14.    Before proceeding further, it would be appropriate to take note
of law on the appeal against acquittal.
15.    In a recent judgement of this Court in Virendra Singh vs.
State of UP and others, 2022 (3) ADJ 354 DB, the law on the issue
involved has been considered. For ready reference, paragraphs 10, 11
and 12 are quoted as under:
“10. In the case of Babu vs. State of Kerala (2010) 9 SCC 189 :
(2010) 3 SCC (Cri) 1179, the Hon'ble Apex Court has observed that
while dealing with a judgment of acquittal, the appellate court has
to consider the entire evidence on record, so as to arrive at a finding
as to whether the views of the trial Court were perverse or otherwise
unsustainable. The appellate court is entitled to consider whether in
arriving at a finding of fact, the trial Court had failed to take into
consideration admissible evidence and/or had taken into
consideration the evidence brought on record contrary to law.
Paragraphs 12 to 19 of the aforesaid judgment are quoted as
"12. This court time and again has laid down the guidelines for the
High Court to interfere with the judgment and order of acquittal
passed by the Trial Court. The appellate court should not
ordinarily set aside a judgment of acquittal in a case where two
views are possible, though the view of the appellate court may be
more, the probable one. While dealing with a judgment of
acquittal, the appellate court has to consider the entire evidence on
record, so as to arrive at a finding as to whether the views of the
trial Court were perverse or otherwise unsustainable. The
appellate court is entitled to consider whether in arriving at a
finding of fact, the trial Court had failed to take into consideration
admissible evidence and/or had taken into consideration the
evidence brought on record contrary to law. Similarly, wrong
placing of burden of proof may also be a subject matter of scrutiny
by the appellate court. (Vide Balak Ram v. State of U.P. AIR 1974
SC 2165; Shambhoo Missir & Anr. v. State of Bihar AIR 1991 SC
315; Shailendra Pratap & Anr. v. State of U.P. AIR 2003 SC 1104;
Narendra Singh v. State of M.P. (2004) 10 SCC 699; Budh Singh &
Ors. v. State of U.P. AIR 2006 SC 2500; State of U.P. v. Ramveer
Singh AIR 2007 SC 3075; S. Rama Krishna v. S. Rami Reddy (D)
by his LRs. & Ors. AIR 2008 SC 2066; Arulvelu & Anr. Vs. State
(2009) 10 SCC 206; Perla Somasekhara Reddy & Ors. v. State of
A.P. (2009) 16 SCC 98; and Ram Singh alias Chhaju v. State of
13. In Sheo Swarup and Ors. King Emperor AIR 1934 PC 227, the
Privy Council observed as under:
"...the High Court should and will always give proper weight and
consideration to such matters as (1) the views of the trial Judge
as to the credibility of the witnesses, (2) the presumption of
innocence in favour of the accused, a presumption certainly not
weakened by the fact that he has been acquitted at his trial, (3)
the right of the accused to the benefit of any doubt, and (4) the
slowness of an appellate court in disturbing a finding of fact
arrived at by a Judge who had the advantage of seeing the
witnesses...."
14. The aforesaid principle of law has consistently been followed
by this Court. (See: Tulsiram Kanu v. The State AIR 1954 SC 1;
Balbir Singh v. State of Punjab AIR 1957 SC 216; M.G. Agarwal v.
State of Maharashtra AIR 1963 SC 200; Khedu Mohton & Ors. v.
State of Bihar AIR 1970 SC 66; Sambasivan and Ors. State of
Kerala (1998) 5 SCC 412; Bhagwan Singh and Ors. v. State of
M.P. (2002) 4 SCC 85; and State of Goa v. Sanjay Thakran and
15. In Chandrappa and Ors. v. State of Karnataka (2007) 4 SCC
415, this Court reiterated the legal position as under:
"(1) An appellate court has full power to review, re-appreciate
and reconsider the evidence upon which the order of acquittal is
founded.
(2) The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 puts no limitation,
restriction or condition on exercise of such power and an
appellate court on the evidence before it may reach its own
conclusion, both on questions of fact and of law.
(3) Various expressions, such as, "substantial and compelling
reasons", "good and sufficient grounds", "very strong
circumstances", "distorted conclusions", "glaring mistakes", etc.
are not intended to curtail extensive powers of an appellate court
in an appeal against acquittal. Such phraseologies are more in
the nature of "flourishes of language" to emphasise the
reluctance of an appellate court to interfere with acquittal than to
curtail the power of the court to review the evidence and to come
to its own conclusion.
(4) An appellate court, however, must bear in mind that in case of
acquittal, there is double presumption in favour of the accused.
Firstly, the presumption of innocence is available to him under
the fundamental principle of criminal jurisprudence that every
person shall be presumed to be innocent unless he is proved
guilty by a competent court of law. Secondly, the accused having
secured his acquittal, the presumption of his innocence is further
reinforced, reaffirmed and strengthened by the trial court.
(5) If two reasonable conclusions are possible on the basis of the
evidence on record, the appellate court should not disturb the
finding of acquittal recorded by the trial court."
16. In Ghurey Lal v. State of Uttar Pradesh (2008) 10 SCC 450,
this Court re-iterated the said view, observing that the appellate
court in dealing with the cases in which the trial courts have
acquitted the accused, should bear in mind that the trial court's
acquittal bolsters the presumption that he is innocent. The
appellate court must give due weight and consideration to the
decision of the trial court as the trial court had the distinct
advantage of watching the demeanour of the witnesses, and was in
a better position to evaluate the credibility of the witnesses.
17. In State of Rajasthan v. Naresh @ Ram Naresh (2009) 9 SCC
368, the Court again examined the earlier judgments of this Court
and laid down that an "order of acquittal should not be lightly
interfered with even if the court believes that there is some
evidence pointing out the finger towards the accused."
18. In State of Uttar Pradesh v. Banne alias Baijnath & Ors.
(2009) 4 SCC 271, this Court gave certain illustrative
circumstances in which the Court would be justified in interfering
with a judgment of acquittal by the High Court. The circumstances
i) The High Court's decision is based on totally erroneous view of
law by ignoring the settled legal position;
ii) The High Court's conclusions are contrary to evidence and
iii) The entire approach of the High Court in dealing with the
evidence was patently illegal leading to grave miscarriage of
iv) The High Court's judgment is manifestly unjust and
unreasonable based on erroneous law and facts on the record of
v) This Court must always give proper weight and consideration to
the findings of the High Court;
vi) This Court would be extremely reluctant in interfering with a
case when both the Sessions Court and the High Court have
recorded an order of acquittal.
A similar view has been reiterated by this Court in Dhanapal v.
State by Public Prosecutor, Madras (2009) 10 SCC 401.
19. Thus, the law on the issue can be summarised to the effect that
in exceptional cases where there are compelling circumstances,
and the judgment under appeal is found to be perverse, the
appellate court can interfere with the order of acquittal. The
appellate court should bear in mind the presumption of innocence
of the accused and further that the trial Court's acquittal bolsters
the presumption of his innocence. Interference in a routine manner
where the other view is possible should be avoided, unless there
are good reasons for interference."
11. Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Ramesh Babulal Doshi vs.
State of Gujarat (1996) 9 SCC 225 : 1996 SCC (Cri) 972 has
observed that while deciding appeal against acquittal, the High
Court has to first record its conclusion on the question whether the
approach of the trial court dealing with the evidence was patently
illegal or conclusion arrived by it is wholly untenable which alone
will justify interference in an order of acquittal.
12. The aforesaid judgments were taken note of with approval by
Supreme Court in the case of Anwar Ali and another vs. State of
Himachal Pradesh (2020) 10 SCC 166, Nagabhushan vs. State of
Karnataka (2021) 5 SCC 222, and Babu (supra) in Achhar Singh vs.
State of Himachal Pradesh (2021) 5 SCC 543.”
16.   In State of U.P. Vs. Phool Singh and Others, 2022 (4) ADJ
397 (DB) also this Court has considered the law on appeal against
acquittal, para 43, 44, 45, 46, 47 and 48 whereof are quoted as under:
“43. In State of U.P. v. M.K. Anthony, (1985) 1 SCC 505, the
Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that: -
"10. While appreciating the evidence of a witness, the approach
must be whether the evidence of the witness read as a whole
appears to have a ring of truth. Once that impression is formed, it
is undoubtedly necessary for the court to scrutinise the evidence
more particularly keeping in view the deficiencies, drawbacks and
infirmities pointed out in the evidence as a whole and evaluate
them to find out whether it is against the general tenor of the
evidence given by the witness and whether the earlier evaluation of
the evidence is shaken as to render it unworthy of belief. Minor
discrepancies on trivial matters not touching the core of the case,
hyper-technical approach by taking sentences torn out of context
here or there from the evidence, attaching importance to some
technical error committed by the investigating officer not going to
the root of the matter would not ordinarily permit rejection of the
evidence as a whole. If the court before whom the witness gives
evidence had the opportunity to form the opinion about the general
tenor of evidence given by the witness, the appellate court which
had not this benefit will have to attach due weight to the
appreciation of evidence by the trial court and unless there are
reasons weighty and formidable it would not be proper to reject the
evidence on the ground of minor variations or infirmities in the
matter of trivial details. Even honest and truthful witnesses may
differ in some details unrelated to the main incident because power
of observation, retention and reproduction differ with individuals.
Cross-examination is an unequal duel between a rustic and refined
lawyer....."
44. In State of U.P. v. Krishna Master, (2010) 12 SCC 324 the
Hon'ble Supreme Court explained the manner in which the Court
should examine the statement of witnesses in the following words:-
"15. Before appreciating evidence of the witnesses examined in the
case, it would be instructive to refer to the criteria for appreciation
of oral evidence. While appreciating the evidence of a witness, the
approach must be whether the evidence of the witness read as a
whole appears to have a ring of truth. Once that impression is
found, it is undoubtedly necessary for the court to scrutinise the
evidence more particularly keeping in view the deficiencies,
drawbacks and infirmities pointed out in the evidence as a whole
and evaluate them to find out whether it is against the general
tenor of the evidence and whether the earlier evaluation of the
evidence is shaken as to render it unworthy of belief. Minor
discrepancies on trivial matters not touching the core of the case,
hypertechnical approach by taking sentences torn out of context
here or there from the evidence, attaching importance to some
technical error committed by the investigating officer not going to
the root of the matter would not ordinarily permit rejection of the
evidence as a whole.
16. If the court before whom the witness gives evidence had the
opportunity to form the opinion about the general tenor of the
evidence given by the witness, the appellate court which had not
this benefit will have to attach due weight to the appreciation of
evidence by the trial court and unless the reasons are weighty and
formidable, it would not be proper for the appellate court to reject
the evidence on the ground of variations or infirmities in the matter
of trivial details. Minor omissions in the police statements are
never considered to be fatal. The statements given by the witnesses
before the police are meant to be brief statements and could not
take place of evidence in the court. Small/Trivial omissions would
not justify a finding by court that the witnesses concerned are liars.
The prosecution evidence may suffer from inconsistencies here and
discrepancies there, but that is a shortcoming from which no
criminal case is free. The main thing to be seen is whether those
inconsistencies go to the root of the matter or pertain to
insignificant aspects thereof. In the former case, the defence may
be justified in seeking advantage of incongruities obtaining in the
evidence. In the latter, however, no such benefit may be available
to it.
17. In the deposition of witnesses, there are always normal
discrepancies, howsoever honest and truthful they may be. These
discrepancies are due to normal errors of observation, normal
errors of memory due to lapse of time, due to mental disposition,
shock and horror at the time of occurrence and threat to the life. It
is not unoften that improvements in earlier version are made at the
trial in order to give a boost to the prosecution case, albeit
foolishly. Therefore, it is the duty of the court to separate falsehood
from the truth. In sifting the evidence, the court has to attempt to
separate the chaff from the grains in every case and this attempt
cannot be abandoned on the ground that the case is baffling unless
the evidence is really so confusing or conflicting that the process
cannot reasonably be carried out. In the light of these principles,
this Court will have to determine whether the evidence of
eyewitnesses examined in this case proves the prosecution case."
45. In Manu Sharma v. State (NCT of Delhi), (2010) 6 SCC 1 the
Hon'ble Supreme Court formulated the principles to be kept in mind
by the appellate Court while dealing with appeals against
"27. The following principles have to be kept in mind by the
appellate court while dealing with appeals, particularly against an
(i) There is no limitation on the part of the appellate court to
review the evidence upon which the order of acquittal is founded.
(ii) The appellate court in an appeal against acquittal can review
the entire evidence and come to its own conclusions.
(iii) The appellate court can also review the trial court's
conclusion with respect to both facts and law.
(iv) While dealing with the appeal preferred by the State, it is the
duty of the appellate court to marshal the entire evidence on record
and by giving cogent and adequate reasons set aside the judgment
of acquittal.
(v) An order of acquittal is to be interfered with only when there
are "compelling and substantial reasons" for doing so. If the order
is "clearly unreasonable", it is a compelling reason for
interference.
(vi) While sitting in judgment over an acquittal the appellate court
is first required to seek an answer to the question whether findings
of the trial court are palpably wrong, manifestly erroneous or
demonstrably unsustainable. If the appellate court answers the
above question in the negative the order of acquittal is not to be
disturbed. Conversely, if the appellate court holds, for reasons to
be recorded, that the order of acquittal cannot at all be sustained
in view of any of the above infirmities, it can reappraise the
evidence to arrive at its own conclusion.
(vii) When the trial court has ignored the evidence or misread the
material evidence or has ignored material documents like dying
declaration/report of ballistic experts, etc. the appellate court is
competent to reverse the decision of the trial court depending on
the materials placed."
46. In Achhar Singh v. State of H.P., (2021) 5 SCC 543, the
Hon'ble Supreme Court explained the scope of powers of the High
Court in appeals against acquittal in the following manner: -
"16. It is thus a well-crystalized principle that if two views are
possible, the High Court ought not to interfere with the trial court's
judgment. However, such a precautionary principle cannot be
overstretched to portray that the "contours of appeal" against
acquittal under Section 378 Cr.P.C. are limited to seeing whether
or not the trial court's view was impossible. It is equally well
settled that there is no bar on the High Court's power to re-
appreciate evidence in an appeal against acquittal. This Court has
held in a catena of decisions (including Chandrappa v. State of
Karnataka, State of A.P. v. M. Madhusudhan Rao and Raveen
Kumar v. State of H.P.) that the Cr.P.C. does not differentiate in the
power, scope, jurisdiction or limitation between appeals against
judgments of conviction or acquittal and that the appellate court is
free to consider on both fact and law, despite the self-restraint that
has been ingrained into practice while dealing with orders of
acquittal where there is a double presumption of innocence of the
accused."
The Hon'ble Supreme Court further held that "homicidal deaths
cannot be left to judicium dei. The court in its quest to reach the
truth ought to make earnest efforts to extract gold out of the heap
of black sand. The solemn duty is to dig out the authenticity. It is
only when the court, despite its best efforts, fails to reach a firm
conclusion that the benefit of doubt is extended."
47. The principles which emerge from the aforesaid decisions, are
that the "contours of appeal" against acquittal under Section 378
CrPC are not limited to seeing whether or not the trial court's view
was impossible. There is no bar on the High Court's power to
reappreciate evidence in an appeal against acquittal. Cr.P.C. does
not differentiate in the power, scope, jurisdiction or limitation
between appeals against judgments of conviction or acquittal. The
appellate court is free to consider on both fact and law, despite the
self-restraint that has been ingrained into practice while dealing
with orders of acquittal where there is a double presumption of
innocence of the accused.
48. While appreciating the evidence of a witness, the approach must
be whether the evidence of the witness read as a whole appears to
have a ring of truth. In the deposition of witnesses, there are always
normal discrepancies, howsoever honest and truthful they may be,
but that is a shortcoming from which no criminal case is free. These
discrepancies are due to normal errors of observation, normal
errors of memory due to lapse of time, due to mental disposition,
shock and horror at the time of occurrence and threat to the life. It is
the duty of the court to separate falsehood from the truth. In sifting
the evidence, the court has to attempt to separate the chaff from the
grains in every case. The main thing to be seen is whether those
inconsistencies go to the root of the matter or pertain to insignificant
aspects thereof. In the former case, the defence may be justified in
seeking advantage of the incongruities occurring in the evidence. In
the latter, however, no such benefit may be available to it. In the
light of these principles, this Court will have to determine whether
the evidence of the eyewitnesses examined in this case proves the
prosecution case. When the trial court has ignored the evidence or
misread the material evidence or has ignored material documents
like the dying declaration, the appellate court is competent to
reverse the decision of the trial court depending on the materials
placed.”
17.   In a latest judgment in Government Appeal No.2995 of 1985
(State of U.P. vs. Laxmi and Others), decided on 13.07.2022, this
Court once again had the opportunity to consider the law on appeal
against acquittal, para 18 and 19 whereof are quoted as under:
“18. While dealing with an appeal against acquittal by invoking
Section 378 Cr.P.C. the appellate court has to consider whether the
trial court's view be deemed as possible one, particularly when
evidence on record has been analyzed. The Hon'ble Supreme Court
in Jafruddin and others vs. State of Kerala 2022 SCC Online SC 495
in para 25 has held that "while dealing with an appeal against
acquittal by invoking Section 378 of the Cr.P.C, the Appellate Court
has to consider whether the Trial Court's view can be termed as a
possible one, particularly when evidence on record has been
analyzed. The reason is that an order of acquittal adds up to the
presumption of innocence in favour of the accused. Thus, the
Appellate Court has to be relatively slow in reversing the order of
the Trial Court rendering acquittal. Therefore, the presumption in
favour of the accused does not get weakened but only strengthened.
Such a double presumption that enures in favour of the accused has
to be disturbed only by thorough scrutiny on the accepted legal
parameters."
19. Hon'ble Supreme Court in Mohan @ Srinivas @ Seena @ Tailor
Seena vs. State of Karnataka, [2021 SCC OnLine SC 1233] has
observed as herein-under:-
"20. Section 378 Cr.P.C. enables the State to prefer an appeal
against an order of acquittal. Section 384 Cr.P.C. speaks of the
powers that can be exercised by the Appellate Court. When the
trial court renders its decision by acquitting the accused,
presumption of innocence gathers strength before the Appellate
Court. As a consequence, the onus on the prosecution becomes
more burdensome as there is a double presumption of innocence.
Certainly, the Court of first instance has its own advantages in
delivering its verdict, which is to see the witnesses in person
while they depose. The Appellate Court is expected to involve
itself in a deeper, studied scrutiny of not only the evidence before
it, but is duty bound to satisfy itself whether the decision of the
trial court is both possible and plausible view. When two views
are possible, the one taken by the trial court in a case of acquittal
is to be followed on the touchstone of liberty along with the
advantage of having seen the witnesses. Article 21 of the
Constitution of India also aids the accused after acquittal in a
certain way, though not absolute. Suffice it is to state that the
Appellate Court shall remind itself of the role required to play,
while dealing with a case of an acquittal.
21. Every case has its own journey towards the truth and it is the
Court's role undertake. Truth has to be found on the basis of
evidence available before it. There is no room for subjectivity nor
the nature of offence affects its performance. We have a hierarchy
of courts in dealing with cases. An Appellate Court shall not
expect the trial court to act in a particular way depending upon
the sensitivity of the case. Rather it should be appreciated if a
trial court decides a case on its own merit despite its sensitivity.
22. At times, courts do have their constraints. We find, different
decisions being made by different courts, namely, trial court on
the one hand and the Appellate Courts on the other. If such
decisions are made due to institutional constraints, they do not
augur well. The district judiciary is expected to be the
foundational court, and therefore, should have the freedom of
mind to decide a case on its own merit or else it might become a
stereotyped one rendering conviction on a moral platform.
Indictment and condemnation over a decision rendered, on
considering all the materials placed before it, should be avoided.
The Appellate Court is expected to maintain a degree of caution
before making any remark.
23. This court, time and again has laid down the law on the scope
of inquiry by an Appellate court while dealing with an appeal
against acquittal under Section 378 Cr.P.C. We do not wish to
multiply the aforesaid principle except placing reliance on a
recent decision of this court in Anwar Ali vs. State of Himanchal
14.2. When can the findings of fact recorded by a court be held to
be perverse has been dealt with and considered in paragraph 20
of the aforesaid decision, which reads as under : (Babu case
[Babu v. State of Kerala, (2010) 9 SCC 189 : (2010) 3 SCC (Cri)
1179]) "20. The findings of fact recorded by a court can be held
to be perverse if the findings have been arrived at by ignoring or
excluding relevant material or by taking into consideration
irrelevant/inadmissible material. The finding may also be said to
be perverse if it is "against the weight of evidence", or if the
finding so outrageously defies logic as to suffer from the vice of
irrationality. (Vide Rajinder Kumar Kindra v. Delhi Admn.
[Rajinder Kumar Kindra v. Delhi Admn., (1984) 4 SCC 635 :
Authority v. Gopi Nath & Sons [Excise & Taxation Officer-cum-
Assessing Authority v. Gopi Nath & Sons, 1992 Supp (2) SCC
312], Triveni Rubber & Plastics v. CCE [Triveni Rubber &
Plastics v. CCE, 1994 Supp (3) SCC 665], Gaya Din v. Hanuman
Prasad [Gaya Din v. Hanuman Prasad, (2001) 1 SCC 501],
Aruvelu [Arulvelu v. State, (2009) 10 SCC 206 : (2010) 1 SCC
(Cri) 288] and Gamini Bala Koteswara Rao v. State of A.P.
[Gamini Bala Koteswara Rao v. State of A.P., (2009) 10 SCC 636
It has been further observed, after following the decision
of this Court in Kuldeep Singh v. Commr. of Police [Kuldeep
Singh v. Commr. of Police, (1999) 2 SCC 10 : 1999 SCC (L&S)
429], that if a decision is arrived at on the basis of no evidence
or thoroughly unreliable evidence and no reasonable person
would act upon it, the order would be perverse. But if there is
some evidence on record which is acceptable and which could be
relied upon, the conclusions would not be treated as perverse and
the findings would not be interfered with."
18. In Phool Singh (Supra) law relating to the effect of defect in
investigation has been discussed, para 56 and 57 whereof are quoted
56. The law relating to the effect of a defect in investigation has
been discussed and summarized by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
Gajoo v. State of Uttarakhand, (2012) 9 SCC 532, in the following
"20. In regard to defective investigation, this Court in Dayal
Singh v. State of Uttaranchal, (2012) 8 SCC 263 while dealing
with the cases of omissions and commissions by the investigating
officer, and duty of the court in such cases, held as under: (SCC
pp. 280-83, paras 27-36) "27. Now, we may advert to the duty of
the court in such cases. In Sathi Prasad v. State of U.P. (1972) 3
SCC 613 this Court stated that it is well settled that if the police
records become suspect and investigation perfunctory, it becomes
the duty of the court to see if the evidence given in court should
be relied upon and such lapses ignored. Noticing the possibility
of investigation being designedly defective, this Court in Dhanaj
Singh v. State of Punjab, (2004) 3 SCC 654, held: (SCC p. 657,
para 5) ''5. In the case of a defective investigation the court has
to be circumspect in evaluating the evidence. But it would not be
right in acquitting an accused person solely on account of the
defect; to do so would tantamount to playing into the hands of the
investigating officer if the investigation is designedly defective.'
28. Dealing with the cases of omission and commission, the
Court in Paras Yadav v. State of Bihar (1999) 2 SCC 126,
enunciated the principle, in conformity with the previous
judgments, that if the lapse or omission is committed by the
investigating agency, negligently or otherwise, the prosecution
evidence is required to be examined dehors such omissions to
find out whether the said evidence is reliable or not. The
contaminated conduct of officials should not stand in the way of
evaluating the evidence by the courts, otherwise the designed
mischief would be perpetuated and justice would be denied to the
complainant party.
29. In Zahira Habibullah Sheikh (5) v. State of Gujarat (2006) 3
SCC 374, the Court noticed the importance of the role of
witnesses in a criminal trial. The importance and primacy of the
quality of trial process can be observed from the words of
Bentham, who states that witnesses are the eyes and ears of
justice. The court issued a caution that in such situations, there is
a greater responsibility of the court on the one hand and on the
other the courts must seriously deal with persons who are
involved in creating designed investigation. The Court held that:
(SCC p. 398, para 42) ''42. Legislative measures to emphasise
prohibition against tampering with witness, victim or informant
have become the imminent and inevitable need of the day.
Conducts which illegitimately affect the presentation of evidence
in proceedings before the courts have to be seriously and sternly
dealt with. There should not be any undue anxiety to only protect
the interest of the accused. That would be unfair, as noted above,
to the needs of the society. On the contrary, efforts should be to
ensure a fair trial where the accused and the prosecution both get
a fair deal. Public interest in the proper administration of justice
must be given as much importance, if not more, as the interest of
the individual accused. In this courts have a vital role to play.'
(emphasis in original)
30. With the passage of time, the law also developed and the
dictum of the court emphasised that in a criminal case, the fate of
proceedings cannot always be left entirely in the hands of the
parties. Crime is a public wrong, in breach and violation of
public rights and duties, which affects the community as a whole
and is harmful to the society in general.
31. Reiterating the above principle, this Court in NHRC v. State
of Gujarat (2009) 6 SCC 767, held as under: (SCC pp. 777-78,
para 6) ''6. ... "35. ... The concept of fair trial entails familiar
triangulation of interests of the accused, the victim and the
society and it is the community that acts through the State and
prosecuting agencies. Interest of society is not to be treated
completely with disdain and as persona non grata. The courts
have always been considered to have an overriding duty to
maintain public confidence in the administration of justice--often
referred to as the duty to vindicate and uphold the ''majesty of the
law'. Due administration of justice has always been viewed as a
continuous process, not confined to determination of the
particular case, protecting its ability to function as a court of law
in the future as in the case before it. If a criminal court is to be an
effective instrument in dispensing justice, the Presiding Judge
must cease to be a spectator and a mere recording machine by
becoming a participant in the trial evincing intelligence, active
interest and elicit all relevant materials necessary for reaching
the correct conclusion, to find out the truth, and administer
justice with fairness and impartiality both to the parties and to
the community it serves. The courts administering criminal
justice cannot turn a blind eye to vexatious or oppressive conduct
that has occurred in relation to proceedings, even if a fair trial is
still possible, except at the risk of undermining the fair name and
standing of the Judges as impartial and independent
adjudicators." (Zahira Habibullah case, SCC p. 395, para 35)'
32. In State of Karnataka v. K. Yarappa Reddy (1999) 8 SCC 715,
this Court occasioned to consider the similar question of
defective investigation as to whether any manipulation in the
station house diary by the investigating officer could be put
against the prosecution case. This Court, in para 19, held as
follows: (SCC p. 720) ''19. But can the above finding (that the
station house diary is not genuine) have any inevitable bearing
on the other evidence in this case? If the other evidence, on
scrutiny, is found credible and acceptable, should the court be
influenced by the machinations demonstrated by the investigating
officer in conducting investigation or in preparing the records so
unscrupulously? It can be a guiding principle that as
investigation is not the solitary area for judicial scrutiny in a
criminal trial, the conclusion of the court in the case cannot be
allowed to depend solely on the probity of investigation. It is
well-nigh settled that even if the investigation is illegal or even
suspicious the rest of the evidence must be scrutinised
independently of the impact of it. Otherwise the criminal trial will
plummet to the level of the investigating officers ruling the roost.
The court must have predominance and pre-eminence in criminal
trials over the action taken by the investigating officers. The
criminal justice should not be made a casualty for the wrongs
committed by the investigating officers in the case. In other
words, if the court is convinced that the testimony of a witness to
the occurrence is true the court is free to act on it albeit the
investigating officer's suspicious role in the case.'
33. In Ram Bali v. State of U.P. (2004) 10 SCC 598, the judgment
in Karnel Singh v. State of M.P. (1995) 5 SCC 518 was reiterated
and this Court had observed that: (Ram Bali case, SCC p. 604,
para 12) ''12. ... In case of defective investigation the court has to
be circumspect [while] evaluating the evidence. But it would not
be right in acquitting an accused person solely on account of the
defect; to do so would tantamount to playing into the hands of the
investigation officer if the investigation is designedly defective.'
34. Where our criminal justice system provides safeguards of fair
trial and innocent till proven guilty to an accused, there it also
contemplates that a criminal trial is meant for doing justice to
all, the accused, the society and a fair chance to prove to the
prosecution. Then alone can law and order be maintained. The
courts do not merely discharge the function to ensure that no
innocent man is punished, but also that a guilty man does not
escape. Both are public duties of the Judge. During the course of
the trial, the learned Presiding Judge is expected to work
objectively and in a correct perspective. Where the prosecution
attempts to misdirect the trial on the basis of a perfunctory or
designedly defective investigation, there the court is to be deeply
cautious and ensure that despite such an attempt, the
determinative process is not subverted. For truly attaining this
object of a ''fair trial', the court should leave no stone unturned to
do justice and protect the interest of the society as well.
57. In State of Karnataka v. Suvarnamma, (2015) 1 SCC 323, the
Hon'ble Supreme Court held that "It is also well settled that though
the investigating agency is expected to be fair and efficient, any
lapse on its part cannot per se be a ground to throw out the
prosecution case when there is overwhelming evidence to prove the
offence."
19. In Mohabbat vs. State of M.P., (2009) 13 SCC 630, Hon’ble
Supreme Court has held that it is well settled that relationship is not a
ground affecting the credibility of a witness, relevant extract of
paragraph 11, 12 and 13.5 are quoted as under:
"11. Learned counsel for the respondent State on the other hand
supported the judgment of the High Court.
"12. Merely because the eyewitnesses are family members their
evidence cannot per se be discarded. When there is allegation of
interestedness, the same has to be established. Mere statement that
being relatives of the deceased they are likely to falsely implicate the
accused cannot be a ground to discard the evidence which is
otherwise cogent and credible. We shall also deal with the
contention regarding interestedness of the witnesses for furthering
the prosecution version.
13. ''5. ... Relationship is not a factor to affect credibility of a
witness. It is more often than not that a relation would not conceal
actual culprit and make allegations against an innocent person.
Foundation has to be laid if plea of false implication is made. In
such cases, the court has to adopt a careful approach and analyse
evidence to find out whether it is cogent and credible.
20.    In Nirmal Singh and Another vs. State of Bihar, AIR 2005
SC 1265, the Hon’ble Supreme Court has held that if eye witness
account is convincing on firing by accused or deceased, some
infirmity in investigation like nonsending of blood stained cloth
wrapped around the wound for chemical examination were not fatal
to prosecution, para 16, 17 and 18 whereof are quoted as under:
“16. Counsel then submitted that the prosecution has failed to prove
that the dalan of the deceased was the real place of occurrence. This
submission is based on the fact that no blood stained earth was
seized from the place of occurrence. It is true that no blood stained
earth was seized from the place of occurrence but there is also
evidence of several witnesses including the investigating officer that
no blood had fallen on the earth. Eye witnesses explained that on
receiving the injury the deceased pressed his wound with his hands
whereafter a piece of cloth was tied around the wound which soaked
the blood which may have come out. There was, therefore, no
likelihood of the earth getting blood stained. Counsel for the
appellants submitted that the intestines were protruding as described
in the inquest report, and in such a situation there must have been
some bleeding,. That may be so, but in view of the explanation
offered by the prosecution witnesses it appears probable that no
blood had fallen on the ground at the place of occurrence. In any
event, if some blood had fallen at the place of occurrence which the
investigating officer failed to notice, that by itself will not be fatal to
the case of the prosecution. We must observe that the investigation in
this case has been most unsatisfactory and the investigating officer
was not conscious of his responsibilities. The blood stained piece of
cloth which was wrapped around the wound of the deceased appears
to have been seized by the investigating officer, but when questioned
as to why it was not sent for chemical examination, he answered that
he had hung that piece of cloth on a guava tree in the police station.
The statement is comical but discloses the utter non-seriousness with
which the investigation was conducted. We had expected better from
the investigating officer who was investigating a serious case of
murder. However, for this reason we will not reject the case of the
prosecution entirely.
17. With these facts in the background, we have to consider whether
the ocular testimony of Pws. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8 & 11 should be
discarded. It is no doubt true that the eye witnesses are related to
each other but that is to be expected since the occurrence took place
in the dalan of the house of the deceased. The evidence of the eye
witnesses does not suffer from any infirmity, and appears to be
convicting. No significant contradiction or infirmity has been
brought to our notice.
18. In these circumstances, we do not feel persuaded to discard the
case of the prosecution only on account of some infirmities which we
have noticed earlier. There appears to be no reason why so many
eye witnesses should falsely implicate the appellants, and there is in
fact, nothing on record to suggest that the witnesses had any reason
to falsely implicate them.”
21.   In Narendra Nath Khaware vs. Parasnath Khaware and
Others, (2003) 5 SCC 488, it was held by the Hon’ble Supreme
Court that absence of bloodstains on the spot is of no consequence
where there was no doubt about the actual occurrence having taken
place and about the spot where it took place; relevant extract of para
7 whereof is quoted as under:-
“7. …………...Another factor which had weighed with the courts
below is the absence of blood on the spot. This was explained as
wholly of no consequence in the facts of the present case where there
is no doubt about the actual occurrence having taken place and
about the spot where it took place. It is also emerging from the
record that the courtyard where the incident took place was open to
sky and it was a rainy day. Therefore, as argued by the learned
counsel for the appellant, the bloodstains might have been washed
away.”
22.   A reference may also be made in this regard to Ram Swaroop
and Others vs. State of U.P., (2000) 2 SCC 461, para 12 whereof is
“12. According to the learned counsel for the appellants, as no
blood had collected or found on the platform, it is a serious infirmity
in the case for the prosecution. This point was also urged before the
High Court and the High Court rightly rejected this point on the
ground that the victim were immediately taken to the police station
and people were also moving here and there at the place of the
occurrence. Therefore, by the time the investigating officer went to
the place, even if blood had fallen on the ground, the officer could
not have collected the blood.”
23.     Same view was taken in State of Rajasthan vs. Satyanarayan,
(1998) 8 SCC 404, para 7 whereof is quoted as under:-
“7. Merely because no blood was found near the house of the
respondent, it cannot be said that no incident took place there. The
fact that kesar Lal had received a knife blow near his house was
admitted by the accused though according to him the knife was with
PW 2- Satyanarayan and not with him As the trial court has pointed
out, the place was a public road and there was lot of traffic on that
road. That could have been the reason why no blood was found
when the spot panchnama was made after few hours. Moreover, the
evidence discloses that intestines of Kesar Lal had come out and
that could have blocked the flow of much blood. Some blood was
absorbed by the clothes. Therefore, the circumstance that not
sufficient blood was noticed when the spot panchnama was made
should not have been utilised by the High court for holding that the
prosecution version was not correct and that the defence version
was more probable.”
24.     As per the law discussed above, it is the duty of this Court not
only merely discharge the function to ensure that innocent person is
not punished but also that guilty person does not escape. Settled law
is that both are public duties of the Court then alone law and order
can be maintained. As held, for truly attaining this object of a ‘fair
trial’ the Court should leave no stone unturned to do justice and
protect the society as well. We are conscious of the fact that this
appeal is of the year 1983, however, bound by the aforesaid duty, we
proceed to record our findings.
25.     As per the law discussed above, we find that the judgment of
the trial court is wholly perverse and is not sustainable in the eye of
law. We find that the approach of the trial court dealing with the
evidence was patently illegal as the conclusion arrived at is wholly
unsustainable and requires interference. We also find that the
evidence of the witnesses read as a whole has a ring of truth and the
trial court has adopted a hyper technical approach by giving
importance to some minor lapses committed by the Investigating
Officer and on that basis rejected the evidence as a whole. The trial
court has picked up sentences from here and there from the
statements of the eye witnesses and has raised presumption regarding
innocence of the accused. We are of the firm opinion that the entire
judgment is based on complete misreading of the evidence and the
same is purely based on conjectures and surmises and is perverse in
nature. Therefore, as per the settled law, we are incline to reconsider
the entire evidences on record.
26.     We find that the first information report was lodged promptly
without any delay. The incident had taken place at 1.00 pm and the
first information report was lodged on the same day at 3.00 pm. The
Investigating Officer promptly recorded the statement of the
informant under Section 161 Cr.P.C. and proceeded to the place of
occurrence and inspected the dead body and sealed the same. The
bloodstained soil and plain soil were collected and recovery memo
was prepared. One empty cartridge was recovered from the spot,
recovery memo whereof was prepared as Exhibit-11. PW.1-Shiv
Sharan Singh, who is the eyewitness of the incident and the real
brother of the deceased had clearly stated that if they return from
their field, house of the accused comes first and thereafter, would
reach to his own house and by explaining the site plan he had clearly
specified the spot where the incident had taken place. It is clearly
stated that the residence of Ram Autar is in front of the house of
Dashrath Dhobi and that of Goverdhan. He had also stated that his
brother Babu Singh had slapped the sister of the accused while she
was plucking gram leaves alonwith her mother. On this the mother
and sister of the accused returned to their house abusing them and
after some time when they reached near the house of Ram Autar,
Ram Autar came out and stood in front of his brother-deceased Babu
Singh and said that since you have slapped my sister, he will teach
him a lesson and took out a country made pistol from his waist and
fired on the chest of Babu Singh. He had also stated that when he
tried to move forward and started shouting then other villagers
Goverdhan, Dasrath, Shiv Mohan, Layak Singh and Ram Raj came
to the spot, who have seen the incident and when they tried to catch
the accused, he reloaded the country made pistol, threatened the
witnesses and ran away towards west. This clearly show that a
categorical description of the spot, time and the manner in which the
offence has been committed by the accused Ram Autar has been
given by the PW-1, which also finds categorical support from the
statement of PW-2-Dashrath. The aforesaid statement further reflects
that the accused Ram Autar was prepared with his country made
pistol to commit the crime and has actually committed the same. He
further stated that after incident he removed his brother and placed
him on the Chabutara of Goverdhan where he died. He had withstood
the cross examination and had also stated the distance that Ram
Autar fired from a distance of about four feets (Chaar Hath Ki Duri)
27.    Similarly, PW-2 Dashrath, whose house is in front of the house
of the accused- Ram Autar and spot where the murder was
committed, had categorically proved his presence on the spot and has
also given exact description of the place and the manner in which the
offence was committed, which could not be dislodged by the defence
witnesses. The informant as well as the prosecution witnesses after
investigation was not shy in stating that when the deceased Babu
Singh was fired upon he was standing on the Kaccha Rasta and
immediately after being shot was shifted to Chabutara of Goverdhan
where he died and where the dead body was found lying when the
Investigating Officer had reached the spot. PW-2 having proved his
presence on the spot from the time much earlier to the time of
incident had clearly stated that when the mother and sister of the
accused Ram Autar came to the spot abusing the deceased they all
went inside the house and accused Ram Autar came out after about
10-15 minutes and sat on Chabutara and when he saw Babu Singh
coming, he rushed towards him blocked his way and repeatedly
asking him why did he slap his sister, who did not answer the said
question, thereafter Ram Autar took the country made pistol from his
waist and fired on the chest of the deceased.
28.     At this stage, we would like to refer to the post mortem report
and the defence argument that the evidence has come that the
deceased was fired upon from the front side but as per post mortem
report deceased suffered injury on the left side, therefore, ocular
account of prosecution version is not correct. We find that the
incident has been clearly narrated that accused Ram Autar came in
front of Babu Ram and stopped him from the front side and was
repeatedly asking him why he had slapped his sister. It is quite
possible that until the accused Ram Autar was asking him this
question, he might have been standing straight, however, as a natural
human reaction, when he had seen the accused taking out his
countrymade pistol, he might have naturally turned side way and
therefore, he suffered injury on the left side. This appears to be quite
natural coupled with the fact that injury is on the chest and which by
itself clearly proves that the accused Ram Autar has fired upon him
with a clear intention to kill him, therefore, we find that this fact that
the deceased suffered fire arm injury on the left side of his chest does
not help the accused.
29.     PW.3-Station House Officer-Madan Singh had clearly stated
that he prepared Chick FIR and G.D. and had recorded the statement
of the appellant in the police station and inspected the place of
occurrence where he found that the dead body of the deceased Babu
Singh lying on the Chabutara of Goverdhan. He had prepared the
panchnama and site plan was also prepared. He had proved that he
has collected the bloodstained soil and plain soil from the spot. He
had proved the recovery of empty cartridge from the spot. Thereafter,
he searched the house of the accused where nobody was found but he
recovered illegal cartridges from the house of the accused. On the
next day, he had recorded statements of other witnesses. He had also
proved that accused was absconding and proceedings under Section
82-83 Cr.P.C. were initiated against him and after receiving the
warrants from the Court, he attached the goods of the accused and
had prepared a ‘fard’ report dated 14.12.1982. He had also stated that
during investigation he could not find sister and mother of the
accused and had shown the place of occurrence as place “A” and no
blood was found on that place and the dead body was lying on the
Chabutara of Goverdhan. The distance between spot on Kaccha
Rasta and Chabutara is extremely short, may be 3-4 paces. Therefore,
place of occurrence of crime is very much ascertainable, more so,
coupled with specific eye witness account.
30.    Much emphasis has been placed by the learned counsel
appearing for the accused respondents that blood was not found on
the place of occurrence, i.e. Kaccha Rasta and therefore, the incident
as alleged has not taken place and Ram Autar is not guilty of
committing such murder. From perusal of the post mortem report, we
find that there is a entry wound and margins were inverted and
blackening was present. One big pallet (Chharra) was also found
inside the chest. Normally, this kind of wound, if any fatal injury
suffered without any exist firearm wound, blood would not
immediately started oozing out as the big pallet might have blocked
the blood from immediately oozing out from the injury and it has
come in the evidence that after committing murder the accused
immediately reloaded his country made pistol, threatened the
witnesses and ran away towards west side and immediately thereafter
the body of Babu Singh was lifted from the place of occurrence to
the Chabutara of Goverdhan. It is nobody’s case that the murder had
taken place at any other place except the place shown in the site plan,
therefore, it is clear that if the defence version is taken to be true that
the murder had taken place at some other place, it could not have
been possible to bring the body of the deceased to the Chabutara of
Goverdhan       without    there    being   any   blood    trail  on    the
floor/passage/rasta etc. There is absolutely no evidence on record to
prove or even to suggest that place of occurrence could have been
different. The blackening present on the wound further supported the
eye witness account of PW-1 that the deceased was fired upon in
close range (Chaar Hath Ki Doori).
31.    In the case of Nirmal Singh (supra) the Hon’ble Apex Court
has held that in case if some blood had fallen on the place of
occurrence, which the Investigating Officer has failed to notice that
by itself will not be fatal to the case of the prosecution. Similar view
has been expressed in Narendra Nath Khaware (supra), Ram
Swaroop and Others (supra) and Satya Narayan (supra).
Therefore, in our opinion, even if the Investigating Officer has stated
that no blood was found on the spot marked as spot “A” it would not
help the defence. At the worst this could have been a case of
defective investigation of which no benefit can be granted to the
accused person when there is a direct evidence available on record.
Therefore, the benefit granted to the accused that as no blood was
found at place “A” the murder has not taken place in the manner as
alleged is wholly perverse and in the totality of evidence available on
record is not sustainable in the eye of law.
32.    PW-4-Dr. Satish Chandara Srivastava has clearly stated that
the death of the deceased was possible on 07.12.1982 at 2.00 pm due
to firearm injury. He has also stated that collected blood was found in
the chest of the deceased and a big pallet was also found inside the
33.    In this background, this Court is of the opinion that the
presumption raised by the trial court in granting benefit of doubt that
since the informant and the deceased are the owner of agricultural
field whereas the accused belonging to labour class, therefore, it is
not understandable as to why the deceased Babu Singh slapped only
sister of the accused, who was aged about 8-10 years and why he did
not slap mother of the accused, is neither here nor there and it is only
on this ground that the trial court has perversely drawn the
presumption that the informant was not present on the spot by taking
the sentence from the statement of PW-2, Dashrath, who is also an
eyewitness that the deceased was coming alongwith his brother-PW-
1-Shiv Sharan Singh when the incident had taken place and although
he named the other witnesses namely Ram Raj, Layak Singh and that
some other persons were gathered on the spot but as he has not
mentioned the name of PW.1 alongwith the names of persons who
have seen the incident. Therefore, presumption raised by the trial
court that presence and hence, the testimony of PW-2-Dashrath was
not worth belief is also highly perverse.
34.    Another presumption was raised by the trial court that as the
deceased Babu Singh was wearing only Kaccha (underwear) at the
time of incident, therefore, it reflects his bad character due to which
he was murdered, is also not reflected from the entire evidence on
record. The incident is dated 07.12.1982 and it is of common
knowledge that at times villagers usually used to roam around
wearing only underwear particularly when they visit their field,
hence that alone, without any evidence, is not sufficient to raise such
presumption. Even otherwise, even such presumption of bad
character of deceased, by no standard proves the innocence of the
35.    In the statement of accused recorded under Section 313 Cr.P.C.
he has talked about ‘enmity’ and at other place ‘old enmity’.
However, he had given no description of the enmity or old enmity as
alleged by him, therefore, presumption raised by the trial court about
enmity is also not sustainable in the eye of law.
36.    The trial court observed that once the allegation was that the
deceased Babu Singh has slapped sister of the accused while she was
plucking gram leaves but still the Investigating Officer is not
included the same in the site plan and has not recorded the same in
his case diary is also per se illegal inasmuch this ground i.e. non-
highlighting the aforesaid spot in the site plan would not have
effected the prosecution case. Therefore, wholly irrelevant factor has
been taken into account to grant benefit of acquittal to the accused.
Admittedly, mother and sister of the accused Ram Autar were
missing from the spot and since no allegation were levelled against
them, therefore, this does not effect the merit of the investigation
conducted by the Investigating Officer.
37.    A presumption again raised by the trial court that villagers
usually visit their field in the morning hours and thereafter usually
take their lunch by 10-11 am and relax thereafter is neither here nor
there when the time, spot and manner of the incident was clearly
proved beyond doubt. In the post mortem report it is further reflected
that semi digested food was present in the stomach of the deceased.
The time of incident was at 1.00 o’clock and therefore, presence of
semi digested food in the stomach was natural as the deceased must
have taken something in the morning, which was present in his
stomach in the shape of semi digested food.
38.    We, therefore, find that the present judgment is purely based
on presumption whereas direct evidence on record beyond any
shadow of doubt proves the manner time and place in which the
incident had taken place committed by the accused Ram Autar.
39.    The defence argument is also to the effect that PW-1-Shiv
Sharan Singh is the real brother of the deceased and highly interested
witness. Suffice to say that merely because the eyewitnesses are the
family members there evidence cannot per se be discarded as held by
the Hon'ble Apex Court in Mohabbat (supra).
40.    We, therefore, find that the judgment of acquittal is patently
illegal and the conclusion arrived at by the trial court is wholly
untenable and requires interference and reversal. The evidence of
PW-1-Shiv Shankar Singh and PW-2-Dashrath, who are the
eyewitnesses clearly reflects ring of truth and proves beyond shadow
of doubt that the accused Ram Autar has committed murder of Babu
Singh and is liable to be convicted under Section 302 IPC.
41.    We are also of the view that a crime has been committed in
breach and violation of the public rights and duty and it is harmful to
the society. We are, therefore, duty bound to maintain public
confidence and administration of justice and to uphold the Majesty of
law. We cannot turn a blind eye to the highly perverse judgment
passed purely on the basis of presumptions and by not reading the
evidence as a whole and only picking up sentences in isolation from
here and there from the statements of eyewitnesses, we are, therefore,
of the opinion that while being conscious that no innocent person is
punished, we are also duty bound to see that a guilty person does not
go unpunished.
42.    Hon’ble Apex Court in Criminal Appeal No.327 of 2022
(Karan Singh vs. The State of Uttar Pradesh and Others), decided
on 02.03.2022, had the occasion to consider the contingencies
whereat a ground was taken by the accused that since a long span of
time has elapsed and thus, it would not be proper to convict him,
however, the Hon’ble Apex Court in paragraph 47 has observed as
“47. We find no grounds to interfere with the concurrent findings of
the Trial Court and the High Court. The fact that the trial/appeal
should have taken years and that other accused should have died
during the appeal cannot be a ground for acquittal of the Appellant.
The appeal is thus dismissed.”
43.   Recently, yet in Criminal Appeal No.-- of 2022 (Arising out
of Special Leave Petition (Criminal) No.-- of 2022, further arising
out of Diary No.21596 of 2020, State of Rajasthan vs. Banwari Lal
and Another, decided on 08.04.2022, the Hon’ble Apex Court in
paragraphs 7 & 8 has held as under.
“7. At this stage, few decisions of this Court on principles for
sentencing and tests for awarding an appropriate sentence in a
given case are required to be referred to and considered.
i) In the case of Mohan Lal (supra), the High Court modified the
judgment and order passed by the learned trial Court and
sentenced the accused to the period already undergone by him,
which was only six days and absolutely no reasons, much less
valid reasons, were assigned by the High Court. While setting
aside the order passed by the High Court, this Court has
observed in paragraphs 9 to 13 as under:
“9. The High Court simply brushed aside the aforementioned
material facts and sentenced the accused to the period already
undergone by him, which is only 6 days in this case. In our
view, the trial court and the High Court have taken a lenient
view by convicting the accused for offences under Sections
325 and 323 IPC. Absolutely no reasons, much less valid
reasons, are assigned by the High Court to impose the meagre
sentence of 6 days. Such imposition of sentence by the High
Court shocks the judicial conscience of this Court.
10. Currently, India does not have structured sentencing
guidelines that have been issued either by the legislature or
the judiciary. However, the courts have framed certain
guidelines in the matter of imposition of sentence. A Judge has
wide discretion in awarding the sentence within the statutory
limits. Since in many offences only the maximum punishment
is prescribed and for some offences the minimum punishment
is prescribed, each Judge exercises his discretion accordingly.
There cannot, therefore, be any uniformity. However, this
Court has repeatedly held that the courts will have to take into
account certain principles while exercising their discretion in
sentencing, such as proportionality, deterrence and
rehabilitation. In a proportionality analysis, it is necessary to
assess the seriousness of an offence in order to determine the
commensurate punishment for the offender. The seriousness of
an offence depends, apart from other things, also upon its
11. This Court in Soman v. State of Kerala [Soman v. State of
Kerala, (2013) 11 SCC 382 : (2012) 4 SCC (Cri) 1] observed
thus: (SCC p. 393, para 27)
“27.1. Courts ought to base sentencing decisions on
various different rationales — most prominent amongst
which would be proportionality and deterrence.
27.2. The question of consequences of criminal action can
be relevant from both a proportionality and deterrence
standpoint. 27.3. Insofar as proportionality is concerned,
the sentence must be commensurate with the seriousness
or gravity of the offence. 27.4. One of the factors relevant
for judging seriousness of the offence is the consequences
resulting from it.
27.5. Unintended consequences/harm may still be
properly attributed to the offender if they were reasonably
foreseeable. In case of illicit and underground
manufacture of liquor, the chances of toxicity are so high
that not only its manufacturer but the distributor and the
retail vendor would know its likely risks to the consumer.
Hence, even though any harm to the consumer might not
be directly intended, some aggravated culpability must
attach if the consumer suffers some grievous hurt or dies
as result of consuming the spurious liquor.”
12. The same is the verdict of this Court in Alister Anthony
Pareira v. State of Maharashtra [Alister Anthony Pareira v.
State of Maharashtra, (2012) 2 SCC 648 : (2012) 1 SCC (Civ)
848 : (2012) 1 SCC (Cri) 953] wherein it is observed thus:
(SCC p. 674, para 84) “84. Sentencing is an important task in
the matters of crime. One of the prime objectives of the
criminal law is imposition of appropriate, adequate, just and
proportionate sentence commensurate with the nature and
gravity of crime and the manner in which the crime is done.
There is no straitjacket formula for sentencing an accused on
proof of crime. The courts have evolved certain principles: the
twin objective of the sentencing policy is deterrence and
correction. What sentence would meet the ends of justice
depends on the facts and circumstances of each case and the
court must keep in mind the gravity of the crime, motive for
the crime, nature of the offence and all other attendant
13. From the aforementioned observations, it is clear that the
principle governing the imposition of punishment will depend
upon the facts and circumstances of each case. However, the
sentence should be appropriate, adequate, just, proportionate
and commensurate with the nature and gravity of the crime
and the manner in which the crime is committed. The gravity
of the crime, motive for the crime, nature of the crime and all
other attending circumstances have to be borne in mind while
imposing the sentence. The court cannot afford to be casual
while imposing the sentence, inasmuch as both the crime and
the criminal are equally important in the sentencing process.
The courts must see that the public does not lose confidence in
the judicial system. Imposing inadequate sentences will do
more harm to the justice system and may lead to a state where
the victim loses confidence in the judicial system and resorts
to private vengeance.”
ii) In the case of Udham (supra), in paragraphs 11 to 13, it is
observed and held as under:
“11. We are of the opinion that a large number of cases are
being filed before this Court, due to insufficient or wrong
sentencing undertaken by the courts below. We have time and
again cautioned against the cavalier manner in which
sentencing is dealt in certain cases. There is no gainsaying
that the aspect of sentencing should not be taken for granted,
as this part of Criminal Justice System has determinative
impact on the society. In light of the same, we are of the
opinion that we need to provide further clarity on the same.
12. Sentencing for crimes has to be analysed on the touchstone
of three tests viz. crime test, criminal test and comparative
proportionality test. Crime test involves factors like extent of
planning, choice of weapon, modus of crime, disposal modus
(if any), role of the accused, anti-social or abhorrent
character of the crime, state of victim. Criminal test involves
assessment of factors such as age of the criminal, gender of
the criminal, economic conditions or social background of the
criminal, motivation for crime, availability of defence, state of
mind, instigation by the deceased or any one from the
deceased group, adequately represented in the trial,
disagreement by a Judge in the appeal process, repentance,
possibility of reformation, prior criminal record (not to take
pending cases) and any other relevant factor (not an
exhaustive list).
13. Additionally, we may note that under the crime test,
seriousness needs to be ascertained. The seriousness of the
crime may be ascertained by (i) bodily integrity of the victim;
(ii) loss of material support or amenity; (iii) extent of
humiliation; and (iv) privacy breach.”
In the said decision, this Court again cautioned against the
cavalier manner in which sentencing is dealt with in certain cases.
iii) In the case of Satish Kumar Jayanti Lal Dabgar (supra), this
Court has observed and held that the purpose and justification
behind sentencing is not only retribution, incapacitation,
rehabilitation but deterrence as well.
8. Applying the law laid down by this Court on principles for
sentencing, to the facts of the case on hand, we are of the opinion
that the approach of the High Court is most cavalier. Therefore, the
order of the High Court merits interference by this Court. Merely on
the technical ground of delay and merely on the ground that after the
impugned judgment and order, which is unsustainable, the accused
have resettled in their lives and their conduct has since been
satisfactory and they have not indulged in any criminal activity, is
no ground not to condone the delay and not to consider the appeal
on merits. Hence, the delay of 1880 days in preferring the appeal is
condoned.”
44. Applying the principles of law so laid down in the case of Karan
Singh (supra) and Banwari Lal (supra) an inescapable principle of
law stands culled out that merely after lapse of sufficient time
coupled with other factors, namely, the age of the accused and his
resettlement, if any post acquittal by the trial court, cannot be a
ground to bestow any benefit so as to wipe away the aftermath of
commission of crime.
45.    In view of the aforesaid discussion, the instant appeal stands
allowed. The judgment and order dated 26.07.1983 passed by the
Learned Special Judge, Fatehpur in Session Trial No. 104 of 1983
(State vs. Ram Autar Kori), arising out of Case Crimes No.
172/1982, under Section 302 IPC, Police Station Khakhreru, District
Fatehpur, acquitting the accused-respondent-Ram Autar s/o Ram
Swarup Kori is set aside and reversed. The accused-respondent-Ram
Autar s/o Ram Swarup Kori is held guilty of committing offence
punishable under Section 302 IPC.
46. For the offence under Section 302 I.P.C., the accused-respondent
Ram Autar s/o Ram Swarup Kori is sentenced to undergo simple
imprisonment for life and to pay a fine of Rupees Twenty Thousand
Only (Rs. 20,000/-) and if he fail to pay the amount of fine, he shall
have to undergo imprisonment for a period of six months in lieu
47.    The accused-respondent -Ram Autar s/o Ram Swarup Kori is
directed to surrender before the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate,
Fatehpur within a period of 15 days from the date of this order to
serve out the sentence awarded to him. In case he does not surrender
within the stipulated time, learned Chief Judicial Magistrate,
Fatehpur shall commit him to custody as per law.
48.   Let a certified copy of this judgment and order be sent to the
Court concerned immediately for ensuring its compliance.