This Original Petition has been preferred by the defendant in
O.S.No.624/2012 on the file of the IIIrd Additional Sub Court,
Kozhikode (formerly O.S.No.190/2011 on the file of Sub Court,
Thalassery) challenging Ext.P6 order, viz., order in I.A.No.5/2021
dated 28.10.2021. The respondent herein is the sole plaintiff before
the trial court.
2.     Heard the learned counsel Sri Millu Dandapani,
appearing for the petitioner and Advocate K.V.Pavithran, appearing
for the respondent.
3.     It is argued by the learned counsel for the petitioner that
the petitioner filed written statement in the Suit claiming
Rs.16,83,000/- by the respondent herein, on 21.10.2011 and
thereafter additional written statement was filed on 07.10.2021
with petition to receive the same. It is submitted further that by
way of additional written statement, the petitioner put up plea of
`adjustment' of the Suit amount towards the damages sustained to
the petitioner which is assessed as Rs.77,41,970/-.
4.     The respondent herein, the plaintiff in the Suit, filed
objection and zealously opposed acceptance of additional written
statement, which was filed after a period of 10 years with plea of
5.     It is submitted by the learned counsel for the respondent
that there is no pleading in the original written statement regarding
the adjustment and the amount which the defendant wanted to
adjust is yet to be decided by the trial court. Further, unilateral
adjustment is not permitted in law and the defendant could not raise
a totally new case by way of adjustment, by filing additional
written statement.
6.     Reply affidavit also has been filed before this Court
stating that when the original written statement was filed as early as
on 21.10.2011, the plea of set off or counter-claim or `adjustment'
not raised in the said original written statement and at a much
belated stage, plea of `adjustment' being pressed into by filing
additional written statement. It is averred further that the plea of
`adjustment' is barred by limitation also.
7.     While crystallysing the controversy being posed,
reference to relevant provisions in the Code of Civil Procedure is
essential. Order 8 Rule 6A of the Code of Civil Procedure permits
a defendant in a Suit to plea `set off' or `counter claim' against the
claim of the plaintiff in respect of any right or claim based on a
cause of action accruing to the defendant against the plaintiff either
before or after the filing of the suit but before the defendant has
delivered his defence or before the time limited for delivering his
defence has expired, whether such counter-claim is in the nature of
a claim for damages or not. Similarly, Order 8 Rule 9 deals with
subsequent pleadings. Order 8 Rule 9 is extracted hereunder for
“Subsequent pleadings:-- No pleadings subsequent to the written
statement of a defendant other than by way of defence to set-off or
counter-claim shall be presented except by the leave of the Court and
upon such terms as the Court thinks fit; but the Court may at any time
require a written statement or additional written statement from any of
the parties and fix a time of not more than thirty days for presenting the
same.”
Thus in order to raise a plea of adjustment, permission of the Court
contemplated under Order 8 Rule 9 is mandatory.
8.     In a decision reported in [2009 KHC 4489 : 2009 (3)
KLT SN 54 : 2009 (14) SCC 525], P.A.Jayalakshmi v. H.Saradha
& Ors., while dealing with Order 8 Rule 9 and Order 6 Rule 17, the
Apex Court held that ordinarily at a much belated stage, leave for
filing additional written statement is usually not granted.
9.      In another decision of the Apex Court reported in [2019
Kumar Kalra v. Wing Cdr. Surendra Agnihotri & Ors. (3 Bench
decision), restrictions on filing counter-claim, after filing of written
statement has been discussed and it has been held that there is no
absolute right to the defendant to file counter-claim with
substantive delay even if limitation period prescribed has not
elapsed. Majority view in this decision is as under:
“O.8 R.6A of the CPC does not put an embargo on filing the counter
claim after filing the written statement, rather the restriction is only with
respect to the accrual of the cause of action. Having said so, this does not
give absolute right to the defendant to file the counter claim with substantive
delay, even if limitation period prescribed has not elapsed. The Court has to
take into consideration the outer limit for filing the counter claim, which is
pegged till the issues are framed. The Court in such cases have the discretion
to entertain filing of the counter-claim, after taking into consideration and
evaluating inclusive factors provided below which are only illustrative,
though not exhaustive: i. Period of delay. ii. Prescribed limitation period for
the cause of action pleaded.      iii. Reason for the delay. iv.     Defendant's
assertion of his right. v. Similarity of cause of action between the main suit
and the counter-claim. vi. Cost of fresh litigation. vii. Injustice and abuse of
process.    viii.   Prejudice to the opposite party.       ix.   And facts and
circumstances of each case. x. In any case, not after framing of the issues.
Scope of discretion vested with the Court under O.6 R.17 and O.8 R.9
to allow for belated counter claims remains to be examined. It must be
determined when it may be proper for the Court to refuse a belated counter
claim, in spite of it being permissible within the scheme of O.8 R.6A and the
Limitation Act, 1963. To ensure that the objective of introducing the statutory
amendments with respect to counter claims was not defeated, it was rightly
held that a belated counter claim raised by way of an amendment to the
written statement (under O.6 R.17) or as a subsequent pleading (under O.8
R.9) should not be allowed after the framing of issues and commencement of
trial. Having considered the previous judgments of this Court on counter
claims, the language employed in the rules related thereto, as well as the
intention of the Legislature, I conclude that it is not mandatory for a counter
claim to be filed along with the written statement. The Court, in its discretion,
may allow a counter claim to be filed after the filing of the written statement,
in view of the considerations mentioned in the preceding paragraph.
However, propriety requires that such discretion should ordinarily be
exercised to allow the filing of a counter claim till the framing of issues for
trial. To this extent, I concur with the conclusion reached by my learned
10. The legal position is not in dispute further that when set
off or counter-claim is raised in the written statement, the defendant
shall pay court fee for the same and no court fee is liable to be paid
if a plea of `adjustment' is raised. As per the impugned order, the
court below relied on 2 decisions to dismiss the application, which
are; (i) [1989 (1) KLT 449], Cheriya Elias v. Surendran Chit
Fund and (ii)           [ILR 2021 (3) Ker. 46], Crompton Greaves
Limited v. Icon Integrated Industries and Software Limited. In
Cheriya Elias v. Surendran Chit Fund's case (supra), a Division
Bench of this Court while differentiating set off and adjustment had
“Set off is a plea open to a defendant by which he could claim wiping
off or reducing the plaint claim by adjustment of the amount due to him from
the plaintiff. A plea of set off is distinguishable from a plea of payment of
adjustment. Set off extinguishes the debt or reduces the same. Payment of
adjustment refers to a satisfaction of extinguishment of a debt effected prior
to the raising of defence in the written statement. The question of set off can
arise only in respect of dues which are outstanding and which have not
already been adjusted. Thus, a plea of payment or adjustment is definitely
and essentially a different plea and can be pressed into service only if the
same was raised before the institution of the suit and not afterwards. To
determine whether a plea raised in defence is a plea of set off or of payment
by adjustment it has to be ascertained as to whether a separate action could
be maintained by the defendant on the basis of his claim. If he could institute
a separate suit for realisation of the amount due to him, it is a case of set off.
If the adjustment was made prior to the filing of the suit by the plaintiff and a
plea is taken to that effect, it would be a plea of adjustment by payment. In
such a case no court fee would be payable on the amount as it stood adjusted
prior to the institution of suit. As a plea of set off is pleaded in the written
statement and not a claim for rendition of accounts or a plea of payment by
adjustment, the 1st defendant cannot contend that he has no liability to pay
court fees.”
Going by the ratio of the decision, plea of payment or adjustment is
definitely and essentially different plea and can be pressed into
service only if the same was raised before the institution of the suit.
In Crompton Greaves Limited v. Icon Integrated Industries and
Software Limited's case (supra), this Court held as under:
“A contention has been raised that the plea raised by the defendants
is not one falling under set off or counter-claim but only an adjustment and
as such, the same can be adjudicated without raising set off or counter claim
or paying court fee. One of the basic factors which has to be taken into
consideration while determining whether a plea raised in a defence is a plea
of set off or payment by adjustment, is to find out as to whether a separate
action could be maintained by the defendant on the basis of claim made by
him. If a separate claim could be maintained by him and put forward in a
separate suit, then the plea would be a plea of set off and court fee will have
to be made on the claim. On the other hand, if adjustment had been made
prior to the filing of the suit, no court fee would be payable on the amount
which stood adjusted prior to the institution of the suit, as the plea in that
case would be plea of adjustment by payment. But no court fee need be paid
on the plea of adjustment for the simple reason that the plea of adjustment is
in the nature of informing the Court that prior to the institution of the suit,
the amount or a part of it stood adjusted and the plaintiff was not entitled to
claim that amount.”
11. Thus the legal position regarding adjustment is no more
res integra on the point that a plea of adjustment by payment is
definitely and essentially a different plea and can be pressed into
service only if the same was raised before the institution of the suit
and not afterwards. To determine whether a plea raised in defence
is a plea of set off or of payment by adjustment it has to be
ascertained as to whether a separate action could be maintained by
the defendant on the basis of his claim. If he could institute a
separate suit for realisation of the amount due to him, it is a case of
set off. If the adjustment was made prior to the filing of the suit by
the plaintiff and a plea is taken to that effect, it would be a plea of
adjustment by payment. That apart, no pecuniary liability arises till
the Court determine that the party complaining of the breach is
entitled to damages. The Court in the first place must decide that
the other side is liable and then, it should proceed to assess and
quantify the liability.    Till the said determination, there is no
liability at all upon the other side and no `adjustment' in regard to
the damages which is not quantified is liable to sustain.
In view of the matter, the plea of `adjustment' that has been
canvassed by filing additional written statement in the present case
appears to be not tenable and, therefore, the trial court rightly
dismissed the application and the same does not suffer from any
perversity, illegality or irregularity and hence requires no
interference by this Court.
Accordingly, this Original Petition stands dismissed.
The interim stay in force shall stand vacated. Since the Suit is
of the year 2012 (a 5+ old matter), the trial court is directed to
expedite the trial as early as possible, within a period of 4 months
from the date of receipt of a copy of this judgment or its production
by the concerned parties.