1)     Present case is a sad and sordid tale of a victim girl who has been
made pregnant at the tender age of 11 years, though in the petition it is
claimed that she is aged only 09 years.
2)     The victim girl has approached this Court through her father
seeking a direction upon respondents No.1 and 2 to constitute a
Medical Board for her examination so that a call is taken as regards the
termination of her pregnancy without wasting any further time.
3)     As per the case of the prosecution, which is discernible from a
perusal of the Case Diary produced by learned counsel for the
respondents, on 27.02.2023, the father of the victim lodged a report
with the police alleging therein that his daughter, aged about 11 years
WP(C) No.527/2023                                               Page 1 of 16
studying in 4th class, has become pregnant because someone has
committed rape upon her. It was further reported by the father of the
victim that because his daughter was minor, as such, the person who
sexually assaulted her was extending death threats to her in case she
disclosed the matter to anybody. On the basis of this report, FIR
No.12/2023 for offences under Sections 363, 376, 506 IPC and 4 of
POCSO Act came to be registered and investigation was set into
motion. During the course of investigation, the accused, who is also a
juvenile, was identified and arrested whereas the victim was subjected
to medical examination. The opinion of the doctor is reproduced as
“As per the history given by the patient herself and
her mother, thorough examination and available
investigations, it is hereby opined that sexual
contact been made and patient is currently 30 weeks
pregnant with a single line intrauterine fetus.”
4)     From the afore-quoted medical report, it is clear that the
petitioner is currently carrying pregnancy of 30 weeks pregnant. The
question that arises for consideration is as to whether at this advanced
stage of pregnancy, the law permits termination of the same.
5)     In the above context, it would be apt to refer to the provisions
contained in Section 3 of the Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act,
1971 (hereinafter referred to as the Act of 1971). It reads as under
3. When pregnancies may be terminated by registered
medical practitioners.—(1) Notwithstanding anything
contained in the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), a
registered medical practitioner shall not be guilty of any
offence under that Code or under any other law for the time
being in force, if any pregnancy is terminated by him in
accordance with the provisions of this Act.
WP(C) No.527/2023                                               Page 2 of 16
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (4), a pregnancy
may be terminated by a registered medical practitioner,—
(a)     where the length of the pregnancy does not exceed
twenty weeks, if such medical practitioner is, or
(b)     where the length of the pregnancy exceeds twenty
weeks but does not exceed twenty-four weeks in
case of such category of woman as may be
prescribed by rules made under this Act, if not less
than two registered medical practitioners are, of the
opinion, formed in good faith, that—
(i)     the continuance of the pregnancy would involve a
risk to the life of the pregnant woman or of grave
injury to her physical or mental health; or
(ii)    there is a substantial risk that if the child were born,
it would suffer from any serious physical or mental
abnormality.
Explanation 1.—For the purposes of clause (a), where any
pregnancy occurs as a result of failure of any device or
method used by any woman or her partner for the purpose
of limiting the number of children or preventing pregnancy,
the anguish caused by such pregnancy may be presumed to
constitute a grave injury to the mental health of the
pregnant woman.
Explanation 2.—For the purposes of clauses (a) and (b),
where any pregnancy is alleged by the pregnant woman to
have been caused by rape, the anguish caused by the
pregnancy shall be presumed to constitute a grave injury to
the mental health of the pregnant woman.
(2-A) The norms for the registered medical practitioner
whose opinion is required for termination of pregnancy at
different gestational age shall be such as may be prescribed
by rules made under this Act.
(2-B) The provisions of sub-section (2) relating to the length
of the pregnancy shall not apply to the termination of
pregnancy by the medical practitioner where such
termination is necessitated by the diagnosis of any of the
substantial foetal abnormalities diagnosed by a Medical
(2-C) Every State Government or Union territory, as the case
may be, shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute a Board to be called a Medical Board for the
purposes of this Act to exercise such powers and functions
as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act.
(2-D) The Medical Board shall consist of the following,
(a) a Gynaecologist;
(d) such other number of members as may be notified in the
Official Gazette by the State Government or Union territory,
as the case may be.
(3) In determining whether the continuance of pregnancy
would involve such risk of injury to the health as is
mentioned in sub-section (2), account may be taken of the
pregnant woman's actual or reasonably foreseeable
environment.
(4) (a) No pregnancy of a woman, who has not attained the
age of eighteen years, or, who, having attained the age of
eighteen years, is a mentally ill person], shall be terminated
except with the consent in writing of her guardian.
(b) Save as otherwise provided in clause (a), no pregnancy
shall be terminated except with the consent of the pregnant
woman.
6)      From a perusal of the aforesaid provision, it is clear that the
pregnancy of a woman, where the length of pregnancy does not exceed
20 weeks, may be terminated by a registered medical practitioner if he
is of the opinion that continuance of the pregnancy would involve a risk
to the life of the pregnant woman or of grave injury to her physical or
mental health. It can also be done by the medical practitioner if there is
substantial risk that if the child were born, it would suffer from such
physical or mental abnormalities as to be seriously handicapped. The
statute further provides that in case length of pregnancy exceeds 20
weeks but does not exceed 24 weeks, such opinion has to be formed by
not less than two registered medical practitioners.
7)      In the above context, Rule 3-B of the Medical Termination of
Pregnancy Rules, 2003, is also required to be noticed. It reads as under:
3-B. Women eligible for termination of pregnancy up to
twenty-four weeks.—The following categories of women
shall be considered eligible for termination of pregnancy
WP(C) No.527/2023                                                   Page 4 of 16
under clause (b) of sub-section (2) Section 3 of the Act, for a
period of up to twenty-four weeks, namely—
(a)    survivors of sexual assault or rape or incest;
(c)    change of marital status during the ongoing
pregnancy (widowhood and divorce);
(d)    women with physical disabilities [major disability as
per criteria laid down under the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities Act, 2016 (49 of 2016)];
(e)    mentally ill women including mental retardation;
(f)    the foetal malformation that has substantial risk of
being incompatible with life or if the child is born it
may suffer from such physical or mental
abnormalities to be seriously handicapped; and
(g)    women with pregnancy in humanitarian settings or
disaster or emergency situations as may be declared
by the Government.
8)     From a perusal of the aforesaid Rule, it is clear that survivors of
sexual assault or rape or incest as also the minors are eligible for
termination of pregnancy upto 24 weeks. In addition to this,
Explanation-2 to Section 3 of the Act of 1971 provides that when
pregnancy occurs because of rape, the anguish caused by such
pregnancy shall be presumed to constitute a grave injury to the mental
health of the pregnant woman.
9)     From a conjoint reading of the all the aforesaid provisions, it is
clear that a minor or a survivor of rape is eligible for termination of
pregnancy upto 24 weeks. However, in the instant case, the victim
carries a pregnancy of about 30 weeks. Therefore, the question that
arises for consideration is as to whether legally it is permissible to
allow the victim in the instant case to terminate her pregnancy.
WP(C) No.527/2023                                                   Page 5 of 16
10)    If we have a look at the Explanation-1 to Section 3 of the Act of
1971 as amended vide Amendment Act of 2021, it provides that where
any pregnancy occurs as a result of failure of any device or method
used by any woman or her partner for the purpose of limiting the
number of children or preventing pregnancy, the anguish caused by
such pregnancy may be presumed to constitute a grave injury to the
mental health of the pregnant woman. The expressed used in the
Explanation is “any woman”, meaning thereby that even an unmarried
woman has a choice to terminate her pregnancy if the same has
occurred due to failure of device or method used for the purpose of
restricting the number of children or preventing pregnancy. In other
words, a woman has been given a right to terminate her unwanted
11)    The Supreme Court has, while deliberating upon the right to
reproductive autonomy to a woman in the case of X vs. Principal
Secretary, Health and Family Welfare Department, Govt. of NCT of
Delhi and another, 2022 SCC Online SC 1321, observed as under
“i. The right to reproductive autonomy
99. The ambit of reproductive rights is not restricted to
the right of women to have or not have children. It also
includes the constellation of freedoms and entitlements
that enable a woman to decide freely on all matters
relating to her sexual and reproductive health.
Reproductive rights include the right to access education
and information about contraception and sexual health,
the right to decide whether and what type of
contraceptives to use, the right to choose whether and
when to have children, the right to choose the number of
children, the right to access safe and legal abortions, and
the right to reproductive healthcare. Women must also
have the autonomy to make decisions concerning these
rights, free from coercion or violence.
WP(C) No.527/2023                                                  Page 6 of 16
100. Zakiya Luna has, in a 2020 publication, argued that
reproduction is both biological and political.90 According
to Luna, it is biological since physical bodies reproduce,
and it is political since the decision on whether to
reproduce or not is not solely a private matter. This
decision is intimately linked to wider political, social, and
economic structures. A woman’s role and status in
family, and society generally, is often tied to childbearing
and ensuring the continuation of successive generations.
101. To this, we may add that a woman is often
enmeshed in complex notions of family, community,
religion, and caste. Such external societal factors affect
the way a woman exercises autonomy and control over
her body, particularly in matters relating to reproductive
decisions. Societal factors often find reinforcement by
way of legal barriers restricting a woman’s right to
access abortion. The decision to have or not to have an
abortion is borne out of complicated life circumstances,
which only the woman can choose on her own terms
without external interference or influence. Reproductive
autonomy requires that every pregnant woman has the
intrinsic right to choose to undergo or not to undergo
abortion without any consent or authorization from a
third party.
102. The right to reproductive autonomy is closely linked
with the right to bodily autonomy. As the term itself
suggests, bodily autonomy is the right to take decisions
about one’s body. The consequences of an unwanted
pregnancy on a woman’s body as well as her mind
cannot be understated. The foetus relies on the pregnant
woman’s body for sustenance and nourishment until it is
born. The biological process of pregnancy transforms the
woman’s body to permit this. The woman may
experience swelling, body ache, contractions, morning
sickness, and restricted mobility, to name a few of a host
of side effects. Further, complications may arise which
pose a risk to the life of the woman. A mere description
of the side effects of a pregnancy cannot possibly do
justice to the visceral image of forcing a woman to
continue with an unwanted pregnancy. Therefore, the
decision to carry the pregnancy to its full term or
terminate it is firmly rooted in the right to bodily
autonomy and decisional autonomy of the pregnant
woman.
103. In K S Puttaswamy v. Union of India, a nine-judge
bench of this Court recognized the right to privacy as a
constitutionally protected right under Article 21 of the
Constitution. In Puttaswamy (supra), this Court held that
the right to privacy enables individuals to retain and
WP(C) No.527/2023                                                    Page 7 of 16
exercise autonomy over the body and mind. The
autonomy of the individual was defined as “the ability to
make decision on vital matters of concern to life. The
judgement delivered on behalf of four judges described
the right to privacy in the following terms:
“297. … Privacy postulates the reservation of a
private space for the individual, described as the
right to be let alone. The concept is founded on
the autonomy of the individual. The ability of an
individual to make choices lies at the core of the
human personality. The notion of privacy enables
the individual to assert and control the human
element which is inseparable from the personality
of the individual. The inviolable nature of the
human personality is manifested in the ability to
make decisions on matters intimate to human life.
The autonomy of the individual is associated over
matters which can be kept private. These are
concerns over which there is a legitimate
expectation of privacy. The body and the mind are
inseparable elements of the human personality.
The integrity of the body and the sanctity of the
mind can exist on the foundation that each
individual possesses an inalienable ability and
right to preserve a private space in which the
human personality can develop. Without the
ability to make choices, the inviolability of the
personality would be in doubt.”
104. Importantly, Puttaswamy (supra) also deals with
facets of reproductive autonomy. Chelameshwar, J. held
that a “woman’s freedom of choice whether to bear a
child or abort her pregnancy are areas which fall in the
realm of privacy.” This Court recognized the right to
bodily integrity as an important facet of the right to
privacy. Puttaswamy (supra) considered Suchita
Srivastava v. Chandigarh Administration to reiterate that
the statutory right of a woman to undergo termination
of pregnancy under the MTP Act is relatable to the
constitutional right to make reproductive choices under
Article 21 of the Constitution.
105. In Suchita Srivastava (supra) this Court explicitly
recognized the concept of reproductive autonomy. In this
case, the victim, an orphaned woman of around 19
years, with mental retardation, became pregnant as a
result of a rape that took place while she was an inmate
at a government-run welfare institution. After the
discovery of her pregnancy, the Chandigarh
Administration approached the High Court of Punjab and
Haryana seeking approval for the termination of her
WP(C) No.527/2023                                                 Page 8 of 16
pregnancy. The High Court constituted an expert body to
conduct an enquiry into the facts. The expert body
recorded that the victim had expressed her willingness to
bear the child and accordingly recommended the
continuation of the pregnancy. However, the High Court
directed the termination of the pregnancy on the ground
that the victim was mentally incapable of making an
informed decision on her own.
106. A three-judge Bench of this Court disagreed with the
High Court’s decision. In a judgment authored by K G
Balakrishnan, C.J., this Court emphasized that the
consent of the pregnant woman is an essential
requirement to proceed with the termination of a
pregnancy under the MTP Act. It was held that the state
administration cannot claim guardianship of the woman
as she was a major. It was further held that the woman
only had “mild mental retardation” and was therefore
competent to give her consent in terms of Section 3(4)(a)
of the MTP Act. This Court concluded that the state must
respect the reproductive rights of women with “mental
retardation” with regard to decisions about terminating
their pregnancy. In the process, this Court recognized
that a woman’s right to reproductive autonomy is a
dimension of Article 21 of the Constitution:
“22. There is no doubt that a woman's right to
make reproductive choices is also a dimension of
“personal liberty” as understood under Article 21
of the Constitution of India. It is important to
recognise that reproductive choices can be
exercised to procreate as well as to abstain from
procreating. The crucial consideration is that a
woman's right to privacy, dignity and bodily
integrity should be respected. This means that
there should be no restriction whatsoever on the
exercise of reproductive choices such as a
woman's right to refuse participation in sexual
activity or alternatively the insistence on use of
contraceptive methods. Furthermore, women are
also free to choose birth control methods such as
undergoing sterilisation procedures. Taken to
their logical conclusion, reproductive rights
include a woman's entitlement to carry a
pregnancy to its full term, to give birth and to
subsequently raise children. However, in the case
of pregnant women there is also a “compelling
State interest” in protecting the life of the
prospective child. Therefore, the termination of a
pregnancy is only permitted when the conditions
specified in the applicable statute have been
WP(C) No.527/2023                                                Page 9 of 16
fulfilled. Hence, the provisions of the MTP Act,
1971 can also be viewed as reasonable
restrictions that have been placed on the exercise
of reproductive choices.”
107. Suchita Srivastava (supra) rightly recognised that
the right of women to make reproductive choices is a
dimension of personal liberty under Article 21. It held
that reproductive rights include a woman’s entitlement
to carry the pregnancy to full term, give birth, and raise
children. More importantly, it also recognised that the
right to reproductive choice also includes the right not to
procreate. In doing so, it situated the reproductive rights
of women within the core of constitutional rights.
108. Decisional autonomy is an integral part of the right
to privacy. Decisional autonomy is the ability to make
decisions in respect of intimate relations.96 In
Puttaswamy (supra) this Court held that personal
aspects of life such as family, marriage, procreation, and
sexual orientation are all intrinsic to the dignity of the
individual. The right to privacy safeguards and respects
the decisional autonomy of the individual to exercise
intimate personal choices and control over the vital
aspects of their body and life. In Common Cause v. Union
of India, 98 this Court observed that right to privacy
protects decisional autonomy in matters related to bodily
“441. The right to privacy resides in the right to
liberty and in the respect of autonomy. The right
to privacy protects autonomy in making decisions
related to the intimate domain of death as well as
bodily integrity. Few moments could be of as
much importance as the intimate and private
decisions that we are faced regarding death.
Continuing treatment against the wishes of a
patient is not only a violation of the principle of
informed consent, but also of bodily privacy and
bodily integrity that have been recognised as a
facet of privacy by this Court.”
109. The right to decisional autonomy also means that
women may choose the course of their lives. Besides
physical consequences, unwanted pregnancies which
women are forced to carry to term may have cascading
effects for the rest of her life by interrupting her
education, her career, or affecting her mental wellbeing.
110. In High Court on its Own Motion (supra), an under-
trial prisoner requisitioned for obtaining permission to
terminate her 4-month pregnancy to a judge of the City
WP(C) No.527/2023                                                Page 10 of 16
Civil & Sessions Court visiting the prison. The woman
stated that it would be too difficult for her to maintain
another child in addition to her five-month old child, who
was suffering from various malaises such as epilepsy,
hernia and other illnesses. In such circumstances, the
woman stated that it was difficult for her to maintain
and take care of another child. The judge forwarded a
letter to the High Court of Bombay along with the
woman’s requisition for information and further action,
which was converted into a suo moto PIL. The High Court
referred to the relevant provisions of the MTP Act to
observe that mental health can deteriorate if the
pregnancy is forced or unwanted:
pregnancy is not a frivolous one. Abortion is often
the only way out of a very difficult situation for a
woman. An abortion is a carefully considered
decision taken by a woman who fears that the
welfare of the child she already has, and of other
members of the household that she is obliged to
care for with limited financial and other resources,
may be compromised by the birth of another
child. These are decisions taken by responsible
women who have few other options. They are
women who would ideally have preferred to
prevent an unwanted pregnancy, but were unable
to do so. If a woman does not want to continue
with the pregnancy, then forcing her to do so
represents a violation of the woman's bodily
integrity and aggravates her mental trauma
which would be deleterious to her mental health.”
111. A woman can become pregnant by choice
irrespective of her marital status. In case the pregnancy
is wanted, it is equally shared by both the partners.
However, in case of an unwanted or incidental
pregnancy, the burden invariably falls on the pregnant
woman affecting her mental and physical health. Article
21 of the Constitution recognizes and protects the right
of a woman to undergo termination of pregnancy if her
mental or physical health is at stake. Importantly, it is
the woman alone who has the right over her body and is
the ultimate decisionmaker on the question of whether
she wants to undergo an abortion.”
12)    In the same judgment, the Supreme Court, while deliberating
upon the right to dignity of a women, observed that if women with
unwanted pregnancies are forced to carry their pregnancies to term, the
WP(C) No.527/2023                                                 Page 11 of 16
state would be stripping them of the right to determine the immediate
and long term path their lives would take. The Court went on to
observe that depriving women of autonomy not only over their bodies
but also over their lives would be affront to their dignity. The Court
concluded that right to dignity would be under attack if women are
forced to continue with unwanted pregnancies.
13)    From the foregoing enunciation of law on the subject, by the
Supreme Court, it is clear that a woman, whether married or unmarried,
has a right to get rid of her unwanted pregnancy. It is on the basis of
this principle that various High Courts of the Country and also the
Supreme Court have allowed the termination of pregnancy of more
than 24 weeks, though the Statute does not provide for the same.
14)    The Supreme Court in the case of Meera Santosh Pal v. Union of
India, (2017) 3 SCC 462, granted permission for medical termination of
pregnancy when the pregnancy had crossed 24 weeks. Again, in the
case of A v. Union of India, (2018) 14 SCC 75, the Supreme Court
permitted termination of pregnancy in a case where the gestational age
was 25/26 weeks. In Sarmishtha Chakraborty v. Union of India, (2018)
13 SCC 399, the Supreme Court permitted termination of pregnancy
when the gestational age was 26 weeks.
15)    Similarly, the High Court of Delhi in the case of Minor R
through mother vs. State NCT of Delhi and another, 2023 SCC Online
Del. 383, permitted termination of pregnancy exceeding 24 weeks. The
High Court of Madhya Pradesh in the case of A Minor Girls vs. State
WP(C) No.527/2023                                           Page 12 of 16
of Madhya Pradesh and another, 2022 SCC Online MP 1416, permitted
termination of pregnancy of 25 weeks. The High Court of Bombay in
the case of Rescue Foundation and another vs. State of Maharashtra
and others, 2021 SCC Online Bom 1384, permitted termination of
pregnancy of 26 weeks.
16)    From the foregoing analysis of the precedents on the subject, it is
clear that the Constitutional Courts, on account of the fact that they are
vested with wider powers, have permitted termination of pregnancy
beyond 24 weeks in appropriate and deserving cases. Thus, while
exercising the powers under Article 226 of the Constitution, this Court
has got wider powers than what is prescribed under Section 3(2) of the
Act of 1971, which permits termination of pregnancy only when the
length of pregnancy does not exceed a maximum period of 24 weeks.
17)    Having held that this Court does have power to permit
termination of pregnancy of a victim of rape who carries fetus of more
than 24 weeks, the next question that is required to be determined is as
to whether the circumstances of the instant case warrant grant of such
18)    As already noted, the victim in the present case is aged only 11
years and she has been sexually molested at this tender age. She is
studying only in the 4th class and is expecting a great future ahead of
her. If permission to terminate the pregnancy is not granted to the
victim, who has, admittedly, expressed her desire to terminate the
pregnancy, it will have serious consequences not only on her physical
WP(C) No.527/2023                                             Page 13 of 16
health but also upon mental health of the victim because she will have
to live with the trauma and stigma of unwanted procreation throughout
her life. This will not be in her interest and would also not be in the
interests of the child that may be born. In these circumstances, if
permission is not granted to the victim to terminate her pregnancy, she
would be exposed to a miserable future. It is not in dispute that the
father of the victim has also expressed his desire that the pregnancy of
the victim needs to be terminated and for this reason, he has
approached this Court by way of the instant petition.
19)    While this Court is of the opinion that the victim should be
permitted to terminate her pregnancy, it is also to be taken into account
that she is at the advanced stage of pregnancy. Whether termination of
pregnancy of the victim at this stage would be medically feasible or
whether it would involve any danger to her life, are the issues which
have to be gone into by the experts in the relevant field, whereafter they
have to take a decision as to whether or not the pregnancy of the victim
should be terminated.
20)    Accordingly, the petition is disposed of with the following
shall constitute a Medical Board of the following:
1.     a Gynecologist;
The needful shall be done by the Principal,
Government Medical College, Srinagar, immediately
upon receipt of this order, whereafter the victim shall
make herself available before the Medical Board at
11.00 am on 21.03.2023 for the purpose of her
medical examination.
(II)   In case the Medical Board is of the opinion that
termination of pregnancy of the minor victim can be
undertaken without risk to her life, the Principal,
Government Medical College, Srinagar, shall ensure
that termination of pregnancy of the minor victim is
undertaken by competent doctors in accordance with
the provisions of the Medical Termination of
Pregnancy Act and rules framed thereunder and all
other regulations and guidelines prescribed for the
purpose.
(III)  Prior to undertaking termination of pregnancy of the
victim, her fresh consent as also fresh consent of her
father shall be obtained by the concerned doctors.
(IV)   The doctors concerned shall preserve the foetus for
the purposes of DNA identification etc. with reference
to the criminal case which has been registered against
the accused.
(V)    The Government of Union Territory of Jammu and
Kashmir shall bear all necessary expenses for
termination of pregnancy of the victim.
WP(C) No.527/2023                                           Page 15 of 16
(VI)     If the child is born alive despite the attempts of
medical termination of pregnancy, the doctors shall
ensure that all necessary care is given to the child.
shall furnish report in the above context before the
Registrar Judicial of this Court within ten days from
today, whereafter the Registrar Judicial shall list the
matter before the Court on 31st March, 2023 for
reporting compliance.
21)     A copy of this order be sent to Principal, Government Medical
College, Srinagar, for information and compliance.
Whether the order is speaking:         Yes/No
Whether the order is reportable:       Yes/No
WP(C) No.527/2023                                                Page 16 of 16