1. The present appeal under Section 173 of the Motor Vehicles Act,
1988 seeks to assail the award dated 26.11.2021 passed by the learned
Motor Accident Claims Tribunal in MACP No. 5171/2016.                 Vide the
impugned award, the learned Tribunal, while awarding a compensation of
Rs.16,32,700/- in favour of the claimants, has granted recovery rights to
the insurer.
2.    The appellant, who is the owner of the car/offending vehicle, bearing
registration no.                     , has approached this Court being
aggrieved by the grant of recovery rights in favour of the insurer.
3.    It may be noted that recovery rights have been granted in favour of
the insurer by the learned Tribunal after taking into account the fact that the
offending vehicle, at the time of the accident, was admittedly being driven
by the appellant’s minor son, who did not possess any driving licence. The
learned Tribunal, therefore, came to a conclusion that the appellant, by
permitting his minor son to drive the vehicle, acted in breach of the terms
of the insurance policy. Consequently, the insurer was granted recovery
Digitally Signed        MAC.APP. 24/2023                                                   Page 1 of 4
4.     The sole contention of learned counsel for the appellant is that the
learned Tribunal has erred in granting recovery rights to the insurer as it
failed to appreciate that the offending vehicle was being driven by the
appellant’s minor son without his knowledge and permission and therefore,
it could not be said that the appellant had wilfully breached the terms of the
insurance policy. He submits that at about 11:45 AM on 06.06.2013, i.e.,
the time of the accident, the appellant was in his office when his minor son
took the keys of the car from his bed side drawer which was inadvertently
not locked at the relevant time. His plea, thus is that since the car was taken
out by the appellant’s minor son without his permission and knowledge,
the appellant cannot be said be in wilful breach of the terms of the
insurance policy.
5.     On the other hand, learned counsel for the insurer submits that the
learned Tribunal has rightly rejected the appellant’s plea that the car was
being driven by his minor son without his knowledge. He submits that the
appellant was aware that his son did not possess a valid driving licence and
therefore, the Tribunal has rightly granted recovery rights to the insurer.
6.     As the only plea of the appellant is that the learned Tribunal has erred
in coming to the conclusion that he was aware of the insured car being
driven by his minor son, it could not be said that there was any wilful or
conscious breach of the terms of the insurance policy on his behalf, it may
be appropriate to first note the relevant extracts of the impugned award on
this aspect. The same read as under:
“39. Though in his affidavit Ex. R1 W1 /A, the respondent no.1
stated that he was getting late for attending his tuition class and his
Digitally Signed        MAC.APP. 24/2023                                                   Page 2 of 4
father was also not present, he took keys of car from the drawer
without knowledge, consent and permission of his father. However,
in the cross-examination he admitted that he had been driving car
off and on for the last about one year prior to 06.06.2013 and he
had driven car no.                      on two occasions prior to
40. Respondent no.2/registered owner has also appeared in witness
box as R2W1. He also deposed that he never allowed respondent
no.1 to drive his car and respondent no.1 in his absence without his
consent took his car. However, in reply to notice under Section 133
of Motor Vehicles Act Ex. R2W1/R-2, he has not disclosed that the
alleged vehicle was being driven by respondent no.1 without his
consent. He has also admitted in the cross-examination that except
the present proceedings he has not given it in writing either before
police authority or before concerned Juvenile Justice Board that his
son had taken the aforesaid car without his knowledge, consent and
permissions. Hence, the defence as taken by respondent no.2 is
after thought and having been taken just to escape the liability. The
parents has to keep proper control over the vehicles so that their
minor children does not drive the vehicle even in their absence.
Recently the Parliament has implemented strict punishment to the
parents who allow their minor children to drive the vehicle. If such
type of contentions are allowed to be accepted, then no person can
be held liable in such situation. The judgment (supra) relied upon
by Ld. counsel for respondent no.2 is not applicable to the facts of
present case because in the above said cases it has been established
by the respondent that the vehicle was driven by minor without the
express or implied authority of registered owner whereas in the
present case the material on record speaks that the respondent no.1
was driving the alleged offending vehicle either with the express
authority or implied authority of registered owner. In view of
aforesaid, the defence taken by respondent no.2/registered owner
holds no ground and same is dismissed.”
7.    In the light of these findings, I am of the view that the learned
Tribunal was justified in not accepting the appellant’s version that the keys
of the insured vehicle were taken by his minor son from his bed side
Digitally Signed        MAC.APP. 24/2023                                                Page 3 of 4
drawer without his knowledge and permission. Once the appellant, despite
being aware that his son was a minor child, left the keys of his car at home
and has failed to give any explanation as to why the keys of the car at home
were left unattended when he himself was not there, the defence being
taken by the appellant is apparently an afterthought in an attempt to
somehow to escape his liability. Even otherwise, the appellant did not lead
any independent witness in support of his plea that the car was being
driven by his minor son without his knowledge and permission.
8.    I may also note that as observed by the learned Tribunal, this plea of
his minor son having taken the car without his permission, was not even
taken by the appellant either before the concerned police authority or the
Juvenile Justice Board. In a matter like this, when the parents of minor
children permit him/her to drive a motor vehicle, not only they put the lives
of their own children in danger but also endager the life of common
citizens. In the present case, the deceased Mr. Harinder Kumar, a young
man of 42 years lost his life only because the appellant did not take
appropriate steps to ensure that his vehicle is driven only by a person
holding a valid driving licence. This Court, therefore, cannot condone such
an act of the appellant and fasten the liability on the insurance company
when it is evident that the terms of the insurance policy were breached by
the appellant himself.
9.    The appeal being meritless is, accordingly, dismissed.
Digitally Signed        MAC.APP. 24/2023                                                Page 4 of 4