1)     The petitioner has challenged order dated 05.09.2020 passed by
whereby charges for offences under Section 120-B read with Section
420 RPC and Section 4-H read with Sections 5(2) and Section 5(1)(d)
of J&K Prevention of Corruption Act have been framed against him
and the co-accused.
2)     It appears that pursuant to registration of FIR No.RC/1(A)/2017
dated 25.07.2017 for offences under Section 120-B read with Section
420 RPC and Section 4-H read with Sections 5(2) and Section 5(1)(d)
of J&K Prevention of Corruption Act with Police Station ACB,
Srinagar, the investigation was set into motion by the respondent
investigating agency. After the completion of investigation, the charge
sheet for aforesaid offences came to be laid before the Court of Special
referred to as the Special Court).
3)     As per the prosecution case, the FIR was lodged on the basis of
preliminary enquiry conducted by the respondents into the allegations
that the petitioner, who was posted as Executive Engineer, CPWD, at
the relevant time, along with the co-accused had entered into a criminal
conspiracy with the contractor M/S Sheikh Sons to cause wrongful loss
to the state exchequer and corresponding wrongful gain to others in the
contract for construction of boundary wall of 9.1 kilometer for Central
University, Kashmir, at Ganderbal. It was alleged that the wrongful loss
to the state exchequer was caused to the tune of Rs.3.4 crore with
corresponding gain to the accused. According to the prosecution case,
during the year 2013, the Central University, Kashmir, had approached
the CPWD, Central Division, Humhama, for the work of construction
of boundary wall around the land of the University. A preliminary
estimate was prepared by the CPWD which was approved by the
competent authority of the University by according administrative
approval for an amount of Rs.11,84,87,000/ vide its letter dated
14.01.2013. On receipt of administrative approval and expenditure
sanction from the University, the petitioner who was posted as
Executive Engineer at the relevant time with CPWD, Srinagar,
prepared the estimate of the work and the same was processed in the
office of the Chief Engineer, Central Zone, Jammu, for accord of
technical sanction of the competent authority. After the technical
sanction by the Chief Engineer, NIT regarding construction of
boundary wall was approved for an amount of Rs.11,47,51,471/ and the
tenders were invited. The tender of M/S Sheikh Sons was accepted
being the lowest one and an intimation in this regard was given by the
petitioner to the contractor M/S Sheikh Sons informing him that his bid
for an amount of Rs.9,38,81,717/ had been accepted and approved by
4)     According to the prosecution case, the petitioner remained
posted as Executive Engineer, CPWD, from 16.07.2012 to 06.12.2013
and he had signed the contract agreement with accused Sheikh Nayeem
Ahmad. It was revealed that the work of construction of boundary wall
around the land of the Central University at Ganderbal was allotted to
M/S Sheikh Sons Prop. Sheikh Mohammad Yaqoob but instead of said
person, the contract was signed by accused Sheikh Nayeem Ahmad. It
was also found that Sheikh Nayeem Ahmad partly executed sub-
standard work on behalf of M/S Sheikh Sons and this was in the
knowledge of the petitioner. It is further alleged that the documents
submitted by M/S Sheikh Sons instead of having been attested by a
Gazetted Officer, were attested under the signature of Sheikh Nayeem
Ahmad who was not authorized on behalf of M/S Sheikh Sons whose
proprietor was Sheikh Mohammad Yaqoob. It is further alleged that the
work was not found satisfactory as per the reports of different
inspecting officers as well as according to Joint Surprise Check report.
In spite of sub-standard work having been executed by the contractor,
the running bills put up by Sheikh Nayeem Ahmad were passed by the
petitioner, who was overall incharge of the work assigned with the task
of supervising the construction of the work. According to the
prosecution case, the petitioner and other co-accused were in a criminal
conspiracy in the execution of the sub-standard work and thereby they
caused wrongful loss to the Government exchequer and wrongful gain
to the M/S Sheikh Sons.
5)     The learned Special Court, after hearing the parties passed the
impugned order whereby charges for the offences under Section 120-B
read with Section 420 RPC and Section 4-H read with Sections 5(2)
and Section 5(1)(d) of J&K Prevention of Corruption Act were framed
against the petitioner and the co-accused. It is this order which is under
challenge before this Court by way of the present proceedings.
6)     It is contended in the petition that from the contents of the charge
sheet and the material annexed thereto no offence is made out against
the petitioner. It has been further contended that as per the law laid
down by the Supreme Court in the case of Lalita Kumari v. Govt. of
UP & Ors., (2014) 2 SCC 1, the preliminary enquiry had to be
completed within a period of seven days but in the instant case the
preliminary enquiry has been conducted for about eight months
whereafter the FIR came to be registered. Therefore, on this ground
alone, the petitioner is entitled to be discharged. It has also been
contended that the accused, Sheikh Mohammad Nayeem, was acting on
behalf of the firm M/S Sheikh Sons, being one of its partners, as such,
it cannot be stated that he had no authority to enter into a contract or to
execute the work on behalf of the firm. The petitioner has placed on
record a copy of the partnership deed of M/S Sheikh Sons. It has also
been contended that the Department of Personnel and Trainings, which
is a supervisory authority of the CBI, has not been consulted before
filing the charge sheet and before granting sanction for prosecution
against the petitioner. It has also been contended that before filing the
charge sheet against the petitioner, it was incumbent upon the
respondent investigating agency to seek the opinion of the State
Vigilance Commission as the offences were allegedly committed
within the territory of erstwhile State of Jammu and Kashmir. It has
been further contended that no proper sanction for prosecution against
the petitioner has been granted, inasmuch as the order of sanction does
not make a mention about the offence under Section 4-H of the J&K
PC Act though he has been prosecuted for the said offence. Lastly, it
has been contended that the respondent investigating agency has no
jurisdiction to investigate the offence as the erstwhile State of Jammu
and Kashmir had not granted any general consent in terms of Section 6
7)     Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the material on
record, including the trial court record.
8)     Before dilating upon the contentions raised by learned counsel
for the petitioner, it would be apt to notice the law relating to framing
of charge/discharge of an accused. In this regard, learned counsel for
the petitioner has relied upon the following judgments of the Supreme
(I)   State through Central Bureau of Investigation
vs. Dr. Anup Kumar Srivastava, (2017) 15
(II)  Dipakbhai Jagdishchandra Patel v. State of
Gujarat and another, (2019) 16 SCC 547;
9)     In State through Central Bureau of Investigation vs. Dr. Anup
Kumar Srivastava, (2017) 15 SCC 560, the Supreme Court has
“18. Framing of charge is the first major step in a criminal
trial where the court is expected to apply its mind to the
entire record and documents placed therewith before the
court. Taking cognizance of an offence has been stated
to necessitate an application of mind by the court but
framing of charge is a major event where the court
considers the possibility of discharging the accused of the
offence with which he is charged or requiring the accused
to face trial. There are different categories of cases
where the court may not proceed with the trial and may
discharge the accused or pass such other orders as may
be necessary keeping in view the facts of a given case. In
a case where, upon considering the record of the case
and documents submitted before it, the court finds that
no offence is made out or there is a legal bar to such
prosecution under the provisions of the Code or any
other law for the time being in force and there exists no
ground to proceed against the accused, the court may
discharge the accused. There can be cases where such
record reveals the matter to be so predominantly of a
civil nature that it neither leaves any scope for an
element of criminality nor does it satisfy the ingredients
of a criminal offence with which the accused is charged.
In such cases, the court may discharge him or quash the
proceedings in exercise of its powers under the
10)    In Dipakbhai Jagdishchandra Patel v. State of Gujarat and
another, (2019) 16 SCC 547, the Supreme Court has, while laying down
upon the guidelines regarding the matters which are to be considered
by the Courts at the stage of framing of charge, observed as under:
“21. At the stage of framing the charge in accordance
with the principles which have been laid down by this
Court, what the Court is expected to do is, it does not act
as a mere post office. The Court must indeed sift the
material before it. The material to be sifted would be the
material which is produced and relied upon by the
prosecution. The sifting is not to be meticulous in the
sense that the Court dons the mantle of the Trial Judge
hearing arguments after the entire evidence has been
adduced after a full-fledged trial and the question is not
whether the prosecution has made out the case for the
conviction of the accused. All that is required is, the
Court must be satisfied that with the materials
available, a case is made out for the accused to stand
trial. A strong suspicion suffices. However, a strong
suspicion must be founded on some material. The
evidence at the stage of trial. The strong suspicion
cannot be the pure subjective satisfaction based on the
moral notions of the Judge that here is a case where it
is possible that accused has committed the offence.
Strong suspicion must be the suspicion which is
premised on some material which commends itself to
the court as sufficient to entertain the prima facie view
that the accused has committed the offence.”
11)    From the foregoing enunciation of law on the subject, it is clear
that at the time of framing of charge, the Court is expected to consider
all the documents referred to in Section 173 of the Cr. P. C and if after
considering those documents and hearing the parties, the Court finds
that the charge against the accused is groundless, an order of discharge
has to follow but if the Court finds that there is ground for presuming
that the accused has committed an offence triable by the said court, then
charge has to be framed against the accused. This is clear from the
language of Section 251-A of the J&K Cr. P. C, which is applicable to
the instant case.
12)    While considering the question of framing of charge, the Court
is certainly not to act as a post office. It has to sift the material available
before it but the same has not to be done meticulously in the manner as
is required to be done after a full-fledged trial. The court has to be
satisfied as to whether from the material on record a case is made out
against the accused and it is not expected to consider as to whether the
accused can be convicted on the basis of such material. Even a strong
suspicion is sufficient to frame charge against the accused.
13)    Adverting to the instant case, it has been alleged by the
prosecution that the petitioner, in his capacity as Executive Engineer,
CPWD, prepared the estimate and sent the same to the Chief Engineer
for approval. There is no denial to this fact. According to the
prosecution case, the successful bidder was M/S Sheikh Sons Proprietor
Sheikh Mohammad Yaqoob, meaning thereby that the bid was allotted
in favour of a sole proprietor concern owned by Sheikh Mohammad
Yaqoob. As per the material on record, the contract has been signed by
Sheikh Mohammad Nayeem and not by Sheikh Mohammad Yaqoob.
The material on record further shows that the petitioner was associated
with the matters relating to signing of the contract. The petitioner
claims that accused Sheikh Mohammad Nayeem was authorized to sign
the contract on behalf of M/S Sheikh Sons and that he was a partner of
the said firm. A copy of the partnership deed has been placed on record.
The prosecution claims that the contract was allotted to a proprietary
concern and not to a partnership firm. If that is so, then there had to be
an authority on behalf of owner of the proprietary concern, in favour of
accused Sheikh Mohammad Nayeem, authorizing him to act on behalf
of the proprietary concern. No such authority is on record of the challan
nor the petitioner has placed any such authority on record during these
proceedings. Thus, prima facie, it appears that there is material on
record to suggest that the contract on behalf of M/S Sheikh Sons has
been executed by a person who was not authorized to do so and the
petitioner was in the thickness of the things during the process of
execution of the contract.
14)    Another allegation against the petitioner is that the quality of the
work executed was sub-standard as had been reported by the officers
who had inspected the work and the same was also found during the
Joint Surprise Check. There is material on record to suggest that the
petitioner was responsible for supervision of the work and, thus, he
failed to exercise proper supervisions during execution of the work. Not
only this, he released the payment for execution of the work in favour
of accused No.9 by approving several running bills. Thus, there is
sufficient material on record to show the complicity of the petitioner.
15)    It has been contended by learned counsel for the petitioner that
there is no evidence on record with regard to the fact that the petitioner
was involved in the conspiracy. In this regard, besides relying upon the
ratio laid down by the Supreme Court in Dr. Anup Kumar Srivastava’s
case (supra), learned counsel has relied upon the judgment of Delhi
High Court in the case of A. K. Ganju vs. CBI (CRL. M. C
No.2384/2011 decided on 22nd November, 2013). In both these
judgments, the Courts have explained that to constitute an offence of
conspiracy, meeting of two or more persons for doing an illegal act or
an act by illegal means is a condition precedent. It has been further laid
down in these judgments that existence of conspiracy is to be deduced
from the circumstances and each circumstance should be established by
reliable evidence so that the circumstances form a chain of events from
which the only conclusion should be against the accused.
16)    There can be no dispute to the proposition of law laid down in
the aforesaid two judgments. The meeting of two or more persons for
doing an illegal act is a condition precedent for constituting the
conspiracy but it is not necessary that all the conspirators must know
each and every detail of the conspiracy nor is it necessary that every
one of the conspirators takes active part in the commission of each and
every conspiratorial acts. The question whether a person is involved in
a criminal conspiracy can be inferred from the circumstances
established from the evidence on record because the conspiracies are
not an open affair.
17)    In the instant case, as already noted, the petitioner was involved
in the process of finalizing the contract between the lowest bidder and
the Government and the contract was executed by an unauthorized
person on behalf of the contractor. Another circumstance regarding
which there is material on record is that sub-standard work was
executed and the petitioner was responsible for supervision of the
work. Besides this, he released payments in favour of the contractor
through an unauthorized person, despite the fact that the work that was
executed was not of optimum quality. All these circumstances, prima
facie, show that the petitioner was part of the conspiracy of causing loss
to the State exchequer and corresponding gain to the contractor which
constitutes an offence under Section 5(2) of the J&K PC Act.
18)    So far as the contention of the petitioner that the respondent has
consumed about eight months in conducting            preliminary enquiry
before registering the FIR, which goes against the spirit of law laid
down by the Supreme Court in Lalita Kumari’s case and, as such, the
charge could not have been framed against the petitioner, is concerned,
the same is without any merit. It is true that in Lalita Kumari’s case
(supra), the Supreme Court has observed that preliminary enquiry
should be completed within a period of seven days yet, having regard
to the nature of offences punishable under the provisions of Prevention
of Corruption Act, it is necessary to procure, peruse and scan necessary
records which generally run into thousands of pages. It is practically
impossible to conclude the preliminary enquiry in such cases within a
short period of seven days. In the instant case also, the respondent
investigating agency had to procure the records from the CPWD and
Central University, Kashmir, scan the said records and thereafter
meticulously peruse the same before registering the FIR. In these
circumstances, the time taken in concluding the preliminary enquiry
does not appear to be unreasonably long. Even otherwise, the petitioner
has not been able to point out anything to show that the time taken in
completion of the preliminary enquiry has caused any prejudice to him.
In my considered opinion, merely because preliminary enquiry has
taken a long time to complete, it cannot vitiate the whole proceedings,
particularly when no prejudice has been caused to the accused by such
act of the enquiry officer.
19)    It has been next contended by learned counsel for the petitioner
that without consulting the Department of Personnel and Trainings, the
respondent investigating agency could not have prosecuted the
petitioner. The contention raised is without any substance for the
reasons that there is no requirement of law that before prosecuting an
accused of CPWD, the Department of Personnel and Training is to be
consulted. As per the provisions of Vigilance Manual, 2017, it is only
if there is a difference of opinion between advices of Central Vigilance
Commission and the concerned department as regards the grant of
sanction for prosecution against a public servant that the issue has to be
resolved by referring the matter to the Department of Personnel and
Training. In the instant case, there is nothing on record to show that
there was any difference of opinion relating to advice for grant of
sanction for prosecution in respect of the petitioner between Central
Vigilance Commission and the CPWD. Therefore, there was no need
for the respondent investigating agency to refer the matter to the
Department of Personnel and Trainings. The argument of learned
counsel for the petitioner in this regard is without any merit.
20)    It has also been contended by learned counsel for the petitioner
that because the offences were alleged to have been committed in the
erstwhile State of Jammu and Kashmir, as such, State Vigilance
Commission was required to be consulted in the matter. However, the
learned counsel has not been able to refer to any Statute, rule or circular
having the force of law which obliges the CBI to seek the opinion of
State Vigilance Commission in the matters relating to prosecution of
public servants for offences under J&K Prevention of Corruption Act.
The argument is without any basis.
21)    Next it has been argued by learned counsel for the petitioner that
there was no general consent given by the erstwhile State of Jammu and
Kashmir in terms of Section 6 of Delhi Special Police Establishment
Act, granting permission to CBI to investigate the offences of the nature
which are subject matter of the instant case. In this regard, it is to be
noted that vide communication S-253/57-PD dated 7th May, 1958,
addressed by Secretary to the Government of Jammu and Kashmir, to
the Deputy Secretary to Govt. of India, Ministry of Home Affairs, New
Delhi, general consent in terms of Section 6 of the Delhi Special Police
Establishment Act has been granted to the exercise of powers by Delhi
Special Police Establishment in the State of Jammu and Kashmir for
investigation of a number of offences, including the offences
punishable under the J&K PC Act. The matter in this regard is no longer
res integra, inasmuch as a Division Bench of this Court in the case of
Lt. Col. H. N. Tripathi vs. State, 1988 CriLJ 582, followed by Sushil
Kumar Khajuria vs. State, 2000 Cri.L.J 682, and in the recent case of
Raj Kumar Gupta and others vs. Union of India & Others, 2021 SCC
Online J&K 436, it has been held that Central Bureau of Investigation
had the jurisdiction to investigate the offences, including certain
offences under the provisions of J&K PC Act committed within the
jurisdiction of erstwhile State of Jammu and Kashmir.
22)    Lastly, it has been argued that though the petitioner has been
prosecuted for the offences under Section 4-H of the J&K PC Act
besides other offences but there is no mention of said offence in the
sanction order. On this ground, it is urged that framing of charge against
the petitioner is not sustainable in law as the sanction order itself is
23)    The argument raised by learned counsel for the petitioner is
without any merit for the reason that a perusal of the order of sanction
for prosecution of petitioner reveals that the sanctioning authority has
duly applied its mind to the material produced before it whereafter it
has granted sanction for prosecution of the petitioner in respect of the
acts and omissions which are subject matter of the said sanction order.
Mere omission to make mention of a particular offence, though
allegations contained in the sanction order constitute such offence,
would not make the order of sanction illegal. In this regard I am
supported by the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Prakash
Singh Badal vs. State of Punjab and others, (2007) 1 SCC 1. In the said
case the Supreme Court has, while dealing with a similar issue,
“47.The sanctioning authority is not required to
separately specify each of the offence against the
accused public servant. This is required to be done at the
stage of framing of charge. Law requires that before the
sanctioning authority materials must be placed so that
the sanctioning authority can apply his mind and take a
decision. Whether there is an application of mind or not
would depend on the facts and circumstances of each
case and there cannot be any generalized guidelines in
that regard.”
24)    Again, in the case of State of Bihar and others vs. Rajmangal
Ram, (2014) 11 SCC 388, the Supreme Court has, while considering
this aspect of the matter, observed as under:
“6. In a situation where under both the enactments any
error, omission or irregularity in the sanction, which would
also include the competence of the authority to grant
sanction, does not vitiate the eventual conclusion in the
trial including the conviction and sentence, unless of course
a failure of justice has occurred, it is difficult to see how at
the intermediary stage a criminal prosecution can be
nullified or interdicted on account of any such error,
omission or irregularity in the sanction order without
arriving at the satisfaction that a failure of justice has also
been occasioned. This is what was decided by this Court in
State by Police Inspector vs. T. Venkatesh Murthy[1]
wherein it has been inter alia observed that,
“14. ……Merely because there is any omission, error
or irregularity in the matter of according sanction,
that does not affect the validity of the proceeding
unless the court records the satisfaction that such
error, omission or irregularity has resulted in failure
of justice.”
7. The above view also found reiteration in Prakash Singh
Badal and Another vs. State of Punjab wherein it was, inter
alia, held that mere omission, error or irregularity in
sanction is not to be considered fatal unless it has resulted
in failure of justice. In Prakash Singh Badal (supra) it was
further held that Section 19(1) of the PC Act is a matter of
procedure and does not go to the root of jurisdiction. On the
same line is the decision of this Court in R. Venkatkrishnan
vs. CBI. In fact, a three Judge Bench in State of M. P. vs.
Virender Kumar Tripathi while considering an identical
issue, namely, the validity of the grant of sanction by the
Additional Secretary of the Department of Law and
Legislative Affairs of the Government of Madhya Pradesh
instead of the authority in the parent department, this
Court held that in view of Section 19 (3) of the PC Act,
interdicting a criminal proceeding mid-course on ground of
invalidity of the sanction order will not be appropriate
unless the court can also reach the conclusion that failure
of justice had been occasioned by any such error, omission
or irregularity in the sanction. It was further held that
failure of justice can be established not at the stage of
framing of charge but only after the trial has commenced
and evidence is led (Para 10 of the Report)”
25)     In view of what has been laid down by the Supreme Court in the
aforesaid judgments, it is clear that merely because a particular section
of law has not been mentioned by the sanctioning authority in the order
of grant of sanction does not vitiate the criminal proceedings and it is
not a matter which goes to the root of the jurisdiction of the trial court.
The argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner is, therefore,
without any substance.
26)     For the forgoing reasons, I do not find any merit in this petition.
The same is, accordingly, dismissed.
27)     A copy of this judgment be supplied to the learned Special Court
for information and compliance.