For the Union of India          : Mr. Y.J. Dastoor, Ld. ASG,
Heard on      : 08.03.2021, 12.03.2021, 18.03.2021 and 22.04.2021.
1. The petitioner, an educationist by profession, has been constrained to invoke
the writ jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India. The petitioner has averred that while she was discharging her duties
as the Principal of Army Public School at Panagarh (arraigned as
―Respondent No. 5‖ in this writ application and hereinafter referred to as the
―said school‖) and whilst serving in her tenure as an extended probationer,
she was terminated from such post in violation of both her fundamental
rights as well as certain statutory rights. This termination was effected on
her by Chairman of the said school (hereinafter referred to as ―Respondent
2. In a bid to challenge her termination, the petitioner has pressed this writ
application before this Court. However, when the matter was taken up for
hearing on March 12, 2021, Mr. Y.J. Dastoor, learned Additional Solicitor
General, appearing on behalf of the contesting Respondents 2 to 8, had
demurred on the maintainability of the writ application itself.
3. In the opinion of Mr. Dastoor, such writ application was not maintainable for
the forthright reason that the said school is a private unaided educational
institution operated by the Army Welfare Education Society (arraigned as
―Respondent No. 3‖ in this writ application and hereinafter referred to as
―AWES‖), a society registered under the Societies Registration Act 1860. In
other words, Mr. Dastoor argued that since the said school was a private
unaided school and the AWES which is managing it, is not a public body, in
view of the mandate of Article 12 of the Constitution of India, neither the said
school nor the society overseeing the affairs of the said school would be
amenable to the writ jurisdiction of this Court.
4. An additional submission was also made by Mr. Dastoor; his specific
submission being that the writ application was in realm of service matters
and since the said school is not in the realm of rendering any public duty,
the issuance of a writ to redress such lis would have limited applicability.
5. Ms. Sonal Sinha, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner, was
nimble-footed in rebuffing the argument made by Mr. Dastoor. Ms. Sinha, on
the other hand, prepared with precedents favouring her argument, submitted
that the Respondents were indeed amenable to the Court‘s writ jurisdiction
based on the exposition of the law laid down in such precedents.
6. Based on such line of argumentation, both parties placed multiple case laws
on the point of when and to whom, a writ would lie under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India. Suffice to say, the point of law is fairly settled by
detailed judgments rendered both by the Supreme Court of India as well as
various High Courts across the country. However, Ms. Sinha expressed her
desire to file a detailed note of arguments on the point of demurral and such
liberty was granted to all the parties.
7. After an extensive hearing over the course of two days, the hearing stood
concluded and I had reserved the matter for judgment on April 22, 2021.
8. Therefore, in pursuance of the arguments advanced by the learned counsels
appearing on behalf of both the parties, the issue which arises for the Court‘s
consideration at this stage is whether the said school is amenable to the writ
jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India in
spite of being an unaided private educational institution and in light of being
managed by the AWES, a society registered under the Societies Registration
9.  Ms. Sinha, learned counsel for the petitioner, commenced with an
elucidation of the development of education laws in the country by
emphasizing     on  the  decision  of   the  Supreme    Court   rendered   in
Unnikrishnan, J.P. –v- State of Andhra Pradesh, reported in (1993) 1
SCC 645, which unequivocally had held that the right to education was a
fundamental right which finds its genesis from Article 21 of the Constitution
of India.
10. Subsequent to the decision of Unnikrishnan JP (supra) in 1993, Ms. Sinha
submitted that the Parliament of India, in its wisdom, passed the 86th
Amendment Act in 2002 which introduced Article 21A into Part-III of the
Constitution of India and enshrined the right to education as a designated
fundamental right. Such an amendment made the right to education for all
children between 6-14 years of age, a fundamental right. In furtherance of
giving effect to such fundamental right, the Parliament passed the Right of
Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 (hereinafter referred
Section 38 of the RTE Act, framed the West Bengal Right of Children to Free
and Compulsory Education Rules, 2012 (hereinafter referred to as ―WBRTE
11. Given the change in the development of education laws as stated in the
foregoing paragraph, Ms. Sinha emphatically submitted that based on the
Supreme Court‘s decision in Marwari Balika Vidyalaya –v- Asha
Srivastava, reported in (2020) 14 SCC 449, the Apex Court while
examining the issue of termination of an Assistant Teacher in a private
unaided institution, had held that a writ application is indeed maintainable
in such cases even as against the private unaided educational institutions.
12. The Full Bench decision rendered by the Allahabad High Court in Roychan
Abraham –v- State of U.P. reported in AIR 2019 All 96, was also cited to
submit that private institutions imparting education to students from the age
of six years and onwards, including higher education perform a public duty;
such a public duty was in the nature of State function and accordingly such
institutions become amenable to the Court‘s writ jurisdiction under Article
226 of the Constitution of India. As a precursor to both Asha Srivastava
(supra) and Roychan Abraham (supra), Ms. Sinha had cited that the
Allahabad High Court in Rachna Gupta –v- Union of India reported in
MANU UP 3494 2014 had explicitly ruled that the Army Public School was,
without ambiguity, amenable to the Court‘s writ jurisdiction. Important to
note, a preliminary objection on maintainability of the writ petition was also
taken in Rachna Gupta (supra) as was done in this case and was overruled
by the Hon‘ble Court.
13. Furthermore, Ms. Sinha then submitted that while it is an admitted fact that
the AWES operates all Army Public Schools across the country; the
individual schools, as the said school in this case, have to conform to the
statutory compliances of the RTE Act, WBRTE Rules as well as the Affiliation
Bye-laws of the Central Board of Secondary Education to which such schools
are affiliated. Highlighting such provisions namely Sections 2, 23 and 24, Ms.
Sinha stressed on the aspect that the service of the petitioner was regulated
under the RTE statute and contrary to the submission of Mr. Dastoor,
learned Additional Solicitor General, was not merely a private contract of
employment      between    the  said  school  (employer)  and   the  petitioner
14. Ms. Sinha also emphasized while being conscious of not admitting to such
fact, that in arguendo, even if the relationship between the petitioner and
the respondent was considered to have emanated out of a contract, it would
not shut the doors of this Court in invoking the writ jurisdiction under
Article 226 of the Constitution. She relied on the Supreme Court ruling of
Mahotsav Smarak Trust –v- V.R. Rudani reported in (1989) 2 SCC 691 to
suggest that a ‗liberal approach‘ had been expounded by the Court in dealing
with cases which may even find its genesis inter alia out of a contract; a writ
in such cases would very well lie to redress such a grievance.
15. On the specific point of whether the Army Public School as an institution,
was a public body, Ms. Sinha relied on the Supreme Court‘s decision in D.S.
Grewal –v- Vimmi Joshi reported in (2009) 2 SCC 210, to stress that the
Apex Court had held that the said school was a ‗public enterprise‘.
16. Ms. Sinha also drew my attention specifically to the WBRTE Rules which
prescribed that any appeal to be preferred by a teacher against the action of
a school was to be preferred to the West Bengal Administrative (Adjudication
of School Disputes) Commission, a statutory creature established by the
West Bengal Act XXXIV of 2008 (hereinafter referred to as ―Act of 2008‖).
While such Act of 2008 has been assented to by President of India and
published in the Kolkata Gazette for publication, the same has not been
notified. However, since the Act of 2008 has not been notified, a relief before
the writ court was the only efficacious remedy preferable as the Act of
2008 specifically stated that disputes between teachers and students was
not envisaged to be agitated before civil courts. With no alternative and
efficacious remedy available, the petitioner has pressed this writ application
seeking a redressal of this lis, submitted Ms. Sinha.
17. While concluding her submissions, Ms. Sinha on the point of a writ of
mandamus being issued by this Hon‘ble Court as a measure to enforce
service conditions of teachers serving in private unaided educational
institutions, relied on two coordinate bench decisions of this Court as
a) Jayanti Mondal –v- State of West Bengal, reported in 2017 SCC
b) Sankar    Prasad    Mukherjee      –v- Maulana   Abul    Kalam     Ajad
University reported in 2019 SCC Online Cal 659.
18. At the onset of his submissions, Mr. Dastoor, learned Additional Solicitor
General, stated that in this case there is neither a violation of any statutory
right nor any fundamental right guaranteed under Part III of the Constitution
of India, as alleged by the petitioner. Mr. Dastoor submitted that the gamut
of Army Public Schools in India are funded from Army Welfare Fund Welfare,
a fund privately funded by the Army that is not a recipient of any financial
contribution from the Union Government or any State Government. Mr.
Dastoor has highlighted that this welfare fund is operated based on the
financial contributions, received from various units of the Army, that is, from
the army personnel themselves.
19. Based on such categorization, Mr. Dastoor submitted that the said school in
question, cannot be considered to be a ‗State‘ as defined under Article 12 of
the Constitution of India. He also hastened to add that the implication which
flowed from such an argument was that the rules framed by the AWES
cannot be classified as ‗statutory‘ in nature. In Mr. Dastoor‘s learned view,
the jurisdiction under Article 226 could only be exercised by a constitutional
court if, and only if, an element of public law is involved; this remains a sine
qua non for the invocation of this Court‘s powers under Article 226 of the
Constitution and such power is not to be trifled with merely to enforce
private contracts of service/ or service related contracts entered into between
two conscious and competent parties.
20. To lay emphasis to his line of argumentation, Mr. Dastoor relied on the
a) Shaheeda Begum –v- Principal, Army School, Secunderabad
reported in 2005 SCC OnLine AP 706: (2006) 3 SLR 448 (AP);
b) Mrs. Sudha Soin –v- Union of India, reported in 2009 SCC OnLine
c) V.K. Walia –v- Chairman Army School reported in 2003 SCC
d) Abha Dave –v- Director, Army Institute of Management and
Technology, reported in 2009 SCC Online Del 1652;
21. As far as the second limb of his argument is concerned, Mr. Dastoor
submitted that in the absence of any statutory requirement, a contract of
employment cannot ordinarily be enforced against an employer and the
appropriate remedy, is not to file a writ application, but instead to sue
for damages in a civil court of appropriate jurisdiction. He highlighted
the well-accepted exceptions to this rule; for instance, the case of a public
servant dismissed from service in contravention to the protections offered
under Article 311 of the Constitution of India, the reinstatement of a
dismissed worker under Industrial/Labour law or dismissal effected by a
statutory body in breach of obligations imposed by a statute. Mr. Dastoor
has submitted that neither of these accepted exceptions have been made out
in the case of the petitioner.
22. While concluding his arguments, Mr. Dastoor submitted that sight must not
be lost of the fact that the petitioner was serving under a period of extended
probation and it was legally permissible for both the AWES or the said school
to evaluate the petitioner‘s performance by virtue of her status as a
probationer, making her eligible for either a confirmation or a discharge
from such service and in the event of a discharge, such contract could not be
enforced through writ application under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India. In support of his arguments, he relied upon the following case laws:
a) Satya Naranyan Athya –v- High Court of Madhya Pradesh,
b) State of U.P. –v- Bridge and Roof Co. reported in (1996) 6 SCC 22.
23. I have heard the learned counsels appearing on behalf of both the parties
and have perused the materials on record.
Jurisdiction of the High Courts under Article 226:
24. The power of judicial review by the High Courts in the country emanates
from Article 226 of the Constitution of India. Akin to the power bestowed to
the Supreme Court of India under Article 32 which is placed in Part III of the
Constitution of India thereby making it a fundamental right in its own
standing, it is axiomatic to state that the scope of the power under Article
226 is much wider as compared to powers conferred under Article 32. The
reason for such an exposition is an all-important, distinguishing feature: writ
applications under Article 32 can be pressed to enforce only a fundamental
right(s). However, in the case of Article 226, in addition to the enforcement
of a fundamental right, a petitioner can also seek the enforcement of any
legal right.
25. It would be quite apposite to fall back upon the exposition on this point of
law made by Subba Rao, J. (as he then was) when he was speaking for the
Constitution Bench in its decision rendered in Calcutta Gas Co. Ltd. –v-
State of West Bengal reported in AIR 1962 SC 1044:
―5. The first question that falls to be considered is whether the
appellant has locus standi to file the petition under Article 226 of
the Constitution. The argument of learned counsel for the
respondents is that the appellant was only managing the industry
and it had no proprietary right therein and, therefore, it could not
maintain the application. Article 226 confers a very wide power
on the High Court to issue directions and writs of the nature
mentioned therein for the enforcement of any of the rights
conferred by Part III or for any other purpose. It is, therefore,
clear that persons other than those claiming fundamental
rights can also approach the court seeking a relief
thereunder. The article in terms does not describe the classes
of persons entitled to apply thereunder; but it is implicit in
the exercise of the extraordinary jurisdiction that the relief
asked for must be one to enforce a legal right. In State of
Orissa v. Madan Gopal Rungta [(1952) SCR 28] this Court has
ruled that the existence of the right is the foundation of the
exercise of jurisdiction of the court under Article 226 of the
Constitution. In Chiranjit Lal Chowdhuri v. Union of India [(1950)
SCR 869] it has been held by this Court that the legal right that
can be enforced under Article 32 must ordinarily be the right of the
petitioner himself who complains of infraction of such right and
approaches the court for relief. We do not see any reason why a
different principle should apply in the case of a petitioner
under Article 226 of the Constitution. The right that can be
enforced under Article 226 also shall ordinarily be the
personal or individual right of the petitioner himself, though
in the case of some of the writs like habeas corpus or quo warranto
26. A similar opinion was also voiced by P.N. Bhagwati, J. (as he then was) when
the Full Bench of the Apex Court rendered its decision in the landmark case
of Bandhua Mukti Morcha –v- Union of India, reported in (1984) 3 SCC
161 and more popularly known as the ‗Bonded Labourers‘ Case‘:
―15. We may point out that what we have said above in regard to
the exercise of jurisdiction by the Supreme Court under Article 32
must apply equally in relation to the exercise of jurisdiction by the
High Courts under Article 226, for the latter jurisdiction is also a
new constitutional jurisdiction and it is conferred in the same wide
terms as the jurisdiction under Article 32 and the same powers can
and must therefore be exercised by the High Courts while
exercising jurisdiction under Article 226. In fact, the jurisdiction
of the High Courts under Article 226 is much wider, because
the High Courts are required to exercise this jurisdiction not
only for enforcement of a fundamental right but also for
enforcement of any legal right and there are many rights
conferred on the poor and the disadvantaged which are the
creation of statute and they need to be enforced as urgently
27. A more recent view was reiterated by the Supreme Court in K.K. Saksena –
v- International Commission on Irrigation & Drainage reported in (2015)
―33. In this context, when we scan through the provisions of Article
12 of the Constitution, as per the definition contained therein, the
―State‖ includes the Government and Parliament of India and the
Government and legislature of each State as well as ―all local or
other authorities within the territory of India or under the control
of the Government of India‖. It is in this context the question as to
which body would qualify as ―other authority‖ has come up for
consideration before this Court ever since, and the test/principles
which are to be applied for ascertaining as to whether a particular
body can be treated as ―other authority‖ or not have already been
noted above. If such an authority violates the fundamental
right or other legal rights of any person or citizen (as the
case may be), a writ petition can be filed under Article 226 of
the Constitution invoking the extraordinary jurisdiction of
the High Court and seeking appropriate direction, order or
writ. However, under Article 226 of the Constitution, the
power of the High Court is not limited to the Government or
authority which qualifies to be ―State‖ under Article 12.
Power is extended to issue directions, orders or writs ―to any
person or authority‖. Again, this power of issuing directions,
orders or writs is not limited to enforcement of fundamental
rights conferred by Part III, but also ―for any other purpose‖.
Thus, power of the High Court takes within its sweep more
―authorities‖ than stipulated in Article 12 and the subject-
matter which can be dealt with under this article is also
28. Therefore, when a preliminary objection has been raised qua maintainability
of the writ application filed by the aggrieved petitioner at her own risk under
Article 226 of the Constitution of India, it would augur well for all to be
reminded of the basic premise on which such power is exercised by the
constitutional courts. Therefore, if the petitioner has felt that she stands
violated of her precious fundamental right or any legal right for that matter,
it is this Court‘s bounden duty to inspect the propriety of the same. However,
the hurdle which remains to be crossed is to examine if the said school,
being an unaided school, as emphasized by Mr. Dastoor, is amenable to the
Court‘s writ jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
The aspect of discharge of a ‘public duty/function’:
29. It is not in dispute that the said school is an unaided school and is managed
by the AWES. AWES, as has been previously stated, is a society registered
under the Societies Registration Act, 1860. Whether such a categorization is
sufficient to place the said school or the AWES beyond the contours of Article
12 of the Constitution of India requires a thorough examination. Merely
registering a body under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 does not ensure
that such body is beyond the pervasive edict of Article 12; a related case in
point would be the case of B.S. Minhas –v- Indian Statistical Institute
reported in (1983) 4 SCC 582, whereby the respondent institute was
declared to be an ‗instrumentality‘ of the Union Government and classified as
a State under Article 12 inspite of being a society registered under the
30. Article 12 of the Constitution, which appears in Part III, states:
―12. Definition.—In this part, unless the context otherwise
requires, ―the State‖ includes the Government and Parliament of
India and the Government and the Legislature of each of the States
and all local or other authorities within the territory of India or
under the control of the Government of India.‖
Initially, the definition of ‗State‘ in Article 12 was considered to be
straightforward. As the nation developed over time, multiple bodies have
sprung up and these bodies suffice to say, serve manifold objects and
discharge duties of myriad kinds to the citizenry. As a direct result of such
proliferation in the growth of such institutions, multiple rounds of litigation
before the Supreme Court have produced a litany of tests, laid down by no
less than Constitution Benches in a catena of judgments, in order to
construe the terms ‗local authorities‘ as well as ‗other authorities‘, as stated
in Article 12 of the Constitution of India, extracted above.
31. Mr. Dastoor had argued that the AWES was not a statutory body nor are its
relations governed by a statute and for this reason alone, AWES or its
educational institutions are not a ‗State‘ within the meaning of Article 12 of
the Constitution of India. Ms. Sinha, on the other hand, had relied upon V.R.
Rudani (supra). The Supreme Court in the case had ruled very clearly
stating that a writ of mandamus could lie to any person or authority
performing a public duty and owing a positive obligation to the affected
party, wherein such a duty need not be imposed by statute. The Court had
―22. Here again we may point out that mandamus cannot be
denied on the ground that the duty to be enforced is not
imposed by the statute. Commenting on the development of this
law, Professor de Smith states: ―To be enforceable by mandamus a
public duty does not necessarily have to be one imposed by
statute. It may be sufficient for the duty to have been imposed by
charter, common law, custom or even contract.‖ [ Judicial Review
of Administrative Action, 4th Edn., p. 540] We share this view.
The judicial control over the fast expanding maze of bodies
affecting the rights of the people should not be put into
watertight compartment. It should remain flexible to meet the
requirements of variable circumstances. Mandamus is a very
wide remedy which must be easily available ―to reach
injustice wherever it is found‖. Technicalities should not
come in the way of granting that relief under Article 226. We,
therefore, reject the contention urged for the appellants on
32. Therefore, what follows is the fact that even if AWES was considered to be a
private body/authority, a writ of mandamus under Article 226 of the
Constitution could be issued to the same if it were proved that it is
performing a public duty and it owed a positive obligation to an affected
party. The reason for such permissibility is the phraseology of Article 226
itself. The Supreme Court had enunciated the implications of such an
exposition in a detailed manner in Binny Ltd. –v- V. Sadasivan, reported in
―11. Judicial review is designed to prevent the cases of abuse of
power and neglect of duty by public authorities. However, under
our Constitution, Article 226 is couched in such a way that a
writ of mandamus could be issued even against a private
authority. However, such private authority must be
discharging a public function and the decision sought to be
corrected or enforced must be in discharge of a public
function. The role of the State expanded enormously and attempts
have been made to create various agencies to perform the
governmental functions. Several corporations and companies have
also been formed by the Government to run industries and to carry
on trading activities. These have come to be known as public sector
undertakings. However, in the interpretation given to Article 12 of
the Constitution, this Court took the view that many of these
companies and corporations could come within the sweep of Article
12 of the Constitution. At the same time, there are private
bodies also which may be discharging public functions. It is
difficult to draw a line between public functions and private
functions when they are being discharged by a purely private
authority. A body is performing a ―public function‖ when it
seeks to achieve some collective benefit for the public or a
section of the public and is accepted by the public or that
section of the public as having authority to do so. Bodies
therefore exercise public functions when they intervene or
participate in social or economic affairs in the public
29. Thus, it can be seen that a writ of mandamus or the remedy
under Article 226 is pre-eminently a public law remedy and is not
generally available as a remedy against private wrongs. It is used
for enforcement of various rights of the public or to compel
public/statutory authorities to discharge their duties and to act
within their bounds. It may be used to do justice when there is
wrongful exercise of power or a refusal to perform duties. This
writ is admirably equipped to serve as a judicial control over
administrative actions. This writ could also be issued against
any private body or person, specially in view of the words
used in Article 226 of the Constitution. However, the scope of
mandamus is limited to enforcement of public duty. The
scope of mandamus is determined by the nature of the duty to
be enforced, rather than the identity of the authority against
whom it is sought. If the private body is discharging a public
function and the denial of any right is in connection with the
public duty imposed on such body, the public law remedy can
be enforced. The duty cast on the public body may be either
statutory or otherwise and the source of such power is
immaterial, but, nevertheless, there must be the public law
element in such action. Sometimes, it is difficult to distinguish
between public law and private law remedies. According
to Halsbury's Laws of England, 3rd Edn., Vol. 30, p. 682,
―1317. A public authority is a body, not necessarily a county
council, municipal corporation or other local authority, which has
public or statutory duties to perform and which perform those
duties and carries out its transactions for the benefit of the public
There cannot be any general definition of public authority or
public action. The facts of each case decide the point.‖
33. Therefore, the major principles which emerge from V.R. Rudani (supra) and
V. Sadasivan (supra), for the Court‘s consideration are as follows:
a) A writ of mandamus can be issued to a private body/authority under
Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
b) Such a writ can only be issued to such a private body/authority if
such an authority is discharging a ‘public function’ and the decision
sought to be corrected or enforced must be in discharging a public
function.
c) The scope of mandamus is determined by the nature of the duty to be
enforced, rather than the identity of the authority against whom it is
sought.
d) A body is performing a ‘public function‘ when it seeks to achieve
some collective benefit for the public or a section of the public and
is accepted by the public or that section of the public as having
authority to do so. Bodies therefore exercise public functions when they
intervene or participate in social or economic affairs in the public
interest.
e) If the private body is discharging a public function and the denial of
any right is in connection with the public duty imposed on such
body, the public law remedy can be enforced.
f) The duty cast on the public body may be either statutory or otherwise
and the source of such power is immaterial, but, nevertheless, there
must be a public law element in such action.
34. As a result of these principles, what patently stands out is the necessity to
examine a sole criterion, that is, if the AWES was discharging a public duty
by operating the Army Public Schools, as is the case with the said school,
through its supervision, management and financing. Mr. Dastoor‘s argument
apropos the nature of AWES – private or otherwise- now appears to be
nothing more than surplusage.
35. As recorded above, Ms. Sinha had submitted that the Parliament of India, in
its wisdom, passed the 86th Amendment Act in 2002 which introduced Article
21A into Part-III of the Constitution of India and enshrined the right to
education as a fundamental right for all children between 6-14 years of
age. In furtherance of giving effect to such fundamental right, the Parliament
passed the RTE Act, 2009 which has been in effect from April 1, 2010
onwards. Section 2(n) of the RTE Act, defines ―school‖ in the following terms:
―(n) ―school‖ means any recognized school imparting elementary
(i) a school established, owned or controlled by the appropriate
(ii) an aided school receiving aid or grants to meet whole or part of
its expenses from the appropriate Government or the local
(iii)   a   school    belonging     to   specified    category;    and
(iv) an unaided school not receiving any kind of aid or grants to
meet its expenses from the appropriate Government or the
36. Therefore, the organic deduction that follows is that since the said school
which is run by AWES, being an unaided school, by virtue of the Section 2(n)
of the RTE Act, the said school had come to discharge a public duty as was
cast upon it by the said statute with effect from April 1, 2010. Such a public
duty stands imposed, in my opinion, in terms of both Article 21A of the
Constitution of India as well as the RTE Act which gave effect to the
fundamental right in unequivocal terms. Unfortunately, as a result, all the
four precedents cited by Mr. Dastoor in paragraph 20 above, prove to be
inconsequential to his benefit as all these decisions had been rendered much
prior to the coming into effect of the RTE Act, that is, prior to April 1, 2010;
not to mention that these judgments did not have any binding effect on this
Court, as per the doctrine of precedent.
37. Furthermore, in my opinion, in light of the law laid down in Asha
Srivastava (supra) relied upon by Ms. Sinha, the issue of a private
unaided educational institute being amenable to the writ jurisdiction of
this Court is no longer res integra. The Supreme Court was seized with
this significant issue wherein the facts of that case were that an Assistant
Teacher, working for gain in a private unaided educational institution, was
terminated from such service by a stigmatic order and without either
procuring the approval of pertinent authorities or holding a disciplinary
enquiry. The Supreme Court had relied on its former decisions rendered in
Ramesh Ahluwalia –v- State of Punjab, reported in (2012) 12 SCC 331
and Raj Kumar –v- Director of Education, reported in (2016) 6 SCC 541,
―16. It is apparent from the aforesaid decisions that the writ
application is maintainable in such a matter even as against
the private unaided educational institutions.‖
38. Subsequently, a learned Single Judge of the Jammu & Kashmir High Court
had ruled on a similar case (termination of a teacher serving under
probation)     in   Satvinder    Singh   –v-   Presentation     Convent     Senior
Secondary School, bearing W.P. (C). No. 971/2020 dated August 4, 2020
wherein the learned Single Judge had relied explicitly on Asha Srivastava
(supra) to hold that the respondent private unaided institution was amenable
to the Court‘s jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
Thus, this exhibition clearly demonstrates that the law as laid down in Asha
Srivastava (supra) now makes it binding upon all High Courts to give effect
to it, in terms of Article 141 of the Constitution of India. Additionally, the Full
Bench of the Allahabad High Court in Roychan Abraham (supra), upon a
reference made by a learned Single Judge, had also relied on Ramesh
Ahluwalia (supra) to reach the conclusion that private institutions
imparting education to students were discharging a public duty and
accordingly, were amenable to the writ jurisdiction of the Court under Article
226 of the Constitution.
39. However, the ordeal for the Respondents does not end here. The Supreme
Court in D.S. Grewal (supra), had in paragraph 20 of its judgment dated
December 17, 2008, noted explicitly that the Army Public School or the said
school was a ‗public enterprise‘ and had directed the Uttarakhand High
Court to dispose of the pending writ petition as expeditiously as possible. In
deference to the same, the Division Bench of the Uttarakhand High Court in
Km. Vimi Joshi –v- Chairman, School Managing Committee reported in
2010 SCC OnLine Utt 2462 by an order dated September 3, 2010 had
―9. It was contended on behalf of the Management Committee that
the School is not amenable to the jurisdiction of Writ Court. It was
contended that the Division Bench of another Court has held that
it is not an Authority within the meaning of Article 12 of the
Constitution of India. In paragraph-20 of the judgment of
Hon'ble Supreme Court, referred above, the Hon'ble Supreme
Court, in no uncertain terms, has held that the School is a
‗Public Enterprise‘. In view of such pronouncement of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court, we hold that the School is an
Authority within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution
of India and, accordingly, is answerable for each of its
40. Therefore, based on the law declared by the Supreme Court in D.S. Grewal
(supra), the said school was declared to be a ‗public enterprise‘ much prior to
the coming into effect of the RTE Act, 2009 and this therefore, also becomes
a declaration of the law under Article 141 of the Constitution of India and
hence, becomes binding on this Court. As enunciated by the Uttarakhand
High Court order in Km. Vimi Joshi (supra) which was in deference to the
Supreme Court‘s declaration of the law, the said school in Panagarh is also
held to be an authority within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of
India, as well as in line with the law laid down in D.S. Grewal (supra). The
sole issue before the Court is so answered.
41. Having held so, Mr. Dastoor‘s interpretation of the law whereby a contract of
employment cannot ordinarily be enforced against an employer and the
appropriate remedy, is not to file a writ application, but instead to sue for
damages in a civil court of appropriate jurisdiction deserves an examination.
42. An important caveat was appended by the Supreme Court in K.K. Saksena
(supra) whereby the Court had ruled that even if an authority was deemed to
be a ‗State‘ under Article 12 of the Constitution, the constitutional courts
before issuing any writ, particularly that of mandamus, must satisfy
that such impugned action of the authority concerned which is under
challenge, forms a part of the public law as opposed to private law. The
―43. What follows from a minute and careful reading of the
aforesaid judgments of this Court is that if a person or authority
is ―State‖ within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution,
admittedly a writ petition under Article 226 would lie against
such a person or body. However, we may add that even in
such cases writ would not lie to enforce private law rights.
There are a catena of judgments on this aspect and it is not
necessary to refer to those judgments as that is the basic
principle of judicial review of an action under the administrative
law. The reason is obvious. A private law is that part of a
legal system which is a part of common law that involves
relationships between individuals, such as law of contract
or torts. Therefore, even if writ petition would be
maintainable against an authority, which is ―State‖ under
Article 12 of the Constitution, before issuing any writ,
particularly writ of mandamus, the Court has to satisfy that
action of such an authority, which is challenged, is in the
domain of public law as distinguished from private law.‖
43. Relying upon K.K. Saksena (supra), the Supreme Court in Ramakrishna
Mission –v- Kago Kunya reported in (2019) 16 SCC 303 had held that:
―34. Thus, contracts of a purely private nature would not be
subject to writ jurisdiction merely by reason of the fact that
they are structured by statutory provisions. The only
exception to this principle arises in a situation where
the contract of service is governed or regulated by a statutory
provision. Hence, for instance, in K.K. Saksena this Court held
that when an employee is a workman governed by the Industrial
Disputes Act, 1947, it constitutes an exception to the general
principle that a contract of personal service is not capable of being
Reading the ‘Legislative Intent’: The scheme of the RTE Act
44. Therefore based on the principles outlined in K.K. Saksena (supra) as well
as Kago Kunya (supra), the overarching implications of the RTE Act requires
a thorough examination to fathom if there is a character of public law
involved in the present lis, which would permit the Court to exercise its
powers of judicial review under Article 226 of the Constitution of India. At
this juncture, I am reminded of the omnipresent words of the House of Lords
which were used in describing the meaning of ‗legislative intent‘ and the
means of interpreting the same. This was laid down in the well-known
precedent of Salomon –v- Salomon Co. Ltd., reported in [1897] AC 22 at
―…―Intention of the Legislature‖ is a common but very slippery
phrase, which, popularly understood, may signify anything from
intention embodied in positive enactment to speculative opinion as
to what the Legislature probably would have meant, although there
has been an omission to enact it. In a Court of Law or Equity, what
the Legislature intended to be done or not to be done can only be
legitimately ascertained from that which it has chosen to enact,
either in express words or by reasonable and necessary
45. A bare perusal of the schematics of the RTE Act, exhibits that the legislative
intent of the Parliament was to ensure that teachers were not left in the lurch
in situations and their grievances in school disputes, would have to be
addressed satisfactorily. Specific provisions of the RTE Act lay down with
utmost clarity, that compliance with the principles of natural justice
are a must while specific grievance redressal mechanisms would be laid
down by the ‘appropriate government’ as defined in the RTE Act;
―23. Qualifications for appointment and terms and conditions
of service of teachers.—(1) Any person possessing such minimum
qualifications, as laid down by an academic authority, authorised
by the Central Government, by notification, shall be eligible for
appointment as a teacher.
(2) Where a State does not have adequate institutions offering
courses or training in teacher education, or teachers possessing
minimum qualifications as laid down under sub-section (1) are not
available in sufficient numbers, the Central Government may, if it
deems necessary, by notification, relax the minimum qualifications
required for appointment as a teacher, for such period, not
exceeding five years, as may be specified in that notification:
Provided that a teacher who, at the commencement of this Act, does
not possess minimum qualifications as laid down under sub-section
(1), shall acquire such minimum qualifications within a period of
five years.
3[Provided further that every teacher appointed or in position as on
the   31st   March,    2015,   who  does    not   possess    minimum
qualifications as laid down under sub-section (1), shall acquire such
minimum qualifications within a period of four years from the date
of commencement of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory
(3) The salary and allowances payable to, and the terms and
conditions of service of, teachers shall be such as may be
24. Duties of teachers and redressal of grievances.—(1) A teacher
appointed under sub-section (1) of section 23 shall perform the
(a) maintain regularity and punctuality in attending school;
(b) conduct and complete the curriculum in accordance with the
(c)   complete   entire  curriculum     within  the   specified  time;
(d) assess the learning ability of each child and accordingly
(e) hold regular meetings with parents and guardians and apprise
them about the regularity in attendance, ability to learn, progress
made in learning and any other relevant information about the
(f)  perform    such    other    duties   as   may   be   prescribed.
(2) A teacher committing default in performance of duties
specified in sub-section (1), shall be liable to disciplinary
action under the service rules applicable to him or her:
Provided    that    before   taking     such   disciplinary    action,
reasonable opportunity of being heard shall be afforded to
such teacher.
(3) The grievances, if any, of the teacher shall be redressed in
46. Entry 25 in the Concurrent List of Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of
India which makes ‗Education‘ a shared subject between the Union and
States; in a bid to ensure decentralization of the grievance redressal
mechanism      of teachers,   the   RTE    Act   also  envisaged  that   State
Governments be empowered to ‘prescribe’ and frame rules in this
regard.
47. Section 2(a) of the RTE Act defines an ‗appropriate Government‘ as:
(i) in relation to a school established, owned or controlled by the
Central Government, or the administrator of the Union territory,
having no legislature, the Central Government;
(ii) in relation to a school, other than the school referred to in
sub-clause (i), established within the territory of—
(B) a Union territory having legislature, the Government of that
Section 2(l) of the RTE Act defines ‘prescribed’ to mean ‗prescribed by
rules made under this Act.
Clause (n) to sub-section (2) of Section 38 of the RTE Act provides the
appropriate Governments with the power to make subsidiary Rules with
regard to such grievance redressal mechanism, in the following terms:
―38. Power of appropriate Government to make rules.—(1) The
appropriate Government may, by notification, make rules, for
carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing powers, such rules may provide for all or any of the
(l) the salary and allowances payable to, and the terms and
conditions of service of, teacher, under sub-section (3) of section
(m) the duties to be performed by the teacher under clause (f) of
(n) the manner of redressing grievances of teachers under sub-
48. Accordingly, in pursuance of the powers conferred under Section 38 of the
RTE Act, the State of West Bengal framed the WBRTE Rules in 2012, which
have been in effect since March 16, 2012. Particularly, Sub-clauses (xiii),
(xiv), (xv), (xvi), (xvii) and (xviii) to clause (g) under sub-rule (15) to Rule
10 of the WBRTE Rules deals inter alia with pointed aspects of recruitment
of teachers, the publication of service rules and leave rules along with
provisions pertaining to disciplinary proceedings:
―10. Authority, form and manner of making applications for
certificate of recognition under sub section (1) of section 18 and
manner of giving hearing under second proviso to clause (3) of
section 18.
(15) Every school seeking recognition under the section 18 shall, in
addition to the requirements of the Board to which it is to be
recognised or seeks to be affiliated to, abide by the following
(xiii) comply with the rules and regulations, and satisfy the
minimum qualification norms set by the National Commission for
Teacher Education to the teachers‘ recruitment for the satisfaction
(xiv) have recruited teachers as per the staff pattern and
qualifications specified by the State Government or the Board with
(xv) have a duly published service rules and leave rules for the
(xvi) follow the provisions relating to disciplinary proceedings
(xvii) have a determined the pay structure of its teaching and non-
teaching staff in such manner as may be directed by the State
(xviii) have provisions for contributory provident fund and gratuity
49. The grievance redressal mechanism for teachers, too, was prescribed by the
State Government under the WBRTE Rules, as such burden was placed on
the State Government to prescribe such a mechanism. Rule 17 of the
WBRTE Rules, as a result, conspicuously deals with the grievance redressal
―17. Manner of redressing grievances of teachers under sub-
section (3) of section 24.—(1) Any grievance by a teacher of any
school or a body of teachers shall be first addressed in writing to
the School Management Committee of the concerned school, and
the School Management Committee shall address such grievance by
passing a reasoned decision within 4 (four) weeks of receipt of such
complaint.
(2) Where the School Management Committee fails to address the
grievance or where the teacher is dissatisfied with the decision,
appeal   may   be   made    to  the   West  Bengal   Administrative
(Adjudication of School Disputes) Commission.‖
50. In juxtaposition to this scheme of the RTE Act and the WBRTE Rules, an
interesting aspect arises for consideration by the Court. Paragraph 19 of the
appointment letter of the petitioner dated June 19, 2019 had the following
―19. You will redress grievances, if any through Chairman, School
Administration and Management Committee. The decision of the
Chairman shall be final and binding on you. It may be noted that Army
Public School Panagarh comes under the category of Unaided Private
School   (illegible) and  it is   not  a  Government      Institute. Legal
Proceedings/Litigations are discouraged.‖
51. While the first part of Paragraph 19 apropos the initiating part of the
grievance redressal mechanism was in compliance with Rule 17 of the
WBRTE Rules, wherein the appropriate authority in dealing with the
grievance of the petitioner was the School Administration and Management
Committee, the latter half of the paragraph which attached finality to its
decision and the assertion that the said school is an unaided private school
and the discouraging attitude towards litigation is patently in the teeth of the
statutory prescriptions of both the RTE Act, WBRTE Rules as well as the law
laid down by the Supreme Court in D.S. Grewal (supra) and Asha
Srivastava (supra). It is axiomatic to state that a contractual provision
cannot run afoul of a statute as laid down distinctly under Section 23 of the
Indian Contract Act, 1872, and so is the case herein.
52. This is squarely in opposition to Mr. Dastoor‘s interpretation of the law
whereby a contract of employment cannot ordinarily be enforced against an
employer and the appropriate remedy, is not to file a writ application, but
instead to sue for damages in a civil court of appropriate jurisdiction. There
is a patent manifestation of the violation of the petitioner‘s rights under the
RTE Act read with the WBRTE Rules which makes it a fit case for judicial
review under Article 226 of the Constitution of India. Therefore, I am of the
informed opinion, that the quoted provisions of the RTE Act read with quoted
provisions of the WBRTE Rules, indeed regulates the contract of service of
the petitioner, and this thereby falls within the exception as stated in Kago
53. Ms. Sinha had pointed out that the statutory body under the Act of 2008 was
presently not in existence as its parent Act was yet to be notified in spite of
having been assented to by the President of India and having been published
in the Calcutta Gazette Extraordinary dated December 29, 2011. This in Ms.
Sinha‘s submission, has hindered the petitioner‘s right in exercising an
appeal to the said Commission.
54. In light of the West Bengal Administrative (Adjudication of School Disputes)
Commission Act, 2008 not having been notified as on date, the only
efficacious and alternate remedy at the disposal of the petitioner for the
redressal of her grievance was to indeed file a writ application under Article
226 of the Constitution of India.
55. Thus, to summarize the findings of the Court:
a) The said school, Army Public School, Panagarh, is held to be a ‗State‘
under Article 12 of the Constitution in pursuance of the law laid down
in D.S. Grewal (supra).
b) In spite of being an private unaided educational institution, since it
has been discharging a public duty under the prescriptions of a statute
and subsidiary rules made under it, that is, the RTE Act and the
WBRTE Rules, the said school is amenable to the Court‘s writ
jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, as per the
law laid down in Asha Srivastava (supra).
c) As per the principle laid down in K.K. Saksena (supra), even if an
authority is deemed to be a ‗State‘ under Article 12 of the Constitution,
the constitutional courts before issuing any writ, particularly that of
mandamus, must satisfy that such impugned action of the authority
concerned which is under challenge, forms a part of the public law as
opposed to private law. Accordingly, after the coming into effect of the
RTE Act, the said school was guided by the same along with the
WBRTE Rules vis-à-vis compliance with rules of natural justice as well
as a prescribed grievance redressal mechanism. This gives it a distinct
characterization of public law.
d) The examined provisions of the RTE Act read with provisions of the
WBRTE Rules, indeed regulates the contract of service of the
petitioner, and this thereby falls within the exception as stated in Kago
e) Lastly, in light of the West Bengal Administrative (Adjudication of
School Disputes) Commission Act, 2008 not having been notified as on
date, the only efficacious and alternate remedy at the disposal of the
petitioner for the redressal of her grievance was to file a writ
application under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
56. In conclusion thereof, the preliminary objection raised on the grounds of
maintainability of the present writ application is hereby rejected. I also
make it clear that a part of the arguments furnished by Mr. Dastoor, in
paragraph 22 of this judgment, vis-à-vis the propriety of terminating the
petitioner‘s services while she was a probationer, touches upon the merits of
the matter and accordingly, I have refrained from delving into the same.
57. In conclusion thereof, the Respondent authorities are granted a period of four
weeks to file their affidavits-in-opposition from date of this judgment.
Affidavits-in-reply, if desired to be submitted by the writ petitioner, be
submitted within a period of two weeks thereafter.
58. Urgent photostat certified copy of this order, if applied for, be given to the
parties upon compliance of all necessary formalities.
I am given to understand that a new principal has been appointed in place
and stead of the petitioner. Her appointment is also as a probationer. In light
of the fact that the judgment in this case would have a direct impact upon
the person newly appointed, the petitioner is directed to add the newly
appointed person as a party to this writ petition and duly serve the amended
copy of the writ petition along with the order passed in court today upon the
added respondent. The added respondent shall also be at liberty to file an
affidavit-in-opposition as directed above. I further make it clear that all
parties shall abide by the result of this writ petition.