1. Aggrieved by the avoidable ‘maternal death’ of his daughter-in-
law Martha Sabar, who died after delivering a dead female child,
the Petitioner has approached this Court with the present petition
praying inter alia for the appointment of a Maternal Death
Review Board comprised of independent members and for this
Court to thereafter direct payment of compensation by the State.
The Petitioner has also prayed for disbursal to the family of the
deceased, her financial entitlements under the National Maternity
Benefit Scheme (NMBS). General directions are also sought for
the proper implementation of the various schemes of the central
and state government including the Janani Suraksha Yojana (JSY)
in the village Labanyagada, Gajapati District, where the Petitioner
resides and in the whole of Odisha.
2. Enclosed with the petition is the enquiry report of Dr. P.L.N.
Patro, the Additional District Medical Officer (ADMO), FW,
Gajapati which concluded that there was no medical negligence at
any stage in the treatment of deceased. It was opined therein that
the cause of death may be “due to severe sepsis with pulmonary
embolism”. Enclosed with the petition is also the report of an
independent fact-finding enquiry undertaken by a human rights
organization, which has come to the opposite conclusion after
interviewing those involved and examining the available records.
3. On 17th May, 2022 this Court passed the following order in this
“1. The present petition is by the father-in-law of
an unfortunate woman, who not only lost her baby
due to an intra uterine death but herself died while
receiving treatment on 25th March, 2015.
2. The case of the Petitioner is that the death of the
baby as well as the woman was due to medical
negligence and was avoidable. The pleadings in
the present petition present disputed questions of
fact with the Opposite Parties claiming that there
was no medical negligence.
3. The Opposite Parties appear to have conducted
an enquiry into the maternal death of the woman in
question. The enquiry report of the ADMO (FW),
Gajapati dated 10th April, 2015 is enclosed with
the petition.
assessment of the materials on record the Court
requests the State Commission for Women, Odisha
(SCWO) to assist it in the task. Accordingly, the
following directions are issued:
(i) A complete set of papers will be made available
by the Registry of this Court to the Secretary,
W.P.(C) No.11860 of 2015
not later than 1st June, 2022;
(ii) The SCWO will constitute an appropriate
enquiry team to examine the papers and also visit
and record statements of the Petitioner and his
family members, the concerned treating doctors,
the place of treatment, the medical case record and
make an assessment as to the veracity of the claims
of either party on the basis of the materials
gathered. The SCWO can also take the assistance
of a qualified medical professional for making its
assessment.
(iii) The report of the SCWO pursuant to the above
directions be made available to this Court not later
than 1st July 2022.
5. As far as the connected matters are concerned,
wherever replies/counter affidavits have not yet
been filed they be filed positively one week prior
to the next date with copies to learned counsel for
the Petitioner, who is permitted to file a rejoinder
thereto before the next date.
6. List on 1st August, 2022 along with the
connected cases listed today. A copy of this order
be delivered forthwith to the Secretary, SCWO
through a Special Messenger.”
4. Pursuant to the above order, the Odisha State Commission for
Women (OSCW) under cover of a letter dated 8th July, 2022 has
submitted the report of the Enquiry Committee (EC) in a sealed
cover. The report was perused by the Court at the hearing on 1st
August, 2022 and copies thereof were directed to be supplied to
both learned counsel for the Petitioner as well as learned counsel
for the State of Odisha to enable them to make their submissions
on the report.
5. At the outset, the Court would like to set out the factual
background as can be gleaned from the report of the EC of the
OSCW. The Petitioner, the father-in-law of the deceased, who
appeared before the EC and was examined as ECW 16 informed
the EC that he had taken the deceased to the Garabandha Primary
Health Center (PHC) for her health check-up on 18th March, 2015.
The Pharmacist on duty there was Mr. Kishore Chandra Panigrahi
(ECW 19). Dr. Sunil Kumar Shukla was the Medical Officer
(MO). ECW 16 informed the EC that the deceased was
complaining of chest and abdominal pain during pregnancy as
was noted in the entry made in the OPD register. Dr. Shukla was
not present. ECW 16 called Anjali Bala Swain, who was the
Auxiliary Nursing Midwife (ANM) but since her arrival was
delayed, ECW 16 referred the deceased to the District Health
6. The EC concluded that since no MO and ANM were available
at Garabandha PHC (New), no treatment was given to the
deceased on 18th March, 2015 although she was nine months
pregnant. The EC concluded that this failure to provide treatment
to the deceased on 18th March, 2015 had a direct nexus with her
death one week later at the DHH on 25th March, 2015.
7. On 18th March, 2015 the deceased returned to her house. On
24th March 2015, she again developed labour pain at 11.45 am and
came to the DHH for an ANC check-up. She complained the
foetus was not moving. Dr. V. Sarojini Devi (ECW 2), who was
the MO of DHH, Paralakhemundi, found some swelling on the
W.P.(C) No.11860 of 2015
face and legs of the deceased. After examining the abdomen of
the deceased, ECW 2 could not detect any foetal movement. She
opined that if a dead child remains in the uterus, it would cause
8. The finding of the EC in regard to the conduct of ECW 2 was:
“strangely she did not prescribe any medicine even after knowing
that the patient was suffering from sepsis. She also did not refer
the patient to the O & G Specialist forthwith.” Save and except
the bed head ticket, there was no other document in support of the
nature of diagnosis, treatment and medicine prescribed to
deceased. In the bed head ticket (Ext. 4) dated 24th March, 2015
there was an endorsement to the effect of “loss of foetus
movement since five days.”
9. It appeared from the evidence of Pramod Chandra Sahoo (ECW
1), who was the laboratory technician at the DHH, that on 24th
March, 2015 he collected the blood samples of the deceased for
testing, blood grouping, Hepatitis B, Haemoglobin, BT CT etc.
on payment of money.
10. The EC examined Dr. Suchitra Kumari Sahoo (ECW 4), who
was the O&G Specialist at DHH, Paralakhemundi. She examined
the deceased on 24th March, 2015 at her residence. On perusing
the Ultrasound report brought to her by the deceased, ECW 4
found Intra Uterine Death (IUD) with severe Oligohydramnios
and with high BP. She advised admission of the deceased in the
DHH. She stated before the EC that “she was also in a mood to
refer the patient to MKCG for better treatment as her BP was high
W.P.(C) No.11860 of 2015
with IUD.” These facts were mentioned by ECW 4 in the bed
head ticket at 9.20 pm on 24th March, 2015. Despite the above
reports being available by 4 pm, the EC found that “there was
none in the hospital to take care of her to admit in Female O & G
Ward. She was loitering in the hospital of DHH with pain having
IUD.” Due to the non-cooperation of the hospital authorities, “she
took ultrasound test after making necessary payment to a private
11. The EC found that the evidence of Dr. Sarojini Devi (ECW 2)
was “shrouded with suspicion”. The Medicine Specialist at DHH,
Dr. Anil Kumar Acharya (ECW 3) was on duty at the Casualty
Department of the DHH on 24th March, 2015 from 5 to 9 pm. At 8
pm he examined the deceased. He suspected IUD and toxemica.
He found non-movement of foetus associated with foetal heart
sound. ECW 3 then called ECW 4 who was the O & G Specialist.
After giving the deceased some primary treatment, they admitted
her to the O & G Department. ECW 4 informed the EC that on
25th March, 2015 at 2.30 pm a macerated female child was
delivered by the deceased followed by placenta and membranes
with no tear and haemorrhage. Around 5.30 pm on 25th March,
2015 on receiving calls from the nurses of the O & G, ECW 4
arrived at 6 pm and found the deceased with severe pain in the
abdomen. ECW 4 then called ECW 3.
12. According to Baby Radharani Jena (ECW 7), who was on
duty at the DHH as a health worker on 24th and 25th March, 2015,
between 2 and 9 pm on 25th March, 2015 she, other nurses and the
ward attendant R. Anusuya, were present. She failed to recollect if
W.P.(C) No.11860 of 2015
any O & G Specialist had visited the ward and labour room during
that period.
13. Tikili Panigrahi (ECW 8), the Counsellor at DHH stated that
on 25th March, 2015 at 11 am she was present in the labour room
with a staff nurse and at that time “no doctor was present in the
labour room.” She recalled ECW 4 informing her on 24th March,
2015 itself about the presence of a dead child in the uterus of the
deceased. However, neither was the deceased admitted to the ICU
nor was oxygen provided to her on that date.
14. Although Dr. Uma Kanta Baskey (ECW 10) claimed before
the EC that on 25th March, 2015 he received an emergency call at
6.35 pm from the attending sister of IPD as to the deterioration of
the health condition of the deceased and that he immediately
rushed to the deceased and found her “gasping with low
15. Further, although he claimed that he had prescribed oxygen
inhalation with injection, the EC found that “there was no
endorsement in the bed head ticket about providing oxygen etc.”
ECW 10 further stated before the EC that at 7.15 pm he declared
the deceased dead.
16. B. Shakuntala (ECW 15) was the Accredited Social Health
Activist (ASHA) of village Deopur. Her evidence revealed that
although the deceased informed her when she was one month and
fifteen days pregnant, ECW 15 did not verify or check the health
condition of the deceased on any occasion or even visited the
W.P.(C) No.11860 of 2015
house of the deceased. ECW 15 also never took the deceased to
Garabandha PHC or Labanyagada PHC, Ayush or Sub-Centre.
She did not take the deceased to any hospital for a health check-
up. Although ECW 15 claimed that she had taken the deceased on
24th March, 2015 to the DHH, Paralakhemundi for scanning, this
claim was negative by the evidence of ECW 4 and Punya Chintal
(ECW 12), ASHA, Labanyagada PHC. ECW 12 stated that ECW
15 requested ECW 12 to take the deceased to the DHH. In turn,
ECW 15 claimed that she was busy in her daughter’s marriage
and she could not accompany the deceased.
17. The EC found the presence of ECW 3 Medicine Specialist and
his admitting the deceased in the OPD to be doubtful. In the same
registration number i.e. 16362 two patients were shown admitted
i.e. the deceased and one A. Trinath, who was a male. The EC
queried: “it is not known how a male person was admitted in a
female ward”.
18. Sometime during the counseling on 25th March, 2015 the
deceased disclosed that this was her second pregnancy and that
she had lost the first child in an institutional delivery for which
she was paid money under the Mamata Scheme. The EC
concluded that “the medical authorities right from ASHA to
DHH, Paralakhemundi had made no effort to ascertain the reason
of loss of the first child and no treatment was also afforded to the
mother on that score.” The EC noted that with the deceased
having lost her first child, the second pregnancy was to be treated
as a “high risk pregnancy.”She was not given any treatment as
W.P.(C) No.11860 of 2015
such for that vulnerable condition. The EC then made the
following observations:
“16…The doctors of DHH did not direct their diagnosis
to know the reason of abdominal pain, non-movement of
the baby in the womb since 18.03.2015. Consequences
of presence of a dead child in mother’s uterus, reasons
for the loss of the first pregnancy and as stated by
ECW2 whether due to presence of dead foetus sepsis
had generated resulting infection in the uterus while
Martha was under high risk pregnancy due to dead child
and why her baby was not removed by cesarian. On
24.03.2015 if she died due to severe sepsis with
pulmonary embolism why she was not provided with
oxygen and inhalation and she being a BPL category
lady why she was not shifted to MKCG for better
treatment.”
19. The report of the EC also quotes the following comment of the
enquiry team member Dr. Mamata Oram, Asst. Professor, O & G,
“as patient was suffering from severe pre-eclampsia. She
needed to be treated at higher centre with ICU setup as
this kind of patient have high mortality rate”.
20. The other specific findings of the EC as regards ECW 4 Dr.
Suchitra Sahoo were as under:
“ECW-4 Dr. Suchitra Sahoo has proved Ext.-6 entries in
the Bed head ticket made at 9.00 pm on 24.03.2015
where there is a endorsement regarding referral of
Martha on MKCG. She stated that she was in mood to
refer the patient to MKCG for better treatment. When
the O&G specialist felt to refer the patient to MKCG for
better treatment as the BP of the patient was high with a
dead baby inside the uterus why she did not refer the
patient to MKCG by 108 or 102 Ambulance with
supporting staff and ASHA as free medical service was
available to BPL patient as per the guidelines. It was her
bounden duty to refer the BPL patient to save her life
Guaranted under Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
W.P.(C) No.11860 of 2015
Consent was necessary in case of major operation not
for referral to higher hospital for better treatment.”
21. The EC found the “functionality and responsibility of DHH”
to be questionable. The specific findings of the EC were as under:
“20. In the instant case lapses, laches, disinterestedness
to treat a poor tribal BPL woman efficiently and
negligence on part of District Head Quarter doctors are
apparent on the face of record. When the state
authorities in order to safeguard the life of a richest or
influential person are providing green-corridor for
transportation of patients to airport to fetch flight, the
poor are deprived of. The hazardous dealing with
deceased was of such a degree was most likely eminent.
It is not a case of individual negligence but omission of
entire team of doctors to provide adequate essential and
timely treatment to Martha Sabar who even spent money
in the hospital for blood test and for Ultrasound test
through Private Radiological Centre. Delegation of
responsibility to Emergency MBBS Doctors, Staff
Nurses, Counsellors and medicine specialist in case of a
critical pregnant woman with IUD abdominal pain is
condemnable. In bed-head ticket, the cause of death is
shown to be due to severe sepsis with pulmonary
embolism but no oxygen was provided. The maternal
Audit report marked as Ext. 16 for the period January
2015 to May 2015 shows that deceased Martha Sabar
died due to “Cardio respiratory failure”.
21. On an in-depth consideration of oral, documentary
evidence and surrounding circumstances, the Enquiry
Team is of considered view that the deceased Martha
Sabar died due to combined negligence of doctors un
duty of DHH, Paralakhemundi in the district of Gajapati
and Garabandha PHC (New), ASHA, ANM and AWW.
Adequate financial assistance to the victim for untimely
death of deceased due to medical negligence is not the
solution specifically when the husband of deceased is an
irresponsible person and habitual drunkard having no
care and affection towards old father and ailing mother.
Efforts should be made by Highest Hon'ble Court to
W.P.(C) No.11860 of 2015
penalize erring doctors/DHH who have betrayed the
faith of a tribal illiterate poor woman and to issue
instructions to ensure timely availability of all schemes
to poor persons in true sense of the action and not by
paperwork.
22. In the instant case, on the basis of statement of
AWW, ANM, ASHA, PHC record and on the basis of
medical record it is evident that the patient was not kept
under care and standard protocol was not monitored.”
22. The next issue that the EC took up for consideration was
whether various schemes for reducing infant and maternal
mortality were implemented in Gajapati District. The EC
discussed the evidence of Dr. Pramod Kumar Panda, District
Paralakhemundi (ECW 20) and Miss Soumya Rani Gouda (ECW
11) who happened to be the District Programme Officer, Gajapati
since August, 2018. The earlier JSY was currently known as the
National Family Benefits Scheme (NFBS). According to ECW
11, the programmes under the National Health Mission (NHM),
the Reproductive, Maternal, Newborn Child and Adolescent
Health (RMNCAH) + A Programme and the quality certification
of health institution were managed by her in the Gajapati District.
It was claimed by her that in Gajapati District they were
implementing the JSY Scheme, the Sishuabong Matru Mrityuhara
Matritava Aashwasan (Suman); Social Awareness and Action to
Maternity OT Quality Improvement Initiative. She also spoke of
the functional first referring unit (FRU) which was functioning at
the level of the sub-divisional hospital since 1994 and at the DHH
W.P.(C) No.11860 of 2015
since 2000. It was stated that the FR wing was not available at the
CHC and PHC of the district. Since 2018, they were operating the
Dakshata Model to improve the standard of labour room services.
23. However, the EC found that “the district authorities are also
doing more paper work and less field work” on the schemes. The
EC has made recommendations in this regard as under:
“An Impartial Committee should be formed in the
district under the Chairmanship of District Collector/
Chairman, D.L.S.A. to monitor implementation of all
schemes aimed to reduce infant and material mortality
and care. Massive awareness camps should be organized
in every Gram Panchayat to highlight all the schemes of
Central Government and State Government. Life-saving
procedure i.e. emergency obstetric hysterectomy (EOH)
should be implemented in each DHH and SHH to
prevent postpartum haemorrhage, rapture uterus,
morbed-adhesions of placenta and uterine sepsis. It is
pertinent to note that, regular antenatal care,
identification of high-risk factors, close monitoring of
labour, and to avoid difficult vaginal delivery the timely
decision to do cesarean can reduce the incidence of
24. The findings of the EC in the above report have not been
challenged by the counsel for the State. This Court, therefore,
proceeds on the basis of the conclusion reached by the EC that the
death of Martha Sabar was due to the collective negligence of the
treating doctors both at the Garabandha PHC (New) and the DHH,
Parlakhemundi. The extent of negligence is palpable in the
finding: “In bed-head ticket, the cause of death is shown to be due
to severe sepsis with pulmonary embolism but no oxygen was
provided.” This Court also notes that not only did the deceased
not receive the benefits under the various schemes, but she even
W.P.(C) No.11860 of 2015
“spent money in the hospital for blood test and for Ultrasound test
25. The victim was a poor tribal woman whom the State health
care system failed. Despite so many schemes on paper, meant to
deliver benefits to her, she died due to the sheer callousness of the
State authorities, doctors, para-medical workers and staff. Even
the basic first-level care and treatment at the level of the ASHA
and ANM under the NHM were not provided to the deceased in
the present case. She was never given advice although hers was a
high-risk pregnancy. She was carrying a dead foetus for a week
and received no treatment. This was despite the revised
guidelines, drawn up separately for the sub-centers, the CHCs and
DHHs, being operational since 2012.          It is indeed extremely
unfortunate that the benefit of the multifarious schemes which are
meant to cater to the needs of the poor and vulnerable like the
deceased in the present case do not reach them in time.
The governing legal regime
26. At this stage, the Court would like to refer to the existing legal
regime. The implementation of the NMBS and JSY was
considered by the Supreme Court in W.P.(C) No.196 of 2001
(People’s Union for Civil Liberties v. Union of India) [hereafter
‘the PUCL Case’] in which an order was passed way back on 20th
November, 2007 directing all the State Governments and the
Union Territories to continue to implement the NMBS and ensure
that “all BPL pregnant women get cash assistance eight-twelve
weeks prior to delivery.” It was specifically directed that “the
amount shall be Rs. 500/- per birth irrespective of number of
W.P.(C) No.11860 of 2015
children and the age of the woman.” It was further directed by the
Supreme Court in the PUCL Case that:
“It shall be the duty of all the concerned to ensure that
the benefits of the scheme reach the intended
beneficiaries. In case it is noticed that there is any
diversion of the funds allocated for the scheme, such
stringent action as is called for shall be taken against the
erring officials responsible for diversion of the funds”.
27. In its various orders in the PUCL Case, the Supreme Court
issued specific directions on the implementation of the Integrated
Child Development Services Scheme (ICDS) as well as the
Antodaya Anna Yojana (AAY) which was meant for the “poorest
of the poor”.
28. The Delhi High Court in Laxmi Mandal v. Harinagar
Hospital2010 SCC OnLine Delhi 2234 dealt with the issue of
maternal deaths and discussed the above orders of the Supreme
Court of India. The Delhi High Court noted in the above judgment
“20. A conspectus of the above orders would show that
the Supreme Court has time and again emphasized the
importance of the effective implementation of the above
schemes meant for the poor. They underscore the
interrelatedness of the “right to food” which is what the
main PUCL Case was about, and the right to
reproductive health of the mother and the right to health
of the infant child. There could not be a better
illustration of the indivisibility of basic human rights as
enshrined in the Constitution of India. Particularly in the
context of a welfare State, where the central focus of
these centrally sponsored schemes is the economically
and socially disadvantaged sections of society, the above
orders of the Supreme Court have to be understood as
preserving, protecting and enforcing the different facets
of the right to life under Article 21 of the Constitution.
W.P.(C) No.11860 of 2015
As already noted, these petitions focus on two
inalienable survival rights that form part of the right to
life. One is the right to health, which would include the
right to access government (public) health facilities and
receive a minimum standard of treatment and care. In
particular this would include the enforcement of the
reproductive rights of the mother and the right to
nutrition and medical care of the newly born child and
continuously thereafter till the age of about six years.
The other facet is the right to food which is seen as
integral to the right to life and right to health.
21. The right to health forming an inalienable
component of the right to life under Article 21 of the
Constitution has been settled in two important decisions
of the Supreme Court: Pt. Parmanand Katara v. Union
of India (1989) 4 SCC 286 and Paschim Banga Khet
Majoor Samiti v. State of West Bengal (1996) 4 SCC
37. The orders in the PUCL Case are a continuation of
the efforts of the Supreme Court at protecting and
enforcing the right to health of the mother and the child
and underscoring the interrelatedness of those rights
with the right to food. This is consistent with the
international human rights law which is briefly
discussed hereafter.”
29. The Delhi High Court in Laxmi Mandal (supra) went on to
discuss Article 25(1) of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, Articles 10 and 12 of the International Covenants on
Economic Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) and the following
observations of the Committee on Economical and Social and
Cultural Rights in its General Comment No.14 of 2000 on the
"8. The right to health is not to be understood as a right
to be healthy. The right to health contains both freedoms
and entitlements. The freedoms include the right to
control one's health and body, including sexual and
reproductive freedom, and the right to be free from
interference, such as the right to be free from torture,
W.P.(C) No.11860 of 2015
non-consensual medical treatment and experimentation.
By contrast, the entitlements include the right to a
system of health protection which provides equality of
opportunity for people to enjoy the highest attainable
level of health. ...
11. The Committee interprets the right to health, as
defined in Article 12.1, as an inclusive right extending
not only to timely and appropriate health care but also to
the underlying determinants of health, such as access to
safe and potable water and adequate sanitation, an
adequate supply of safe food, nutrition and housing,
healthy occupational and environmental conditions, and
access to health-related education and information,
including on sexual and reproductive health. A further
important aspect is the participation of the population in
all health-related decision-making at the community,
national and international levels. ...
14. "The provision for the reduction of the stillbirth rate
and of infant mortality and for the healthy development
of the child" (art. 12.2 (a)) may be understood as
requiring measures to improve child and maternal
health, sexual and reproductive health services,
including access to family planning, pre- and post-natal
care, emergency obstetric services and access to
information, as well as to resources necessary to act on
that information."
30. The Delhi High Court in Laxmi Mandal (supra) thereafter
noted the provisions of the Convention on the Elimination of all
Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) which is an
international convention ratified by India. Specific to the rights of
women in rural areas Article 14 of CEDAW reads as under:
“14 (1). States Parties shall take into account the
particular problems faced by rural women and the
significant roles which rural women play in the
economic survival of their families, including their work
in the non-monetized sectors of the economy, and shall
take all appropriate measures to ensure the application
W.P.(C) No.11860 of 2015
of the provisions of the present Convention to women in
rural areas.
2. States Parties shall take all appropriate measures to
eliminate discrimination against women in rural areas in
order to ensure, on a basis of equality of men and
women, that they participate in and benefit from rural
development and, in particular, shall ensure to such
(a) To participate in the elaboration and
implementation of development planning at all
(b) To have access to adequate health care facilities,
including information, counselling and services in
(c) To benefit directly from social security
(d) To obtain all types of training and education,
formal and non-formal, including that relating to
functional literacy, as well as, inter alia, the benefit
of all community and extension services, in order to
increase their technical proficiency;
(e) To organize self-help groups and co-operatives
in order to obtain equal access to economic
opportunities through employment or self
(f) To participate in all community activities;
(g) To have access to agricultural credit and loans,
marketing facilities, appropriate technology and
equal treatment in land and agrarian reform as well
as in land resettlement schemes;
(h) To enjoy adequate living conditions,
particularly in relation to housing, sanitation,
electricity and water supply, transport and
communications.”
31. The Delhi High Court in Laxmi Mandal (supra) also
discussed the provisions of the Child Rights Convention (CRC)
ratified by India which delineated the rights of the newly born and
young child. The Delhi High Court, thereafter, observed as under:
“27. International human rights norms as contained in
the Conventions which have been ratified by India are
binding on India to the extent they are not inconsistent
with the domestic law norms. The Protection of Human
Rights Act, 1993 (PHRA) recognises that the above
Conventions are now part of the Indian human rights
law. Section 2(d) PHRA defines "human rights" to mean
"the rights relating to life, liberty, equality and dignity of
the individual guaranteed by the Constitution or
embodied in the International Covenants and
enforceable by courts in India" and under Section 2(f)
PHRA "International Covenants" means "the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and
the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
Cultural Rights adopted by the General Assembly of the
United Nations on the 16th December, 1966.
28. The orders in the PUCL Case implicitly recognize
and enforce the fundamental right to life under Article
21 of the Constitution of the child and the mother. This
includes the right to health, reproductive health and the
right to food. In effect, the Supreme Court has spelt out
what the "minimum core" of the right to health and food
is, and also spelt out, consistent with international
human rights law, the "obligations of conduct" and the
"obligations of result" of the Union of India, the States
and the UTs. While recognizing the indivisibility of civil
rights and social and economic rights, the Supreme
Court has made them enforceable in courts of law by
using the device of a "continuing mandamus." On their
part, the High Courts in this country would be obligated
to carry forth the mandate of the orders of the Supreme
Court to ensure the implementation of those orders
within the States and UTs.”
32. In the present case, there has been an acute failure of the entire
teams of doctors at each level of the health care system in Odisha
to provide timely and adequate care and treatment to the deceased
as pointed out by the EC. It shocks the judicial conscience that a
poor tribal woman had been carrying a dead foetus for a week
prior to her death with not one person in the health care system
being able to provide her the needed care and treatment and which
neglect resulted in her inevitable death. There has been a clear
violation of the fundamental right to health of the deceased which
constitutes an integral part of the right to life guaranteed in Article
21 of the Constitution of India.
Directions as to payment of Compensation
33. This Court, therefore, has no hesitation in directing that for the
avoidable death of the deceased, the Government of Odisha
should pay the family members the sum of Rs.10 lakhs within a
period of six weeks from today. The compensation amount will be
kept in fixed deposits (FDs) as directed hereafter. FDs for
Rs.3,50,000/- each will be made in favour of the mother-in-law
and the father-in-law of the deceased Martha Sabar and an FD for
Rs.3,00,000/- in favour of her husband Ganpati Sabar. The FDs
will be initially for a period of one year each and will not be
permitted to be encashed during that period. The interest
therefrom will be credited on a quarterly basis to the respective
savings bank accounts of the aforementioned three persons. The
Collector, Gajapati will ensure that if they do not already have
them, bank accounts will be opened in a nationalized bank in
favour of each of the aforementioned three persons. After the first
year, it will be open to the aforementioned three persons to encash
W.P.(C) No.11860 of 2015
part or whole of their respective FDs as per their choice. Although
the EC has commented adversely on the habits of the husband of
the deceased, this Court is of the view that such conduct by itself
cannot be a ground to completely deprive him of any
34. The State Government will file a compliance affidavit in this
Court as regards the above directions within a period of eight
weeks from today, failing which the Registry will place the matter
before the Court for directions.
Action against the errant doctors, health workers and staff
35. As far as the negligence of the doctors and the health workers
medics and staff is concerned, in view of the factual findings by
the EC, the following directions are issued:
(i) The State Government will immediately issue show cause
notices (SCNs) to each of the doctors, health workers and staff
whose conduct has been adversely commented upon by the EC of
the OSCW in its report;
(ii) A copy of the report will be enclosed to the SCN so issued;
(iii) After receiving their replies to the notices, and following the
due process of law, if so warranted, disciplinary action will be
taken against each of the said persons in accordance with law. The
Court clarifies that nothing stated in this order or the report of the
EC will be construed as the final opinion as regards the individual
conduct of such persons. The entire exercise as above will be
W.P.(C) No.11860 of 2015
endeavoured to be completed within a period of six months from
(iv) The State Government will file a compliance affidavit as
regards the above directions along with the reports of the inquiry
and/or the action taken thereon within a period of seven months
from today. If there is a failure by the State Government to do so,
the Registry will list the matter before the Court for directions.
Directions as to a Comprehensive Action Plan and Policy
36. This Court is constrained to note that Martha Sabar’s death is
not an isolated instance as far as Odisha is concerned. The number
of women in the tribal belts, in the rural and semi-urban areas,
who have lost lives during pregnancy and as a result of unsafe
deliveries is a matter for deep concern. Today in 27 separate writ
petitions this Court is issuing orders for a detailed enquiry by the
OSCW into the maternal deaths of the wives or close relatives of
the respective Petitioners and for remedial measures to be taken.
Again, it would be safe to assume that only a small fraction of
those whose wives have died on account of denial of proper health
care during pregnancy have been able to seek redress in Courts
and elsewhere. The increasing numbers of maternal deaths in
Odisha point to a systemic failure of the health care system which
appears to have failed the poorest and the weakest at a time when
they need it the most.
37. As the present case shows, the extant instructions on conduct
of maternal death audits by in-service medical professionals is
unlikely to unearth the correct facts for remedial action and fixing
W.P.(C) No.11860 of 2015
of responsibility on errant doctors, para medics and staff. This
exercise must be performed by an independent set of medical
professionals. Further, there is an urgent need for proper
orientation, training and sensitisation of support workers
including the ASHAs, ANMs and Anganwadi Workers whose
role is crucial for the proper delivery of the range of health
measures in the various schemes floated by the state and central
governments. If unfortunate maternal deaths like Martha Sabar’s
must be avoided, then the State must move from a post-event
reaction mode to a preventive mode. Therefore, the need for a
38. This Court while endorsing the suggestions made by the
OSCW in its enquiry report on strengthening the system for better
delivery of the large number of welfare-oriented health related
schemes for women and children in general and pregnant women
in particular, directs the State Government through its Additional
Chief Secretary (Health) Government of Odisha to immediately
constitute an Advisory body of health care experts to draw up a
Comprehensive Action Plan which will contain both preventive
and remedial action points in the short and medium term to
address the issue of maternal deaths. The State Government must
separately come up with a Scheme or Policy to address the need
for providing redress including award of compensation for every
needless maternal death, the fixing of responsibility on errant
doctors, para medics and staff in a time-bound manner, which will
obviate the need for every individual case to be taken to either the
OSCW or the Odisha Human Rights Commission (OHRC) or
even this Court for remedial measures. The State Government in
W.P.(C) No.11860 of 2015
drawing up such Scheme/Policy will consult both the OSCW as
well as the OHRC. The exercise of drawing up a Comprehensive
Action Plan and formulating a Scheme/Policy for providing
compensation as directed above be completed within a period of
four months from today. A compliance affidavit in that regard
shall be filed in this Court by the Additional Chief Secretary
(Health), Government of Odisha within five months from today,
failing which the Registry will place the matter before this Court
for directions.
39. Before concluding, the Court would like to place on record its
appreciation of the effort made by the OSCW in undertaking an
enquiry and submitting a comprehensive report which has been of
great assistance to this Court in preparing this judgment.
40. The writ petition is disposed of in the above terms. A copy of
this judgment be delivered through a Special Messenger forthwith
to the OSCW, the OHRC, the Additional Chief Secretary
(Health), Government of Odisha and the Collector, Gajapati.