B wing, 5th Floor, Lok Nayak Bhavan,
National Commission for Scheduled Tribes,
B wing, 6th Floor, Lok Nayak Bhavan,
National Commission for schedule Castes,
W.P.No.13832 of 2013
State Bank of Bikaner & Jaipur,
Industrial Development Bank of India, (IDIB)
Small Industries Development Bank of India, (SIDBI)
Prayer: Writ Petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India
for issuance of a Writ of Certiorarified Mandamus, to call for the entire files
pertaining to the impugned proceedings issued by the 3rd respondent herein
in No DBOD.No.inf.BC.48/11.01.009/2006-07 dated 18th December 2006
specifically in concern with the withdrawn of the Sl.No.35 of the circular
therein in connection with the circular No DBOD No. BP. BC. 62/C.
469(W)-91 dated 4th January 1991 and quash the very same Sl.No.35 of the
said circular alone as arbitrary, irrelevant, unreasonable, and violative of
Art. 14, 15 and clause (1), (4), (4-A) of Art.16 of the Constitution of India
and Consequently direct the 7th to 34th respondents to conduct survey on the
W.P.No.13832 of 2013
available Panel of advocates of their Bank at present and report the
SC/ST/OBC advocates out of the available strength at present with its
percentage of each category wise advocates in all India level / State level /
Region level / Zonal level according to their administrative structure and
consequently direct the 7 to 34 respondents and other public sector banks to
take special endeavor / special drive shall be made to encourage advocates
belonging to the SC/ST/OBC by enrolling them in the panel and allocating
the work to them as required by the clause 2.1 and to ensure the experience
for panel advocate as 5 years as fixed in clause 1.2 of the said RBI Circular
No. DBOD. No. BP. BC. 62 / C. 469 (W) – 91 dated 4 th January 1991, and
consequently direct them to ensure themselves with suitable Board
approved policies / procedures for substituting the same as required in the
Circular No. BC.48 / 11.01.009 / 2006 – 07 dated 18 th December 2006 and
consequently direct the 7 to 34 respondents and other public sector banks to
include the SC/ST/OBC advocates in each branch including the Stressed
Assets Recovery Branches of the Public Sector Banks, irrespective of their
volume of work and need of advocates and consequently direct to allot the
alternative and equal cases including the DRT / DART Court cases and
consequently direct to ensure pay equal fees to the SC/ST/OBC advocates
along with other advocates and consequently direct to maintain proper
Rotation Register for distribution of cases evenly and consequently direct to
create uniform format of application for the empanelment of advocates with
the    specific reference    of  SC/ST/OBC      advocates    particulars     and
consequently and strictly direct the 7 to 34 respondents Banks and other
public sector banks to avoid further escapism, delay and domination of
W.P.No.13832 of 2013
monopoly of certain interested community advocates and interested
advocates of the officials of the said banks in their panel and consequently
direct the 1st respondent to convene a monitoring Committee comprising the
2nd to 5th respondents in All India level and state level for its strict and
effective implementation and consequently direct the 4th and 5th respondent
to conduct special investigation on this subject independently on their own
way in all India level with the 7 to 34 respondents Banks and other public
sector banks under Art.338 and under Art.338A of the Constitution
respectively and submit the special report to the President of India and to
the Prime Minister of India to take necessary follow up steps for the
adequate representation of panel of advocates in the Nationalised and Public
For R8, R9, R15, R19 : Not Ready in Notice
W.P.No.13832 of 2013
The Writ of Certiorified Mandamus has been instituted questioning
the validity of the withdrawal of the circular issued by the Reserve Bank of
India (RBI) in the matter of appointment of the Panel Advocates for the
Nationalised Banks in All India Level / State Level / Regional Level / Zone
Level. Further directions are sought for to empanel the Advocates by
following the established principles of law and to provide adequate
representations to the candidates belongs to SC/ST/OBC Communities.
2. The petitioner in person instituted the present writ petition on the
ground that he was deprived of his opportunity to be empanelled as
Advocate in Banks despite his applications to the respondent / Banks.
3. There are 19 Nationalised Banks plus 6 Banks in Nationalised
State Bank of India Group Public Sector Banks and 3 other Public Sector
Banks having its branches at the time of filing the present writ petition as
W.P.No.13832 of 2013
Sl.    Name of the Bank   Branches  Sl.     Name of the Bank         Branches
2 Andhra Bank                1425  12 Oriental Bank of                   1427
3 Bank of Baroda             2916  13 Punjab National Bank               4323
4 Bank of India              2934  14 Punjab & Sind Bank                   858
5 Bank of Maharastra         1407  15 Syndicate Bank                     2246
7 Central Bank of India      3527  17 Union Bank of India                2569
8 Corporation Bank           1028  18 United Bank of India               1445
Public Sector Banks – State Bank of India Group
Sl.    Name of the Bank   Branches   Sl.    Name of the Bank         Branches
1    State Bank of India     14,000 4    State Bank of Mysore       671
2    State Bank of              860 5    State Bank of Patiala      838
3    State Bank of             1500 6    State Bank of Travancore 712
4. The Nationalised and other Public Sector Banks are engaging the
Advocates for conducting their litigations through their panel of Advocates
and entrusting legal works. The number of Advocates is being increased
time to time depending upon the size of the branch and quantum of legal
5. There is no uniform procedure prescribed for empanelment of
Advocates to the Government of India and to the Reserve Bank of India
(RBI). No sufficient opportunity and adequate representations were
provided to the SC/ST/OBC category Advocates in the matter of
empanelment of Advocates in the Nationalised / Public Sector Banks. Thus,
on the advice of the Government of India, the Reserve Bank of India has
issued the directions and guidelines in No.DBOD. No.BP.BC.62/C.469
(W)-91 dated 4th January, 1991. The reasons and object of the said circular
W.P.No.13832 of 2013
“The system and procedure followed by
banks for the scrutiny and appointment of
advocates on the panel of advocates to attend to
their litigation cases have been reviewed by us
and it has been decided that public sector banks
should     follow   a    uniform    procedure    for
empanelment of advocates. Accordingly, suitable
guide lines for banks have been prepared in
consultation with the Government and are
forwarded herewith. We advise that the banks
should     prepare   fresh   panel   of    advocates
immediately by meticulously following these
guide lines. It also is ensured that the reviews of
panels of advocates contemplated under the
guidelines are under taken on an ongoing basis.”
7. As per the guidelines issued in Clause 1.2, of Reserve Bank of
India in Letter No. DBOD. No. BP. BC. 62 / C. 469 (W) - 91 dated 4th
January 1991, addressed to all Public Sector Banks. Some of the important
guide lines are fixed for the empanelment of advocates are as follows:
a) As per clause 1.1 “Each Branch should have at
least one advocate in the vicinity of the branch for
entrusting legal work. The number of advocates
W.P.No.13832 of 2013
can be increased depending upon the size of the
branch and quantum of legal work.”
b) As per clause 1.2 “The advocates being included
in the panel should have put in at least 5 years of
successful practice at the Bar on the civil side and
they should be advocates of undoubtful legal acu-
men and unblemished integrity.”
c) As per clause 1.3 “Advocates should have experi-
ence in ending commercial matters or bank's suits
and be conversant with barking laws.”
d) As per clause 1.4 “Advocates exclusively practi-
cing in criminal courts can be recommended for
attending criminal work, well reputed advocates in
the area may be included in the panel, it should be
ensured that they will be able to devote sufficient
time and personal attendance to the Bank's work
and also that they do not represent claims and
ideologies advice to those of the bank.”
e) As per clause 1.5 “Advocates should also be will-
ing to abide by the Bank's terms and conditions as
to fees, charges, submissions of pleading for ap-
proval etc. Successful advocates, though less em-
inent, may also be chosen provided thay can be
depended upon to bestow their personal attention
W.P.No.13832 of 2013
and are otherwise suitable for handling the bank's
cases.
f) As per clause 2.1 “other things being equal, spe-
cial endeavor should be made to encourage ad-
vocates belonging to the SC / ST / OBC by en-
rolling them in the panels and allocating the work
to them.”
g) As per clause 3.1 “In the case of advocates
already in the existing panel, a brief resume of the
work already handled by them, with specific re-
commendations whether they should be continued
in the panel or otherwise, may be prepared.”
h) As per clause 4.2 “Efficiency and integrity should
be main criteria for appointment.”
8. The very purpose and intention of the issuance of the above said
Clause 2.1 of the above said circular is to safe guard the right of the
SC/ST/OBC advocates to include them sufficiently in their panel of public
sector nationalized banks as there is no constitutional provisions were
available and the Clause 2.1 of the above circular reads as follows:
“Other     things   being    equal,   special
endeavor should be made to encourage advocates
belonging to the SC / ST / OBC by enrolling them
W.P.No.13832 of 2013
in the panels and allocating the work to them.”
The above said portion of the circular is still not adhered strictly by the none
of the public sector nationalized banks is not correct.
9. The petitioner further states that in the mean time, the RBI has
issued a letter in No DBOD.No. inf. BC. 48/11.01.009/2006-07 dated 18 th
December 2006 and has withdrawn the RBI Circular No. DBOD. No. BP.
BC. 62 / C. 469 (W) - 91 dated 4 th January 1991, addressed to all Public
Sector Banks and the reasons for withdrawal is stated as follows:
“in the light of the changes that have taken
place in the banking scenario, it was observed
that certain circulars issued to Public Sector
Banks (PSBs) during the period from January
1991 to June 2004 on operational matters like
recovery of PA dues, housekeeping, branch
network, customer service etc, have since lost
their relevance. In view thereof, a comprehensive
review of all such circulars issued during the
afore said period was carried out. It has now
been decided issued our a to with Government of
India to withdraw 41 circulars, as detailed in the
enclosed statement.
You are advised to carefully go through the list of
W.P.No.13832 of 2013
circulars in the enclosed statement and in case it
is felt that the instructions in some of the
circulars are still relevant for your bank, kindly
ensure that they are implemented with suitable
Board     approved     policies/  procedures   for
substituting the
10. The petitioner further submits that the circular in No. DBOD. NO.
inf. BC. 48 / 11.01.009 / 2006 - 07 dated 18 December 2006 in connection
with the withdrawal of 41 circulars including the withdrawal of the SI. No.
35 of the circular No DBOD. No. BP. BC.62 / C. 469 (W) - 91 dated 4th
January 1991 is irrelevant, unreasonable, arbitrary and violative of Art. 14,
15, 16 (1) and (4) of the Constitution of India for the following reasons:
a) First of all the reasons stated in the above said
withdrawn letter is "in the light of the changes
that have taken place in the banking scenario, it
was observed that certain circulars issued to
Public Sector Banks (PSBs) during the period
from January 191 to June 2004 on operational
matters like recovery of NPA dues, housekeeping,
branch network, customer service etc, have since
lost their relevance" is false one in connection
W.P.No.13832 of 2013
with the empanelment of advocate, especially in
concern with the SC/ST/OBC advocates.
b) There is no connection between the empanelment
of advocates especially for the empanelment of
SC/ST/OBC advocates with the recovery of NPA
dues, housekeeping, branch net work, customer
service etc as stated for the withdrawal of the said
circular.
c) No sufficient opportunity and places were given
to SC/ST/OBC advocates unto this date is
obvious.
d) Moreover, no comprehensive review of all such
circulars issued during the aforesaid period,
especially in concern with the empanelment of
advocates hailed from SC/ST/OBC. Without
assessing and conducting comprehensive review
the status and position of SC/ST/OBC advocates
in Public Sector Banks held. Hence, the
withdrawn is arbitrary and illegal.
e) The RBI Has committed its blunder with malafied
intention and misdirected the Government of
India to withdraw the said circular in serial No.
35 regarding the empanelment of advocate is not
correct.
f) Because of the said circular the public sector
W.P.No.13832 of 2013
nationalized banks have wantonly failed and
escape from their liability to empanel the
SC/ST/OBC advocates are not correct.
11. The above said circular was withdrawn in concern with the
empanelment of advocates, the said circular has instructed all the Managing
Directors of the Public Sector Banks as “You are advised to carefully go
through the list of circulars in the enclosed statement and in case it is felt
that the instructions in some of the circulars are still relevant for your bank,
kindly ensure that they are implemented with suitable Board approved
policies/ procedures for substituting the same.”
12. The petitioner states that the circular was instructed as above, it
was not carried out by the 7 to 34 respondents and the same was not
supervised, monitored and corrected either by the RBI or by the
Government of India is not correct.
13. The very purpose of the RBI guidelines in letter No DBOD No.
inf.BC. 48 / 11.01.009/2006-07 dated 18th December 2006 is not only to
withdraw the said circular but to ensure themselves whether they are
W.P.No.13832 of 2013
implemented with suitable Board approved policies / Procedures
substituting the same, which was not complied by the none of the
nationalized public sector banks is not correct.
14. The above said Public Sector Banks have 59, 138 Branches, the
empanelled advocates would be at least it's three times approximately as 59,
138 x 3 = 1,77,414 and more may be there. It is a mass employment to the
empanelled advocates of the Public Sector banks. Out of the above said
1,77,414 panel advocates, distribution of 15% to SCs is 26,612 and 7% to
STs is 12,419 and 27% to OBCs is 47,902. Such a big and mass
employment was not opened to the SC/ST/OBC advocates, even after the
nationalization and issuance of specific guidelines to empanel the
SC/ST/OBC advocates is not correct.
15. The petitioner with reference to the respondents / Banks filed
applications and obtained information under the Right to Information Act
(RTI) regarding the empanelment of Advocates by the Banks. The
petitioners have narrated the information provided by each respondents /
Banks regarding the procedures being adopted for empanelment of
W.P.No.13832 of 2013
Advocates for conducting litigations and for rendering legal opinions. Since
none of the procedures adopted are in compliance with the Reserve Bank of
India (RBI) circular, which were prevailing for empanelment of Advocates,
the petitioner filed the writ petition to quash the withdrawal of those circular
issued by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) for the purpose of empanelment
of Lawyers in Nationalised Banks and Public Sector Banks.
16. The reasons stated by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) for
withdrawal of their common circulars, issued to all the Banks for
empanelment of Lawyers reveals that due to the changes that has been taken
place in the banking scenario and to provide autonomy to such Nationalised
Banks and Public Sector Banks, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) withdrew
41 circulars issued by them in consultation with the Government of India.
However, in the said order the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has stated that
the Banks are advised to go through the list of circulars and in case it is felt
that the instructions in some of the circulars are still relevant for their
Banks, they shall ensure that they are implemented with suitable board
approval policy / procedure for substituting the same.
W.P.No.13832 of 2013
17. Therefore, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) never intended to
withdraw the entire circulars by scrapping the contents in those circulars.
The idea was to give autonomous to the Banks enabling them to empanel
Advocates by following the procedures. The Reserve Bank of India (RBI)
unambiguously not intended to give free hand to choose the Lawyers of
their choice but intended to follow the procedures and certain relevant
procedures prevailing in the withdrawn circulars also may be adopted
suitably, while empanelment of Advocates.
18. The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) filed a counter affidavit stating
that the petitioner has no locus standi to seek any relief as prayed for. The
petitioner has misconstrued the scope and purpose of the circular issued by
the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) on 18th December, 2006. There is no
violation of Fundamental, Legal or Statutory Rights of the petitioner. The
petitioner has sought for multiple reliefs, which involves the performance of
the continuous duty of the respondents, which would not normally be
allowed by the Courts. The impugned circulars were issued in consultation
with the Government of India. Therefore, the liberalised regime requires
more autonomy for the Banks and the Public Sector Banks require more
W.P.No.13832 of 2013
operational autonomy to conduct their Bank affairs.
19. The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the 3rd respondent
Reserve Bank of India (RBI) drew the attention of this Court with reference
to the advice given by the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) to the Nationalised
Banks and Public Sector Banks. The Banks were advised to go through the
list of circulars in the enclosed statement and in case it is felt that the
instructions in some of the circulars are still relevant for their Bank, they
shall ensure that it is implemented with suitable board approval policy /
procedure for substituting the same. Therefore, the Reserve Bank of India
(RBI) has not intended to cause any discretion in the matter of empanelment
of Lawyers in the Nationalised Banks and Public Sector Banks. The Banks
were given autonomy to form their procedures and some of the procedures
prevailing through the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) circulars if found
suitable the same shall be substituted.
20. Some of the Banks filed the circulars issued by them for
empanelments of Advocates. Perusal of the circulars issued by the
respective Nationalised Banks and Public Sector Banks would reveal that
W.P.No.13832 of 2013
such procedures provide eligibility criteria for the educational qualification
and process of empanelment. Broadly it can be categorised as Criteria for
Empanelment, Process of Empanelment, Authority for Empanelment,
Preparation of Revised list by the Zones, Distribution / allocation of
works, Other conditions for Empanelment, Review of the Performance,
The Parameters for reviewing the performance of the Panel Advocate,
De-Paneling of Advocate, and Review at Head Office level. Application
format, Reporting format, Feedback from Branches are also part of the
21. The above system is followed by the Bank of India. Some other
Banks have not categorised the procedures as done by the 10th respondent /
the Bank of India. The 13th respondent / Central Bank of India issued
guidelines for empanelment of Advocates in Banks panel, where there are
no such detailed procedures. The Small Industries Development Bank of
India is maintaining improved procedures, wherein also eligibility criteria,
relaxation in eligibility criteria and other procedures are prescribed akin to
that of the procedures approved by the 10th respondent / Bank of India. The
Small Industries Development Bank of India seems to be adopting an
W.P.No.13832 of 2013
improved procedure, which is transparent but whether it satisfies the
principles of equality under Article 14 are to be considered by this Court.
Some other respondents have neither filed their procedures nor filed a
counter affidavit.
22. The issue to be considered is whether the empanelment of
Lawyers in the Nationalised Banks and Public Sector Banks are done in
compliance with the mandates of the Constitution of India.
23. Going through the procedures now being adopted by the
Nationalised Banks and Public Sector Banks, this Court could able to form
an opinion that equal opportunity for empanelment has been denied to the
eligible and meritorious candidates. The procedures though seem to be
transparent, but not in compliance with the equality clause enunciated under
the Constitution of India. Equal opportunity in public employment is the
Constitutional mandate. No doubt, empanelment of Lawyer cannot be
construed as an appointment into the service of the Nationalised Banks and
Public Sector Banks. Lawyers are engaged on contract basis for a particular
tenure on terms and conditions and by fixing remuneration. However, the
W.P.No.13832 of 2013
Nationalised Banks and Public Sector Banks are public institutions are
‘State’ within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
Therefore, they cannot shirk their responsibility from complying with the
mandatory principles of equal opportunity enunciated under the Indian
24. State shall not deny to any person’s equality before law or equal
the protection of laws within the territory. Article 16(1) enumerates “There
shall be equality of opportunity for all citizens in the matter relating to
employment or appointment to any office under the State”. The
Nationalised Banks and the Public Sector Banks are the public institutions
dealing with the public money. Thus, the empanelled Advocates are also
performing their legal duties to the Bank in order to protect the public
institution and the customers of the Bank. Therefore, the empanelled
Lawyers are performing the public duties to protect the interest of the
public, who all are investors, borrowers, etc., from the Nationalised Banks
and Public Sector Banks. Therefore, it is the empanelled Lawyers, who all
are representing the Nationalised Banks and Public Sector Banks and are
performing the public duties for all purposes. Whether it is a contractual
W.P.No.13832 of 2013
employment, temporary engagements or otherwise, the procedure to be
adopted by such Banks must be transparent and in compliance with the
mandates of the Constitution.
25. Certain decisions may be taken to engage Specialised designated
or Senior Counsels by considering certain legal complications or otherwise
by any Bank at the discretion of the Competent Authorities, which is to be
considered as an exception. In other words, the empanelled Lawyers
engaging a designated Senior Counsel to protect the interest of the Bank in
a particular case may be at the discretion of the Competent Authority
concerned. Such special engagements in a case of complex nature cannot be
compared with the empanelment of Lawyers for handling the regular cases
of the Bank. Therefore, the empanelments of Lawyers to conduct the
litigations regularly are to be done only by following the established
principles and in compliance with the Constitution of India.
26. The Bank performs several functions in the growing economic
scenario. The need for banking developments are inevitable. Citizen are
depending on the Banks for their needs and for their transactions. The
W.P.No.13832 of 2013
services of the Banks became imminent in our Great Nation. Thus, the
administration and the appointment procedures including empanelment of
Lawyers to conduct litigations are to be done transparently and in
compliance with the Constitutional requirements and rules of natural justice.
27. Going through the procedures now prevailing for the
empanelment of the Lawyers in the respondents / Banks, this Court has no
hesitation in arriving at a conclusion that they are not in compliance with
the Constitutional mandates and the empanelment of Lawyers are now being
done mostly based on the choices of the authorities of the Bank. The choice
if given to the authorities in the absence of transparency and definite
procedure for equal opportunity will lead to corruption, favouritism and
nepotism. The Lawyers, who have god fathers are capable of soliciting the
competent authorities and they alone would get opportunity for
empanelment in the Banks. Such a situation now prevailing is not only
unconstitutional but infringing the Fundamental Rights of the citizen, who
all are the legal practitioners.
28. Right to be considered for appointment / empanelment in a Bank
is a Fundamental Right of a citizen. Large number of eligible lawyers are
aspiring and longing to secure an opportunity and their basic right cannot be
denied. Thus, the prevailing procedures are depriving the rightful candidates
to participate in the process of empanelment of Lawyers in the Nationalised
Banks and Public Sector Banks.
29. When large number of litigations are being conducted by the
Nationalised Banks and Public Sector Banks, empanelment are expected to
be done by selecting Competent Lawyers and by providing due opportunity
to the SC/ST/OBC candidates. The procedures now being adopted paves
way for empanelment of the Lawyers at the whims and fancies of the
Competent Authorities of the Banks. Undoubtedly, the situation would lead
to corrupt practices, favouritism and nepotism, which is Unconstitutional.
30. It is well settled that not only the Government, but all public
bodies are trustees of the power vested in them and custodians of the public
interest. Discharge of that trust in the best possible manner is the primary
duty of those in charge of the affairs of the State or public body. This
W.P.No.13832 of 2013
necessarily implies that the nature of functions and duties including the
power to engage, employ or recruit servants, agents, advisors and
representatives must be exercised in a fair, reasonable, non-discriminatory
and objective manner. It is also fairly well settled that duty to act fairly and
reasonable is a facet of ‘Rule of Law’ in a Constitutional democracy like our
Great Nation. A long time of decisions of this Court over the past five
decades or so have rules that arbitrariness has no places in a polity governed
by rule of law and that Article 14 of the Constitution of India strikes at
arbitrariness in every State action.
31. The Apex Court in E.P.Royappa Vs. State of Tamil Nadu
reported in [(1974) 4 SCC 3], declared that Article 14 is the genus while
Article 16 is a specie and the basic principle which informs both these
Articles are equality and inhibition against discrimination. Thus, violating
of Article 14 and if it affects any matter of public employment it is also
violating of Article 16. Therefore, Articles 14 and 16 strike at arbitrariness
in State action and ensure fairness and inequality of treatment.
W.P.No.13832 of 2013
32. In the case of Maneka Gandhi Vs. Union of India reported in
[(1978) 2 SCR 621], the Apex Court held that the principle of
reasonableness both legally and philosophically is an essential element of
equality and that non-arbitrariness pervades Article 14 with brooding
omnipresence. This implies that wherever there is arbitrariness in State
action whether, it be legislative or executive Article 14 would spring into
action and strike the same down.
33. In the case of Ramana Shetty Vs. International Airport
Authority reported in [1979 AIR (SC) 1628], the Hon’ble Supreme Court of
India relying upon the pronouncements of E.P.Royappa and Menaks
Gandhi cases (cited supra) once again declared that State action must not
be guided by extraneous or irrelevant considerations because that would be
denial of equality. The Apex Court recognised the principles of
reasonableness and rationality are legally as well as philosophically
essential elements of equality and non-arbitrariness as projected by Article
14, whether it be authority of law or exercise of executive power without the
making of a law. It is held that State cannot act arbitrarily in the matter
entering into relationships be it contractual or otherwise with a third party
W.P.No.13832 of 2013
and its action must conform to some standard or norm, which is in itself
rational and non-discrminatory.
34. In the case of D.S.Nakra Vs. Union of India reported in [1983
(1) SCC 305], the Constitutional Bench of the Supreme Court of India
reviewed the earlier pronouncements and while affirming and explaining the
same held that it must now be taken to be settled that what Article 14 strike
at is arbitrariness and that any action that is arbitrary must necessarily
involve negation of equality.
35. In the case of Dwarkasas Marfatia Vs. Board of Trustees of the
Port of Bombay reported in [1989 (3) SCC 293], the Apex Court had an
occasion to examine whether Article 14 had any application to contractual
matters. The Apex Court declared that every action of the State or an
instrumentality of the State must be informed by reason and actions that are
not so informed can be questioned under Article 226 and 32 of the
36. Subsequent decisions of Apex Court in Som Raj and Others Vs.
State of Haryana and Others reported in [(1990) 2 SCC 653], Neelima
Misra Cs. Harinder Kaur Paintal and Others reported in [(1990) 2 SCC
746] and Sharma Transport Vs. Government of Andhra Pradesh and
Others reported in [(2002) 2 SCC 188], have followed, reiterated and
applied the principles settled by the pronouncements in the earlier
mentioned cases.
37. In the case of Shrilekha Vidyarthi Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh
reported in [1991 (1) SCC 212], which happens to be the first of these
decisions, the Apex Court had an occasion to examine whether the
Government Counsel in the Districts are holders of an ‘office or post’ or
such appointments are no more than professional engagements like the one
between a private client and his lawyer. That case arose out of a challenge
mounted by the Government Counsel who were engaged throughout the
State of Uttar Pradesh to handle civil, revenue or criminal cases and whose
services were en masse terminated by the State only to be replaced by fresh
appointments on the basis of a new panel prepared for that purpose and
communicated to the District Magistrates concerned. On behalf of the State,
W.P.No.13832 of 2013
it was argued that the engagement of Government Counsel was nothing but
a professional engagement between a client and his lawyer with no public
element attached to it.
38. Relying upon the decisions of this Court in Ramana Dayaram
Shetty Vs. International Airport Authority of India [91979) 3 SCC 489],
Kasturi Lal Lakshmi Reddy Vs. State of Jammu and Kashmir [(1980) 4 SCC
1], Dwarkadas Marfatia and Sons Vs. Board of Trustees of the Port of
Bombay [(1989) 3 SCC 293] and Mahabir Auto Stores and Others Vs.
Indian Oil Corporation and Others [(1990) 3 SCC 752], the Apex Court held
that the power of judicial review and the sweep of Article 14 was wide
enough to take within its fold the impugned circular issued by the State in
exercise of its executive powers irrespective of the precise nature of
appointment of the Government Counsel in the districts or the rights,
contractual or statutory, which the appointees may have. This Court
reiterated the well settled principles that State action can survive only if it
does not suffer from the vice arbitrariness which is the very essence of
Article 14 of the Constitution and Rules of law. The Apex Court observed:
“It is now too well-settled that every State
W.P.No.13832 of 2013
action, in order to survive, must not be
susceptible to the vice of arbitrariness which is
the crux of Article 14 of the Constitution and
basic to the rule of law, the system which governs
us. Arbitrariness is the very negation of the rule
of law. Satisfaction of this basic test in every
State action is sine qua non to its validity and in
this respect, the State cannot claim comparison
with a private individual even in the field of
contract. This distinction between the State and a
private individual in the field of contract has to
be borne in the mind.”
39. In view of the principles laid down by the Apex Court of India, in
the line of cases (cited supra), it is necessary for the Nationalised Banks and
Public Sector Banks to reform their system of selection and empanelment of
Lawyers to the Banks for conducting litigations, to give legal opinion and to
deal with the legal matters to make the empanelment more transparent, fair
and objective. Necessary procedures shall be brought or in the availability
of procedures required amendments are to be made so as to ensure equal
opportunity for all eligible Lawyers to participate in the process of
empanelment, which is their Fundamental Right ensured under the
W.P.No.13832 of 2013
Constitution of India. Right to participate in the selection process is the
Fundamental Right of a citizen. Thus, the respondents / Banks are bound to
review and reform their system of selection and empanelment of Lawyers
either for contractual engagement, permanent engagement or otherwise.
However, special engagements for a particular case for engaging designated
Senior Counsel or expert counsel may be done by exercise of discretion of
the Competent Authorities in the public interest and to protect the interest of
the Banks. Such special appointments may be made without reference to the
procedures for empanelment of Lawyers for conducting litigations on
regular basis.
40. The prevailing procedures being adopted by the Banks for
empanelment of Lawyers are not in consonance with the established
principles to be followed for appointments / empanelments. Procedures and
method of selections and merit assessments are to be made and the
guidelines or procedures should contemplate the same for empaneling
Lawyers. It is needless to state that adequate representations to be provided
to SC/ST/OBC candidates without compromising the merits. Thus, the
procedures to be adopted must be transparent and must provide equal
W.P.No.13832 of 2013
opportunity without compromising the merits and the interest of the Bank.
41. In the context of the revised procedures to be formulated, the
respondents / Nationalised Banks and Public Sector Banks are at liberty to
collect materials from various Public Organisations / Central Government /
State Governments and also the established principles settled by the
Constitutional Courts across the country and thereafter, finalise the
procedures / guidelines to be adopted and publish the same, enabling all the
eligible Lawyers to participate in the process of empanelment in Banks.
42. Public notification, inviting applications from the eligible
Lawyers is the primary procedure to be followed and it is the basic element
of equal opportunity to be provided to all eligible Lawyers. Further
procedures are to be contemplated, which must ensure transparency, merit
assessment etc., to provide equal opportunity.
43. In view of the facts and circumstances, the respondents 7 to 34
herein are directed to review the existing procedure of their respective
Banks for empanelment of Lawyers and suitably alter / amend / frame new
W.P.No.13832 of 2013
rules / procedures in consonance and in compliance with the Constitutional
mandates and based on the established principles to be adopted for
appointment / empanelment. The said exercise is directed to be completed
within a period of four (4) months from the date of receipt of a copy of this
44. The respondents 7 to 34 are directed to submit their compliance
report to the Registrar (Judicial), Madras High Court, who in turn, is
directed to list the matter “For Reporting Compliance” before this Court on
45. With the above directions, the Writ Petition stands disposed of.
No costs.
Speaking order/Non-Speaking order
Note: Registry is directed to list the matter before this Court on 01.08.2023
under the caption “For Reporting Compliance”.
W.P.No.13832 of 2013
Department of Banking Operations and Development
Reserve Bank of India,
National Commission for Scheduled Castes,
B wing, 5th Floor, Lok Nayak Bhavan,
National Commission for Scheduled Tribes,
B wing, 6th Floor, Lok Nayak Bhavan,
National Commission for schedule Castes,