Case :- WRIT - C No. - 1594 of 2022
Counsel for Petitioner :- Uma Nath Pandey
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Tarun Agrawal
Case :- WRIT - C No. - 1600 of 2022
Counsel for Petitioner :- Ashish Kumar,Deepak Kumar Pandey
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Tarun Agrawal
Case :- WRIT - C No. - 9460 of 2022
Counsel for Petitioner :- Awadhesh Prasad,Radhey Shyam
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Tarun Agrawal
Case :- WRIT - C No. - 1485 of 2022
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Tarun Agrawal,Yatindra
Case :- WRIT - C No. - 30130 of 2021
Counsel for Petitioner :- Rajesh Kumar Patel,Subedar
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.
1.     This batch of writ petitions involving common question of
facts and law were heard together and are being decided by a
common judgment.
2.     The petitioners have questioned the legality of Clause 12 of
the Government Order dated 1st June, 2021, which was issued in
modification of the earlier Government Orders dated 6 th April,
2021 and 4th May, 2021. By means of the impugned government
order, the State of Uttar Pradesh raised the amount of ex-gratia
payment to the dependants of a deceased employee dying on
election duty due to COVID-19 from Rs.15 lacs to Rs.30 lacs
subject to the fulfilment of conditions in Clause-12.
3.     In usual course, the National Authority by virtue of Section
12 of the Disaster Management Act, 2005 is empowered to
recommend guidelines for the minimum standards of relief which
is to be provided to persons affected by disaster. Section 12 of the
Act of 2005 for ready reference is extracted hereunder:-
“12. Guidelines for minimum standards of relief. —The
National Authority shall recommend guidelines for the
minimum standards of relief to be provided to persons affected
by disaster, which shall include,—
(i)     the minimum requirements to be provided in the relief
camps in relation to shelter, food, drinking water, medical cover
(ii)    the special provisions to be made for widows and
(iii) ex gratia assistance on account of loss of life as also
assistance on account of damage to houses and for restoration
of means of livelihood;
(iv) such other relief as may be necessary.”
4.     It is evident from the above quoted provision that ex-gratia
assistance on account of loss of life is one of the measures for
restoration of the means of livelihood to the members of aggrieved
family. The State Government is also empowered under Section
38 of the Act of 2005 to take measures defined under Section
38(2) which include the financial help in the nature of ex-gratia
payment under Section 38(2)(l) and this is how the aforesaid
government orders have come to be issued for compensating the
loss of lives to the dependants of those who on being deputed to
perform election duties in the U.P. Panchayat Elections – 2021
contracted COVID-19 and died. Section 38(2)(l) for ready
reference is reproduced hereunder:-
“Section 38(2)(l):- such other matter as it deems necessary or
expedient for the purpose of securing effective implementation
of provisions of this Act.”
5.     A person having contracted pandemic i.e. COVID-19 while
on election duty became a matter of consideration in the light of
recommendations made by the Election Commission of India as
well as the National Authority. Therefore, to avoid litigation as
against the claims which may have arisen on account of the death
of a person discharging election duty by his dependants, the ex-
gratia payment to the tune of Rs.30 lacs was a measure evolved by
the State Government to compensate the dependants of any such
loss of life, whose death occurred on account of COVID-19
having been contracted while on election duty. The Election
Commission of India for the purpose of ex-gratia payment is said
to have defined the election duty to mean the performance of such
duty by leaving one's house on a scheduled day till a person
returned back home. The election duty included training, polling
duty, counting duty or any other duty relating to election. It
implies that contracting COVID-19 while on election duty after
leaving one's place of residence till reaching back home was the
range of movement to which every case has to be corroborated.
6.     In the present case, the U.P. Panchayat Election was notified
in the month of March, 2021 whereafter the schedule of election
duty in various capacities came to be issued on 6 th April, 2021.
The chart below indicates the relevant details as regards the
petitioners being sent on election duty, date of diagnosis of
COVID-19 followed by their hospitalization and date of death in
the hospitals or otherwise.
Case No.  Petitioner Name of        Date of       Tested      Time Gap   Time gap    Time gap
deceased/ date Election      Positive on between    between     between
of death       duty                      date of    date of     date of
7.      Taking into account the fatal impact of COVID-19, it was
for this reason that the State Government by a Government Order
dated 6th April, 2021 decided to compensate for the loss of life of
any employee sent on election duty to the dependants with the
payment of Rs.15 lacs which was enhanced to Rs.30 lacs. The
definition of election duty specified by the Election Commission
of India adopted in paragraph 2 of the Government Order dated 1 st
June, 2021 of which Clause 12 has been impugned herein
remained para materia. The hardship in the matter of
implementation of the ex-gratia payment to the dependents of
pandemic victims was experienced on account of relating the
COVID-19         deaths     during       election     duty which fell  for
consideration before the State Government and the matter was
considered in the background of published opinions in Lancet
journal which were relied upon by the State Advisory Board of
8.     The Government Order issued by the State of U.P. on 1 st
June, 2021 dispelled many confusions as regards contracting
COVID-19 and broader principles were adopted to ameliorate the
implementation of the compensatory scheme evolved by the State.
In the first place, the definition of the election duty was liberally
adopted to include all the activities in relation to election duties
where the probability of contracting COVID-19 prior to its
diagnosis was prominent. The definition clause however made it
dependant upon a person going to election duty on a scheduled
date till he returned back home. The most difficult aspect of the
scheme is to relate a COVID-19 death to the date of election duty.
For any death on account of COVID-19, it is essential for a
claimant to establish that the deceased had attended the election
duty prior to his death which he contracted while on election duty.
The difficulty certainly arises in the determination of the fact of
contracting Covid infection but where it is definite that a person
prior to diagnosis or death had performed election duty, it is to be
assumed that COVID-19 was contracted while on election duty
unless proved otherwise. The State Government in order to
mitigate the technical hardship considered the entire issue with the
assistance of experts and it was found that a COVID-19 patient
from the date of disease onset had mortality expectancy within 28
days. There is however, no scientifically proven assessment of
time, after the disease onset, within which a person may be
diagnosed as COVID positive during the range of mortality
expectancy period as derived from experimentation or data.
9.     In these circumstances, the State Government in order to
have a broader application of the policy decision proceeded to lay
down the parameters for entitlement of ex-gratia payment.
Paragraph 12 of the impugned Government Order lays down three
parameters. Firstly, COVID-19 deaths which occur within 30 days
of the election duty would entitle a claim. Secondly, the test
reports Antigen/RT PCR positive, blood report or CT Scan would
be a sufficient proof to prove the death having occurred on
account of COVID-19 and thirdly, an asymptomatic case meeting
with the death on account of COVID-19 within 30 days of
election duty was also covered under the scheme.
10.    In this background, three type of cases have emerged
before this Court. In first category, the asymptomatic deaths
having occurred within 30 days from the date of election duty
on account of COVID-19 and in the second category, where
symptoms were detected within a gap of 30 days from the date
of election duty but the actual death occurred beyond 30 days
from the date of election duty and, thirdly, where symptoms
were detected beyond 30 days of election duty and death
occurred within 30 days of detection of symptoms or later.
11. The case put-forth by the State in response to the above
situations in two fold. It is urged that the first category cases are
not entitled to the ex-gratia payment as there is no proof of a
deceased having contracting COVID-19 while on election duty
and to deny the claim of second and third category, it is submitted
that any death that has occurred beyond a period of 30 days from
the date of election duty is not relatable to the election duty, hence
the claim is liable to rejection.
12.    Sri Ashok Khare, learned Senior Advocate appearing for the
petitioners has argued in the light of order passed by the Apex
Court on 4th October, 2021 passed in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 539 of
2021 (Gaurav Kumar Bansal Vs. Union of India and others) but the
guidelines embodied therein being of a later point of time do not
provide us a complete answer. The ICMR guidelines pointed out
also do not doubtlessly support or counter the stand of the State
Government put-forth.
13.    Learned counsel for the State has also laid emphasis on the
point that the controversy involves a policy decision of the State
based on the opinion of experts, therefore, the Court has no option
of reading down the scope of Government Order otherwise than
the manner in which it is supported by its scientific understanding.
The submission put-forth is to the effect that any irrational or
layman's understanding of the Government Order would bring in a
heterogeneous classification or class within the class which shall
offend the mandate of Article 14 of the Constitution of India. In
support of the argument put-forth, learned Additional Advocate
General for the State has relied upon certain decisions.
14.    It is a well known fact that COVID-19 was witnessed no
less than a largest precedented catastrophe leading to mortality of
human lives on a very high scale. The scientific advancement was
almost bent on its knees to acknowledge helplessness, yet, some
how the preventive measures sensitised by the State coupled with
medical aid overcame upon the threat to human life for restoration
of normalcy. It is not to forget that the behavioural obedience i.e.
use of mask and following guidelines on free movement was as
significant as the medicinal values and much was attributed to the
superstitions as well. In the general perception of the people, the
asymptomatic and symptomatic cases of COVID-19 were
marginally distinct and in both the type of cases, the common
cause was Covid infection. It is not the case before us that the
deaths have not occurred because of COVID-19 but what is
disputed is that the deaths having taken place beyond 30 days
from the date of election duty would not entitle the dependants for
the ex-gratia payment. This defence is based on Clause-12 of the
Government Order dated 1st June, 2021 impugned herein this
bunch of writ petitions.
15.    In the background stated above, the question that crops
up for consideration is as to whether a COVID-19 death for
the purposes of ex-gratia payment is rightly regulated and
understood by the executive as per Clause-12 of the
Government Order, if not, whether the defence put forth is
violative of the object of equality read with the purpose of
Section 12(iii) of the Act of 2005.
16.    This Court may note that the life and its dignified protection
is the first and foremost duty of the welfare state. During the
course of disaster management, certain duties on the part of the
State assume more significance. We have experienced that during
COVID-19, broader guidelines striking note of caution were
issued from time to time to restrict free movement, yet for the
purposes of governance within our democratic organization, the
guidelines prohibiting assembly had to be compromised by the
State of U.P. itself so as to carry out the U.P. Panchayat Elections
in furtherance of the mandate of law. The sovereign function thus
necessitated the engagement of human resource in bulk which
necessarily visited the state with a more onerous duty to protect
the lives of those who were engaged in election duty. It is needless
to reiterate that the protection of life of all such individuals
engaged in election duty even on a single day during COVID-19
became an absolute duty of the State. The State at the time of
outbreak of pandemic remained under an obligation to free the
environment from the probabilities of outbreak or spread of
infection and the hospital services were equally liable to be
maintained conducive to the survival of human life. In the case at
hand, all these claims where the persons sent on election duty died
of COVID-19, it necessarily must be understood that all such
persons for the purpose of care, treatment and protection of life
remained at the mercy of the State. The wisdom of the policy
devised by the State lies in meeting the emerging situation for the
dependants of a COVID-19 victim, therefore, equal treatment of
all is bound to be achieved by adopting a pragmatic approach.
17.     Having regard to the three parameters provided in para-12,
this Court would note that any case detected beyond the period of
30 days from election duty as covid positive is certainly a
category not covered under the scheme. The death of
asymptomatic cases within 30 days of election duty as per the
mandate of government order is covered under the G.O. Provided
the death certificate on account of COVID-19 is produced by the
claimants. This principle broadens the scope of G.O. for
symptomatic cases where the infection after election duty was
detected within 30 days, however, death in such a case occurred
beyond the period of 30 days. The two situations that deserve to
be treated at par are; firstly, where the death occurred due to
covid-19 within a period of 30 days of participation in election
duty in an asymptomatic case and; secondly, where the infection
of COVID-19 was detected within 30 days of election duty but the
death occurred thereafter during treatment or otherwise.
18.     The bar of 30 days period in the cases where infection was
detected within 30 days of election duty but death occurred
beyond the same is not attributable to any negligence on the part
of victim that would defeat the claim rather it is owing to the lack
of extra ordinary care or treatment of which the duty would lay on
the State. Therefore, all the detected cases within 30 days of
election duty cannot be segregated from those where the infection
despite remaining undetected resulted into the death of a victim
due to COVID-19 within the period prescribed i.e. 30 days. Any
other principle derived by the State on the basis of scientific
understanding is bound to defeat the very object of the
Government Order and the purpose will frustrate. It is not
necessary for the State Government to ahdere to the strict
scientific principles in the matter of situations which went beyond
the control of scientific means, therefore, the State Government in
its caveat cannot impose an embargo upon the Courts of law to
construe the scope of policy strictly within the scientific
19.    The scientific understanding alone is not decisive to
implement the policy of the State which by its very nature is a mix
of multiple variables. The State is not to be guided by the
laboratory results or publication in journals alone but what is
relevant is the impact of a disaster as it may be understood in
common parlance not opposed to scientific principles altogether.
Scientific temper is itself a matter of concern and debatable. For
example the elephant's head on the holy mankind body of 'deity' of
Lord Ganesha may or may not be opposed to scientific beliefs but
it accompanies our mystical belief from ages and likewise many
more. The scientific discoveries and inventions promote scientific
temper but failure of science is bound to leave a grey area for our
personal faith, traditional usages, beliefs and superstitions until
modern science or spiritual attainments unfold the absolute truth.
By quoting one instance, it is not meant to hurt anyone’s
sentiments rather is illustrative of our understanding. Embracing
personal faith, usages, belief and superstitions besides scientific
temperament is the beauty of Article 21 of the Constitution of
India within which the horizons of our freedom grow for an
inclusive dignified existence. This, however, does not suggest that
the State has a religion as opposed to democracy that guarantees
the rule of law to achieve the object of equality amongst the
20.    This Court would thus reject the argument of the State to
approach the issue at hand purely on the basis of scientific
principles as portrayed on the strength of some publication in the
Lancet Journal and expect the State to implement the impugned
clause of Government Order dated 1st June, 2021 without
discriminating between the deaths of asymptomatic and
symptomatic cases on the yardstick of 30 days from the date of
election duty. It must be read beneficially for those cases too
which were detected within 30 days and in that event, the date of
death would become immaterial once it is on account of COVID-
21.    The constitutional morality under the directive principles of
the State is well reflected from Article 38 of the Constitution of
India which postulates eradication of inequality. This Article is the
driving force of the public policy and offers ample guidance to the
executive as well as all other organs of the State to streamline the
beneficent decisions serve the purpose and object of social and
economic justice equally. The apex court as far back as in the
decision reported in      (2008) 2 SCC 672 (Delhi Development Authority, &
another vs. Joint Action Committee, Allottee of SFS Flats & Ors) in para-65
“65. Broadly, a policy decision is subject to judicial review
on the following grounds :
(b) if it is dehors the provisions of the Act and the
(c) if the delegatee has acted beyond its power of
(d) if the executive policy is contrary to the statutory or a
larger policy.”
In a recent decision of the apex court reported in            (2021) 7 SCC
772 (Distribution of Essential Supplies and Services During Pandemic, In Re.) , the
apex court has succinctly dealt with the permissible extent of
judicial review in policy decisions of the State and for our purpose
paras 15 to 19 of the judgement being relevant are extracted as
“15. It is trite to state that separation of powers is a part of
the basic structure of the Constitution. Policy-making
continues to be in the sole domain of the executive. The
judiciary does not possess the authority or competence to
assume the role of the executive, which is democratically
accountable for its actions and has access to the resources
which are instrumental to policy formulation. However, this
separation of powers does not result in courts lacking
jurisdiction in conducting a judicial review of these policies.
Our Constitution does not envisage courts to be silent
spectators when constitutional rights of citizens are infringed
by executive policies. Judicial review and soliciting
constitutional justification for policies formulated by the
executive is an essential function, which the courts are
entrusted to perform.
16. We had clarified in our order dated 30 April 2021, that in
the context of the public health emergency with which the
country is currently grappling, this Court appreciates the
dynamic nature of the measures. Across the globe, the
executive has been given a wider margin in enacting
measures which ordinarily may have violated the liberty of
individuals, but are now incumbent to curb the pandemic.
Historically, the judiciary has also recognized that
constitutional scrutiny is transformed during such public
health emergencies, where the executive functions in rapid
consultation with scientists and other experts. In 1905, the
Supreme Court of the United States in Jacobson vs
Massachusetts` considered a constitutional liberty challenge
to a compulsory vaccination law that was enacted to combat
the smallpox epidemic. Harlan, J had noted the complex role
of the Government in battling public health emergencies in
the following terms (Jacobson case SCC OnLine US SC paras 6
“6…....the State may invest local bodies called into
existence for purposes of local administration with
authority in some appropriate way to safeguard the
public health and the public safety...
18…….While this court should guard with firmness
every right appertaining to life, liberty or property as
secured to the individual by the Supreme Law of the
Land, it is of the last importance that it should not
invade the domain of local authority except when it is
plainly necessary to do so in order to enforce that
law. The safety and the health of the people of
Massachusetts are, in the first instance, for that
Commonwealth to guard and protect……So far as
they can be reached by any government, they
depend, primarily, upon such action as the State in
its wisdom may take, and we do not perceive that
this legislation has invaded any right secured by the
17. The Supreme Court of United States, speaking in the wake
of the present COVID-19 pandemic in various instances, has
overruled policies by observing, inter alia, that “Members of
this Court are not public health experts, and we should respect
the judgment of those with special expertise and responsibility
in this area. But even in a pandemic, the Constitution cannot
be put away and forgotten” and “a public health emergency
does not give Governors and other public officials carte
blanche to disregard the Constitution for as long as the
medical problem persists. As more medical and scientific
evidence becomes available, and as States have time to craft
policies in light of that evidence, courts should expect policies
that more carefully account for constitutional rights”.
18. Similarly, courts across the globe have responded to
constitutional challenges to executive policies that have
directly or indirectly violated rights and liberties of citizens.
Courts have often reiterated the expertise of the executive in
managing a public health crisis, but have also warned against
arbitrary and irrational policies being excused in the garb of
the “wide latitude” to the executive that is necessitated to
battle a pandemic. This Court in Gujarat Mazdoor Sabha vs
State of Gujarat, albeit while speaking in the context of labour
rights, had noted that policies to counteract a pandemic must
continue to be evaluated from a threshold of proportionality to
determine if they, inter alia, have a rational connection with
the object that is sought to be achieved and are necessary to
achieve them.
19. In grappling with the second wave of the pandemic, this
Court does not intend to second-guess the wisdom of the
executive when it chooses between two competing and
efficacious policy measures. However, it continues to exercise
jurisdiction to determine if the chosen policy measure
conforms to the standards of reasonableness, militates
against manifest arbitrariness and protects the right to life of
all persons. This Court is presently assuming a dialogic
jurisdiction where various stakeholders are provided a forum
to raise constitutional grievances with respect to the
management of the pandemic. Hence, this Court would, under
the auspices of an open court judicial process, conduct
deliberations with the executive where justifications for
existing policies would be elicited and evaluated to assess
whether they survive constitutional scrutiny.”
22.    The ex-gratia payment payable by the State was notified in
terms of Section 38 of the Act of 2005 referred to above and this
was a promise held to the dependants of any such person who died
due to COVID-19 having contracted the infection while on
election duty. The compensation for loss of life certainly is an
actionable claim and it is for this reason that Section 71 of the Act
of 2005 provides as under:-
“71. Bar of jurisdiction of court. —No court (except the
Supreme Court or a High Court) shall have jurisdiction to
entertain any suit or proceeding in respect of anything done,
action taken, orders made, direction, instruction or guidelines
issued by the Central Government, National Authority, State
Government, State Authority or District Authority in
pursuance of any power conferred by, or in relation to its
functions, by this Act.
23.    We must remember that the State is not to be driven by the
scientific understanding of situation alone but what is relevant is
the general perception of people which settles for acceptance. If
judiciary cannot form an opinion contrary to law, it equally
applies on the executive not to loose sight of the purpose for
which laws are made. Scientific reasons are not always sacrosanct
but what remains is the purpose and objects of legislation.
24.    The Supreme Court as well as the High Courts have been
empowered to entertain any suit or proceeding in respect of
anything done, action taken, orders made etc. by the respective
authorities/ governments.
25.    Therefore, for any claim that has trammelled in law through
a government order within the scope of Section 12 read with
Section 38 of the Act of 2005, the jurisdiction has been vested in
the Supreme Court of India and the High Courts to entertain a
proceeding of suit or other proceeding, hence this Court is
convinced that all the writ petitions filed for payment of ex-gratia
amount are maintainable. This is, however, not to suggest that
Article 21 of the Constitution of India in the matter of pandemic
or disasters imposes a blanket pecuniary liability upon the State as
regards the loss of life of citizens or their property to which any
negligence of the State authorities or agents or misconstruction of
a policy decision arrived at for a larger purpose is an exception. It
can, therefore, be inferred that a suit for recovering damages as a
measure of compensation can be filed against the State for
negligence of its agents within the scope of Section-9 CPC unless
specifically barred by law or necessary intendment. Section-71
reproduced above supports the position of law and is well
supported by a decision of the apex court reported in    AIR 1969 SC
78 (Dhulabhai etc. v. State of M.P. and another).
26.    This Court may further note that Section 73 and 74 of the
Disaster Management Act protect the State and its agents or
officers from any legal action for anything done in good faith. The
statutory protection, however, does not render a suit or proceeding
non-maintainable for it may be possible for the claimant to
establish by leading evidence that action or omission was
deliberate and not in good faith. This Court may take note of the
definition of ‘good faith’ as provided under Section-52 of Indian
Penal Code as under:
“52. “Good faith”.—Nothing is said to be done or believed in
“good faith” which is done or believed without due care and
attention.”
The negligence co-exists with bad faith. The burden of
proof shall lay heavily on the claimants but it does not render the
suit or claim as non-maintainable.
27.    The position of law is further supported under an apex court
judgement reported in      (1994) 6 SCC 205 (N. Nagendra & Co. v.
State of A.P.)     wherein it is held that the State cannot claim
sovereign immunity from compensation due to negligence of its
agents in cases directly resulting in breach of Article 21 of the
Constitution of India. The decision holds good until now.
28.    Thus, we are of the considered opinion that the field of
compensation beyond the scope of section 12 (iii) of the Disaster
Management Act, 2003 is well protected as against negligence or
things not done in good faith irrespect of any measure such as ex-
gratia but in the present case it is the claim of ex-gratia payment
which we are concerned with.
29.    Now coming to the aspect as to whether the victims named
in the chart set out hereinabove have died of Covid-19 or
otherwise. Sri Ashok Khare has taken us through the apex court
judgement passed in the case of     Gaurav Kumar Bansal v. Union
of India and others.      We find that deaths having taken place in
the hospitals on account of Covid-19 fully stand the test of
certification. The argument that the medical reports mentioning
cardiac failure or otherwise may not be attributed to Covid-19
does not impress the Court for the reason that Covid-19 is an
infection that may result to the mortality of a person affecting any
organ be it lungs or heart etc. Once the admission of deceased
persons was on account of Covid-19, the resulting cause being
heart failure or dysfunction of any other organ leading to death is
immaterial and would nevertheless be treated as Covid-19 death.
No other argument was advanced for our consideration, therefore,
having given our anxious consideration, we allow the claims in
terms of our observations made hereinabove.
27.     As a result, all the writ petitions except Writ-C No. 3276 of
2022 (Smt. Khushboo v. State of U.P. and others) are allowed and the
opposite parties are directed to release the ex-gratia payment to
the dependents entitled thereto within a period of one month
failing which the claims so allowed shall be made good inclusive
of simple interest @ 9% p.m. from the date of judgement upto the
date of actual payment.
The Writ-C No. 3276 of 2022 (Smt. Khushboo v. State of U.P. and others)
is accordingly dismissed.
28.     Each of the petitioners, whose claims are allowed shall be
entitled to a cost of Rs. 25000/- in each case.