2. This appeal is directed against the order dated 10.05.2018 passed by the High Court
of Judicature at Allahabad (Lucknow Bench) in Misc. Single No. 2582 of 2003 whereby
the High Court has set aside the demand made by the appellants for a sum of
Rs.10,08,210.51 towards interest on arrears of excise revenue.
On 14.03.2002, the Government of Uttar Pradesh declared the Excise Policy for
the year 2002-03. On the basis of the Excise Policy and under the provisions of U.P.
Excise (Settlement of License for Retail Sale of Country Liquor) Rules, 2002 (for short
‘the Rules’), the District Magistrate/Collector, Lakhimpur Kheri issued an advertisement
for the settlement of the excise shops for the year 200203.
4. The respondent submitted an application in the prescribed form for grant of license for
the retail sale of country liquor shop, Mohammadi No.1, Lakhimpur Kheri. A license was
granted to the respondents for the year 200203 (from 01.04.2002 to 31.03.2003) for an
annual license fee of Rs.29,52,000/.
5. In the month of December 2002, the respondent submitted an application for
surrendering the excise shop/license.
6. As per the terms and conditions of the settlement, the respondent was liable to pay
license fee for the shop for the aforesaid period i.e. from 01.04.2002 to 31.03.2003. The
respondent had lifted quota of Rs.20,35,212/by the month ending 31.12.2002.
7. The appellants vide notice dated 06.01.2003 apprised to the respondent that the
application filed by him for surrender of excise shop can be entertained only after deposit
of balance of Rs.9,16,788/towards license fee. On 25.01.2003 the appellants again
issued notice to the respondent to pay the outstanding license fee amounting to
Rs.9,16,788/within a week.
8. The respondent preferred Writ Petition No.855 (MB) of 2003 wherein the High Court
directed the respondent to file an appeal before the Additional Commissioner Excise
(Licensing and Industrial Development) U.P. Accordingly, the respondent filed an appeal
on 19.02.2003 before the Excise Commissioner, U.P., Allahabad. Subsequently on
08.03.2003, the license of the respondent was cancelled. The Excise Commissioner,
while dismissing the appeal vide order dated 23.04.2003, held that under Rule 19 and
Section 36 of the U.P. Excise Act, 1910 (for short, ‘the Act’), the respondent is liable to
pay entire dues. The revision filed by the respondent was also dismissed by the
Secretary, Excise Department by order dated 18.07.2003.
9. After cancellation of the license, the District Excise Officer recalculated the total
amount due against the respondent and adjusted the amount of security of
Rs.2,95,200/out of total amount of Rs.9,38,762/and found the respondent was still liable
to pay Rs.6,43,562/to the Department.
10. Aggrieved by the order dated 18.07.2003, the respondent filed the writ petition, Misc.
Single No.2582 of 2003, before the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad (Lucknow
Bench). The High Court, vide order dated 01.08.2003, stayed the said recovery
proceedings subject to deposit of Rs.2,75,000/by the respondent before the District
11. The appellants filed counter affidavit in the writ petition on 13.02.2004. On
21.12.2015, the writ petition was dismissed by the High Court for non-prosecution. In the
year 2017, the respondent deposited the remaining amount of Rs.3,68,562/with the
Department. Thus, the amount which was due in 2003 was paid in the year 2017 but the
respondent failed to make payment of interest to the Department. The order dated
21.12.2015 was recalled by the High Court on 19.01.2018.
12. Further, on 10.01.2018, the Department issued notice to the respondent for payment
of Rs.10,08,210.51 due towards interest. On 10.05.2018 the High Court passed the
impugned order holding that the demand of Rs. 10,08,210.51 towards interest was not
justified as the respondent was under the protection of an interim order.
13. Learned counsel for the appellants submits that as per the terms and conditions of
the settlement, the respondent was liable to pay the license fee for the shop for the year
2002-03. He did not pay the license fee from January 2003 to March 2003. He went on
challenging the demand made by the Department for payment of balance of license fee
and remained unsuccessful in his challenge. Finally, he filed the writ petition before the
High Court i.e. Misc. Single No.2582 of 2003 wherein an interim order was granted. On
account of this order, the appellants were restrained from collecting license fee. The writ
petition was dismissed for non-prosecution. The respondent had deposited the remaining
license fee in the year 2017 but failed to pay the interest to the Department. It is argued
that when the writ petition was dismissed, the respondent ought to have paid the interest
accrued on the license fee. It is further argued that the High Court was not justified in
denying interest on the ground that the appellant had the protection of an interim order
granted by the court.
14. On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondent submitted that the High Court
had restrained the appellants from recovering the license fee by an interim order. The
respondent has paid the license fee in the year 2017. Therefore, the appellants are not
justified in demanding interest for the period during which a stay on recovery of license
fee was granted by the High Court.
15. Having regard to the contentions urged, the question which falls for consideration is
whether the respondent is liable to pay interest for the period during which recovery of
license fee under Section 36 of the Act was stayed by the High Court and eventually
when the writ petition was dismissed.
16. Section 38A of the Act specifically provides for payment of interest on arrears of
(1) Where any excise revenue has not been paid within three months from the date on which it
become payable, interest at such rate not exceeding twentyfour per cent per annum, as may be
prescribed, shall be payable from the date such excise revenue becomes payable till the date
Provided that until a higher rate is prescribed, the rate of interest will be eighteen per cent per
17. It is not disputed that the respondent was liable to pay license fee under Section 36
of the Act for the year 200203, even on surrender of the license. The High Court had
granted an interim order restraining the appellants from recovery of the license fee for
three months, subject to the respondent depositing a sum of Rs.2,75,000/within a period
of six weeks. Admittedly, the writ petition was dismissed on 21.12.2015 for
nonprosecution, which was restored later.
18. When the interim order was in force, the recovery of license fee was temporarily
suspended. The restraint was only against the Department not to recover the license fee.
There was no prohibition for the respondent to deposit the balance of license fee. It is to
be stated here that the High Court has not quashed the demand of license fee made by
the appellants. There is a difference between stay of operation of an order and quashing
of an order which has been explained by this Court in Shree Chamundi Mopeds Ltd. V.
Church of South India Trust Association CSI CINOD Secretariat, Madras, (1992) 3
“While considering the effect of an interim order staying the operation of the order under
challenge, a distinction has to be made between quashing of an order and stay of operation of
an order. Quashing of an order results in the restoration of the position as it stood on the date
of the passing of the order which has been quashed. The stay of operation of an order does not,
however, lead to such a result. It only means that the order which has been stayed would not
be operative from the date of the passing of the stay order and it does not mean that the said
order has been wiped out from existence.”
19. Following the said decision, this Court in Kanoria Chemicals and Industries Ltd.
and Others v. U.P. State Electricity Board and Others, (1997) 5 SCC 772 has held
that an order of stay which is granted during the pendency of a writ petition/suit or other
proceeding comes to an end with the dismissal of the substantive proceedings and it is
the duty of the court in such cases to put the parties in the same position that they would
have been in but for the interim order of the court. In that case, this Court rejected the
contention that when the operation of the notification itself was stayed, no surcharge
“11. …. Holding otherwise would mean that even though the Electricity Board, who was the
respondent in the writ petitions succeeded therein, yet deprived of the late payment surcharge
which was due to it under the tariff rules/regulations. It would be a case where the Board suffers
prejudice on account of the orders of the court and for no fault of its. It succeeds in the writ
petition and yet loses. The consumer files the writ petition, obtains stay of operation of the
notification revising the rates and fails in his attack upon the validity of the notification and yet
he is relieved of the obligation to pay the late payment surcharge for the period of stay, which
he is liable to pay according to the statutory terms and conditions of supply — which terms and
conditions indeed form part of the contract of supply entered into by him with the Board. We do
not think that any such unfair and inequitable proposition can be sustained in law.
It is equally well settled that an order of stay granted pending disposal of a writ petition/suit or
other proceeding, comes to an end with the dismissal of the substantive proceeding and that it
is the duty of the court in such a case to put the parties in the same position they would have
been but for the interim orders of the court. Any other view would result in the act or order of the
court prejudicing a party (Board in this case) for no fault of its and would also mean rewarding
a writ petitioner in spite of his failure. We do not think that any such unjust consequence can be
countenanced by the courts. As a matter of fact, the contention of the consumers herein,
extended logically should mean that even the enhanced rates are also not payable for the period
covered by the order of stay because the operation of the very notification revising/enhancing
the tariff rates was stayed. Mercifully, no such argument was urged by the appellants. It is un-
understandable how the enhanced rates can be said to be payable but not the late payment
surcharge thereon, when both the enhancement and the late payment surcharge are provided
by the same notification — the operation of which was stayed.”
20. In Rajasthan Housing Board and Others v. Krishna Kumari, (2005) 13 SCC 151
this Court observed that Order 39 of the Civil Procedure Code, 1908 provides for grant
of temporary injunction at the risk and responsibility of the person who obtains it and, if
ultimately case is decided against such person, he would be liable to pay interest on the
arrears of any amount due which had been stayed by the injunction order. The legal
maxim actus curiae neminem gravabit, which means that an act of the Court shall
prejudice no man, becomes applicable in such a case.
21. In South Eastern Coalfields Ltd. V. State of M.P. and Others, (2003) 8 SCC 648
the writ petitioner therein had argued that interest accrued due to nonpayment of
enhanced amount of royalty was protected by a judicial order of an interim nature and,
therefore, merely because the writ was finally dismissed, the writ petitioner should not be
held liable for payment of interest so long as money was withheld under the protective
umbrella of the injunction order. This submission was rejected by this Court by holding
“The principle of restitution has been statutorily recognized in Section 144 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908. Section 144 CPC speaks not only of a decree being varied, reversed, set
aside or modified but also includes an order on a par with a decree. The scope of the provision
is wide enough so as to include therein almost all the kinds of variation, reversal, setting aside
or modification of a decree or order. The interim order passed by the court merges into a final
decision. The validity of an interim order, passed in favour of a party, stands reversed in the
event of a final decision going against the party successful at the interim stage. Unless otherwise
ordered by the court, the successful party at the end would be justified with all expediency in
demanding compensation and being placed in the same situation in which it would have been if
the interim order would not have been passed against it. The successful party can demand (a)
the delivery of benefit earned by the opposite party under the interim order of the court, or (b) to
make restitution for what it has lost; and it is the duty of the court to do so unless it feels that in
the facts and on the circumstances of the case, the restitution far from meeting the ends of
justice, would rather defeat the same. Undoing the effect of an interim order by resorting to
principles of restitution is an obligation of the party, who has gained by the interim order of the
court, so as to wipe out the effect of the interim order passed which, in view of the reasoning
adopted by the court at the stage of final decision, the court earlier would not or ought not to
have passed. There is nothing wrong in an effort being made to restore the parties to the same
position in which they would have been if the interim order would not have existed.”
22. In Nava Bharat Ferro Alloys Limited v. Transmission Corporation of Andhra
Pradesh Limited and Another, (2011) 1 SCC 216 the appellant therein had challenged
the revised tariff rates imposed by the respondent therein and obtained an interim order
of stay against collection of the disputed amounts. The High Court subsequently upheld
upward revision of tariff. Thereafter, the respondent therein raised a demand for
additional charges/interest on outstanding amounts from the date of tariff revision and
the High Court upheld such demand holding that there was no subsisting relief once the
demand was upheld. This Court further held that the principle of restitution entitles the
successful party to be restored back to the position it would hold had there been no
order/judgment adverse to it. The appellant therein had obtained only an adinterim order
of stay against enforcement of tariffs. A party who fails in the main proceedings cannot
take benefit from the interim order issued during the pendency of such proceedings.
Therefore, it was held in that case that the amount became recoverable from the
appellant therein no sooner the judgment of the High Court was reversed and the revision
of tariffs was upheld.
23. In State of Rajasthan and Another v. J.K. Synthetics Limited and Another,
(2011) 12 SCC 518 the interest for the period of which recovery of royalty was to be paid
under Section 9(2) of the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957
remained stayed under the interim orders of the court. However, eventually the writ
petition was dismissed. This Court held that whenever there is an interim order of stay in
regard to any revision in rate or tariff, unless the order granting interim stay or the final
order dismissing the writ petition specifies otherwise, on the dismissal of the writ petition
or vacation of the interim order, the beneficiary of the interim order shall have to pay
interest on the amount withheld or not paid by virtue of the interim order. It was held thus:
“23. It is therefore evident that whenever there is an interim order of stay in regard to any revision
in rate or tariff, unless the order granting interim stay or the final order dismissing the writ petition
specifies otherwise, on the dismissal of the writ petition or vacation of the interim order, the
beneficiary of the interim order shall have to pay interest on the amount withheld or not paid by
virtue of the interim order. Where the statute or contract specifies the rate of interest, usually
interest will have to be paid at such rate. Even where there is no statutory or contractual
provision for payment of interest, the court will have to direct the payment of interest at a
reasonable rate, by way of restitution, while vacating the order of interim stay, or dismissing the
writ petition, unless there are special reasons for not doing so. Any other interpretation would
encourage unscrupulous debtors to file writ petitions challenging the revision in tariffs/rates and
make attempts to obtain interim orders of stay. If the obligation to make restitution by paying
appropriate interest on the withheld amount is not strictly enforced, the loser will end up with a
financial benefit by resorting to unjust litigation and the winner will end up as the loser financially
for no fault of his. Be that as it may.”
24. From the above discussion, it is clear that imposition of a stay on the operation of an
order means that the order which has been stayed would not be operative from the date
of passing of the stay order. However, it does not mean that the stayed order is wiped
out from the existence, unless it is quashed. Once the proceedings, wherein a stay was
granted, are dismissed, any interim order granted earlier merges with the final order. In
other words, the interim order comes to an end with the dismissal of the proceedings. In
such a situation, it is the duty of the Court to put the parties in the same position they
would have been but for the interim order of the court, unless the order granting interim
stay or final order dismissing the proceedings specifies otherwise. On the dismissal of
the proceedings or vacation of the interim order, the beneficiary of the interim order shall
have to pay interest on the amount withheld or not paid by virtue of the interim order.
25. Coming to the facts of the present case, the respondent was not successful in his
challenge to the notice dated 06.01.2003 demanding the balance of license fee before
the Authorities under the Act. Therefore, he filed the writ petition bearing Misc. Single
No.2582 of 2003 before the High Court wherein the High Court, by an interim order,
stayed the recovery of the monthly instalment of license fee for the months January 2003
to March 2003, subject to deposit of Rs.2,75,000/within a period of six weeks before the
District Excise Officer. It is not disputed that this amount of Rs.2,75,000/was deposited
by the respondent. The said writ petition was dismissed by the High Court for
nonprosecution vide Order dated 21.12.2015. On 23.12.2017, the respondent deposited
the remaining amount of Rs.3,68,562/towards license fee. However, the respondent did
not make payment of interest to the Department. The writ petition was restored on
19.01.2018. In the meantime, the appellants issued a notice calling upon the respondent
to pay Rs.10,08,210.51/towards interest due. The High Court held that the respondent
was not liable to pay interest as he was under the protection of the interim order. Given
the settled position of law, in our view the High Court has erred in holding that the
respondent was not liable to pay interest due to the protection given under the interim
26. In the result, the appeal succeeds and it is accordingly allowed. The order of the High
Court dated 10.05.2018 in Misc. Single No. 2582 of 2003 is set aside.
27. At this stage, learned counsel for the respondent submits that the respondent may
be permitted to make an application under onetime settlement scheme 2021 wherein
certain concessions have been made for payment of interest dues. The submission of
the learned counsel is accepted and the respondent is permitted to make an application
in terms of the said scheme within a period of eight weeks from today. We make it clear
that if such an application is filed by the respondent, the authority concerned is directed
to consider the same in accordance with law. No costs.