Mr. Sharan Sethi, Senior Standing Counsel for respondents.
Petitioner is a Business Process Outsourcing (BPO) Service
Provider located in India.
Challenge in the instant petition is to the order dated 15.02.2021
(Annexure P-18) passed by the Additional Commissioner CGST (Appeals)
Gurugram wherein it has been held that the services provided by the
petitioner are in the nature of “Intermediary Services” as per Section 2 (13)
of the IGST Act (for short the 'Act') and do not qualify as “export of
services” in terms of Section 2 (6) of the Act and thereby rejecting the
refund claim of un-utilized Input Tax Credit (ITC) used in making zero rated
supplies of services without payment of Integrated Goods and Service Tax.
Petitioner is registered with Haryana GST Authorities and is
involved in providing a host of services collectively referred as BPO
Services to customers located in India as well as outside India. An
illustrative list of services stated to be rendered by the petitioner is as under:-
(i) Maintaining vendor/customer master data, scanning and
processing vendor invoices, book keeping, preparing/finalizing books
of account, generating ledger reconciliations, managing customer
receivables etc.
(ii) Developing, licensing and maintaining software as per
clients' needs.
(iii) Technical IT support i.e. trouble-shooting services.
(iv) Data analysis and providing solutions to clients in respect
of forecasting of demand for their offerings and management of
inventory, supporting various business functions like sourcing and
supply chain management.
It is asserted that aforesaid services are actually deliverables of
the petitioner on its “own account”. Such services are provided by petitioner
from India remotely through telecommunication/internet links using its own
infrastructure and work force of approximately 50 thousand employees.
Petitioner entered into a Master Services Sub-Contracting
Agreement dated 01.01.2013 (hereinafter referred to as MSA) with Genpact
International Incorporated (GI) an entity located outside India. It is asserted
that as per terms of the MSA various services are to be provided by the
petitioner on a principal to principal basis. Further the petitioner is engaged
by GI for actual performance of BPO services to the clients of GI located
outside India.       The arrangement requires the petitioner to complete the
assigned processes/scope of work directly to the 3rd parties located outside
India. Copy of the MSA entered between the petitioner and GI stands
annexed as Annexure P-1 alongwith the petition.
For the period from July 2017 to March 2018, petitioner filed
an application with Haryana GST authorities on            18.10.2018 claiming
refund of un-utilized ITC amounting to Rs.27,26,27,276/- on account of zero
rated supplies of services without payment of Integrated Goods and Service
Tax (IGST) under Letter of Undertaking. The refund claim was filed under
Section 16 of the Act read with Section 54 of the Central Goods and
Services Act 2017 and Rule 89 of the Central Goods and Services Rules
2017. The Deputy Commissioner Division East-II CGST Gurugram vide
Order-in-Original dated 14.03.2019 (Annexure P-3) sanctioned an amount of
Rs.26,34,61,625/- towards refund by forming an opinion that the services
rendered by the petitioner qualify as “export of services”. The refund claim
was, however, partially rejected to the extent of Rs.91,65,651/- on account
of ITC availed in respect of certain alleged ineligible inputs and input
services. Petitioner being aggrieved by the rejection of the partial amount
preferred an appeal dated 13.06.2019 before the Joint Commissioner CGST
(Appeals). It would be apposite to take note at this stage that the Central
Board of Customs and Indirect Taxes issued a circular dated 18.07.2019
towards clarification whether 'intermediary services' to overseas entities
qualify as export of services.     On account of numerous representations
received expressing apprehensions on the fall out of such circular, the same
was ab initio withdrawn vide circular dated 04.12.2019. In the meanwhile
the Principal Commissioner of Central GST Gurugram exercising the
powers conferred under Section 107 (2) of the CGST Act, reviewed the
proceedings and passed an order dated 13.09.2019 reviewing the order in
original dated 14.03.2019 and by recording that the services provided by the
petitioner are in the nature of intermediary services and do not qualify as
export of services in terms of Section 2 (6) of the IGST Act. Accordingly
directions were issued for filing of an appeal before the Joint Commissioner
(Appeals) GST Gurugram. Pursuant to such development, the department on
13.09.2019 also filed an appeal against the order in original dated
14.03.2019 contesting the entire amount of refund sanctioned to the
petitioner amounting to Rs.26,34,61,625/-. In the appeal reliance was placed
on circular dated 18.07.2019 which was subsequently withdrawn.             The
material ground taken in the appeal was that the petitioner was paid by
Genpect International (GI) and as such the petitioner fell within the category
of intermediary. Thereafter the order in appeal dated 27.05.2020 (Annexure
P-9) was passed by the Joint Commissioner, CGST (Appeals) Gurugram
holding that the amount of Rs.26,34,61,625/- was erroneously refunded to
the petitioner. View taken was that the services provided by the petitioner
are in the nature of “intermediary services” as per Section 2 (13) of the Act
and do not qualify as “export of services” in terms of Section 2 (6) of the
Petitioner assailed the order dated 27.05.2020 by filing CWP
No.10302 of 2020 before this Court. The writ petition was disposed of vide
order dated 29.01.2021 (Annexure P-15).            The order in appeal dated
27.05.2020 was set aside and the matter remanded back to the appellate
authority for a decision afresh.
Thereafter the order dated 15.02.2021 (Annexure P-18) has
been passed by the Appellate Authority, disallowing the appeal filed by the
petitioner and allowing the appeal filed by the department against order in
original dated 14.03.2019. The appellate authority held that the services
performed by the petitioner fall within the category of “intermediary
services” and do now qualify as “export of services” under Section 2 (6) of
the Act. Consequently, the refund amounting to Rs.26,34,61,625/-
previously sanctioned in favour of the petitioner was rejected. Furthermore,
refund to the extent of Rs.82,15,102/- which was a subject matter of appeal
filed by the petitioner was also denied.
It be noted that apart from the refund in question, two other
refund applications for the period starting from April 2018 to September
2018 and October 2018 to March 2019 have been rejected vide orders dated
09.12.2020 and 02.02.2021 (Annexures P-13 and P-14), respectively, on the
same very basis.
It is against such brief factual backdrop that the instant petition
has been filed assailing the order dated 15.02.2021 at Annexure P-18. A
writ of mandamus is also sought for grant of refund for the subsequent
period of time as well.
The first contention raised by learned Senior counsel is that the
impugned order dated 15.02.2021 (Annexure P-18) passed by the Appellate
Authority proceeds not only beyond the grounds in the appeal but also
beyond the scope of remand as directed by this court. It is asserted that this
Court while disposing of CWP No.10302 of 2020 vide order dated
29.01.2021 (Annexure P-15) had remanded the matter to decide the appeal
afresh. The appeal in turn is stated to have been surmised only on Clause
3.4 and Clause 10 of the MSA. However, the Appellate Authority has
undertaken a completely new exercise vis-a-vis the other clauses of the
agreement and which apart from being irrelevant to the issue at hand was not
permissible in law. Further contended that the conclusion of the appellate
authority that the services rendered by the petitioner tantamount to
“intermediary” services is patently wrong and perverse. As per definition of
“intermediary” under Section 2 (13) of the Act a person who provides
services “on his own account” is not an “intermediary”. The provider of the
main service stands clearly excluded from the definition of “intermediary”.
No evidence is on record to establish that the petitioner had not provided the
main service. There was not even an allegation that there was any 3rd party
which the petitioner had “arranged” and who had in turn provided the main
services. It is argued that the petitioner is rendering services “on its own
account” and is not facilitating any supply of services between GI and its
customers. Petitioner is responsible for providing all services, for all the risk
related to performance of services and pricing of the services.
Mr. Tarun Gulari, learned Senior counsel has extensively
referred to the MSA and the various clauses contained therein to impress
upon this Court that the petitioner is rendering services to GI on a “principal
to principal” basis and not in the capacity of GI's agent. There is no separate
agreement entered between the petitioner and GI's customers and therefore
in no manner can the petitioner be equated to an agent or broker. Further
contention is that the petitioner is not facilitating supply of services between
GI and its customers but is actually providing the services “on its own
account” to the end customers as sub-contracted by GI in terms of the MSA.
Since the actual service is being performed by the petitioner under the sub-
contract and it does not “arrange” or “facilitate” the service, it cannot be
regarded as an “intermediary”. It has also been pointed out that the
petitioner's turn over is the entire charge for the service which is the main
service itself whereas in the case of an “intermediary” the turn over is a mere
commission or a facilitation fee which is not the fact in the present case.
Learned Senior counsel further submits that the appellate authority in the
impugned order has relied on various clauses of the MSA such as Clause
3.1, 3.4, 4.1, 4.2, 5.2, 5.4, 7, 7.1, 7.4, 10.1 and 16.1 to arrive at the
conclusion that the petitioner is an “intermediary” but without giving any
analysis of the clauses and yet concluding that the petitioner acts as an
“intermediary”. The Appellate Authority has not assigned any independent
reasons to arrive at such a conclusion. Yet another contention raised is that
the Appellate Authority has proceeded erroneously to take a view that since
petitioner is rendering services “on behalf “ of GI and therefore qualifies as
an “intermediary”. It is asserted that usage of the term “on behalf” of in the
impugned order is misleading as using such term, the appellate authority is
presuming that there is a relationship of agency between the petitioner and
GI and which on the face of it is contrary to the express terms of the MSA.
In this regard it is submitted that the findings of the appellate authority in
para 13 of the impugned order dated 15.02.2021 that the petitioner is an
agent of GI is contrary to the admission of the respondents in the reply filed
dated 08.09.2020 in CWP No.10302 of 2020. Learned Senior counsel has
also pointed out the contradictory findings recorded in the impugned order
inasmuch as while in paragraph 18, the Appellate Authority clearly observes
that the petitioner binds GI by its actions but on the other hand it stands
recorded in para 19 of the same that the petitioner cannot bind the principal
i.e. GI.    The impugned order is stated to the proceeding on mere
presumption as in para 17 thereof it has been erroneously stated that there
are two supplies involved. In this regard it is argued that in the case of a
sub-contract there is only one sale involved and the findings in the impugned
order have no factual or legal basis to allege that there was a second contract
of agency between the petitioner and GI.
Still further argued that the Appellate Authority has relied on
the ruling in the case of Infinera India (P.) Ltd., In re [2020] 112
Karnataka Vservglobal (P.) Ltd., In re [2018] 19 GSTL 173 (AAR-
Maharashtra) and recorded a finding that there has been a material change
in the definition of “intermediary” under the GST regime. It is asserted that
there is a clear case of misreading inasmuch as in the ruling as of Infinera
(supra), the observations are to the contrary that there is no difference in the
definition of “intermediary” under the GST and pre-GST regime.              It is
argued that the decision in Infinera (supra) rather clinches the issue in
favour of the petitioner.
Learned Senior counsel has also argued that the appellate
authority has failed to appreciate that the BPO services rendered by the
petitioner have been held to be “export of services” under the erstwhile
Service Tax regime and the refund claims were sanctioned on a regular basis
by the tax authorities. In support of such contention reliance has been
placed on Order in Original dated 25.01.2018 (Annexure P-2) wherein the
nature of services rendered by the petitioner were elaborately gone into and
discussed and it was held that the BPO services performed by the petitioner
are in the nature of “main service” and not “intermediary services”. As a
sequel it is submitted that the definition of “intermediary services” under the
service tax regime and GST regime being broadly similar and as such there
being neither any change in the facts nor any change in the statutory
provisions a different view could not have been taken by the authorities
pertaining to a different period for the same assessee. Contention is that the
principle of consistency would apply to tax proceedings as well.
We may also take note that on a previous date of hearing
i.e.27.10.2021, learned Senior counsel had referred to a circular dated
20.09.2021 issued by the Principal Commissioner (GST), Government of
India, Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue, Central Board of
Indirect Taxes and Customs, New Delhi, to urge that the claim of the
petitioner would be covered under such circular which in turn clarifies that
sub-contracting arrangements do not constitute “intermediary Services”.
On 27.10.2021 statement of counsel for the respondents was recorded to the
effect that such circular dated 20.09.2021 would be taken into consideration
while preparing reply to the writ petition.
Mr. Sharan Sethi, learned Senior Standing for the respondents has
justified the passing of the impugned order dated 15.02.2021 (Annexure P-
18) rejecting the claim of the petitioner for refund by adverting to the
averments made in the written statement. Reference has been made to
different clauses of the MSA to stress that broadly two categories of services
are involved.     First category comprises        of the “main services” being
provided by GI to its customers. Second category comprises of ancillary and
supportive services (to the main services) being provided by the petitioner.
It is urged that both these categories of services are clearly identifiable and
distinguishable from each other. Learned counsel has invited our attention
to the specific averments made in such regard in correlation to the different
clauses contained under the MSA and the same read as under:-
(2) Two distinct supplies: There are clearly two categories of supplies
in the arrangement, the main supply and the ancillary supply.
(i)      The main supply between GI and its customers i.e. two
principals, comprise of the below:-
a.     Business Processing Outsourcing and Information Technology
services (Recitals of agreement).
b.     Managing New and existing Customer Relationships by
performing all functions to obtain new Customers (Article 3.1of the
agreement).
c. Appointment of GI Account Representative to deal with GI
Customers (Article 3.2 of the agreement).
d. Negotiate Customer agreements and statement of work (Article
e. Customer Invoicing and collection (Article 3.4 of the agreement)
(ii) The Ancillary supply provided by applicant to facilitate the
provision of main supply between the two principals which is
the     supply     of    intermediary      services    is   as    below:-
a. Maintenance of and expanding GI customer Relationship
through    regular      meetings      with  GI   customers,    developing
presentations       for     GI       customers,     attending    industry
meetings/conventions, handling public relations and advertising
matters etc. (Article 3.1 of the Agreement).
b. Supply of services to GI Inc, for negotiating Customer
Agreements and statement of work.
c. Supply of financial data and other support in order for Gl Inc,
to render invoices to GI Inc, customers (Article 3.4 of the
d. Personal data processing:- In performance of this agreement, each
Provider (Applicant) may have access to, or otherwise Process, Gl_
Customer Personal Data on GI Customer's behalf Gl Customer
personal data will be accessed and otherwise processed by each
provider (Applicant) only to the extent strictly necessary to perform
this agreement, or upon Gl’'s written instructions and in strict
compliance thereof.(Article 4.1 of the Agreement);
e. Data Protection: Each provider (Applicant) agrees to keep the Gl
Customer Personal Data confidential, and agrees to not disclose any
GI Customer Personal Data to third parties without having first
received             express           written       approval        from
the GI Customer and Gl (Article 4.2 of the agreement);
f. Data Recovery Services: Provider (Applicant) shall provide to
GI the disaster recovery assistance, cooperation and services, if any,
that         are        relevant.          (Article   5.2     of       the
g. Reports: Each Provider (Applicant) shall provide to Gl, and
directly to the GI customer, where so agreed the reports set
forth in the Customer Statements of Work in accordance with the
frequencies set forth therein (Article 5.3 of the Agreement);
h. Records Retention: Each provider (Applicant) shall retain
applicable books and records in accordance with the records
retention standards in accordance with Law, or as required by Gl or
the GI Customer (Article 5.4 of the Agreement).”
It is submitted that from a perusal of the services performed by
the petitioner, it would be clear that the petitioner is acting on behalf of GI
and supplying support services so that GI can supply main services in the
nature of business process outsourcing, information technology services,
managing relationship with customers, negotiate customers agreement and
statement of work and customer invoicing and collection to its customers.
Further, it is contended that under Clause 3.2 of the MSA it is the obligation
of GI to appoint dedicated account representatives for each customer who in
turn would coordinate with the provider i.e. the petitioner.             Such GI
representative(s) would have the overall responsibility for managing and
coordinating the delivery of the services to GI customers. As such it is
argued that such an arrangement where one party-GI possesses ---the
authority to take decisions with regard to actions taken by another party-
petitioner, in the course of day-to-day management, can only be referred to
as a Principal-agent relationship. The role of the petitioner as such has been
described to be supportive in nature and not to act in an autonomous way.
Clause 3.4 of the MSA has also been referred to whereby GI is responsible
for handling all disputes with customers. It is thus contended that GI is
directly responsible to its customers for any fault/lapse on the part of the
petitioner in providing services to the customers of GI. The principal i.e.GI
is responsible for the lawful acts of its agent i.e. the petitioner. Therefore the
petitioner cannot be said to provide “services on its own account”. Mr.
Sethi, learned counsel has further referred to the Transfer Pricing Report
report Annexure P-24 to urge that a similar picture emerges even therefrom
and which further crystallizes that the petitioner is only performing
supporting functions/services for GI. On the strength of such submissions
learned counsel vehemently contends that the petitioner fulfils all the
ingredients to be termed as an “intermediary”.
Insofar as the issue of the petitioner having been allowed
refunds for the previous periods under the pre-GST regime, it is contended
that the principle of res-judicata does not apply in matters pertaining to tax
for different assessment years. Each assessment year is a separate unit and a
decision/view in one year is not to be carried forward and held good for a
subsequent year. It is submitted that in tax matters each years assessment is
final only for that year and does not govern later years.
On the basis of such submissions counsel submits that there is
no merit in the writ petition and the same ought to be dismissed.
We have heard counsel for the parties at length and have
perused the pleadings on record.
The primary issue that arises for consideration is as to whether
the petitioner would be covered under the expression “intermediary” as
defined under the provisions of the IGST Act and consequently the BPO
services rendered by the petitioner under the MSA (Annexure P-1) be treated
as “intermediary services” ?
For adjudication of such issue it would be necessary to advert to
certain relevant statutory provisions:-
Section 2, Definitions.- In this act, unless the context otherwise
(1) to (5)     xxxxx xxxxx xxxxx xxxxx
(6)    “export of services” means the supply of any service when,-
(i) The supplier of service is located in India;
(ii) The recipient of service is located outside India;
(iii) The place of supply of service is outside India;
(iv) the payment for such service has been received by the
supplier of service in convertible foreign exchange;[or in Indian
rupees where-ever permitted by the Reserve Bank of India]; and
(v) the supplier of service and the recipient of service are not
merely establishments of a distinct person in accordance with
Explanation 1 in section 8;
Section 13:- Place of supply of services where location of
supplier or location of recipient is outside India.- (1) The provisions
of this section shall apply to determine the place of supply of services
where the location of the supplier of services or the location of the
recipient of services is outside India.
(2) The place of supply of services except the services specified
in sub-sections (3) to (13) shall be the location of the recipient of
Provided that where the location of the recipient of services is
not available in the ordinary course of business, the place of supply
shall be the location of the supplier of services.
(3) The place of supply of the following services shall be the
location where the services are actually performed, namely:—
(a) services supplied in respect of goods which are required to
be made physically available by the recipient of services to the
supplier of services, or to a person acting on behalf of the supplier of
services in order to provide the services:
Provided that when such services are provided from a remote
location by way of electronic means, the place of supply shall be the
location where goods are situated at the time of supply of services:
[Provided further that nothing contained in this clause shall
apply in the case of services supplied in respect of goods which are
temporarily imported into India for repairs or for any other treatment
or process and are exported after such repairs or treatment or
process without being put to any use in India, other than that which is
required for such repairs or treatment or process;]
(b) services supplied to an individual, represented either as the
recipient of services or a person acting on behalf of the recipient,
which require the physical presence of the recipient or the person
acting on his behalf, with the supplier for the supply of services.
(4) The place of supply of services supplied directly in relation
to an immovable property, including services supplied in this regard
by experts and estate agents, supply of accommodation by a hotel,
inn, guest house, club or campsite, by whatever name called, grant of
rights to use immovable property, services for carrying out or co-
ordination of construction work, including that of architects or
interior decorators, shall be the place where the immovable property
is located or intended to be located.
(5) The place of supply of services supplied by way of
admission to, or organisation of a cultural, artistic, sporting,
scientific, educational or entertainment event, or a celebration,
conference, fair, exhibition or similar events, and of services ancillary
to such admission or organisation, shall be the place where the event
(6) Where any services referred to in sub-section (3) or sub-
section (4) or sub-section (5) is supplied at more than one location,
including a location in the taxable territory, its place of supply shall
be the location in the taxable territory.
(7) Where the services referred to in sub-section (3) or sub-
section (4) or sub-section (5) are supplied in more than one State or
Union territory, the place of supply of such services shall be taken as
being in each of the respective States or Union territories and the
value of such supplies specific to each State or Union territory shall
be in proportion to the value for services separately collected or
determined in terms of the contract or agreement entered into in this
regard or, in the absence of such contract or agreement, on such
other basis as may be prescribed.
(8) The place of supply of the following services shall be the
location of the supplier of services, namely:––
(a) services supplied by a banking company, or a financial
institution, or a non-banking financial company, to account holders;
(b) intermediary services;
(c) services consisting of hiring of means of transport,
including yachts but excluding aircrafts and vessels, up to a period of
one month.
Explanation.––For the purposes of this sub-section, the expression,––
(a) “account” means an account bearing interest to the
depositor, and includes a non-resident external account and a non-
(b) “banking company” shall have the same meaning as
assigned to it under clause (a) of section 45A of the Reserve Bank of
India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934);
(c) “financial institution” shall have the same meaning as
assigned to it in clause (c) of section 45-I of the Reserve Bank of India
(d) “non-banking financial company” means,––
(i) a financial institution which is a company;
(ii) a non-banking institution which is a company and
which has as its principal business the receiving of deposits, under
any scheme or arrangement or in any other manner, or lending in any
(iii) such other non-banking institution or class of such
institutions, as the Reserve Bank of India may, with the previous
approval of the Central Government and by notification in the Official
Gazette, specify.
(9) The place of supply of services of transportation of goods,
other than by way of mail or courier, shall be the place of destination
of such goods.
(10) The place of supply in respect of passenger transportation
services shall be the place where the passenger embarks on the
conveyance for a continuous journey.
(11) The place of supply of services provided on board a
conveyance during the course of a passenger transport operation,
including services intended to be wholly or substantially consumed
while on board, shall be the first scheduled point of departure of that
conveyance for the journey.
(12) The place of supply of online information and database
access or retrieval services shall be the location of the recipient of
Explanation.––For the purposes of this sub-section, person
receiving such services shall be deemed to be located in the taxable
territory, if any two of the following non-contradictory conditions are
satisfied, namely:––
(a) the location of address presented by the recipient of
services through internet is in the taxable territory;
(b) the credit card or debit card or store value card or
charge card or smart card or any other card by which the recipient of
services settles payment has been issued in the taxable territory;
(c) the billing address of the recipient of services is in
the taxable territory;
(d) the internet protocol address of the device used by the
recipient of services is in the taxable territory;
(e) the bank of the recipient of services in which the
account used for payment is maintained is in the taxable territory;
(f) the country code of the subscriber identity module
card used by the recipient of services is of taxable territory;
(g) the location of the fixed land line through which the
service is received by the recipient is in the taxable territory.
(13) In order to prevent double taxation or non-taxation of the
supply of a service, or for the uniform application of rules, the
Government shall have the power to notify any description of services
or circumstances in which the place of supply shall be the place of
effective use and enjoyment of a service.
SECTION 16. Zero rated supply. (1) “zero rated supply” means any
of the following supplies of goods or services or both, namely:––
(a) export of goods or services or both; or
(b) supply of goods or services or both [ for authorised
operations] to a Special Economic Zone developer or a Special
Economic Zone unit.
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (5) of section 17 of
the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, credit of input tax may be
availed for making zero-rated supplies, notwithstanding that such
supply may be an exempt supply.
[(3) A registered person making zero rated supply shall be
eligible to claim refund of unutilised input tax credit on supply of
goods or services or both, without payment of integrated tax, under
bond or Letter of Undertaking, in accordance with the provisions of
Section 54 of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act or the rules
made thereunder, subject to such conditions, safeguards and
procedure as may be prescribed:
Provided that the registered person making zero rated supply of
goods shall, in case of non-realisation of sale proceeds, be liable to
deposit the refund so received under this sub-section alongwith the
applicable interest under Section 50 of the Central Goods and
Services Tax Act within thirty days after the expiry of the time limited
prescribed under the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of
1999) for receipt of foreign exchange remittances, in such manner as
may be prescribed.
(4) The Government may, on the recommendation of the
Council, and subject to such conditions, safeguards and procedures,
by notification, specify___
(i) a class of persons who may make zero rated supply on
payment of integrated tax and claim refund of the tax so paid;
(ii) a class of goods or services which may be exported
on payment of integrated tax and the supplier of such goods or
services may claim the refund of tax so paid.]
Section 2. Definitions.- In this Act, unless the context otherwise
(1) to (4) xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx
(5) “agent” means a person, including a factor, broker,
commission agent, arhatia, del credere agent, an auctioneer or any
other mercantile agent, by whatever name called, who carries on the
business of supply or receipt of goods or services or both on behalf of
(6) to (121) xxx xxx xxx xxx
SECTION 54. Refund of tax. (1) Any person claiming refund of
any tax and interest, if any, paid on such tax or any other amount paid
by him, may make an application before the expiry of two years from
the relevant date in such form and manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that a registered person, claiming refund of any
balance in the electronic cash ledger in accordance with the
provisions of sub-section (6) of section 49, may claim such refund in
[such form and] manner as may be prescribed.
(2) A specialised agency of the United Nations Organisation or
any Multilateral Financial Institution and Organisation notified
under the United Nations (Privileges and Immunities) Act, 1947 (46
of 1947), Consulate or Embassy of foreign countries or any other
person or class of persons, as notified under section 55, entitled to a
refund of tax paid by it on inward supplies of goods or services or
both, may make an application for such refund, in such form and
manner as may be prescribed, before the expiry of [two years] from
the last day of the quarter in which such supply was received.
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (10), a registered
person may claim refund of any unutilised input tax credit at the end
Provided that no refund of unutilised input tax credit shall be
allowed in cases other than––
(i) zero rated supplies made without payment of tax;
(ii) where the credit has accumulated on account of rate
of tax on inputs being higher than the rate of tax on output supplies
(other than nil rated or fully exempt supplies), except supplies of
goods or services or both as may be notified by the Government on
Provided further that no refund of unutilised input tax credit
shall be allowed in cases where the goods exported out of India are
subjected to export duty:
Provided also that no refund of input tax credit shall be
allowed, if the supplier of goods or services or both avails of
drawback in respect of central tax or claims refund of the integrated
tax paid on such supplies.”
Section 2 (6) of the IGST Act lays down the conditions which
need to be fulfilled for qualification of a service as “export of services”. A
conjoint reading of Section 13 (2) and Section 13 (8) clarifies the manner for
determining the place of supply of services where location of supplier or
location of recipient is outside India.         Generally, “place of supply” of
services is the location of the recipient, except in case of certain specified
services. For “intermediary” services, the place of supply is the location of
the supplier. Section 16 (1) (a) inter alia provides that the export of services
amount to “zero rated supply”. Section 16 (2) provides that credit of input
tax may be availed for making zero rated supplies. Section 54 of the CGST
Act prescribes the manner in relation to claiming refund by tax payers,
mainly covering the eligibility and prescribed timelines for filing the refund
claim application.      A tax payer engaged in export of services without
payment of GST is eligible to claim refund of unutilized input tax credit.
By way of passing the impugned order dated 15.02.2021
(Annexure P-18) findings have been recorded that petitioner provides
services on behalf of GI and as such there is a principal agent relationship.
Further the petitioner is arranging and facilitating the supply of services
between GI and its customers and while doing so petitioner is acting as an
“intermediary”.     It has further been held that petitioner is not providing
services on “its own account”. That apart it has been observed that there has
been a material change in the definition of “intermediary” under the GST
regime and consequently the petitioner cannot benefit from the orders of
refund that had earlier been passed under the sales tax regime.
We have examined the MSA (Annexure P-1) in depth and
which was imperative to take a view as regards the findings recorded in the
impugned order dated 15.02.2021 (Annexure P-18).             In para 16 of the
impugned order the recitals of the MSA dated 07.01.2013 (Annexure P-1) as
also certain clauses have been referred to while concluding the petitioner to
be an “intermediary”. The relevant extract of the recitals and the clauses in
question read as follows:-
WHEREAS, GI is in the business of providing business process
outsourcing and information technology services to its customers (each a
“GI Customer,” and, collectively, the “GI Customers”) and establishing,
maintaining and expanding mutually beneficial relationships with such GI
WHEREAS, Provider is an Affiliates of GI and has agreed to act as
non-exclusive subcontractor for GI, subject to, and in accordance with, the
WHEREAS, GI intends to appoint the Provider or any of them as its
subcontractor(s) to perform certain of these business process outsourcing
and information technology services on behalf of GI for the GI Customers,
as may be appropriate, from time to time;
WHEREAS, Provider shall have the opportunity to accept or reject
any such proposed appointment by GI in its sole discretion, subject to the
terms of this Agreement;
WHEREAS, each provider agrees that, in the event it shall have
agreed to accept any such appointment by GI, to perform its obligations in
a manner and at a level that satisfies in all respects GI's obligations to the
relevant GI Customers, as set forth in the agreements and statements of
work (each, a “Customer Statement of Work”) entered into from time to
time between GI and the GI Customers (collectively, the “GI Customer
WHEREAS the provider acknowledges that upon such acceptance to
perform services for GI, Customer Statement of Work terms on performance
standards, indemnities, liabilities and other      operating terms, excepting
pricing under each Customer Statement of Work will be applicable by
reference to all services to be performed by the Provider under this
WHEREAS, GI will have continuing responsibility for obtaining new
GI Customers and managing and expanding its relationships with existing
GI Customers, for the benefit of the Provider and other similarly situated
Affiliates of GI (the “Other GI Provider Affiliates”) who also provide
services to GI in satisfaction of GI's obligations to the GI Customers under
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing and the mutual
promises herein, and for other good and valuable consideration, the receipt
and sufficiency of which are hereby acknowledged, the Parties hereby agree
In addition to any other obligations set forth below in this Agreement,
GI shall be obligated to provide the following services:
3.1    Managing New and Existing Customer Relationships, GI shall be
responsible for performing all functions necessary to obtain new GI
Customers for whom Services shall be performed by the Provider and by
the Other GI Provider Affiliates and for maintaining and expanding all
existing GI Customer relationships. Such functions shall include, but not be
limited to, scheduling regular meetings with existing and potential GI
Customers; developing presentations for GI Customers on existing and new
product and service offerings; preparation for, and attendance at,
appropriate conventions and industry meetings; handling all public
relations and advertising matters etc.
3.2    GI Account Representatives. GI shall at all times have one or more
specific senior personnel identified and appointed to serve each GI
Customer (each, a “GI Account Representative”) who shall be responsible
for managing the relationship with each GI Customer to whom they are
assigned. GI and the applicable GI Account Representatives shall also be
responsible for determining which Providers and/or other GI Provider
Affiliate(s) shall be assigned to perform services for each GI Customer as
per GI Customer requirements (in consultation with the relevant Providers
and Other GI Provider Affiliates) and for balancing to the extent feasible,
the allocation of services among the Providers and other GI Provider
Affiliates so that each GI Affiliate is providing Services in accordance with
its capacity and capabilities. The GI Account Representatives for each
Customer shall also (a) be the primary contact for the Providers in dealing
with the respective GI Customer under this Agreement, (b) have overall
responsibility for managing and coordinating the receipt of the Services for
such GI Customer, (c) interact regularly with the Provider Account
Representative (as hereinafter defined) and (d) have the authority to make
decisions with respect to actions to be taken by GI in the ordinary course of
day-to-day management of GI's receipt of the Services.
3.4    Customer Invoicing and Collection. GI shall be responsible for
processing all invoices rendered to GI Customers, in the form required by
each GI Customer, as set forth in the relevant Customer Agreement, and for
handling all disputes with GI customers. Notwithstanding the foregoing, it
shall be the responsibility of each Provider to furnish GI with all financial
data and other support as may be necessary in order for GI to render
invoices to GI Customers with respect to Services provided by the Provider.
4.1       Personal Data.     In     performance of this Agreement, each
Provider may have access to, or             otherwise Process, GI Customer
Personal Data on a GI Customer's behalf. GI Customer Personal Data
will be accessed and otherwise Processed by each Provider only to the
extent strictly necessary to perform this Agreement, or upon GI's written
instructions and in strict compliance thereof.
(a)     Notwithstanding anything in Article 11 (Confidentiality) to the
contrary, each Provider agrees to keep the GI Customer Personal
Data Confidential, and agrees to not disclose any GI Customer
Personal Data to third parties without having first received express
written approval from the GI Customer and GI and, if required by
applicable Law, the applicable Data Subject. All Provider personnel
with Process GI Customer Personal Data only on a need-to-know
basis in connection with the performance of this Agreement.
5.1           The Customer Agreement and Customer Statements of
Work are by reference incorporated into the terms of this Agreement
and Standard Operating Procedures.
(a) On or before the Service Commencement Date for
any Customer Statement of Work, each Provider shall deliver a draft
of the standard operating procedures for the services which will be
finalized and adopted by the Provider.
(b) Subject to the terms of this Agreement, the Parties
shall comply at all times with the standard operating procedures.
(c) Each Provider shall update the standard operating
procedures from time to time to reflect changes in the services being
delivered.
5.2   Disaster Recovery Services. Provider shall provide to GI the
disaster recovery assistance, cooperation and services, if any, that are
relevant. Each provider shall be responsible for business continuity
planning or disaster recovery to the extent set forth in a Customer
Statement of Work.
5.3   Reports. Each provider shall provide to GI, and directly to the
GI Customer, where so agreed, the reports set forth in the Customer
Statements of Work in accordance with the frequencies set forth
therein.
5.4   Records Retention.          Each provider shall retain applicable
books and records in accordance with the records retention standards
in accordance with Law, or as required by GI or the GI Customer,
Whichever is the longest.
7.1   General.     The service levels mentioned in each Customer
Statement of Work shall be used to measure Provider's performance
(the “Service Levels”). For project based Customer Statement of
Work all the Deliverables and the Milestones or any other such
measurement shall be used to measure the Provider's progress with
respect to completion of the applicable services.
7.2 and 7.3 xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx
7.4   Measurement and Monitoring Tools. Provider shall implement
its measurement and monitoring tools and procedures to measure and
monitor its performance against the Service Levels in any given
Customer Statement of Work.             Upon GI's reasonable    request,
Provider shall provide GI with information and access to such
measurement and monitoring tools and procedures for purposes of
(a) The charges for Services provided to GI by a Provider
during a particular calendar year with respect to each GI customer
(the “Provider Service Fee”) shall be invoiced to and paid for by GI
to the Provider at an amount equal to the excess of (i) over the sum of
(ii), (iii) and (iv) below:
(i) the amount invoiced to the GI Customer for such
Services (as denominated in US Dollars), in accordance with such
Customer Statements of Work and Customer Agreements including
amount invoiced for special projects/migration.
(ii)   (a) GI's fully-loaded costs in providing its Services
with respect to such GI Customer, calculated in U.S. Dollars, as
described in Article 3 hereof and (b) GI's pass through costs
including attributable to special projects/migration ((a) and (b)
together referred to as “GI Costs”)
(iii) Arms' length net margin to be retained by GI
pursuant to an economic analysis in accordance with internationally
accepted principles as agreed between the Parties from time to time.
(iv) Any adjustments made by GI for compensating the
Support Region ((ii), (iii) and (iv) together referred to as “GI Service
16.1 Termination for Cause. If a Provider fails to perform any of
its material obligations under this Agreement or a Customer
Statement of Work and does not cure such failure within the cure
period mentioned in such Customer Statement of Work or where no
such cure period is mentioned in a Customer Statement of Work,
within 30 days of receipt of a notice of default from GI, then GI may,
by giving notice to the Provider within 120 days (or such number of
days as mutually agreed) of the last day of such cure period,
terminate such Customer Statement of Work as of the date specified in
such notice of termination.
The recitals of the MSA provide that GI has sub-contracted the
petitioner for providing the services to its customers. It is clear therefrom
that the petitioner is engaged by GI for actual performance of BPO services
and information technology services to the customers of GI. Petitioner
would be held responsible for all risk related to performance of services
which would be akin to services provided on “its own account”. Clause 3.1
provides that GI would be responsible for obtaining new customers and
maintaining relationship with existing customers, to whom services are
provided by the petitioner. Clause 3.3 provides that GI would be responsible
for negotiation with all GI customers. Clause 3.4 provides that GI would be
responsible to raise invoices as well as handling all disputes of GI customers
and the petitioner would be obligated to provide all data in such regard.
Afore-said clauses would clarify that the petitioner who is actually
performing the services would share the details of the performance/status of
the provision of services, cost incurred etc. which would enable GI to bill or
address any dispute arising with the GI's customers. Clause 4.1 provides
that the petitioner can access or process the personal date of GI customer to
the extent necessary for performance of the services. Clause 4.2 provides
for data protection and whereby the petitioner would be responsible for
maintaining confidentiality of information pertaining to GI customers.
Clause 5.2 obligates the petitioner to provide disaster recovery assistance to
GI. Clause 5.3 states that petitioner would provide the report set-forth in the
Customer Statement of Work to GI and its customers. Clause 5.4 obligates
the petitioner to retain records and books in accordance with records
retention standards in accordance with law or as required by GI. Clause 7
provides that the service levels mentioned in the Customer Statement of
Work, would be used as criteria to measure the performance of the
petitioner. Clause 10 of the MSA lays down the manner in which the
petitioner would raise invoices on GI for the services rendered. Clause 16
provides that if the petitioner fails to perform any of the obligations under
the MSA or under the Customer Statement of Work, GI may then terminate
the contract.
The MSA bears out the arrangement between GI and the
petitioner and the same may be summarized as below:-
i) “GI has service agreement for providing BPO services with
respective GI customers at global level.         GI issues invoices and
receives remittence from the GI customers.
ii) GI under the MSA sub-contracted the execution of the BPO
services to the petitioner.
iii) Petitioner executes the delivery of BPO services to the
customers of GI under the MSA.
iv) Petitioner issues invoices to GI and receives payment from
GI in convertible foreign exchange as its service fee.”
The MSA dated 01.01.2013 (Annexure P-1) entered between
the petitioner and GI is clearly for the purpose of sub-contracting services to
the petitioner by GI. These are the very services which GI was contractually
supposed to provide to its own customers.
As per definition of “intermediary” under Section 2 (13) of the
IGST Act the following three conditions must be satisfied for a person to
qualify as an “intermediary”;-
First, the relationship between the parties must be that of a
principal-agency relationship.      Second, the person must be involved in
arrangement or facilitation of provisions of the service provided to the
principal by a 3rd party. Third, the person must not actually perform the
main service intended to be received by the service recipient itself. Scope of
an “intermediary” is to mediate between two parties i.e. the principal service
provider (the 3rd party) and the beneficiary (the agents principal) who
receives the main service and expressly excludes any person who provides
such main service “on his own account”.
A bare perusal of the recitals and relevant clauses of the MSA
reproduced hereinabove do not in any manner indicate that petitioner is
acting as an “intermediary” so as to fall within the scope and ambit of the
definition of “intermediary” under Section 2 (13) of the IGST Act. Such
clauses cannot also be interpreted to conclude that the petitioner has
facilitated the services. The said clauses are in relation to the modalities of
how the actual work would be carried out and do not in any manner establish
that the petitioner was required to arrange/facilitate a 3rd party to render the
main service which has actually been rendered by the petitioner.
It would not be out of place to refer to an order in original dated
25.01.2018 (Annexure P-2) passed by the Assistant Commissioner,
Division-East-1, GST, Gurugram, granting refund of Rs.26,34,83,928/- for
the period April-June 2016 and July-September 2016 after making a detailed
analysis of the MSA and holding that the petitioner cannot be treated as as
The relevant findings recorded by the department are as
The company is involved in provision of various types of
IT enabled professional services such as business consulting, back
office management, IT helpdesk services, call center services etc.
('BPO services') to overseas entity, Genpact International Inc. As per
the terms of Master Services Sub-contracting agreement ('MSA'), the
Company provides BPO services of nature mentioned above directly
to the customers of Genpact International Inc. ('GI') located outside
India. The arrangement requires the Company to complete the
assigned processes/scope of work and submit the deliverables directly
to the third parties, either on-line or on-call or through e-mail using
dedicated electronic networks and voice circuits.
Service provided by the Company cannot be classified as
services of an 'Intermediary'. The terms 'intermediary' is defined
under Rule 2 (f) of the Place of Provision of Service Rules, 2012
('POPS Rules') as: 'intermediary' means a broker, an agent or any
other person, by whatever name called, who arranges or facilitates a
provision of a service (hereinafter called the 'main service') between
two or more persons, but does not include a person who provides the
main service on his account”.
On a perusal of the above definition, it is evident that the
following two conditions must be fulfilled collectively for a service
provider to qualify as an 'intermediary':
Involved in arrangement or facilitation in provision of the
service provided by the principal;
No role in actual performance of service intended to be
received by the receiver.
In view of the above definition, it is clear that the scope of
intermediary is to mediate between two parties i.e. the principal
service provider and the beneficiary who receives the main service
and expressively excludes any person who provides such main service
on his own account from its scope.
In the present case, since the company provides BPO services
on behalf of GI, it undoubtedly provides the main services on its own
account. Accordingly, the services provided by the company under the
MSA will get excluded from the purview of 'intermediary services'. It
shall be noteworthy to highlight that the agreement with parent entity,
GI is on a principal to principal basis and there is no separate
agreement of the company with any of the customers of the parent
entity. Evidently, the scope of the services performed by the company
is completely different from facilitation of service between the GI and
customers of GI.
In the light of the above facts, it can be concluded that the
services mentioned above rendered by Genpact India is in the nature
of it is a main service and not of intermediary.”
It has gone uncontroverted that such order has since become
final as no appeal has been filed at the instance of the respondents.
In the impugned order the department has chosen to deviate
from the view taken in the order in original dated 25.01.2018 (Annexure P-
2) on the ostensible basis that there has been a change in law w.e.f.
01.07.2017 i.e.with the onset of the GST regime.
We find such view to be wholly mis-conceived.
In the pre-GST regime the term “intermediary services” was
defined under Rule 2 (f) of the Place of Provision of Service Rules 2012.
Under the 2012 Rules “intermediary services” were defined to mean a
broker/an agent or any other person, by whatever name called, who arranges
or facilitates a provision of a service (hereinafter called the 'main' service) or
a supply of goods, between two or more persons, but does not include a
person who provides the main service on his account.
A perusal of the definition of “intermediary” under the service
tax regime vis-a-vis the GST regime would show that the definition has
remained similar. Even as per circular dated 20.09.2021 issued by the
Government of India, Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue, Central
Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs (GST Policy Wing), the scope of
“intermediary” services has been dealt in para 2 thereof. In para 2.2 it stands
clarified that the concept of “intermediary” was borrowed in GST from the
Service Tax Regime. The circular after making a reference to the definition
of “intermediary” both under Rule 2 (f) of the Place of Provision of Service
Rules 2012 and under Section 2 (13) of the IGST Act clearly states that there
is broadly no change in the scope of “intermediary” services in the GST
regime vis-a-vis the service tax regime except addition of supply of
securities in the definition of “intermediary” in the GST law.
We also find that in the impugned order dated 15.02.2021
(Annexure P-18) there has been a clear misreading of the ruling in the case
of Infinera (supra) while observing that there has been a material change in
the definition of “intermediary” under the GST regime. To the contrary a
bare perusal of the ruling in the case of Infinera (Supra) which stands
reproduced by the Appellate Authority in the impugned order itself would
show that the definition of the term “intermediary” had been noticed both
under the pre-GST regime as also under the GST regime and it had been
“From the above definitions, in essence, there does not
seem to be any difference between the meaning of the term
”intermediary” under the GST regime and pre-GST regime. In the
pre-GST regime, an intermediary referred to a person who facilitates
the provision of a main service between two or more person but did
not include a person who provided the main service on his account.
Similarly, in the GST regime, an intermediary refers to a person who
facilitates the supply of goods or services or both between two or
more persons but excludes a person who supplies such goods or
services or both on his own account.
Accordingly, in the light of such position wherein there is no
change in the legal position i.e. with regard to the scope and ambit of
“intermediary” services under the service tax regime vis-a-vis the GST
regime and there being no change of facts as it is the MSA of 2013
(Annexure P-1) which continues to operate, the department cannot take a
different view for different periods. In M/s Radhasoami Satsang Soami
Bagh, Agra Versus Commissioner of Income Tax (1992) 1 SCC 659, even
though it had been observed that res judicata dopes not apply to income tax
proceedings, yet it was observed as follows:-
16.    We are aware of the fact that strictly speaking res
judicata does not apply to income tax proceedings.        Again, each
assessment year being a unit, what is decided in one year may not
apply in the following year but where a fundamental aspect
permeating through the different assessment years has been found as
a fact one way or the other and parties have allowed that position to
be sustained by not challenging the order, it would not be at all
appropriate to allow the position to be changed in a subsequent year.
17.    On these reasonings in the absence of any material
change justifying the Revenue to take a different view of the matter –
and if there was no change it was in support of the assessee – we do
not think the question should have been reopened and contrary to
what had been decided by the Commissioner of Income-tax in the
earlier proceedings, a different and contradictory stand should have
been taken. We are, therefore, of the view that these appeals should
be allowed and the question should be answered in the affirmative,
namely, that the Tribunal was justified in holding that the income
derived by the Radhasoami Satsang was entitled to exemption under
Sections 11 and 12 of the Income Tax Act of 1961”.
In Bharat Sanchar Nigam Ltd. Vs. Union of India (2006) 3
SCC 1, the Hon'ble Supreme Court had reiterated that where facts and law in
a subsequent assessment year are the same, no authority whether quasi-
judicial or judicial can generally be permitted to take a different view.
Paragraph 20 of the judgment would be relevant to the issue at
hand and is reproduced hereunder:-
“20. The decisions cited have uniformly held that res judicata does
not apply in matters pertaining to tax for different assessment years
because res judicata applies to debar Courts from entertaining issues
on the same cause of action whereas the cause of action for each
assessment year is distinct. The Courts will generally adopt an earlier
pronouncement of the law or a conclusion of fact unless there is a
new ground urged or a material change in the factual position. The
reason why Courts have held parties to the opinion expressed in a
decision in one assessment year to the same opinion in a subsequent
year is not because of any principle of res judicata but because of the
theory of precedent or the precedential value of the earlier
pronouncement. Where facts and law in a subsequent assessment year
are the same, no authority whether quasi-judicial or judicial can
generally be permitted to take a different view. This mandate is
subject only to the usual gateways of distinguishing the earlier
decision or where the earlier decision is per incuriam. However,
these are fetters only on a coordinate bench which, failing the
possibility of availing of either of these gateways, may yet differ with
the view expressed and refer the matter to a bench of superior
strength or in some cases to a bench of superior jurisdiction.
The principle of consistency as such ought to apply in the
present matter as well and we find merit in the stand taken on behalf of the
petitioner that the view taken in the order in original dated 25.01.2018
(Annexure P-2) holding the petitioner to be not an “intermediary” under the
MSA, should prevail even under the GST regime.
Furthermore, we find that the finding recorded by the
respondents-department to hold the petitioner to be in a principal agent
relationship with the GI to be without any basis and to be clearly erroneous.
The impugned order proceeds oblivious of Clause 21.6 of the MSA and
which is in the following terms:-
21.6 Relationship of Parties Nothing in this Agreement
shall constitute or be deemed to constitute a relationship of employer
and employee, agency, joint venture or partnership between the
parties hereto or constitute or be deemed to constitute one Party as
agent of the other for any purpose whatsoever, and except as
expressly provided herein, neither Party shall have the authority or
power to bind the other, or to contract in the name of or create a
liability against the other, in any way or for any purpose.”
During the course of arguments, Mr. Sharan Sethi, learned
Senior Standing Counsel for the respondents would concede that there is no
separate agreement entered between the petitioner and GI's customers. In no
manner as such can the petitioner be equated to be an agent or broker. It
would also be useful at this stage to advert to the stand taken by the
respondents-department in the written statement that had been filed in the
previous round of litigation i.e. CWP No.10302 of 2020 that had been filed
by the petitioner. In para 8 of the written statement that stands placed on
record and appended as Annexure P-11 it had been stated as follows:-
“It is further mentioned that the service is primarily in
the nature of various types of backend services which are in the
nature of call centre services, back office management, IT helpdesk
services etc. ('BPO services') to the overseas entity. The petitioner
provides these services to third parties on behalf of its client located
outside India. The arrangement requires the company to complete
the assigned processes/scope of work and submit the deliverables
directly to the third parties, either on-line or on-call or through e-
mail using dedicated electronic networks and voice circuits.
Still further in para 9 of the written statement it was clearly
averred to the following effect:-
“the test of agency must be satisfied between the
principal and the agent i.e. the “intermediary” which is not the case
The findings as regards the petitioner to be an agent is in
contradistinction to the clear stand taken by the department in the previous
round of litigation.
It is undisputed that the petitioner has an agreement only with
Pursuant to the sub-contracting arrangement as per MSA
(Annexure P-1), the petitioner provides the main service directly to the
overseas clients of GI but does not get any remuneration from such clients.
Pursuant to the arrangement, it is GI which gets paid by its customers to
whom the services are being provided directly by the petitioner. Nothing
has been brought on record to show that the petitioner has a direct contract
with the customers of GI. Still further there is nothing on record to show
that petitioner is liaisoning or acting as an “intermediary” between GI and its
customers.    All that is evident from the record is that the petitioner is
providing the services which have been sub contracted to it by GI. As a
Sub-contractor it is receiving fee/charges from the main contractor i.e. GI for
its services.       The main contractor i.e. GI in turn is receiving
commission/agents from its clients for the main services that are rendered by
the petitioner pursuant to the arrangement of sub-contracting. Even as per
the afore-noticed circular dated 20.09.2021 and in reference to para 3.5 it
stands clarified that sub-contracting for a service is not an “intermediary”
In the present case we find that in the written statement
reference is made to a Transfer Pricing Report (Annexure P-24) as also to
draw a distinction between two categories of supplies as per MSA i.e. main
supply and the ancillary supply. The passing of the impugned order is
sought to be justified that the main supply takes place between GI and its
customers whereas it is the ancillary supply which is provided by the
applicant to facilitate the provision of the main supply.
We find that the written statement seeks to justify the impugned
order on grounds which are not even part of the impugned order and which
is clearly impermissible in law. A reference in this regard may be made to
the judgment of the Apex Court in Mohinder Singh Gill and another Vs.
The Chief Election Commissioner, New Delhi and others (1978) 1 SCC
405, wherein it had been held that when a statutory functionary makes an
order based on certain grounds, its validity must be judged by the reasons so
mentioned and cannot be supplemented by fresh reasons in the shape of an
affidavit or otherwise. It was further observed that an order which was
otherwise bad in the beginning may, by the time it comes to Court on
account of a challenge, get validated by additional grounds later brought out.
For the reasons recorded above, we are of the considered view
that the impugned order dated 15.02.2021 (Annexure P-18) holding the
petitioner to be an “intermediary” under Section 2 (13) of the IGST Act,
cannot sustain.
The same as such is quashed and consequently the order in
original   dated    14.03.2019      (Annexure   P-3)   granting    refund      of
Rs.26,34,61,625/- in favour of the petitioner is restored.
It is further directed that the benefit of this order shall enure to
the petitioner for grant of subsequent refunds as well.
Writ petition is allowed in the aforesaid terms.