This is an appeal filed under Section 104 and Order
XLIII, Rule 1(j) of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
E.A.No.32 of 2020 in E.P.No.20 of 2016 in O.S.No.6 of 2015
before the Sub Court, Hosdurg, was an application filed by the
1st respondent under Order XXI, Rule 90 of the Code. That
E.A. was allowed as per order dated 22.01.2021. Challenging
that order, the decree holder-auction purchaser has preferred
this appeal.
2.   On 23.03.2021, this appeal was admitted to file
and notice was ordered to be issued to the respondents. While
the 1st respondent entered appearance through his learned
counsel, respondents 2 to 4 did not turn up.
3.   Heard   the   learned counsel   appearing   for the
appellant and also the learned counsel appearing for the 1 st
4.   The appellant obtained a decree in O.S.No.6 of
2015 for realisation of Rs.10,49,935/- along with interest and
F.A.O.No.25 of 2021
costs from respondents 2 to 4. The appellant filed E.P.No.20 of
2016 where she brought initially 29 cents of property
belonging to respondents 2 to 4 on sale. Respondents 2 to 4
challenged the order of the Execution Court to sell the whole
of the property before this court by filing O.P.(C) No.2052 of
2017 contending that the sale of a part of the same would be
sufficient to satisfy the decree. As per the direction of this
Court, the Execution Court enquired further into the matter
and ordered that the sale of 18 cents of land, namely, 11.759
cents and another plot of 7 cents, both comprised in
Sy.No.270/2 of Perole Village, was enough to satisfy the
decree, and the said property was sold in auction on
5.    The 1st respondent filed P.L.P.No.2478 of 2017
before the District Legal Services Authority, Kasaragod,
claiming that money was due to him from respondents 2 and
4. That matter was settled and an award allowing the 1 st
respondent to realise an amount of Rs.11 lakhs from the other
respondents was passed. The same 29 cents of land belonging
F.A.O.No.25 of 2021
to respondents 2 to 4 was attached in E.P.No.45 of 2017 filed
by the 1st respondent for the realisation of the said amount.
6.    The 1st respondent knowing that E.P.No.20 of 2016
was also pending against respondents 2 to 4 and the same
property was being proceeded against, filed E.A.No.55 of
2017 requesting the court to initiate steps for the rateable
distribution as provided under Section 73 of the Code, once
sale of the property is taken place. E.A.No.55 of 2017 was
filed in E.P.No.20 of 2016 and after hearing the parties
concerned, that application was allowed by the Execution
Court as per order dated 03.10.2018. It was thereafter the
sale of 18 cents of property has taken place on 05.02.2020.
Soon the 1st respondent came with E.A.No.32 of 2020 seeking
to set aside the sale, invoking the provisions of Order XXI,
Rule 90 of the Code on the ground that the said sale was
vitiated by fraud and irregularity. It was contended that when
the property was scheduled to be sold after effecting
necessary     proclamation  on    05.02.2020,    the   appellant
approached the Execution Court on 01.02.2020 by filing
F.A.O.No.25 of 2021
E.A.No.22 of 2020 seeking permission to participate in the
auction and also to allow set-off as provided in Order XXI,
Rule 72 of the Code. That application was allowed by the
Execution Court without giving notice to the 1st respondent. In
the auction sale the property was purchased by the appellant
for an amount of Rs.18,00,100/- and the entire decree debt
due to him, i.e., Rs.15,14,657/- was allowed to be set off
against the auction price. It was alleged that the decree-
holder did not pay the balance sale consideration also, but
that contention was turned out to be incorrect. By contending
that despite the order for rateable distribution, permission to
bid and set off was granted in favour of the appellant in total
negation of the provisions of Order XXI, Rule 72 of the Code,
and that amounted to fraud and irregularity, resulting in
substantial injury to the 1st respondent, he sought to set
aside the sale.
7.    The     appellant resisted  the   said   application
contending that there was absolutely no irregularity or
elements of fraud in the process of publication of the
F.A.O.No.25 of 2021
proclamation or the conduct of the sale, giving rise to a cause
of action for an application under Order XXI, Rule 90 of the
Code. Only because there was no other bidder, he sought
permission of the court to bid the property. It was his right to
get the amount due under the decree to set off. Following the
order of this Court in O.P.(C) No.2052 of 2017, 11 cents of
property along with a residential building of respondents 2 to
4, was excluded from the proclamation schedule and hence
the 1st respondent can have no grievance. Order for rateable
distribution was passed by the Execution Court at a time when
the sale of 29 cents of land was proposed to be sold and when
the sale was confined to 18 cents only, the order of rateable
distribution lost its significance. The 1 st respondent can
proceed against the said 11 cents of property and can also
appropriate the balance sale price of Rs.2,85,433/-, which
was deposited by the appellant, as early on 14.02.2020.
Thereby the appellant contended that the alleged irregularity
and fraud are quite unreal and there is absolutely no reason
to set aside the sale dated 05.02.2020.
F.A.O.No.25 of 2021
8.    The Execution Court took the stand that the order of
rateable distribution was in vogue despite confining the auction to
18 cents of land alone. Further, it was held that the appellant
obtained permission to participate in the auction and to set off
the decree debt due to him against the sale price without giving
notice to the 1st respondent and that amounted to not only
irregularity but also a fraudulent act. On finding further that by
happening such a sale, the 1st respondent was denied to have the
benefit of the order of rateable distribution, whereby he suffered
a substantial injury, the sale was set aside.
9.    The learned counsel appearing for the appellant
would contend that once the sale was confined to 18 cents of
land and the remaining 11 cents was excluded, the order of
rateable distribution lost its significance, and therefore, the
same cannot be a reason for attributing defect to the process
of sale. The sale was conducted after necessary proclamation
and such publication itself is enough to have notice to
everyone, including the 1st respondent, and therefore, his
grievance of lack of notice cannot be reckoned with. After set
F.A.O.No.25 of 2021
off the decree debt, the balance sale consideration was
deposited by the appellant on 14.02.2020 itself. But the
Execution Court observed that there was no such deposit,
which also was one of the reasons to set aside the sale.
10.   The learned counsel for the appellant placing
reliance on Saheb Khan v. Mohd. Yousufuddin and others
[(2006) 4 SCC 476] and Chilamkurti Bala Subrahmanyam
v. Samanthapudi Vijaya Lakshmi and another [(2017) 6
SCC 770] would contend that the 1st respondent does not
have any reason to allege any injury on account of the sale of
18 cents of land, and therefore, sub-rule (2) of Rule 90 of
Order XXI of the Code interdicts and the sale cannot be set
11.   On the application of the 1st respondent, E.A.No.55
of 2017, the Execution Court allowed rateable distribution as
provided under Section 73 of the Code among the appellant
and the 1st respondent. Ever thereafter E.P.No.20 of 2016 filed
by the appellant and E.P.No.45 of 2017 filed by the 1 st
respondent were being proceeded with simultaneously. When
F.A.O.No.25 of 2021
the property of the common judgment debtors was brought
on sale, their grievance of selling the entire extent of 29 cents
was not ventilated by the Execution Court and that resulted in
their filing of O.P.(C) No.2052 of 2017. As per the direction of
this Court in the said Original Petition, the Execution Court
confined the sale proceedings to 18 cents of land; whereby,
11 cents and the building thereon were excluded. In the wake
of that order, the appellant would contend, the order for
rateable distribution paled into insignificance.
12.    Section 73 of the Code reads,-
“73.   Proceeds   of  execution   sale   to  be  rateably
distributed among decree-holders.- (1) Where assets
are held by a Court and more persons than one have,
before the receipt of such assets, made application to
the Court for the execution of decrees for the payment
of money passed against the same judgment-debtor
and have not obtained satisfaction thereof, the assets,
after deducting the costs of realization, shall be
rateably distributed among all such persons :
Provided as follows:-
(a) where any property is sold subject to a mortgage or
charge, the mortgage or incumbrancer shall not be
entitled to share in any surplus arising from such sale;
F.A.O.No.25 of 2021
(b) where any property liable to be sold in execution of
a decree is subject to a mortgage or charge, the Court
may,      with   the   consent  of   the   mortgagee   or
encumbrancer, order that the property be sold free
from the mortgage or charge, giving to the mortgagee
or encumbrancer the same interest in the proceeds of
the sale as he had in the property sold;
(c) where any immovable property is sold in execution
of a decree ordering its sale for the discharge of an
encumbrance thereon, the proceeds of sale shall be
firstly, in defraying the expenses of the sale;
secondly, in discharging the amount due under the
thirdly, in discharging the interest and principal monies
due on subsequent encumbrances (if any); and
fourthly, rateably among the holders of decrees for the
payment of money against the judgment-debtor, who
have, prior to the sale of the property, applied to the
Court which passed the decree ordering such sale for
execution of such decrees, and have no obtained
satisfaction thereof.
(2) Where all or any of the assets liable to be rateably
distributed under this section are paid to a person not
entitled to receive the same, any person so entitled
may sue such person to compel him to refund the
assets.
(3) Nothing in this section affects any right of the
Government."                             (emphasis supplied)
“72. Decree holder not to bid for or buy property
without permission.- (1) No holder of a decree in
execution of which property is sold shall, without the
express permission of the Court, bid for or purchase
the property.
(2) Where decree-holder purchases, amount of decree
may be taken as payment- Where a decree holder
purchases with such permission, the purchase-money
and the amount due on the decree may, subject to the
provisions of Section 73, be set off against one another,
and the Court executing the decree shall enter up
satisfaction  of  the  decree   in   whole   or    in   part
accordingly.”                            (emphasis supplied)
13.   The contention of the appellant is two-fold in
regard to the substantial question touching the interplay
between Section 73 and Order XXI, Rule 72 of the Code.
Firstly, in the light of the order of the Execution Court to
confine the sale to 18 cents of land, the right of the 1 st
respondent to claim rateable distribution was lost. Secondly, it
was his right to set off the decree debt due to him; since the
F.A.O.No.25 of 2021
sale was confined to a part of the property alone.
14.   Going by the provisions of Section 63 of the Code,
if the same property is attached in execution of more than
one decree for realisation of money, one of the such courts, if
there is a difference in grade, the court of the highest grade,
has to sell the property. It is in continuation of that the
provisions in Section 73 of the Code have to be understood.
Section 73 enables different decree holders, who obtained
decrees against the same judgment debtor to have a rateable
distribution of the assets belonging to the judgment debtor.
Once, rateable distribution is ordered, it is the obligation of
the Execution Court, which proceeds to sell the property to
see that the sale proceeds after defraying the items of
expenditure enumerated in provisos (a) to (c) to sub-section
(1) of Section 73 of the Code, to rateably distribute the
reminder among the sharing decree-holders. In order to have
the right of rateable distribution under Section 73 of the Code,
the conditions precedent are that the decree holders should
have obtained decrees against the common judgment debtor
F.A.O.No.25 of 2021
and initiated execution proceedings before receipt of the
assets. In this case, those conditions were satisfied and the 1 st
respondent obtained an order of rateable distribution with
notice to the appellant.
15.   It   was  after passing    the order    for rateable
distribution on 03.10.2018, that the question as to what part
of the attached property was to be sold has arisen. When that
matter was taken up before this Court, a direction was given
to the Execution Court to consider that question before
proceeding further with the process of sale for the obvious
reason that it is an inexorable obligation of the Court under
Order XXI Rule 64 of the Code to ensure that such part of the
property as is sufficient to satisfy the decree/s alone is sold.
An enquiry was therefore conducted, including calling for a
report of the Commissioner. The Execution Court found that
the sale of 18 cents of property would be enough. It was in
that situation, that the sale took place on 05.02.2020. There
is no case for the appellant that ever during that process the
order for rateable distribution was meddled with. An order
F.A.O.No.25 of 2021
lawfully passed by a Court cannot be obliterated or made
nugatory on account of subsequent developments, so long as
it is not set aside, recalled or annulled in an appropriate
proceeding.     We   are  therefore  not able   to  accept   the
contention of the appellant that the order for rateable
distribution would not bind the parties after confining the sale
to 18 cents of property.
16.   The sale was for Rs.18,00,100/-. Against the said
sale price, the appellant, who purchased the property on the
basis of the permission granted by the Execution Court as per
the order in E.A.No.22 of 2020, got whole of the amount due
to her as per the decree set off and deposited the balance
amount     of   Rs.2,85,433/- in   court on   14.02.2020.   The
question immediately arises is whether the appellant could
have claimed a set off when there was an order for rateable
distribution of the sale proceeds.
17.   Sub-rule (2) of Rule 72 of Order XXI of the Code
allows the decree holder, who purchases the property with the
permission of the court, to set off the money due to him
F.A.O.No.25 of 2021
under the decree against the sale price. But the said right is
subject to the provisions of Section 73 of the Code. A conjoint
reading of Section 73 and Order XXI Rule 72 of the Code
would show that whenever a set off is allowed under the said
Rule, the order of rateable distribution, if there is one, shall
have to be reckoned with and only after ascertaining the
proportionate amount entitled by the decree holder-purchaser,
his entitlement to set off can be decided. The provisions do
not convey a meaning that in a case where rateable
distribution is ordered by the Court, there can be unbridled
right to the decree holder-purchaser to set off the entire
decree debt due to him. What he is entitled is only to set off
the proportionate amount he is entitled on the rateable
18.   As per Order XXI, Rule 84 of the Code, an auction
purchaser of an immovable property is bound to deposit 25%
of the auction price immediately. The balance sale price has
to be deposited before the court closes on the fifteenth day
from the date of sale in terms of the provisions of Order
F.A.O.No.25 of 2021
XXI, Rule 85 of the Code. When one of the sharing decree
holders is the purchaser and there is order for set off, he is
obliged to deposit immediately in the court 25% of the sale
consideration after deducting the proportionate amount found
to be due to him. After a provisional approximation, if the
proportionate sale proceeds, which he is entitled exceeds 25%
of the sale only, he can set off that amount and he need not
deposit any amount at that stage. While making deposit of
the balance sale price, he can deduct the balance amount
eligible for set off. If the amount eligible for set off is less
than 25%, set off to the extent he is entitled can alone be
allowed and he has to deposit the remainder of the 25%,
immediately after the sale and the balance within the
stipulated time. Violation thereof, undoubtedly, will vitiate
the sale and the court is bound to take steps for resale as
provided in Order XXI, Rule 87 of the Code.
19.   If the sale price is sufficient to cover all the debts,
there would not be any question of dividing the sale price
proportionately. But when the sale price fetched is less, the
F.A.O.No.25 of 2021
Execution Court is obliged to find out the proportionate
amount entitled by each of the decree holders and the decree
holder-purchaser     can  set   off  only   the  amount  he   is
proportionately entitled to. Here, the appellant was allowed to
set off the entire decree debt. Taking into account the total
amount of sale price of Rs.18,00,100/-, the appellant was not
entitled   to   get set  off  of   the  entire  decree debt  of
Rs.15,14,657/-. The order on 02.02.2020 in E.A.No.22 of
2020 allowed the appellant to set off the entire amount due to
her under the decree in her favour. Since the leave granted to
the appellant was to set off the entire decree debt, the
process of conduct of the sale has become irregular being
violative of the provisions of subrule (2) of Rule 72 of Order
XXI of the Code. That is a reason sufficient to invoke Rule 90
of Order XXI of the Code.
20.   Pertaining to the said order another allegation
raised is that that order was passed by the Execution Court
without giving notice to the 1 st respondent. Once rateable
distribution among two or more decree holders is ordered, it
F.A.O.No.25 of 2021
is always desirable to consolidate all the related Execution
Petitions and are proceeded jointly. In the sale proclamation
being drawn up in such a case, all the debts realisable by the
sharing decree-holders shall be stated. Here, there was an
order   dated    03.10.2018   for  rateable   distribution. That
necessitated giving notice to the 1 st respondent before
granting such an order for set off. No doubt, the Execution
Court is not prohibited from giving permission to one of the
decree holders to participate in the auction and to set off. But
while doing so, notice shall be given to all the decree holders,
and the order shall be in compliance with the provisions of
Order XXI Rule 72(2) of the Code. Such a notice was not
given to the 1st respondent, in this case. That amounted to an
act of fruad, whereof the process of the conduct of the sale
became vitiated.
21.   The learned Counsel appearing for the appellant in
the above context submitted that since the excess sale price
of Rs.2,85,433/- is in deposit and 11 cents of land along with
a residential building belonging to respondents 2 to 4 is still
F.A.O.No.25 of 2021
available to be proceeded against, the interest of the 1st
respondent is not affected. Therefore there can have no
contention    by   the   1st respondent    that  he   sustained a
substantial injury as a consequence of such a sale, without
which one cannot claim to set aside a sale. That contention is
buttressed by the learned counsel by referring to Saheb
Khan (supra). In the said decision a three-judge Bench of the
Apex Court considered the impact of sub-rule (2) of Rule 90 of
Order XXI of the Code. The Apex Court held as follows:
“13. Therefore before the sale can be set aside
merely establishing a material irregularity or fraud
will not do. The applicant must go further and
establish to the satisfaction of the Court that the
material   irregularity  or   fraud has   resulted   in
substantial injury to the applicant. Conversely, even
if the applicant has suffered substantial injury by
reason of the sale, this would not be sufficient to set
the sale aside unless substantial injury has been
occasioned by a material irregularity or fraud in
publishing or conducting the sale. (See: Dhirendra
Nath Gorai and Suibal Chandra Shaw and others v.
Sudhir Chandra Ghosh and others [(1964) 6 SCC
101]; Jaswantlal Natvarlal Thakkar v. Sushilaben
F.A.O.No.25 of 2021
Manilal Dangarwala & others [(1991) Supp. 2 SCC
691]; Kadiyala Rama Rao v. Gutala Kahna Rao
(dead) by & others [(2000) 3 SCC 87]).
22.   The     Apex   Court   reiterated   that    principle  in
Chilamkurti       Bala   Subrahmanyam(supra)          also.   In  the
instant case, by allowing to set off the entire decree debt due
to the appellant against the sale price, the right of the 1 st
respondent to get the proportionate amount from the auction
price was lost. That undoubtedly had resulted substantial
injury to the 1st respondent. In short, the material irregularity
occasioned in the sale dated 5.2.2020 has resulted in substantial
injury to the 1st respondent. Under Order XXI, Rule 90 of the Code
the decree-holder, or the purchaser, or any other person entitled to
share in a rateable distribution of assets, or whose interest are
affected by the sale is entitled to apply for setting aside the sale.
The 1st respondent, therefore, is a person entitled to apply for
setting aside the sale. Hence, going by the principles laid down
in the aforesaid decisions also the sale is liable to be set
23.   The learned Counsel appearing for the appellant
F.A.O.No.25 of 2021
lastly contended that having obtained a decree in 2015, the
appellant shall not be denied to enjoy the fruits of it for the
reason attributable to the irregularity in the process of the
court. In his view the lapse, even if there is, it is on the part
of the court and that cannot be made a reason to set aside
the sale thereby putting the appellant at peril. The maxim
'actus curiae neminem gravabit' means that the act of the
Court shall prejudice no one is a well-accepted principle. In
Shakuntala Bai v. Narayan Das, 2004 (5) SCC 772 the
question considered was whether the legal representatives are
entitled to defend further proceedings, like an appeal, after
the death of the plaintiff to the estate of whom the benefit
under the decree has accrued and, there arises a challenge to
that benefit. The Apex Court held in that context,
“In normal circumstances after passing of the
decree by the Trial Court, the original landlord
would have got possession of the premises. But if
he does not and the tenant continues to remain in
occupation of the premises it can only be on
account of the stay order passed by the appellate
court. In such a situation, the well known maxim
F.A.O.No.25 of 2021
'actus curiae neminem gravabit' that 'an act of the
court shall prejudice no man' shall come into
operation. Therefore, the heirs of the landlord will
be fully entitled to defend the appeal preferred by
the tenant and claim possession of the premises
on the cause of action which had been originally
pleaded and on the basis whereof the lower Court
had decided the matter and had passed the decree
for eviction.”
24.   In view of that principle, even on taking that there
was some flaw on the part of the Court, that shall not
prejudice the right of the 1st respondent.
25.   In   the  circumstances,   we  find  no  reason   to
interfere with the order of the Execution Court. The appeal
deserves only to be dismissed and the same is dismissed. The
Execution Court will proceed with the Execution Petitions in
accordance with law.