The petitioner who is working as a Senior
Executive Engineer at the fourth respondent-Semi
Conductor Technology and Applied Research Centre,
(for short ‘STARC’), is before this Court aggrieved of
the communication dated 07.08.2021 at Annexure
‘CC’, communication dated 27.11.2021 at Annexure
‘GG’ and is seeking directions to the fourth respondent
to consider her representations dated 06.07.2021 and
12.07.2021 for sanction of Child Care Leave with
retrospective effect and to regularize the petitioner’s
salary and to     release   the  salary withheld from
24.05.2021. A prayer is also made seeking directions
to the respondents to reimburse the medical bills
furnished by the petitioner.
2. The petitioner delivered a baby girl on
19.08.2020.   She has been on maternity leave from
19.08.2020 to 14.02.2021.      The petitioner thereafter
availed    personal    leave   from    15.02.2021    to
26.04.2021.     However, it is the contention of the
petitioner that during the second wave of COVID-19
and the lockdown announced by the Government of
Karnataka, the petitioner was given the benefit along
with other employees, to work from home during the
lockdown period.     The respondent-Organisation also
does not deny the fact that the petitioner’s attendance
was regularized upto 23.05.2021. However, when the
petitioner did not join duty after the sanctioned leave
was exhausted, the impugned communication dated
07.08.2021 was issued to the petitioner stating that
she was staying away from duty without sanction of
leave and the overstay without sanction of leave
would be treated as unauthorized absence.           The
petitioner was informed that she would not be entitled
for leave    salary for   the unauthorized    period of
absence.     The petitioner was also informed that
disciplinary action could be initiated against her for
willful absence from duty after expiry of leave period
sanctioned by the Management.
3.  The   petitioner   responded   to   the said
communication while pointing out to the benefits that
were required to be provided to a woman under
maternity, in terms of the Maternity Benefit Act, 1961,
and the two Official Memoranda dated 29.09.2008 and
06.05.2021 issued by the Ministry of Personnel, Public
Grievances & Pensions (Department of Personnel and
Training), Government of India,      which provides for
grant of child care leave to women employees having
minor children below the age of 18 years.           The
petitioner   had   also      approached    the   Central
Administrative Tribunal at Bengaluru seeking similar
relief.   The fourth respondent thereafter sent one
more communication dated 27.11.2021 noticing the
fact that the application filed by the petitioner was
dismissed as withdrawn, by order dated 16.11.2021.
The petitioner was once again called upon to join
duties immediately and regularize the absence from
24.05.2021. Nevertheless, the petitioner has filed the
instant writ petition with the prayers as noticed
4. Learned Counsel for the petitioner submits
that the provisions of the Maternity Benefit Act, 1961
(hereinafter referred to as the ‘Act 1961’ for short) is
applicable to the petitioner who is an employee of the
fourth respondent-Organisation which is a fully funded
organization controlled by the Government of India.
It is also contended that the fourth respondent does
not dispute the fact that the leave benefits which are
available to the employees of the Defence Research
Development Organisation (DRDO for short) is also
made applicable to the employees of the fourth
respondent-Organisation. The learned Counsel would
draw the attention of this Court to Section 5(5) of the
Act 1961, to contend that that the petitioner should be
allowed to carry on her work from home after availing
the maternity benefit for the period as provided under
the Act.    The learned Counsel would further contend
that notifications have been issued by the Central
Government,       directing   all   the    Public   Sector
Undertakings,      which    include    the    respondent-
Organisation, to ensure that as far as possible,
provisions should be made to lactating mothers to
work from home, in view of the prevalence of COVID-
19 pandemic.
5. It is submitted that in terms of the directions
issued by the Government of India, it is the duty of
the respondent-Organisation to provide for Child Care
Leave and to permit the petitioner to work from home,
until it is declared by the Central Government/State
Government that there is no need for its employees to
work from home. The learned Counsel has sought to
place    reliance   on    a  decision   of   the   Central
Administrative Tribunal, Principal Bench at New Delhi,
in the case of Saphla Rani Vs. Chairman-cum-
6.  Per    contra,   learned  Counsel   for   the
respondents would submit that the benefit of the Act
1961, as applicable to the respondent-Organisation
has been granted to the petitioner.      However, it is
submitted that the third respondent is a Society
registered under the Societies Registration Act and it
is an autonomous body. The third respondent-Society
has its own Rules and Regulations and HR policy in the
matter of grant of maternity leave and other service
benefits. It is also admitted by the respondents in the
statement of objections that in the matter of leave
and leave concessions, it has adopted the policy of the
DRDO and is made applicable to its employees.
7. However, in respect of Child Care Leave, in a
meeting of the 14th STARC Employees Meet held on
31.03.2018, the fourth respondent has considered the
request made by its employees, especially in respect
of female employees who sought additional benefits in
the form of various policies like child care leave,
flexible timings etc; considering the fact that work
from home may not be possible at few instances,
parenting issues inherited due to lack of such policies
should be taken seriously.        It was decided that
providing crèche and Day Care facilities as per
Maternity Benefit Act, 2017, was an option. However,
it was specifically decided that creation of crèche and
Day    Care  facility  was  not  advisable   within the
premises due to sensitive and risk involved processes,
usage of chemicals and toxic gases. Nevertheless, it
was also decided that if some of the employees are
interested, then the matter can be taken up with The
Centre For Artificial Intelligence And Robotics for
availing Crèche facilities.
8. During the course of the argument, when this
Court probed the third respondent as to whether
crèche facilities were made available, information is
given by the Deputy Manager-P & A on behalf of
respondent-Organisation that consequent           to the
resolution passed on 31.03.2018, no requests were
made by the employees seeking establishment of
crèche facility within the premises. Nevertheless it is
stated that arrangement can be made at the adjacent
ITI Complex which already has facilities such as
crèche, Quarters, Hospital, Ambulance etc.            The
respondent-Organisation is already availing the other
facilities such as Quarters, Hospital, Ambulance etc.
from the ITI.      Therefore, it is stated in the said
communication that facility would be made for the
petitioner’s child to make use of the crèche facility
which is available in the ITI premises.     It is further
stated    that  if  the   women     employees    of   the
respondent-Organisation      are    still seeking     the
establishment of a crèche in its premises, then
appropriate financial sanction will have to be obtained
from the competent authority for construction of the
facility and as and when the finances are provided for,
the facility will be provided.
9. Learned Counsel for the respondents has
submitted that any rate, the respondent-Organisation
cannot be equated to the Government of India and the
facilities  available    to  the  Central   Government
employees, be it in the nature of providing maternity
leave, Child Care Leave and other facilities cannot be
automatically adopted to the respondent-Organisation.
Learned Counsel would submit that material has been
placed along with the statement of objections at
Annexure ‘R7’ issued by the Department of Personnel
& Training (DOPT), Government of India, answering
the query as to whether women employees of Public
Sector undertakings/bodies etc., are entitled to Child
Care Leave, that the orders issued by the DOPT are
not automatically applicable to the employees of
Bodies, Banks etc.     It has been made clear by the
DOPT that it is for the PSUs/Autonomous Bodies to
decide the applicability of the rules/instructions issued
for   the  Central  Government     employees      to their
employees in consultation with their Administrative
Ministries.    Consequent     to  the   instructions  and
communications made by the DOPT, a resolution has
been passed by the Board of Governors of the third
respondent-Society       on     22.09.2021      regarding
implementation of Child Care Leave in the units of the
third respondent.     It was resolved that the third
respondent will not implement Child Care Leave for its
employees at its Units and foundries which are
involved in production and implementation, since such
facilities would affect the production schedules and
delivery timelines.
10. Heard the learned Counsel for the petitioner,
learned Counsel for the respondents and perused the
petition papers.
11. The contentions of the petitioner in respect
of grant of child Care Leave, proceeds on the footing
that all the employees of STARC, just like the
employees of the Government of India are eligible for
the said facility. Though reference is made to Section
5(5) of the Act, 1961, it is evident from the said
provision that maternity benefits such as work from
home after availing the maternity benefit could be
given only in case where the nature of work assigned
to the women is such that it is possible for her to work
from home. In this regard, a specific decision is taken
by the fourth respondent-Organisation in its meeting
held along with its employees on 31.03.2018, at
Annexure ‘R9’, paragraph-26 that the premises of the
fourth   respondent-Organisation     is  sensitive   and
involved with risk due to usage of chemicals and toxic
gases.     The employees working with the fourth
respondent-Organsiation    are   involved   in  research
work which is both sensitive as well as complicated.
Sensitive, in the nature of the work done, in the sense
that the research is for the benefit of the Government
of India which uses the facility in the defence fields
and the research work will not be divulged to the
public. This istelf would prove that the nature of work
assigned to the petitioner cannot be carried on from
home.     The respondents are also on record, in their
statement of objections, that even during the period
of lockdown, the top officials from the cadre of Deputy
managers have been functioning from the premises
12. Insofar as the Child Care Leave, as rightly
pointed    out   by   the  learned    Counsel   for the
respondents, consequent to the Advisory given by the
DOPT regarding applicability of the Child Care Leave
facility   available   to   the   employees     of  the
bodies    that   decisions   may   be   taken    by the
PSUs/autonomous bodies in consultation with their
Administrative Ministries, the Board of     Governors of
the third respondent-Society has specifically resolved
on 22.09.2021 that they would not implement the
Child Care Leave facility in the Organisation as it
would affect the production schedules and delivery
13. It is therefore clear that the petitioner has
not been able to point out to any specific provision of
law    or  rules   that   would   mandate    the   fourth
respondent Organisation to grant child care leave
facility as is available to the Central Government
employees, to the employees of STARC.
14. Nevertheless, during the course of the
proceedings, this Court has noticed that by the
impugned      communications    issued  by   the   fourth
respondent-Organisation     to   the petitioner,  it has
warned the petitioner about unauthorized absence and
the consequence of willful disobedience. The petitioner
has also been informed that she will be liable for
recovery and remittance, in accordance with law.
However, having regard to the peculiar facts and
circumstances of this case where the petitioner has
been on leave commencing from 19.08.2020 having
exhausted the leave sanctioned in her account, this
Court cannot lose sight of the fact that during the
period of delivery and post delivery, there were two
serious waves of COVID-19 pandemic, firstly, which
commenced during the month of March 2020 and for
prolonged period lockdown was announced by the
State Government.    The second wave of COVID-19
pandemic again commenced from April 2021.           This
Court would take judicial notice of the fact that there
was a third wave in the month commenced from
November-December      2021.       Therefore,   if   the
petitioner was unable to join duties, the fourth
respondent-Organsiation     is   required    to    have
sympathetic view towards the petitioner.    During the
course of the argument, the learned Counsel for the
petitioner has pleaded that the petitioner is ready and
willing to join the duty, provided child care facility is
provided to the new born.
15. The learned Counsel for the third respondent
has made a statement along with a communication
issued by the Deputy Manager on behalf of the
respondent that crèche facility will be made available
for the petitioner’s child in the adjacent ITI premises.
16. Although it was pointed out by the learned
Counsel for the fourth respondent that another woman
of the organization who also took the benefit of
Maternity leave almost similar to the petitioner,
however, has joined duty from 02.04.2021, but this
Court is of the considered opinion that in such cases,
parity cannot be drawn. The difficulties of the mother
may    be   different  in    each  case   and    therefore,
everything     would    depend     on   the    facts   and
circumstances of each case.
17. For the foregoing reasons, this Court is of
the considered opinion that although the prayer made
by the petitioner regarding grant of child care leave
cannot be granted, however, liberty is reserved to the
petitioner to make fresh representations regarding the
unauthorized absence and seek regularization of the
same. As and when such representations are given by
the   petitioner,  after   she   joins duty,  the fourth
respondent-Organisation         shall   consider    such
representations sympathetically and pass orders in the
light of the observations made hereinabove.
This writ petition is accordingly disposed of. No
order as to costs.