The State of West Bengal and Ors.
... For the Private Respondent.
The writ petitioner is aggrieved by inaction on the
part of the Dumdum Police Station in respect of a complaint
of   harassment      by  the    private   respondents     son   and
daughter-in-law.
It is submitted that the son does not reside with the
writ   petitioner.   There   is   serious   matrimonial     discord
between     the  writ   petitioner’s    son   being    the   private
respondent No.7 and the daughter-in-law being the private
respondent No.8. It is stated that the daughter-in-law
forcefully occupied some portions of the writ petitioner’s
premises.
Admittedly, there are proceedings filed by the
daughter-in-law inter alia for residence under the provisions
of the Domestic Violence Act, 2005 which are since pending.
On the complaint filed by the daughter-in-law
against the writ petitioner and her husband charge-sheet
No.988 of 2020 dated 31st December 2020 under Section
498 and 506 of the Indian Penal Code has been filed. There
are other complaints filed by the daughter-in-law against
the writ petitioner is under investigation.
In so far as the husband’s complaint against the
private respondent, charge-sheet No.535 of 2021 under
Section 341, 323, 506 of the Indian Penal Code dated 31st
May 2021 are pending.
The writ petitioner has also filed proceedings before
the   Sub    Divisional    Officer,   Barrackpore    under   the
provisions of the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and
Senior Citizens Act, 2007 which has not been addressed till
date. In that view of the matter, it is directed that the Sub
Divisional Officer, Barrackpore shall enter into the said
complaint and pass appropriate orders under the said Act of
Considering     the    above,    the  Officer-in-Charge,
Dumdum Police Station shall ensure that there is absolutely
no breach of peace in the area and maintain strict vigil in
the said premises and address any threat of peace
With the aforesaid observations, the writ petition is
disposed of.
There shall be no order as to costs.
All parties shall act on the server copy of this order
duly downloaded from the official website of this Court.