Rule.      Rule made returnable forthwith and heard the learned
counsel for the parties.
2.             The petitioner claims to belong to ‘Madiga’ Scheduled Caste. The
petitioner has taken admission in the Bachelor of Technology (B.Tech.) course
being conducted at the respondent No.2-University. With a view to pursue
higher education, the petitioner sought verification of her caste claim based
on the caste certificate dated 05.01.2014. The Scrutiny Committee by its
order dated 29.07.2019 has held that the said caste certificate issued in
favour of the petitioner was in contravention to Rules 5 (1), (2) and 14 of the
Tribes, Other Backward Classes and Special Backward Category (Regulation
of Issuance of Verification of) Caste Certificate Rules, 2012 (for short, the
Rules of 2012).       The Scrutiny Committee therefore declared the caste
certificate as invalid and proceeded to cancel the same. The benefits derived
pursuant to the said caste certificate were directed to be withdrawn. Being
aggrieved, the petitioner has challenged the aforesaid order.
3.          Shri S.R.Narnavare, learned counsel for the petitioner submitted
that the Scrutiny Committee was not justified in cancelling the petitioner’s
caste certificate on the ground that the same was issued in contravention to
Rule 5(1) and (2) as well as Rule 14 of the Rules of 2012. The basis for arriv-
ing at such conclusion was only in view of the fact that in the service record of
the petitioner’s grandfather his permanent address was shown to be in District
Karimnagar, Andhra Pradesh. The petitioner grandfather was appointed in
Western Coalfields Limited on 22.02.1968 and on that basis the Scrutiny
Committee concluded that he was a migrant in the State of Maharashtra hav-
ing settled here in 1968. It was concluded that the petitioner could not prove
that her forefathers were ordinary residents of the State of Maharashtra.
According to him, this conclusion was arrived at without granting any proper
opportunity to the petitioner to substantiate this aspect and without conduct-
ing a detailed enquiry through the Vigilance Cell. Inviting attention to the
judgments of this Court in Badalsingh Bharosa Rawale vs. Divisional Caste
Certificate Scrutiny Committee No.3, Nagpur and another [2016(1)
Mh.L.J.77] and Rajanna Ganganna Rashalawar vs State Of Maharashtra and
others [2022(4) Mh.L.J.283], it was submitted that the question with regard
to  migration    of  forefathers   was   required    to   be  answered    after
permitting the petitioner to adduce evidence to indicate otherwise. No such
opportunity was granted to the petitioner.        The said finding had been
recorded merely on the basis of the fact that the petitioner’s grandfather had
secured employment in the year 1968 and that in his service record his
permanent address was shown as Karimnagar, Andhra Pradesh.
It was further contended that the insistence of the Scrutiny
Committee to require the petitioner to submit pre-constitutional documents
was without any legal basis. There was no such requirement prescribed either
in the Maharashtra Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, De-notified
Tribes (Vimukta Jatis), Nomadic Tribes, Other Backward Classes and Special
Backward Category (Regulation of Issuance and Verification of) Caste
Certificate Act, 2000 (for short, the Act of 2000) or in the Rules of 2012.
Placing reliance on the decision in Mahesh Pralhadrao Lad vs. State of
Maharashtra and others [2009(2) Mh.L.J.90] it was submitted that the
Scrutiny Committee was required to consider all documents produced by a
claimant irrespective of the fact that they were of the pre-constitutional or
post-constitutional period.
Without prejudice to the aforesaid, the learned counsel submitted
that the petitioner was willing to pay the requisite fees to enable her result to
be declared by the respondent No.2-University. This was for the reason that
the petitioner desires to pursue further studies. The petitioner had also filed
an undertaking dated 11.07.2022 in which she had stated that she was willing
to pay difference of fees in case if it was found that the petitioner was not
entitled to a caste validity certificate. The undertaking was given subject to
outcome of the decision of the Scrutiny Committee and this writ petition. The
learned counsel also placed reliance on the judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme
Court in Civil Appeal No.4864 of 2021 ( Pankaj Kumar vs. State of Jharkhand
and others) decided on 19.08.2021. It was thus prayed that the writ petition
be allowed.
4.         Ms N. P. Mehta, learned Assistant Government Pleader for the
respondent no.1 supported the order passed by the Scrutiny Committee. She
submitted that from the material collected by the Scrutiny Committee, it was
clear that the forefathers of the petitioner had migrated in the State of
Maharashtra from 1968 and onwards. The petitioner’s father was born in the
year 1974 in Maharashtra but the same was not sufficient to prove that the
petitioner and her forefathers were ordinary residents of the State of
Maharashtra. From the permanent address of the petitioner’s grandfather, it
was clear that the family was residing in Karimnagar, Andhra Pradesh. It was
necessary for the petitioner to have produced pre-constitutional documents to
establish her claim of belonging to ‘Madiga’ Scheduled Caste.         Since all
relevant material was considered by the Scrutiny Committee, no interference
with the impugned order was called for.     The learned Assistant Government
Pleader placed reliance on the decision in Bir Singh vs. Delhi Jal Board and
others [(2018) 10 SCC 312] as well as on paragraph 38 of the decision in
Pankaj Kumar (supra). It was thus submitted that the petitioner was not
entitled for any relief whatsoever.
Shri J.B.Kasat, learned counsel for the respondent no.2-University
submitted that since the petitioner had secured admission from the reserved
category, her result has been withheld for want of validity certificate and on
production of the same her results would be declared.
5.          We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and we have
perused the documents on record. It is seen that the petitioner has been
issued a caste certificate on 05.01.2014. His father has been issued a birth
certificate by the then Municipal Council, Chandrapur dated 28.04.1974. The
petitioner has secured admission at the B. Tech. course being conducted by
the respondent No.2-University in the reserved category. When the petitioner
sought verification of her caste claim based on the caste certificate dated
05.01.2014, the Scrutiny Committee found that the petitioner’s grandfather
was employed with the Western Coalfields Limited since 22.02.1968 and in
his service record the permanent address given was of District Karimnagar,
Andhra Prasesh. On that basis, the Scrutiny Committee concluded that as per
Rule 5(1) of the Rules of 2012 a caste certificate could be issued to a person
who himself or whose father or grandfather was ordinarily residing within the
area of the territorial jurisdiction of the Competent Authority on the deemed
date.     In absence of the claimant being such ordinary resident, a caste
certificate cannot be issued. By holding that the petitioner had failed to prove
her claim of being an ordinary resident of Chandrapur Sub-Division on the
deemed date which was 10.08.1950, the caste certificate has been cancelled.
This is by treating the petitioner as a migrant and by relying upon Rule 14 of
the Rules of 2012 which prohibits the Scrutiny Committee from verifying such
caste certificate issued by the Authorities beyond the State of Maharashtra.
Consequentially, the said caste certificate has been cancelled.
6.          The question whether an applicant is an ordinary resident of the
area within the territorial jurisdiction of the Competent Authority on the
deemed date as required by Rule 5(1) is a question of fact which is required
to be adjudicated by granting an applicant necessary opportunity to prove the
same. A finding that the applicant was not an ordinary resident cannot be
recorded by taking a summary enquiry.           In Badalsingh Bharosa Rawale
(supra), the Division Bench of this Court has considered this aspect by
observing that the same has to be decided by permitting the claimant to
tender evidence in that regard.       In the present case, there was no such
opportunity granted to the petitioner to demonstrate that she and her
forefathers were residing in the State of Maharashtra prior to 1950.
Admittedly, there was no enquiry conducted by the Vigilance Cell and the
Scrutiny Committee has merely referred to the service record of the
petitioner’s grandfather to conclude that since he was appointed in the year
1968 at Western Coalfields Limited, it was clear that he was a migrant in the
State of Maharashtra from 1968.
We find that firstly, the petitioner was not put to notice that her
caste certificate was liable to be cancelled for the reason that it was issued in
contravention to Rule 5 of the Rules of 2012. Had such opportunity been
granted to the petitioner, she would have been in a position to put-forth her
stand in that regard. Secondly, the aforesaid conclusion has been recorded
without any report of the Vigilance Cell.         As per the Rules of 2012 the
Vigilance Cell is empowered to visit the place of residence of the claimant and
his/her forefathers for making a detailed enqiry. If such enquiry would have
been undertaken by the Vigilance Cell, relevant material with regard to
ordinary residence of the petitioner could have been gathered. The same has
not been done in the present case.
7.          Insofar as Rule 14 of the Rules of 2012 is concerned, the same
prohibits verification of caste certificate by the Scrutiny Committee when such
caste certificate is issued to a migrant from another State. In other words, a
caste certificate issued to a claimant by an Authority other than one from the
State of Maharashtra cannot be verified. Thus, even for relying upon Rule 14
of the Rules of 2012 it would have to be first conclusively established that the
claimant seeking verification is a migrant from another State and hence such
verification is not possible.    Rule 14 has been relied upon pursuant to a
summary enquiry which would not be permissible. It is to be borne in mind
that the conclusion recorded by the Scrutiny Committee that the claimant is a
migrant has multiple consequences. Such conclusion is likely to affect the
academic as well as service prospects of such claimant and hence it is
necessary that before such finding is recorded, the procedure prescribed by
the Rules of 2012 in the matter of verification of caste/tribe claim is complied
8.          The decision of this Court in Niraj Kamlakar More vs. Scheduled
Tribe Certificate Scrutiny Committee, Aurangabad [2012 (5) Mh.L.J.367] is
required to be noted. After considering the provisions of Sections 4, 6 and 7
of the Act of 2000, it was held that a caste certificate issued by the Competent
Authority in accordance with Section 4(1) of the Act of 2000 is valid only
when a validity certificate is granted by the Scrutiny Committee.          Under
Section 7(1) of the Act of 2000 the power of cancellation and confiscation of a
caste certificate can be exercised only if the Caste Scrutiny Committee is of
the opinion that the caste certificate was obtained fraudulently. The aforesaid
legal position is also to be kept in mind before a caste certificate is sought to
be cancelled. The Scrutiny Committee has not adverted to these aspects while
passing the impugned order.
9.          For these reasons we find that the order passed by the Scrutiny
Committee is not sustainable since the conclusion that the petitioner is a
migrant and that the caste certificate issued to her on 05.01.2014 is in
contravention of Rules 5(1) & (2) and 14 of the Rules of 2012 has been
recorded in a summary enquiry.          It is therefore necessary to direct the
scrutiny Committee to conduct a fresh enquiry into the caste claim of the
petitioner in accordance with the Rules of 2012 after giving due opportunity
to the petitioner. For this reason, it is not necessary to go into the question of
benefits to which the petitioner would be entitled to if she is treated as
migrant as sought to be urged by the respondents by relying upon the
decision in Bir Singh (supra).
The petitioner has completed her education from the respondent
no.2-University. She seeks declaration of her result to enable her to further
prosecute studies. She has also tendered her undertaking in that regard. In
these facts, the result of the petitioner can be directed to be declared
provisionally subject to outcome of the proceedings before the Scrutiny
Committee and on paying difference of fees as payable by the candidates from
the open category.
Committee passed by the Scrutiny Committee cancelling the
petitioner’s caste certificate is set aside.
(ii)        The Scrutiny Committee is directed to re-examine the
petitioner’s claim of issuance of caste validity certificate by
following the prescribed procedure including conducting an
enquiry by the Vigilance Cell, if found necessary. The petitioner
shall be granted due opportunity after putting her on notice if the
Scrutiny Committee proposes to cancel her caste certificate. To
facilitate such exercise, the petitioner shall appear before the
Scrutiny Committee on 15.09.2022. A decision on the petitioner’s
caste claim be taken within a period of six months from the date of
her appearance before it.
(iii)       The respondent no.2-University shall provisionally
declare the petitioner’s result of her B.Tech.(Chemical Technology)
examination held in Summer 2021 subject to her depositing the
difference of fees as payable by         candidates from the open
category. The result declared provisionally would be subject to
final outcome of the validity proceedings before the Scrutiny
Committee. The mark-sheet and the degree certificate issued to
her may mention this fact.
Rule is made absolute in aforesaid terms with no order as to costs.