Leave granted in SLP [Crl.] No.1541/2014.
It is stated by both the counsels for the appellant and the accused that
the matters were kept aside in terms of the order dated 12.09.2018 to await
the judgment in Hira Singh & Anr. v. Union of India & Anr. case which judgment
has now been delivered and reported as Hira Singh & Anr. v. Union of India &
Anr.- (2020) SCC Online SC 382. This Court has opined on the issue whether
the actual content of the weight of the offending drug is to be considered or
whether as a whole procedure has to be looked into on the basis of the larger
objective of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act to opine as
“65. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, Reference is
(I) The decision of this Court in the case of E. Michael Raj (supra) taking the
view that in the mixture of narcotic drugs or psychotropic substance with one
or more neutral substance(s), the quantity of the neutral substance(s) is not to
be taken into consideration while determining the small quantity or
commercial quantity of a narcotic drug or psychotropic substance and only
the actual content by weight of the offending narcotic drug which is relevant
for the purpose of determining whether it would constitute small quantity or
(II) In case of seizure of mixture of Narcotic Drugs or Psychotropic
Substances with one or more neutral substance(s), the quantity of neutral
substance(s) is not to be excluded and to be taken into consideration along
with actual content by weight of the offending drug, while determining the
“small or commercial quantity” of the Narcotic Drugs or Psychotropic
(III) Section 21 of the NDPS Act is not stand-alone provision and must be
construed along with other provisions in the statute including provisions in the
NDPS Act including Notification No.S.O.2942(E) dated 18.11.2009 and
(IV) Challenge to Notification dated 4 18.11.2009 adding “Note 4” to the
Notification dated 19.10.2001, fails and it is observed and held that the same
is not ultra vires to the Scheme and the relevant provisions of the NDPS Act.
Consequently, writ petitions and Civil Appeal No.5218/2017 challenging the
aforesaid notification stand dismissed.”
The effect of the aforesaid is that the quantity of the neutral substance
is not to be excluded and to be taken into consideration along with the actual
content of the weight of the offending drug while determining small and
commercial quantities.
The aforesaid being the position and the appeals being allowed by the
High Court predicated only on a view to the contrary without examination of
the merits of the appeal, there is no option but to set aside the impugned
judgment and remit the matter back to the High Court for consideration of the
appeal on merits keeping the aforesaid judgment in mind.
We may further note the submissions of learned counsels for the
respondent(s) that the number of respondents may have served substantive
part of sentence and if there are no other cases subsequently brought against
them, the High Court may consider confining the sentence to the period
undergone. This would be an aspect to be examined by the High Court but is
naturally dependent on the minimum sentence to be imposed.
We call upon the State to place a chart qua all the accused i.e. whether
they are charged with any other cases in this behalf for the High Court to be
able to take a call in the matter.
The appeals are allowed in the aforesaid terms leaving parties to bear
their own costs.
Leave granted.
We have heard learned counsel for parties.
The impugned order of acquittal reversing the judgment of the High
a) The sample originally sent was not accepted but was subsequently
accepted but it was not disclosed as to what objections were put by the
laboratory and whether these were with respect to the seal on the sample
parcels or any discrepancy in documents so sent to them or there were any
other reason which compelled the lab not to accept the sample parcels.
b) The charas sample which was examined both for qualitative and
quantitative test would not meet the principles laid down in respect of
quantification of the drug, an aspect we may note stands covered by the
judgment in Hira Singh (supra) opining that in the case of seizure of a mixture,
the quantity of neutral substance is not to be excluded and to be taken into
consideration along with the actual content of weight of the offending drug
while determining the small or commercial quantity.
We have remitted the connected matters in view of the aforesaid
judgment on the second aspect. However, the present case is slightly different
case because the acquittal based on two separate grounds of the first grant of
acquittal would still stand.
The aforesaid being the position, we dismiss the appeals leaving parties
to bear their own costs.
We have heard learned counsel for parties.
Learned counsel for the respondent sought to distinguish this case from
the orders passed in Criminal Appeal No.912/2010 today on the basis that the
application of the State Government to lead additional evidence was
disallowed by the High Court.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the State has drawn our attention
to para 9 of the impugned order to say that the only aspect which weighed
while allowing the appeal was that the earlier view that the contraband
substance so recovered in the present case cannot be said to be charas and
that aspect stands now overruled with the judgment in Hira Singh (Supra) as
the quantity of neutral substance has to be included.
We are in agreement with the submission of learned counsel for the
State that the present matter will also have to be remitted back to the High
Court for consideration in terms of the judgment except that the High Court
having rejected the application for adducing additional evidence, that aspect
is not permitted to be agitated again.
The appeal is allowed in the aforesaid terms leaving parties to bear their
own costs.
The appeal was tagged with some connected appeals which have been
dealt with us by our order passed in Criminal Appeal No.912/2010 and
connected matters today remitting the same based on the judgment of this
Court in Hira Singh (supra). However, it has been rightly pointed out by learned
counsel for the appellant that the said aspect which no more survives 8 is one
of the reasons for acquittal of the respondent. The other reason was that the
independent witnesses turned hostile and the testimony of the police
witnesses did not seem to inspire confidence. We have perused the judgment
in this behalf of the High Court and cannot say that this is a case where the
acquittal by the High Court should be turned into one of conviction, applying
the parameters for such a legal position.
The appeal is accordingly dismissed leaving parties to bear their own
We have heard learned counsel for parties.
Insofar as the offence under the Indian Forest Act is concerned while
convicting the owner and the driver (both of whom are deceased) the other
two persons were acquitted including the respondent before us as mere
passenger. Insofar as the NDPS Act is concerned, no doubt the acquittal is
predicated only on the legal view which now stands reversed in the judgment
of Hira Singh (supra). However, the important aspect is the concurrent
findings whereby it has been opined that there was no evidence of the
appellant and the other accused having knowledge of the transportation and
violation of the Rules.
The aforesaid being the position, we are not inclined to remit this matter
back for reconsideration in view of the judgment in Hira Singh (supra). The
appeal is dismissed leaving parties to bear their costs.