IA 13529/2022 (under Order XXXIX Rules 1 and 2 of the CPC)
1.    Formerly known as Taxify OU, the plaintiff was incorporated in
2013 in Estonia as a taxi aggregator, to aggregate all taxies in Tallinn,
Estonia, Riga and Latvia on one platform. The plaintiff claims to have
conceived and adopted the brand ―BOLT‖ in 2018, and that the
expression signified speed as well as electricity. The plaintiff further
avers that, under the brands ―BOLT‖ and                   , the plaintiff was
providing, worldwide, ride-hailing, food and grocery delivery, rental
of cars, e-bikes and scooters and EV (electric vehicle) charging
stations/docks. By dint of continuous use, it is asserted that the marks
―BOLT‖ and                     have amassed considerable goodwill and reputation
and have become exclusively associated with the products and
services of the plaintiff. The                                  mark, it is further asserted,
constitutes an ―original artistic work‖ within the meaning of Section
2(c)1 of the Copyright Act, 1957, of which the plaintiff, as the creator,
is the owner and right holder.
2.         Admittedly, the plaintiff has no trademark registration in India,
though it has applied for registration of the trademark Bolt Charge in
Class 99 and of the                      device mark in Classes 09, 12, 35, 36, 37 and
39. The said applications are pending, as on date, with the Registrar of
3.         No suit for infringement of trade mark can, therefore, lie at the
instance of the plaintiff against anyone in this country, including the
defendant. The tort with which the plaintiff charges the defendant is,
indeed, not infringement, but passing off. The plaintiff‘s case is that
the defendant, by using the mark                               , is passing off its products and
services as those of the plaintiff, or deceiving the unwary consumer
into believing the existence of an association between the two.
4.         Predicated on the said allegation, the plaintiff seeks, by means
of the present suit, an injunction against the defendant from using the
(c) “artistic work” means, –
(i)       a painting, a sculpture, a drawing (including a diagram, map, chart or plan), an engraving
or a photograph, whether or not any such work possesses artistic quality;
(ii)      a work of architecture; and
(iii)     any other work of artistic craftsmanship;
impugned           mark. The plaintiff has filed, with the plaint, I.A.
13529/2022 under Order XXXIX Rules 1 and 2 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908       (CPC), seeking           an interlocutory injunction
restraining the defendants and all others acting on their behalf from (i)
passing off their goods and services under the impugned ‗BOLT‘ and
marks as those of the plaintiff in relation to ―all kinds of
mobility, delivery, EV charging and all related goods and services and
any other services cognate and allied thereto‖, and (ii) reproducing,
imitating or copying the artistic work in the plaintiff‘s              logo,
pending disposal of the suit.
5.     The present judgement disposes of I.A. 13529/2022.
Submissions of Ms Swathi Sukumar on behalf of plaintiff
6.     Arguing for the plaintiff, Ms Swathi Sukumar emphasizes the
worldwide goodwill that her client commands which, in her
submission, has percolated into this country as well. She submits that
the applicant‘s goods and services are provided in over 400 cities in
over 45 countries in Europe, Africa, West Asia, South America and
Latin America, with over 100 million customers globally. Over 2.5
million drivers, it is submitted, offer rides over the ―Bolt platform‖.
She draws my attention to the averment, in the plaint, that the
plaintiff, as a ―global market leader in transportation‖, offers services
which include vehicles for hire, micro mobility, car sharing, Electric
Vehicle (EV) charging stations and docks (with which alone we are
concerned in the present case) and food and grocery delivery services.
7.     The plaintiff operates a website https://bolt.eu/.     It also has
accounts on (i) Facebook with 1,707,969 likes and 1,711,954
followers, (ii) LinkedIn with 157,979 followers, (iii) Instagram with
around 92,900 followers, (iv) Twitter with around 44,800 followers
and (v) TikTok with around 28,300 followers and 3,82,400 likes. The
plaintiff also trades through a mobile application titled ―BOLT‖,
available on Apple‘s App Store and Google‘s Play Store. The plaint
asserts that, as on August 2022, the BOLT mobile app had invited
approximately 96,100 reviews on the App Store of Apple and
28,70,000 reviews on Google‘s Play Store. The App is downloadable
in India. The plaint asserts that users in India have downloaded the
app at least 2 lakh times.
8.     The defendant makes only EV charging docks/stations. Insofar
as EV charging docks are concerned, the plaintiff claims to be
operating such docks, using the ―BOLT‖ mark, in Tallinn and Estonia,
with the intent to install charging points in Lithuania and Portugal.
The plaint has also provided web links to various foreign newspapers
and news channels which contain articles featuring the plaintiff.
9.     The plaintiff claims to have earned revenue, from its trademarks
―BOLT‖ and           to the tune of € 80 million in 2018, € 148 million in
2019, € 221 million in 2020 and € 500 million in 2021. The plaintiff
also claims to have expended, in advertising and promotional
activities, € 9 million in 2018, € 18 million in 2019, € 16 million in
2020 and € 61 million in 2021. The plaintiff‘s marks also stand
registered in, inter alia, the European Union, Pakistan, the Russian
Federation, Switzerland, Australia, Turkey, Philippines and Mexico.
Ms. Sukumar, learned Counsel for the plaintiff submits, in fact, that
the plaintiff has 92 registrations worldwide.
10.    To emphasise the reputation and goodwill that her client
commands, Ms. Sukumar has drawn my attention to the following
articles, published in CNBC and the Economic Times:
“Europe’s answer to Uber expands into the electric scooter
   Bolt, formerly known as Taxify, is launching its electric
kick scooter-sharing service in Madrid.
   The move marks another stepping stone in the start-up‘s
move toward new mobility options beyond car-hailing.
   The Estonia-based company is seeking to raise an
additional round of funding from investors.
It‘s a phenomenon that‘s seen wild popularity – and infamy –
in some U.S. cities. Now, the electric scooter craze looks set to
gain further ground in Europe.
Estonian ride-hailing firm Bolt, formerly known as Taxify, is
launching its electric kick scooter-sharing service in Madrid,
following a rollout last year in Paris.
Rides in the Spanish capital will cost 15 cents a minute, on top
of a 1 euro minimum charge. Customers need to scan a QR
code to unlock the scooters and can leave them on the street
once a trip is complete.
―Beating the traffic is a big issue in cities like Madrid and a lot
of trips are much more efficiently covered with an electric
scooter rather than a car with a driver.‖ Bolt co-founder and
CEO Markus Villig said in a statement.
―By bringing Bolt scooters to Madrid, we‘re solving two
things at once; reducing car rides as well as saving time and
money for our customers.‖
The move marks another stepping stone in the start-up‘s drive
toward new mobility options beyond car-hailing. It recently
went through rebranding, changing its name to Bolt, which is
the same name it used for the Paris scooter service.
It also mirrors Uber‘s aim to become a one-stop shop for
mobility. The ride-hailing giant made its own push into the e-
scooter market last year following the acquisition of bike –
Bolt is also looking to branch out into another key area for
Uber – food delivery. It recently announced plans to launch a
competitor to Uber Eats in Estonia, Finland and South Africa
this summer.
As it pushes toward a renewed focus on growth, Bolt is
seeking to raise an additional round of funding from investors.
It recently hired a new finance chief, former Spotify SPOT
executive Johan Bergqvist, who will be tasked with overseeing
fundraising efforts at the firm.
The company hasn‘t disclosed how much it‘s looking to raise,
nor who the investors will be. Bolt‘s last big investment –
which it secured last year when it was still known as Taxify –
saw it raise $175 million at a $1 billion valuation.
The company is backed by Chinese ride-hailing giant Didi
Chuxing and German automaker Daimler DAI-DE, which
itself owns a taxi hire application called MyTaxi.
The dockless e-scooter market has seen massive interest form
investors, with serious cash being pumped into the likes of
Lime and Bird.
Lime recently closed a $310 million funding deal that values
the firm at $2.4 billion, while Bird last year raised $300
million at a $2 billion valuation – the latter is also reportedly in
talks to raise a further $300 million.
But the battery-powered devices have seen some regulatory
pushback in a number of cities, amid complaints that they are
being ridden illegally on sidewalks and dumped in
inappropriate places.
San Francisco temporarily banned them last year, before
granting permits to some start-ups in the space to let them
resume operations. But Lime, Bird and Uber were refused
licenses by the local authority.
Madrid and Paris, meanwhile, banned e-scooters from
sidewalks last year, while Spain‘s capital also banned three
operators, including Lime, for failing to comply with its rules.
Madrid‘s city hall later restored Lime‘s ability to operate,
while Bolt and Jump were also granted permits.
    Estonian ride-hailing start-up Bolt has raised $713 million
in fresh funding to push into the rapidly growing online
grocery delivery industry.
    The new investment round values Bolt at about $4.75
billion, more than double its last private valuation of $2
billion.
    The Uber rival is branching out into new services like food
delivery, electric scooter and bike rentals in a bid to
become a ―super app.‖
―Bolt, a rival of Uber's ride-sharing and food delivery business, last
raised funding in August at a valuation of more than €4 billion.
The company also offers electric scooter rentals, car-sharing and a 15-
minute grocery delivery service, catering to over 100 million
customers in 45 countries and over 400 cities across Europe and
"We are expanding all the five product lines extremely quickly,
developing product R&D and rolling out in new cities," chief
executive Markus Villig told Reuters in an interview.
While Uber is the biggest rival for ride-hailing, Bolt faces competitors
in food delivery including Just Eat Takeaway.com and DoorDash,
which entered Europe via a $8 billion purchase of Wolt.
To gain customers, platforms often offer discounts leading to price
wars in some markets.
"In many cases, we have been the driving force that actually lowers
prices for consumers, so from day one, we were really focused on
being frugal," Villig said.
"We have been offering substantially lower prices than anybody else
in the industry ... we expect this to continue."
―Uber rival Bolt raises $711 million at valuation of over $8 billion
While Uber is the biggest rival for ride-hailing, Bolt faces competitors
in food delivery including Just Eat Takeaway.com and DoorDash,
which entered Europe via a $8 billion purchase of Wolt.
Stockholm: Estonian startup Bolt said on Tuesday it had raised €628
million ($711.40 million) from investors led by Sequoia Capital and
Fidelity Management and Research Co, taking its valuation to €7.4
billion ($8.38 billion).‖
11.       These articles, submits Ms. Sukumar, themselves indicate that
the plaintiff‘s BOLT mark enjoys trans-border reputation. Seen in
conjunction with the number of times the plaintiff‘s App has been
downloaded by Indian users, Ms Sukumar submits that the spillover of
her client‘s reputation into India stands evidenced.                    She has also
placed reliance on certain data sourced from the internet which
indicates the number of times the plaintiff‘s App was accessed by
drivers in Ahmedabad, Pune, Surat, Chennai and Kolkata. She relies,
in this context, on the following passages from the judgement of a
learned Single Judge of this Court in Groupon Inc. v Mohan Rao2:
―51. One cannot lose sight of the fact that the plaintiff offers its
services on cyber space, and not through physical products. In the
era of internet technology, the dissemination of information is
instant as it is not constrained by territorial boundaries.
Furthermore, the presence of social networking websites have
made it possible for an organization to advertise its services and
products online thereby reaching thousands of people world over
instantaneously, as opposed to conventional modes of advertising
through journals and magazines. The decision in Roca Sanitario
S.A. v. Naresh Kumar Gupta3, relied upon by the defendants was
not rendered in a case dealing with an internet business and, thus, is
of no avail to the defendants.
52.     The Court in Roca Sanitario2 observed that trans-border
reputation cannot be the sole criterion. In the instant case, the
plaintiff has provided data by COMSCORE, which reveals that in the
last quarter of 2010, i.e. before the defendants actually sold their
first coupon, the plaintiff website had received 30,000 visitors with
Indian IP addresses. Prima facie, this establishes that Indian
consumers were aware of the plaintiff's mark and the services in
respect of which it was used, and may have even availed of
services on the plaintiff's website, as Indians who travel abroad can
purchase coupons on the plaintiff's website in respect of services
being offered in the local territory they may be visiting.
Furthermore, nothing prevents Indian consumers from buying
coupons on the plaintiff's website and gifting them to their near and
dear ones who reside in the local territory where the services are
being offered. In fact, the recent trend of online business is to cater
to such people who order a product or services from one part of the
globe, but request for it to be delivered/rendered to an entirely
different part of the globe.‖
In addition, Ms. Sukumar cites the following passages from
judgements of Division Benches of this Court in MAC Personal Care
Pvt Ltd v. Laverana GMBH & Co. KG4:
―14. The concept of trans-border reputation has grown quite
considerably through case law, which has been noted by the
learned Single Judge, and the judgments referred to by the learned
Single Judge have been noted by us in paragraph 7 above. We
therefore need not rewrite the same. The concept of trans-border
reputation essentially means that a plaintiff wishing to enforce its
unregistered trademark in India need not necessarily have a
commercial use in the Indian market in order to maintain an action
for passing off. International reputation and renown may suffice if
the same spills over to India.
19.     As against a single registration, registrations in multiple
jurisdictions create an even stronger presumption that reputation
inures in favour of the trademark.
20.     If international magazines, journals and publications
including books have referred to the trademark, then such
publications, depending upon their renown can be taken as valuable
of reputation, even if they are few.
30.     Honesty of adoption at the initial stage itself has to be
established to take benefit of concurrent registration under Section
12(3) of the Act. If the user at the inception is dishonest,
subsequent concurrent user will not purify the dishonest intention.
Commercial honesty at the initial stage of adoption is required.
What is protected is innocent use of a mark by two or more persons
unknown to each other and unaware of the mark used by the other.
Adoption must be honest, bona-fide and without any knowledge on
the part of the adopter. The onus and burden is on the defendant to
show that the user and adoption at the initial stage was honest.‖
Ms Sukumar drew my attention the following passage from the well-
known decision of the Supreme Court in Toyota Jidosha Kabushiki
Kaisha v. Prius Auto Industries Ltd5 (―Toyota‖, hereinafter):
―38. The next exercise would now be the application of the
above principles to the facts of the present case for determination
of the correctness of either of the views arrived at in the two-tier
adjudication performed by the High Court of Delhi. Indeed, the
trade mark ―Prius‖ had undoubtedly acquired a great deal of
goodwill in several other jurisdictions in the world and that too
much earlier to the use and registration of the same by the
defendants in India. But if the territoriality principle is to govern
the matter, and we have already held it should, there must be
adequate evidence to show that the plaintiff had acquired a
substantial goodwill for its car under the brand name ―Prius‖ in the
Indian market also. The car itself was introduced in the Indian
market in the year 2009-2010. The advertisements in automobile
magazines, international business magazines; availability of data in
information-disseminating portals like Wikipedia and online
Britannica Dictionary and the information on the internet, even if
accepted, will not be a safe basis to hold the existence of the
necessary goodwill and reputation of the product in the Indian
market at the relevant point of time, particularly having regard to
the limited online exposure at that point of time i.e. in the year
2001. The news items relating to the launching of the product in
Japan isolatedly and singularly in The Economic Times (issues
dated 27-3-1997 and 15-12-1997) also do not firmly establish the
acquisition and existence of goodwill and reputation of the brand
name in the Indian market. Coupled with the above, the evidence
of the plaintiff's witnesses themselves would be suggestive of a
very limited sale of the product in the Indian market and virtually
the absence of any advertisement of the product in India prior to
April 2001. This, in turn, would show either lack of goodwill in the
domestic market or lack of knowledge and information of the
product amongst a significant section of the Indian population.
While it may be correct that the population to whom such
knowledge or information of the product should be available would
be the section of the public dealing with the product as
distinguished from the general population, even proof of such
knowledge and information within the limited segment of the
population is not prominent.‖
Ms Sukumar sought to distinguish the case of her client, from the case
of Toyota before the Supreme Court, by submitting that, in the present
case, actual proof of knowledge, by the defendant, of the trade mark of
the plaintiff was forthcoming.
12.    Thus, submits Ms Sukumar, the plaintiff‘s marks had amassed
international reputation and goodwill, which had spilled over into
India before the defendant adopted the impugned                             mark.
Apropos the user of the impugned mark by the defendant, Ms
Sukumar relies on the following:
(i)     a news item figuring in the Deccan Herald dated 26th
October 2021, titled ―REVOS launches Bolt charging system‖,
(ii)    the        Whois         information          regarding         the
www.boltevcharging.com and https://bolt.earth domain names
of    the    defendant,       which     disclose    that   the     domain
www.boltevcharging.com was registered on 9th December 2021,
and https://bolt.earth was registered on 14th July 2021, and
(iii)   the applications filed by the defendant for registration of
the       and        marks, which were on ―proposed to be used‖
basis.
13.    There is, in fact, in Ms Sukumar‘s submission, nothing to
indicate user, by the defendant, of the impugned               mark, prior to
2021. Referring to a Youtube video filed by the defendant before this
Court with the reply to the plaintiff‘s IA.13529/2022, captioned
―REVOS BOLT: Peer to Peer Charging Network – Coming Soon!!‖,
dated 2nd October 2020, on the basis of which the defendant is
claiming user of the impugned              mark since 2nd October 2020, Ms
Sukumar submits that the claim is contrary to the other documents of
the defendant, which the defendant itself has placed on record, already
cited supra. As against this, the plaintiff was using its BOLT and
marks, worldwide, since 2018.
14.    Ms Sukumar further submits that, against the defendant‘s
application for registration of the             mark, the First Examination
Report, dated 21st September 2011, issued on behalf of the Registrar
of Trade Marks, cited, inter alia, the             mark, in respect of which
the application of Bolt Support KE Ltd., a subsidiary of the plantiff
was then pending, as an earlier mark to which the defendant‘s mark
was deceptively similar. The adoption of the impugned marks by the
defendant was, therefore, in her submission, ab initio dishonest.
15.    Having itself applied for registration of its BOLT marks, both in
word and device form, the defendant cannot, submits Ms Sukumar,
seek to contend that the BOLT mark was generic, or common to the
trade. She refers, in this context, to the following response of the
defendant, to the FER of the Registrar in respect of the defendant‘s
application for registration of the         mark:
―We feel that the Device (Logo) “BOLT” is unique and does not
bear any similarity or resemblance with any of the conflicting
marks, i.e., MONARCH BOLT and U.S. BOLT, as mentioned in
your examination report. Kindly note that “BOLT” is not a
generic word and Device (Logo) and there is no such same mark
registered till date.‖
Additionally, submits Ms Sukumar, it is well settled that the mere fact
that there were other infringers, against whom the plaintiff had not
proceeded, did not estop it from proceeding against the defendant.
16.    To underscore the possibility of confusion between the
plaintiff‘s and defendant‘s marks, Ms Sukumar refers to the manner in
which the two Apps appear on the Google Play App site, side by side,
Submissions of Mr Chander M Lall on behalf of defendant
17.    Mr Chander M Lall, arguing for the defendant, submits that the
plaint instituted by the plaintiff is bereft of any sustainable cause of
action.    The plaintiff, he submits, has no trans-border reputation
whatsoever, at least in EV charging stations, in which activity his
client is the largest player in India. Trans border reputation, submits
Mr Lall, must be shown to have existed on the date the defendant
adopted the impugned                mark.
18.    There is, in Mr Lall‘s submission, not even the remotest
connection between the services rendered by the plaintiff and the
goods manufactured and sold by the defendant.                    The plaintiff is
engaged in providing taxi services for hire.                The defendant, per
contra, is engaged in the business of EV charging stations. Mr Lall
relies, in this context, on para 8 of the plaint which, in his
submissions, as much as admits this position:
―The plaintiff, formerly known as Taxify OU, was incorporated in
2013 by Markus Vilig, with a vision to aggregate all taxis in
Tallinn, Estonia and Riga, Latvia onto one platform. The service
was launched in August 2013 and global operations were launched
in 2014. The Plaintiff conceived and adopted the brand ‗BOLT‘, in
2018, to signify speed as well as electricity. In 2019, the Plaintiff
consolidated all operations under the brand ‗BOLT‘ and has
continuously been offering goods and services under the
trademarks/trade name ‗BOLT‘ and              , in relation to ride-
hailing, food and grocery delivery, rental of cars, e-bikes and
scooters, EV charging stations/docks, worldwide.‖
In fact, submits Mr Lall, the plaintiff was essentially in the business of
taxi ride-hailing, and the inclusion of ―EV charging stations/docks‖ in
the bouquet of activities in which it was engaged, in the afore-
extracted passage from the plaint, is a strained effort at creating a
cause of action where none exists. EV charging stations/docks is, in
fact, he submits, the business activity, not of the plaintiff, but of the
defendant. Mr Lall also invites attention, in this context, to para 12 of
the plaint, in which it is averred thus:
―… The internet has increased the visibility and the reach of the
Plaintiff worldwide in relation to mobility, delivery, EV charging,
and all related goods and services. Through the Plaintiff‘s constant
posting on the aforementioned social media channels, consumers
have become accustomed to understanding that the trademark
BOLT is a commercial sign of origin specifically for mobility,
transportation, and delivery goods and services. Documents
substantiating the same are filed along with the plaint.‖
(Emphasis supplied)
Mr Lall submits that the italicized words in para 12 of the plaint
impliedly acknowledge that the plaintiff‘s field of activities, in which
it has any goodwill or reputation, does not include EV charging
stations. The reference to EV charging earlier in the same paragraph
is, therefore, he submits, deliberately misleading.
19.     In para 16 of the plaint, in fact, submits Mr Lall, the plaintiff
has averred that it ―also operates EV charging docks with the BOLT
mark including EV charging stations in Tallinn, Estonia and will soon
be installing charging points in Litania and Portugal‖. Exposure in
Tallinn, Estonia, Lithuania and Portugal, submits Mr Lall, can hardly
be regarded as trans border or worldwide reputation, far less
reputation which has spilled over to India.
20.     Mr Lall also invites my attention to the following promotional
article, containing a photograph, placed on record by the plaintiff itself
which, in his submission, indicates that the EV charging docks
installed by the plaintiff were only for charging the plaintiff‘s own
electric scooters:
This position, submits Mr Lall, is clear from the following recitals,
which are to be found in the same article:
―Why use Bolt charging docks?
Our charging docks are an innovative way to park and charge Bolt
scooters.
They also help to reduce environmental pollution, cutting out the
need for our Operations teams to collect low-battery scooters using
vans and additional resources.
The charging docks encourage better parking habits and contribute
to the overall improvement of the cityscape, especially as all
charging point are located in busy areas.
As there are no cables that could wear out and require additional
maintenance, our charging docks offer a sustainable urban charging
solution for the 21st century!
How to use Bolt’s scooter charging docks
One charging dock can hold up to ten scooters. These charging
docks are suitable for the Bolt 4, Bolt 3, and Bolt 2 scooter models.
All charging docks are marked on the map inside your Bolt app.
As there are no cables to plug in, to start charging, simply push the
scooter into the socket – and that‘s it!
Note: You must push your scooter into the charging dock before
ending your ride.
21.    Mr Lall further submits that, in para 26 of the plaint, the
plaintiff has acknowledged that the defendant was ―incorporated in
India in February 2020 and carries on the business, inter alia, of
chargng points for Electric Vehicles (EVs).‖              In February 2020,
submits Mr Lall, the plaintiff did not have a single EV charging point,
even for its own scooters, anywhere in the world. Thus, he submits,
the defendant enjoys priority of user vis-à-vis the plaintiff even in
respect of EV charging stations. Though the defendant had applied
for registration of its       and      trade marks on 30th August 2021 on
―proposed to be used‖ basis, Mr Lall submits that, as
(i)    since 2018, Defendant 2 had adopted the mark ‗BOLT‘
(ii)   by 2nd October 2020, Defendant 2 had introduced
‗BOLT‘ to the public at large by uploading public posts on
social media platforms like YouTube and Instragram,
(iii)  on 16th October 2020, Defendant 2 uploaded yet another
public post revealing further features of its BOLT EV chargers,
(iv)   as such, when Defendant 2 had conceptualized and
adopted ‗BOLT‘, the plaintiff had not even been rebranded as
(v)    even if, therefore, it were to be assumed that the plaintiff
had introduced ‗BOLT‘ charging docks on 13th October 2021,
the plaintiff had priority of user dating back to 2 nd October
Mr Lall referred me to screenshots of the relevant social media posts
of the defendant, which vouchsafe these assertions.
22.    As against this, submits Mr Lal,
(i)    the defendants have been using the mark ‗BOLT‘ for EV
charging stations since 2020,
(ii)   in 2021, the defendants achieved the milestone of setting
up 10000 EV chargers across 60 Indian cities, and
(iii)  as on date, the defendant‘s charging network spans 100
cities in India at more that 13,000 locations, including 2500
chargers in the Delhi-NCR region alone.
23.    Mr Lall has also adverted to the various encomiums that have
been awarded to the defendants over time.              He has referred to a
Chartered Accountants‘ Certificate which has certified the total
amount spend by the defendants on promotion and publication of the
brand name ‗BOLT‘ till 1st August 2022 as ₹ 17,49,36,464/-.
Moreover, points out Mr Lall from the following document, filed with
the written statement, the defendant‘s EV charging stations stood
installed in 24 cities on or before 8th January 2021, whereas the
plaintiff introduced its first charging station in Estonia in August
24.   Mr Lall has also cited the following news item which figured in
the Business Standard of 24th March 2022:
“BOLT installs 10k EV Charging Points in India, Fast
Tracks its Expansion Plans
(ANI/BusinessWire India): BOLT, an All-in-One EV
Infrastructure Provider, announced the installation of 10,000
BOLT EV charging stations in India in the past 6 months.
This milestone is an important step towards the startup's
goal of installing One Million BOLT charging points across 500
cities in India & other emerging markets. BOLT is on track to
deploy 100,000 charging points in the next 6 months by catering to
demand coming from non-metro cities such as Jaipur, Nagpur,
Vijayawada,                                                       etc.
With BOLT's experience of making Bengaluru the first EV
ready city in India, the top three cities that have seen the maximum
usage of the startup's EV charging station are Bengaluru,
Delhi/NCR and Hyderabad. BOLT has dispensed over 50,000 kW
of energy so far and of the total 5000 publicly available BOLT EV
charging points in India, Bengaluru has the highest number
installed in the country with 3000+ chargers followed by
Delhi/NCR region at 1000+ and 500+ in Hyderabad. BOLT has
added more than 60000+ users on the BOLT charging network up
to March 2022.
Furthermore, BOLT charging points across India have
helped generate a passive income of over INR 3,000 per month for
top BOLT charging point hosts. The overwhelming demand for a
safe, reliable, and affordable EV charging infrastructure combined
with collaboration with other EV ecosystem players has helped fast
track the startup's goal. In the last 6 months alone, more than 20
OEMs/EV ecosystem players such as SpareIt, Park+ and EV fleet
solution providers have partnered with BOLT across India.
BOLT is India's largest EV charging network, comprising
the universal (https://bolt.earth/bolt) BOLT Charging Point and the
with the objective of building a strong EV charging infrastructure,
it is India's first dedicated network of IoT-enabled EV charging
points connecting riders across the country. Made-in-India, BOLT
is a universal charging point which is compatible with any portable
charger that comes with EVs and works with the existing AC
power supply everywhere.
Anyone, and not just the EV owner, can buy & install
BOLT in the shops, garages, RWAs, commercial parking spaces,
etc. for riders and use it ubiquitously to generate passive income
and establish a denser charging network. Installing BOLT requires
no additional infrastructure and can be done in under 30 min with
little to no maintenance.‖
25.    Mr. Lall submits that the comparison of the plaintiff‘s and
defendants‘ Apps would be meaningless, as the defendants‘ App is for
EV charging stations whereas the plaintiff‘s App is for taxi hailing
services. In fact, submits, Mr. Lall, on the ground of assumed trans-
border reputation for taxi hailing services, the plaintiff essentially
wants to inject the defendants from using the mark ―BOLT‖ with
respect to EV charging stations. Mr. Lall submits that the plaintiff has
suppressed the response, dated 9th December 2020, submitted by it in
reply to the notification of provisional refusal of protection for its
IRDI 4700773 for the trademark ―BOLT‖, in which the plaintiff
sought to contend that there was no likelihood of confusion or
deception vis-à-vis the cited earlier marks, as the application for the
plaintiff‘s BOLT marks were for a niche category of goods and
services, (specifically in relation to a mobile App for transport and
delivery related services).
26.    In fact, submits Mr. Lall, the case set up by the plaintiff is
completely lacking in any material evidencing trans-border reputation
which has spilled over into India. The only evidence of trans-border
reputation, he submits, is the assertion that the plaintiff‘s App had
been downloaded by several persons who were travelling abroad, so
as to use the App abroad, and by way of a survey report of a survey
conducted among taxi drivers.
27.       Mr Lall also contests the plaintiff‘s claim that its ‗BOLT‘ or
mark was entitled to be regarded as a ―well known trade mark‖.
Drawing attention to the definition of ―well known trade mark‖ as
contained in Section 2(1)(zg)6 of the Trade Marks Act, Mr Lall
submits that a mark had to have become well known ―to the
substantial segment of the public which uses‖ the goods or services in
respect of which the mark had become ―well known‖. He submits that
the main segment of services rendered by the plaintiff was taxi-
hailing, and it could not be said that a substantial segment of the
public in India who availed taxi-hailing services was aware of the
plaintiff. As the plaintiff‘s mark does not satisfy the criteria either of
Section 2(1)(zg) or of Section 11(6) of the Trade Marks Act, Mr Lall
submits that the plaintiff‘s BOLT or                                   mark could not be regarded
as a ―well known trade mark‖. Though Section 11(9)7 clarifies that
use or registration of a mark in India was not required for the mark to
acquire the status of a ―well known trade mark‖, Mr Lall submits that
the conditions of Section 11(6) had, nonetheless, to be satisfied.
28.       Mr Lall further submits that, in order for a case of passing off to
succeed, the plaintiff would have to establish that the defendant, by
2. Definitions and interpretation.—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(zg) ―well known trade mark‖, in relation to any goods or services, means a mark which has
become so to the substantial segment of the public which uses such goods or receives such services
that the use of such mark in relation to other goods or services would be likely to be taken as
indicating a connection in the course of trade or rendering of services between those goods or
services and a person using the mark in relation to the first-mentioned goods or services.
11. Relative grounds for refusal of registration.—
(9) The Registrar shall not require as a condition, for determining whether a trade mark is a well-
known trade mark, any of the following, namely:—
(i) that the trade mark has been used in India;
(ii) that the trade mark has been registered;
(iii) that the application for registration of the trade mark has been filed in India; (iv) that
(a) is well-known in; or
(c) in respect of which an application for registration has been filed in, any
jurisdiction other than India; or
(v) that the trade mark is well-known to the public at large in India.
using the impugned mark, was causing the public, in India, to be
confused or to believe an association between the impugned mark and
the asserted mark, so as to pass off the goods covered by the latter as
the former. He places extensive reliance, in this regard, on Toyota,
citing, for the purpose, paras 14, 17, 18, 25 to 30, 33, 34 and 38 to 40
of the report. He also relies on paras 31, 32, 52, 76, 77, 85 and 86 of
the report in Pfizer Products Inc. v. B.L. & Co.8 and para 8 of the
judgement of the Supreme Court in Milmet Oftho Industries v.
Allergan Inc.9 The judgements cited by Ms Sukumar were all, he
submits, rendered prior to Toyota and were, moreover, in cases in
which the product of the plaintiff was used in India.
29.       Reiterating the fact that his client was the first in the Indian
market for EV charging services, Mr Lall referred to invoices placed
on record. Relying on a graphical presentation at page 99 of the
documents filed with the written statement, Mr Lall submits that his
client was way ahead in the number of installed charge points at
11,200 till the Financial Year 2022, as against the next player Statia
which had merely 6,600 installed charge points. Mr Lall submits that
the reach of the defendant and its business stands vouchsafed even by
the Deccan Herald report dated 26th October 2021, to which reference
has already been made in para 12 supra. The report, he points out,
acknowledged that (i) even in its pre-launch phase, the defendant‘s
Bolt charging points had been installed in 60 cities in India with an
installed capacity of over 3600 KW, (ii) the defendant‘s Bolt OS had
been deployed in over 10000 devices, (iii) the defendant had 30 OEMs
across India, China, Vietnam and Nepal and (iv) the defendant was
soon planning to launch its product in Europe and other parts of South
30.       In rejoinder, Ms Sukumar refers to paras 32, 33 and 33.2 of the
judgement of the Supreme Court in S. Syed Mohideen v. P.
Sulochana Bai10 which, she submits, set out the standards to be met
for a successful plea of passing off. Submitting that both priority of
use and reputation have to be considered while examining a plea of
passing off, Ms Sukumar points out that, when the defendant launched
its services, the plaintiff was already a billion dollar company. She
further submits that the suit instituted by her client is not with respect
to taxi-hailing services, but EV charging services used for charging
electric scooters, which is an allied service.             She points out, by
reference to articles in the CNBC and Economic Times that the
valuation of the plaintiff‘s services wrote from US $ 1 billion in 2018-
2019 to about US $ 4.75 billion by August 2021 and that, by January
2022, the plaintiff was catering to over 100 million customers in 45
countries. She submits that, in order to succeed in its claim of passing
off, the plaintiff was not required to be engaged in the activity of EV
charging in India, and that the awareness, by Indian customers, of the
plaintiff‘s mark was sufficient. Downloading of the plaintiff‘s App,
submits Ms Sukumar, evidenced not only knowledge, but also intent
to use the plaintiff‘s services.         Viewed thus, there were 1,90,000
Indian users of the plaintiff‘s services.
31.       To show trans border goodwill and reputation, Ms Sukumar
submits that it was sufficient to show that the plaintiff‘s brand had a
strong presence abroad, which it clearly had. She also submitted that
the plaintiff had included, as a footer on its web page, the slogan ―Bolt
India‖, which, too, indicated the plaintiff‘s intent to expand into the
Indian territory. If no protection were to be granted by this Court, Ms
Sukumar submits that the distinctiveness of the plaintiff‘s mark, as
well as its potential for expansion, would stand destroyed. Relying on
the judgement of the UK Supreme Court in Starbucks (HK) Ltd v.
British Sky Broadcasting Group11, Ms Sukumar submits that, even in
the absence of trans border reputation, intent on the part of the
plaintiff to expand to India was sufficient to maintain a claim for
passing off. She relies, in this context, on paras 9, 10 and 15 of the
judgement of the Supreme Court in N.R. Dongre v. Whirlpool
Corporation12 and on para 14 of the report in MAC Personal Care4.
Toyota5, she submits, does not alter the law on trans border reputation,
but merely deals with the quantum of evidence necessary in that
regard. Apropos Pfizer8, Ms Sukumar submits that this Court, in the
said case, arrived at a positive finding of existence of worldwide
reputation in the project forming subject matter of controversy, as well
as spillover of the reputation into India but went on, nonetheless, to
hold that there was no chance of confusion as the product of the
defendant was different in colour from that of the plaintiff, and it
could not be assumed that the spillover of the product‘s reputation
would extent to awareness of the colour of the product. She has
referred, in this context, to paras 46, 47, 48, 52 and 53 of the said
decision. Ms Sukumar submits that, in her case, she had shown actual
knowledge, by Indian consumers, of the plaintiff‘s product (as
evidenced by the survey conducted on taxi drivers and the number of
downloads of the plaintiff‘s App) and the plaintiff‘s intent to use its
product in India (as evidenced by the advertisements and applications
for registration of the plaintiff‘s mark in India). She relies, in this
context, once again, on paras 17 to 20, 25, 28, 30, 33, 47, 52, 53 and
56 to 59 of Groupon2 and paras 6, 9, 21 and 31 to 34 of the judgement
of a learned Single Judge of this Court in Sona Blw Precision
Forgings Ltd v. Sonae EV Pvt Ltd13 and para 13 of the report from
the judgement of the Supreme Court in Laxmikant V. Patel v.
32.       Ms Sukumar submits that the defendant, though having been
put on notice regarding the pre-existing BOLT mark of Bolt Support
Ke Ltd in the FER issued against the defendant‘s application for
registration of the           mark, nonetheless went on to use the impugned
mark, thereby evincing its dishonest intent.                   In this regard, Ms
Sukumar submits that the defendant has, in para 57 of its written
statement filed by way of response to the present suit, averred thus:
―The Defendant No. 1 made necessary efforts to duly distinguish
between the two logos, the same extended to distinct in of services
in the App Store/Play Store where in the name of the app ‗BOLT‘
appears with the suffix ‗EV Charging Network‘ to sufficiently
make the user aware of the type of service provided via the plaint.
The Defendant no. 1 also made conscious choices for the
differentiation of color patterns and logo for their plaints available
on the Android Play Store and Apple App Store. The Defendant
no. 1‘s app logo features a light green thunderbolt enclosed in a
light green circle on an opaque white background while the
Plaintiff‘s logo features the word ―BOLT‖ in white ink, on an
opaque green (significantly darker than the green used by the
Defendants) background.‖
33.    Ms Sukumar submits that the only evidence of user submitted
by the defendant are by way of the invoices filed with the written
statement, which are merely electronic printouts.            The defendant
registered its website on 4th July 2021 and 19th December 2021. The
application for registration of the            and      marks, in 2021, was
also on ―proposed to be used‖ basis.
34.    Superfluities aside, the primary issue in the present case is
whether the plaintiff has, prima facie, been able to make out a case of
passing off, by the defendant, of its product or services as those of the
plaintiff, by use of the impugned             mark.
35.    Elements of passing off
35.1 Unlike infringement, passing off is a common law tort. Being a
tort unconfined by the shackles of statute, passing off is, by its very
nature, elastic. In substance, the tort is exactly what its title suggests,
which is the passing off, by one person, of his goods or services as
those of another. In the intellectual property regime, passing off is
understood as the use of a mark, or design, by one, in such a manner
as would confuse the mythical creature of average intelligence and
imperfect recollection into believing the goods or services, to which
the mark pertains, to be the goods or services of another. All that is
needed is confusion, not conviction.
35.2 Unlike infringement, therefore, the commission of the tort of
passing off is dependent, largely, on the psyche of the consumer – of
average intelligence and imperfect recollection.                 While examining
whether passing off has, or has not, taken place, therefore, one has to
weigh, in the balance, other attendant factors as well, the existence of
which might lessen, or remove altogether, the chance of confusion.
The mere establishment of the fact that the defendant is using the trade
mark which is deceptively similar to that of the plaintiff does not,
however, necessarily ipso facto lead to an inevitable inference of
passing off. It is open to the defendant to show, by other means, that,
even if the trade mark, used by the defendant, is deceptively similar to
that of the plaintiff, the defendant is, nevertheless, not guilty of the
tort of passing off, as other factors, seen cumulatively, negate the
possibility of the customer being deceived or confused.                       Cadila
Health Care v. Cadila Pharmaceuticals Ltd15 identified the essence
of passing off thus:
―The passing-off action depends upon the principle that nobody
has a right to represent his goods as the goods of somebody. In
other words and is not to sell his goods or services under the
pretence that they are those of another person.‖
35.3 The following passage from Kaviraj Pt Durga Dutt Sharma v.
Navaratna Pharmaceutical Laboratories16 classically distinguishes
infringement from passing off:
―In an action for infringement, the plaintiff must, no doubt, make
out that the use of the defendant's mark is likely to deceive, but
where the similarity between the plaintiffs and the defendant's
mark is so close either visually, phonetically or otherwise and the
court reaches the conclusion that there is an imitation, no further
evidence is required to establish that the plaintiffs rights are
violated. Expressed in another way, if the essential features of the
trade mark of the plaintiff have been adopted by the defendant, the
fact that the get-up, packing and other writing or marks on the
goods or on the packets in which he offers his goods for sale show
marked differences, or indicate clearly a trade origin different from
that of the registered proprietor of the mark would be immaterial;
whereas in the case of passing off, the defendant may escape
liability if he can show that the added matter is sufficient to
distinguish his goods from those of the plaintiff.‖
The ingredients of a passing off action were thus delineated in Cadila
―The passing-off action depends upon the principle that nobody
has a right to represent his goods as the goods of somebody. In
other words a man is not to sell his goods or services under the
pretence that they are those of another person. As per Lord Diplock
in Erven Warnink BV v. J. Townend & Sons17 the modern tort of
passing off has five elements i.e. (1) a misrepresentation, (2) made
by a trader in the course of trade, (3) to prospective customers of
his or ultimate consumers of goods or services supplied by him, (4)
which is calculated to injure the business or goodwill of another
trader (in the sense that this is a reasonably foreseeable
consequence), and (5) which causes actual damage to a business or
goodwill of the trader by whom the action is brought or (in a quia
timet action) will probably do so.‖
Thereafter the decision proceeded to identify, authoritatively, the
following determinative aspects to decide whether passing off has, or
has not, in a given case, taken place:
―(a) The nature of the marks i.e. whether the marks are word
marks or label marks or composite marks i.e. both words and label
works.
(b)       The degree of resembleness between             the   marks,
phonetically similar and hence similar in idea.
(c)       The nature of the goods in respect of which they are used as
trade marks.
(d)       The similarity in the nature, character and performance of
the goods of the rival traders.
(e)       The class of purchasers who are likely to buy the goods
bearing the marks they require, on their education and intelligence
and a degree of care they are likely to exercise in purchasing
and/or using the goods.
(f)     The mode of purchasing the goods or placing orders for the
goods.
(g)     Any other surrounding circumstances which may be
relevant in the extent of dissimilarity between the competing
marks.‖
In Mahendra & Mahendra Paper Mills Ltd v. Mahindra &
Mahindra Ltd18, again a case of passing off, the Supreme Court
delineated the factors which would have a bearing on the aspect of
chance of confusion, in the following passage:
―Without intending to be exhaustive some of the principles which
are accepted as well settled may be stated thus : that whether there
is a likelihood of deception or confusion arising is a matter for
decision by the court, and no witness is entitled to say whether the
mark is likely to deceive or to cause confusion; that all factors
which are likely to create or allay deception or confusion must be
considered in combination; that broadly speaking, factors creating
confusion would be, for example, the nature of the market itself,
the class of customers, the extent of the reputation, the trade
channels, the existence of any connection in course of trade, and
others.‖
35.4 Satyam Infoway Ltd v. Siffynet Solutions (P) Ltd19 identified
the three elements of a passing off action thus:
―13. The next question is, would the principles of trade mark
law and in particular those relating to passing off apply? An action
for passing off, as the phrase “passing off” itself suggests, is to
restrain the defendant from passing off its goods or services to the
public as that of the plaintiffs. It is an action not only to preserve
the reputation of the plaintiff but also to safeguard the public. The
defendant must have sold its goods or offered its services in a
manner which has deceived or would be likely to deceive the
public into thinking that the defendant's goods or services are the
plaintiffs. The action is normally available to the owner of a
distinctive trade mark and the person who, if the word or name is
an invented one, invents and uses it. If two trade rivals claim to
have individually invented the same mark, then the trader who is
able to establish prior user will succeed. The question is, as has
been aptly put, who gets these first? It is not essential for the
plaintiff to prove long user to establish reputation in a passing-off
action. It would depend upon the volume of sales and extent of
advertisement.
14.       The second element that must be established by a plaintiff
in a passing-off action is misrepresentation by the defendant to the
public. The word misrepresentation does not mean that the plaintiff
has to prove any mala fide intention on the part of the
defendant. Of course, if the misrepresentation is intentional, it
might lead to an inference that the reputation of the plaintiff is such
that it is worth the defendant's while to cash in on it. An innocent
misrepresentation would be relevant only on the question of the
ultimate relief which would be granted to the plaintiff [Cadbury
Schweppes v. Pub Squash20, Erven Warnink v. Townend21]. What
has to be established is the likelihood of confusion in the minds of
the public (the word ―public‖ being understood to mean actual or
potential customers or users) that the goods or services offered by
the defendant are the goods or the services of the plaintiff. In
assessing the likelihood of such confusion the courts must allow
for the ―imperfect recollection of a person of ordinary memory‖
[Aristoc v. Rysta22].
15.       The third element of a passing-off action is loss or the
likelihood of it.‖
Most significantly, passing off being a tort predicated on the
appropriation, to oneself, of the benefit of the goodwill and reputation
earned by another, the existence of such goodwill and reputation was
emphasized as an inalienable sine qua non, in the following passage
from Satyam Infoway19:
―This brings us to the merits of the dispute between the parties. As
we have already said, a passing-off action is based on the goodwill
that a trader has in his name unlike an action for infringement of a
trade mark where a trader's right is based on property in the name
as such. Therefore, unless goodwill can be established by the
appellant by showing that the public associates the name “Sify”
with the services provided by the appellant, it cannot succeed.‖
(Emphasis supplied)
35.5 On a study of these, and other, authorities on the point, this
Court, in FDC Ltd v. Faraway Foods Pvt Ltd23, identified the
following ingredients of a valid passing off action:
―(i)     Passing off, though an action based on deceit, does not
require the establishment of fraud as a necessary element to sustain
the action. Imitation or adoption, by the defendant, of the plaintiffs
trade mark, in such manner as to cause confusion or deception in
the mind of prospective customers, is sufficient.
(ii)     The principles for grant of injunction, in passing off
actions, are the same as those which govern the grant of
injunctions in other cases, i.e. the existence of a prima facie case,
the balance of convenience, and the likelihood of irreparable loss
in issuing to the plaintiff, were injunction not to be granted.
(iii) Proof of actual damage is not necessary, to establish
passing off. However, proof of misrepresentation is necessary,
even if intent to misrepresent is not approved. The question of
intent may, nevertheless, be relevant, when it comes to the ultimate
relief to be granted to the plaintiff.
(iv)     Passing off may be alleged by a claimant who owns
sufficient proprietary interest in the goodwill associated with the
product, which is really likely to be damaged by the alleged
misrepresentation.
(v)      Grant of injunction, in cases where passing off is found to
exist, is intended to serve two purposes, the first being preservation
of the reputation of the plaintiff, and the second, safeguarding of
the public against goods which are ―passed off as those of the
plaintiff.
(vi)     The ingredients/indicia of the tort of passing off are the
(a)     There must be sale, by the defendant, of
goods/services in a manner which is likely to deceive the
public into thinking that the goods/services are those of the
plaintiff.
(b)     The plaintiff is not required to prove long user to
prove established reputation. The existence, or otherwise,
of reputation, would depend upon the volume of the
plaintiffs sales and the extent of its advertisement.
(c)     The plaintiff is required to establish
(i)     misrepresentation by the defendant to the
public, though not necessarily mala fide,
(ii)    likelihood of confusion in the minds of the
public (the public           being      the potential
customers/users of the product) that the goods of the
defendant are those of the plaintiff, applying the test
of a person of ―imperfect recollection and ordinary
(iii) loss, or likelihood of loss, and
(iv)    goodwill of the plaintiff, as a prior user.
Elsewhere, the five elements of passing off have been identified as
(a) misrepresentation, (b) made by the trader in the course of trade,
(c) to prospective customers or ultimate consumers of the goods or
services supplied by him, (d) calculated to injure the business or
goodwill of another (i.e. that such injury is reasonably foreseeable)
and (e) actual damage, or the possibility of actual damage, to the
business or goodwill of the plaintiff.
(vii) In cases of alleged passing off, the Court, while examining
the likelihood of causing confusion, is required to consider, in
conjunction, inter alia,
(b)     the class of customers dealing in the product,
(c)     the extent of reputation possessed by the plaintiff,
(d)     the trade channels through which the product is
made available to the customer and
(e)     the existence of connection in the course of
trade. The Supreme Court has also held that, in passing off
action on the basis of unregistered trade marks, the Court is
required to assess the likelihood of deception or confusion
(i)     the nature of the marks, i.e. whether there
were demands/label marks/composite marks,
(ii)    the degree of similarity between the
(iii) the nature of the goods,
(iv)    the similarity in nature, character and
performance of the goods of the rival parties,
(v)     the class of purchasers, and the degree of
care which they would be expected to exercise
while purchasing the goods, and
(vi)    the mode of purchasing the goods and
placing orders.
(viii) That the defendant is not producing the goods
manufactured by the plaintiff may not be relevant, where the
plaintiff' s mark is found to have sufficient reputation.
(ix)     Courts are required to be doubly vigilant where passing off
is alleged in respect of pharmaceutical products, in view of the
possibility of adverse effects resulting from administration of a
wrong drug. For the said reason, the degree of proof is also lower,
in the case of alleged passing of pharmaceutical products.
(x)      Passing off differs from infringement. Passing off is based
on the goodwill that the trader has in his name, whereas
infringement is based on the trader's proprietary right in the name,
registered in his favour. Passing off is an action for deceit,
involving passing off the goods of one person as those of another,
whereas an action for infringement is a statutory remedy conferred
on the registered proprietor of a registered trade mark for
vindication of its exclusive right to use the trade mark in relation to
the goods in respect of which registration has been granted. Use of
the trade mark by the defendant is not necessary for infringement,
but it is a sine qua non for passing off. Once sufficient similarity,
as is likely to deceive, is shown, infringement stands established.
Passing off, however, may be resisted on the ground of added
material, such as packing, procurement through different trade
channels, etc., which would distinguish the goods of the defendant
from those of the plaintiff and belie the possibility of confusion or
deception.‖
35.6 In Renaissance Hotel Holdings Inc. v. B. Vijaya Sai24, the
Supreme Court held thus:
―50.     It could thus be seen that this Court has pointed out the
distinction between the causes of action and right to relief in suits
for passing off and for infringement of registered trade mark. It has
been held that the essentials of a passing off action with those in
respect of an action complaining of an infringement of a registered
trade mark, cannot be equated. It has been held that though an
action for passing off is a common law remedy being an action for
deceit, that is, a passing off by a person of his own goods as those
of another; the action for infringement is a statutory right conferred
on the registered proprietor of a registered trade mark for the
vindication of the exclusive rights to the use of the trade mark in
relation to those goods. The use by the defendant of the trade mark
of the plaintiff is a sine qua non in the case of an action for
infringement. It has further been held that if the essential features
of the trade mark of the plaintiff have been adopted by the
defendant, the fact that the get-up, packing and other writing or
marks on the goods or on the packets in which he offers his goods
for sale show marked differences, or indicate clearly a trade origin
different from that of the registered proprietor of the mark, would
be immaterial in a case of infringement of the trade mark, whereas
in the case of a passing off, the defendant may escape liability if he
can show that the added matter is sufficient to distinguish his
goods from those of the plaintiff.
51.     Again, while considering the provisions of Section 21 of
the 1940 Act, this Court in Ruston & Hornsby Ltd. v. Zamindara
Engg. Co.25] , observed thus : (SCC pp. 729-30, paras 4-6)
―4.       It very often happens that although the defendant is
not using the trade mark of the plaintiff, the get up of the
defendant's goods may be so much like the plaintiff's that a
clear case of passing off would be proved. It is on the
contrary conceivable that although the defendant may be
using the plaintiff's mark the get up of the defendant's
goods may be so different from the get up of the plaintiff's
goods and the prices also may be so different that there
would be no probability of deception of the public.
Nevertheless, in an action on the trade mark, that is to say,
in an infringement action, an injunction would issue as
soon as it is proved that the defendant is improperly using
the plaintiff's mark.
5.        The action for infringement is a statutory right. It is
dependent upon the validity of the registration and subject
to other restrictions laid down in Sections 30, 34 and 35 of
the Act. On the other hand the gist of a passing off action is
that A is not entitled to represent his goods as the goods
of B but it is not necessary for B to prove that A did this
knowingly or with any intent to deceive. It is enough that
the get-up of B's goods has become distinctive of them and
that there is a probability of confusion between them and
the goods of A. No case of actual deception nor any actual
damage need be proved. At common law the action was not
maintainable unless there had been fraud on A's part. In
equity,         however,      Lord       Cottenham,       L.C.,
in Millington v. Fox26 held that it was immaterial whether
the defendant had been fraudulent or not in using the
plaintiff's trade mark and granted an injunction
accordingly. The common law courts, however, adhered to
their view that fraud was necessary until the Judicature
Acts, by fusing law and equity, gave the equitable rule the
victory over the common law rule.
6.        The two actions, however, are closely similar in
some respects. As was observed by the Master of the Rolls
in Saville Perfumery Ltd. v. June Perfect Ltd.27 :
‗The statute law relating to infringement of trade
marks is based on the same fundamental idea as the
law relating to passing-off. But it differs from that
law in two particulars, namely (1) it is concerned
only with one method of passing-off, namely, the
use of a trade mark, and (2) the statutory protection
is absolute in the sense that once a mark is shown to
offend, the user of it cannot escape by showing that
by something outside the actual mark itself he has
distinguished his goods from those of the registered
proprietor. Accordingly, in considering the question
of infringement the courts have held, and it is now
expressly provided by the Trade Marks Act, 1938,
Section 4, that infringement takes place not merely
by exact imitation but by the use of a mark so
nearly resembling the registered mark as to be likely
36.    Passing off and trans border reputation
36.1 Where the plaintiff is dealing in goods or providing services,
under its mark, within the territory in which the defendant is alleged
to have, by adopting a deceptively similar mark, passed off its goods
or services as those of the plaintiff, identification of whether the
necessary ingredients of passing of do, or do not, exist, is a simpler
exercise. Where, however, as in the present case, the plaintiff has no
business, whatsoever, in India, matters become complex. Passing off
being a tort of capitalization, by the defendant, of the goodwill and
reputation earned by the plaintiff, it has to be established that the
plaintiff has goodwill and reputation in India.
36.2 Here again, where the plaintiff, though situated abroad, carries
on business within the territory of India, or has some business
exposure within India, the exercise of examining whether the plaintiff
has the requisite goodwill or reputation in India is simplified. We are,
however, faced with a situation in which, admittedly, the plaintiff
carries on no commercial activity, whatsoever, within the territory of
India. The activities in which the plaintiff is engaged are not, even to
the most infinitesimal degree, carried out within Indian borders.
36.3 Even in such a situation, however, the possibility of the
defendant, situated in India, passing off its goods and services as those
of the plaintiff is not entirely ruled out, for the simple reason that the
plaintiff, even if situated and carrying out its business activities
abroad, may, at any time, decide to expand, or diversify, to India. A
consumer of average intelligence and imperfect recollection, who
comes across the defendant operating under the mark of the foreign
plaintiff, or under a deceptively similar mark, may well presume that
the defendant has decided to enter the Indian commercial firmament.
Were this to be established, the defendant might still be found guilty
of passing off its goods or services as those of the plaintiff, though the
plaintiff is entirely situated abroad and has, till date, no commercial
existence in India.
36.4 By plain logic, however, in such a case, the plaintiff would
have to show that its goodwill and reputation, though garnered abroad,
is so considerable that it has spilled over to India. In other words, the
plaintiff would have to establish (i) that it has trans-border reputation,
i.e. reputation which extends beyond the regions in which it has
commercial existence, (ii) that the trans border reputation has
extended to India and (iii) that the ―spillage‖ is so considerable as to
confuse or deceive a customer of average intelligence and imperfect
recollection into believing that the goods or services of the defendant
are those of the plaintiff.
36.5 The task of identifying the indicia of trans border reputation
and the extent of is percolation into India to maintain a passing off
action against a defendant located in India is facilitated by a
considerable body of case law that has, over the years, developed on
the issue.   I deem it appropriate to refer, in this context, to the
decisions of the Supreme Court and of Division Benches of this Court
on the issue, as they are of binding precedential value.
36.6 In N.R. Dongre12, the respondent Whirlpool Corporation
(―Whirlpool‖) sued the appellant N R Dongre (―Dongre‖) for having
manufactured      and sold        washing machines under the mark
‗WHIRLPOOL‘, thereby confusing and deceiving buyers into
believing that they had been manufactured by Whirlpool. Though
Whirlpool was located abroad, and had no subsisting trade mark
registration in India, the Supreme Court upheld the decision of this
Court to injunct Dongre, as Whirlpool had the necessary trans border
reputation which had spilled over into India.              This finding was
returned on the basis of the following facts:
(i)    Though there was no evidence of actual sales of
Whirlpool appliances in India, Whirlpool had been frequently
advertised and featured in international magazines having
Indian circulation.
(ii)   Whirlpool was trading in its products in several parts of
the world and was also sending the products to India in a
limited circle.
(iii)   The worldwide reputation of Whirlpool was travelling
trans border to India through commercial publicity made in
magazines which were available or bought in India, in the strata
of society which used washing machines.
36.7 In Milmet Oftho9, the appellant Allergan Inc (―Allergan‖) sued
Milmet Oftho Industries (―Milmet‖) for having used the mark
‗OCUFLOX‘ for eye drops, in respect of which Allergan claimed to
be the prior owner and user of the mark. Allergan had no registration
of the mark in India, though it claimed to have several registrations
worldwide.       Applications, for registration of the mark, filed by
Allergan and Milmet were, however, pending with the Indian Trade
36.7.1 The learned Single Judge of the High Court declined
injunction, holding that Allergan was not selling OCUFLOX drops in
India, and that Milmet had first introduced the product in this country.
An appeal, therefrom, was allowed by the Division Bench, on the
premise that Allergan was first in the market.
36.7.2 The Supreme Court, in appeal, upheld the decision of the
Division Bench, reasoning thus:
―8.     We are in full agreement with what has been laid down by
this Court. Whilst considering the possibility of likelihood of
deception or confusion, in present times and particularly in the
field of medicine, the courts must also keep in mind the fact that
nowadays the field of medicine is of an international character.
The court has to keep in mind the possibility that with the passage
of time, some conflict may occur between the use of the mark by
the applicant in India and the user by the overseas company. The
court must ensure that public interest is in no way imperilled.
Doctors, particularly, eminent doctors, medical practitioners and
persons or companies connected with the medical field keep
abreast of latest developments in medicine and preparations
worldwide. Medical literature is freely available in this country.
Doctors, medical practitioners and persons connected with the
medical field regularly attend medical conferences, symposiums,
lectures, etc. It must also be remembered that nowadays goods are
widely advertised in newspapers, periodicals, magazines and other
media which is available in the country. This results in a product
acquiring a worldwide reputation. Thus, if a mark in respect of a
drug is associated with the respondents worldwide it would lead to
an anomalous situation if an identical mark in respect of a similar
drug is allowed to be sold in India. However, one note of caution
must be expressed. Multinational corporations, which have no
intention of coming to India or introducing their product in India
should not be allowed to throttle an Indian company by not
permitting it to sell a product in India, if the Indian company has
genuinely adopted the mark and developed the product and is first
in the market. Thus the ultimate test should be, who is first in the
market.
9.      In the present case, the marks are the same. They are in
respect of pharmaceutical products. The mere fact that the
respondents have not been using the mark in India would be
irrelevant if they were first in the world market. The Division
Bench had relied upon material which prima facie shows that the
respondents' product was advertised before the appellants entered
the field. On the basis of that material the Division Bench has
concluded that the respondents were first to adopt the mark. If that
be so, then no fault can be found with the conclusion drawn by the
36.7.3 The following three important features of this decision merit
(i)     Firstly, it is necessary to note that, even in this case, the
Supreme Court upheld the necessity of the existence of trans
border reputation which has spilled over into India as a
prerequisite for grant of relief. Given the peculiar nature of
pharmaceutical products, the Supreme Court held that, by dint
of extensive literature and advertisements, with which doctors
were necessarily conversant, existence of worldwide reputation
could be presumed.
(ii)   Secondly, the Supreme Court, even in such a case and
will full consciousness of the overwhelming public interest
involved, deemed it necessary to enter a cautionary caveat, by
holding that ―multinational corporations, which have no
intention of coming to India or introducing their product in
India should not be allowed to throttle an Indian company by
not permitting it to sell a product in India, if the Indian
company has genuinely adopted the mark and developed the
product and is first in the market‖.
(iii)  Thirdly, the Supreme Court was also obviously
influenced by the fact that the rival marks were identical, i.e.
OCUFLOX. The case was, therefore, one of clear imitation.
36.7.4 In this context, it is also necessary to understand the ―first in
the market‖ concept.        In Milmet Oftho9, the Supreme Court was
dealing with a situation in which Milmet and Allergan were selling
identical products, using identical marks. In such a situation, applying
the ―first in the market‖ principle poses no problems. In the present
case, per contra, there is nothing, whatsoever, to indicate that the
plaintiff was “in the EV-charging market” at all, even till date. The
―market‖, in which the plaintiff was using the asserted       mark, was
a market of taxi hailing services with, perhaps, associated activities of
food and grocery delivery and the like. In the EV-charging market,
therefore, it becomes questionable whether the plaintiff can claim to
be ―first‖.
36.8 Toyota5       is,   perhaps,     the     most    authoritative   of     the
pronouncemenets on trans border reputation and spillover, in the
context of passing off actions.
36.8.1 Toyota      Jidosha      Kabushiki      Kaisha   (―Toyota‖)     was      a
manufacturer of automobiles, incorporated in Japan. Toyota instituted
a suit against Prius Auto Industries Ltd (―Prius‖) in this Court,
alleging infringement and passing off, by Prius, by use of the marks
‗TOYOTA‘, ‗TOYOTA INNOVA‘, ‗TOYOTA DEVICE‘ and
‗PRIUS‘. Toyota claimed priority of user. Interlocutory injunction
was granted, by a learned Single Judge of this Court, in favour of
Toyota and against Prius, in respect of all these marks. Prius appealed
to the Division Bench of this Court only against the injunction granted
against use, by it, of the ‗PRIUS‘ mark. The Division Bench allowed
Prius‘ appeal, and set aside the injunction granted in favour of Toyota
and against Prius, qua use of the ‗PRIUS‘ mark by the latter. Toyota
appealed to the Supreme Court.
36.8.2 Before the learned Single Judge, Prius contended that the mark
‗PRIUS‘ had not been registered in favour of Toyota for any product,
and no PRIUS car had been shown to have been sold in India so as to
result in creation of any goodwill therein. The product itself not being
in existence in India, Prius contended that there was no possibility of
Indian customers identifying the defendant‘s registered ‗PRIUS‘ trade
mark with Toyota‘s products. Prius claimed, in fact, to be the first in
the Indian market to manufacture add on accessories.
36.8.3 The learned Single Judge of this Court held that as (i) Toyota
was the first in the world market to use the mark ‗PRIUS‘, (ii) the
goodwill and reputation of the brand ‗PRIUS‘, given quantum of sales
of ‗PRIUS‘ cars and exponential rise thereof, and (iii) the permeation,
into India, of the goodwill and reputation of Toyota in the mark
‗PRIUS‘, Toyota was entitled to an injunction as sought. In arriving
at the said decision, the learned Single Judge took into account (a) the
fact that the plaintiff‘s websites had been visited by many Indians
seeking information about Prius cars, (b) exhibitions of the car held in
India and other countries, (c) advertisements in different automobile
magazines and cover stories in international magazines and journals,
and (d) availability of information regarding the car in information-
disseminating portals such as Wikipedia and Britannica. The learned
Single Judge relied on N.R. Dongre12 and Milmet Oftho9 to hold that
the Court was required to examine who was first in using the mark in
the world market.        Given the repute that the mark had earned
internationally, which, according to the learned Single Judge, had
permeated into India, Toyota was held to be entitled to an injunction.
36.8.4 The Division Bench of this Court disagreed with the learned
Single Judge. It was held that the learned Single Judge had taken into
accounts facts pertaining to a period after the date of first use of the
impugned PRIUS mark by Prius. The reportage, and advertising, of
the launching of the Prius car by Toyota in 1997 was held not to be
groundbreaking, and figured as small news items in select papers.
The Division Bench held that the Universality doctrine (which posits
that a mark signifies the same source the world over) had been
replaced with the Territoriality doctrine (which recognized the
separate existence of the trade mark in each country). Prior to April
2001, when Prius commenced use of the impugned PRIUS mark in
India, internet penetration in the country was held to be limited, and
insufficient to justify an inference of establishment, by Toyota, of its
goodwill and reputation in India.
36.8.5 The Supreme Court, in its judgement, identified, at the outset,
the three ingredients of passing off as goodwill of the plaintiff,
misrepresentation by the defendant, and damage suffered by the
plaintiff as a consequence.
36.8.6 Paras 29 to 39 of the report, thereafter, deal with the
Territoriality doctrine, which applied to trade mark passing off in
preference to the Universality doctrine. They merit reproduction, in
29.     The view of the courts in UK can be found in the decision
of the UK Supreme Court in Starbucks11 wherein Lord Neuberger
observed as follows:
―52. As to what amounts to a sufficient business to
amount to goodwill, it seems clear that mere reputation is
not enough…. The claimant must show that it has a
significant goodwill, in the form of customers, in the
jurisdiction, but it is not necessary that the claimant
actually has an establishment or office in this country. In
order to establish goodwill, the claimant must have
customers within the jurisdiction, as opposed to people in
the jurisdiction who happen to be customers elsewhere.
Thus, where the claimant's business is carried on abroad, it
is not enough for a claimant to show that there are people
in this jurisdiction who happen to be its customers when
they are abroad. However, it could be enough if the
claimant could show that there were people in this
jurisdiction who, by booking with, or purchasing from, an
entity in this country, obtained the right to receive the
claimant's service abroad. And, in such a case, the entity
need not be a part or branch of the claimant: it can be
someone acting for or on behalf of the claimant.‖
30.     It seems that in Starbucks11, the Apex Court of UK had
really refined and reiterated an earlier view in Athletes' Foot
Mktg. Associates Inc. v. Cobra Sports Ltd.28, to the following
―… no trader can complain of passing-off as against him in
any territory … in which he has no customers, nobody who
is in trade relation with him. This will normally shortly be
expressed by stating that he does not carry on any trade in
that particular country … but the inwardness of it will be
that he has no customers in that country …”
31.      A passing reference to a similar view of the Federal Court
of Australia in Taco Bell v. Taco Co. of Australia29, may also be
made.
32.      Prof. Cristopher Wadlow's view on the subject appears to
be that the test of whether a foreign claimant may succeed in a
passing-off action is whether his business has a goodwill in a
particular jurisdiction, which criterion is broader than the
“obsolete” test of whether a claimant has a business/place of
business in that jurisdiction. If there are customers for the
claimant's products in that jurisdiction, then the claimant stands in
the same position as a domestic trader.
33.      The overwhelming judicial and academic opinion all over
the globe, therefore, seems to be in favour of the territoriality
principle. We do not see why the same should not apply to this
country.
34.      To give effect to the territoriality principle, the courts must
necessarily have to determine if there has been a spillover of the
reputation and goodwill of the mark used by the claimant who has
brought the passing-off action. In the course of such determination
it may be necessary to seek and ascertain the existence of not
necessarily a real market but the presence of the claimant through
its mark within a particular territorial jurisdiction in a more subtle
form which can best be manifested by the following illustrations,
though they arise from decisions of courts which may not be final
in that particular jurisdiction.
Panhard v. Panhard Levassor Motor Co. Ltd.30, the plaintiffs
were French car manufacturers who had consciously decided to not
launch their cars in England (apprehending patent infringement).
Nevertheless, some individuals had got them imported to England.
It was seen that England was one of the plaintiff's markets and
thus, in this case, permanent injunction was granted. Similarly
in Grant v. Levitt31, a Liverpool business concern trading as the
Globe Furnishing Company, obtained an injunction against the use
of the same name in Dublin as it was observed that advertisements
by the plaintiff had reached Ireland and there were Irish customers.
36.       C & A Modes v. C & A (Waterford) Ltd.32, was a case
where the plaintiffs operated a chain of clothes stores throughout
the UK and even in Northern Ireland but not in the Republic of
Ireland where the defendants were trading. The Court held that,
―a very substantial and regular custom from the Republic of
Ireland was enjoyed by this store. Up to that time an
excursion train travelled each Thursday from Dublin to
Belfast, and so great was the influx of customers from the
Republic as a result of that excursion that the store
ordinarily employed extra part-time staff on Thursday on
the same basis as it did on Saturday which were normally
the busiest shopping days.‖
The said view has since been upheld by the Irish Supreme Court.
37.       Whether the second principle evolved under the trinity test
i.e. triple identity test laid down in Reckitt & Colman Products
Ltd. v. Borden Inc.33 would stand established on the test of
likelihood of confusion or real/actual confusion is another question
that seems to have arisen in the present case as the Division Bench
of the High Court has taken the view that the first test i.e.
likelihood of confusion is required to be satisfied only in quia timet
actions and actual confusion will have to be proved when the suit
or claim is being adjudicated finally as by then a considerable
period of time following the initiation of the action of passing-off
might have elapsed. Once the claimant who has brought the action
of passing-off establishes his goodwill in the jurisdiction in which
he claims that the defendants are trying to pass off their goods
under the brand name of the claimant's goods, the burden of
establishing actual confusion as distinguished from possibility
thereof ought not to be fastened on the claimant. The possibility or
likelihood of confusion is capable of being demonstrated with
reference to the particulars of the mark or marks, as may be, and
the circumstances surrounding the manner of sale/marketing of the
goods by the defendants and such other relevant facts. Proof of
actual confusion, on the other hand, would require the claimant to
bring before the Court evidence which may not be easily
forthcoming and directly available to the claimant. In a given
situation, there may be no complaints made to the claimant that
goods marketed by the defendants under the impugned mark had
been inadvertently purchased as that of the plaintiff claimant. The
onus of bringing such proof, as an invariable requirement, would
be to cast on the claimant an onerous burden which may not be
justified. Commercial and business morality which is the
foundation of the law of passing-off should not be allowed to be
defeated by imposing such a requirement. In such a situation,
likelihood of confusion would be a surer and better test of proving
an action of passing-off by the defendants. Such a test would also
be consistent with commercial and business morality which the
law of passing-off seeks to achieve. In the last resort, therefore, it
is preponderance of probabilities that must be left to judge the
claim.
38.     The next exercise would now be the application of the
above principles to the facts of the present case for determination
of the correctness of either of the views arrived at in the two-tier
adjudication performed by the High Court of Delhi. Indeed, the
trade mark “Prius” had undoubtedly acquired a great deal of
goodwill in several other jurisdictions in the world and that too
much earlier to the use and registration of the same by the
defendants in India. But if the territoriality principle is to govern
the matter, and we have already held it should, there must be
adequate evidence to show that the plaintiff had acquired a
substantial goodwill for its car under the brand name “Prius” in
the Indian market also. The car itself was introduced in the Indian
market in the year 2009-2010. The advertisements in automobile
magazines, international business magazines; availability of data
in information-disseminating portals like Wikipedia and online
Britannica Dictionary and the information on the internet, even if
accepted, will not be a safe basis to hold the existence of the
necessary goodwill and reputation of the product in the Indian
market at the relevant point of time, particularly having regard to
the limited online exposure at that point of time i.e. in the year
2001. The news items relating to the launching of the product in
Japan isolatedly and singularly in The Economic Times (issues
dated 27-3-1997 and 15-12-1997) also do not firmly establish the
acquisition and existence of goodwill and reputation of the brand
name in the Indian market. Coupled with the above, the evidence
of the plaintiff's witnesses themselves would be suggestive of a very
limited sale of the product in the Indian market and virtually the
absence of any advertisement of the product in India prior to April
2001. This, in turn, would show either lack of goodwill in the
domestic market or lack of knowledge and information of the
product amongst a significant section of the Indian population.
While it may be correct that the population to whom such
knowledge or information of the product should be available
would be the section of the public dealing with the product as
distinguished from the general population, even proof of such
knowledge and information within the limited segment of the
population is not prominent.
39.     All these should lead to us to eventually agree with the
conclusion of the Division Bench of the High Court that the brand
name of the car Prius had not acquired the degree of goodwill,
reputation and the market or popularity in the Indian market so as
to vest in the plaintiff the necessary attributes of the right of a
prior user so as to successfully maintain an action of passing-off
even against the registered owner. In any event the core of the
controversy between the parties is really one of appreciation of the
evidence of the parties; an exercise that this Court would not
undoubtedly repeat unless the view taken by the previous forum is
wholly and palpably unacceptable which does not appear to be so
in the present premises.‖
36.8.7 Several important principles emerge from these passages,
which may be enumerated as under:
(i)     The territoriality principle applies; not the universality
doctrine. Existence of goodwill and reputation has, therefore,
to be shown to exist in India. Universal or worldwide goodwill
and reputation, sans any evidence of territorial goodwill and
reputation, is not sufficient.
(ii)    Mere reputation is not enough. The claimant/plaintiff
must show that it has significant goodwill.
(iii)   The actual existence of an office of the plaintiff in the
country of the defendant is not necessary.
(iv)    However, the claimant must have customers within the
country of the defendant, as opposed to persons in the
defendant‘s country who are customers elsewhere. Thus, where
the claimant‘s business is carried on abroad, it is not enough for
the claimant to show that there are people in the defendant‘s
country who happen to be its customers when they are abroad.
(vi)   However, it would be enough if the claimant could show
that there were people in the defendant‘s country who, by
booking with, or purchasing from an entity in the defendant’s
country, obtained the right to receive the claimant‘s service
abroad. The person from whom such booking or purchase took
place could be the claimant, or its branch office, or someone
acting for or on behalf of the claimant.
(vii)   The claimant must be ―present through its mark in the
territorial jurisdiction‖ of the country of the defendant, though
the existence of a ―real market‖ was not necessary.
(viii) Such presence could, for instance, be shown by extensive
advertisements which had been circulated and seen, or read, in
the country of the defendant.
(ix)   Once the existence of trans border reputation and
goodwill was thus established, the claimant was not required,
further, to prove the existence of actual confusion.           The
likelihood of the customer of average intelligence and imperfect
recollection being confused, by the use of the impugned mark
of the defendant, that the goods or services of the defendant
were those of the claimant-plaintiff, was sufficient.
37.   Applying the above principles
37.1 Applying these principles to the facts of the present case, I am
unable to hold the plaintiff entitled to injunctive relief, against the
defendant, as sought. The plaintiff has not, in my opinion – despite
the commendable efforts of Ms Sukumar to convince me otherwise –
been able to cross the Toyota5 trans-border threshold of goodwill and
reputation. I say so, for the following reasons:
(i)    In support of her contention that the plaintiff‘s trans
border reputation had spilled over into India, Ms Sukumar cited
(a)     articles in the CNBC and the Economic Times,
(b)     the downloading, by Indian users, of the plaintiff‘s
mobile App 2 lakh times, and
(c)     the results of a survey conducted among drivers in
Ahmedabad, Pune, Surat, Chennai and Kolkata, which
disclosed the number of times the plaintiff‘s website was
accessed by them.
(ii)   The CNBC article (reproduced in para 10 supra) reported
(a)     the plaintiff was launching its electric kick scooter-
sharing service in Madrid, following a roll-out the
previous year in Paris,
(b)     this marked a stepping stone in the plaintiff‘s move
towards new mobility options besides car hailing,
(c)     the electric scooter craze looked set to gain further
(d)     the plaintiff was promoting the advantages of
electric scooters as a viable option to beat traffic, when
(e)     the plaintiff was also seeking to branch out into
food delivery, electric scooter and bike rentals, so as to
become a “super app”,
(f)     for these expansions, the plaintiff was inviting
investments from investors, and
(g)     the plaintiff was backed by the Chinese and
German ―giants‖ Didi Chuxing and Daimler DAI-DE,
which itself owned a taxi hire application My Taxi.
(iii)  The Economic Times article, for its part, reported that
(a)     the plaintiff was a rival of Uber‘s ride sharing and
food delivery business,
(b)     Bolt also offered electric scooter rentals, car
sharing and a 15-minute grocery delivery service,
(c)     these services catered to 100 million customers in
45 countries and over 400 cities across Europe and
(d)     the plaintiff faced competition in food delivery
from, inter alia, Just Eat, Takeaway.com and DoorDash,
which had also largely entered Europe, and
(e)     to gain customers, platforms offered attractive
discounts, leading to price wars, and the plaintiff claimed
to be offering its services at lower prices than others.
(iv)   Neither of these articles, therefore, made even an oblique
reference to the plaintiff entering the EV charging business.
Regarding EV charging as ―allied‖ to electric scooter-sharing
services would, in my view, stretching the concept of allied
goods and services a notch too far. The import of these articles
is clear and obvious. The plaintiff was, till then, engaged in
providing taxi hailing services. It had, a year earlier, ventured
into the electric scooter sharing field, in Paris. It was seeking to
branch out into other cities in Europe and Africa. There is
nothing to indicate that it was either engaged in providing EV
charging services, or making EV charging points, or intending
to do so any time in the foreseeable future. More significantly,
these articles do not suggest, even obliquely, that the plaintiff
was expanding its activities to India or, for that matter, even to
Asia. It cannot, therefore, be held, on the basis of these articles,
that an average customer in India, who would read them, would
believe that the plaintiff was venturing into the Indian market
with EV charging solutions.
(v)      The defendant had not sought to contend, anywhere, that
it was engaged, commercially, in the activity of EV charging
stations, or in providing EV charging services. In fact, in para
12 of the plaint, as Mr Chander Lall correctly points out, the
plaintiff has acknowledged that ―consumers have become
accustomed to understanding that the trademark BOLT is a
commercial          sign     of   origin    specifically for  mobility,
transportation and delivery goods and services‖. There is no
reference, here, to providing EV charging services.
(vi)     The limited reference to EV charging stations installed
by the plaintiff34, is of charging docks installed by the plaintiff
in Tallinn and Estonia, with plans to install further docks in
Lithuania and Portugal, for charging the plaintiff’s electric
scooters. I am, prima facie, in agreement with Mr Lall that the
mere fact that the plaintiff, otherwise engaged in providing taxi-
hailing services and intending to expand into the electric
Refer paras 19 and 20 supra
scooter sharing business, was installing charging docks to
charge its scooters in Tallinn, Estonia, Lithuania and Portugal,
could hardly make out a case even for inferring the existence of
trans border reputation, in the plaintiff, in the commercial EV
charging segment, much less of permeation of such trans border
reputation into India.
(vii) The number of times the plaintiff‘s App has been
downloaded in India, or its website accessed by drivers, cannot,
in my prima facie view, make out a case of spillover of trans
border reputation of the plaintiff, in the EV charging market,
into India, even if, arguendo, EV charging were to be regarded
as an activity allied to electric scooter sharing. Toyota5 is clear
in requiring that, even if the plaintiff has no market in India, it
would be required to show that its goods or services were
purchased, or availed, by customers in India through the
plaintiff, its branch, or its agents. The plaintiff‘s App cannot
substitute as an agent of the plaintiff, especially as the App can
be downloaded anywhere in the world.
(viii) Equally, Toyota5 also approves the view, in Starbucks11,
that the existence of customers in the defendant‘s country, who
would avail the services of the plaintiff abroad, cannot make
out a case of permeation of trans border reputation.              Ms
Sukumar acknowledges that, even if persons in India were to
download the plaintiff‘s App, no services of the plaintiff could
be availed thereby in India, and that the purpose of such
downloading would only be to avail the plaintiff‘s services
abroad. The limited downloading of the plaintiff‘s App by
persons who may be travelling abroad to countries where the
plaintiff‘s services are available cannot, prima facie, be
regarded as any sign of spillover of the plaintiff‘s reputation
into India, much less in the EV charging arena.
(ix)   The ―driver survey‖, to which Ms. Sukumar drew
attention, tells us precious little.        All that is presented is a
tabular statement of drivers in five cities. This statement is
supposed to reflect the number of times the plaintiff‘s website
was accessed by the drivers.             Whether it does, or not, is
anybody‘s guess; at the very least, it is a matter which would
have to suffer trial even for a prima facie view to be ventured
thereon. Even if it does, the purpose of accessing the website is
unknown. Nor can the Court hold that the mere accessing of
the plaintiff‘s website in this fashion justifies a finding, even
prima facie, of permeation of the reputation of the plaintiff into
India, far less in the field of EV charging, which alone the
defendant is engaged in.
(x)    As in the case of Toyota5, in the present case too, the
evidence and material cited by Ms Sukumar, even view
cumulatively, do not constitute sufficient spillover, into India,
of the trans border reputation, if any, possessed by the plaintiff
with respect to the use of the                mark as would justify
injuncting the defendant from using the impugned                   mark
for EV charging stations.
(xi)   Though Ms Sukumar, in rejoinder, ventured a submission
that, even in the absence of spillover of trans border reputation,
mere intent, on the part of the plaintiff, to enter the Indian
market would be sufficient, the submission cannot, prima facie,
merit acceptance. It would, moreover, fly directly in the face of
the principles enunciated so authoritatively by the Supreme
Court in Toyota5.         Passing off is, at all times, a tort the
commission of which involves an element of confusion or
deception, and the confusion or deception must be suffered by
the mythical customer who chances on the defendant‘s mark.
For this, the awareness, by such customer, of the reputation of
the plaintiff, is an indispensable sine qua non. Intent of the
plaintiff to venture into the Indian market space cannot,
therefore, substitute the necessity of spillover of trans border
reputation.
(xii) For the same reason, the fact that the plaintiff may have
applied for obtaining trade mark registrations in India can have
no impact on the issue in controversy. The customer in India is
unaware of the number of applications submitted by the
plaintiff for registration of its mark.
37.2 In examining these aspects, the Court has to be acutely
conscious of the cautionary note sounded both in Milmet Oftho9 and
in Toyota5, that the Court must not permit large multinational
corporations, which have no intent of coming to India, to throttle an
Indian company by not permitting it to sell its product in India. The
plaintiff is not engaged in providing EV charging services anywhere
in the world. All that it has done, towards that end, is to install some
EV charging stations in a handful of locations, for charging its own
electric scooters.     No trans border reputation in providing EV
charging services can, therefore, be credited to the plaintiff. There is
nothing to indicate any permeation, into the Indian market space, or
the psyche of the Indian customer, of any such reputation of the
plaintiff in the EV charging sphere.            The material on which Ms
Sukumar relies, even seen cumulatively, cannot justify, prima facie,
any finding of spillover of trans border reputation of the plaintiff in
the EV charging arena into India.
37.3 For that matter, I am unable to convince myself, even prima
facie, that, even in the field of electric scooter sharing services, the
plaintiff has any trans border reputation, much less a reputation that
has spilled over into India. The plaintiff is, even internationally, a
new player in the electric scooter sharing field, though it might be
having considerable repute in the field of taxi-hailing.       Quite apart
from the fact that the viability of electric scooter sharing appears itself
to be mired in controversy, it is only in 2020 that the plaintiff
commenced providing such services in Paris. The existence of trans
border reputation, in the plaintiff, in the electric scooter sharing arena
too, is, therefore, extremely questionable. In any event, no spillover
of such reputation to India can, prima facie, be said to exist.
37.4 The defendant, on the other hand, is the first in the Indian
market in providing EV charging services. Toyota5 makes it clear that
the ―first in the market‖ principle has to be applied with respect to the
Indian, and not the international, market. The territoriality principle
has overtaken the universality doctrine. In the Indian market, the
defendant is not only the first; the material cited by Mr Lall, and noted
hereinbefore, make out, prima facie, an enviable exposure of the
defendant in the EV sharing space, far ahead of others in the field.
The comparative analysis of the plaintiff‘s and defendant‘s exposures
in this field in India, therefore, eminently call for application of the
note of caution sounded in Milmet Oftho9, of not allowing foreign
Companies to throttle Indian entrepreneurs.
37.5 There is no justification, therefore, prima facie, for the Court to,
by allowing the application of the petitioner, who has no market
exposure whatsoever in India, and, prima facie, no spillover or
percolation of its trans border reputation into India, to jeopardize the
market, or the repute, that the defendant has earned by use of the
impugned           mark, for providing EV charging services.
38.    Resultantly, I.A. 13529/2022 is dismissed.
39.    It need hardly be said that the views expressed in this
judgement are only prima facie, and not intended to influence the final
decision in the suit, one way or the other.