1. Impugned in this Appeal is Award dated 25th July 2019, passed by
Motor Accident Claims Tribunal, Kupwara, (for short “Tribunal”) on a
Claim petition bearing File no.04/2016 titled Jawahira Begum v. United
India Insurance and others, directing appellant Insurance Company to
pay compensation in the amount of Rs. 32,43,212/- along with 7.5%
interest per annum from the date of institution of claim till realization,
on the grounds made mention of therein.
2. A claim petition, as is discernible from perusal of the file, was filed by
respondents 1 to 3 before the Tribunal on 19.05.2016, averring therein
that deceased Parvaiz Ahmad Wani aged 32 years, died in an accident,
which took place on 12.02.2016 at Drugmulla, due to rash and negligent
driving of driver of offending vehicle, TATA Sumo bearing
Registration no. JK05/5713, which was insured with appellant
Insurance Company, Claimants / Respondents 1 to 3 sought
compensation to the tune of Rs.1,00,000,000/-.
3. Appellant Insurance Company resisted the claim before the Tribunal on
the ground that claimants had no cause of action against appellant-
Insurance Company because as per police report alleged accident took
place due to collusion between the two vehicles, i.e., bearing
Registration no.JK09-5769 (Maruti Car) and no.JK05-5713 (Tata
Sumo) and that the collusion between two vehicles had taken place due
to contributory negligence of both the drivers of aforesaid vehicles.
4. The Tribunal, in view of pleadings of parties, framed following Issues
for determination, which are:
(1) Whether on 12.02.2016 a TATA Sumo bearing registration
no.JK05-5713, driven by its driver respondent no.3 rashly and
negligently from Kupwara to Drugmulla collided with a Maruti
Vehicle 800 bearing Registration no.JK09-5759, as a result of
which deceased Parvaiz Ahmad Wani who was driving the said
Maruti vehicle from Drugmulla to Kupwara sustained critical
injuries and succumbed to the same at SMHS Hospital, Srinagar
on 29.02.2016? ...OPP
(2) Whether the accident was the result of contributory negligence
of both the drivers of TATA Sumo bearing registration No.
JK05-5713 and Maruti vehicle 800 bearing registration No.
JK09-5759, as such the respondent company cannot be
exclusively saddled with liability of compensation in favour of
the petitioners? ...OPR-1
(3) Whether respondent/driver of the vehicle TATA Sumo bearing
registration No. JK05-5713 was driving the offending vehicle
without valid and effective driving license at the time of
accident, as such the respondent company cannot be saddled
with liability for payment of compensation? ...OPR-1
(4) In case issue No. 1 is proved in affirmative, to what amount of
compensation the petitioners are entitled to and from whom?
5. Claimants, in support of their claim petition, produced and examined
three witnesses before the Tribunal besides claimants/respondent no.1.
Appellant Insurance Company also produced two witnesses. By
impugned Award, the Tribunal found claimants/respondents entitled to
receive compensation of Rs.32,43,212/- along with 7.5% interest per
annum.
6. I have heard learned counsel for parties at length. I have perused the
record and considered the matter.
7. Learned counsel for appellant Insurance Company has stated that the
Tribunal erred in passing impugned Award while calculating the
income of deceased as Rs.31,93,212/- on account of loss of dependency
as monthly income of deceased was taken as Rs.18,608/-. The deceased
is said to have been of the age of 32 years at the time of accident, so
30% of the income was added to the income of deceased as future
prospects and net salary of deceased taken as Rs.24,191/- per month
and yearly income taken as Rs.2,90,292/-.
8. It is also contended by learned counsel for appellant Insurance
Company that deceased is having three dependents and the Tribunal
deducted 1/3rd of income towards deceased personal and living
expenses and Rs.1,86,400/- was taken as annual loss of income of
dependency. The Tribunal while calculating further had wrongly taken
Rs.2,90,292/- as annual loss of income of dependency instead of
Rs.1,86,400/- and multiplier 11 was applied and compensation under
Head of Loss of Income was wrongly calculated as Rs.31,93,212/-
instead of Rs.20,50,400/-. According to learned counsel, compensation
granted by the Tribunal is highly exorbitant.
9. When above submissions of learned counsel for appellant-Insurance
Company is tested on the touchstone of law laid down by the Supreme
Court in Sarla Verma v. Delhi Transport Corporation, 2009 AIR (SC)
3104 and National Insurance Company v. Pranay Sethi AIR 2017 SC
5157, the same seem to be misconceived.
10.The Tribunal has in detail discussed all the aspects of the matter
concerning calculation of compensation to be granted in favour of
claimants. As can been seen from perusal of impugned Award, the
Tribunal, while deciding Issue no.4, has in detail discussed the law laid
down by the Supreme Court in Santosh Devi v. National Insurance Co.
Ltd, AIR 2012 SC 2185 and Sarla Verma (supra) and thereafter
computed the compensation to be paid to claimants/respondents.
In the above milieu, it is germane to add that there cannot be
actual compensation for anguish of heart or for mental tribulations. The
quintessentiality lies in the pragmatic computation of the loss sustained
which has to be in the realm of realistic approximation. Therefore,
Section 168 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 stipulates that there should
be grant of “just compensation”. Thus, it becomes a challenge for a
court of law to determine “just compensation” which is neither a
bonanza nor a windfall, and simultaneously, should not be a pittance.
[Vide: K. Suresh v. New India Assurance Co. Ltd. (2012) 12 SCC 274 ].
11.It is next averred that Tribunal has failed to consider that deceased
being government employee, working in Forest Department as Junior
Assistant and posted in Forest Division, Kupwara, his legal heirs would
be entitled to full salary for a period of seven years and, therefore, it
was incumbent upon the Tribunal to take into consideration the said fact
while assessing the payment of compensation, but this aspect was
ignored by the Tribunal while passing impugned Award.
12.The above submission of learned counsel for appellant Insurance
Company qua salary/pensionary benefits is misconceived. Whether
pensionary benefits can be deducted by calculating loss of income, is
no longer res integra. Family pension received by family of deceased
cannot be deducted while calculating the loss of income.
13.Law is now settled. The Supreme Court in Reliance General Insurance
Company v. Shashi Sharma (2016) 9 SCC 627, Sebastiani Lakra v.
National Insurance Company Limited, AIR 2018 SC 2079 ; and
National Insurance Company Ltd v. Mannat Johal (2019) 15 SCC 260,
has held that family pension received by family of deceased employee
cannot be deducted from calculating the loss of income and similarly
other benefits, extended to dependents of deceased employee, viz.
family pension, life insurance, provident fund etc., must remain
unaffected and cannot be allowed to be deducted.
14.The deductions cannot be allowed from the amount of compensation
either on account of insurance, or on account of pensionary benefits or
gratuity or grant of employment to kin of deceased. The main reason is
that all these amounts are earned by deceased on account of contractual
relations entered into by him with others. It cannot be said that these
amounts have accrued to dependents or legal heirs of deceased on
account of his death in a motor vehicle accident. The claimants/
dependents are entitled to just compensation under the Motor Vehicles
Act as a result of death of deceased in a motor vehicle accident. Thus,
the natural corollary is that the advantage that accrues to the estate of
deceased or to his dependents as a result of some contract or act which
deceased performed in his life time cannot be said to be the outcome or
result of death of deceased even though these amounts may go into the
hands of dependents only after his death.
15.Insofar as the amounts of pension and gratuity are concerned, these are
paid on account of the service rendered by deceased to his employer. It
is now an established principle of Service Jurisprudence that pension
and gratuity are the property of deceased. They are more in the nature
of deferred wages. The deceased employee works throughout his life
expecting that on his retirement he will get substantial amount as
pension and gratuity. These amounts are also payable on death,
whatever be the cause of death. Therefore, applying the same
principles, the said amount cannot be deducted.
16.The Supreme Court in Helen C. Rebello (Mrs) and others v.
Maharashtra State Transport Corporation and another, (1999) 1 SCC
90, has held that Provident Fund, Pension, Insurance and similarly any
cash, bank balance, shares, fixed deposits, etcetera, are all pecuniary
advantages receivable by heirs on account of one’s death but all these
have no correlation with the amount receivable under a statute
occasioned only on account of accidental death. Such an amount will
not come within the periphery of the Motor Vehicles Act, to be termed
as pecuniary advantage liable for deduction and that family pension is
also earned by an employee for benefit of his family in the form of his
contribution in the service in terms of the service conditions receivable
by heirs after his death and heirs receive family pension even otherwise
than accidental death. The Supreme Court also said that compassionate
appointment in the case of death of an employee in harness, could not
be stated to be an advantage receivable by heirs on account of one’s
death and had no correlation with amount receivable under a statute
occasioned on account of accidental death. Compassionate appointment
may have nexus with death of an employee while in service but it is not
necessary that it should have a correlation with accidental death.
17.Learned counsel for appellant-Insurance Company has also urged that
the Tribunal has erred in laying down that appellant Insurance
Company shall deposit award amount within two months along with
interest @ 7.5.% per annum from the date of filing of petition till final
liquidation, failing which appellant Insurance Company had to pay at
enhanced rate of interest @ 9% per annum from the date of filing of
petition till realization of award amount. While saying this, he also
avers that even granting of 7.5% interest is not in accordance with law
in the face of delay committed by respondents in prosecuting the matter
with expedition.
18.Insofar as above submission of learned counsel for appellant as regards
interest part is concerned, there is sum and substance in submission of
learned counsel for appellant. The Tribunal has wrongly applied 9%
interest. There shall be interest of 6% per annum from the date of
institution of the claim till final realisation. To that extent impugned
Award is also set-aside and modified.
19.For the foregoing reasons, the Appeal is dismissed. Nevertheless,
impugned Award dated 25th July 2019, passed by Motor Accident
Claims Tribunal, Kupwara, as regards payment of interest @ 9%, is set-
aside and the Award is modified to the extent that interest @ 6% per
annum shall be paid by appellant Insurance Company from the date of
institution of the claim till final realisation.
20.Respondents/Claimants 1 to 3 have filed Cross objections/Appeal as
they also feel aggrieved of the Award dated 25th July 2019 passed by
Motor Accident Claims Tribunal, Kupwara, in claim petition No.
04/2016, titled Jawahira Begum and others v. United India Insurance
Company Limited and others, and seek setting-aside thereof by
increasing the quantum of compensation.
21.Learned counsel for respondent has stated that respondents/claimants
filed a claim petition titled Jawahira Begum & Ors V/s United India
Insurance Co. Ltd. and others, before the Motor Accident Claims
Tribunal, Kupwara, on 19.05.2016 and upon full-dress trial, the
Tribunal passed the award for an amount of Rs.32,43,212/- in favour of
claimants against the Insurance Company. He contends that the view
taken and conclusion drawn by the Tribunal in impugned Award, regard
being had to the pleadings of the appellants, is not at all admitted by the
attendant facts and circumstances of the case, rendering in sequel
thereto, the impugned award bad and unsustainable in law and
accordingly liable to be corrected to the tune of applying multiplier 16
instead of 11 while passing the final award, the same can be corrected.
22.Learned counsel for respondents/claimants has also averred that
deceased was working in Forest Department as Junior Assistant and the
net salary as per Last pay certificate was Rs. 18,608/- per month, the
deceased was 32 years of age at the time of accident, so the Tribunal
was supposed to enhance the future income of deceased 50% instead of
30% as future income under law, as such the net salary of the deceased
becomes Rs. 27912/- per month and yearly income of the deceased
becomes Rs, 3,34,944/- instead of 2,90,292/- the deceased is having
three dependents (claimants 1 to 3) as such the Tribunal has deducted
1/3rd of the income towards deceased personal and living expenses as
such the yearly income of the deceased would have been Rs. 2,23,296/-
instead of Rs.2,90,292/- as annual loss of dependency and the Tribunal
was supposed to apply multiplier of 16 instead of 11 in terms of the law
laid down by the Supreme Court in Pranay Sethi and Sarla Verma
(supra) and the compensation under the head of loss of income has been
wrongly calculated as Rs.31,93,212/- instead of Rs.35,72,736/-. While
concluding the submissions, learned counsel for respondents/ claimants
prays for enhancement of compensation awarded by the Tribunal.
23.I have given my thoughtful consideration to the submissions made by
learned counsel for respondents/claimants. I do not find any merit in
the Cross Objections/Appeal as the Tribunal has given just
compensation in favour of claimants and the same does not warrant any
interference, more particularly in view of the findings given by me
herein above while dismissing, the appeal, bearing Mac App
no.78/2019.
24.In view of above the Cross Objections/Appeal is also dismissed.
25.Copy be sent down along with the record.