The petitioners arraigned as accused in the above captioned FIR, have come up before
this Court under Section 482 CrPC for quashing of the FIR and all consequential proceedings
based on the compromise with the victim.
2.    During the pendency of the petition, the accused and the victim(s) have compromised
the matter, and its copy is annexed with this petition as annexure P-2.
3.    After that, the petitioners came up before this Court to quash the FIR, and in the
quashing petition, the victim has been impleaded as respondent.
4.    On 21 Mar 2022, the victim/ aggrieved person Balwinder Singh (R-2) stated before the
JMIC Jalandhar that there would be no objection if the court quashes this FIR and consequent
proceedings. As per the concerned court's report dated 23 Mar 2022, the parties consented to
the quashing of FIR and consequent proceedings without any threat.
5.    Despite the opposition of the State’s counsel to this compromise, the following aspects
CRM-M No. 11258 of 2022                                                                     --2--
a)     The accused and the private respondent(s) have amicably settled the matter
between them in terms of the compromise deed and the statements recorded before
b)     A perusal of the documents reveal that the settlement has not been secured
through coercion, threats, social boycotts, bribes, or other dubious means;
c)     The victim has willingly consented to the nullification of criminal proceedings;
d)     There is no objection from the private respondents in case present FIR and
consequent proceedings are quashed;
e)     In the given facts, the occurrence does not affect public peace or tranquillity, moral
turpitude or harm the social and moral fabric of the society or involve matters
concerning public policy;
f)     The rejection of compromise may also lead to ill will. The pendency of trial affects
g)     There is nothing on the record to prima facie consider the accused as an
unscrupulous, incorrigible, or professional offender;
h)     The purpose of criminal jurisprudence is reformatory in nature and to work to
bring peace to family, community, and society;
i)     The exercise of the inherent power for quashing the FIR and all consequential
proceedings is justified to secure the ends of justice.
6.    The offence under section 324 IPC is non compoundable under Section 320 of Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC). However, without adjudicating this point, in the facts and
circumstances peculiar to this case, the prosecution qua the non-compoundable offences can
be closed by quashing the FIR and consequent proceedings.
7.    In Ram Prasad v State of Uttar Pradesh, (1982) 2 SCC 149, Supreme Court holds,
The appellants, who are the accused and the complainant, Shri Ram,
who was the person injured as a result of firing, have appeared
before us and stated that they wish to compound the offence. The
offence for which both the appellants have been convicted is one
under Section 307 read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code, but
having regard to the nature of the injury sustained by Shri Ram, we
think that the proper offence for which the appellants should have
been convicted was under Section 324 read with Section 34. Shri Ram
received only one injury on the shoulder and that was also in the
nature of simple hurt. We would, therefore, convert the conviction of
the appellants to one under Section 324 read with Section 34. Since
the parties belong to the same village and desire to compound the
offence, we think, in the larger interest of peace and harmony
between the parties and having regard to the nature of the injury,
that it would be proper to allow the parties to compound the offence.
8.    In Shiji @ Pappu v. Radhika, (2011) 10 SCC 705, Hon’ble Supreme Court holds,
CRM-M No. 11258 of 2022                                                                 --3--
[13]. It is manifest that simply because an offence is not
compoundable under Section 320 Indian Penal Code is by itself no
reason for the High Court to refuse exercise of its power under
Section 482 Criminal Procedure Code That power can in our opinion
be exercised in cases where there is no chance of recording a
conviction against the accused and the entire exercise of a trial is
destined to be an exercise in futility. There is a subtle distinction
between compounding of offences by the parties before the trial
Court or in appeal on one hand and the exercise of power by the High
Court to quash the prosecution under Section 482 Criminal Procedure
Code on the other. While a Court trying an accused or hearing an
appeal against conviction, may not be competent to permit
compounding of an offence based on a settlement arrived at
between the parties in cases where the offences are not
compoundable under Section 320, the High Court may quash the
prosecution even in cases where the offences with which the accused
stand charged are non-compoundable. The inherent powers of the
High Court under Section 482 Criminal Procedure Code are not for
that purpose controlled by Section 320 Criminal Procedure Code
Having said so, we must hasten to add that the plenitude of the
power under Section 482 Criminal Procedure Code by itself, makes it
obligatory for the High Court to exercise the same with utmost care
and caution. The width and the nature of the power itself demands
that its exercise is sparing and only in cases where the High Court is,
for reasons to be recorded, of the clear view that continuance of the
prosecution would be nothing but an abuse of the process of law. It is
neither necessary nor proper for us to enumerate the situations in
which the exercise of power under Section 482 may be justified. All
that we need to say is that the exercise of power must be for securing
the ends of justice and only in cases where refusal to exercise that
power may result in the abuse of the process of law. The High court
may be justified in declining interference if it is called upon to
appreciate evidence for it cannot assume the role of an appellate
court while dealing with a petition under Section 482 of the Criminal
Procedure Code. Subject to the above, the High Court will have to
consider the facts and circumstances of each case to determine
whether it is a fit case in which the inherent powers may be invoked.
9.    In Parbatbhai Aahir v State of Gujarat, (2017) 9 SCC 641, a three Judges Bench of Hon’ble
Supreme Court, laid down the broad principles for quashing of FIR, which are reproduced as
[16]. The broad principles which emerge from the precedents on the
subject, may be summarized in the following propositions:
16 (i) Section 482 preserves the inherent powers of the High Court to
prevent an abuse of the process of any court or to secure the ends of
justice. The provision does not confer new powers. It only recognises
and preserves powers which inhere in the High Court;
16 (ii) The invocation of the jurisdiction of the High Court to quash a
First Information Report or a criminal proceeding on the ground that
a settlement has been arrived at between the offender and the victim
is not the same as the invocation of jurisdiction for the purpose of
compounding an offence. While compounding an offence, the power
of the court is governed by the provisions of section 320 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973. The power to quash under Section 482
is attracted even if the offence is non-compoundable.
CRM-M No. 11258 of 2022                                                             --4--
16 (iii) In forming an opinion whether a criminal proceeding or
complaint should be quashed in exercise of its jurisdiction under
Section 482, the High Court must evaluate whether the ends of
justice would justify the exercise of the inherent power;
16 (iv) While the inherent power of the High Court has a wide ambit
and plenitude it has to be exercised; (i) to secure the ends of justice
or (ii) to prevent an abuse of the process of any court;
16 (v) The decision as to whether a complaint or First Information
Report should be quashed on the ground that the offender and victim
have settled the dispute, revolves ultimately on the facts and
circumstances of each case and no exhaustive elaboration of
principles can be formulated;
16 (vi) In the exercise of the power under Section 482 and while
dealing with a plea that the dispute has been settled, the High Court
must have due regard to the nature and gravity of the offence.
Heinous and serious offences involving mental depravity or offences
such as murder, rape and dacoity cannot appropriately be quashed
though the victim or the family of the victim have settled the dispute.
Such offences are, truly speaking, not private in nature but have a
serious impact upon society. The decision to continue with the trial in
such cases is founded on the overriding element of public interest in
punishing persons for serious offences;
16 (vii) As distinguished from serious offences, there may be criminal
cases which have an overwhelming or predominant element of a civil
dispute. They stand on a distinct footing in so far as the exercise of
the inherent power to quash is concerned;
16 (viii) Criminal cases involving offences which arise from
commercial, financial, mercantile, partnership or similar transactions
with an essentially civil flavour may in appropriate situations fall for
quashing where parties have settled the dispute;
16 (ix) In such a case, the High Court may quash the criminal
proceeding if in view of the compromise between the disputants, the
possibility of a conviction is remote and the continuation of a criminal
proceeding would cause oppression and prejudice; and
16 (x) There is yet an exception to the principle set out in
propositions (viii) and (ix) above. Economic offences involving the
financial and economic well-being of the state have implications
which lie beyond the domain of a mere dispute between private
disputants. The High Court would be justified in declining to quash
where the offender is involved in an activity akin to a financial or
economic fraud or misdemeanour. The consequences of the act
complained of upon the financial or economic system will weigh in
the balance.
10.  In Ramgopal v. The State of Madhya Pradesh, Cr.A 1489 of 2012, decided on 29.09.2021,
Hon’ble Supreme Court holds,
[11]. True it is that offences which are ‘non-compoundable’ cannot be
compounded by a criminal court in purported exercise of its powers
under Section 320 Cr.P.C. Any such attempt by the court would
amount to alteration, addition and modification of Section 320 Cr.P.C,
which is the exclusive domain of Legislature. There is no patent or
latent ambiguity in the language of Section 320 Cr.P.C., which may
justify its wider interpretation and include such offences in the docket
of ‘compoundable’ offences which have been consciously kept out as
non-compoundable. Nevertheless, the limited jurisdiction to
CRM-M No. 11258 of 2022                                                              --5--
compound an offence within the framework of Section 320 Cr.P.C. is
not an embargo against invoking inherent powers by the High Court
vested in it under Section 482 Cr.P.C. The High Court, keeping in view
the peculiar facts and circumstances of a case and for justifiable
reasons can press Section 482 Cr.P.C. in aid to prevent abuse of the
process of any Court and/or to secure the ends of justice.
[12]. The High Court, therefore, having regard to the nature of the
offence and the fact that parties have amicably settled their dispute
and the victim has willingly consented to the nullification of criminal
proceedings, can quash such proceedings in exercise of its inherent
powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C., even if the offences are non-
compoundable. The High Court can indubitably evaluate the
consequential effects of the offence beyond the body of an individual
and thereafter adopt a pragmatic approach, to ensure that the felony,
even if goes unpunished, does not tinker with or paralyze the very
object of the administration of criminal justice system.
[13]. It appears to us those criminal proceedings involving non-
heinous offences or where the offences are predominantly of a
private nature, can be annulled irrespective of the fact that trial has
already been concluded or appeal stands dismissed against
conviction. Handing out punishment is not the sole form of delivering
justice. Societal method of applying laws evenly is always subject to
lawful exceptions. It goes without saying, that the cases where
compromise is struck postconviction, the High Court ought to exercise
such discretion with rectitude, keeping in view the circumstances
surrounding the incident, the fashion in which the compromise has
been arrived at, and with due regard to the nature and seriousness of
the offence, besides the conduct of the accused, before and after the
incidence. The touchstone for exercising the extraordinary power
under Section 482 Cr.P.C. would be to secure the ends of justice.
There can be no hard and fast line constricting the power of the High
Court to do substantial justice. A restrictive construction of inherent
powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C. may lead to rigid or specious justice,
which in the given facts and circumstances of a case, may rather lead
to grave injustice. On the other hand, in cases where heinous
offences have been proved against perpetrators, no such benefit
ought to be extended, as cautiously observed by this Court
in Narinder Singh &Ors. vs. State of Punjab &Ors. [(2014) 6 SCC 466, ¶
29], and Laxmi Narayan [(2019) 5 SCC 688, ¶ 15].
[14]. In other words, grave or serious offences or offences which
involve moral turpitude or have a harmful effect on the social and
moral fabric of the society or involve matters concerning public
policy, cannot be construed between two individuals or groups only,
for such offences have the potential to impact the society at large.
Effacing abominable offences through quashing process would not
only send a wrong signal to the community but may also accord an
undue benefit to unscrupulous habitual or professional offenders,
who can secure a ‘settlement’ through duress, threats, social
boycotts, bribes or other dubious means. It is well said that “let no
guilty man escape, if it can be avoided.”
11.    In Shakuntala Sawhney v Kaushalya Sawhney, (1979) 3 SCR 639, at P 642, Hon’ble
Supreme Court observed that the finest hour of Justice arises propitiously when parties, who
fell apart, bury the hatchet and weave a sense of fellowship or reunion.
CRM-M No. 11258 of 2022                                                                 --6--
12.   In Himachal Pradesh Cricket Association v State of Himachal Pradesh, 2018 (4) Crimes
324, Hon’ble Supreme Court holds “[47]. As far as Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 135 of 2017 is
concerned, the appellants came to this Court challenging the order of cognizance only because
of the reason that matter was already pending as the appellants had filed the Special Leave
Petitions against the order of the High Court rejecting their petition for quashing of the
FIR/Chargesheet. Having regard to these peculiar facts, writ petition has also been
entertained. In any case, once we hold that FIR needs to be quashed, order of cognizance
would automatically stands vitiated.”
13.   Considering the entire facts, compromise, and in the light of the above-mentioned
judicial precedents, I believe that continuing these proceedings will not suffice any fruitful
purpose whatsoever. In the facts and circumstances peculiar to this case, the Court invokes the
inherent jurisdiction under section 482 CrPC and quashes the FIR and all subsequent
proceedings qua the petitioner(s). The bail bonds of the petitioner are accordingly discharged.
All pending application(s), if any, stand closed.
Petition allowed in the terms mentioned above.