CM(M) 36/2022 & CM No. 2056/2022 (for stay)
3.     The present petition under Article 227 of the Constitution of India
impugns the order dated 2nd December, 2021 passed by the District Judge
(Commercial Court) in CS (COMM.) No. 2857/2021, whereby show cause
notice has been directed to be issued to the petitioner Bank (hereinafter
‘plaintiff’), to be answered and endorsed through the Chairman, as to why
criminal contempt should not be initiated against him for overreaching the
process of the Court.
4.     The facts giving rise to the filing of the commercial suit leading to the
(i) The respondent (hereinafter ‘defendant’) approached the plaintiff
for grant of a car loan cum hypothecation scheme of Rs.5,01,000/-
for the purchase of a vehicle. The loan documents were executed
and the loan was duly sanctioned to the defendant on 21st
(ii) The defendant defaulted in payments of monthly instalments
towards repayment of the loan and consequently, issued a notice
dated 16th April, 2021 to the defendant to recall the loan facility
available to the defendant.
(iii) In August, 2021, the plaintiff filed a commercial suit for recovery
against the defendant which was registered as CS (COMM.) No.
5.     The summons were issued in the commercial suit on 16th August,
2021. The relevant part of the order is set out below:
“Issue notice of suit (in the prescribed form viz. the
summons for settlement of issues) as well as the
accompanying applications with all the annexed
documents to the defendants on filing of the process fee
by the plaintiff. In case any address of the defendant(s) is
of outstation, the ordinary process be sent through the
District Judge concerned.
Process be also sent through registered/speed post
AD. The sealed covers containing the summons and
complete paperbook of the case be handed over dasti to
the plaintiff/counsel for putting the same in the postal
transmission. The original postal receipt(s) along with
the downloaded tract report from the site of India Post be
placed on record by the plaintiff/counsel on the next date.
In case the plaintiff has any e-mail, fax ID and
mobile number (having facility of whatsApp/Gims/Sandes
App) of the defendant, defendant be served under Rule12
of the Delhi Court Services of Process By Courier, FAX
and Electronic Mail Service (Civil Proceedings) Rule
2010. The plaintiff shall file the affidavit qua the same.
In terms of Rule 13 plaintiff is directed to place on
record a copy of the plaint and· documents in electronic
format/scanned images in compliance of Rule 13 for
forwarding/annexing/attaching the same with the
process. Requisite process fee for sending process by e-
mail in compliance of Rule 14 be also filed alongwith the
copies as above for onward transmission to Nazarat
Branch, Tis Hazari Courts for service through e-mail.”
6.     In terms of the aforesaid order passed by the Commercial Court, the
plaintiff took steps for affecting service on the defendant through ordinary
process as well as speed post, by filing process fee and sealed covers
containing the summons and paper book respectively. Pursuant thereto,
steps were taken for affecting service on the defendant by ordinary process
as well as through speed post. In this regard, reference may be made to the
speed post notices issued and the speed post tracking report, as also the
report of the Ahlmad, attached to the Commercial Court. In addition to the
service through the above modes, the plaintiff also sent the photograph of
the summons issued by the Commercial Court to the defendant by means of
WhatsApp since the plaintiff had the phone number of the defendant
provided in the loan documents.
7.     When the matter came up before the Commercial Court on 2nd
December, 2021, the contention of the defendant was noted by the
Commercial Court that the defendant had received a private notice of
appearance for the said date through WhatsApp on 30th November, 2021 and
further, that the defendant had not received any notice/summons from the
Court. The contention of the plaintiff was also noted that the plaintiff had
filed the process fee and in addition thereto, photograph of the summons
was also sent through WhatsApp to the defendant. On the basis of the above,
the Commercial Court passed the impugned order issuing show cause notice
to the plaintiff as to why criminal contempt proceedings be not initiated
against the plaintiff.
8.     Relevant observations of the Commercial Court are set out below:
“Today this kind of debacle was seen in other cases of
ICICI Bank Ltd. also but it was ignored. Now it appears that that
plaintiff has adopted this kind of practice on a regular basis for
the reasons best known to it and it certainly amounts to over
reaching the judicial system. No party has a right to start a
parallel system along with the judicial proceedings. The plaintiff
has been called upon to explain the same.
Plaintiff to show cause as to why the action be not
recommended against it for the criminal contempt of the court
for over reaching the process of the court.
Show cause notice be replied, forwarded or endorsed
through the Chairman of the plaintiff bank for the next date of
hearing.”
9.     Senior counsel appearing on behalf of the plaintiff assails the
impugned order on the following grounds:
(i)    There was no violation of the order dated 16th August, 2021 passed by
the Commercial Court inasmuch as the plaintiff had taken steps for the
ordinary service as well as service through speed post upon the defendant.
(ii)   Process fee was duly filed in terms of which the summons were
prepared for ordinary service by the process server and summons in respect
of service through speed post were handed over to the plaintiff to be sent
through speed post.
(iii)  Even though steps were not taken by the plaintiff for service through
email, but the photograph of the summons were duly sent to the defendant
through WhatsApp as provided in the order dated 16th August, 2021.
(iv)   The photocopy of the summons were sent through WhatsApp only to
ensure presence of defendants before the Commercial Court on the next date
of hearing.
(v)    Reliance has been placed on the order dated 10th July, 2020 of the
Supreme Court in Suo Moto W.P.(C) No. 3/2022 to contend that the
Supreme Court itself during the period of lockdown had directed service to
be affected through various electronic means including WhatsApp.
(vi)   Even if the photograph of the summons were sent to the defendant
through WhatsApp, no case of contempt has been made out much less
criminal contempt.
10.    None appears on behalf of the respondent despite advance service. In
the facts and circumstances of the case, no notice is required to be issued to
the respondent.
11.    In the considered view of this Court, there was no occasion at all for
the Commercial Court to issue show cause notice for initiating criminal
contempt against the plaintiff. Just because the photograph of the summons
were sent by the plaintiff to the defendant through WhatsApp cannot amount
to overreaching the judicial system or running a parallel system with the
judicial system. The aforesaid observations were completely uncalled for.
As noted above, the plaintiff had duly filed process fee and taken steps for
issuance of regular summons to the defendant through the ordinary process
as well as speed post. The photograph of the summons were sent through
WhatsApp only as an additional measure so as to ensure the appearance of
the defendant before the Commercial Court. There is nothing malafide in the
same and it cannot be said that that was an attempt to overreach the judicial
proceedings. It was not that the plaintiff had sought to send the summons
through WhatsApp in substitution of the ordinary service to the defendant. It
was only sent as a secondary measure to ensure the presence of the
defendant on the next date. Therefore, Commercial Court has completely
gone overboard in issuing notice for initiating contempt proceedings.
12.    The Supreme Court in its judgment in Dr. Prodip Kumar Biswas Vs.
Subrata Das and Ors. (2004) 4 SCC 533, while dealing with the issue of
criminal contempt has observed that proceedings for criminal contempt can
be initiated only when the act prejudices or interferes or tends to interfere
with the course of judicial proceeding or administration of justice. Contempt
of court is a special jurisdiction which ought to be exercised sparingly and
with great caution. Contempt proceedings should not be initiated lightly.
13.    In any case, in view of Sections 10 and 15 of the Contempt of Courts
Act, 1971, only High Courts have the power to take cognizance in respect of
contempt of courts subordinate to it. Subordinate courts cannot assume
jurisdiction and issue show cause notice as to why contempt proceedings be
not initiated. A subordinate court can only make a reference to the High
Court for initiating contempt proceedings. Therefore, the impugned order is
clearly in excess of the jurisdiction vested with the Commercial Court.
14.     In view of the above, the order passed by the Commercial Court
suffers from patent illegality and is also without jurisdiction and hence,
cannot be sustained.
15.     Accordingly, the petition is allowed and the impugned order is set
aside to the extent show cause notice for initiating criminal contempt
proceedings has been directed to be issued to the plaintiff.