Civil Writ Petition No.1041 of 2021
Decided on : March 6, 2023
State of Himachal Pradesh & others
of         ….Respondent
Whether approved for reporting? Yes.
For the Petitioner
with Mr. Ajay Thakur, Advocate.
rt              General, for respondents No.1 to 3.
with Mr. Het Ram Thakur, Advocate,
for respondent No.5.
In instant petition, petitioner has assailed action of
respondents-State, allowing respondent No.5 to contest and
H   thereafter elect her as President of Municipal Council Dehra,
District   Kangra    against    the   seat    reserved        for    Women
(General), on the ground that respondent No.5 Sunita Kumari,
for belonging to a Scheduled Caste category, was not eligible
to contest and seek election as President/Chairperson, which
was reserved for Women belonging to General Category.
CWP No.1041 of 2021
2.          I have heard Mr. Ajay Sharma, learned Senior
Advocate, on behalf of petitioner; Mr. Kapil Dev Sood, Senior
Advocate, appearing for respondent No.5 and Mr. Hemant
Vaid, learned Additional Advocate General, for respondent-
State, and have also gone through the material placed before
Undisputed facts, in present case, are that for
conducting elections for Members/Office-bearers of Municipal
Councils and Nagar Panchayats in District Kangra, Deputy
ou   Kangra    issued    Order      dated
announcing category-wise reservation of the Wards, whereby
Ward No.3 Hanuman Mandir was allocated to General
Category, whereas Ward No.6 Shiv Mandir was reserved for
women.
C     On 17.12.2020, Government of Himachal Pradesh
issued Notification, notifying reservation to the Offices of the
Chairpersons in Municipalities in District Kangra, wherein
office of Chairperson of Municipal Council Dehra was reserved
H   for Women (General) Category.
5.          Petitioner   and   respondent     No.5      are     elected
Members of Municipal Council Dehra.          Petitioner contested
election from Ward No.6 Shiv Mandir against a seat reserved
for Women (General Category), whereas respondent No.5
contested election from Ward No.3 Hanuman Mandir allocated
CWP No.1041 of 2021
for General Category.    It is also undisputed that respondent
No.5 belongs to Scheduled Caste category.
6.          Elections   for   electing   Members         of    Municipal
Council Dehra were conducted from on 10.1.2021 onwards  .P.
and petitioner and respondent No.5 were declared elected as
contested the election.
Ward Members from their respective Wards from which they
Thereafter, election for Office of
President/Chairperson of Municipal Council Dehra, which was
reserved for Women belonging to General Category, was fixed
on 18.1.2021.
Vide communication dated 15.1.2021, Returning
Oficer-cum-SDO(C), Dehra, sought clarification from Deputy
Commissioner, Kangra, regarding reservation of post of
President in Municipal Council Dehra, on the following points:
“1. Whether a women of any category is eligible
ig  h           2.
If a women has not taken benefit of her SC
category and has fought election in open
ward, whether she is eligible for president
H               3.   The women candidate has not attached any
caste certificate with her nomination paper
4.   In case the candidate of President seat under
general category has no majority, what
procedure we should adopt?”
Commissioner, Una, had also sought clarification with respect
CWP No.1041 of 2021
to reservation of seats of Chairpersons and Members of Urban
Local Bodies (ULB). In response thereto, vide communication
dated 16.1.2021, Secretary (UD) to the Government of
Himachal Pradesh had conveyed to the District Election
Officer-cum-Deputy Commissioner, Una, as under:
“I am directed to refer to your letter No.60/ADC/
LFA dated 12/01/2021 on the subject cited above and
to say that similar matter was referred to Law
Department by the Panchayat Raj Department and the
opinion of the Law Department is as under:-
“The Hon’ble apex Court vide Judgment dated
10-02-2009 passed in Civil Appeal No.976 of
ou    2009 titled as Bihari Lal Rada Vs Anil Jain (Tinu)
and others on the basis of the Law laid down by
the Hon’ble Apex Court in other cases has held
rt  that there is nothing in law that a person
belonging to backward class and got himself
elected from a ward reserved for that class is
debarred from contesting the election in the
office of President/Chairperson when that office
C            is not reserved and meant to be filled in from
the members belonging to the general category.
From the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex
Court in the above titled case, this department is
ig  h                 of the view that when a seat has been reserved
for general category women then the women of
Scheduled casts, Schedule Tribes and backward
class category are also eligible for contesting
election against that seat.””
H   Similar advice was communicated to the District Election
Officer-cum-Deputy      Commissioner,     Kangra,        as     well     as
9.         Election of Chairperson/President of Municipal
Council   Dehra   was    conducted      on    18.1.2021,         wherein
respondent No.5, Member from Ward No.3, was elected
unanimously for the post of President.
CWP No.1041 of 2021
10.           Grievance of the petitioner is that respondent
No.5 belongs to Scheduled Caste category, whereas post of
Chairperson was reserved for Women belonging to General
before      Returning   Officer-cum-SDO     (Civil),
Category and, therefore, petitioner had filed representation
furtherance whereto clarification was sought by Returning
Officer-cum-SDO (Civil), Dehra, which was responded by the
State, in terms of communication dated 16.1.2021, informing
that women belonging to any category can contest the
election for office of Chairperson reserved for Women
(General) Category, whereas, according to the petitioner, a
woman belonging to Scheduled Caste category, despite
elected as Member from a Ward reserved for women
belonging to General Category, cannot be permitted to
contest the election for the office of Chairperson/ President of
Municipal Council reserved for Women belonging to General
Category. It is claim of the petitioner that post reserved for
Woman of General Category means a post reserved for all
H   women, but excluding the women belonging to reserved
category.
11.           Referring pronouncement of a two-Judges Bench
of Supreme Court in Sarswati Devi v. Shanti Devi (Smt.) and
others, (1997) 1 SCC 122, it has been contended that seats
meant for General Category are to be filled only by candidates
CWP No.1041 of 2021
elected on the seats reserved/meant for General Category,
and reservation of seat of President/Chairperson of Municipal
Council to a category is for the Member elected from the seat
reserved for the said category.
Referring pronouncement of the Supreme Court in
Kasambhai F. Ghanchi v. Chandubhai D. Rajput and others,
(1998) 1 SCC 285; and Bihari Lal Rada v. Anil Jain (Tinu) and
others, (2009) 4 SCC 1, it has been submitted that idea of
providing reservation is to give benefit to the weaker section
of the society but not to the persons like respondent No.5,
who, despite belonging to the Scheduled Caste category, has
been elected from the seat allocated for General Category and
is holding the post of President/Chairperson of the Municipal
Council, repeatedly grabbing the chances of women belonging
to General Category by depriving them from being elected to
the post of President/ Chairperson.
13.         It has been contended on behalf of petitioner that
definition of word “general” referred in Bihari Lal Rada’s case
H   is not applicable in present case, as the provisions contained
in Chapter-III of the Himachal Pradesh Municipal Election
Rules, 2015 provide reservation of seats to the General
Category, wherein sub-rule (7) of Rule 12 clearly prescribes
that out of total offices, including the office reserved for
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (including women
CWP No.1041 of 2021
belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes), one
half of the offices shall be reserved for women and the
Municipality having the next highest women population
percentage shall be reserved for women belonging to General
It has been contended by the learned counsel for
the petitioner that when an Office has been reserved for
women belonging to General Category, it means that such
reservation for General Category is in exclusion of the
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes women, and, thus,
respondent No.5, being a women belonging to a Schedule
Caste, cannot contest for the seat or Office reserved for
women belonging to the General Category.
It is also contended on behalf of the petitioner that
Officer-cum-SDO     (Civil)    has     not     applied       his
independent mind while dealing with the representation
submitted by the petitioner but has acted upon the advice of
the Deputy Commissioner, communicated to him on the basis
H   of the advice of the Secretary of the Urban Department/Law
Department, which is impermissible in law as Returning
Officer has to decide the matter applying his own mind and, in
present case, there is complete non-application of mind by the
Returning officer as he, instead of applying his mind, has
followed the instructions of the Higher Authorities.
CWP No.1041 of 2021
16.         Referring State of Punjab and others v. Mohabir
Singh and others, (1996) 1 SCC 609, it has been contended
that it is duty of the authority to take a decision itself but not
and failure of the authority to do so amounts to non-
under the direction or as per dictates of the higher authorities
application of mind and, as such, decision is not sustainable.
Referring judgment of a Coordinate Bench of this Court,
passed in CWP No.7295 of 2012, titled as Ajay Parihar v. State
of H.P., decided on 18.5.2016, it has been contended that a
process must be completed and an act by the authorities must
be done in the manner as provided under the Act, Rules and
Law and, therefore, it has been contended that Returning
Officer had to take decision at his own, without referring the
matter to the higher authorities with respect to eligibility of
respondent No.5 to contest the election of the post/office of
the President/ Chairperson of the Municipal Council and it has
been contended that on this count petition deserves to be
allowed.
H   17.         With respect to maintainability of the petition, it
has been canvassed on behalf of the petitioner that in present
case there is issue involved regarding exercise of power by
the concerned authority in illegal manner and the said issue
cannot be adjudicated in Election Petition.                 Therefore,
petitioner is entitled to invoke extraordinary jurisdiction of this
CWP No.1041 of 2021
High Court as provided under Article 226 of the Constitution of
18.              It has been contended on behalf of respondents
that in pronouncement of the Supreme Court in Civil Appeal.P.
No.976 of 2009 (arising out of SLP (Civil) No.19237 of 2008),
titled as Bihari Lal Rada Vs Anil Jain (Tinu) and others, decided
on 10-02-2009, reported in (2009) 4 SCC 1, it has been held
filled-in   by    a   Member
that post of President of Municipality which is required to be
belonging    to   Scheduled          Castes,
Scheduled Tribes or Backward Classes, as the case may be,
can be filled by any Member belonging to one of those
categories, irrespective of the fact whether they have been
elected from a general ward or a reserved ward and,
therefore, present petition is not maintainable.
It has been submitted on behalf of respondents
that the post, in present case, was reserved for “women” and
respondent No.5, being a woman, is entitled to contest the
election from any Ward open for all, reserved for women of
H   General Category, in addition to Ward reserved for Scheduled
Caste Category and the fact of her belonging to a Scheduled
Caste category cannot come in her way for contesting election
for the post meant for “general category” or “women
belonging to general category”.
CWP No.1041 of 2021
20.         It    has    been    contended         on     behalf      of     the
respondents      that   petitioner,   though      participated         in    the
election   process       conducted      for      the       post/office         of
President/Chairperson of Municipal Council, but she was not a
candidate, as no nomination by her or on her behalf was filed
and none of the elected Members proposed her name to the
post/office of President/Chairperson of the Municipal Council
and she had not objected to the election of respondent No.5
as Chairperson/ President of Municipal Council Dehra and,
therefore, she has no right and entitlement to file and
maintain the present writ petition.
It has been further submitted on behalf of
respondents that petitioner has alternate remedy of filing
Election Petition to challenge the election of respondent No.5
but she has failed to avail the same and on this count also
present petition is not maintainable.
22.         Mr. K.D. Sood, learned Senior Advocate, referring
pronouncement of this Court in Manish Dharmaik v. State of
H   Himachal Pradesh and others, 2021(1) Him LR (DB) 376; and
CWP No.691 of 2021, titled as Kauser v. State Election
Commission and others, decided on 8.2.2021, as well as
provisions of Article 243ZG of the Constitution, has contended
that present petition is not maintainable.
CWP No.1041 of 2021
23.           In Sarswati’s case, the Supreme Court had held
that for contesting for the seat/office of President/Chairperson
of the Municipal Council reserved/meant for a particular
reserved/meant for such category.
category, contestant must be elected as Member from a seat
In other words, the seat
reserved/meant for woman belonging to General Category can
only be occupied by a Member elected from the seat reserved
for women belonging to General Category. Heavy reliance has
been placed, by the learned counsel for the petitioner, on this
pronouncement.
Pronouncement in Sarswati’s case was considered
by a three-Judges Bench of the Supreme Court in Kasambhai’s
case, wherein it was held that conclusion arrived at Sarswati’s
case did not flow from the language of relevant provision and
it is not in consistent with the concept of reservation and,
thus, it does not lay down a correct law. Therefore, reliance
on behalf of the petitioner on a judgment already overruled by
a Larger Bench of the Supreme Court is of no help to her.
H   25.           In Bihari Lal Rada’s case, similar issue had arisen
for consideration before the Supreme Court, wherein it was
contended that where office of President is meant for General
Category, there only a candidate, who had contested and won
from a general seat alone was entitled to contest for the post/
office   of   President.    Referring   observations         made        in
CWP No.1041 of 2021
Kasambhai’s case, the aforesaid plea was rejected by the
Supreme Court as under:
“34. The construction suggested by Shri Patwalia,
that the word ‘belonging to’ governs ‘general category’
is grammatically attractive but suggested construction
not only would defeat the main purposes of the
provisions and the scheme of the Act, which is to make
special provisions for those with special needs, and to
the understanding of the Legislature when it enacted
Section 10 and 18 of the Act, 1973. The apprehension
that persons belonging to general category may loose
themselves     elected
their chance forever or for a long time to get
is   totally   untenable  and
unsustainable. The whole idea is to see that minimum
number of seats as provided for is filled in by
vulnerable sections of the Society. There can never be
any constitutional or legal objection if more members
from those weaker sections get elected to the
Municipalities on their own merit from the seats meant
for the unreserved category.
35. In our view, the question is no more in res integra
C    but squarely covered by the decision of this Court
reported in Kasambhai F. Ghanchi Vs. Chandubhai D.
Rajput & Anr. [1998 (1) SCC 285]. In that case the
appellant therein who belonged to Backward Class but
ig  h         had been elected to the Jambusar Municipality from an
unreserved seat stood for election for the post of
President of the Municipality which was reserved for a
Backward Class candidate. The only question that had
fallen for consideration in the said case was: Whether
H             the appellant, who belongs to a Backward Class but
had been elected to the Jambusar Municipality from an
unreserved seat, could stand for election for the post
of President of the Municipality which was reserved for
a Backward Class candidate or whether the candidate
for that post could only be a person who was elected to
the Municipality from a seat which was reserved for the
Backward Class? This court held:
“13. The idea of providing reservation for
the benefit of the weaker sections of the society
is not only to ensure their participation in the
conduct of the affairs of the municipality but it is
CWP No.1041 of 2021
also an effort to improve their lot. The
reservation ensures that the specified minimum
number of persons belonging to that category
become members of the municipality. If because
of their popularity a larger number of Scheduled
Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Backward Classes or
women get elected to the municipality than the
number of reserved seats that would be
welcome. When the idea is to promote the
weaker sections of the society, and to improve
their lot, it would be a contradiction in terms if
members belonging to that section are debarred
from standing to the office of the President
because such a candidate is popular enough to
get elected from a general constituency. It is a
fundamental principle of democratic election
that a person who is more popular is elected,
ou    popularity being measured by the number of
votes which the person gets. The language of
various legal provisions do not in any way
rt  suggest, expressly or by necessary implication,
that even though a person who belongs to a
reserved category and is popular enough to get
elected from a general constituency should be
C        barred from contesting the election of the
President when that office is to be filled only by
a reserved category person.”
ig  h   36.   It was further observed: (Kasumbhai case)
“16. The Act and the Rules provide for
reservation for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled
Tribes, Backward Classes and women. No
H             reservation or classification is made ward-wise.
To put it differently all members of the
Scheduled Castes, for example, will be regarded
as belonging to one class irrespective of the fact
whether they had been elected to a reserved
seat or to a general seat. Similar is the position
with regard to the Backward Classes, Scheduled
Tribes and women. The law does not
contemplate or provide for any further sub-
classification of the type which has been
suggested by the respondents. Just as all
members of the municipality, irrespective of the
fact whether they had been elected to a
CWP No.1041 of 2021
reserved seat or not, are eligible for election to
the post of the President when it falls in the
general category, similarly when as per the
roster the President is to be one who, say,
belongs to the category of Scheduled Caste then
all members of the municipality who are
Scheduled Caste, irrespective of the seat to
which they had been elected, would be eligible
to stand for election. Neither the Act nor the
Rules stipulate that it is only such a member
who has been elected to the reserved seat who
would be eligible to stand for election to the post
of President when it is the turn of that category
of candidate to become the President of the
municipality.” (Emphasis supplied)
Shri Patwalia, however, made an attempt to
distinguish the said judgment by submitting that the
Gujarat Municipal Act did not provide for any post of
the President to be elected from the candidates
belonging to general category, therefore, a Backward
Class candidate although elected from a general
category seat was held to be entitled to contest for the
office of the President since the said office was
C  reserved only for Backward Class. It was submitted
that the requirement in that case was that the
candidate must be a backward class candidate and it
did not matter from which category of seat he was
ig  h   elected.
38.    According to him in the present case the office
of the President is meant for general category and only
a candidate who had contested and won from a
H       general seat alone was entitled to contest for the office
of the President. We find it very difficult to rationalize
much less endorse the argument advanced by the
learned senior counsel.
39.    In Kasambhai F. Ghanchi this Court while
examining the true import and effect of the provisions
of Article 243T of the Constitution of India observed:
“There is no indication or suggestion in
Article 243-T or in the Act that in case the office
of the President is required to be filled by a
member who is a Scheduled Caste, Scheduled
CWP No.1041 of 2021
Tribe, Backward Class or a woman, then only a
member who has been elected from a reserved
seat can stand for election. In other words, for
the purpose of election to the post of President
the reservation which is contemplated by the
Act is only to the effect that the person elected
should belong to the category of Scheduled
Caste, Scheduled Tribe, Backward Class or
woman, as per the roster. Conceivably, as in the
present case, an elected member may fall within
two or more categories and, in this way, may be
in a position to seek re-election as envisaged by
Section 33 of the Gujarat Municipal Act. If this is
not so, and with the category changing every
year, as per the roster, Section 33 will become
redundant. The legislative intent, therefore,
clearly is that one person, whether elected from
ou    reserved or general seat, but who belongs to the
category out of which the President is to be
elected, can seek re-election as envisaged by
rt  Section 33 of the Act.”
C  40.    Be that as it may, neither Article 243T of the
Constitution nor Section 10 (5) of the Haryana
Municipal Act provide for any reservation to the office
of the President in favour of any candidate who does
ig  h   not belong to Scheduled Caste or Backward Class.
Obviously there cannot be any such reservation of
seats in Municipalities nor to the office of Chairperson
in favour of candidates belonging to general category.
There is no separate category like general category.
H       The expression belonging to the general category
wherever employed means the seats or offices
earmarked for persons belonging to all categories
irrespective of their caste, class or community or tribe.
The unreserved seats euphemistically described as
general category seats are open seats available for all
candidates who are otherwise qualified to contest to
that office.
41.   The word ‘General’ derived from Latin word
genus.
“….It relates to the whole kind, class, or order.
Pertaining to or designating the genus or class,
as distinguished from that which characterizes
the species or individual; universal, not
particularized, as opposed to special; principal or
central, as opposed to local; open or available to
all, as opposed to select; obtaining commonly,
or recognized universally, as opposed to
particular; universal or unbounded, as opposed
to limited; comprehending the whole or directed
to the whole, as distinguished from anything
applying to or designed for a portion only.
Extensive or common to many.” (See Black’s
There is nothing in the provisions of the Act,
1973 suggesting that in case the office of the President
of a Municipality is required to be filled in from the
members belonging to the general category then only
a member who has been elected as such from an
unreserved ward alone can stand for election. There is
nothing in law that a person belonging to Backward
Class and got himself elected from a ward reserved for
that class is debarred from contesting the election to
C   the office of President/Chairperson when that office is
not reserved and meant to be filled in from the
members belonging to the general category.
ig  h         43.    In our view, wherever the office of the President
of a Municipality is required to be filled in by a member
belonging to Scheduled Caste, Scheduled Tribe or
Backward Class as the case may be it would be enough
if one belongs to one of those categories irrespective
H             of the fact whether they have been elected from a
general ward or a reserved ward. Likewise, the office of
the President of a Municipality if not reserved or meant
for general category, all the candidates irrespective of
their caste, class or community and irrespective of the
fact whether they have been elected from a reserved
ward or a general ward are entitled to seek election
and contest to the office of the President of the
26.       No doubt, Rule 12(7) speaks about reservation of
one half of the offices, out of total offices, for women
CWP No.1041 of 2021
belonging to General Category, excluding the offices reserved
for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, including women
belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. There is
exclusion of offices/seats reserved for Scheduled Castes/  .P
Scheduled Tribes, including seats/offices reserved for women .
belonging to Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes, because
50% of seats of total seats/offices reserved for Scheduled
Castes/Scheduled Tribes has already been reserved for
women belonging to Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes in
Rule 12(5). But, it, i.e. Rule 12(7) does not say that a woman
belonging to Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe category
contest   to   the   post/office     reserved
belonging to General Category. As a matter of fact, this sub-
section provides reservation for ‘women’ but not reservation
for General Category. As observed by the Supreme Court in
Bihari Lal Rada’s case, ‘General Category’ means open to all.
It is inclusive of entire unreserved category as well as reserve
categories such as Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Other
H   Backward Classes, etc.
27.         Reservation is for women but not for General
Category. ‘General Category’ means ‘all’ and ‘reservation for
all’ makes no sense. Thus appropriate meaning of ‘General
Category’ is open for all.
28.         Reservation has been provided exercising power
under Articles 15 and 16 of the Constitution. Clauses (3) and
(4) of Article 15 of Constitution empower the State to provide
reservation for socially and educationally backward classes of
citizens, for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and .
women. There is no provision in the Constitution to provide
reservation to General Category. As a matter of fact, “General
whom reservation has been provided.
Category” means all classes, including the categories for
Seats meant for
General Category cannot be filled by excluding any person of
any category who is otherwise eligible and entitled for that on
his own merit.
Reservation to the Members of Municipal Council
as well as Chairpersons of Municipalities has been provided in
the Constitution under Article 243T of PART IX-A, dealing with
the Municipalities.   Power to provide such reservation flow
from Article 15 of the Constitution and, therefore, provisions of
such reservation are to be interpreted in consonance with the
H   provisions of Article 15(1) of Constitution, which provides that
the State shall not discriminate against any citizen on the
ground only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any
of them. Clauses (3), (4), (5) & (6) of Article 15 are exceptions
carved out therein providing reservation for certain classes
which nowhere provides that there shall be reservation in
CWP No.1041 of 2021
favour of ‘General Category’ in exclusion of Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes or Other Backward Classes.
30.         Provisions of Article 15 or 243T of the Constitution
nowhere provide that seat of Member in Municipalities or
office of President/Chairperson can be reserved in favour of
persons belonging to General Category. “General Category”
is, in fact, an Open Category, which is not a quota for a
separate class but a category available to all men and women.
Provision of reservation is not aimed for dividing the society in
separate segments by providing reservation to each class by
creating a class as ‘General Category’ in exclusion of other
reserved categories.
Vertical   Reservation    for     Scheduled         Castes,
Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes and horizontal
reservation for women is based upon historical and social
reasons, as these classes of the society were and are living in
adverse social environment, difficult geographical terrains,
living conditions, hostile atmosphere and large segment of
H   these classes is being discriminated and deprived of equal
social status in the society, so as to give them an environment
of equal opportunity with dignity to grow and bloom together
with other privileged classes of the society. Reservation has
been provided to socially and educationally backward classes,
which include Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Other
CWP No.1041 of 2021
Backward Classes        and Women, for       providing       them       an
opportunity to gain equal status and dignity in the society.
Even as on date, persons belonging to a section of society not
permitted to enter in the house and temple; to fetch water
from common source; to have community feast together with.
all classes, particularly so-called “General Category” people.
There are instances where even luggage of teachers is thrown
from accommodation rented to them on disclosure of their
caste; groom is not allowed to ride horse in his marriage
procession and in some places marriage procession is not
permitted to cross the village with band party.                A larger
section of the society considers women as second grade
citizens not entitled to take decision on their own and there
are instances where instead of elected women candidates as a
Member/Office bearer of the Local Self Body, oath is sworn by
the husband by not permitting the wife to do so. The women
are not allowed to choose life partners of their choice and the
inter-caste marriage results into honour-killing, even burning
H   the couple alive, etc.
These are few examples of so many
and social   reasons,     which       are    still
continuing, for which reservation has been provided for
as well as Women, but not for others.        The reservation has
been provided to bring all at par.
CWP No.1041 of 2021
32.           Thought behind providing reservation is that
weaker section of society, nourished with medicine of
reservation, shall, one day, become equal in status with equal
opportunity of growing and living in the society to live a
dignified life among all.
Reservation may be equated with .
crutches which are not necessitated to be provided to healthy
person but definitely to those who are not able or permitted to
healthy   atmosphere     and   equal
stand on their legs or whose legs are weak for deprivation of
status     in    the     society.
Therefore, there is no provision for providing separate
reservation to all sections of society.
Bharat has a heritage of an incomparable rich
culture and well developed society, based on Dharma, i.e.
Rule of Law, wishing marching of all together towards
prosperity.    Oldest text Vedas pronounce that all be live
together, grow together, progress together, eat together and
march together towards the ultimate goal of life.                   But for
taboos and evils ingrained in the society during medieval era
H   we are behaving contrary to that spirit of Vedas, our ancient
rich values, culture and real Dharma and despite framing the
Constitution to achieve the goal for providing justice, liberty
and equality to all with fraternity, as envisaged in the
Preamble of the Constitution, our society is following practices
which are blur on the Indian Society and that is the reason for
CWP No.1041 of 2021
providing   and continuation of      reservation for         deprived,
downtrodden and suppressed classes.
34.         Reservation is not a quota provided to the
sections of the society by dividing the society in Scheduled
Castes/Scheduled Tribes/Other Backward Classes and General
Categories, in exclusion of rest from every category, but a
special provision or measure to ensure achievement of
Constitutional Goal of equality of status with dignity to all
sections of the society by providing a crutch to those whose
legs are broken or not permitted to be developed or suffering
from disease because of ill, undemocratic and irreligious
behaviour of the society.       Therefore, cases related to
reservation are to be adjudicated in aforesaid historical and
social background and the conditions prevailing as on date in
the society but not on the basis of pseudo-equality, as
‘unequals cannot be treated as equals’.
35.         From the above discussion, it has emerged that
Vertical Reservation has been provided to achieve the goal of
H   the Constitution for providing social, economic, and political
justice with liberty of thought, expression, belief, faith and
worship and with equality of status and of opportunity, by
inculcating fraternity amongst all citizens with aim to protect
unity and integrity of the nation.    Classes to whom Vertical
Reservation has been provided have not been excluded from
CWP No.1041 of 2021
the mainstream or the entire society. Therefore, seats ‘open
to all’ or meant for “General Category” are available to all
sections of the society, including the section to whom Vertical
Reservation has been provided. “Open Category” or “General
Category” is not a category remained after subtracting the .
categories to whom Vertical Reservation has been provided
but Open or General Category includes all, irrespective of
compete    and contest,    on
religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth. Everybody is free to
his/her    own merit,           including
categories provided benefit of Vertical Reservation.
Reservation for women has also been provided to
ensure their equal participation in every field of life, including
social and administrative matters.           Article 243T of the
Constitution mandates that seats not less than one-third of
total seats, including seats for reserved category, shall be
reserved for women candidates in their respective category.
Therefore, one-third or more seats can be reserved for women
in Municipalities and that seat of Member or office of
H   President/Chairperson of the Municipality can also be reserved
for women.
37.          In Himachal Pradesh, Rule 12,               contained in
Chapter-III of the Himachal Pradesh Municipal Election Rules,
2015, provides reservation of 50% seats for women in the
Municipalities. It provides that 50% of seats available in each
CWP No.1041 of 2021
category, i.e. General Category, Scheduled Castes Category,
Scheduled Tribes Category, shall be reserved for women in
each category separately.        There are two sets of seats
available in Vertical Reservation. For one set, in the General
Category, all men and women belonging to all categories, .
irrespective of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth,
subject to eligibility, are competent and entitled to contest.
For seats reserved for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes, sometimes denoted as ‘SC (General) and ST (General)’,
all men and women of respective category, subject to
eligibility, are competent and entitled to contest for the seats
in their respective category. All men and women, entitled to
compete and contest the seat reserved for Scheduled
Castes/Scheduled Tribes/Other Backward Classes, are also
entitled to contest the seat meant for Open or General
38.         Reservation of seats for women is also in aforesaid
terms, but excluding men. Therefore, all women belonging to
H   all categories, irrespective of their religion, race, caste, sex or
place of birth, subject to eligibility, are entitled to contest
election for the seats meant for all as well as women
belonging to Open or General Category. All women entitled to
compete and contest the seat reserved for Scheduled Castes
CWP No.1041 of 2021
and Scheduled Tribes are also eligible for seat meant for all as
well as women belong to Open or General Category.
39.            It is evident from the aforesaid discussion that a
man or a woman may be eligible to contest election from .P
more than one seat, in different capacity, as a candidate .
belonging to reserved category can contest election for a seat
meant for General Category as well as reserved category, and
such person shall also be entitled to contest the election of
Member or office of President/Chairperson of the Municipality
in either capacity. There is no legal impediment or bar to a
person, including a man and a woman, to exercise his/her
right to contest in either category. Therefore, a woman
belonging to reserved category can contest election for the
seat of Member available for General Category, which is open
for all, including men and women, and she can also contest for
seat reserved for women belonging to General Category.
Similarly, a Member belonging to Scheduled Caste Category is
not disentitled for contesting and competing for the office of
H   President or Chairperson available for General Category or
meant    for    Open   Category,   which    is    available       to    all,
irrespective of their religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth.
Therefore, respondent No.5 was eligible to contest and hold
the post of President/Chairperson of the Municipality reserved
for ‘women’ belonging to General Category.
CWP No.1041 of 2021
40.         Contention of the petitioner that by seeking
clarification and explanation from the higher authorities,
concerned authority has not applied its own mind to decide
the issue raised before it, is also misconceived.      .P.
decision should be taken by the concerned authority at its
own which is conferred power for that purpose and every act
of the authority must be done in the manner as provided
under the Act, Rules or Law, but, at the same time, any
authority/officer is not prohibited seeking aid and advice from
the superiors or from the experts or Law Department of the
State or otherwise, so as to arrive at a right conclusion before
arriving at a conclusion to take decision.         It is not a case
where the competent authority had submitted the case before
the higher authority for dictating him the decision thereon but
it is a case where on receiving representation of the
petitioner, the competent authority sought clarification in the
matter and after receiving the clarification, that too based
upon the pronouncement of the Supreme Court, has decided
H   the issue raised by the petitioner and permitted respondent
No.5 to contest election for and hold the post of President/
Chairperson   of   the   Municipality   reserved        for    ‘women’
belonging to General Category. Therefore, I am of the opinion
that the issue raised by the petitioner is misconceived and is
not sustainable.
41.         Sections 283 and 296 of the Himachal Pradesh
Municipal Act, 1994, contained in Chapter XVII – Disputes
relating to Election, read as under:
“283. Election Petitions.-No election under this Act shall
be called in question except by an election petition
presented in accordance with the provisions of this
296. Grounds for setting aside election.-
(1) If the authorised officer is of the opinion –
(a) that on the date of his election the elected
person was not qualified, or was disqualified
to be elected under this Act; or
ou    (b)      that any corrupt practice has been
committed by the elected person or his
rt        agent or by any other person with the
consent of the elected person or his agent;
C           (c) that any nomination has been improperly
(d) that the result of the election, in so far as it
ig  h                      concerns the elected person, has been
materially affected –
(i)     by the improper acceptance of any
nomination; or
H                             (ii)    by improper reception, refusal or
rejection of any vote or the
reception of any vote which is void;
(iii)   by any non-compliance with the
provisions of this Act or of any rule
made under this Act; the authorised
officer shall set aside the election
of the elected person.
(2) When an election has been set aside under sub-
section (1), a fresh election shall be held.”
42.         Contention of the petitioner that unlawful exercise
of power by the authority cannot be adjudicated in an Election
Petition is also misconceived, as any action of the concerned
authority, contrary to provisions of law, including allowing
ineligible person to contest and compete and to be elected
can be adjudicated in the Election Petition as the same very
action shall be in question to lay challenge to the election of
unqualified or disqualified or ineligible person to the post/
office. Therefore, plea raised in present petition was available
to the petitioner for filing Election Petition to assail the
election of respondent No.5.
C     Article 243 ZG creates bar to interference by
Courts in electoral matters, which reads as under:
ig  h           “243ZG.
Bar to interference by courts in electoral
(a)   the validity of any law relating to the
H                     delimitation of constituencies or the allotment of
seats to such constituencies, made or purporting
to be made under article 243ZA shall not be
called in question in any court;
(b)   no election to any Municipality shall be called in
question except by an election petition
presented to such authority and in such manner
as it provided for by or under any law made by
the Legislature of a State.”
CWP No.1041 of 2021
44.         The aforesaid provisions are pari materia to the
provisions related to Gram Panchayats, contained in Article
243-O of the Constitution.
A Division Bench as well as a Coordinate Bench of
this High Court in Manish Dharmaik v. State of Himachal   .
Pradesh and others, 2021(1) Him LR (DB) 376; and CWP No.691
of 2021, titled as Kauser v. State Election Commission and
others, decided on 8.2.2021, have already discussed the law in
this regard in the matter related to Panchayat and has arrived
at conclusion that a petition, like present one, is not
maintainable at all and, thus, on this sole point present
petition is liable to be dismissed.
I find force in the contention of the respondents
that at the time of election of President/Chairperson of the
Municipality, name of petitioner was not proposed by any of
the elected Member of the Municipality and she was not a
contesting candidate in the election and, therefore, she has no
right to file the present petition. It is not a case that in case of
H   ineligibility of respondent No.5, petitioner was the only
available candidate, as a women Member belonging to
General Category. Therefore, also petitioner is not entitled to
maintain the present petition.
47.         It is also settled that availability of alternative
remedy is not an absolute bar to entertain a petition under
CWP No.1041 of 2021
Article 226 of the Constitution.     In an appropriate case, for
valid reasons and grounds, writ petition may be entertained
under Article 226 of the Constitution, as power of Judicial
not inhibited by any provision of alternate remedy.
Review provided to the High Courts, under the Constitution, is
present case, no such extraordinary exceptional case is made
out, entitling the petitioner to maintain the present writ
petition.
In election matters, person can be unseated by
way of not only Election Petition but also by filing an
appropriate Writ Petition of Quo Warranto, by a person, where
there is no alternate remedy is available, and the elected
person, being ineligible to hold the said office, has usurped
the post and power, but for petitioner, in present case, in the
facts and circumstances narrated hereinabove, such recourse
is also not available, as even otherwise, as discussed supra,
respondent No.5 is not ineligible person to hold the office of
Chairperson/President of Municipal Council so as to enable the
H   petitioner to maintain a writ petition of Quo Warranto against
her for holding the said office because respondent No.5 is
eligible and entitled to hold the said office.
49.         In view of above discussion and in the light of the
earlier pronouncements of the Courts, I find no merit in the
CWP No.1041 of 2021
present Writ Petition.     Accordingly, the Writ Petition is
dismissed.
Writ Petition stands disposed of, so also pending
application, if any.                                 .P.