This  miscellaneous    first appeal is  filed under
Section 47(C) of the Gurardian and Wards Act, 1890 (for
short, 'the Act'), against the judgment and decree dated
03.03.2022 passed by the IV Addl. Prl. Judge, Family
Court, Bengaluru (hereinafter referred to as 'the Family
Court'), in G & WC.No.128/2018, wherein the Family
Court has allowed the petition filed by the respondent-
father under Section 25 of the Act and directed the
appellant-mother to hand over the custody of the minor
child to the respondent and further restrained the
appellant from removing the child from the jurisdiction of
the Family Court till the custody of the child is handed
over to the respondent.
2. Heard the learned Senior Counsel for the parties
and also perused the material available on record.
3. Brief facts of the case as revealed from the
records which would be necessary for the purpose of
disposal of this appeal are, the marriage of the appellant
with the respondent was solemnized as per the Hindu
rites and customs on 23.10.2011 and from the said
wedlock, a girl child who was named Mayra Giri was born
on   26.04.2015.    Both   the  parties are   Doctors   by
profession. It appears that the parties had come across
each other through a marriage portal, and thereafter got
married. At the time of marriage, the respondent's
parents and his sister with her two years old daughter
were staying with him and the appellant was fully aware
of the same and she had allegedly consented for the
marriage knowing that she had to reside with the
respondent along with his family members.
4. After the marriage, the appellant allegedly
started quarrelling with the respondent's family members
and she also used to abuse them and created unpleasant
atmosphere in the house. The ill-treatment to the family
members by the appellant continued inspite of the
respondent advising her and being unable to bear the ill-
treatment, the family members of the respondent were
constrained to leave the house and they started residing
separately. After the family members had left the house,
the appellant had told the respondent that her plan to
throw out his family members had worked out and the
same trick was played by her mother to get rid of her in-
laws. Even after the family members of the respondent
started residing separately, the appellant continued her
hostile attitude towards them and she even objected the
respondent      visiting them    or  supporting   them. The
appellant allegedly had grown up in her maternal
grandparents house, and therefore, she did not value the
family relationship and the bondage, and therefore, she
always attempted to separate the respondent from his
family members.
5. It is the specific case of the respondent that the
appellant was short-tempered and she was in the habit of
behaving     aggressively    even   on   petty  issues. The
respondent had, therefore, taken the help of trained
counsellors in order to save his marriage and whenever
the counsellors tried to point out the flaws in her, the
appellant retaliated and she also abused the counsellor
and she did not cooperate for counselling. During one of
the sessions, the Counsellor had advised that the
appellant needs psychological evaluation. After one such
counselling, the appellant allegedly fought with the
respondent, abused him in filthy language, assaulted him
and also broke his mobile phone which had forced the
respondent to approach the police and file a complaint
against her. The appellant was in the habit of picking up
quarrel with the respondent in public. When the appellant
was pregnant, inspite of request, her parents refused to
take care of her, and therefore, the parents of the
respondent who      had gone     to Tokyo   for  attending
respondent's sister's delivery, had to fly back for taking
care of the appellant. The respondent's parents after
coming back from Tokyo had taken care of the appellant
during her advanced stage of pregnancy and after she
gave birth to the girl child, they also had taken care of
the mother and the child.
6. In the month of February 2016, the appellant
had joined Columbia Asia Hospital and started working
there on the administrative side. It appears that she
came in contact with one Shivanand who was also
working in the said hospital on the administrative side
and she developed illicit relationship with him. After
developing illicit relationship with the said Shivanand, the
appellant gave priority to the said relationship and
virtually abandoned the child who was being taken care
of by the respondent and his parents. The appellant used
to stay overnight in her working place and continued her
adulterous affair with the said Shivanand who was
already married and had a child from the said marriage.
Even when the child was sick, the appellant instead of
attending the child, had gone to the hospital and the
respondent with the help of his parents had to take care
of the child.
7. The appellant merrily continued the relationship
with Shivanand and throughout lied to the respondent.
After sometime, the appellant started misbehaving with
the respondent's parents. Till the child was about three
years old, the parents of the respondent stayed in his
house, and thereafter, the appellant started picking up
quarrels intentionally and also started abusing them in
filthy language and insisted that they should leave the
house and during the first week of April 2018, the
appellant allegedly threw her in laws out of the house in
the midnight and left them with no choice but to
approach the police and lodged a complaint against the
appellant. When the respondent had gone to the police
station to see his parents, the appellant allegedly took
the child and left the house without even informing the
respondent, and thereafter, filed a police complaint
before the J.P.Nagar Police Station alleging domestic
violence and dowry demand against the respondent and
his parents.
8. After the birth of the child, for about three years,
the parents of the respondent and the respondent only
had taken care of the child and the appellant had no
concern about the child and she never bothered to take
care of her. As a vengeance against the respondent and
his parents, respondent had taken away the child and left
the house. The attempts made by the respondent to
bring back the appellant and his child were all in vain and
the appellant expressed her unwillingness to rejoin the
respondent and she had taken all her belongings from
the house of the respondent. Inspite of the Counsellors
advising the respondent that the child needs the love and
affection of the father, the appellant did not cooperate
with the respondent and she always tried to keep the
child away from the respondent.
9. The family members of the appellant also were
hostile towards the respondent and they did not properly
advise the appellant and in fact because of their ill-
advise, the appellant had left the company of the
respondent    and   after  separation,   she  had  started
demanding     huge   amount    from  the   respondent   for
settlement   of  the   dispute.  The   appellant  was  not
spending quality time with the child and she denied the
parental care, love and affection to the child which
started affecting the growth of the child. On the other
hand, the respondent made all attempts to meet the
child and tried to spend some quality time with the child
by taking her out and playing with her. The respondent's
sister and her minor daughter also used to meet the child
whenever the respondent brought her home and the child
Mayra Giri had developed a bondage with the daughter of
the respondent's sister.
10.  After  the   appellant   moved  out   of  the
matrimonial home along with the child, she continued her
immoral relationship with the said Shivanand and they
started moving out steadily and stayed together in
various hotels and resorts overnight and on certain
occasions even the child was taken along with her by the
appellant. The said Shivanand was also visiting the
apartment which was taken on rent for the purpose of
the appellant and he used to stay overnight in the
apartment. The respondent subsequently came to know
that on the day on which the appellant had left the
matrimonial home with the child, the said Shivanand had
picked up her from the house and also accompanied her
to the police station and assisted her for filing the
complaint against the respondent and his parents. The
relationship   between    the   appellant and   the  said
Shivanand was known to her parents and inspite of the
same they had supported her and on one occasion, her
father even had made arrangement for their stay
together in a Club at Mysuru. After coming to know about
the adulterous affair of the appellant, the respondent had
lodged a    complaint against the appellant and her
paramour     before  the   J.P.Nagar    Police  Station  on
05.06.2018, who after investigation have filed a detailed
charge sheet against them for the offences punishable
under Sections 420, 497, 109, 504, 506, 418 read with
34 IPC and Sections 75 & 87 of Juvenile Justice Act.
11. Since the child was growing in a unholy
atmosphere in the midst of an illicit relationship between
the   appellant   and   her   paramour     Shivanand,   the
respondent started apprehending that the welfare of the
child and its future was not safe with the appellant and
the child was required to be brought up in a safe and
stable environment. It is under these circumstances, he
had approached the Family Court, Bengaluru, by filing
the petition under Section 25 of the Act, with a prayer to
grant custody of the child to him and also to restrain the
appellant from removing the child from the jurisdiction of
the Family Court till the child is handed over to his
12. In the said proceedings, the respondent had
entered appearance and filed her objections denying the
petition averments and allegations made against her,
while admitting the marriage and the birth of the child.
She contended that the respondent and his parents had
demanded dowry at the time of marriage, and therefore,
in addition to cash, lot of jewellery was also given to the
respondent and his family members by her parents at the
time of marriage. She has stated that prior to the
marriage, the respondent had never told her that his
parents and his sister who had a minor daughter were
staying with him. She also stated that there were many
people living in respondent's house, and therefore, there
was no sufficient food for her in the house and on the
other hand, the respondent's family members were
abusing her and demanding money from her and she was
not allowed to go out anywhere. She also stated that
they did not allow her parents to visit her nor they
allowed her to visit her parents, and therefore, her father
would stay in a hotel nearby and would meet her outside
the house. She has stated that she was made to do all
the household work and even food was served by her to
all the members of the family in their home. She was
being ill-treated, abused and assaulted in the house, and
therefore, she had lodged a police complaint, and
thereafter, appellant's parents moved out of the house.
13. She also stated that the previous marriage of
the respondent was broken because he and his family
members had demanded money from his first wife and
her parents. She has stated that the respondent had no
love and affection towards her but he only had physical
relationship with her to satisfy his lust. The respondent
used to come home late and start shouting at her and
inspite   of  she   tolerating   all  the  ill-treatment,  the
respondent and his family members always treated her in
hostility and she was not properly taken care of even
during    the  period    of  her    pregnancy.    She  further
contended that the parents and the sister of the
respondent who were at home never took care of the
child even after she started working in Columbia Asia
Hospital. The respondent allegedly was in the habit of
taking all her money, and therefore, she was always
dependent on her father for financial help.
14. She has stated that on 02.04.2018, she had
prepared food for her daughter and when she was about
to feed her daughter, she noticed that the entire food
was eaten by her in-laws and she had no food to feed her
child. When the appellant questioned them, they had
abused and assaulted her and thereafter, threw her out
of the house along with the child, and therefore, she was
constrained to lodge a police complaint and thereafter
she took shelter in her parents house. Subsequently, she
had taken a premises on rent and she has been residing
in the said premises along with the child. She has stated
that she has taken utmost care of the child and provided
her with all basic facilities and also admitted her in a play
school. She has stated that she is capable of taking care
of the child and the child has a emotional bonding only
with her and not with the father. She has denied the
alleged relationship with Shivanand and has stated that a
false criminal complaint was lodged by the respondent
against them. She has also stated that the girl child will
not be safe in the custody of the respondent, and
therefore, prayed to dismiss the petition.
15.   Before  the   Family  Court,   in order   to
substantiate his case, the respondent examined himself
as PW-1 and two other witnesses were examined on his
behalf as PWs-2 & 3. Thirty four documents were marked
through PW-1 as Exs.P-1 to P-34 and through PW-3,
Exs.P-35 to P-53 were marked. On behalf of the
appellant, she had got herself examined as RW-1 and
examined another witness as RW-2. She got marked 18
documents as Exs.R-1 to R-18 in support of her defence.
The Family Court, thereafter, heard the arguments
addressed    on   both  sides  and   vide  the impugned
judgment and decree allowed the petition filed by the
respondent under Section 25 of the Act and directed the
appellant to hand over the custody of the minor child
Mayra Giri to the respondent within one month from the
date of the order and also passed an order restraining
the appellant from removing the minor child from the
jurisdiction of the Family Court till the custody of the
child is handed over to the respondent. Being aggrieved
by the said judgment and decree, the appellant is before
16. Learned Senior Counsel for the appellant has
raised the following contentions:-
•      That the Family Court has erred in
directing handing over of custody of the minor girl
child to the father.
•      That there is nobody to take care of the
girl child in the house of the respondent.
•      That   the   Family  Court  has   placed
reliance on the morphed photographs and cooked
up    electronic    documents     produced    by   the
respondent.
•      That most of the documents relied
upon by the Family Court are electronic documents
and in the absence of a certificate under Section
65B of the Indian Evidence Act, the Family Court
could not have placed reliance on the same. He
submits that oral and documentary evidence placed
on record have been misread and misunderstood
by the Family Court which has resulted in passing
an erroneous order.
•     That the girl child has been in the
custody of the mother ever since the mother and
the child were thrown out of the matrimonial house
and the child is now growing in a good atmosphere
and pursuing her studies and at this juncture, if the
custody is handed over to the respondent, the
same will have an adverse effect on the overall
growth of the child.
•     That the appellant is a doctor having a
good income and she is capable of taking care of
the child and while considering the issue regarding
custody of a minor girl child, the welfare of the
child alone should be the priority. In support of his
arguments,    he  has   placed   reliance upon    the
following judgments:
W.P.No.13165/2019         disposed    of    on
RATRE - FAM No.251/2018 of High Court of
Chattisgarh disposed of on 13.12.2022;
17. Per contra, learned Senior Counsel appearing
on behalf of the respondent has urged the following
•     That    ever     since   the   appellant
abandoned the matrimonial home, she has kept the
child away from the respondent and for the last
more than six years, the appellant has denied the
respondent even the visitation rights though the
courts have permitted the same.
disclosed anything about the welfare, health and
education of the child to the respondent.
•     That the character of the appellant
disentitles her the custody of the girl child.
•     That the police after investigation have
filed a charge sheet against the appellant and her
paramour for the offence punishable under Section
497 and other offences under the IPC and Sections
75 & 87 of the Juvenile Justice Act.
•     That       various       hotel      bills,
correspondences between the appellant, Shivanand
and her father, photographs of the appellant in the
company of her paramour and the evidence of
PWs-1    &   3  would   clearly  establish   the illicit
relationship of the appellant with her paramour
•     That though in normal circumstances,
the mother would be the right person to have the
custody of the minor girl child, having regard to the
facts and circumstances of the present case and
taking into consideration the environment in which
the child is being brought up, it is not safe for the
child to continue in the custody of the mother.
•     That the material on record would go to
show that the appellant has no love and affection
towards the child and she has not been taking care
of the child and the child is being exposed to an
unholy environment around it.
•     That in view of Section 14 of the Family
Courts    Act,    1984,    non-compliance     of   the
requirement of Section 65B of the Indian Evidence
Act would not come in the way of the Family Court
in   taking    into   consideration   the   electronic
documents     and   photographs    produced   by   the
•     That the appellant has no respect to
the orders passed by the Court and she has flouted
all the interim orders passed by various courts
including the High Court and the Hon'ble Supreme
•      That the Family Court has taken lot of
pain in appreciating the voluminous evidence on
record    and  has   arrived at   a  just   and right
conclusion which does not call for any interference
by this Court, and accordingly prays to dismiss the
appeal. In support of his arguments, he has placed
reliance on the following judgments.
THAPAR - CM(M).No.1425/2013 of Delhi
High Court disposed      of on 23.11.2015;
Court        disposed of on 04.03.2022.
18.   The point that arises for consideration in this
"whether the Family Court was
justified in allowing the petition filed by
the respondent under Section 25 of the
Act and directing the appellant to hand
over custody of the minor child to the
respondent     and   also   restraining   the
appellant from removing the child from
the jurisdiction of the Family Court till
the custody of the child is handed over to
the respondent?"
19.  The minor child whose custody has been
sought by the respondent in the present case was born
on 26.04.2015. The appellant allegedly removed the child
from the custody of the respondent on 02.04.2018. The
respondent has, thereafter, approached the jurisdictional
Family Court by filing a petition under Section 25 of the
Act. As on the date of filing the petition, the child was
aged about three years and now she is aged about 7
years and 9 months.
20.  Section    6   of   the   Hindu    Minority   and
Guardianship Act, 1956 (for short, 'the Act of 1956')
provides that the father of the child is the natural
guardian. However, an exception is made in respect of
the child who is below the age of five years and in normal
circumstances, the custody of the child below five years
should be given to the mother unless the father
establishes that the welfare and interest of the child will
be jeopardized if the custody is given to the mother.
Even though Section 6 of the Act of 1956 provides that
the father is the natural guardian of the Hindu minor
child, it automatically does not disentitle the mother from
claiming the custody of the child and when the question
of custody of a minor child is brought before the Court,
the   Court   is  required   to   adjudicate    the dispute
notwithstanding Section 6 of the Act of 1956 and the
question of custody is principally required to be decided
keeping in mind the paramount interest and welfare of
the child. The Court, therefore, is required to appreciate
the conduct, behaviour and character of the respective
parties, keeping in mind as to who would be the better
suitable person when it comes to taking care of the
welfare of the child. The Court for the said purpose is not
only required to consider the bonding and comfort of the
child, but also the environment in which it is presently
growing keeping in mind about the welfare and future
growth of child. In addition to financial security, the
Court is also required to take into consideration who
would be available for the child when it is in need of their
love and affection and under whose care and protection
the child would have a better future. The Court is also
required to take into consideration that if the child is
allowed to continue in the custody of the parent with
whom it is presently growing whether it may have any
adverse effect on the mental and physical growth of the
21.   In the case of SAKSHI MITTAL VS GOURAV
RAJENDRA MITTAL - 2022(4) KAR.L.J.640, the Division
Bench of this Court at paragraph No.15 has observed as
"15.    The   object    and  purpose    of
guardian and wards Act, 1890 is not mere
physical   custody   of  the   minor   but  due
protection   of   rights   of   ward's   health,
maintenance and education. In considering
the question of welfare of minor due regard
has to be given to the right of father as
natural guardian but if the custody of father
cannot promote the welfare of children, they
may be refused such guardianship. [See:
(1973) 1 SCC 840]. It is a well settled legal
principle that there is a difference between
custody and guardianship. Guardianship is a
more comprehensive and more valuable right
than mere custody. The court while exercising
parens patriae jurisdiction is guided by sole
and paramount consideration of what would
best subserve the interest and welfare of the
child to which all other consideration must
yield. The welfare and benefit of the child
would         remain          the      dominant
consideration.[See:         'SMRITI      MADAN
22.    The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
GAURAV NAGPAL VS SUMENDRA NAGPAL at paragraph
Nos.50 & 51 has observed as follows:-
"50. When the court is confronted with
conflicting demands made by the parents,
each time it has to justify the demands. The
court has not only to look at the issue on
legalistic basis, in such matters human angles
are relevant for deciding those issues. The
court then does not give emphasis on what
the   parties   say,   it  has    to exercise a
jurisdiction which is aimed at the welfare of
the minor. As observed recently in Mausami
Moitra Ganguli case [(2008) 7 SCC 673 : JT
(2008) 6 SC 634] , the court has to give due
weightage      to    the    child's    ordinary
contentment, health, education, intellectual
development and favourable surroundings but
over and above physical comforts, the moral
and ethical values have also to be noted. They
are equal if not more important than the
others.
51. The word “welfare” used in Section
13 of the Act has to be construed literally and
must be taken in its widest sense. The moral
and ethical welfare of the child must also
weigh with the court as well as its physical
well-being. Though the      provisions  of the
special statutes which govern the rights of the
parents or guardians may be taken into
consideration, there is nothing which can
stand in the way of the court exercising its
parens patriae jurisdiction arising in such
cases."
23.    The High Court of Chhattisgarh, Bilaspur in
the case of DEVNATH RATRE VS. SMT. MALTI RATRE -
"17. The principles in relation to the
custody of a minor child are well settled. In
determining the question as to who should be
given custody of a minor child, the paramount
consideration is the "welfare of the child" and
not rights of the parents under a statute for
the time being in force."
"26. Reiterating the well settled legal
position   that   while    deciding  the   dispute
pertaining to custody of minor, Courts should
keep in mind the paramount interest of the
minor, the Supreme Court, in yet another
decision rendered in Purvi Mukesh Gada v.
Mukesh Popatlal Gada and Another reported in
(2017) 8 SCC 819, has held that it was
incumbent upon the High Court to find out the
welfare of the children before passing the
order regarding custody because the welfare
of the child is the supreme consideration in
such matters."
discussed above, it is also important to bear
in mind a very germane biological aspect of
the matter concerning puberty, privacy and
care needed to a girl child at age between 10
to 15 years.     At this juncture of life, the girl
needs    special   care   and   attention  of  the
mother. There are certain biological changes,
which a girl child undergoes during this age,
which cannot be taken care of by the father.
(See:2017 SCC Online Chh 1247, Balram v.
24.     The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
10 SCC 549 at paragraph No.4 has observed as follows:-
"4. The child of today cannot develop to
be a responsible and productive member of
tomorrow's society unless an environment
which is conducive to his social and physical
health   is   assured to     him.  Every  nation,
developed or developing, links its future with
the status of the child. Childhood holds the
potential and also sets the limit to the future
development of the society. Children are the
greatest gift to humanity. Mankind has the
best hold of itself. The parents themselves live
for them. They embody the joy of life in them
and in the innocence relieving the fatigue and
drudgery in their struggle of daily life. Parents
regain peace and happiness in the company of
the children. The children signify eternal
optimism in the human being and always
provide the potential for human development.
If the children are better equipped with a
broader human output, the society will feel
happy with them. Neglecting the children
means loss to the society as a whole. If
children are deprived of their childhood —
socially, economically, physically and mentally
— the nation gets deprived of the potential
human       resources    for    social  progress,
economic empowerment and peace and order,
the social stability and good citizenry. The
Founding      Fathers    of   the     Constitution,
therefore, have emphasised the importance of
the role of the child and the need of its best
development. Dr Bhimrao Ambedkar, who was
far ahead of his time in his wisdom projected
these    rights   in  the    Directive   Principles
including the children as beneficiaries. Their
deprivation has deleterious effect on the
efficacy of the democracy and the rule of law."
25.    The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
SCC 840 at paragraph No.15 has observed as follows:-
"15. In our opinion. Section 25 of the
Guardians and Wards Act contemplates not
only    actual   physical    custody    but    also
constructive custody of the guardian which
term includes all categories of guardians. The
object and purpose of this provision being ex
facie to ensure the welfare of the minor ward,
which necessarily involves due protection of
the right of his guardian to properly look after
the     ward's     health,    maintenance      and
education, this section demands reasonably
liberal interpretation so as to effectuate that
object. Hyper-technicalities      should not be
allowed to deprive the guardian the necessary
assistance    from   the    Court   in  effectively
discharging his duties and obligations towards
his ward so as to promote the latter's welfare.
If the Court under the Divorce Act cannot
make any order with respect to the custody of
Ajit alias Andrew and Maya alias Mary and it is
not open to the Court under the Guardians
and Wards Act to appoint or declare guardian
of the person of his children under Section 19
during his lifetime, if the Court does not
consider him unfit, then, the only provision to
which the father can have resort for his
children's custody is Section 25. Without,
therefore,    laying  down    exhaustively  the
circumstances in which Section 25 can be
invoked, in our opinion, on the facts and
circumstances of this case the husband's
application under Section 25 was competent
with respect to the two elder children. The
Court was entitled to consider all the disputed
questions of fact or law properly raised before
it relating to these two children. With respect
to Mahesh alias Thomas, however, the Court
under     the   Divorce   Act   is at   present
empowered to make suitable orders relating
to his custody, maintenance and education. It
is, therefore, somewhat difficult to impute to
the legislature an intention to set up another
parallel Court to deal with the question of the
custody of a minor which is within the power
of a competent Court under the Divorce Act.
We are unable to accede to the respondent's
suggestion that his application should be
considered    to   have    been    preferred   for
appointing or declaring him as a guardian. But
whether the respondent's prayer for custody
of the minor children be considered under the
Guardians and Wards Act or under the Indian
Divorce Act, as observed by Maharajan, J.,
with which observation we entirely agree, “the
controlling    consideration     governing    the
custody of the children is the welfare of the
children concerned and not the right of their
parents”. It was not disputed that under the
Indian Divorce Act this is the controlling
consideration.   The    Court's    power    under
Section 25 of the Guardians and Wards Act is
also, in our opinion, to be governed primarily
by the consideration of the welfare of the
minors concerned. The discretion vested in
the Court is, as is the case with all judicial
discretions to be exercised judiciously in the
background of all the relevant facts and
circumstances. Each case has to be decided
on its own facts and other cases can hardly
serve as binding precedents, the facts of two
cases in this respect being seldom — if ever —
identical. The contention that if the husband is
not unfit to be the guardian of his minor
children, then, the question of their welfare
does not at all arise is to state the proposition
a bit too broadly and may at times be
somewhat misleading. It does not take full
notice of the real core of the statutory
purpose.    In   our  opinion,   the   dominant
consideration in making orders under Section
25 is the welfare of the minor children and in
considering this question due regard has of
course to be paid to the right of the father to
be the guardian and also to all other relevant
factors having a bearing on the minor's
welfare. There is a presumption that a minor's
parents would do their very best to promote
their children's welfare and, if necessary,
would not grudge any sacrifice of their own
personal     interest   and    pleasure.    This
presumption arises because of the natural,
selfless affection normally expected from the
parents for their children. From this point of
view, in case of conflict or dispute between
the mother and the father about the custody
of their children, the approach has to be
somewhat different from that adopted by the
Letters Patent Bench of the High Court in this
case. There is no dichotomy between the
fitness of the father to be entrusted with the
custody     of    his  minor     children   and
considerations of their welfare. The father's
fitness has to be considered, determined and
weighed    predominantly    in  terms    of  the
welfare of his minor children in the context of
all the relevant circumstances. If the custody
of the father cannot promote their welfare
equally or better than the custody of the
mother, then, he cannot claim indefeasible
right to their custody under Section 25 merely
because there is no defect in his personal
character and he has attachment for his
children—which every normal parent has.
These are the only two aspects pressed before
us, apart from the stress laid by the husband
on the allegations of immorality against the
wife which, in our firm opinion, he was not at
all justified in contending. Such allegations, in
view of earlier decisions, had to be completely
ignored in considering the question of custody
of the children in the present case. The
father's fitness from the point of view just
mentioned cannot override considerations of
the welfare of the minor children. No doubt,
the father has been presumed by the statute
generally to be better fitted to look after the
children     —   being   normally  the   earning
member and head of the family — but the
Court has in each case to see primarily to the
welfare of the children in determining the
question of their custody, in the background
of all the relevant facts having a bearing on
their health, maintenance and education. The
family is normally the heart of our society and
for a balanced and healthy growth of children
it is highly desirable that they get their due
share of affection and care from both the
parents     in  their  normal   parental  home.
Where, however, family dissolution due to
some     unavoidable    circumstances   becomes
necessary the Court has to come to a judicial
decision on the question of the welfare of the
children on a full consideration of all the
relevant circumstances. Merely because the
father loves his children and is not shown to
be otherwise undesirable cannot necessarily
lead to the conclusion that the welfare of the
children would be better promoted by granting
their custody to him as against the wife who
may also be equally affectionate towards her
children and otherwise equally free from
blemish, and, who, in addition, because of her
profession and financial resources, may be in
a   position   to guarantee     better   health,
education and maintenance for them. The
children are not mere chattels : nor are they
mere play-things for their parents. Absolute
right of parents over the destinies and the
lives of their children has, in the modern
changed social conditions, yielded to the
considerations of their welfare as human
beings so that they may grow up in a normal
balanced manner to be useful members of the
society and the guardian court in case of a
dispute between the mother and the father, is
expected to strike a just and proper balance
between the requirements of welfare of the
minor    children and    the  rights   of  their
respective parents over them. The approach
of the learned Single Judge, in our view, was
correct and we agree with him. The Letters
Patent Bench on appeal seems to us to have
erred in reversing him on grounds which we
are unable to appreciate."
26.    The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
VIVEK SINGH VS ROMANI SINGH - (2017) 3 SCC 231 at
paragraph Nos.11 and 16 has observed as follows:-
"11. This Court in Gaurav Nagpal v.
Sumedha Nagpal [Gaurav Nagpal v. Sumedha
1] stated in detail, the law relating to custody
in England and America and pointed out that
even in those jurisdictions, welfare of the
minor    child   is   the  first and  paramount
consideration and in order to determine child
custody, the jurisdiction exercised by the
court rests on its own inherent equality
powers where the court acts as “parens
patriae”. The Court further observed that
various statutes give legislative recognition to
the aforesaid established principles. The Court
explained the expression “welfare”, occurring
in Section 13 of the said Act in the following
manner: (SCC p. 57, paras 51-52)
construed literally and must be taken in
its widest sense. The moral and ethical
welfare of the child must also weigh
with the court as well as its physical
well-being. Though the provisions of
the special statutes which govern the
rights of the parents or guardians may
be taken into consideration, there is
nothing which can stand in the way of
the court exercising its parens patriae
jurisdiction arising in such cases.
52.   The   trump   card   in   the
appellant's    argument is that the child
is living since long with the father. The
argument is attractive. But the same
overlooks a very significant factor. By
flouting various orders, leading even to
initiation of contempt proceedings, the
appellant has managed to keep custody
of the child. He cannot be a beneficiary
of his own wrongs. The High Court has
referred to these aspects in detail in the
impugned judgments.”
16. In the instant case, the factors
which weigh in favour of the appellant are
that child Saesha is living with him from
tender age of 21 months. She is happy in his
company. In fact, her desire is to continue to
live  with    the   appellant.  Normally,    these
considerations would have prevailed upon us
to hold that custody of Saesha remains with
the appellant. However, that is only one side
of the picture. We cannot, at the same time,
ignore the other side. A glimpse, nay, a
proper glance at the other side is equally
significant. From the events that took place
and noted above, following overwhelming
factors in favour of respondent emerge."
27.     The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
AND OTHERS - 2022 SCC ONLINE SC 937 at paragraph
No.13 has observed as follows:-
"13. We have stated earlier that the
question ‘what is the wish/desire of the child’
can be ascertained through interaction, but
then, the question as to ‘what would be the
best interest of the child’ is a matter to be
decided by the court taking into account all
the relevant circumstances. A careful scrutiny
of the impugned judgment would, however,
reveal that even after identifying the said
question rightly the High Court had swayed
away from the said point and entered into
consideration of certain aspects not relevant
for the said purpose. We will explain the
raison d'etre for the said remark"
28.      In the case of NIL RATAN KUNDU V.
ABHIJIT KUNDU - (2008) 9 SCC 413, the Hon'ble
Supreme Court while considering the principles governing
custody of minor at paragraph No.52 of its judgment has
observed as follows:-
"52. In our judgment, the law relating
to custody of a child is fairly well settled and it
is this : in deciding a difficult and complex
question as to the custody of a minor, a court
of law should keep in mind the relevant
statutes and the rights flowing therefrom. But
such cases cannot be decided solely by
interpreting legal provisions. It is a human
problem and is required to be solved with
human touch. A court while dealing with
custody cases, is neither bound by statutes
nor by strict rules of evidence or procedure
nor   by   precedents.      In   selecting   proper
guardian     of   a   minor,      the    paramount
consideration should be the welfare and well-
being of the child. In selecting a guardian, the
court is exercising parens patriae jurisdiction
and is expected, nay bound, to give due
weight    to    a   child's    ordinary    comfort,
contentment, health, education, intellectual
development and favourable surroundings.
But over and above physical comforts, moral
and ethical values cannot be ignored. They
are equally, or we may say, even more
important,      essential     and     indispensable
considerations. If the minor is old enough to
form an intelligent preference or judgment,
the court must consider such preference as
well, though the final decision should rest with
the court as to what is conducive to the
welfare of the minor."
29.   From   the   pronouncements    made    in  the
aforesaid judgments, it is trite law that the courts while
considering the question of a minor child's custody, has
to keep in mind the overall well being of the child and the
paramount consideration should be only its welfare. In
addition to the moral and ethical welfare, the Court
should also consider the physical well-being of the child.
The provision of the statute cannot come in the way of
the courts exercising its parens patriae jurisdiction
arising in such cases. The Court is required to evaluate
the material available before it and keeping in mind the
welfare and paramount interest of the child should order
custody to the parent who can provide and assure a
conducive environment for the child's overall growth and
who can provide safety, stability and security to the
child. Home is the first school of the child and parents
are its first teachers. When the child is deprived of a
proper parenthood, its overall growth and happiness gets
effected and in such situation, the Courts are not only
required to consider the comforts and attachments of the
child   but  should   also  take  into  consideration   the
surroundings in which the child is growing, the moral and
ethical values which the child learns by observation,
availability of care and affection when the child needs it
most and thereafter strike a balance which would be
more beneficial for the child's welfare and interest. The
preference and desire of the child is to be considered
only if the child is mature enough to form an intelligent
preference and judgment, otherwise the Court has to
take the onus for providing an environment which would
be more conducive to the welfare of the child. The
material evidence available on record is, therefore,
required to be evaluated keeping these aspects in mind.
30.    In the present case, the parents of the child
are qualified doctors. The appellant is working in a
private hospital on the administrative side, while the
respondent is a Post Graduate i.e., MD in Pathology. Both
of them are divorcee from the earlier marriage and they
do not have any children from their earlier marriage. The
parties came to know each other on a marriage portal,
and thereafter, they decided to marry each other. The
material on record would go to show that at the time of
marriage, the respondent's parents, sister and her minor
daughter were staying with him and many relatives also
used to visit them. Whereas, the appellant was brought
up by her grandparents and it appears that her parents
were not in good terms, and therefore, she had not
received parental love, care and affection when she was
growing. It appears therefore that she has no respect or
value for the relationships and she was in the habit of
quarrelling on silly issues. She also did not want the
respondent's parents and family members to stay with
him, and therefore, she saw to it that they left the house.
Inspite   of  such   behaviour   of   the   appellant,   the
respondent's parents came back to the house of the
respondent when the appellant was pregnant and they
not only took care of the appellant during her pregnancy,
but also took care of the appellant and the child after the
appellant gave birth to the child. Inspite of all these, the
appellant deliberately raised quarrel with them and threw
them out of the house.
31.    The material on record would go to show that
the appellant was not only behaving rudely with the
respondent and her in-laws, but she also had behaved
rudely during the family counselling. She was in the habit
of quarrelling with the respondent in public and she was
never truthful to the respondent or her in-laws. After the
birth of the child, she started working in a private
hospital where she came into contact with one Shivanand
who was already married and had a child, and inspite of
the same, she developed illicit relationship with him. The
material on record would go to show that in the guise of
attending the hospital, she used to be away during
weekends and spend time with the said Shivanand while
the respondent and his parents with the help of a
housemaid had to take care of the minor child.
32.   If the issue regarding the relationship of the
appellant with the said Shivanand juxtaposition the
welfare of the child is considered, it appears that the
appellant has given more importance to the illicit
relationship of hers with the said Shivanand and has
neglected the child. On 02.04.2018, she had left the
matrimonial home along with the child and the material
on record would go to show that thereafter she stayed in
a rented premises which was taken on rent by the
aforesaid Shivanand in the month of March 2018 itself,
which would go to show that even prior to the alleged
incident on 02.04.2018, the appellant had decided to
leave the company of the respondent. Thereafter, she
had handed over custody of the child to her parents who
were residing at Panchakul in Chandigarh while she
continued to stay at Bengaluru with Shivanand.
33.    The appellant had given birth to the girl child
in the month of April 2015, and thereafter, in the year
2016,    she   had   joined   Columbia    Asia  Hospital     in
Bengaluru and started working on the administrative
side. It is in the said hospital, she came in contact with
Shivanand, who was also working on the administrative
side and even after knowing he was married and had a
child from the said marriage, the appellant developed
intimacy with him and she spent most of the weekends
with him and hardly gave any time to the child who was
being taken care by the respondent and his parents with
the help of housemaid. The material on record would go
to   show    that  after  the   appellant  developed    illicit
relationship with the said Shivanand, till the time she left
the matrimonial home in the month of April 2018, the
appellant and the said Shivanand had stayed overnight in
many hotels and lodges in and around Bengaluru and this
aspect is prima facie proved by the respondent by
producing necessary documents which proves the stay of
the appellant with the said Shivanand in various hotels
and lodges overnight and on certain dates, they had even
checked in as husband and wife. There are several
photographs in Ex.P-8 - series which shows the appellant
in the company of the said Shivanand and in certain
photographs even the minor child is present with them.
34.    The respondent, after coming to know about
the illicit affair of the appellant, had lodged a complaint
before the jurisdictional police against the appellant and
the said Shivanand, and the police after investigation
have filed a detailed charge sheet against the appellant
and    Shivanand      for the   offences  punishable  under
Sections 420, 497, 109, 504, 506, 418 read with 34 IPC
and Sections 75 & 87 of Juvenile Justice Act. The police
during the course of investigation have secured the
records relating to the hotel stay of the accused persons,
their call records, their bank statements and also their e-
mail correspondences which prima facie show that the
accused persons were in illicit relationship.
35.   The respondent has examined himself as
PW-1 and he has reiterated the petition averments and
also has deposed in detail with regard to the adulterous
relationship of the appellant. Nothing has been elicited
during his cross-examination to disbelieve the said
version of his. The respondent has produced sufficient
material before the Family Court in support of his
allegations against the appellant regarding her adulterous
relationship. Ex.P-8 - photographs of the appellant with
the said Shivanand were got marked and Ex.P-9 is the
charge sheet filed by the jurisdictional police against the
appellant and Shivanand for the offence of adultery and
other allied offences. Ex.P-15 is a document evidencing
the appellant's stay with Shivanand in various hotels and
lodges in and around Bengaluru and the said document is
part of the charge sheet filed by the police. Ex.P-17 is a
e-mail correspondence between the appellant, Shivanand
and appellant's father which would throw light on the
relationship of the appellant with Shivanand.
36.   In order to prove the relationship of the
appellant with Shivanand, the respondent had examined
PW-3 who has deposed that after leaving the company of
the respondent, the appellant started residing in a
premises in Sai Deep Apartments, wherein PW-3 was also
residing. The said apartment allegedly was taken on rent
by Shivanand in the month of March 2018 and he had
paid advance amount of Rs.75,000/- for taking the said
apartment on lease. PW-3 has deposed that Shivanand
was frequently visiting the said apartment and on certain
occasions, his car was also parked in the basement of the
said    apartment.    He   has    also  produced  certain
photographs which he had taken which shows that the
appellant was in the company of Shivanand in the
apartment premises and the child is also seen in the
photographs. He has also spoken to certain incidents
where Shivanand had misbehaved with the child.
37.   The respondent has also produced sufficient
material before the Family Court to show that, after the
appellant started working in a private hospital, the
respondent and his family members with the help of
housemaid was taking care of the minor child. He has
produced Ex.P-2 - lab report and medical bills of the
child, Ex.P-4 - Health Insurance of the child and he also
has deposed that he had admitted the child to a play
school and also had paid the fee for the same. PW-2 is
the housemaid who was working in the house of the
respondent and she has deposed that the respondent and
his parents were taking care of the child when the
appellant was away from home and she has also stated
that the appellant did not bother to take care of the child.
38.   A reading of Ex.P-9 - charge sheet would go
to show that the allegations made by the respondent are
all found in the charge sheet and the charges levelled
against the appellant and Shivanand in the charge sheet
are supported by material which include the statement of
the witnesses and the documents secured by the police
during   investigation.  Exs.P-12  &   13  are   the   bank
statement of the appellant and Shivanand which show
that their relationship was personal and beyond business.
Ex.P-14 is the statement of credit card belonging to
Shivanand which shows that his credit card was swiped
during his stay with the appellant on various occasions as
found in Ex.P-15 which is a statement providing the
details of various hotels in which the appellant and the
said Shivanand had stayed prior to she leaving the
matrimonial home. Ex.P-16 is the letter issued by the
Columbia Asia Hospital which shows that the appellant
and the said Shivanand were punching in and out in the
hospital at the same time and they were also absent
from duty on the same dates and timings and the said
dates and timings tallies with the dates they had stayed
in the hotels and lodges as found in Ex.P-15. Ex.P-17 is a
email correspondence dated 08.05.2018 which speaks
about the appellant's relationship with Shivanand. Ex.P-
20 is the call details of the appellant and the same shows
that she was in constant touch only with Shivanand and
the said document does not disclose that she used to call
Dr. Samir Singh - RW-2 who was allegedly one of the
partner in their startup business. Ex.P-25 is the hospital
record which shows that the appellant had faked the
medical documents relating to the child and Ex.P-26 -
email message discloses that the appellant had not
honoured the court orders and denied visitation rights to
the respondent. Exs.P-29 & P-30 would go to show that
the appellant had brought her father to the mediation
centre in violation of the court order on 17.08.2019 and
on the said date, the respondent and appellant's father
had exchanged blows and a charge sheet as per Ex.P-31
has been filed on the complaint of the respondent.
39.   Ex.P-32 is a crucial document which shows
the relationship of the respondent with the child. The said
document is the letter dated 18.11.2019 issued by the
Mediation Centre to the Registrar of the High Court in
respect of the meetings held in the Mediation Centre. The
report of the meeting that was held on 16.11.2019 would
go to show that on the said date the minor child and the
father spent time in the mediation centre and the child
was comfortable with the respondent. The report dated
07.12.2019 would go to show that the child was not
cooperative with the father as the mother followed the
child by video recording the meeting and her presence
during the meeting encouraged the child to cry loud and
seek mother's attention.
40.  The appellant had examined herself as RW-1
and also examined Dr. Samir Singh as RW-2. It is her
specific case that she was not in relationship with
Shivanand and her meetings with Shivanand was in
relation to a business which she intended to start with
Dr. Samir Singh and the said Shivanand in the name of a
company called ARCORE. However, she has not produced
any material before the Family Court to show that the
aforesaid three persons intended to start a company
known as ARCORE. She has not produced any material
before the Family Court to show that the meeting that
was held in the hotel was related to starting the company
known as ARCORE. She has produced certain minutes of
meeting proceedings of the company, but the fact
remains that she has not produced any material to show
that there existed a company known as ARCORE.
Further, in the photographs at Ex.P-8, the presence of
Dr. Samir Singh is not seen. If the meetings were in
relation to any business transaction, they were required
to be held in the coffee shop or in the lobby of the hotel
or in a meeting room. However, Ex.P-15 document
clearly shows that the appellant and the said Shivanand
had checked into the hotel room and they had stayed in
the room on certain occasions even overnight.
41.  There are certain text messages available on
record which has been forwarded by the appellant to the
respondent and a reading of the same would clearly go to
show that the appellant has apologised for her mistakes
on number of occasions and had promised to mend her
ways and not to repeat the mistakes. The said messages
would also go to show that it was the respondent who
was taking care of the child. From the cross-examination
of RW-1, it is seen that a LEECO mobile phone was gifted
by the respondent to the appellant and the possession of
the said mobile phone was in the custody of the
respondent. The suggestion made on behalf of the
appellant would go to show that the photographs and e-
mail communications produced by the respondent were
extracted by him from the said phone without her
42.    RW-2's deposition is of no help to the
appellant. The said witness has not produced any
material before the Court to prove that he along with the
appellant and Shivanand intended to start the company
known as ARCORE nor has he produced any material to
show that he was part of the meetings that were held in
various hotels as evidenced from the photographs at
Ex.P-8. As evidenced from Ex.P-15, it is only the
appellant and Shivanand had checked in and stayed
together in hotels. It is the specific contention of the
appellant    that  the   photographs   and   the electronic
documents are morphed and created documents and
reliance cannot be placed on the same. However, no
efforts were made by the appellant either to send the
disputed photographs for scientific examination nor did
she make any attempt to examine any witness to prove
that   the    electronic  documents     produced   by   the
respondent were created documents.
43.    The material on record would also go to show
that   after   the  appellant  left the   company   of  the
respondent, she was in the habit of filing false and
frivolous criminal complaints against him. Immediately
after leaving the matrimonial home, she had filed a
complaint    against   the    respondent   and  his   family
members for the offences punishable under Section 498A
IPC and the provisions of Dowry Prohibition Act and in
the said case a final B report was filed. The appellant also
had filed Crime No.2833/2018 before the Cyber Crime
Police Station alleging that the respondent had hacked
her phone and bank account and no action is taken in
respect of the said complaint till date. At the instance of
the appellant, the aforesaid Shivanand had filed a PCR
making false allegation against the respondent and a
case was registered in Crime No.76/2019 against the
respondent in J.P.Nagar Police Station pursuant to the
said PCR and even in the said case, a final B report has
been filed. The appellant had filed a complaint against
the respondent in J.P.Nagar Police Station for the offence
punishable under Section 307 IPC and even in the said
case, final B report has been filed in the year 2021. The
appellant   had   also   filed   a  complaint  against   the
respondent and PW-3 - Vijayamurthy and his wife for the
offence punishable under Section 354B IPC and even in
the said case, final B report was filed in the year 2021. In
respect    of  the  incident    that  had   taken   place     on
17.08.2019 in the Bengaluru Mediation Centre play area,
the   appellant    had   filed   a   complaint   against    the
respondent which was treated as an NCR, wherein the
appellant had alleged that the respondent had put poison
in the food of the minor child. The said complaint was
closed subsequently. In the month of August 2020 and
December 2020, she had filed two separate complaints
before the J.P.Nagar Police Station alleging that the
respondent was sending goons after her and the said
complaint     was   also    treated   as  NCR    and    closed
subsequently. All these aspects would clearly go to show
the attitude and hostility of the appellant towards the
respondent,     inspite   of    she   continuing   her    illicit
relationship with the aforesaid Shivanand after leaving
the matrimonial house.
44.    The material on record would also go to show
that the appellant was not only rude to the respondent
and his family members, but on certain occasions, she
had not cooperated even with the court during the course
of trial and she had shouted at the respondent's advocate
and also at the court. This has been taken note of by the
court while recording the evidence. The material on
record would also go to show that the appellant was not
only in the habit of lying with her husband and his family
members, but she also has lied even before the court.
45.   The material on record would go to show that
the appellant has got scant respect to the court orders
and she has violated the court orders with apparent
impunity. Several orders of the court providing visitation
rights to the respondent were not honoured by her and
she had successfully kept the child away from the
respondent. The Family Court had permitted visitation
rights to the respondent by order dated 15.12.2018
passed on IA-10/2018. The said order was not honoured
by the appellant and on the other hand, she had
questioned     the     same    before    this  Court      in
W.P.No.2487/2019 contending that the child was staying
in Panchkula at Chandigarh in the care of her parents,
and therefore, it was not possible for providing visitation
rights to the respondent. The respondent, therefore, had
agreed for the visitation and interim custody of the minor
child in the month of April and May 2019 during which
period the child had summer vacation, and accordingly,
the order of the Family Court was modified by this Court
in W.P.No.2487/2019. Even the said order was not
honoured by the appellant, and therefore, the respondent
had   initiated  contempt    proceedings    against  her   in
CCC.No.1013/2019 and inspite of she giving an affidavit
of undertaking that she will hand over the custody of the
child   as     per   the   orders    of    this   Court    in
W.P.No.2487/2019,      she   had   failed   to  honour   her
46.   Thereafter, on number of occasions, she was
absent before this Court in the contempt proceedings and
this Court was compelled to issue bailable warrant to her.
Subsequently, the appellant had appeared before this
Court and had undertaken to appear regularly on all the
dates of hearing. Since the appellant had not complied
the orders passed in favour of the respondent granting
him visitation rights, in order to facilitate the same, this
Court    on    29.09.2020    in  CCC.No.1013/2019        had
appointed a Court Commissioner with a direction for
handing over the custody of the minor child to the
respondent at a designated place. The material on record
would go to show that as and when the child met the
respondent    under   the  supervision   of   the   Court
Commissioner, the child was always comfortable with the
respondent and had spent quality time with him. The
order sheet dated 16.10.2020 recorded by this Court in
CCC.No.1013/2019 would go to show that the appellant's
interference when the child was in the company of the
respondent was deprecated by this Court. The contempt
petition was ultimately disposed of by this Court on
05.11.2020 and in paragraphs 8 & 10 of its orders, this
Court has taken note of the fact that the child was
comfortable in the company of the respondent.
47.  The order passed by this Court disposing of
the   contempt   proceedings  was   questioned    by  the
respondent before the Hon'ble Supreme Court and the
Hon'ble Supreme Court after issuing notice in the said
proceedings, having taken note of the fact that the order
of visitation rights was not being honoured by the
appellant, had passed an order permitting the respondent
to have visitation rights on alternative Sundays of every
month i.e., the Second and Fourth Sundays. The said
order was also not honoured by the appellant on one
pretext or the other.
48.   The material on record would go to show that
out of 52 dates of visitation rights to the respondent, the
appellant had permitted him to have visitation rights only
on 12 dates and that too was interrupted by her by
recording the meetings of the respondent with the child.
Therefore, it is very clear that after the appellant had
taken away the child from the custody of the respondent
in the month of April 2018, she hardly allowed the child
to be with the respondent and the Family Court as well
as this Court in the contempt proceedings have recorded
a finding that the appellant was in the habit of tutoring
the child and always filled its mind with negativity about
the respondent.
49.   The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
42 at paragraphs 50 to 53 has observed as under:
"50. When the court is confronted
with    conflicting   demands    made    by  the
parents, each time it has to justify the
demands. The court has not only to look at
the issue on legalistic basis, in such matters
human angles are relevant for deciding
those issues. The court then does not give
emphasis on what the parties say, it has to
exercise a jurisdiction which is aimed at the
welfare of the minor. As observed recently in
Mausami Moitra Ganguli case [(2008) 7 SCC
673 : JT (2008) 6 SC 634] , the court has to
give due weightage to the child's ordinary
contentment, health, education, intellectual
development and favourable surroundings
but over and above physical comforts, the
moral and ethical values have also to be
noted. They are equal if not more important
than the others.
Section 13 of the Act has to be construed
literally and must be taken in its widest
sense. The moral and ethical welfare of the
child must also weigh with the court as well
as   its  physical    well-being.   Though   the
provisions of the special statutes which
govern     the    rights  of   the   parents  or
guardians may be taken into consideration,
there is nothing which can stand in the way
of the court exercising its parens patriae
jurisdiction arising in such cases.
52. The trump card in the appellant's
argument is that the child is living since long
with the father. The argument is attractive.
But the same overlooks a very significant
factor. By flouting various orders, leading
even to initiation of contempt proceedings,
the appellant has managed to keep custody
of the child. He cannot be a beneficiary of
his own wrongs. The High Court has referred
to these aspects in detail in the impugned
judgments.
53. The conclusions arrived at and
reasons indicated by the High Court to grant
custody to the mother do not in our view
suffer from any infirmity. It is true that
taking the child out of the father's custody
may cause some problems, but that is
bound to be neutralised."
50.    The learned counsel for the appellant has
strenuously contended that the respondent has not
produced necessary certificate under Section 65B of the
Indian Evidence Act, 1872 and therefore, the documents
at Exs.P-7 & P-8 which are the photographs of the parties
and also the various other electronic documents on which
reliance has been placed by the respondent cannot be
taken into consideration as the said documents are not
admissible in the absence of certificate under Section 65
of the Indian Evidence Act. In support of his arguments,
he has relied upon the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in the case of ARJUN PANDITRAO KHOTKAR VS
OTHERS - (2014) 10 SCC 473 and RAVINDRA SINGH
He also placed reliance on the judgment of this Court in
the     case    of    MR.     VISHWAS       SHETTY      in
W.P.No.13165/2019 dated 30.11.2022.
51.    Though we are in respectful agreement with
the aforesaid judgments on which reliance has been
placed by the learned counsel for the appellant, in view
of Section 14 of the Family Courts Act, 1984, the Family
Court is authorized or empowered to receive as evidence
any report, statement, documents, information if any, in
its opinion, the same would assist it to deal effectually
with a dispute, irrespective of whether it is relevant or
admissible under the Indian Evidence Act, 1872. Section
14 of the Family Courts Act reads as follows:
"14. Application of Indian Evidence Act,
1872.-A Family Court may receive as evidence
any      report,     statement,      documents,
information or matter that may, in its opinion,
assist it to deal effectually with a dispute,
whether or not the same would be otherwise
relevant    or  admissible  under   the   Indian
Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872). -A Family
Court may receive as evidence any report,
statement, documents, information or matter
that may, in its opinion, assist it to deal
effectually with a dispute, whether or not the
same     would    be   otherwise   relevant   or
admissible under the Indian Evidence Act,
1872 (1 of 1872)."
52.    The Division Bench of Kerala High Court in
the case of SABITHA UNNIKRISHNAN VS VINEET DAS -
2021 SCC ONLINE KER 2995 at paragraph No.15 has
observed as follows:
"15. The technicalities of the Evidence
Act cannot be imported to a proceedings
before the Family Court because Section 14 of
the Family Courts Act authorizes a Family
Court to receive as evidence any report,
statement, document, information or matter
that may, in its opinion assist it to deal
effectually   with  a  dispute  irrespective  of
whether it is relevant or admissible under the
Indian Evidence Act, 1972. It is discernible
from Section 14 that the technicalities of
Indian     Evidence     Act    regarding   the
admissibility or relevancy of evidence are not
strictly applicable to the proceedings under
the Family Court and in the matrimonial
dispute before the Family Court, a discretion
has been given to the court to rely on the
documents produced if the court is satisfied
that it is required to assist the court to
effectively deal with the dispute."
53.     The aforesaid view has been also reiterated
by the Division Bench of High Court of Punjab and
Haryana in the case of RITU SAIGAL VS RAKESH SAIGAL
- FAO-4720-2017 DATED 04.03.2022, wherein it has
been held that Section 14 of the Family Courts Act given
wider powers to the Family Court on the issues of
relevance and admissibility of evidence which are led in a
dispute between husband and wife. As per the above said
Section, it is the discretion of the Family Courts to
receive any evidence, reports, statement, document,
information or matter which in its opinion, is necessary to
deal effectively with the dispute event if it is not
admissible in Indian Evidence Act, 1872. Therefore, we
find no merit in the contention of the appellant that
photographs and electronic documents on which reliance
has been placed by the Trial Court is required to be
discarded in view of non-compliance of Section 65B of
54.   From the oral and documentary evidence
available on record, it can be gathered that after the
child was born to the appellant, the respondent's parents
had initially taken care of the child and after the
appellant joined Columbia Asia Hospital, the respondent,
his parents and the housemaid were taking care of the
child. Exs.P-1 to P-4 would go to show that it is the
respondent who has taken care of the health and medical
needs of the child. Even PW-2 - housemaid has clearly
deposed that it was the respondent and his parents who
were taking care of the child in the absence of the
appellant in the house. It has also come on record that
after she joined Columbia Asia Hospital, she developed
illicit relationship with Shivanand who was working in the
said hospital and the material on record would prima
facie show that after she joined Columbia Asia Hospital
till she left the matrimonial home in the month of April
2018, she had stayed in various hotels and lodges in and
around Bengaluru along with the said Shivanand and the
material on record would also go to show that they had
checked into the hotels as husband and wife and they
were punching in and out in the work place always
together and they were also absent from duty on the
same dates and timings and the said dates and timings
tallied the dates on which they had stayed together in
the hotels.
55.  The material on record would also go to show
that after the appellant left the matrimonial home on
02.04.2018, she started staying in an apartment along
with the child, which was taken on rent by the aforesaid
Shivanand in the month of March 2018 itself and even
the advance deposit amount for the said apartment was
paid by him. Though she continued to stay in the said
apartment , thereafter, the custody of the minor child
was handed over by her to her parents who were residing
at Panchkul in Chandigarh. This aspect is very clear from
the orders passed by this Court in W.P.No.2487/2019
and it is under these circumstances, the order passed by
the Family Court regarding visitation rights was modified
by this Court in the said writ petition only for the reason
that the appellant was not in a position to comply with
the said order as the child was in the custody of her
parents at Panchkul in Chandigarh.
56.    The material on record would also go to show
that after the Hon'ble Supreme Court had passed an
order of visitation rights in favour of the respondent in
SLP.No.15871/2020 directing the maternal grandparents
of the child to accompany the child to the house of the
respondent, the maternal grandparents of the child viz.,
the parents of the appellant had filed an affidavit on
09.03.2021 stating that the child did not wish to go to
the father and a submission was also made that the
maternal     grandparents    may     not  be    given   the
responsibility of taking the child to the respondent's
house. Therefore, it can be presumed that the maternal
grandparents viz., the parents of the appellant were not
interested in cooperating for the welfare of the child, and
on the other hand, they had shirked their responsibility.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court had, therefore, modified its
earlier order and had directed the appellant to leave the
child in the house of the respondent and further observed
that the paternal grandparents of the child viz., the
parents of the respondent will be there in the house and
the child shall sleep with the paternal grandparents
during the night. In compliance of the said order, the
paternal grandparents were very much present in the
house respondent to receive the child. However, the
order passed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court could not be
complied since the respondent was tested positive for
COVID and additionally, the appellant had not cooperated
for compliance of the orders passed by the Hon'ble
Supreme      Court   granting   visitation  rights to  the
57.   The respondent who had taken care of the
child prior to the appellant leaving the matrimonial
house, has diligently initiated these proceedings seeking
custody of the child without there being any delay. The
material on record would also go to show that the
respondent    all  along   during   the   pendency  of the
proceedings before the Family Court was ready and
willing to take care of the child and he also had filed
multiple applications seeking visitation rights of the child
and though repeated orders were passed in his favour,
the appellant had successfully seen that the said orders
were not complied with and the respondent was denied
visitation rights on most of the occasions. Out of 52
dates of visitation rights, the respondent was able to
exercise his rights only on 12 dates. The Trial Court as
well as this Court while disposing of the contempt
proceedings has taken note of the conduct of the
appellant and have observed that she was in the habit of
tutoring the child and filled the child's mind with
negativity as against the respondent. This Court had in
fact deprecated the conduct of the appellant as found in
the      order     dated    16.10.2020        passed      in
CCC.No.1013/2019. The material on record would also go
to show that the appellant was in the habit of behaving
rudely in the house with the respondent as well as with
his parents and sister and in fact her rude behaviour
during the course of cross-examination was taken note of
by the learned Judge of the Family Court who had the
occasion to note the demeanour of the appellant while
she was in the witness box.
58.   The appellant having left the custody of the
child in her parents house immediately after leaving the
matrimonial house, had continued to stay at Bengaluru in
the premises which was taken on rent by Shivanand and
the material on record, more so the evidence of PW-3
would go to show that Shivanand was frequently visiting
the said apartment. The appellant had not only kept the
child in the custody of her parents at Panchkul in
Chandigarh,    but   she   had     also   not  provided    any
information about the child to the respondent. In fact,
even during her deposition, she had refused to provide
such    information   inspite   of    the   Court   repeatedly
questioning    about    the    same.      From    the   overall
appreciation of all these aspects of the matter, it is very
clear that after the appellant left the matrimonial house
along with the child, she had handed over the custody of
the child to her parents who were residing at Panchkul
and the child was attending the school at Panchkul.
Appellant's parents had shown their unwillingness to
shoulder the responsibility of the child and accordingly
made a statement before the Hon'ble Supreme Court and
it appears thereafter the child was shifted to Bengaluru
and presently the child is admitted to a school at
59.   Therefore, it is very clear that prior to the
appellant leaving her matrimonial house as well as after
she left the matrimonial house, she had not taken care of
the child and it was the respondent and his parents who
were taking care of the child while she was staying from
the   matrimonial    home.     After  appellant  left  the
matrimonial home, she had handed over custody of the
child to her parents at Panchakul and she continued her
stay in Bengaluru and the material on record would go to
show that she was constantly moving with the aforesaid
Shivanand during the said period. Therefore, it can safely
presumed that appellant bothered least about the welfare
and interest of the child and she had taken the child
away from the respondent only out of vengeance. She
has not stated anything touching the character of the
respondent nor has she proved that the respondent had
no love and affection towards the child or that he had
misbehaved badly with the child so as to raise a
presumption against him. The respondent, on the other
hand, has successfully proved before the Court that the
relationship of the appellant with the said Shivanand was
beyond business meetings as sought to be contended by
the appellant and she had given more priority to the said
relationship of her's when compared to the welfare and
well-being of the child.
60.   The Family Court during the course of trial
and this Court during the pendency of the contempt
proceedings     have   observed    that   the   child was
comfortable in the company of the respondent. The
photographs at Ex.P-8 as well as the evidence of PW-3
and the documents produced by him during the course of
his examination would go to show that the appellant was
found in the company of the said Shivanand along with
the child. The respondent is a qualified doctor who is a
Post Graduate viz., MD in Pathology and he is working in
a private hospital. He has a good income and he is
financially secured. He has conducted himself in a decent
manner throughout in all the court proceedings and there
are no allegations whatsoever against his character and
morality. In addition to the same, he has the assistance
of his parents at his home who have taken care of the
child till the appellant had left the matrimonial home and
even thereafter they had shown their readiness and
willingness to take care of the child in compliance of the
orders passed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court which
directed visitation rights to the respondent, wherein the
paternal were directed to stay with the child and sleep
with it during night.
61.    The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
311, at paragraph 49 has observed as under:
"49. The crucial factors which have to
be kept in mind by the courts for gauging the
welfare of the children equally for the parent's
can be inter alia, delineated, such as (1)
maturity and judgment; (2) mental stability;
(3) ability to provide access to schools; (4)
moral    character;   (5)   ability to   provide
continuing involvement in the community; (6)
financial sufficiency and last but not the least
the factors involving relationship with the
child, as opposed to characteristics of the
parent as an individual."
62.    In the case of MAUSAMI MOITRA GANGULI
VS JAYANT GANGULI - (2008)7 SCC 673, at paragraph
20 has observed as under:
"20. The question of welfare of the
minor child has again to be considered in the
background       of    the    relevant   facts   and
circumstances. Each case has to be decided
on its own facts and other decided cases can
hardly serve as binding precedents insofar as
the factual aspects of the case are concerned.
It is, no doubt, true that father is presumed
by the statutes to be better suited to look
after the welfare of the child, being normally
the working member and head of the family,
yet in each case the court has to see primarily
to the welfare of the child in determining the
question of his or her custody. Better financial
resources of either of the parents or their love
for the child may be one of the relevant
considerations       but   cannot    be    the   sole
determining factor for the custody of the
child. It is here that a heavy duty is cast on
the court to exercise its judicial discretion
judiciously   in    the   background     of  all  the
relevant facts and circumstances, bearing in
mind    the   welfare      of   the  child   as   the
paramount consideration."
63.    In the case of MARY VANITHA VS BABU
ROYAN - 1991 SCC OnLine Mad 843, the High Court of
Madras at paragraph 17 has observed as under:
17. While considering the question of
‘welfare of the minors’ the right of the father
as recognised by law has to be kept in mind
and given its due weight, but the primary
and paramount consideration undoubtedly
remains to be the welfare of the minors. The
expression ‘welfare of the minors’ though
has not been defined, yet undoubtedly has
to be given a very wide meaning It ought
not to be measured in money only or by
physical comfort alone. It has many facets,
such   as   financial,  educational,  physical,
moral and religious welfare. In the instant
case, the mother/petitioner is getting a
decent income of Rs. 3,000 per month by
way of salary. She is well educated and she
is physically and mentally all right to bring
up the minor children. Further, she is also
affectionate towards her children. Though
some allegations have been made about her
character, as stated earlier they have to be
proved    by   the   other  side,  before   the
appropriate forum. At any rate, that cannot
be a ground at this stage for denying the
custody of the two minor children to the
mother/petitioner. The decision cited by the
Respondent in Snehlata's case, AIR 1979 Raj
29, it is said that in the appointment or
declaration of any person as guardian of a
Hindu minor by a Court, the welfare of the
minor shall be the paramount consideration.
The other decision reported in Chakki's case,
(1988) 2 D.M.C. 140, is also to the same
effect. As mentioned above, a number of
decisions were referred to me in this context
of conflicting claims between mother and
father for custody and guardianship of minor
children. The right of the natural guardian to
have custody of the minor, unless he or she
is disqualified or it is found that the welfare
of the child requires recognition of the other;
the other point of view emphasises, that the
legal rights of the natural guardian may only
be secondary consideration, the principal
factor being the interest and welfare of the
child. A passage in Halsbury's Laws of
was also relied on by Mr. Alagarsamy, which
is reproduced herein below:
“There is no rule of law that a child of
tender years should remain with his
mother and the question of whether
it is better for a child to be with his
mother or his father must depend
upon the particular circumstances of
the case and upon the view, which the
Court takes of the characters and
qualities of the respective parents.”
64.   In almost similar circumstances wherein the
child was not given sufficient time to develop affinity or
to be comfortable with the father and wherein the child
was throughout kept in the custody of the mother, the
Delhi High Court in the case of SMT. SHILPI THAPAR VS
SHRI     MANAN       THAPAR      (CM(M).No.1425/2013        and
connected matters disposed of on 23.11.2015) has
observed that any factor or influence which is injurious to
the child his well-being and balanced psychological
development should be removed. The mother's care for
the child is stifling its emotional growth and her over
protective concern is inhibiting the development of the
individuality   and    personality,    and   it   is, therefore,
necessary     to   immediately      remove      this  unhealthy
influence from the child's mind. The respondent-father
lives with his parents who are in their early 60s and are
always available at home to take care of the child.
Hence, when he comes back from school, he would
always have the care of his grandparents. It was further
observed in the said case that the father should have an
important role in the child's growth and cannot be
overlooked that the development of the personality of
any child, particularly that of a female child is inflicted.
65.   Though     in   normal    circumstances,       the
wish/desire of the child would also play a prominent role
while deciding the custody of the said child, having
regard to the material available on record and more so
for the reason that the child was throughout kept away
from the father and was being tutored by the appellant-
mother, we are of the view that in the present case, no
purpose would have been served by ascertaining from
the child its desire or wish. Desire and wish of the child
can be ascertained only if the child is mature enough to
form an intelligent preference and judgment, otherwise,
it is for the court to analyze the material and make a
decision taking into consideration the paramount interest
of the child. The Family Court, in our opinion, has
properly exercised its jurisdiction and discretion, and
therefore, we are of the considered opinion that the
Family Court was fully justified in directing to hand over
the custody of the child to the respondent-father.
66.     The fight between the parents has resulted in
denial    of   a   proper   parenthood     to  the     child and
resultantly, it has been denied of its childhood, happiness
and family atmosphere during its growing years. The
Hon'ble Supreme Court in Rosy Jacob's case supra in its
conclusion paragraph of the judgment has observed as
"21. ……….that the two spouses would
at least for the sake of happiness of their own
off-spring, if for no other reason, forget the
past and turn a new leaf in their family life, so
that they can provide to their children a
happy, domestic home, to which their children
must be considered to be justly entitled. The
requirement of indispensable tolerance and
mental understanding in matrimonial life is its
basic foundation. The two spouses before us
who are both educated and cultured and who
come from highly respectable families must
realise that reasonable wear and tear and
normal jars and shocks of ordinary married
life has to be put up with in the larger
interests of their own happiness and of the
healthy, normal growth and development of
their off-spring, whom destiny has entrusted
to their joint parental care. Incompatibility of
temperament has to be endeavoured to be
disciplined into compatibility and not to be
magnified by abnormal impulses or impulsive
desires and passions. The husband is not
disentitled to a house and a housewife, even
though the wife has achieved the status of an
economically emancipated woman; similarly
the wife is not a domestic slave, but a
responsible partner in discharging their joint
parental obligation in promoting the welfare of
their children and in sharing the pleasure of
their children's company. Both parents have,
therefore,     to   co-operate     and    work
harmoniously for their children who should
feel proud of their parents and of their home,
bearing in mind that their children have a
right to expect from their parents such a
home."
67.    We    hope     that  the   appellant    and the
respondent in the present case who are qualified doctors
and responsible members of the society will realize the
mistake committed by them and keeping in mind the
interest and welfare of the minor child will come together
atleast for the purpose of taking care of the welfare of
the child, who in a short period of time would be
attaining the age of maturity and would need them by
her side at the time when she undergoes certain
biological changes in her. The father is the natural
guardian of the minor child and he has a equal right to
claim custody of the child and if the child is more than 5
years of age, his right cannot be denied unless court is of
the opinion that in the interest of the child's welfare and
growth, the custody should continue with the present
custodian. After analyzing the material on record, we
have recorded reasons as to why continuation of the
child's custody with the appellant would not serve the
interest and welfare of the child. Nothing adverse is
found against the respondent to deny him the custody of
the child. He has taken steps at the earliest point of time
and has been fighting for the cause ever after. Having
appreciated the material available on record, in the
background of the various judgments referred to above
and keeping in mind the interest and welfare of the child,
we find no illegality or irregularity in the judgment and
decree passed by the Family Court which is impugned in
this   appeal.  We,   therefore,   answer   the  point   for
consideration in the affirmative. Accordingly, we proceed
to pass the following order:
68.   The appeal is dismissed. We feel that the
interest of the minor child will be best served if the
custody of the child is handed over to the respondent,
but with sufficient access to the appellant to visit the
minor     at  frequent   intervals,  and   therefore,  while
confirming the judgment and decree dated 03.03.2022
passed by the Family Court in G & WC.No.128/2018 filed
by the respondent under Section 25 of the Act, and
directing appellant to grant custody of the minor child to
the respondent, we are inclined to grant visitation rights
to the appellant though she has not prayed for the same,
on the following terms:
(i)   The appellant is directed to hand over the
minor child to the custody of the respondent after
completion of the child's annual final examinations for
the present academic year i.e., 2022-23.
(ii) The respondent shall make arrangements for
the child to continue her studies in her present school
and shall shift his residence to a place which is within the
radius of 5 Kms. from the child's school.
(iii) The respondent shall provide the school
calendar of the child with list of holidays along with dates
of examination to the appellant.
(iv) The respondent shall meet all the expenses of
the minor child towards her education, health, care, food
and clothing and in the event the appellant also wishes to
contribute towards the upbringing of the child, the
respondent shall not create any obstruction to and/or
prevent     the    appellant   from     also   making     such
(v) The appellant will be at liberty to visit the minor
child either in the respondent's house or in the premises
of a mutual friend or any other place as may be agreed
upon on every Sunday. To enable the appellant to meet
the   child,  the   respondent    shall  ensure    the  child's
presence either in his house or in the house of the
mutual friend or in a public place agreed upon at 10.00
a.m. The appellant will be entitled to take the child out
with her for the day, and to bring her back to the
respondent's house or the premises of the mutual friend
within 7.00 p.m. in the evening.
(vi) On all important festival days for which holiday
is declared to the School, the appellant shall be entitled
to take custody of the child between 10.00 a.m. and 1.00
(vii) The appellant, upon prior intimation to the
respondent, will also be entitled to meet the minor at her
school once a week after school hours for about an hour.
(viii) The appellant will also be entitled to the
custody of the minor for 10 consecutive days during the
summer vacation on dates to be mutually settled
between the parties.
(ix) During long holidays/vacations covering more
than ten days, the child will be allowed to be in the
company of the mother for half of the said long
(x) The mother is entitled to communicate with the
child through phone/video call/skype etc., between 7.00
p.m. to 8.00 p.m. everyday.
(xi) The aforesaid arrangement will continue for the
present, but the parties will be at liberty to approach the
Family Court, Bengaluru, for fresh directions should the
same     become    necessary    on   account   of  changed