W.P.(C) Nos.3646 and 4821 of 2022
Dated this the 2nd day of March, 2022
The petitioners are aggrieved by the denial of
education loan. The petitioner in W.P.(C) No.3646/2022
wanted to study Post Graduate Diploma in Management
(Securities Market) in the National Institute of Securities
Markets (NISM), Navi Mumbai. The petitioner submitted
Ext.P1 application for education loan of ₹7,30,000/- to the 2 nd
respondent-Manager of State Bank of India. The petitioner
had submitted all documents required by the Bank in support
of the application. The Bank, however, rejected the loan
application submitted by the petitioner. The 2 nd respondent
rejected the application for education loan for the reason that
the CIBIL score of the co-applicant is not up to the mark. The
petitioner challenges Ext.P6 communication and seeks to
direct the 2nd respondent to process his loan application.
2.   The petitioner in W.P.(C) No.4821/2022 wanted to
study MBA in Happy Valley Business School, Coimbatore,
affiliated to Annamalai University, Chennai. The petitioner
submitted application for sanction of education loan of an
amount of ₹3,96,000/- from the respondent-Branch Manager
of the State Bank of India. The petitioner submitted all the
requisite documents in support of her application. The
respondent, however, issued Ext.P5 letter stating that the
CIBIL score of the co-borrower is less than 685. The
petitioner was required to resubmit the application with a
co-borrower of satisfactory credit history.
3.   The petitioners state that the Reserve Bank of
India had affirmed that education loan is a futuristic loan and
the aim of the educational assistance is for providing
financial    support      from   the   banking     system     to
deserving/meritorious students for pursuing higher education
in India and abroad. Rejection of the loan application
submitted by the petitioners goes against the mandate given
by the Reserve Bank of India through their various Circulars.
4.    The    petitioners   contended  that   this  Court
considered the issue of denial of educational loan on the
basis of low credit score of the guarantors. This Court in
Pranav S.R. v. The Branch Manager, State Bank of India
and another [2020 KHC 4695] held that unsatisfactory credit
scores of the parents of the petitioner cannot be a ground to
reject an educational loan application in view of the fact that
the repayment capacity of the petitioner after his education
should be the deciding factor. Therefore, the respondents
are compellable to sanction and disburse the educational
loan applied for by the petitioners.
5.    The respondents vehemently opposed the writ
petition. The respondent-Bank submitted that the educational
loan policy of the State Bank of India is that the loan would
be sanctioned jointly in the name of the student and his/her
parents/guardians.      The     parent/guardian   would  be    a
co-borrower in the loan. The Bank has to ensure that the
co-borrower has necessary credit discipline. The Bank has
the prerogative to depend upon the Credit Information
6.    The respondent stated that Ext.R2(a) Circular
dated 27.06.2014 issued by the Reserve Bank of India
requires that banks/financial institutions should include in
their   credit   appraisal     process/loan   policies, suitable
provisions for obtaining Credit Information Reports from one
or more of the Credit Information Companies so that the
credit decisions are based on information available in the
system. The Bank processed the application submitted by
the petitioners and it was found that the credit history of
co-borrowers is not up to the mark.
7.    The educational loans, along with instalment and
leases, and small business facilities and commitments, are
classified as retail loans as per Ext.R2(b) Circular issued by
the Reserve Bank of India, contended the respondents.
Consequently, in Ext.R2(c) Master Circular dated 20.03.2021
issued by the State Bank of India, it was provided that
Borrower/Co-borrower/Guarantor       should  not   have   any
adverse credit history. In case of secured loans, CIBIL Score
should be -1 or more than 591 and in the case of unsecured
loans, CIBIL Score should be -1 or more than 685.
8.    The learned counsel for the respondents argued
that the judgment of this Court in Pranav S.R. (Supra) was
delivered on the basis of the Model Scheme framed by the
Indian Banks Association and this Court had no opportunity
to analyse Exts.R2(a) and R2(b) Circulars of the RBI and
Ext.R2(c) Master Circular issued by the SBI based on the
Circulars of the RBI. Relying on the judgment of the Hon’ble
Apex Court in ICICI Bank Limited v. Official Liquidator of
APS Star Industries Limited and others [(2010) 10 SCC 1],
the learned Standing Counsel argued that the Circulars
issued by the RBI have statutory force. The Standing
Counsel also relied on the judgment in Annamalai
University represented by Registrar v. Secretary to
Government, Information and Tourism Department and
others [(2009) 4 SCC 590] and urged that the Circulars and
Guidelines of the RBI have the status of subordinate
9.    When a judgment is delivered without adverting to
such statutory instruments, such judgment should be treated
as per incuriam, contended the Standing Counsel, relying on
the judgment in Dr. Shah Faesal and others v. Union of
India and another [2020 (4) SCC 1]. In W.P.(C) No.14236
of 2021, this Court directed the student to substitute the
Co-obligant with one having sufficient credit score, in order to
avail educational loan, pointed out the Standing Counsel.
Society Ltd. No.C.904 v. Registrar of Co-operative
Societies (General), Thiruvananthapuram and others
[2016 (3) KHC 630], this Court has held that writ petition is
not the remedy when a Co-operative Bank denies loan,
contended the petitioner.
11. I have heard the learned counsel for the
petitioners and the learned Standing Counsel representing
12. The applications submitted by the petitioners for
educational loan have been rejected by the Bank for the
reason that the parents / co-applicants do not have the
requisite credit score. This Court in Pranav S.R. (Supra) has
held that unsatisfactory credit scores of parents cannot be a
ground to reject an educational loan in view of the fact that
the repayment capacity of the student after his education
should be the deciding factor as per the Circulars issued by
13. The respondents argue that the judgment in
Pranav S.R. (Supra) was delivered by this Court, based on
Circulars issued by the Indian Banks Association and this
Court had no opportunity to read Exts.R2(a) and R2(b)
Circulars issued by the RBI, which have statutory support as
those are issued in exercise of the powers under Section
35A of the Banking Regulation Act. The fact that Banks are
bound by the Circulars issued by the RBI, is not in dispute.
The question is whether Exts.R2(a) and R2(b) would be
applicable to the educational loans in issue.
14. Ext.R2(a) Circular dated 27.06.2014 has been
issued in the context of providing a Data Format for
furnishing of Credit Information to Credit Information
Companies. Paragraph 2(ii) of Ext.R2(a) Circular is as
Bureau Usage in all Lending Decision and
Account Opening : Banks / FIs should include in
their credit appraisal processes/loan policies,
suitable provisions for obtaining CIRs from one or
more CICs so that the credit decisions are based on
information available in the system. In this context,
as commercial borrowers' data is not adequately
populated with the CICs, to start with, banks/FIs
may institute board approved policies for credit
bureau usage in all lending decisions and account
opening to retail borrowers/consumer borrower
segment.
Ext.R2(a) provides that Banks should include in their credit
appraisal processes/loan policies, suitable provisions for
obtaining CIRs from one or more CICs. A reading of
paragraph 2(ii) quoted would indicate that the Circular is
primarily intended to apply commercial borrowers. Though
the paragraph states that the Banks may institute Board
approved policies for credit bureau for all lending decisions
and account opening to retail borrowers and consumer
borrower segment, it is evident that the loan policies in this
regard should be “suitable” so as to take credit decisions on
the basis of information available in the system.
15. Ext.R2(b) Guidelines have been issued by the RBI
for the purpose of maintaining Accounting Standards. In the
said context, the Guidelines proceed to state that the term
‘Retail Banking’ would take in student and educational loans.
But, the educational loans provided by the Banks in India
under Vidya Lakshmi Scheme, stand on a different footing.
India is one of the youngest nations in the world with more
than 54% of the total population below 25 years of age. Yet,
less than 5% of potential workforce in India gets formal skill
training to be employable and stay employable.
16. With a view to enable poor and middle class
students to pursue higher education of their choice without
any constraint of funds, a Scheme was provided by the
Government of India to ensure that no student misses out on
higher education for lack of funds. Vidya Lakshmi Portal for
students seeking Education Loan has been developed under
the guidance of Department of Financial Services, (Ministry
of Finance), Department of Higher Education (Ministry of
Education) and Indian Banks Association (IBA).
17. In exercise of the powers conferred by Sections 21
and 35A read with Section 56 of the Banking Regulation Act,
1949, the Reserve Bank of India, in public interest, has
issued Reserve Bank of India (Priority Sector Lending-
Targets and Classification) Directions, 2020. Direction 4
contained therein categorises Education as a priority sector.
Direction 11 states that Loans to individuals for educational
purposes, including vocational courses, not exceeding ₹20
lakhs will be considered as eligible for priority sector
18. The Banks including the nationalised Banks are
within their competence to sanction student/education loans
dehors any special Scheme framed by the Government or
RBI. But, when the Banks disburse loans as priority sector
loans, the eligibility criteria fixed for sanction of such loans
should necessarily have a nexus with the object sought to be
achieved. The Nationalised Banks and Scheduled Banks will
not be justified in framing conditions for sanctioning of such
priority sector loans so as to defeat the very purpose of grant
of such loans.
19. The      judgment      in      Kasaragod Co-operative
Educational Society Limited (supra) was a case involving
denial of a commercial loan and hence will not apply to the
facts of the case. In view of my finding that Exts.R2(a) and
R2(b) do not apply to the facts of these writ petitions, the
judgments of the Hon’ble Apex Court in ICICI Bank Limited
(Supra) and Annamalai University (Supra) will not be of any
assistance to the respondents.
20. This Court in the judgment in Pranav S.R. (Supra)
has held      that  for educational    loans,  the repayment
possibilities are to be decided not on the financial position of
the parents but solely on the projected future earnings of the
students on employment after education. In view of the facts
and reasons stated above, I find no reason to take a different
view in the matter.
The writ petitions are therefore allowed. The
respondents are directed to reconsider the loan applications
submitted by the petitioners, disregarding the low Credit
Score of the co-obligants, if any, and sanction and disburse
eligible loan amount, if the petitioners are otherwise eligible,
within a period of one month.