3      The Directorate of Medical Education
W.A.Nos.1093 and 1094 of 2022
6      National Board of Examinations
W.A.No.1094 of 2022:
2      The Director General of Health Services
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
Government of India
W.A.Nos.1093 and 1094 of 2022
PSG Institue of Medical Science and Research
Prayer: Appeals under Clause 15 of the Letters Patent against the
common order dated 25.2.2022 passed by the learned Single Judge
in W.P.No.11963, 13564 and 13466 of 2020.
For the Appellant        : Mr.Sricharan Rangarajan
in both the appeals        for Mr.V.Vignesh
For the Respondents      : Mr.Murugendran
for 1st respondent in
W.A.Nos.1093 and 1094 of 2022
The writ appeals have been filed to challenge the common
order dated 25.2.2022 passed in W.P.No.11963, 13564 and 13466
of 2020, whereby the learned Single Judge issued the following
“48. While the writ petitions are ordered accordingly,
in   the   overall  circumstances   of  the   case,   the
following order is passed :-
i) The Chief Secretary, Government of Tamil
Nadu, is directed to take necessary action
against Dr.G.Selvarajan departmentally for
stopping pension and other benefits payable
to the individual, which would be subject to
the outcome of the investigation;
ii) The Enquiry Officer is directed to register
an FIR against all persons, including known
and unknown persons as also against the
private medical colleges, which were under
W.A.Nos.1093 and 1094 of 2022
the scanner of investigation for filling up the
seats in derogation of the merit list;
iii) The enquiry officer is further directed to
conduct enquiry against all persons in the
Directorate of Medical Education and the
Department under which the said Directorate
is functioning so that none of the persons,
who    have   had   a   foothold  in   the   said
iv) The Director General of Police, Chennai, is
directed not to transfer the officers, who are
part   of   the   enquiry   team    formed    for
investigating this matter at the instance of
this Court.
v) State is directed to pay a compensation in
a sum of Rs.4,00,000/= (Rupees Four Lakhs
only) to the petitioners in W.P. Nos.11963
and 13564 of 2021 within a period of four
weeks from the date of receipt of a copy of
this order. The said amount shall initially be
paid by the State and, thereafter, the same
shall be recovered from the then Secretary,
Selection Committee, Directorate of Medical
Education        from       his       retirement
proceeds/pension. Further liberty is granted
W.A.Nos.1093 and 1094 of 2022
to the petitioners to to proceed in accordance
with law for any other relief, if so advised on
the basis of the decision Krishna Sradha's
vi) The enquiry officer is directed to ensure
compliance of registration of the case and
conduct enquiry and to file further report on
the    progress   of   the   investigation    on
2. Before adverting to the merits of the appeals, it would be
appropriate to give a detailed narration of the facts of the case to
throw light on the affairs of the Selection Committee so as the
private medical colleges in giving admission to students in Post
Graduate Medical courses sacrificing merit.             It is in the case of
admission in Post Graduate Medical course for the academic year
3. The facts on record show that two-rounds of counselling for
filling up the Post Graduate Medical Seats under government quota
W.A.Nos.1093 and 1094 of 2022
was conducted between 30.4.2020 and 30.7.2020 and thereupon
four-rounds           of mop-up counselling was conducted to fill the
unfilled seats of government quota. The two-rounds of counselling
for the Post Grade Medical Seats under management quota was also
conducted between 6.5.2020 and 31.7.2020.                    The mop-up
counselling for the management quota seats was not conducted. It
was stated that a total of 103 management quota seats remained
unfilled after two-rounds of counselling in the management quota.
The allegation of the writ petitioners/non-appellants is that after
holding two-rounds of counselling for government quota as well as
management quota seats, mop-up counselling was conducted only
to fill up unfilled seats of government quota, while the same was not
applied to fill up unfilled seats in the management quota and private
medical colleges were allowed to fill vacant seats on their own.
4. It is stated that the Selection Committee decided not to
conduct mop-up counselling for the management quota seats
despite availability of sufficient time and despite the direction of the
Apex Court fixing 31.8.2020 as the deadline for completion of the
W.A.Nos.1093 and 1094 of 2022
process of admissions to the Post Graduate Medical courses for the
academic year 2020-2021.            The last counselling for management
quota seats was conducted between 26.7.2020 and 31.7.2020. The
writ appellant, Secretary of the Selection Committee sent a letter
after a month on 30.08.2020 to all the private colleges, directing
them to admit the candidates for the Post Graduate Courses from
the list of candidates who have not been allotted any seat in Post
Graduate Courses in management seats. As a result, the private
colleges were allowed to fill up the seats at their discretion
overlooking the merit and the direction of the Apex Court.
5. The writ petitioners/non-appellants, who were meritorious
but were not allotted seats, filed writ petitions: (i) W.P.No.11963 of
2020 seeking a direction on the respondent authorities to fill up the
Post Graduate Medical seats declared as vacant as per the seat
matrix published by the Selection Committee              on 17.8.2020 by
conducting MOP up counselling for management seats on the basis
of merit; and, (ii) W.P.No.13466 of 2020 seeking a direction on the
Selection Committee to allot seat in Medical Post Graduation in
W.A.Nos.1093 and 1094 of 2022
M.S.Orthopedics        course  in government/Self   financing   medical
college in Tamil Nadu on the basis of the Post Graduate Medical
Counselling conducted by the Selection Committee.          Even though
one another writ petition was filed by an aspiring candidate, being
W.P.No.13564 of 2020, seeking a direction on the respondents
therein to fill up the Post Graduate Medical seats declared vacant as
per the seat matrix published on 17.8.2020 only by conducting
mop-up counselling for management seats,          but for the reasons
best known to the appellant, the said writ petitioner has not been
arrayed as party to the present proceedings.
6. During the course of hearing the writ petitions, it was
brought to the notice of the Single Bench that many vacant
management quota seats in private medical colleges were filled
without observing the merit in the academic year 2020-21, in
violation of the regulations framed by the erstwhile Medical Council
of India and the directions issued by the Apex Court in Dar-Us-
Slam Educational Trust & Ors vs. Medical Council of India &
Ors. (W.P. (Civil) No.267 of 2017 - Dated 09.05.2017).
W.A.Nos.1093 and 1094 of 2022
7. The learned Single Judge, who initially heard the matters,
vide order dated 28.10.2020, passed an order observing that the
private colleges have given admissions for some of the important
clinical courses to candidates who otherwise do not deserve
admission. After dealing with the claim by the writ petitioners/non-
appellants on merits, the learned Single Judge observed as under:
“20. ... During this academic year, the pandemic has
been taken advantage of to stage manage and fill up
nearly   74   seats  with  unmeritorious   candidates.
Conspiracy is something which can only be inferred
or deduced from a given set of facts and the analysis
made supra based on the data provided by the
Respondents, clearly brings out a conspiracy between
the officials belonging to the Directorate of Medical
Education and the self-financing colleges. There is
definitely something more than what meets the eye
and it requires a thorough investigation by a neutral
agency. Only such an investigation will expose the
culprits behind this conspiracy and the total money
that was collected from these candidates by the
concerned private self-financing colleges. These self-
W.A.Nos.1093 and 1094 of 2022
financing colleges are not conducting charity and
have obviously profited through these admissions. At
the end of the day, the citizens of this country must
be satisfied that merit is not compromised when it
comes     to  post-graduate    medicine   and     super-
specialties and that the Courts are there to ensure
the same. Therefore, some stringent steps must be
taken by the Courts to ensure probity and to send a
strong message that such illegal actions will not be
tolerated by the Courts.”
In the aforesaid order, ultimately, an enquiry was ordered to be
conducted.         The operative portion of the said order is reproduced
“28. A copy of this order shall be marked to the
D.G.P. Tamil Nadu and the D.G.P is directed to allot
the case immediately to CBCID which shall consist of
a team headed by an officer not below the rank of an
Assistant Commissioner. The scope of enquiry shall
be broadly as follows:
a. Whether there was any conspiracy between the
officials of the Directorate of Medical Education,
officials in the Selection Committee and the self-
financing colleges (list extracted supra) in filling up
W.A.Nos.1093 and 1094 of 2022
b. The amount received from each candidate who
was admitted by the self-financing colleges on
c. any other matter that unfolds during investigation
in this regard.”
The writ petitions were directed to be listed on 1.2.2021 for
reporting compliance and submission of the enquiry report.
8. Thereafter, the writ petitions were listed on various dates
and by the order under challenge dated 25.2.2022, the learned
Single Judge after considering the enquiry report, held that the
appellant herein was instrumental in depriving the meritorious
candidates of their rightful seats under the management quota in
the private medical colleges and issued divers directions, as stated
supra.         It was categorically observed by the learned Single Judge
that the appellant herein was holding the office of the Secretary,
Selection Committee, for a period of two months without any valid
order.
W.A.Nos.1093 and 1094 of 2022
9. The writ appeals have not been filed by the medical colleges
to assail the judgment. In view of the above, we would be dealing
with the issues raised by the writ appellant to challenge the
judgment of the learned Single Judge.
10. Learned counsel for the appellant submits that an adverse
order has been passed against the writ appellant without affording
an opportunity of hearing to him, thus, on the aforesaid ground
itself, the impugned order deserves to be set aside. It is more so
when the learned Single Judge has relied on an enquiry report of the
CBCID without furnishing a copy thereof to the appellant and,
therefore, the principles of natural justice have been violated.
11. It is also submitted that a direction to stop disbursement
of pension and other benefits to which the appellant is entitled to
would have serious consequences and otherwise a direction has
been given in contravention of Rule 9 of the Tamil Nadu Pension
Rules, 1978.           It is urged that, pending enquiry, a direction to
W.A.Nos.1093 and 1094 of 2022
withhold the pension could not have been given, rather such an
order can be passed by the competent authority only if the appellant
is found guilty of misconduct of the nature indicated in the Rules.
Ignoring the aforesaid, the learned Single Judge has issued the
direction to withhold pensionary benefits of the appellant.
12. It is also stated that even the direction to register an FIR
has been given without affording an opportunity to the appellant to
clarify the factual position that the process adopted for admission
was strictly as per the rules and the direction of the Apex Court in
Dar-Us-Slam Educational Trust & Ors, supra, was not applicable.
13. Learned counsel for the appellant, referring to the then
prevalent         pandemic     Covid-19    situation,   submitted     that   the
counselling process in the State of Tamil Nadu was conducted online
and efforts were put in to fill up the government quota seats and,
thus,        two-rounds     of  counselling   and   four-rounds    of   mop-up
counselling were conducted within the stipulated time.                  Due to
paucity of time, a unanimous decision was taken by the members of
W.A.Nos.1093 and 1094 of 2022
the Selection Committee not to conduct mop-up counselling for the
management quota seats, after two-rounds of counselling.                Thus,
the decision of the Selection Committee not to hold mop-up
counselling to fill up unfilled seats was due to the reasons then
prevalent. Referring to Clause 24 of the Prospectus for Admission to
PG Degree Courses in Management Quota in Tamil Nadu for the
academic year 2020-2021, learned counsel for the appellant
justified the non-conducting of mop-up counselling for the unfilled
management quota seats and submitted that a direction was given
to the colleges to fill the stray vacancies in the management quota
on their own, but by following the merit position.
14. It is further submitted on behalf of the appellant that the
requirement of sending names in the ratio of 1:10 pursuant to the
direction        of   the  Apex  Court   in  the  case    of  Dar-Us-Slam
Educational Trust & Ors, supra, is not applicable to Post Graduate
Medical courses and, therefore, the list in the ratio of 1:10 was not
prepared and sent to the private medical colleges.
W.A.Nos.1093 and 1094 of 2022
15. It is further urged that vide the letter sent by the appellant
on 30.8.2020 to all the private medical colleges, he had shared a
list of the candidates giving details of their names, registration
numbers, email IDs, apart from other details, with a direction to
strictly adhere to merit while filling up the stray vacancies and, thus,
there was no intention to defy the judgment of the Apex Court or to
tinker with the merit list.
16. Learned counsel for the appellant has further submitted
that the action of sending the letter dated 30.8.2020 to the private
medical colleges to fill up the unfilled seats on their own was due to
paucity of time to conduct the mop-up counselling for the
management quota seats. It was for the reason that the Selection
Committee was busy in holding the mop-up counselling for filling up
the government quota seats.             However, ignoring all these aspects,
an adverse order has been passed against the appellant.
17. The further argument is in reference to the enquiry report,
where, according to the learned Single Judge, certain discrepancies
W.A.Nos.1093 and 1094 of 2022
in the appointment of the appellant as the Secretary of the Selection
Committee and foul play during the selection of students               to Post
Graduate Medical courses for the academic year 2020-2021 have
been alleged.          It is contended that such discrepancy was on account
of non-consideration of the fact that extension of service was given
by the government and it is not that the appellant himself had
drawn the order aforesaid. In view of the extension of service of the
appellant, he discharged the duties after retirement to conduct the
counselling. Thus, he has not misused his position as the Secretary
of the Selection Committee and never prevented his subordinates
from sending separate merit lists to 14 private medical colleges for
filling up the vacant seats.            The allegations that the appellant
indulged in malpractices; caused bogus blocking of seats to help the
private medical colleges to fill up the vacancies on their own are
denied.
18. It is submitted that such an enquiry report could not have
been relied upon without furnishing a copy of it to the appellant,
because the ex parte report drawn by the enquiry officer is in
W.A.Nos.1093 and 1094 of 2022
ignorance of the efforts put in by the appellant to strictly adhere to
the rules and the direction of the Apex Court in filling up Post
Graduate Medical seats in different colleges.           Therefore, on the
aforesaid ground also, the judgment of the learned Single Judge has
been assailed with a prayer to set aside it qua the writ appellant.
19. Learned counsel for the appellant further submitted that
the        learned  Single  Judge   has  drawn    conclusion    about    the
malpractices even of the medical college, i.e., as to how they could
admit the students within a day, because on 30.8.2020 the
intimation was sent to the private colleges to fill up the vacant seats
on their own and it was filled on 31.8.2020.        As to how the private
medical colleges could secure the names and merit position of the
students was an issue raised by the learned Single Judge, ignoring
the fact that the merit list of the students is hosted on the website
and otherwise a direction was given by the writ appellant to fill up
the vacant seats as per merit with a list of candidates.             If the
enquiry officer has recorded his finding that on the website of the
Selection Committee the contact details of the candidates were not
W.A.Nos.1093 and 1094 of 2022
available and ignoring the merit, admissions were given, then an
order should have been passed against the medical colleges for
having filled the seats ignoring the merit position and not against
the writ appellant.
20. The further argument was that the judgment of the Apex
Court in the case of          Dar-Us-Slam Educational Trust & Ors,
supra, was in reference to Under Graduate courses and not for Post
Graduate courses. This was even clarified by the Apex Court in the
case of Ashish Ranjan v. Union of India, (2017) 8 SCC 627.
Despite the clarification and the finding that the order passed in
Dar-Us-Slam Educational Trust & Ors, supra, would not apply to
the Post Graduate courses, the Government of India, Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare, issued a circular on 26.5.2017 in terms
of the judgment in the case of Dar-Us-Slam Educational Trust &
Ors, supra. The said circular was issued presuming application of
the judgment in the case of        Dar-Us-Slam Educational Trust &
Ors, supra, even for Post Graduate medical courses and has not
been accepted in the case of Ashish Ranjan, supra.
W.A.Nos.1093 and 1094 of 2022
21. For the reasons aforesaid, prayer was made to set aside
the judgment, if not entirely, then at least qua the writ appellant.
22. All the respondents, except PSG Institute of Medical
Science and Research and the National Board of Examinations, have
contested the writ appeals.           The arguments raised by learned
counsel for the respondents would be dealt with while dealing with
the arguments of learned counsel for the writ appellant.            It is to
avoid repetition of facts.
23. The challenge to the order of the learned Single Judge has
been made mainly on the ground that the said order has been
passed against the writ appellant without affording an opportunity of
hearing, as the writ appellant was not a party to the writ petitions.
The fact aforesaid is not in dispute and when this issue was raised
before this court, learned counsel for the appellant was directed to
raise all the issues before this court so as to provide an opportunity
of hearing in reference to issues dealt with by the learned Single
W.A.Nos.1093 and 1094 of 2022
Judge. The court was otherwise of the view that the matter can be
remanded, but noticing that multiple directions have been given by
the learned Single Judge and out of them only few pertain to the
appellant, in order to render justice, the court though it fit to give
an opportunity of hearing to the appellant on all the issues to
suitably justify his action, which was the subject matter of the writ
petition. Accordingly, in reference to the first argument, learned
counsel for the appellant was given an opportunity to argue the case
on all the issues so that if a case is made out, interference would be
caused in the judgment to the extent it is required.
24. Pursuant to the opportunity granted, the argument was
made to justify the action of the writ appellant in sending the letter
to the private medical colleges to fill up unfilled management quota
seats in         Post Graduate Medical    courses on    their own after
completion of the second round of counselling.          Here we need to
address the issue to find out whether there was any justification on
the part of the writ appellant to send the letter to the private
medical colleges to fill up the unfilled seats on their own without
W.A.Nos.1093 and 1094 of 2022
holding mop-up counselling after two-rounds of counselling, that
too, when four-rounds of mop-up counselling was conducted to
recommend the names of the students against the government
quota seats.
25. The issue aforesaid would otherwise deal with the issue of
non-supply of the copy of the enquiry report to the appellant,
because while filing the appeals, a reference of the enquiry report
has also been given and is in the knowledge of the appellant and
otherwise this court would record its finding on each issue so that it
may not be based on the enquiry report, which otherwise has been
relied by the learned Single Judge. It is for the reason that copy of
enquiry report was not supplied to the writ appellant.            Thus, this
court would be recording its finding on all the issues to find whether
there was any justification for the writ appellant not to hold mop-up
counselling to fill up vacant seats after two-rounds of counselling.
26. To find out whether the action of the appellant is justified
or not, we would be reiterating certain facts, which have already
W.A.Nos.1093 and 1094 of 2022
27. For the academic year 2020-2021, all the seats in Post
Grade Medical Colleges were to be filled on or before 31.8.2020 and,
accordingly, the process for filling up the government quota seats so
as the management quota seats was to be started by the Selection
Committee by holding the counselling.         Consequently, the process
of counselling was started and the dates for it are tabulated as
(i) For PG Government Quota seats:
30.04.2020 to 13.05.2020         1st Round of counselling
24.07.2020 to 30.07.2020         2nd Round of counselling
16.08.2020 to 26.08.2020    1st Round of Mop-up counselling
24.08.2020 to 28.08.2020    2nd Round of Mop-up counselling
27.08.2020 to 30.08.2020    3rd Round of Mop-up counselling
29.08.2020 to 31.08.2020    4th Round of Mop-up counselling
(ii) For PG Management Quota seats:
06.05.2020 to 16.05.2020         1st Round of counselling
26.07.2020 to 31.07.2020         2nd Round of counselling
W.A.Nos.1093 and 1094 of 2022
So far as Post Graduate Medical Seats under government quota are
concerned, two-rounds of counselling was conducted, followed by
four-rounds of mop-up counselling to recommend the names of
meritorious candidates against the unfilled seats after the two-
rounds of counselling.             Two-rounds of counselling is to be
conducted and if any seat remains unfilled, mop-up counselling is to
be conducted to make admission as per merit.
28. The facts aforesaid are relevant for the reason that the
Selection Committee rightly conducted four-rounds of mop-up
counselling to fill up the Post Graduate Medical Seats under
government quota, but surprisingly after two-rounds of counselling
for       management      quota  seats,  mop-up    counselling    was    not
conducted to recommend the names of students in the order of
merit,        despite  seats  remaining   vacant   after   two-rounds     of
counselling.
29. Learned counsel for the appellant has given justification
W.A.Nos.1093 and 1094 of 2022
for not holding mop-counselling for the management quota seats.
The first reason is the paucity of time and the second reason is that
the        Selection Committee   was   busy   in holding    the  mop-up
counselling for the government quota seats and, therefore, sent a
letter to the private medical colleges on 30.8.2020 to fill up the
unfilled seats in the order of merit.
30. We would first address the issue of paucity of time to
justify the action of the Selection Committee. The tabulation given
above shows that the second round of counselling for management
quota ended on 31.7.2020, that was almost one month prior to the
last date for completion of the process. Thus, it cannot be said by
the Selection Committee that there was paucity of time to hold the
mop-up counselling during the intervening period and it is more so
when the mop-up counselling was conducted for the government
quota seats during that period.        In view of the above, the first
ground raised by the writ appellant to justify the action cannot be
accepted.
W.A.Nos.1093 and 1094 of 2022
31. It is also urged that the during the intervening period of
one month, the Selection Committee was busy in holding the mop-
up counselling for the government quota seats, thus could not hold
mop-up counselling for management quota seats.                  The aforesaid
explanation is also not tenable because the tabulation given above
shows that earlier two-rounds of counselling for government as well
as management quota seats was on overlapping days.                       Thus,
simultaneously the counselling for the government quota as well as
the management quota seats was conducted.                   It could not be
explained by the appellant as to why the same procedure could not
be adopted for the mop-up counselling, when sufficient time was
available. The said fact speaks volumes against the appellant.
32. It is not that the writ appellant was not in the know of the
vacant seats in the management quota seats after the second-round
of counselling, but despite knowing it and even when the entire
record was in his office,           no effort was made to hold mop-up
counselling         to recommend the names of the candidates for
management quota seats in the order of merit simultaneously while
W.A.Nos.1093 and 1094 of 2022
doing it for the government quota seats.        The appellant being the
Secretary of the Selection Committee sent a letter on 30.8.2020 to
all the private medical colleges directing them to admit the
candidates for the Post Graduate Medical courses from the list of
candidates who have not been allotted any seat in Post Graduate
courses. The letter aforesaid was sent after lapse of almost thirty
days from the date of second counselling, giving room to the private
medical colleges to fill the seats within a day, which may not be
enough to invite the candidates in the order of merit and thereby
the medical colleges were given liberty by the writ appellant to fill
up the vacant seats ignoring the mechanism provided for admission.
In that process, admissions were given without adhering to merit.
33. In view of the above, the appellant was instrumental in
giving liberty to the private medical colleges to fill up the seats on
their own and without giving sufficient time to call for and admit
students strictly in the order of merit.        As a consequence, the
candidates not having sufficient merit were given admission by the
private medical colleges.       The fact aforesaid is sufficient to prove
W.A.Nos.1093 and 1094 of 2022
how the Selection Committee had conducted itself giving room to
private medical colleges to fill up the seats on their own, which
could not have been unless there is a connivance between the
appellant and the private medical colleges. It is inferred accordingly
because filling up of the seats by the private medical colleges on
their own volition would remain to their benefit only and is not
unknown to the system. It is in such premise that the Apex Court in
Dar-Us-Slam Educational Trust & Ors, supra, to control the
malpractices adopted by the medical colleges issued directions that
whenever admissions are to be given, it should be by the process of
counselling and fee may be deposited by the students at the time of
counselling, so that the lame excuse of non-reporting of the
candidates may not be raised by the medical college to fill the seats
on their own. The affairs of the private medical colleges were taken
note of by the Apex Court in the judgment, supra, and, therefore,
the ratio therein would apply for admission to medical colleges. A
detailed reason for it would be given while dealing with the
argument of learned counsel for the appellant that after the
judgment of the Apex Court in the case of Ashish Ranjan, supra,
W.A.Nos.1093 and 1094 of 2022
the judgment in Dar-Us-Slam Educational Trust & Ors, supra,
would not be applicable for admission to Post Graduate Courses.
34. The writ appellant, being the Secretary of the Selection
Committee, was under an obligation not to conduct himself in the
manner which may not be appropriate to fill up the management
quota seats for Post Graduate Medical Courses by the private
medical colleges. The facts on record show that no efforts were put
in to conduct the mop-up counselling for the management quota
seats to recommend the names of the candidates in the order of
merit, which was otherwise done for filling up the government quota
seats by holding four-rounds of mop-up counselling. A justification
that it was the unanimous decision of the Selection Committee has
been given to say that the writ appellant alone could not have been
penalised for the alleged malpractice.
35. The argument aforesaid would not be tenable and if at all
it was the decision of the Selection Committee, to which the writ
appellant was the Secretary, every member of the Selection
W.A.Nos.1093 and 1094 of 2022
Committee should be subjected to the same direction as is to be
given for the writ appellant, because it is not now unknown that the
medical colleges involve themselves in filling up the vacant seats
without resorting to the procedure, for their own gain, not otherwise
permissible in law.        The facts on record speak volumes about the
conduct of the writ appellant as being instrumental in filling up the
vacant seats of management quota going against all the canons of
law, thereby giving room to the private medical colleges to fill up
the vacant seats on their own, sacrificing merit.
36. The issue is further to be considered in the light of one
more fact to highlight the conduct of the writ appellant. If the mop-
up counselling for the management quota seats could not have been
conducted for the reason that they were busy in mop-up counselling
for government quota seats, then what prevented the writ appellant
from immediately sending a letter to the private medical colleges to
fill up the vacant seats after completion of the second-round of
counselling on 31.7.2020. The letter for it was sent after a month
on 30.8.2020, when only one day remained to fill up the vacant
W.A.Nos.1093 and 1094 of 2022
seats.         The aforesaid act of the Selection Committee remains
unexplained. The consequences are serious for the reason that in
one day it would not be possible for any private medical college to
give admission to the candidates strictly in the order of merit.
37. The facts aforesaid prove the mal-intention of the
appellant in allowing the private medical colleges to fill the vacant
seats in Post Graduate Medical courses, which have to be filled
strictly in the order of merit and can be observed in the counselling
only. It is for that reason it could not be shown that vacant seats
were filled by the private medical colleges strictly in the order of
merit. Rather, the writ petitions were filed by the candidates only
for the reason that sacrificing the merit, admissions were given to
other students and, therefore, the learned Single Judge had initially
ordered for enquiry and thereupon passed the impugned judgment.
38. The conclusion aforesaid has been drawn after giving
opportunity to the writ appellant, as he was not a party to the writ
petitions.       The finding aforesaid has been recorded by this court
W.A.Nos.1093 and 1094 of 2022
without referring even to the enquiry report.          Therefore, the issue
regarding the opportunity of hearing to the writ appellant and, that
too, without supplying a copy of the enquiry report gets satisfied.
39. The writ appellant has pleaded that he had conducted
himself fairly, as, according to him, while sending the letter to the
private medical colleges to fill the stray vacant seats in the
management quota on their own, the required details of meritorious
candidates was enclosed.          The learned Single Judge has recorded a
finding adverse to the appellant to the effect that the letter dated
30.8.2020 sent by the appellant to the private medical colleges was
not containing any contact details of the candidates, despite giving
the required details in the aforesaid letter.
40. We find that the letter sent by the appellant on 30.8.2020
was containing the names of the candidates along with their merit
position and email-id, etc., but the gist of the letter shows it to have
been sent with incorrect information about the mop-up counselling
for even management quota seats till 29.8.2020, which in fact was
W.A.Nos.1093 and 1094 of 2022
only for the government quota and for ready reference, the part of
the letter written by the appellant giving incorrect information is
quoted hereunder:
“I am to state that the counselling for Post Graduate
Degree/Diploma and MDS courses in Government
Medical/Dental      Colleges      and     Government/
Management       quota seats in       Self   Financing
Medical/Dental Colleges had been conducted
from 30.04.2020 to 29.08.2020 for the academic
year 2020-2021 in various phases.
As per the orders issued by the Hon'ble Supreme
Court of India vide reference cited the Merit List of
the candidates who have not been allotted Post
Graduate Degree / Diploma and MDS courses in
Mangement quota seats in Self Financing Medical
colleges has been attached herewith.”
[emphasis supplied]
41. The letter aforesaid further gives reference of the order of
the Supreme Court, but without details of the orders. If the writ
appellant had otherwise adhered to the direction of the Apex Court
W.A.Nos.1093 and 1094 of 2022
in sending the letter dated 30.8.2020 to allow the private medical
colleges to fill up the stray vacancies in the Post Graduate Medical
Courses against management quota seats, then while arguing the
writ appeals, a reference of the judgment permitting the writ
appellant to do so should have been given.             Further, the fact
remains that four-rounds of mop-up counselling was conducted for
government quota seats, but the same mechanism was not adopted
for management quota seats.
42. It is also required to be clarified further that if the
judgment of          the  Apex Court   in the   case of    Dar-Us-Slam
Educational Trust & Ors, supra, was not applicable, then why the
appellant had conducted four-rounds of mop-up counselling to
recommend the names of candidates against government quota
seats.
43. In view of the above, we are unable to accept the
argument of learned counsel for the writ appellant that the
procedure for filling up the seats in Post Graduate Medical Courses
W.A.Nos.1093 and 1094 of 2022
44. At this stage, it would be gainful to refer to Clause 24(a)
of      the     Prospectus  for   Admission  to   PG   Degree    Courses    in
Management Quota in Tamil Nadu for the academic year 2020-
2021. The relevant part of the prospectus is quoted hereunder:
24. (a) After completion of second round of
counseling if there is any vacancy that will be filled
up by mop-up round.
(b) The vacancies arising after re-allotment will be
filled up with the candidates from the Rank list (if
time permits as per DGHS Schedule)”
45. An argument has been raised that as per the prospectus
for       admission     to  Under   Graduate    Medical   courses,   mop-up
counselling is mandatory, but the same is not mandatory for Post
Graduate Medical Courses.. The argument aforesaid is not tenable
in the light of the clarity in Clause 24(a) of the prospectus, quoted
above.
W.A.Nos.1093 and 1094 of 2022
46. The writ appellant, thus, conducted himself going against
the condition given in the prospectus to hold mop-up counselling,
even if the argument is accepted for the sake of it that the judgment
of the Apex Court in the case of Dar-Us-Slam Educational Trust
& Ors, supra, has no application.            A clarity about the mop-up
counselling after the completion of second-round of counselling was
given in the prospectus, but the same was not adhered to by the
appellant selectively for management quota seats, while applying it
for the government quota seats.             This again speaks about the
conduct of the writ appellant and it could not be clarified as to why
the compliance of Clause 24(a) of the prospectus was not made for
stray vacancies in management quota seats.
47. The argument that it was not mandatory to conduct mop-
up counselling for management quota seats is far from truth and
otherwise goes against the writ appellant.
48. At this stage, we would further consider the issue in
W.A.Nos.1093 and 1094 of 2022
reference to the direction given by the Apex Court in the case of
Dar-Us-Slam Educational Trust & Ors, supra.                It is submitted
that the judgment of the Apex Court and direction in the case of
Dar-Us-Slam Educational Trust & Ors, supra, was applicable
only for Under Graduate medical courses and not for Post Graduate
Medical courses. A reference of the judgment in the case of Ashish
Ranjan, supra, has been given.           The argument aforesaid is to
justify sending of the letter dated 30.8.2020 to the private medical
colleges to fill up the stray vacancies in management quota without
holding         the  mop-up  counselling   after  the   second-round      of
counselling.
49. The argument aforesaid has been addressed in the light of
Clause 24(a) of the prospectus to hold that the argument of learned
counsel for the appellant not to conduct the mop-up counselling is
not tenable. It is, however, necessary to further look into the issue
as to whether the judgment of the Apex Court in the case of Dar-
Us-Slam Educational Trust & Ors, supra, would be applicable
only to Under Graduate Medical courses.
W.A.Nos.1093 and 1094 of 2022
50. We have gone through the judgment of the Apex Court in
the case of Ashish Ranjan, supra, and find that the judgment of
Dar-Us-Slam Educational Trust & Ors, supra, was not made
applicable to Post Graduate Medical courses.              The judgment
aforesaid was rendered on the facts of that case and for admission
in Post Graduate Medical courses for the academic year 2017-2018.
We find that even if the judgment of the Apex Court in the case of
Dar-Us-Slam Educational Trust & Ors, supra, may not be
applicable to direct mop-up counselling after the second-round of
counselling, the prospectus was clearly applicable and Clause 24(a)
of it has been quoted above to indicate that there was a mandate to
conduct mop-up counselling after two-rounds of counselling for
filling up the stray vacancies, but the writ appellant failed to hold
the mop-up counselling to fill up the stray vacancies in the
management quota seats while conducting it for government quota
seats. The purpose of counselling is to admit students strictly as per
merit.
W.A.Nos.1093 and 1094 of 2022
51. It is however clarified that the reference of the judgment
in Dar-Us-Slam Educational Trust & Ors, supra, has been given
by the learned Single Judge in paragraph (6) to emphasize that fees
should be collected from the students after the counselling to avoid
the management admitting students on the pretext that they did not
turn up to seek admission.            It is after recording the reason and
discussing the conduct of the medical college in taking lame excuses
to deny the admission to meritorious candidates on the ground that
they did not turn up on the date of admission.                   In the said
background, we can safely hold that the writ appellant could not
give justification in not conducting mop-up counselling to fill up the
stray vacancies of management quota seats despite a clear mandate
in the prospectus. Thus, we hold that irrespective of the judgment
of the Apex Court in the case of Dar-Us-Slam Educational Trust
& Ors, supra, the action of the writ appellant not to conduct mop-
up counselling against the stray vacancies of management quota
seats, speaks volumes against the appellant and, therefore, the
conclusion remains against the writ appellant.
W.A.Nos.1093 and 1094 of 2022
52. A contest has been made against the finding of the learned
Single Judge in regard to the extension of the tenure of the writ
appellant and his working for two months without extension of
service.        The facts on record show that the writ appellant retired
from service on 31.7.2019 and he was given extension of service for
19 months, i.e., till 28.2.2021. For a period of two months, there
was no order of extension of service, i.e., from 1.1.2021 to
28.2.2021. Yet, the appellant worked and discharged his duties as
the Secretary of the Selection Committee. The extension order for it
was issued on 12.8.2021. Thus, it was obligatory on the part of the
writ appellant to justify his working for the period of two months
without an order on or before 1.1.2021, as he could not have
worked during the intervening period of two months anticipating
extension at a subsequent date.
53. The findings of the learned Single Judge are even against
the officers of the department who had given extension of service to
the writ appellant after his retirement, which was the root cause for
all the issues raised in the writ petitions and considered by the
W.A.Nos.1093 and 1094 of 2022
learned Single Judge.         Therefore, enquiry directed by the learned
Single Judge in this regard would be against the affairs of the
officers of the department.
54. Now, let us analyze certain directions given by the learned
Single Judge after drawing the conclusions aforesaid.                   It is
submitted that a direction could not have been given to stop the
pensionary benefits of the writ appellant without holding an enquiry
and conclusion thereupon or his conviction in the criminal case. A
reference of the Rule 9 of the Tamil Nadu Pension Rules, 1978 has
been given to indicate that the pension can be stopped as a
measure of punishment by applying the procedure, but it is only
after holding the enquiry and if charges are found proved or
alternatively, on the conviction of the delinquent in the criminal
case. In this case, enquiry is yet to be conducted.
55. We find substance in the argument of learned counsel for
the writ appellant.         The pension cannot be stopped without an
enquiry and unless the charge is found proved. The direction
W.A.Nos.1093 and 1094 of 2022
contained in paragraph 48(i) of the judgment of the learned Single
Judge needs to be interfered.                The Chief Secretary of the
Government of Tamil Nadu would direct the disciplinary authority to
hold the enquiry against the writ appellant and then to proceed in
accordance with law. The entire exercise for it would be completed
within a period of six months from the date of the judgment. Any
delay in that regard would be viewed against the disciplinary
authority and no extension of time for completion of the action
would be given.
56. The direction to pay a sum of Rs.4 lakh to the writ
petitioners/non-appellants, who were deprived of the admission, is
not interfered in view of the finding recorded above. The students
were dragged in the litigation only for the reason that the writ
appellant did not conduct mop-counselling, but sent a list of
candidates which allowed the medical college to give admission
ignoring the merit of the candidates even from the list.
57. So far as the other directions contained in paragraph 48 of
W.A.Nos.1093 and 1094 of 2022
the judgment of the learned Single Judge are concerned, they are
not        expressly   against  the  appellant   and   otherwise, we find
justification in those directions.      It is looking to the fact that while
action is taken against the writ appellant, it should be initiated
against everyone involved in the matter and especially the officers
who remained posted in the Directorate of Medical Education and
the department concerned.            Therefore, no interference in those
directions is made at the instance of the writ appellant and it is
further clarified that the judgment of the learned Single Judge would
apply to all concerned in view of the above.
The writ appeals are disposed of with the aforesaid. There will
be no order as to costs. Consequently, C.M.P.Nos.6755 and 6758 of
2022 are closed.
W.A.Nos.1093 and 1094 of 2022
5      The Director General of Health Services
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
Government of India
W.A.Nos.1093 and 1094 of 2022