1]      Petitioner No.1, a partnership firm engaged in rendering
comprehensive architectural services comprising of Petitioner No.2 as
a Partner, has filed this Petition under Section 9 of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996, in which the following reliefs are sought :
“(a)     This Hon’ble Court be pleased to order and direct
Respondent Nos.1 and 2 to forthwith pay to or deposit with the Petitioner a
sum of Rs.3.39,76,770/- (Rupees Three Crores Thirty Nine Lakhs Seventy
Six Thousand Seven Hundred Seventy only) as the admitted fees payable
under the Letters of Appointment as per the particulars set out in Exhibit
(b) In the alternative to prayer clause (a) this Hon'ble Court be
pleased to order and direct Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 to deposit in this
Hon'ble Court or to furnish solvent security to the satisfaction of this Hon'ble
Court in any other manner that this Hon'ble Court may deem fit, for the sum
of Rs.3,39,76,770/- (Rupees Three Crores Thirty Nine Lakhs Seventy Six
Thousand Seven Hundred Seventy only) as per the particulars set out in
Exhibit "MM" to the present Petition.
(c) This Hon'ble Court be pleased to stay the effect and
implementation of the purported termination letter dated 15th September,
2021 and to restrain Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 from acting upon or in
furtherance thereof until payment to the Petitioner of the fees of the Petitioner
as set out in the particulars at Exhibit "MM" hereto;
(d) This Hon'ble Court be pleased to restrain Respondent No. 1 and
2, their servants, agents or assigns or any other persons claiming by, through
or under them, including but not limited to the new architects Respondent
No.3, from taking any further steps in respect of redevelopment of the said
Plot until payment of the fees of the Petitioner as set out in the particulars at
Exhibit "MM" hereto.”
The aforesaid reliefs are sought on the basis of dispute that has
surfaced between the parties and pending the commencement, hearing
and final disposal of the arbitral proceedings and passing of the Arbitral
Award. The Petitioners have sought the above reliefs by way of interim
measures, with insistence that the reliefs so granted, shall continue to
remain in force till arbitration proceedings are culminated.
2]      Primordially let the parties to the proceedings be introduced.
Respondent Nos.1 and 2 the owners of an old tenanted building
comprising of ground plus three floors known as ‘Cassinath Building’,
at Mahim, Mumbai, which was constructed prior to 1940. The property
was acquired by Respondent Nos.1 and 2                          with an intention to
redevelop and they approached the Petitioner-firm with a proposal, to
appoint it as an Architect for the redevelopment project which
envisaged inter alia construction of new building on the existing plot
and shifting tenants/occupants from the existing building to the
alternate transit accommodation.
Accordingly, by the first Letter of Appointment issued on
16.02.2015, Petitioner No.1 came to be appointed as an Architect for
the proposed redevelopment work. The Letter of Appointment highlight
the scope of work as well as details of the fees payable by the
Respondents and it also stipulate the timelines within which the fees
were to be paid, being 30 days from the date of receipt of each bill.
The said Letter of Appointment also contain a very specific
clause about the Petitioners being paid the fees in case of decision on
the part of Respondents to sell or grant development rights to any other
person and I would make reference to the said clauses a little while
later.
Another Letter of Appointment came to be issued in favour of the
Petitioners on 20.03.2018 enlisting the scope of work and clarifying that
separate letter will be issued, detailing professional fees payable
alongwith mode of payment and other terms and conditions agreed
between the parties. The said letter also contemplated the manner in
which the Agreement could be terminated and also retained the power
to appoint any Architect after obtaining NOC from the Petitioners.
3]      With the Letter of Appointment being placed in hand and terms
and conditions of engagement of services being crystalized, the
Petitioners, as they were supposed to, applied and secure several
permissions and approvals from various statutory authorities including
MCGM, obtained requisite NOC from the Traffic, Fire and and Building
Proposal Department and also secured Intimation of Disapproval (IOD)
on 28.07.2016.           Permission with respect to the temporary transit
structure was secured and even Commencement Certificate(CC) was
also procured on 25.07.2019, setting the stage ready for the project.
4]      The Petitioners, put forth their case by submitting that their firm
rendered architectural services with respect to Planning, Design and
Preparing the Drawings/Plans etc. as required for the purpose of
accomplishment of the project and played a pro-active role.                     The
Petition contain a specific submission that the Petitioners raised
running account bills bearing Nos. I to X for the services rendered and
the same were duly acknowledged by Respondent Nos.1 and 2 and
periodically, part payments were also released as against the                   bills
raised.     The last running bill was submitted by the Petitioner on
22.12.2020, but the grievance of the Petitioners pertain to non-
clearance of the bills, despite a specific clause in the Agreement to
make payment against each bill, within 30 days of its receipt. The
Petitioners allege that Respondent Nos.1 and 2 consistently failed to
clear the bills within the agreed period, despite repeated requests being
made and communications being exchanged with Mr. Yusuf Mukri, son
of Respondent No.2 who was representing and acting on behalf of
Respondents. The correspondence and communications addressed by
the Petitioners in the form of emails, WhatsApp messages are clearly
set out in the Petition.
In the month of December, 2020, the Petitioner No.2 came
across a Public Notice regarding proposed redevelopment through a
Developer, who was ready and willing to take up the project.                    The
Petitioners raised running bills upon the Respondent Nos.1 and 2, but
the bill amount remained outstanding. In fact, the Petitioners offered
several options to the Respondents for clearing the amount due and
payable to them.           To draw curtain on the past transactions, the
Petitioners were informed that the proposed developer did not require
the services of the Petitioners, as he had his own team of Architects
and the Developer had asked the Respondents to obtain NOC from
the Petitioners. In turn, Respondent Nos.1 and 2 offered the Petitioners
a sum of Rs.50 Lakhs towards full and final settlement of the dues
payable in three installments and for no reasons                to guess, the
Petitioners rejected the said proposal.
5]      Respondent Nos.1 and 2 called upon the Petitioners to provide
details of amounts paid by it from the beginning of the Project towards
the    professional services rendered and the said requirement was
responded to by the Petitioners by specifying that an amount of
Rs.1,03,54,759/- was payable. After the figure was quoted, Respondent
Nos.1 and 2 intimated the Petitioners that the Developer would be
paying the amount due and payable and as directed, the Petitioners
forwarded statement of charges for the additional services.                  The
Petitioners were taken for surprise when the construction activities
commenced on the plot without obtaining their consent and without
clearing the outstanding dues and therefore the Petitioners addressed
letter to Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai, appraising it about
unauthorized construction commencing on the plot. The MCGM took
cognizance of the complaint and fixed hearing on the application filed
by the Petitioners before the Deputy Chief Engineer, as regards to the
appointment of new Architect and despite the Petitioner’s objection, the
new Architect came to be appointed for the project of Respondents.
Not only this, but by communication dated 15.09.2021, the
Respondents terminated the services of Petitioners and this letter was
received by the Petitioners on 18.09.2021.       The MCGM passed an
order permitting appointment of new Architect as the building was in
dilapidated condition and also granted the proposal for transit camp
The above-mentioned facts are to be seen as the basis for the
prayers sought in the Petition under Section 9, filed by the Petitioner.
6]      I have heard Learned senior counsel, Mr.J.P. Sen for the
Petitioners and Mr.Prateek Seksaria for Respondent Nos.1 and 2.
Respondent No.3- the newly appointed Architect is represented
by Mr.Aseem Naphade.
The learned senior counsel justified the relief sought in the
Petition by asserting the existence of Arbitration Clause in the Letter of
Appointment in the form of Clause 16 and he would submit that without
settling the claim of the Petitioners, as agreed in the Letter of
Appointment, the Respondents surreptitiously requested change of
Architect before the MCGM and sought its replacement on the ground
that the Architect has demanded unreasonable and ill-legitimate
professional fees.
The submission of the learned senior counsel is, Respondent
Nos.1 and 2 have breached the terms and conditions of the Agreement
intentionally and took advantage of the soft approach of the Petitioners
who went to the extent of expressing willingness to waive interest
component if the amount received by them was cleared within the
stipulated period. The learned senior counsel submit that, Respondents
with malafide intent and in futile attempt to evade its obligation to pay
the professional fees to the Petitioners under the Agreement, purported
to terminate the appointment itself,       with respect to the proposed
redevelopment scheme.
7]      Mr.Sen, would further submit that it is always permissible for the
court to grant such relief in exercise of power under Section 9(1)(ii)(b)
before institution of the arbitral proceedings as it is within the power of
this Court to permit such interim measures or direction as may appear
to the Court to be just and convenient. He would submit that interim
measures can be for the purpose of amendment, protection,
reservation, improvements of the property which is subject matter of
arbitration agreement and it can also be for the specific purpose of
securing the amount in dispute in arbitration.
Ultimately he would submit that, while deciding the Petition under
Section 9, the Court must have due regard to the underlying purpose,
which is conferred upon the Court, i.e. to permit efficacy of Arbitration,
as form of dispute resolution.
In support of the relief sought, particularly seeking deposit of the
amount or solvent surety, to that effect, he would submit that prayer is
perfectly justified in the present case since there is technically no
defence for paybility of the amount and it is in the interest of justice, to
secure the amount, which form part of subject matter of proposed
arbitration, even if no case strictly within the purview of Order XXXVIII
Rule 1 and 2 is made out.
The learned senior counsel place reliance upon the Division
Bench Judgment of this court in the case of Valentine Maritime Ltd.
vs. Kreuz Subsea Pte Limited & Anr., 2021 SCC OnLine Bom 75
and also another Division Bench decision in the case of Jagdish Ahuja
and Another vs. Cupino Limited (2020) 4 Bom CR 1, to buttress his
submission that where there was no defence to the invoices issued and
when the amount due and payable was admitted, there was good
chances of succeeding in arbitral proceedings which justified grant of
interim measures pending the arbitration reference, even if no case
was strictly made within the purview of Order XXXVIII, Rule 1 and 2.
8]      Per contra, the learned counsel Mr. Seksaria would contest the
Petition by posing a straight question, as to whether relief sought as
interim measure, can be granted.
The submission is, the contract between the parties is in the
nature of service contract and claim is in the form of monetary claim
and since the contract is determinable, no Court would grant specific
performance and in any case at the end of the proceedings of
Arbitration, the Petitioners may claim damages/compensation.                       He
would place reliance upon decision of the learned Single Judge of this
Court in case of Spice Digital Ltd. vs. Vistaas Digital Media Pvt. Ltd.
2012 SCC OnLine Bom 1536, in support of his submission.
He would also place reliance upon the decision of the learned
Single Jude of this Court in the case of Kotak Mahindra Bank
Limited vs. Williamson Magor & Co. Ltd. & Anr. 2021 SCC
9]      The learned counsel wound raise another objection                        for
entertaining the application, relying upon the       decision of the Apex
Court in the case of Firm Ashok Traders & Anr. vs. Gurumukh Das
Saluja & Ors. (2004) 3 SCC 155, by submitting that Section 9 permits
filing of the application before commencement of the arbitral
proceedings, but it do not give indication of how much before and by
relying upon the decision of the Apex Court, he would submit that the
party invoking section 9 may not have actually commenced the arbitral
proceedings, but must be able to satisfy the Court that the Arbitral
proceedings were actually contemplated or manifestly indicated, and
were positively going to commenced within a reasonable time.                     He
would submit that the law has been crystalized in the decision of Firm
Ashok Traders (supra) that the distance of time must not be such as
it would destroy the proximity of relationship of the two events between
Applying the above principles to the facts in hand, the submission
comes from Mr.Seksaria, that the alleged termination notice is dated
15.09.2021 and Petition under Section 9 has been filed on 26.10.2021
pending the hearing and final disposal of the arbitral proceedings, but it
is submitted that despite lapse of period of almost a year, no Arbitration
proceedings are instituted and therefore he would question the
timelapse by advancing his submission that there is no material to
indicate that the arbitral proceedings are actually contemplated                    or
manifestly intended, and in these circumstances, the argument is, the
relief under Section 9 must be turned down to such a party, in such a
situation.
The learned counsel for Respondent Nos.1 and 2 would also
oppose the ground of relief by submitting that in order to be entitled for
which relief claimed, being deposit of amount, the rigors of Order
XXXVIII Rule 5, for        adjudication before Judgment, must be strictly
complied with, since what is sought by the Petitioner is nothing but an
attachment         before  judgment     and   therefore      the      parameters
contemplated for exercising the said power must be satisfied even
before the Court from whom interim measures of such nature are
prayed for.
10]     The learned counsel or Respondent No.3 has adopted                                 the
arguments of Mr.Seksaria and submit that he has nothing more to add.
11]     In the wake of contentious arguments, I have perused the copy
of Petition alongwith its accompanying annexures and also the
additional Affidavit filed by the Petitioners.
The onset of the relationship between the Petitioners on one
hand and Respondent Nos.1 and 2 on the other, is the Letter of
Appointment dated 16.02.2015, when the Petitioner came to be
engaged as an Architect, to avail his professional services, relating to
architectural work of planning, designing, obtaining various approvals
and for preparation of detailed working drawings and to assist/advise
the Respondents on construction methodology to the Project
Management and other consultants to be appointed for the permissible
development of the project.
The Letter of Appointment, stipulate the professional fees to be
paid as       per the scope of the work mentioned, depending on the
estimated built up area of the project or actual build up area whichever
is higher, which was set out in Para 1, itself in the following manner :
“a]      at Rs.76.50 per sq. ft. of gross proposed built-up area as
defined hereunder. The gross proposed built-up area (as defined
above) of the project as presently designed is estimated as 1,00,000
sq. ft (approximately).”
Clause 2 of the Letter of Appointment set out the mode of
payment of the professional fees payable, as per clause 1                                  in
accordance with the stages mentioned therein.
On perusal of the chart, it is evident that before submission of the
Building Completion Certificate (B.C.C.) for the occupation of building
or part thereof from Municipal Corporation, 100% of the total fees (less
received earlier), shall become payable to the Petitioners.
12]     Certain other important clauses in the Agreement which are
relevant for the purpose of present case are reproduced below :
“9.        In addition to your fees as stated above, we agree to pay you
professional fees, for the additional services which may be required to be
rendered by you for obtaining EACH of the remarks, permissions,
N.O.Cs. from various authorities, and if done, shall be paid by us extra,
as per the amount indicated in the “List of Additional Services” annexed
with this agreement as Annexure “A”.
13.        In the event, if we decide to sell or grant development rights to
any other persons, after your obtaining approval of plans from BMC, (i.e.
IOD and/or C.C. in part or full is obtained), then, you shall be paid full
fees as per Clause No.1, irrespective of the stage of development and
the quantum of services rendered by you upto that stage and we agree
to pay you the same immediately on our taking the aforesaid decision.”
15.        This engagement may be terminated at any time by either party
[either by consent referring to arbitration as per clause no.16] upon prior
notice being given, and provided that as a condition precedent, the fees
due to you as per Clauses (1) to (14) above are paid to you or an
amount as directed by the arbitrator is first deposited with him, and not
withstanding any thing contained herein, your termination will not take
effect and we shall not appoint any other Architect for the proposal on
the property under reference till such fees are paid to you or deposited
with the arbitrator as the case may be.
16.        We confirm and agree that it has been expressly agreed by and
between yourself and ourselves that except for clause no.15, any
dispute or difference between us as to the terms of your engagement as
Architect/s as aforesaid shall be decided by arbitration of such panel of
arbitrators or individual arbitrator who shall be member or members of
"PEATA" and such arbitration proceeding shall be governed by the
provision of the Indian Arbitration Act 1940, or any statutory modification
or re-actment thereof, subject to the observance of the condition
precedent obligation by either parties as per clause 15 above.”
The Agreement is accompanied with the schedule of additional
services in the form of Annexure A.
13]     For the purpose of obtaining necessary permissions from the
Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai, on 28.03.2016, once again
an appointment letter is issued in favour of the Petitioners appointing
the Petitioner No.1 as an Architect, which pitched two more conditions
“8.      A thirty days clear notice in writing is required by either
of the parties to terminate the agreement, during the pendency of
which your services shall be continued to be rendered. However, on
termination of the agreement, the fees shall be paid to you as per
agreement entered into with you separately in this regard.
9.       We confirm that we can appoint any other
Architect/Licensed Surveyor only after obtaining your NOC. We will
not carry out any further work till the new architect/Licensed Surveyor
is appointed and is accepted by the authorities. In this event, your
NOC will not be withheld unreasonably and will be deemed to be
issued on our paying your dues, or in the event of dispute on the
mater being referred to the arbitration and the detailed terms and
conditions mentioned in our agreement entered into with you in this
regard and shall prevailo.
10       In event of any dispute, the matter shall be referred to
arbitration as per our detailed agreement.”
14]     Now, I shall turn my focus on the actual dispute about payment
of architectural fees, which has surfaced in the Petition.
It is on 25.07.2019 the commencement certificate was issued by
the MCGM. The Petitioners, with reference to the letter of appointment,
issued the last running bill, Bill No.X dated 22.12.2020 , comprising of
professional services and informed the Respondents, that an amount of
Rs. 1,03,54,759/- is payable towards professional fees, by calculating
the interest on delayed payment. The said statement in the form of Bill
at Exhibit F bifurcate the amount due and payable as per the clauses
contemplated in the Letter of Appointment dated 16.02.2015.
The Petitioners have placed on record communication received
from the Respondents dated 03.05.2018, where the following statement
is made.
“Please be rest assured your money is safe and all your dues
will be cleared in full, we only request you for some more grace period.
Needless to say all your dues will be cleared at the earliest.”
The Petitioners claim that since Respondents had assured about
timely payment and in the wake of                long      professional relationship
shared between them, the work was continued, until it was informed
about termination of services by letter dated 15.09.2021 by citing the
“With reference to the subject cited above we would like to
inform you that there is a tremendous pressure from the tenants of the
building whose lives are at a stake, and you have not been co-
operating as an Architect of the project, we do hereby cancel and
terminate your appointment as an Architect of the above mentioned
project.
This letter of Cancellation/Termination is being sent to you, as
the same was raised by you, in the meeting called by the Hon. Dy.
Please note that you are no more our architect in the above
project and the new architect Aman & Associates, appointed by us and
informed to the Hon. Dy. Chief Engineer, shall here onwards, apply and
obtain all further approvals and permissions required. ”
15]     The Petitioners submit that instead of paying the amount which
was due and payable, the Respondents chose to terminate services of
the Petitioners on the ground of their alleged non-cooperation as an
Architect of the project and this stand is seriously contested by the
Admittedly, the dispute revolving around the appointment letter is
liable to be referred to the Arbitrator, in light of Clause 16, contained in
the Letter of Appointment, but pending the commencement and hearing
of the      arbitral proceedings        to be instituted, the Petitioners seek
payment of the amount towards professional fees payable to them
under the Letter of Appointment or a direction is sought against
Respondent No.1 and 2 to deposit the said amount in this Court or
furnish solvent surety which this Court may deem fit.
In order to secure this relief, a specific statement is made in the
Petition, which read thus :
“51. From the communications exchanged between the
Petitioner and Respondent No.1 and 2 and on their behalf by the said
Mr.Yusuf Mukri (son of Respondent No.2), it is clear that Respondent
Nos.1 and 2 on their own admission are in the process of dissipating
their assets, which may render an Award in favour of the Petitioner a
paper Award. The Respondent No.1 and 2 have admitted the
Petitioner’s claim for its professional fees and other charges under the
Letter of Appointment. This is a fit case for an order of payment/deposit
against Respondent Nos.1 and 21 at this stage itself.”
16]     The grant of the above relief is opposed on the ground that the
claim is in the nature of money suit and therefore the relief prayed can
not be granted as it would amount to grant of the decree.
Reliance is placed upon decision in the case of Maharashtra
Jeevan Pradhikaran & Anr. vs. Lark Construction Pvt. Ltd. 2005 (1)
MH.L.J. 953, which pertains to the power to be exercised by the Civil
Court under Order 39 Rule 1 and 2, where it was categorically held
that the grant of final relief in the form of final relief to pay the amount
at the interim stage would not be a permissible mode and what could
have been possibly done was to release part of the money claim
involved in the suit.
The learned counsel for the Respondent has also relied upon the
decision of the Court in the case of Spice Digital Ltd. vs. Vistaas
Digital Media Pvt. Ltd. (supra),            wherein the issue of grant of relief
under Section 9 and 17 of the Act of 1996 arose for consideration, and
it has been specifically held as under in para 15 and 16 :-
“15. It is not in dispute that even during the lock in period, the
respondent can terminate the contract if there was material breach of
contract. Whether the contract was rightly terminated or not is the
issue which is pending before the arbitral tribunal and would be
decided at the time hearing of the claims made by the Appellant before
the arbitral tribunal. The question that arises for consideration of this
court is that whether interim measures can be grasnted in a contract
which is determinable.
16.       The arbitral tribunal in the impugned order after referring to
clause 6.2 as amended and clause 12.1 of the agreement has
recorded prima facie finding that the agreement by its very nature is
determinable even during the lock in period. It is held that in case
other than for material breach, the licensor if it invokes clause 12 and
terminated the agreement, the the licensee is entitled to certain rights
which include withholding any license fees that may be due and
payable and also moving the competent court for whatever reliefs the
Licensee would be entitled. In Para 36 of the impugned order the
arbitral tribunal has recorded a finding that the contract by its nature is
determinable and interim relief by way of injunction cannot be granted.
In Para 29 of the impugned order, it is held that if the agreement by its
very nature is determinable within the meaning of section 14(1)(c) of
the Specific Relief Act, specific performance cannot be granted. If
specific relief cannot be granted, then in terms of Section 41(e) of the
Specific Relief Act no injunction can be granted. It is held that if the
licencee is not entitled to final relief of permanent injunction, then in
that event no interim relief by way of injunction can be granted”.
17]      The observations made above are to be read in the facts of the
case, which reveal that the Respondents issued termination notice to
the Petitioners alleging breaches and the Petitioners specifically denied
such breaches and made a request for continuing discharge of the
obligations under the licensed agreement. The Petition filed by the
Petitioners under Section 9 of the Act sought a relief that the
Respondents shall not act on the basis of termination notice, the
dispute being referred to the Sole Arbitrator and the Arbitrator
dismissed the Application filed under Section 17 of the Arbitration Act.
It is, in this background, observations were made in Para 21 to the
“21. In my view, the injunction sought by the Appellant under
section 17 of the Arbitration Act, 1996 for the contract which is
determinable or is terminated even according to the appellant, such
injunction is statutorily prohibited. In my view, at the interim stage, the
arbitral tribunal while deciding application under section 17 and the
court deciding application under section 9 of the Arbitration Act, 1996
cannot continue operation of such determinable contract or the same
having been terminated otherwise it would amount to re-writing the
contract. In my view the arbitral tribunal was thus right in refusing to
grant injunction under section 17 of the Arbitration Act, 1996. Even
otherwise, the arbitral tribunal has given a finding of fact after
considering the facts, provisions of the agreement and the provisions
of Specific Relief Act and thus no interference is warranted by this
court with such finding of fact recorded by Che arbitral tribunal at this
stage.”
18]     The power to grant interim measures under Section 9 of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act is guided by the underlying principles
which govern the exercise of analogous power under the Civil
Procedure Code (CPC) and it is settled position of law that this power
cannot be totally independent of those principles.                   Exercise of the
power under Section 9 cannot be carried out in an uncharted territory
ignoring the basic principles of procedural law contained in the Code,
but at the same time, procedural provisions enumerated in the Code,
cannot be invoked to defeat the grant of interim relief, when the Court
would decide Application under Section 9 of the Act.
The existence of an arbitration agreement or arbitral clause is a
sine qua non for contracting parties, to refer their disputes to arbitration
and to avail any interim relief in terms thereof. While exercising this
power, the Court will ascertain the manifest intention on the part of the
Applicant to take recourse to the arbitral proceedings at the time of
filing of the Application under Section 9 of the Act and this intention can
be gathered from the surrounding circumstances which may include
issuance of notice in a given case, establishing the manifest intention to
refer the dispute to arbitral tribunal .
The Court exercising powers under Section 9 possess wide
powers including “the same power for making orders as it has for the
purposes and in relation to any proceeding before it”. Nevertheless
discretion will not be exercised lightly and unless the Court is satisfied
that the essential conditions for grant of such relief have been met by
the party seeking it.
19]     The time or the stage of invoking jurisdiction of the court under
the Section is also clearly set out by sub-section (1) being a party
approaching the Court before or during the arbitral proceedings or at
any time after making of arbitral warrant, but before its enforcement in
accordance with Section 36.
The amendment inserted by Act 3 of 2016              has created an
imperative mandate in a contingency where the Application is preferred
for interim measures before commencement of the arbitral proceedings
and the court passed an order in any interim measure of protection,
then arbitral proceedings shall be commenced within a period of 90
days from the date of such order or within such further time, that the
Court may determine.
In any case, an application filed is not a Suit and it is also not
necessary that the party invoking Section 9, must                 had actually
commenced the arbitral proceedings, but suffice to establish before the
Court that the proceedings are actually contemplated or manifestly
intended. The purpose of interim protection to be granted by the court
evidently is to protect the interest of the party seeking such order until
its rights are finally adjudicated by the arbitral tribunal and to ensure
that the Award passed by the Tribunal is capable of enforcement.
What type of measures can be granted in the form of protection
for the subject matter are enumerated in sub-section (1) (ii) of Section 9
and this would cover contingencies specified in clause (a) to (e).
Clause (e) of sub-section (1) vests the Court exercising power under
Section 9, to pass such other interim measure of protection as may
appear to the court to be just and convenient and the Court shall have
the same power for making orders as it has for the purpose of and in
relation to, any proceedings before it. For exercising these powers the
Court must derive a conclusion that whatever is considered necessary
for protection of the property in dispute, by way of interim measure the
protection can be granted and definitely this confer wide discretion on
the Court, but it cannot be said to be an unguided discretion, as the
guiding factor is the enumeration of such situations by the legislature,
though the legislature did not intend that the circumstances shall be
exhaustive. However, the power conferred upon the Court in the
Section is not unbridled and it is subject to ascertain measures and
restrictions such as, firstly, it can be exercised by the Court to the same
extent and in the same manner as it could be for the purpose or in
relation to any proceedings before it and secondly, exercise of power
to make interim arrangements should not militate against any power
which might be vested in arbitral tribunal.
20]     One such contingency where the interim measure for protection
can be granted is contemplated by clause (b), for securing the amount
in dispute in arbitration. This contingency prompting the Court to mould
the interim relief for securing the amount in dispute in arbitration is
often compared with Order XXXVIII Rule 5 of the CPC and the position
as regards whether the party filing an application under Section 9 would
strictly bound to adhere to Order XXXVIII Rule 5 is no more resintegra
and has been put to rest by two Division Benches of this court and also
recently by the Hon’ble Apex court itself in the case of Essar House
Private Limited vs. Arcellor Mittal Nippon Steel India Limited in
Civil Appeal (Arising out of SLP (C ) No.3187 of 2021).
21]     In the case of Jagdish Ahuja and another vs. Cupino Limited,
2020 SCC OnLine Bom 849, Division Bench of this Court made
specific observations while formulating the question as to whether the
Court while granting relief under Section 9 of the Act of 1996 is strictly
bound by the provisions of Order XXXVIII Rule 5 and answered it in
Para 6 and 7 as follows :-
“6. As far as Section 9 of the Act is concerned, it cannot be said that
this court, while considering a relief thereunder, is strictly bound by
the provisions of Order 38 Rule 5. As held by our Courts, the scope of
Section 9 of the Act is very broad; the court has a discretion to grant
thereunder a wide range of interim measures of protection "as may
appear to the court to be just and convenient", though such discretion
has to be exercised judiciously and not arbitrarily. The court is, no
doubt, guided by the principles which civil courts ordinarily employ for
considering interim relief, particularly, Order 39 Rules 1 and 2 and
Order 38 Rule 5; the court, however, is not unduly bound by their
texts. As this court held in Nimbus Communications Limited v. Board
of Control for Cricket in India (Per D.Y. Chandrachud J, as the learned
Judge then was), the court, whilst exercising power under Section 9,
"must have due regard to the underlying purpose of the conferment of
the power under the court which is to promote the efficacy of
arbitration as a form of dispute resolution." The learned Judge further
"Just as on the one hand the exercise of the power under
Section 9 cannot be carried out in an uncharted territory
ignoring the basic principles of procedural law contained
in the Code of Civil Procedure 1908, the rigors of every
procedural provision in the Code of Civil Procedure 1908
cannot be put into place to defeat the grant of relief which
would subserve the paramount interests of justice. A
balance has to be drawn between the two considerations
in the facts of each case."
7. In an appropriate case, where the court is of the view that there is
practically no defence to the payability of the amount and where it is
in the interest of justice to secure the amount which forms part of the
subject matter of the proposed arbitration reference, even if no case
strictly within the letter of Order 38 Rule 1 or 2 is made out, though
there are serious allegations concerning such case, it is certainly
within the power of the court to order a suitable interim measure of
protection. As we have noted above, the amount is either to be
deposited into the treasury in accordance with the agreement
between the parties or if, for any reason, it is not payable to the
revenue towards the Respondent's tax liability, as is the case of the
Appellants here, it is to be paid to the Respondent Itself as part of the
price of debentures. In fact, when these two options were posed by
the learned Single Judge to the Appellants' counsel, in fairness both
conceded that there was no third option.”
22]     Another Division Bench of this Court in Valentine Maritime Ltd.
vs. Kreuz Subsea Pte Limited & Another, (supra), derived a similar
inference by relying upon the Apex Court decision in the case of
Adhunik Steels Ltd. vs. Orissa Manganese and Minerals (P) Ltd.
(2007) 7 SCC 125 and observed as under :-
“95. Insofar as judgment of this Court delivered by the Division Bench
of this court in case of Nimbus Communications Limited v. Board of
Control for Cricket in India Cupra) relied upon by the learned senior
counsel for the VML is concerned, this Court adverted to the judgment
of Hon'ble Supreme Court in case of Adhunik Steels Ltd. v. Orisa
Manganese and Minerals (P) Ltd., (2007) 7 SCC 125 and held that in
view of the decision of the Supreme Court in case of Adhunik Steels
Ltd., (supra) the view of the Division Bench in case of National
Shipping Company of Saudi Arabia (supra) that the exercise of power
under section 9(ii)(b) is not controlled by provisions of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 cannot stand. This court in the said judgment of
Nimbus Communications Limited (supra) held that the exercise of the
power under section 9 of the Arbitration Act cannot be totally
independent of the basic principles governing grant of interim
injunction by the civil Court, at the same time, the Court when it
decides the petition under section 9, must have due regard to the
underlying purpose of the conferment of the power upon the Court
which is to promote the efficacy of arbitration as a form of dispute
resolution.
96. This court held that just as on the one hand the exercise of the
power under Section 9 cannot be carried out in an uncharted territory
ignoring the basic principles of procedural law contained in the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908 cannot be put into place to defeat the grant of
relief which would sub-serve the paramount interests of justice. A
balance has to be drawn between the two considerations in the facts
of each case. The principles laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure,
1908 for the grant of interlocutory remedies must furnish a guide to the
Court when it determines an application under Section 9 of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996. The underlying basis of Order
38 Rule 5 therefore has to be borne in mind while deciding an
application under Section 9(ii)(b) of the Arbitration Act.”
It was thus held that the arbitral tribunal is also empowered to
make an interim Award and to grant money claim on the basis of
admitted claim and or acknowledged liability, so as to clear the claim
which is subject matter of the dispute before the arbitral tribunal if such
case is made out by the Applicant.
23]     The Hon’ble Apex Court in the case of Essar House Private
Limited vs. Arcellor Mittal Nippon Steel India Limited (supra) by
making a reference to both the above decisions of the Bombay High
Court,      has taken the principle ahead and specifically concluded as
“ While it is true that the power under Section 9 of the
Arbitration Act should not ordinarily be exercised ignoring the basic
principles of procedural law as laid down in the CPC, the technicalities
of CPC cannot prevent the Court from securing the ends of justice. It
is well settled that procedural safaeguards, meant to advance the
cause of justice cannot be interpreted in such manner, as would defeat
justice.”
24]     Taking cognizance of the decisions from various High Courts,
holding that power under Section 9 of the Arbitration Act is wider than
the power under the provisions of CPC, it reproduced the relevant
observation from the decisions of this Court and held as under :-
“48. Section 9 of the Arbitration Act confers wide power on
the Court to pass orders securing the amount in dispute in arbitration,
whether before the commencement of the arbitral proceedings, during
the arbitral proceedings or at any time after making of the arbitral
award, but before its enforcement in accordance with Section 36 of
the Arbitration Act. All that the Court is required to see is, whether the
applicant for interim measure has a good prima facie case, whether
the balance of convenience is in favour of interim relief as prayed for
being granted and whether the applicant has approached the court
with reasonable expedition.
49.      If a strong prima facie case is made out and the
balance of convenience is in favour of interim relief being granted, the
Court exercising power under Section 9 of the Arbitration Act should
not withhold relief on the mere technicality of absence of averments,
incorporating the grounds for attachment before judgment under
Order 38 Rule 5 of the CPC.
50.      Proof of actual attempts to deal with, remove or
dispose of the property with a view to defeat or delay the realisation of
an impending Arbitral Award is not imperative for grant of relief under
Section 9 of the Arbitration Act. A strong possibility of diminution of
assets would suffice. To assess the balance of convenience, the
Court is required to examine and weigh the consequences of refusal
of interim relief to the applicant for interim relief in case of success in
the proceedings, against the consequence of grant of the interim
relief to the opponent in case the proceedings should ultimately fail.”
25]     The position of law thus stands crystalized in the above manner
and the inference which could be gainfully drawn from the authoritative
pronouncement, is that the provisions as contained in Section 9 and 17
of the Arbitration Act, 1996 are meant for protecting the subject matter
of the dispute till the arbitration proceedings culminate into an Award.
The court is also entitled to consider whether denial of such order
would result in great prejudice to the parties seeking such protective
order.      The obstructive conduct of the party against whom such
direction is sought, is also to be recorded as material consideration,
apart from the most important element whether there is practically no
defence to the paybility of the amount, and, therefore, it is only in the
interest of justice         to secure     the amount, which forms part of the
subject matter of the proposed arbitration reference and in such case,
it is certainly within the power of the Court to order suitable interim
measures for its protection.
The apprehension expressed in Para 51, based on the
correspondence, exchanged by Respondent Nos.1 and 2, is sufficient
to secure the claim of the Petitioners by invoking Order XXXVIII Rule 5
of CPC, particularly in absence of specific denial of the claim and since
now the MCGM has granted substitution of the Petitioner firm by
another Architect.
26]     I must gainfully refer to another decision of the Hon’ble Apex
Court in case of Sanghi Industries Limited vs. Ravin Cables Ltd. &
Anr. (in Civil Appeal No.6908/2022) where their Lordships of the Apex
court, have made pertinent observations, which I must reproduce :-
4.1       The order(s) which may be passed by the Commercial Court in
an application under Section 9 of the Arbitration Act, 1996 is basically
and mainly by way of interim measure. It may be true that in a given
case if all the conditions of Order XXXVIII Rule 5 of the CPC are
satisfied and the Commercial Court is satisfied on the conduct of the
opposite/opponent party that the opponent party is trying to sell its
properties to defeat the award that may be passed and/or any other
conduct on the part of the opposite/opponent party which may
tantamount to any attempt on the part of the opponent/opposite party to
defeat the award that may be passed in the arbitral proceedings, the
Commercial Court may pass an appropriate order including the restrain
order and/or any other appropriate order to secure the interest of the
parties. However, unless and until the conditions mentioned in Order
XXXVIII Rule 5 of the CPC are satisfied such an order could not have
been passed by the Commercial Court which has been passed by the
Commercial Court in the present case, which has been affirmed by the
The     above      observations  necessarily     indicate      that     while
considering the application under Section 9 of the Arbitration Act for
interim measures, the Court would seek strict compliance of conditions
incorporated in Order XXXVIII Rule 5 of the CPC.
However, the aforesaid observations will have to be read in the
background of the facts which were involved and on careful reading of
the said Judgment, it can be discerned that the dispute revolved around
three purchase orders and the Appellant claimed the loss of INR 29.31
Crores,      owing to the      defective  quality of cables supplied.             The
Appellant invoked bank guarantees issued by Respondent No.1 which
according to Respondent No.1 were performance bank guarantees and
thereafter the Appellant invoked arbitration and immediately on the next
date, Respondent no.1 approached the Court under Section 9 of the
Arbitration Act before the Commercial Court and the Commercial Court
by invoking Section 9(2)(e) of the Act directed the Appellant to deposit
the amount of respective performance bank guarantees, which were
already invoked and for which payments were already made by the
bank.       The High Court dismissed the appeal, which resulted into
proceedings before the Hon’ble Apex Court.
The observations made in Para 4, therefore, must be read in the
background of paragraph 3 and 4 of the said Judgment and particularly
when the Court took note of the fact that before any order could be
passed, the bank had already invoked the bank guarantee and the
amount thereunder was already paid prior to passing of the order by
the Commercial Court.
In any case, the said decision in Sanghi Industries Limited
(supra) cannot be said to unsettle the position of law which has been
consistently followed, being laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court in the
case of Adhunik Steel (supra), where the Apex Court, issued the
guidelines for        exercise of power under Section 9, in the following
“The grant of an interim prohibitory or mandatory
injunction is governed by well-known rules and it is difficult to
imagine that the legislature while enacting Section 9 of the
Act intended to make a provision which was dehors the
accepted principles that governed the grant of an interim
injunction. Same is the position regarding the appointment of
a receiver since Section 9 itself brings in the concept of "just
and convenient" while speaking of passing any interim
measure of protection. The concluding words of Section 9,
"and the court shall have the same power for making orders
as it has for the purpose and in relation to any proceedings
before it" also suggest that the normal rules that govern the
court in the grant of interim orders is not sought to be
jettisoned by the provision. Moreover, when a party is given a
right to approach an ordinary court of the country without
providing a special procedure or a special set of rules in that
behalf, the ordinary rules followed by that court would govern
the exercise of power conferred by the Act. On that basis
also, it is not possible to keep out the concept of balance of
convenience, prima facie case, irreparable injury and the
concept of just and convenient while passing interim
measures under Section 9 of the Act.
The position of law which, therefore emerges is, power under
section 9 of the Act is totally independent of the principles governing
grant of injunction that would govern the Courts in this connection.
27]     The reliance upon the decision in the case of Firm Ashok
Traders & Another (supra) is of no support to Mr.Sakseria,
representing Respondent Nos.1 and 2 as the said decision though
have coined the term “proximately contemplated” or “manifestly
intended” have categorically held that if arbitral proceedings are not
commenced within a reasonable time, of an order under Section 9, the
relationship between the order and arbitral proceedings would stand
snapped. Even in the said Judgment, after explaining what would be
the reasonable period, while granting relief by way of interim measure,
Applicant was directed to take steps for appointment of Arbitrator(s)
without any further loss of time.
In any case, now when the insertion of sub-section (2) of Section
9   by Act No.3 of 2016, there is a statutory provision            which itself
contemplate that where interim measures of protection are conferred
on party, the arbitral proceedings shall be commenced within a period
of 90 days from the date of order or within such time as the Court may
determine.
Hence, the decision in the Firm Ashok Traders and Another
(supra) do not take case of the Respondents any further.
The further decision in the case of Maharashtra Jeevan
Pradhikaran & Anr. vs. Lark Construction Pvt Ltd., 2005(1) Mh.L.J.
953, is completely based on different circumstances, dealing with the
power to grant interim injunction under Order XXXIX Rule 1 and 2 read
with Section 151 of the CPC.          The impugned order directed the
Defendants to release the amount and it was held that it could not
have been done as the suit was in the nature of money decree.
It is now settled position that while exercising power under
Section 9 of the Arbitration Act, the Court shall not be strictly bound by
the CPC and since there is specific power conferred upon the Court to
grant such interim measures for protection, reservation of the subject
matter of the arbitration agreement, the decision deserve to be
distinguished as against the power under Section 9 of the Arbitration
and Conciliation Act. Similar is the case relied upon by the learned
counsel of the Single Judge of this Court in Spice Digital Ltd. (supra)
when the Court was dealing with the application filed under Section 17
before the Arbitral Tribunal.
28]     In the wake of aforesaid legal scenario, I must now examine
whether the Petitioner deserve the relief in terms of prayer clause (a) or
(b) by applying the aforesaid parameters.
When the Letter of Appointment which has been construed by
the parties as an Agreement/MoU reached between them is perused, it
is evident that the services of the Petitioners were engaged as an
Architect     which       included the professional     services       related      to
architectural       work of Planning, Designing, Working on Drawings etc.
and professional fees was agreed in terms of the scope of the work on
the estimated built up area or under the actual built up area whichever
is higher. The fees to be paid towards the professional services was to
be paid depending upon the stage of the work, with the specifications
being mentioned in the Letter of Appointment itself.           Clause 5 clearly
stipulated that the bill shall be paid within 30 days on its receipt and not
only this, 15% interest was also agreed upon the dues remaining
outstanding, thereafter. Liberty was also conferred upon the Petitioners
to suspend the rendering of the services if the dues remained unpaid
for more than 60 days.
Apart from the prevailing fees agreed, fees towards additional
services was separately carved out in Annexure A.
29]     The Letter of Appointment contain a clause in the form of Clause
No. 13, where the Petitioners were assured of the fees in                            a
contingency when Respondents decide to sell or grant development
rights to any other person and the liability to pay full dues was taken on
themselves, irrespective of the stage of development and quantum of
The case of the Petitioners specifically pleaded in the Petition
unequivocally state that running bills for the services rendered were
raised from time to time by the Petitioners and necessary NOCs as
well as IOD was also obtained. A specific statement is made that the
Petitioner rendered architectural services with respect to Planning,
Design and Preparing Drawings/Plans etc. for the purpose of project
and raised running account bills which were duly acknowledged by
Respondent Nos.1 and 2 . Part payments were made pursuant thereto
and in the last bill dated 22.12.2020, forwarded alongwith running
account bill, entire details were forwarded to the Respondents. The
bills, however, remained unpaid, despite the Petitioners performing
their part of obligation, under the Letter of Appointment by rendering
substantial services to the Project. The Petitioners raised demand of
Rs.1,03,54,759/- due and payable towards prevailing services rendered
and from the correspondence that has been placed alongwith the
Petition, the Respondent Nos.1 and 2 informed the Petitioners that the
amount of outstanding fees would be paid by the new Developer and
copy of the communications are placed on record in the form of Exhibit
Q and R, but the amount due and payable did not come to the
Petitioner and remain unpaid even till date. Since there is no denial
from the Respondents about the bills raised and despite                  several
concessions offered by the Petitioner, the payments are not received,
either from Respondent Nos.1 and 2 or from the newly appointed
Developer, as it was intimated to the Petitioners that the Developer will
clear the dues.
Thus, from the pleadings in the Petition, which are not traversed,
it is evident that there is practically no defence to the paybility of the
amount and since Respondent Nos.1 and 2 have already appointed
new Developer through whom work is likely to be carried out, and on
being satisfied that the prima-facie case exist in favour of the
Petitioners and balance of convenience also lies in their favour and
irreparable loss would be caused to them if the amount is not secured
by directing it to be deposited towards the fees due and payable in
terms of the Letter of Appointment, in absence of any denial that the
amount is not payable, I deem it appropriate to grant relief, pending the
commencement of the arbitration proceedings to be initiated within the
period of 90 days from today.
As far as prayer clauses (c) and (d) are concerned, I am not
intending to stall the Project of Respondent Nos.1 and 2 and they may
proceed with the Project with the aid of new Architect being appointed
i.e. Respondent No.3.
b]        Respondent Nos.1 and 2 are directed to deposit in
this Court, 50% of the amount mentioned in prayer clause
(a) of the Petition, being Rs.3,39,76,770/- (Rs.Three Crores
Seventy Only) as admitted fees payable under the Letter of
Appointment, as per the particulars set out in the Petition and
the remaining 50% of the above amount, by                     furnishing
solvent surety,      to the satisfaction of the Registrar of this
c]        The aforesaid deposit of 50% of the amount claimed
in prayer clause (a) and furnishing of surety for the balance
50% of the amount, shall be made within a period of 8 weeks
from today.
d]        The Petitioners are at liberty         to seek appropriate
relief from the arbitral tribunal, once the proceedings are
initiated as the relief granted by way of interim measure will
have a limited life till the arbitration is invoked.