1.     The instant petition has been filed by the petitioner under Article
226 of the Constitution of India, impugning the order of Respondent No.
2 dated 17.10.2006 notifying therein the termination of services of the
petitioner as Caretaker. By way of the instant petition, the petitioner has
prayed for the following reliefs:
“(a) A Writ of certiorari calling for the records of the case for
(b) A writ of certiorari quashing the impugned Memorandum
dated 17.10.2006 (Annexure P-23) whereby the services of the
petitioner were terminated, being illegal, arbitrary,
discriminatory, unjust, malafide and without jurisdiction,
vindicative.
(c) A writ of Mandamus commanding the respondents to
forthwith reinstate the petitioner in service with continuity of
service and payment of consequential benefits, including back-
wages.
(d) A Writ of mandamus commanding the respondent to pay the
cost of the petition to the petitioner
(e) Any other writ, order or direction which may be deemed fit
and proper in the facts and circumstances of the case and in the
interest of justice.”
2.     The brief facts that are crucial for adjudication of the case, and that
have emerged from a conjoint reading of the petition, counter affidavit
and the rejoinder thereto, as well as upon the perusal of earlier order of
this Court dated 22.9.2006 in WP (C) No. 153/2005 filed by the petitioner
for regularisation of his services as Caretaker, are delineated hereinbelow:
a.     Dinesh Kumar, the petitioner herein, was employed as a
Caretaker with the Respondent No. 2. Respondent No. 1
is the University of Delhi whereas Respondent No. 2 is
Shaheed Rajguru College of Applied Sciences for
Women (hereinafter referred to as “the College”).
b.     The College issued an advertisement in the Times of
India on 26.3.1997 inviting applications for various
teaching and non-teaching posts. One of the posts notified
at S. No. 7 was “Caretaker (1) (Rs. 950-1400), (SC)”, for
which the qualifications prescribed were“matriculation
with some experience of maintenance of Electrical,
Sanitary, Water installations and Supervision of normal
building repairs.” The petitioner by way of his
application dated 2.4.1997, addressed to the Principal of
the College, applied for the position of Caretaker.
c.    The College issued memorandum bearing number
CASW/PF/DK/98/296(A) dated 21.7.1998 appointing the
petitioner to the said position on daily wages for a period
of   three   months.This     was   followed    by   another
memorandum bearing number CASW/PF/DK/98/641(8)
dated 5.10.1998 issued by the College whereby
engagement of services of the petitioner was renewed on
an ad-hoc basis for a period of six months. Thereafter, his
appointment was continued from time to time by ad-hoc
appointment letters until 2004.
d.    On 2.10.2002, the College again advertised a call for
applications to certain non-teaching posts. One of the
posts notified was for “Caretaker (l)”, against which the
qualifications were notified as “Matriculation with some
experience of maintenance, sanitary water installations
and supervision of normal building repairs.” The
petitioner applied to the said position through his
application dated 8.10.2002.
e.    On 26.4.2004, the petitioner sent a letter, by registered
post to the Principal of the College, requesting for
regularisation of his services as well as for giving him
annual increments.
f.    On the same date, the College advertised a call for
applications in the Time of India for recruitment to
certain teaching and non-teaching positions. One of the
positions notified in the non-teaching category at S. No. 3
was “Caretaker (1)”. The qualifications for the said
position were the same as notified earlier. The petitioner
applied to the said position through his application dated
28.4.2004, and his candidature was considered by the
g.    In the meeting of the Governing Body of the College
dated 5.8.2004, it was noted that for appointment to the
post of Caretaker no one was recommended for regular
appointment but in the case of petitioner, it was
recommended to appoint him on purely ad-hoc basis, and
he be asked to undergo training in electricity and
sanitation   within    a   period   of   one   year.    The
recommendation was accordingly approved. The College
issued an Office Order dated 10.8.2004, whereby the
petitioner was intimated about the said requirement to be
fulfilled within the span of one year.
h.    The petitioner approached this Court by way of a Writ
Petition bearing number WP (C) No. 153/2005 on
7.1.2005 praying for his regularisation. The said petition
was disposed of by this Court vide the judgment dated
22.9.2006 wherein it was held that his services could not
be regularised. The respondents therein were asked to
take a decision, on the suitability of the petitioner to the
post and whether to continue him in service, within a
period of two months.
i.    Aggrieved by the said judgment, the petitioner by way of
Letter Patents Appeal bearing no. LPA 2036/2006
approached a Division Bench of this Court, which was
ultimately dismissed as withdrawn. During the pendency
of the said appeal, the College on 17.10.2006 issued a
letter to the petitioner, whereby the services of the
petitioner as Caretaker were terminated.
j.    The petitioner, aggrieved by the same, has approached
this Court by way of the instant petition under Article 226
of the Constitution of India impugning the said
termination order.
3.     Learned counsel appearing for the petitioner submitted that on
26.3.1997, the respondent College issued an advertisement in the Times of
India, inviting applications for filling up various teaching and non-
teaching posts including that of Caretaker. It is submitted that the
petitioner, in compliance with all the requirements of the post of
Caretaker, including that of being a candidate from the scheduled caste,
mentioned in the advertisement and accordingly, applied for the same,
vide his application dated 2.4.1997.
4.     It is submitted that thereafter, the petitioner was interviewed by the
respondent for the post of Caretaker and based on his performance in the
said interview, and after taking into consideration the qualifications and
experience, etc. mentioned in his biodata, the respondents selected the
petitioner for the post of Caretaker.
5.     It is further submitted that on 21.7.1998, the petitioner was offered
appointment as Caretaker on dailywages for a period of three months,
even though the post advertised was a regular post and the petitioner was
interviewed by a duly constituted Selection Committee.
6.     It is stated that on 5.10.1998, the Respondent No.2 issued a fresh
memorandum of appointment to the petitioner, appointing him on a basic
pay of Rs. 3050 per month in the pay scale of 3050-75-3950-80-4590 plus
allowances. The said appointment was subject to approval of appropriate
authorities. It is, however, submitted that the offer of appointment was
made on an ad-hoc basis for the period of six months.
7.     It is submitted that on 2.10.2002, the College again advertised a call
for applications to certain non-teaching posts. One of the posts notified
was for “Caretaker (l)”, against which the qualifications were notified as
“Matriculation with some experience of maintenance, sanitary water
installations and supervision of normal building repairs.” The petitioner
applied to the said position through his application dated 8.10.2002.
8.     On 26.4.2004, the College again advertised a call for applications in
the Times of India for recruitment to the position of “Caretaker (1)”. The
petitioner applied to the said position through his application dated
28.4.2004, and his candidature was considered by the Selection
Committee. However, in the meeting of the Governing Body of the
College dated 5.8.2004, it was recommended to appoint him on a purely
ad-hoc basis, and he be asked to undergo training in electricity and
sanitation within a period of one year.
9.     The petitioner approached this Court by way of a Writ Petition
bearing number WP (C) No. 153/2005 on 7.1.2005 praying for his
regularisation. The said petition was disposed of by this Court vide the
judgment dated 22.9.2006 wherein it was held that his services could not
be regularised.
10.    It is submitted that aggrieved by the said judgment, the petitioner
filed Letter Patents Appeal bearing no. LPA 2036/2006, which was
ultimately dismissed as withdrawn. During the pendency of the said
appeal, the College on 17.10.2006 issued a letter to the petitioner,
whereby the services of the petitioner as Caretaker were terminated.
11.    It is also submitted that since joining the duties in July 1998, the
petitioner was serving the Respondent College to the satisfaction of the
higher authorities without any break and there was no cause of complaint
with regard to the work and conduct of the petitioner.
12.    It is submitted that such a termination order issued on the part of the
respondent was illegal, arbitrary, malafide, discriminatory, and unjust. It
is submitted that the order was passed notwithstanding the facts that the
post advertised initially was reserved for scheduled caste candidate and
for appointment on regular basis, and then terminating the services of the
petitioner after 8 years on the erroneous ground that the petitioner has not
acquired the qualification of learning maintenance of electricity and
sanitation and obtained the relevant certificates, even though he had
already acquired the said qualification, in violation of the settled position
in law and principles of equity, justice and good conscience and in
infringement of the legal and fundamental rights of the petitioner.
13.    Per Contra, learned counsel for the respondents vehemently
opposed the instant petition and the contentions made therein and
submitted that the petitioner in this writ petition has assailed the memo
dated 17.10.2006 whereby his services were terminated. It is submitted
that the petition is not maintainable as the petitioner was employed as a
Caretaker in the respondent College, and as such is a 'workman' as
defined in Section 2(s) of the Industrial Disputes Act while the
respondent College is an "industry" as defined in Section 2(j) of the
Industrial Disputes Act. The remedy provided under the Industrial
Disputes Act is an equally efficacious remedy.
14.    It is also submitted at the very outset that the controversy with
regard to his appointment prior to 3rd August 2005 is now barred by res
judicata. The petitioner had approached this Court by way of a Writ
Petition bearing number WP (C) No. 153/2005 on 7.1.2005 praying for
his regularisation. The said petition was disposed of vide the judgment
dated 22.9.2006 wherein it was held that his services could not be
regularised. The respondents therein were accordingly asked to take a
decision on the suitability of the petitioner to the post within a period of
two months. Aggrieved by the said judgment, the petitioner by way of
Letter Patents Appeal bearing no. LPA 2036/2006 approached a Division
Bench of this Court, which was ultimately dismissed as withdrawn.
15.    It is submitted that the petitioner was initially appointed vide letter
dated 21st July, 1998 on daily wages for a period of three months. On the
cessation of the said term of his appointment, he was re-appointed from
time to time vide appointment letters dated 5.10.1998, 3.4.1999,
and 1.10.2004.
16.    It is submitted that petitioner's appointment was pending selection
of a regular employee. Each such appointment was for a fixed period and
on ad-hoc basis, which is specified in each of the said appointment letters.
He was re-appointed as the post was required to be advertised again and
the selection was to take place.
17.    It is submitted that the said post was advertised in the Times of
India dated 26th April 2004. It is submitted that the petitioner in response
to the advertisement dated 26th April 2004 had applied for the post of
Caretaker. It is stated that a perusal of the said advertisement shows that
the post was a general post i.e. open for all category employees.
18.    It is submitted that the Selection Committee for the post of
Caretaker met on 31st July 2004 and found that the petitioner was found
lacking technical skills. The Committee recommended giving him one
year's time to learn the trade and improve his quality and the case will be
reviewed afterwards. The Chairperson of the Governing Body further
mentioned that "purely on compassionate ground we give him time to
improve".
19.    It is submitted that the Governing Body of the College, which is
also the Appointing Authority, met on 5th August 2004 and after taking
the recommendations of the Selection Committee decided to appoint Mr.
Dinesh Kumar purely on an ad-hoc basis and he was asked to undergo
training in electrical and sanitation within a period of one year.
20.    It is further submitted that a letter dated 10th August 2004 was
issued informing petitioner that he shall have to learn maintenance of
electricity and sanitation and obtain the relevant certificate. It is stated
that vide an earlier letter dated 03.08.2004, the petitioner was appointed
as an ad-hoc employee for a period of three months.
21.    The averment that the petitioner had acquired the said
qualifications before his appointment, is wrong. It is submitted that the
petitioner did not possess the requisite qualification. In any case, he had
not furnished any proof of his having acquired said qualification.
22.    It is submitted that the petitioner's certificate which was issued by
the Directorate of Technical Education Board, Delhi was considered by
the Selection Committee. The Selection Committee was of the opinion
that the petitioner did not possess the necessary qualifications. It is further
submitted that the certificate said to have been issued by ITI Shahdara,
Delhi was never deposited by the petitioner with the College. He had
never informed the College of his pursuing the said course and/or having
completed the said course.
23.    It is also submitted that the petitioner having joined the College
pursuant to the decision of the Selection Committee is barred from
challenging the said decision of the Selection Committee including with
regard to acquiring of his qualifications from Directorate of Technical
24.    It is stated that this Court, vide judgment dated 22.09.2006, granted
two months’ time to the College to decide about the suitability of the
petitioner. The Governing Body, in its meeting held on 12.10.2006,
considered the suitability of the petitioner for confirmation. After taking
into consideration that the petitioner had failed to obtain qualifications as
mentioned in the College letter dated 10.08.2004 and finding that he was
not suitable for confirmation decided to terminate his services with
immediate effect. The said decision of the Governing Body was
communicated to the petitioner.
25.    It is submitted that the Governing Body being the employer of the
petitioner was the sole judge to judge the suitability of the petitioner for
the post of Caretaker. It is not the case of the petitioner that his
termination is punitive.
26.    In view of the above submissions, it is submitted that the instant
petition is devoid of merits and this Court may be pleased to dismiss the
present petition.
27.    In Arguendo, it is nonetheless submitted that in case this Court
holds its opinion against the College then the following factor will be
required to be taken into consideration, while granting relief:
a. It is submitted that the petitioner was on probation. He thus
had no right to the post. The period of working on probation is
irrelevant as the College could not take any action in view of
order dated 07.01.2005 passed by this Court in W.P. (C) No.
153/2005 restraining the College from terminating his service.
b. In such cases, the courts have been granting compensation
instead of reinstatement. Reference may be made to the
judgments of Regional Manager LIC vs. Dinesh Singh (2020)
12 SCC 656, Deputy Executive Engineer vs. Kuber Bhai
Kangi Bhai (2019) 4 SCC 307, and District Development
Officers and Ors vs. Satish Kanti Lai Amrela(2018) 12 SCC
28.    It is further submitted that the Post of Caretaker has ceased to exist
after implementation of Pay Commissioner, it was decided by Govt. of
India to merge posts of Caretaker in the General Ministerial Cadre in the
corresponding scale. It is stated that the UGC also conveyed vide its letter
dated 02.04.2013 to merge existing posts of Caretaker in the Ministerial
Cadre, Executive Council of University of Delhi on 16.11.2013 resolved
to that effect and conveyed to the Colleges vide letter dated 7th January
2014 and the Governing Body of the College on 02.04.2015 resolved to
merge the post of Caretaker with Jr. Assistant. Amongst other work,
duties of erstwhile post of Caretaker are now the duties of Jr. Assistant
and are being performed by one of the Jr. Assistant.
29.    Heard learned counsels appearing on behalf of parties at length and
perused the record.
30.    Learned counsels for the respondents, at the outset, have
challenged the issue of maintainability of the instant petition. Therefore,
before delving into the substance of the petition, it is pertinent to refer to
the question of its maintainability, as has been contested.
31.    The challenge has been made inter alia on the following grounds:
(i) That the lisin question is barred by res judicata;
(ii) That the petitioner has approached this Court without
having availed the statutory remedy available; and
(iii) That there has been a considerable delay in filing the
instant writ petition.
32.    Dealing with the question of res judicata, two sub-contentions
arise - first, whether the principle can be applied to writ petitions, and if
yes, then the second issue is, whether the instant lisisbarred by the same.
33.    The doctrine of res judicata is a rule of prudence that is rooted in
public policy. Its rationale is based on the following maxims:
(i) Nemo Debet Lis Vaxari Pro Eadem Causa - meaning that
no man should be tormented twice for the same cause;
(ii) Interest Republicae Ut Sit FinisLitium- meaning that it is in
the interest of the State that there should be an end to a
(iii) Res Judicata Pro Veritate Occipitur- meaning that a
judicial decision must be accepted as correct.
34.    Therefore, the conclusiveness of judicial decisions ensures the final
determination of disputes qua the parties, and the protection of interest of
the parties as well as the state by avoiding multiplication of litigation.
35.    As regards the question of applicability of the doctrine to writ
petitions, reference can be made to the decision of the Constitution Bench
in Direct Recruit Class II Engineering Officers’ Association v. State of
Maharashtra &Ors. (1990) 2 SCC 715, wherein it was held as under:
“35...It is well established that the principles of res judicata are
applicable to writ petitions. The relief prayed for on behalf of
the petitioner in the present case is the same as he would have,
in the event of his success, obtained in the earlier writ petition
before the High Court. The petitioner in reply contended that
since the special leave petition before this Court was dismissed
in limine without giving any reason, the order cannot be relied
upon for a plea of res judicata. The answer is that it is not the
order of this Court dismissing the special leave petition which is
being relied upon; the plea of res judicata has been pressed on
the basis of the High Court’s judgment which became final after
the dismissal of the special leave petition. In similar situation a
Constitution Bench of this Court in Daryao v. State of UP, AIR
1961 SC 1457, held that where the High Court dismisses a writ
petition under Article 226 of the Constitution after hearing the
matter on the merits, a subsequent petition in the Supreme
Court under Article 32 on the same facts and for the same
reliefs filed by the same parties will be barred by the general
principle of res judicata. The binding character of judgments of
courts of competent jurisdiction is in essence a part of the rule
of law on which the administration of justice, so much
emphasised by the Constitution, is founded and a judgment of
the High Court under Article 226 passed after a hearing on the
merits must bind the parties till set aside in appeal as provided
by the Constitution and cannot be permitted to be circumvented
by a petition under Article 32...”
36.    Thus, the principle is clear that res judicata is applicable even in
writ petitions. However, the essentials of res judicata must be met in
order to be made applicable to the case in question.
37.    Before going into the second sub-contention, it is pertinent to visit
the jurisprudence on res judicata. Section 11 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908, reads as under:
“11. Res Judicata: No Court shall try any suit or issue in which
the matter directly and substantially in issue has been directly
and substantially in issue in a former suit between the same
parties, or between parties under whom they or any of them
claim, litigating under the same title, in a Court competent to
try such subsequent suit or the suit in which such issue has been
subsequently raised, and has been heard and finally decided by
Explanation IV.-- Any matter which might and ought to have
been made ground of defence or attack in such former suit shall
be deemed to have been a matter directly and substantially in
issue in such suit.
Explanation V.-- Any relief claimed in the plaint, which is not
expressly granted by the decree, shall for the purposes of this
section, be deemed to have been refused.
Explanation VI.-- Where persons litigate bona fide in respect of
a public right or of a private right claimed in common for
themselves and others, all persons interested in such right shall,
for the purposes of this section, be deemed to claim under the
persons so litigating . […]
Explanation VIII.-- An issue heard and finally decided by a
Court of limited jurisdiction, competent to decide such issue,
shall operate as res judicata in a subsequent suit,
notwithstanding that such Court of limited jurisdiction was not
competent to try such subsequent suit or the suit in which such
issue has been subsequently raised.]”
38.   What essentially emerges from a bare reading of the provision is
that in order to attract the principles of res judicata, the following
ingredients must be fulfilled:
(i) The matter must have been directly and substantially in
issue in the former suit;
(ii) The matter must be heard and finally decided by the Court
(iii) The former suit must be between the same parties or
between parties under whom they or any of them claim,
litigating under the same title; and
(iv) The Court in which the former suit was instituted is
competent to try the subsequent suit or the suit in which such
issue has been subsequently raised.
39.    Applying the same to the instant case, what is observed is that the
parties in the instant petition were impleaded even in the previous
petition, there is also no doubt that the Court was competent to adjudicate
the instant lisas well and the matter therein was heard and finally decided.
However, regarding the condition that the matter must have been directly
and substantially in issue in the former petition is not fulfilled. The issue
in the earlier writ petition was limited to the question of regularisation of
the petitioner, and pending appeal the termination order that is the root of
the instant petition was carried out, therefore the argument of the instant
petition being barred by res judicata holds no ground.
40.    Coming to the second contention regarding whether an alternate
remedy is a bar to the entertainment of Writ Petition by the High Court, it
is settled law that in the ordinary course, the High Court would not
exercise its writ jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution if an
effective and efficacious alternate remedy is available. However, it is also
established that the existence of an alternate remedy does not by itself bar
the High Court from exercising its jurisdiction in certain contingencies.
41.    In the landmark case of Whirlpool Corporation. v. Registrar of
Trade Marks (1998) 8 SCC 1, the Hon’ble Supreme Court had held as
“15. Under Article 226 of the Constitution, the High Court,
having regard to the facts of the case, has a discretion to
entertain or not to entertain a writ petition. But the High Court
has imposed upon itself certain restrictions one of which is that
if an effective and efficacious remedy is available, the High
Court would not normally exercise its jurisdiction. But the
alternative remedy has been consistently held by this Court not
to operate as a bar in at least three contingencies, namely,
where the writ petition has been filed for the enforcement of any
of the Fundamental Rights or where there has been a violation
of the principle of natural justice or where the order or
proceedings are wholly without jurisdiction or the vires of an
Act is challenged.”
42.    In the case of Radha Krishan Industries v. State of Himachal
Pradesh2021 SCC OnLine SC 334, the Hon’ble Supreme Court has
reiterated and summarized the principles governing the exercise of writ
jurisdiction by the High Court in the presence of an alternate remedy. The
Hon’ble Supreme Court has observed:
“28. The principles of law which emerge are that:
(i) The power under Article 226 of the Constitution to issue
writs can be exercised not only for the enforcement of
fundamental rights, but for any other purpose as well;
(ii) The High Court has the discretion not to entertain a writ
petition. One of the restrictions placed on the power of the High
Court is where an effective alternate remedy is available to the
(iii) Exceptions to the rule of alternate remedy arise where (a)
the writ petition has been filed for the enforcement of a
fundamental right protected by Part III of the Constitution; (b)
there has been a violation of the principles of natural justice;
(c) the order or proceedings are wholly without jurisdiction; or
(d) the vires of a legislation is challenged;
(iv) An alternate remedy by itself does not divest the High Court
of its powers under Article 226 of the Constitution in an
appropriate case though ordinarily, a writ petition should not
be entertained when an efficacious alternate remedy is provided
(v) When a right is created by a statute, which itself prescribes
the remedy or procedure for enforcing the right or liability,
resort must be had to that particular statutory remedy before
invoking the discretionary remedy under Article 226 of the
Constitution. This rule of exhaustion of statutory remedies is a
rule of policy, convenience and discretion; and
(vi) In cases where there are disputed questions of fact, the
High Court may decide to decline jurisdiction in a writ petition.
However, if the High Court is objectively of the view that the
nature of the controversy requires the exercise of its writ
jurisdiction, such a view would not readily be interfered with.”
43.    Therefore, it is crystallized that existence of an alternate remedy is
no bar to entertaining the writ petition by the High Court in exercise of its
jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution. Non-entertainment of
the writ petitions in such cases is a manifestation of self-restraint by the
High Court to avoid the exercise of extraordinary powers in each and
every case at the throw of a hat, and to reserve the same for cases where
the interests of justice and the Court’s conscience requires them to be
exercised. In the instant case, having considered the peculiar facts, this
Court is not inclined to dismiss the case on the basis of the existence of
alternative remedy.
44.    This Court is also of the opinion that in a writ petition, delay/laches
or mere technicalities should not be the basis for denying of relief and
dismissal of the petition. Furthermore, the instant petition has stayed
pending before this Court since 2009, and as such giving consideration to
the substantial time passed, in the opinion of this Court, it is neither
appropriate nor in the interest of justice to reject the petition on
technicalities or minor defects.
45.    In view of the aforesaid, the contentions qua maintainability and
the arguments raised by the respondents in their support do not find
favour with this Court and are accordingly rejected.
Challenge to the Termination Order
46.    The only question that now remains for adjudication in the instant
petitions is whether there is any irregularity or illegality in the
termination order dated 17.10.2006 passed by the Respondent College
terminating the services of the petitioner as Caretaker.
47.    This Court has had a conjoint reading of the petition, counter
affidavit and the rejoinder thereto as well as perused the earlier order of
this Court dated 22.9.2006 in WP (C) No. 153/2005 filed by the petitioner
for regularisation of his services as Caretaker.
48.   The relevant contents of the impugned termination order are
reproduced hereunder:
You had filed a writ petition, being WP(C) No. 153/2005, in the
High Court of Delhi, which was decided vide order/judgment
dated 22nd September 2006. As per the said judgment you were
to be treated as having been appointed on probation and the
Governing Body of the college was allowed two months time to
decide about your suitability to the post and whether to
continue you in service.
The matter has been considered by the Governing Body in its
meeting held on 12th October 2006, resolution Number 2006-
178. I regret to inform you that the Governing Body did not find
you suitable for confirmation. The Governing Body further
observed that you have failed to acquire the qualification as
mentioned in our letter dated 10th August 2004.
In view of the aforesaid, please note that your services stand
terminated with immediate effect.
Even though the termination of your services does not amount
to retrenchment yet without prejudice to our rights and
contentions we are enclosing herewith our Cheque No. 158774
dated 17th October 2006 (Drawn on State Bank of India, Anand
Vihar, Delhi) in your favour for Rs.11731/- (Eleven Thousand
Seven Hundred and Thirty One only) to cover retrenchment
compensation and one month's salary in lieu of notice.
49.    From the perusal of the facts of the case, it emerges that Dinesh
Kumar, the petitioner herein, was employed as a Caretaker with the
Respondent No. 2 College. The College had issued an advertisement in
the Times of India on 26.3.1997 inviting applications for various teaching
and non-teaching posts. One of the posts notified was for “Caretaker (1)
(Rs. 950-1400), (SC)”. The qualifications for the said post were
prescribed as “matriculation with some experience of maintenance of
Electrical, Sanitary, Water installations and Supervision of normal
building repairs.” The petitioner applied to the said post through his
application dated 2.4.1997 addressed to the Principal of the College.
However, as is clear from the record that pursuant to the same
advertisement, there was no selection carried out and the advertisement
lapsed after the expiry of 18 months.
50.    The College thereafter issued amemorandum bearing number
CASW/PF/DK/98/296(A) dated 21.7.1998 appointing the petitioner to
the said position on daily wages for a period of three months. This was
followed by issuance of a series of memos whereby his appointment was
continued from time to time by ad-hoc appointment letters until 2004.
51.    On 2.10.2002, the College again advertised a call for applications
to certain non-teaching posts, wherein, one of the posts notified was for
“Caretaker (l)”. The petitioner applied to the said position through his
application dated 8.10.2002.
52.    On 26.4.2004, the petitioner sent a letter, by registered post to the
Principal of the College, requesting for regularisation of his services as
well as for giving him annual increments. On the same date, the College
advertised a call for applications for recruitment to certain teaching and
non-teaching positions. One of the positions notified was “Caretaker (1)”.
The petitioner applied to the said position through his application dated
28.4.2004, and his candidature was considered by the Selection
Committee. The Selection Committee came to the following conclusion:
"No other SC/ST/OBC candidate was suitable for the post. Mr
Dinesh Kumar (SC) was found lacking technical skill. The
committee recommends to give him one year's time to learn the
trade and improve his quality. The case will be reviewed
afterwards."
53.    Subsequently, in the meeting of the Governing Body of the College
dated 5.8.2004, it was noted that for appointment to the post of Caretaker
no one was recommended for regular appointment but in the case of
petitioner, it was recommended to appoint him on purely ad-hoc basis and
he be asked to undergo training in electricity and sanitation within a
period of one year. The recommendation was accordingly approved. The
College issued an OfficeOrder dated 10.8.2004, whereby the petitioner
was intimated about the said requirement to be fulfilled within the span of
one year.
54.    The petitioner approached this Court by way of a Writ Petition
bearing number WP (C) No. 153/2005 on 7.1.2005 praying for his
regularisation. The said petition was disposed of by this Court vide the
judgment dated 22.9.2006 wherein it was held that his services could not
be regularisedbecause of the fact that the appointment of the petitioner
was not pursuant to the advertisement dated 26.3.1997, and therefore
regularisation could not be made for ad-hoc appointments. The
respondents therein were accordingly asked to take a decision, on the
suitability of the petitioner to the post and whether to continue him in
service, within a period of two months.
55.    Aggrieved by the said judgment, the petitioner by way of Letter
Patents Appeal bearing no. LPA 2036/2006 approached a Division Bench
of this Court, which was ultimately dismissed as withdrawn. During the
pendency of the said appeal, the College on 17.10.2006 issued a letter to
the petitioner, whereby the services of the petitioner as Caretaker were
terminated.
56.    Industrial Disputes Act is a self-contained umbrella legislation that
covers the panorama of employer-employee issues in the industrial space.
As such, the benefits of the welfare legislation must be utilised by the
aggrieved employees. Although alternative remedy is not a bar, the trend
of directly approaching the High Court by way of a writ petition without
having availed the statutory remedies, needs to be checked and frowned
upon.
57.    In the instant case, the remedies under Industrial Disputes Act,
1947 have not been availed by the petitioner before approaching this
Court. However, in light of the peculiar facts and circumstances of the
case, as well as considering the fact that the petition was filed long back
in 2009 and has remained pending for adjudication before this Court, the
instant petition is not being dismissed merely on the ground of existence
of alternate remedy.
58.     Upon having perused the records of the case and having analysed
the facts of the case at hand, it emerged that the petitioner did not meet
the qualification criteria and necessary certification. Despite the
opportunities granted, he failed to undergo the requisite professional or
skill-based training and failed to furnish the certificate for the same. As
such, an employee on daily wages or appointed on an ad-hoc basis, as a
matter of right, cannot claim to be employed for a position to which one
is ineligible.
59.     Additionally, as per the records, notwithstanding the fact that the
termination of his services did not amount to retrenchment, the
Respondent College issued a Cheque bearing No. 158774 dated 17th
October 2006 (Drawn on State Bank of India, Anand Vihar, Delhi) in the
favour of petitioner for a sum of Rs.11,731/- to cover retrenchment
compensation and one month’s salary in lieu of notice.
60.     Therefore, no cogent reasons are found whatsoever, to impeach the
legality of impugned termination order. Hence, in light of the foregoing
discussion and analysis, there are no cogent reasons to entertain the
petition and allow the prayers sought therein. In the aforesaid terms, the
instant petition, being devoid of merits, stands dismissed. Pending
applications, if any, also stand disposed of.
61.   It is made clear that any observations made herein shall have no
bearings whatsoever on the merits of the case during any other
proceedings before any other Court.
62.   The judgment be uploaded on the website forthwith.