1. In this petition, preferred under article 227 of the
Constitution of India, an issue broaches as to the
limitation of and latitude for an appellate court in an
appeal under Order 43 rule 1(r) of the Code of Civil
Procedure 1908, (CPC in short), against an order of
grant/refusal of a temporary injunction relief by a civil
court. To put it more bluntly, issue is whether an appellate
court can, in purported exercise of its jurisdiction under
Order 43 rule 1(r) CPC, sidestep main cause of a civil suit
and the appealable order passed therein, and self-generate
a new situation to deal with.
2.     As the facts of the present case present such a
scenario, so this Court has taken a call to examine the
case   in   exercise   of  its  jurisdictional   authority    and
responsibility under article 227 of the Constitution of India
while being fully aware of the eternal enunciation coded in
the article 227 of the Constitution of India which is meant
to keep the subordinate courts/tribunal within the bounds
of their jurisdiction and authority, and consequently to nip
the reported extra-judicial transgression on the part of a
court/tribunal before it repeats into a tendency.
3.       With the aforeset preface, the facts attending the
case are set out for undertaking supervisory scrutiny.
4.      The petitioner, as being the plaintiff, files a civil suit
on 21st April 2022 before the Court of Sub Judge,
Anantnag     for   seeking    a  decree   of   declaration    and
injunction. The petitioner’s right to sue related to his
purported status as being the President of the Municipal
Committee, Bijbehara. The sole defendant named in the
suit is Executive Officer, Municipal Executive Committee,
Bijbehara, Anantnag, Kashmir, the respondent no. 1
5.      The purported cause of action for the petitioner to
file   the    suit    is    issuance     of    a    notice     no.
MC/Bij/G/2022/1033-39 dated 20th April 2022 by the
Committee Bijbehara, for the purpose of convening a
special meeting under rule 27 of the Procedure & Business
Conduct Rules/Byelaws 2021 with respect to a purported
resolution for motion of No-confidence alleged to be signed
by nine out of sixteen elected Municipality Committee
members of the Municipal Committee, Bijbehara. The
Municipal Committee, Bijbehara is in last year of its five-
year tenure. The petitioner alleged procedural deficiencies
and manipulation attending both the resolution and no-
confidence moved against him and the communication
issued by the sole defendant the Executive Officer,
6.       The trial court of Sub Judge, Anantnag, vide its
order dated 21st April 2022 came to stay, ad interim, the
operation     of     the     said    Communication        no.
MC/Bij/G/2022/1033-39 dated 20th April, 2022 of the
Committee, Bijbehara read with the resolution bearing No-
confidence. It is pertinent to mention here that the elected
members of the Municipal Committee Bijbehara who had
moved the purported resolution for No-confidence against
the petitioner were not named as the defendants in the
7.     Said ad interim order of stay dated 21ist April, 2022
of the Court of Sub Judge, Anantnag came to be
questioned by the respondents 2 to 10, who then were not
figuring as defendants in the suit, before this Court in a
petition  CM(M)    66/2022     under   article 227   of   the
Constitution of India which came to be disposed of vide an
order dated 27th April, 2022 with a direction in terms
whereof the respondents 2 to 10, as being the petitioners
in said CM(M) 66/2022, were ordered impleaded as
defendants 2 to 10 in the suit of the petitioner, along with
original  sole  defendant    Executive     Officer, Municipal
Executive    Committee     Bijbehara,     for   enabling   the
respondents 2 to 10 contest the suit and temporary
injunction application of the petitioner.
8.       Upon becoming as the defendants 2 to 10, the
respondents 2 to 10 came to pose challenge through their
joint written statement and objections filed in answer to
the suit and the temporary injunction application of the
petitioner. The respondents 2 to 10 in their written
statement maintained not only preliminary objections to
the maintainability of the suit by reference to section 44 of
the Municipal Act, 2000 and others as well but also on the
merits of the case as well. The respondents 2 to 10 in their
written statement stated that it was only upon the failure
of the petitioner to act in convening the meeting for fresh
election that the original defendant Executive Officer,
Municipal Executive Committee Bijbehara, had stepped in,
by    compulsion     of   statutory    provisions,    with his
communication challenged in the suit by the petitioner.
Thus, the respondents 2 to 10 defended the legality and
validity of the exercise attending their resolution for no
confidence motion against the petitioner.
9.        The learned Sub Judge, Anantnag came to pass
final order dated 26th May 2022 thereby dismissing the
temporary injunction application of the petitioner, and also
vacating the interim direction of stay of the communication
no. MC/Bij/G/2022/1033-39 dated 20th April, 2022 of the
defendant no.1 the Executive Officer, Municipal Executive
Committee Bijbehara with a further direction to the
defendant no. 1 the Executive Officer Municipal Executive
Committee, Bijbehara, to exercise the process of No-
confidence motion strictly in terms of the provisions of the
Municipal Act, 2000 and the Rules thereunder.
10.         This Order dated 26th May, 2022 of the learned
Sub Judge, Anantnag came to be challenged in an appeal
filed on 27th May 2022 by the petitioner before the lower
appellate court of the Additional District Judge, Anantnag.
It is at this stage of litigation that the actual course of legal
proceedings envisaged to be carried out by the appellate
court acting under the spell of Order 43 rule 1(r) CPC came
to take, or rather taken, to a different course by the court
of the Additional District Judge, Anantnag as if the trial
court’s exercise in hearing and adjudicating the temporary
injunction application of the petitioner and disposing it of
by labor of an order dated 26th May, 2022 was of no
interest and importance to the court of the Additional
District Judge, Anantnag as it was willing to charter a new
course of its own fancy to be nursed by the purported
choice/consent of the respondents 2 to 10 and the
11.         Before proceeding to dwell upon the course of
action so resorted to by the Court of Additional District
Judge, Anantnag, it is in the fitness of the situation to
mention that being seized of an appeal under Order 43 rule
1(r) CPC it was mandated upon the appellate court of
Additional District Judge, Anantnag to hear the same and
dispose it on its merits in conformity with the principle of
judicial hierarchy and domain of civil courts. The intended
outcome of the appeal so filed by the petitioner before the
court of Additional District Judge, Anantnag would have
been either the order impugned of the Court of Sub Judge,
Anantnag getting set aside or confirmed/varied/altered by
an appellate order of the Court of Additional District
Judge, Anantnag following the well settled legal principle
that an appeal against an order of discretion is an appeal
on principle affording very limited scope of examination of
order passed under order 39 rule 1 & 2 CPC in granting or
refusing an interlocutory injunction relief.
12.      While hearing the appeal filed by the petitioner, in
terms of the submissions made from the petitioner’s as
well as the respondents 2 to 10’s end about which
reference is gatherable from a perusal of an order dated
11th June, 2022 and which exercise if taken to its logical
end would have resulted in disposal of the appeal as
warranted in law, but instead the Court of Additional
District Judge, Anantnag allowed itself a distraction and
take a detour. The Additional District Judge, Anantnag
relieves, in fact abandons, the exercise of examining the
submissions so made by the parties on the merits of the
case in appeal and examining the trial court order, and
resorts to become self-imposed supervisory authority of the
Municipal Committee, Bijbehara by not only in calling
for the official record from the office of the Municipal
Committee, Bijbehara but also to make both the petitioner
and the respondents 2 to 10 to undertake a fresh process
& exercise for resolution/motion of no-confidence. This
gets done under the pretext of an application dated 6 th
June 2022 preferred by the respondents 2 to 10 in the said
13.    In terms of their said application dated 06/06/2022,
the respondents 2 to 10 solicited the Additional District
Judge, Anantnag to appoint a judicial officer for monitoring
the special meeting to be convened for voting on the no
confidence motion against the petitioner for ensuring that
the legal provisions governing the matter in question are
followed and adhered to.
14.      To this application of the respondents 2 to 10, by
reference to a purported no objection on the part of the
counsel    representing   the   petitioner  in  appeal,  the
Additional District Judge, Anantnag ventured in the extra-
judicial mode, which is reflected from order dated 11th
June, 2022 in which after having heard the full dressed
submissions of the parties on the merits of the case so as
to be in an enabling position to deliver the judgment with
respect to the legality and sustainability of the order
impugned, the Additional District Judge, Anantnag instead
opts to nominate a Sub Judge, serving as Secretary,
District Legal Services Authority (DLAS), Anantnag on fees
of Rs. 20,000/- payable by the respondents 2 to 10 to
supervise laying of a new No-confidence Motion by the
respondents 2 to 10 against the petitioner before the
Secretary Municipal Committee Bijbehara and to be taken
up for discussion on 20th June 2022. Thus, a serving
judicial officer, paid by the litigants, came to be placed in
service of the litigants by the Additional District Judge,
Anantnag without bothering to mention it on record as to
under which provision of the CPC and the Civil Courts Act,
1977 Svt., such a venture was contemplated and carried
out by the Additional District Judge, Anantnag and by
which    authority   in  and    of  law   a Sub-Judge    was
commanded to act as supervisor in the internal political
matters of a Municipal Committee.
15.      The Sub Judge, so appointed as supervisor, came
to carry out the diktat so issued to him and submitted his
report dated 20th June 2022 to the Additional District
Judge, Anantnag. From the perusal of the said report of
the Sub Judge, as being the Supervisor, it reflects that
said judicial officer not only acted as conductor of the
meeting right from reading the purported no confidence
motion moved afresh purportedly on the part of the
respondents no. 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8 & 9 plus one more but also
investigator and on spot judge also. The alleged meeting on
20th June 2022 is said to have been requisitioned vide a
notice dated 18th June 2022 issued by the Executive
Officer, Municipal Committee, Bijbehara and the purported
no-confidence motion against the petitioner is reported to
have been carried out by vote of 8 against 6.
16.      Borrowing reliance from the said report of the Sub
Judge as Supervisor, the Additional District Judge,
Anantnag came to conduct fresh hearing of the matter in
extenso and to pass a 30-page impugned judgment dated
20/07/2022 bearing a declaration that the petitioner has
lost majority in the Municipal Committee Bijbehara and
has no right to hold the office of the President, and then
passing on a writ like directive to the Executive Officer,
Municipal Committee Bijbehara to proceed as per sub rule
6, 7 & 8 of Rule 27 of Jammu & Kashmir Municipality
(Procedure and Conduct of Business) Bye Laws 2021. The
Additional District Judge, Anantnag parted with the
judgment with wordings “appeal disposed of and be
consigned to records after due compilation”. It is lost to
imagination as to what fate the trial court order dated 21st
April 2022 and suit of the petitioner was consigned by the
Additional    District Judge,   Anantnag    vide  his   said
17.       Now, caught in this factual backdrop, this Court
finds itself pondering as to which role has been served by
the Additional District Judge, Anantnag whether as an
amicus curia of the parties to the disputes or a judge of the
cause in appeal before him. This Court is no doubt
whatsoever that the Additional District Judge, Anantnag
personalized the jurisdiction of the court and felt free to
abandon the cause in appeal before him so as to be a
mend maker for the Municipal Committee, Bijbehara's
political state of affairs.
18.       Facts speak aloud from the record of the case that
the Additional District Judge, Anantnag lost sight of the
very jurisdiction, lest that of its bounds, in which the
Court    of   Additional    District  Judge,  Anantnag,   was
approached in appeal with respect to the matter. Once the
trial court of Sub Judge, Anantnag had, by examining the
prima facie nature of the petitioner’s case, the factor of
balance of convenience and irreparable injury, refused
temporary injunction relief in favor of the petitioner leaving
the Communication no. MC/Bij/G/2022/1033-39 dated
20/04/2022        of   the     Executive  Officer,  Municipal
Committee, Bijbehara to run its due course to its logical
end, then what was meant for and expected of the
appellate court of the Additional District Judge, Anantnag
to do was simply to adjudge the legality of the said trial
court order and pass its judgment thereupon leaving rest
of things to proceed on their own course of nature.
19.        The learned Counsel for the respondents 2 to 10
has, with all vehemence at his command, tried to impress
upon this Court that the end shall justify the means
adopted by the Additional District Judge, Anantnag as the
outcome of the indulgence granted by the Additional
District Judge, Anantnag has been to pave the way for
removal of the petitioner as president of the Municipal
Committee Bijbehara and re-election of the new president
for the remainder of the duration of the Municipal
Committee. The learned Counsel for the respondents 2 to
10 has pressed into service pleas of all hues right from the
court serving the democratic restoration of the Municipal
Committee, the no-objection of the petitioner’s counsel to
the measure resorted to by the Additional District Judge,
Anantnag resulting in denuding the petitioner any locus to
petition this Court under article 227 COI to upset the
exercise carried out by judicial intervention, the restricted
scope for this Court to intervene under article 227 of the
COI in the light of the pronouncement of the judgment in
the case of Shalini Shyam Shetty vs Rajindra Shanker,
20.       The submissions made by the learned counsel for
the respondents 2 to 10 lay a very tempting trap but loose
the bearings in the face of pointed query of this court as to
wherefrom Order 43 rule 1(r) CPC did the Additional
District Judge Anantnag draw the jurisdiction to create a
new script viz a viz the order of the trial court in appeal.
The learned Counsel for the respondents 2 to 10 has
argued that the powers of an appellate court are co-
extensive with that of the trial court qua a civil suit as
provided under the scheme of CPC and that being so the
course of action adopted by the Additional District Judge,
Anantnag can safely be salvaged. For sailing this plea, the
learned Counsel refers to section 107 (1) & (2) and 108
CPC read with Order 43 rule 2 CPC which provides that
rules of Order 41 shall apply, so far as may be, to appeal
from Orders. This Court is taking due notice of said two
sections read with Order 43 rule 2 CPC which read as
“Section 107: Powers of Appellate Court
(1) Subject to such conditions and limitations as may
be prescribed, an Appellate Court shall have power: -
(a) to determine a case finally;
(c) to frame issues and refer them for trial;
(d) to take additional evidence or to require such
evidence to be taken.
(2) Subject as aforesaid, the Appellate Court shall have
the same powers and shall perform as nearly as may
be the same duties as are conferred and imposed by
this Code on Courts of original jurisdiction in respect of
suits instituted therein.
Section 108: Procedure in appeals from appellate
decrees and orders
The provisions of this part relating to appeals
from original decrees shall, so far as may be, apply to
(a) from appellate decrees, and
(b) from orders made under this Code or under any
special or local law in which a different procedure is
not provided.
The rules of Order XLI shall apply, so far as may
be, to appeals from orders.”
21       Even if, for sake of saying, said submission of the
learned Counsel for the respondents 2 to 10 is accepted as
correct, then also same cannot be read to enable an
appellate court to possess a power to mutate the very
script of the suit before the trial court and in the garb of
co-extensive nature of power of an appellate court viz a viz
the trial court in relation to a suit create a new fact
situation alien to the original lis and carry forward its own
perception-based outcome to a given civil suit. That will be
nothing but an act of perversion of jurisdiction as has
happened in the present case at the hands of the
Additional District Judge, Anantnag. Everybody in the
matter that is the learned Counsel of both sides, the trial
court, the appellate court of Additional District Judge,
Anantnag and lastly even this Court are at loss to know &
show from the impugned judgment of the Additional
District Judge, Anantnag as to what has been done to the
trial court’s impugned order and labor invested to pass the
said order which was taken in appeal, and also the
paralysis of the civil suit lying on the file of the civil
court to nobody’s understanding as to what disposal is
left to be given to the suit.
22.       In fact, at the best, in case the Additional District
Judge, Anantnag found himself arrested with a concern to
become the benefactor of the Municipal Committee,
Bijbehara for its democratic set up on the asking of the
parties, then the Additional District Judge, Anantnag
ought to have re-directed the contesting parties to the trial
court for working out their purported consensus to affect
the desired outcome, that too, if possible and legally
tenable, in the fitness of facts of the case because a civil
court is also not meant to be a fishing and phishing forum
for litigants to come for pleasure litigation.
23         However, it is a misplaced understanding of the
learned Counsel of the respondents 2 to 10 as to the
nature of appellate jurisdiction in the matter dealing with
an appealable order the basis of passing which is
discretion of the trial court. Such species of appeal, as held
in para 14 of Wander Limited vs Antox India Private
Limited (1990 (Supp.1) SCC 727) are acknowledged to be
an Appeal on Principle affording an appellate court so
much an empowerment to examine only if the discretion
has been exercised arbitrarily, or capriciously or perversely
by the court below or where the court below has ignored
the settled principles of law regulating grant of refusal of
interlocutory injunction. Instead of self-confining itself
within the said limitation of appellate level examination,
the Additional District Judge, Anantnag usurped the
occasion to act a political manager for the affairs of the
Municipal Committee, Bijbehara and the stake holders
thereof. The indulgence, so lend, by the Additional District
Judge, Anantnag not only undermined and wasted the
work/order of the trial court but also projects and portrays
a common perception that appellate level litigation can be
a speculative venture amenable to any end/outcome
depending upon the individual disposition & propensity of
an appellate judge at a given point of time rather than
judicial disposition of the judge and judicial disquisition of
the matter.
24.         The context in which an appellate court, while
hearing an appeal from an appealable order passed in a
civil suit, can by reference to section 108 CPC afford itself
a position to exercise power envisaged under section 107
CPC is not available in the present case by any stretch of
claim, so this court is not getting into examination of that
aspect which is only of academic interest viz the present
25.       In the backdrop of the aforesaid factual and legal
evaluation and discussion, the mandate of the Hon’ble
Supreme Court of India’s judgment in Shalini Shyam
Shetty case (2010 (8) SCC 329) is fully available to this
Court and applicable in this case that in order to keep the
tribunals and courts subordinate to it, within the bounds
of their authority, a High Court has the jurisdiction of
superintendence to interfere and in an appropriate cases
the power can be exercised suo motu as well. When it is
recognized for and expected from a High Court to exercise
its power of superintendence by standard of high degree of
judicial discipline, then surely the court of Additional
District Judge, Anantnag in exercise of its limited appellate
jurisdiction against an interlocutory order of refusal of
injunction ought to have kept itself to the highest degree of
judicial discipline which was to hear the appeal and
dispose it of leaving for the parties and the court below to
deal with the rest. In fact, this Court is in a state of
disbelief that the Additional District Judge, Anantnag
made a subordinate judicial officer to get paid with rupees
twenty thousand by one of the parties to the dispute and
carry out and conduct the No-confidence motion meeting
in which the No-confidence motion was laid by the very
same respondents from whom the fee of rupees twenty
thousand was made payable to the judge so appointed
leaving the judge as a privy to matter.
26.        This Court finds itself posed with a call through
this petition which is either to sanctify the administration
of justice by the court of law or to salvage the political
administration of a Municipal Committee. Without any iota
and moment of hesitation, this Court is taking the first call
to sanctify the administration of justice and to sensitize the
courts and judges to follow judiciously the judicial
discipline and decorum in dealing and deciding the cases
within the bounds of their respective defined jurisdiction
rather than defining their own jurisdiction to dispose the
cases thereupon. Judicial Officers/Judges irrespective of
their hierarchical placement     must always bear in mind
that by being the individuals in the Judicial Institution for
the sake of administration of justice, they are not meant to
individualize   the    Judicial  Institution  exposing    the
administration of justice to be bound by the individual’s
whim and fancy.
27.       Thus, this petition is allowed not by the fact that
the petitioner has made out a case for the indulgence of
this court but because the court has found out a cause in
the case through the petition. The impugned order dated
20/07/2022 on file no. 52 titled Majid Nabi Khan vs
and the proceedings related there with and to the passing
of the said order, of the Court of Additional District Judge,
Anantnag are set at naught by holding the same as null
and void ab initio. The District Judge, Anantnag is directed
to recall the appeal on the file no. 52 of 2022 from the
Court of Additional District Judge, Anantnag and to hear
and adjudicate it by himself within 30 days from the date
of receipt of copy of this judgment. Failure to decide the
matter within time given would be condoned only upon
show of reasons on record by the Principal District Judge,
Anantnag. Further, it is directed that the Principal District
Judge, Anantnag shall call upon Mr. Mir Wajahat, the Sub
Judge (Secretary DLSA) Anantnag to remit the fee of
rupees twenty thousand (Rs.20,000/-) if received from and
paid by the respondents 2 to 10 and the same shall then
be returned to the respondents 2 to 10 against receipt.
28.    A copy of this judgment be sent and notified to the
Principal District Judge, Anantnag by the Registrar
Judicial Srinagar of this Court at the earliest. Parties are
also at liberty to seek and secure a certified copy of this
judgment and place it before the Principal District Judge,
Anantnag for notice and action in accordance therewith.
29.       Disposed of.
Whether the judgment is speaking     :   Yes/No
Whether the judgment is reportable   :   Yes/No