APPLICATION U/S 438 CR.P.C. No. - 5397 of 2020
Counsel for Applicant :- Ajay Kumar Vashistha
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Heard Mr. Ajay Kumar Vashistha, learned counsel for the applicant
and Mr. Akhilesh Kumar Srivastava, learned A.G.A. appearing for
Perusal of the record shows that this Court after hearing the
submissions advanced by learned counsel for the applicant granted
an interim protection on 09.09.2020 allowing two weeks' time for
the State to file counter affidavit.
Submission germane to the matter is that husband and father-in-
law of the deceased have already been acquitted by the court
below. To substantiate the said fact, learned counsel appearing for
the applicant passed on a certified copy of the acquittal order,
which has been returned to him, after perusal. Applicant before
this Court is mother-in-law of the deceased.
Acquittal of two accused persons by court below and interim
protection to applicant by this Court in the offence under Sections
498A, 304-B, 201 IPC and 3/4 D.P. Act required attention of this
Court to traverse to the pleadings of both anticipatory bail as well
as counter affidavit closely to reach at a final conclusion in
applicant's matter.
Bare perusal of reply given to the averments of anticipatory bail
application in counter affidavit appears to be perfunctory and
cavalier in manner as also bereft of any cogent or coherent factual
and legal foundation as the Government Counsel Sri I.P.S.
Rajpoot, AGA-I, (AOR-A/I-0034/2012) who drafted the affidavit
did not hesitate in proving the applicant to be of criminal mind
without adducing any substance in support thereof. Excerpt of the
averments in paragraph - 10 of counter affidavit says "लल ककन पपररर नन
अकभययकप आपरपरधक पववरत कक मकहलप हह". Though no document is annexed.
Remaining reply in entire counter affidavit rests on denial to each
fact mentioned in anticipatory bail application. Contents of counter
affidavit reflects the impetuousness of Government Counsel as
well as the deponent where each fact is negated sans due care
constricting the role of the applicant as per their whims. This Court
cannot turn a blind eye to such imprecise conduct of the deponent
as well as learned Government Counsel brought in the counter
affidavit. The reply quietly appears to be a transcription of
parawise narratives sent by the concerned department.
Surprisingly, most of the paragraphs i.e. paragraph Nos. 3 to 12 of
the counter affidavit are sworn to be verified on the basis of
record, however, nothing is brought on record in support thereof.
It is a staggering irony that deponent of counter affidavit, who is
Deputy Superintendent of Police/ Circle Officer, Sahawar, District
Kasganj, believed himself to be empowered with sanction to
author a certificate of propensity of a person without any cogent
has marked Azadi-ka-Amrit Mahotsav terming it to be 'Amrit Kaal'
with prospective vision in welfare of citizens of the country,
however, Police Administration feels more comfortable to remain
with colonial structure. Such attitude of functionaries who are
instrumental to safeguard the public at large diminishes the
ingrained belief over the System and plays a role in impeding the
goal set out to ascend to new heights of prosperity.
A bare reading of the averments in counter affidavit whereby the
applicant is said to be of criminal intent appears to be on the basis
of skewed information. No such officer is allowed to enjoy
impunity on the pretext of discharging official functioning nor can
be set free to form an audacious remark without any basis. It is the
prime duty of the concerned A.G.A. also who drafts counter
affidavit to acquire the material relying on which the averments
being made in counter affidavit.
Taking note of such negligent pleadings in counter affidavits, in
numerous cases, this Court has already warned the learned
Government Advocate as well as learned AGAs repeatedly to be
careful while dictating counter affidavits but seems to be with no
Let a personal affidavit be filed by the deponent of counter
affidavit dated 22.9.2020 (Shailendra Singh Son of Sri Mahipal
Singh, Deputy Superintendent of Police/ Circle Officer, Sahawar,
District Kasganj), within ten days, as to what was in his possession
for making statement in paragraph no. 10 of the counter affidavit.
He shall remain present before this Court on the said date along
with the record of the case.
Mr. I.P.S. Rajpoot, learned AGA-I, (AOR-A/I-0034/2012) shall
also remain present before this Court on the next date fixed to
explain his conduct of dictating counter affidavit in such
irresponsible manner.
Let a copy of this order be placed before the learned Advocate
Principal Secretary (Law), U.P., Lucknow and, Director General of
List this case on 21.02.2023. Interim order, if any, is extended till
the next date of listing.
Registrar General of this Court shall ensure that the order be
communicated to all concerned forthwith.