The Writ Petition is filed aggrieved by the proceedings
dated 22.09.2021 issued by the 3rd respondent as also letter
dated 21.10.2021 of the 4th respondent in rejecting the case
of the petitioner for compassionate appointment as illegal,
arbitrary, unjust, to quash the same and for a consequential
direction to the respondents to appoint the petitioner, in any
suitable post, on compassionate grounds.
2.     Heard Mr.M.R.S.Srinivas, learned counsel for the
petitioner and the learned Assistant Government Pleader for
Services-III representing the respondents.
3.     The basic facts, as set out in the affidavit filed in
support of the Writ Petition, may be stated for better
appreciation of the petitioner’s case.
4.     The petitioner is the only daughter of one Peddisetty
Uma Maheswara Rao, who died on 05.05.2021 due to
COVID-19, while he was working as watchman in P.W.D.
Workshop Division, Sitanagaram, Guntur District. The wife of
the said Uma Maheswara Rao is uneducated, dependent on
the deceased and the petitioner being the daughter of the
deceased, not survived by siblings, sought for compassionate
appointment claiming inter alia, that there is no earning
member in the family and further that her husband one Sri
Y.Srinivasa Rao is not also gainfully employed. Though she
submitted the relevant certificates, the respondents rejected
her case mainly on the ground that the petitioner is a
married daughter and as such she is not entitled for
compassionate appointment. In this regard reliance was
placed on Government Memo No.406/10/A.I/Admn.II/2004
5.     Learned counsel for the petitioner, inter alia, submits
that as per G.O.Ms.No.350, General Administration (SER-A)
Department dated 30.07.1999 when there is only a married
daughter to the deceased Government employee, without
elder or younger brother or sisters and the spouse of the
deceased Government employee is not willing to avail the
compassionate appointment, such married daughter may be
considered for compassionate appointment, provided she is
dependent on the deceased Government employee subject
to satisfying other conditions and instructions issued on the
scheme from time to time. In the light of the said G.O., the
learned counsel submits that the Memo referred to above,
has no statutory or legal basis and the same cannot override
G.O.Ms.No.350 dated 30.07.1999. He further submits that
the petitioner’s only brother predeceased their father and the
petitioner has to look after her mother and further that there
is no other earning member in the family, including the
petitioner’s husband.     The learned counsel also contends
that the petitioner was dependent on her father as her
husband is not gainfully employed and the order of rejection
solely on the ground that the petitioner is a married
daughter amounts to discrimination as the married daughters
are placed under a separate class, which has no proximate
nexus and object sought to be achieved to mitigate financial
difficulties and provide support to the family of the deceased
employee, who dies in harness.        He also states that the
Government of Andhra Pradesh, G.A.D.(SER.A) Department
issued       Circular Memo     No.1512950/Ser.A/2021         dated
21.10.2021 to provide compassionate appointments to the
kith and kin of the Government employees, died due to
COVID-19. The learned counsel further places reliance on
the judgment of a Division Bench in Commissioner of
Police and Others v. K.Padmaja1             and also a recent
judgment of a learned Single Judge in W.P.No.10340 of 2014
dated 26.02.2021 and urges that the Writ Petition deserves
to be allowed, in the light of the above referred judgments.
6.      Per contra, the learned Assistant Government Pleader
while reiterating the contentions raised in the counter-
affidavit submits that the case of the petitioner is not
considered by the authorities as the petitioner is a married
daughter, who is not dependent on her deceased father and
as such the proceedings impugned in the Writ Petition
cannot be found fault with. He submits that the cause of
death of the petitioner’s father is not mentioned in the Death
Certificate produced by the petitioner and therefore she is
not entitled for the benefit of the Government Orders issued
in Circular Memo No.1512950/SER.A/2021 dated 21.10.2021.
The learned Assistant Government Pleader also places
reliance on the Memo issued by the Government dated
20.03.2004 and contends as per the clarification the said
memo, once marriage is performed, a daughter is not
dependent on her father/mother even if she is an
unemployee or her husband is un-employee and further that
a married daughter is dependent on her father/mother if she
is living with her father/mother when her husband deserts or
disappears for years together or dies. The learned Assistant
Government Pleader also places reliance on the judgment of
the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Civil Appeal Nos.9280-9281 of
2014 in N.C.Santosh v. State of Karnataka and
Others2. Accordingly, he prays for dismissal of the Writ
7.       Considered arguments of both the learned counsel and
perused the material on record. The only point that falls for
consideration is, as to whether the petitioner is entitled for
compassionate appointment and if so, the impugned orders
8.       There is no dispute that the petitioner is the daughter
of the deceased Government Employee. The family member
Certificate     dated  10.06.2021   and    No-earning       Member
Certificate dated 26.06.2021 issued by the concerned
Tahsildar, Mangalagiri, reveals the status of the petitioner as
legal heir of the deceased and her financial status and that
the petitioner and her mother are non-earning members,
respectively. In the counter-affidavit, there is no specific
denial to the petitioner’s pleaded case that her husband is
not gainfully employed, except doing stray works and that
the petitioner was dependent on her deceased father.                  A
reading of the counter-affidavit would disclose that the
petitioner’s case was rejected only on the ground that she is
a married daughter and living with her husband and
therefore, she is not dependent on her deceased father.
Reliance is placed on the Memo dated 20.03.2004 referred to
above in this regard.
9.     The    Government     vide    G.O.Ms.No.612,       General
Administration    (SER-A)   Department     dated     30.10.1991
provided that where the deceased employee does not have
any male child but leaves behind him/her, a married
daughter and unmarried minor daughter, the choice of
selecting one of them for appointment under the Social
Security scheme shall be left to the spouse of the deceased.
Thereafter, the Government vide G.O.Ms.No.350 dated
30.07.1999, clarified that when there is only a married
daughter to the deceased Government employee without
older or younger brothers or sisters and the spouse of the
deceased Government employee is not willing to avail the
compassionate appointment, such married daughter may be
considered compassionate appointment, provided she is
dependent on the deceased Government employee and
subject to satisfying the conditions and instructions issued on
the scheme from time to time.
10.    The above said Government Order dated 30.07.1999
and subsequent memo dated 20.03.2004 were considered by
the Hon’ble Division Bench in K.Padmaja’s case referred to
supra.   The Hon’ble Division Bench while dealing with the
Writ Petition filed by the Department against the orders
passed by the erstwhile A.P.A.T., in O.A.No.6938 of 2012,
considered similar contentions advanced and dismissed the
Writ Petition confirming the orders in favour of the applicant
for compassionate appointment. In the said judgment, the
Hon’ble Division Bench, inter alia, opined that even if the
applicant is residing in a separate house, that by itself is not
ground to reject the claim of the appointment. The Hon’ble
Division Bench also held that merely because family pension
is paid to the wife of the deceased, the same is not a ground
to deprive the benefit of compassionate appointment under
the scheme notified by the Government for the children of
the deceased, who dies in harness.
11.    In view of the above legal position, the contentions of
the learned counsel for the petitioner deserves to be upheld
and the submissions made by the learned Assistant
Government Pleader are liable to be rejected.
12.   In    Ch.Damayanthi’s       v.  APSRTC’s      case      vide
W.P.No.10340 of 2014, a learned Single Judge of this Court
had extensively dealt with the matters pertaining to
compassionate appointments visa-a-vis the claims of the
married daughters and allowed the Writ Petition, inter alia,
“41. In the present case the deceased
employee left behind his wife and the petitioner
only.   There are no brothers or sisters to the
petitioner only. There are no brothers or sisters
to the petitioner. The claim of the mother of the
petitioner for compassionate appointment was
rejected. Now after demise of her father, it is the
responsibility cast upon the petitioner to take
care of her old aged and widow mother, as she is
the only daughter to her parents and there is
nobody to take care of her mother for her
remaining life. Due to this reason also, the case
of the petitioner has to be considered, besides,
the petitioner and her husband not having any
permanent source of income for their survival.
42.    If the petitioner, who has to take
care of her widowed mother, is not given
compassionate appointment, the whole family will
be pushed to indigenous condition and to penury
compassionate appointment scheme            will    be
defeated.     As such, this Court hold that the
petitioner     is  entitled    for   compassionate
appointment under the “Bread Winner Scheme”.
Above referred judgments, in the considered opinion
of this Court, applies to the facts of the present case.
13.    Insofar as the judgment relied on by the learned
Assistant Government Pleader in N.C.Santosh case referred
to supra, the Hon’ble Supreme Court was dealing with
compassionate appointments as provided in Karnataka Civil
Services Rules, 1996. The Hon’ble Supreme Court in the said
judgment inter alia, opined that the norms prevailing on the
date of consideration of the application should be the basis
for consideration of claim for compassionate appointment.
The said judgment has no application to the facts of the
present case.
14.    It may not be out of place here to refer to a judgment
in Bhuvaneswari V.Puranik3.            The learned Judge while
dealing with the object of compassionate appointments
succinctly dealt with the legal position and allowed a Writ
Petition, wherein a challenge was laid to Rule 2(1) (a) (i),
Rule 2(1) (b) and Rule 3(2) (i) (c) of the Karnataka Civil
Services (Appointment on Compassionate Grounds) Rules,
1996, holding inter alia as follows:
“If the marital status of a son does not make
any difference in Law to his entitlement for seeking
appointment       on  compassionate    grounds,     the
marital status of a daughter should make no
difference, as the married daughter does not seize
to be a part of the family and Law cannot make an
assumption that married sons alone continue to be
the part of the family.”
15.    In the aforementioned view of the matter, the
proceedings impugned in the Writ Petition are liable to be set
16.    Accordingly, the Writ Petition is allowed and the
impugned proceedings are set aside. The respondents are
directed to consider the case of petitioner for compassionate
appointment, in any suitable post, within a period of six (6)
weeks from the date of receipt of a copy of this order. No
Miscellaneous Petitions, if any, pending in this Writ
Petition shall stand closed.