The learned counsel for the respondent has attempted
to oppose the application seeking condonation of delay. But
having regard to the totality of the circumstances of this
case, we find that there had been sufficient and genuine
cause for the appellant having not approached this Court
within limitation. The application seeking condonation of
delay is allowed and delay in filing is condoned.
Leave granted.
The principal challenge in these appeals is to the order
dated 16.07.2018, as passed by the High Court of Punjab &
Haryana, Chandigarh in CRA-S-827-SB-2017 (O&M) whereby, the
regular criminal appeal filed by the appellant came to be
dismissed, when no one appeared for the appellant and the
Court accepted the submission of the State counsel that the
appeal was rendered infructuous for the reason that the
appellant had served out the sentence. The impugned order
16.07.2018, a short one, reads as under:-
“Custody certificate filed in Court today, is
On the previous date also, the appellant had
gone unrepresented. None is present even today.
Learned State counsel submits that the instant
petition has been rendered infructuous in view of
the fact that the appellant has completed his
sentence.
Dismissed as infructuous.”
The   order   aforesaid    effectively  leads   to   the
confirmation of the appellant’s conviction of offence under
Section   18  of  The   Narcotic   Drugs  and  Psychotropic
Learned counsel for the appellant has contended, and
rightly so, that an appeal against conviction could not
have been treated as infructuous merely for the reason that
the convicted appellant had served out the sentence awarded
by the Trial Court. Learned counsel has further pointed out
that the sentence awarded to the appellant was only of five
months’ imprisonment with fine of Rs.3,000/-; and even at
the initial stage of appeal, it was specifically pointed
out before the Court that the appellant had undergone the
sentence of imprisonment and had deposited the fine imposed
but, he was nevertheless seeking to assail his conviction.
The relevant facts and submissions were distinctly noted by
the High Court in the order dated 10.05.2017 that reads as
“Learned counsel for the appellant submits
that though the appellant has already undergone
his entire sentence of 5 months and has also paid
the fine imposed upon him, upon his conviction
for the commission of an offence punishable under
Section 18 of the NDPS Act, he would still like
to pursue the appeal on merits.
On his request, adjourned to 31.05.2017
summoned in the meanwhile.”
Though learned counsel for the respondent has attempted
to support the conviction and sentence of the appellant but
could not dispute the position that merely for execution of
the   sentence,     an    appeal    against    conviction    cannot   be
treated as infructuous. Moreover, the matter before the
High Court was an appeal against conviction. Therein, if
nobody was present for the appellant for any reason, the
High    Court     could     have    taken    appropriate    steps    for
representation on behalf of the appellant but, in any case,
the appeal could not have been dismissed as infructuous. So
far as the contention on merits are concerned, in our view,
the same ought to be urged before the High Court.
For what has been discussed hereinabove, it appears
just   and    proper     that    while    setting   aside    the   order
impugned, the appeal filed by the appellant before the High
Court   be   restored      to   its   number   for  consideration     on
Accordingly, these appeals succeed to the extent and
in the manner indicated above; the impugned order dated
16.07.2018     is   set   aside;     and  the   appeal  filed    by  the
appellant, being CRA-S-827-SB-2017 (O&M), before the High
Court of Punjab & Haryana is restored to its number. We
would    request     the    High    Court   to   afford   an   adequate
opportunity of hearing to the parties before taking final
decision in the matter.
Date : 13-11-2021 This matter was called on for hearing today.
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
Leave granted.
These Appeals succeed to the extent and the Appeals filed by
the Appellant, being CRA-S-827-SB-2017 (O&M), before the High Court
of Punjab & Haryana is restored to its number in terms of the
singed order.
All pending applications stand disposed of.