Heard Mr. Ayank Mishra, learned counsel for the applicants, Mr.
Pankaj Srivastava, learned A.G.A for the State and perused the material
available on record.
As legal submission have been raised by counsel for the applicant
challenging the summoning order passed by the concerned Magistrate,
hence, the present application is being decided without issuing notice to
opposite party no.2
The present application under Section 482 Cr.P.C. has been filed by
the applicants to quash the summoning order dated 15.09.2021 passed by
No.2, Ghaziabad in Criminal Complaint Case No. 11006 of 2020 (Smt. Jyoti
Vainiwal Vs. Deepak Kumar Tomar and others), under Section 406 I.P.C.,
Police Station-Kotwali, District-Ghaziabad, pending in the Court of
Brief facts of the case are that, the present complaint has been filed by
opposite party no.2 on 22.07.2020 with the allegations that marriage of
opposite party no.2 was solemnized with applicant no.5 on 14.05.2019
according to Hindu Rites and Rituals wherein sufficient dowry including
money and ornaments were given by the parents of opposite party no.2.
It has been further alleged that opposite party no.2 was not permitted
to meet her parents and was mentally and physically harassed by the
applicants for reasons best known to them. It is further alleged that all the
demands of the applicants' side were fulfilled by the family of opposite party
no.2 as and when raised by them, after the marriage of opposite party no.2
with applicant no.5. On 26.12.2019 when the father of opposite party no.2
came to meet her, the applicants misbehaved with him and the opposite party
no.2 was sent back to her parents house along with her father on the same
day. When the opposite party no.2 came to know that applicants are not
interested in calling her back, she requested them to return her Stree Dhan. A
notice in this regard was sent by the opposite party no.2 which was neither
replied by the applicants nor the Stree Dhan was returned, hence, the present
complaint was filed in which the applicants have been summoned vide order
dated 15.09.2020 without following the mandatory requirement as provided
under Section 202 Cr.P.C., which has been challenged before this Hon'ble
Learned counsel for the applicants submits that though the address of
the applicants as mentioned in the complaint is Bengaluru, hence they are
residents of Bengaluru but the concerned Magistrate sitting at Ghaziabad has
summoned the applicants ignoring and not complying the provision of
Section 202 Cr.P.C., 1973. He further submits that procedure stipulated in
the said provision is mandatory which imposes an obligation on the
Magistrate to ensure that before summoning an accused, who resides beyond
his jurisdiction, the Magistrate shall make necessary inquiries into the case
himself or direct investigation to be made by a police officer or by such
other person as he thinks fit for finding out whether or not there is sufficient
ground to proceed against the accused.
It is undisputed that the applicants are residing at Bengaluru, which is
beyond the jurisdictions of the concerned Magistrate sitting at Ghaziabad,
hence the concerned Magistrate was duty bound to follow the procedure as
prescribed under Section 202(1) Cr.P.C. amended in the year 2006. In
support of his submission counsel for the applicants has placed reliance
upon the judgement of this Court in case of Sayed Sibte Haider Vs.
Mohammad Askari Ali & Anr., passed in Criminal Misc. Application Under
Section 482/378/407 Cr.P.C. 115 of 2018, vide order dated 28.02.2019.
Learned A.G.A. for the State submits that in case, this Court is
satisfied that the mandatory requirement of Section 202 Cr.P.C. is not
fulfilled by learned Magistrate before issuing the process, this Court can
direct the Magistrate to do so.
As the counsel for the applicant while challenging the summoning
order has turned upon Section 202 Cr.P.C., hence the following is extracted
“202. Postponement of issue of process.—(1) Any Magistrate, on
receipt of a complaint of an offence of which he is authorised to
take cognizance or which has been made over to him under
Section 192, may, if he thinks fit, 1 [and shall, in a case where the
accused is residing at a place beyond the area in which he
exercises his jurisdiction,] postpone the issue of process against
the accused, and either inquire into the case himself or direct an
investigation to be made by a police officer or by such other
person as he thinks fit, for the purpose of deciding whether or not
there is sufficient ground for proceeding.”
As per the provision of Section 202 Cr.P.C. as amended with effect
from 23.06.2006, the requirement is that in those cases where the accused is
residing at a place beyond the area in which the concerned Magistrate
exercises his jurisdiction, it is mandatory on the part of Magistrate to
conduct an enquiry or investigation before issuing the process. That means,
in case, if such an enquiry is not conducted in cases where the accused
resides at a place beyond the area in which the Magistrate exercises his
jurisdiction, the purpose of amendment in Section 202 Cr.P.C. would
The essence of purpose of amendment has been captured by this Court
in case of Vijay Dhanuka v. Najima Mamtaj, reported in (2014) 14 SCC
"11. Section 202 of the Code, inter alia, contemplates
postponement of the issue of the process "in a case where the
accused is residing at a place beyond the area in which he
exercises his jurisdiction" and thereafter to either inquire into the
case by himself or direct an investigation to be made by a police
officer or by such other person as he thinks fit. In the face of it,
what needs our determination is as to whether in a case where the
accused is residing at a place beyond the area in which the
Magistrate exercises his jurisdiction, inquiry is mandatory or not.
12. The words "and shall, in a case where the accused is residing at
a place beyond the area in which he exercises his jurisdiction"
were inserted by Section 19 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
(Amendment) Act (Central Act 25 of 2005) w.e.f. 23-6-2006. The
aforesaid amendment, in the opinion of the legislature, was
essential as false complaints are filed against persons residing at
far off places in order to harass them. The note for the amendment
"False complaints are filed against persons residing at far off
places simply to harass them. In order to see that innocent persons
are not harassed by unscrupulous persons, this clause seeks to
amend sub-section (1) Section 202 to make it obligatory upon the
Magistrate that before summoning the accused residing beyond his
jurisdiction he shall enquire into the case himself or direct
investigation to be made by a police officer or by such other
person as he thinks fit, for finding out whether or not there was
sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused." The use of
the expression "shall" prima facie makes the inquiry or the
investigation, as the case may be, by the Magistrate mandatory.
The word "shall" is ordinarily mandatory but sometimes, taking
into account the context or the intention, it can be held to be
directory. The use of the word "shall" in all circumstances is not
decisive. Bearing in mind the aforesaid principle, when we look to
the intention of the legislature, we (2014) 14 SCC 638 find that it
is aimed to prevent innocent persons from harassment by
unscrupulous persons from false complaints."
As per provisions of Section 202(1) Cr.P.C. the enquiry or
investigation, as the case may be, is mandatory before summons are issued
against the accused living beyond the territorial jurisdiction of the concerned
Magistrate, which has been held in the case of Abhijir Pawar v. Hemant
Madhukar Nimbalkar and another, (2017) 2 SCC 528. The relevant para of
the aforesaid judgement is as under:-
"Admitted position in law is that in those cases where the accused
is residing at a place beyond the area in which the Magistrate
exercises his jurisdiction, it is mandatory on the part of the
Magistrate to conduct an enquiry or investigation before issuing
the process. Section 202 Cr.P.C. was amended in the year 2005 by
the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2005, with
effect from 22-6-2006 by adding the words ?and shall, in a case
where the accused is residing at a place beyond the area in which
he exercises his jurisdiction?. There is a vital purpose or objective
behind this amendment, namely, to ward off false complaints
against such persons residing at a far-off places in order to save
them from unnecessary harassment. Thus, the amended provision
casts an obligation on the Magistrate to conduct enquiry or direct
investigation before issuing the process, so that false complaints
are filtered and rejected. The aforesaid purpose is specifically
mentioned in the note appended to the Bill proposing the said
amendment."
Similar view has been taken in the Supreme Court judgement in the
case of Sunil Todi vs. The State of Gujarat, reported in 2021 SCC Online SC
1174, wherein enquiry by the concerned Magistrate is mandatory, in case,
where the accused is residing at a place beyond the area of its jurisdiction
prior to issuance of process.
In view of the above, the impugned order is not sustainable in the eyes
of law and is liable to be quashed.
Accordingly, the application u/s 482 Cr.P.C. is allowed.
The impugned order dated 15.09.2021 is hereby quashed. Matter is
remanded back to the Court below for the further proceeding, in accordance
with law, specially in view of the provisions of Section 202(1) Cr.P.C. as
discussed above.
The concerned Magistrate may pass appropriate orders, in accordance
with law, after giving proper opportunity of hearing to both the parties.