Mr. Nayan Deep Rana, Advocate for the complainant.
This is a petition filed under Section 482 of Cr.P.C. for
setting aside the order dated 16.12.2020 (Annexure P-2) and order dated
08.01.2021 (Annexure P-1) passed by the Court of Chief Judicial
Magistrate, Rewari and Sessions Judge, Rewari, respectively, whereby an
application for grant of permission to visit United States of America (for
short “USA”) and to release the passport of the petitioner has been
dismissed and the criminal revision filed against the said order has also
been dismissed. Further, a prayer has been made in the petition to allow
the petitioner to visit USA for a period of 30 days from the date of
receiving the passport and also for issuance of directions to the police
officials to release the passport of the petitioner confiscated in FIR No.63
dated 17.02.2020 registered under Sections 420, 406, 120-B, 34 of the
Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter to be referred as “the IPC”) at
The brief facts which have given rise to the filing of the
present criminal miscellaneous petition are that the petitioner had made
an application praying for grant of permission to visit USA for family
reunion w.e.f. 18.12.2020 to 10.01.2021. It was the case of the
applicant/petitioner that he had been granted the concession of
anticipatory bail by the Court of Sessions Judge, Rewari and that the
applicant/petitioner had already joined the investigation and that the
applicant/petitioner is an Overseas Indian citizen having an Indian
Passport No.N2419844 and is married to Mrs. Kimberly Marie, who is a
citizen of USA having passport No.514439506 and out of the wedlock,
the petitioner has a son named Ayan, who is also a US citizen by birth
having passport No.506273592. It was averred that the wife and son of
the petitioner are residing in Utah, a state in USA, at the address 584E,
Southfork Drive, Draper, UT-84020 and that the petitioner is residing in
India at Omkar Building Off. Annie Besant Rd. Worli Mumbai and that
the petitioner wanted to visit his wife and son for conjugal union and in
order to comply with the directions imposed under Section 438(2) of the
Code of Criminal Procedure (hereinafter to be referred as “the Cr.P.C.”),
the petitioner was taking the prior permission of the Court and had, thus,
filed the said application. It was further averred that the parents of the
petitioner were permanently residing in India and even the company
owned by the petitioner and the other assets were also in India. It was
stated that the petitioner undertook not to violate the conditions of bail
and further, to return the passport to the Investigator on his arrival back to
India. With the said averments, the application was filed before the Chief
Judicial Magistrate, Rewari. Additional Public Prosecutor had opposed
the said application on the ground that the petitioner was not cooperating
in the investigation and also that the present case was a case under
Sections 420, 406, 120-B, 34 of the IPC,and the order of the National
Company Law Tribunal (for short ‘NCLT’) was passed against the
petitioner and also that he was not the authorized signatory of the
company and the signatures were withdrawn on 24.09.2021 but the
petitioner had placed two purchase orders on 17.10.2019 and had also
signed two PDC cheques in order to cheat the complainant who had
supplied the waste and scrap material. Application was also opposed on
the ground that the petition bearing case No.CRM-M-33202-2020 titled
as Joginder Singh Vs. State of Haryana and others, had been filed against
the anticipatory bail granted to the petitioner by the Sessions Court and
the said case was pending before this Court. Additional Public Prosecutor
had also pointed out that there were chances of the petitioner fleeing from
the course of justice as he was an Overseas Indian Citizen and his wife as
well as his son were US citizens and in case, conjugal union was the
ultimate/main objective sought, then the wife and son of the petitioner
could also visit India instead of the petitioner going to USA for the family
The Chief Judicial Magistrate, Rewari, after considering the
said averments and also after hearing the parties, dismissed the
application vide order dated 16.12.2020 primarily on the following
i)    The petitioner was not cooperating in the investigation.
ii)   The petition bearing CRM-M-33202-2020 for cancellation of bail
granted to the petitioner had been filed before the High Court by
the complainant i.e. Joginder Singh and the same was pending
adjudication at that time.
iii)  The allegations against the petitioner were stated to be serious,
inasmuch as after having been suspended from the Board of
Directors as per the NCLT order dated 24.09.2019, the petitioner
still placed two purchase orders and signed two PDC cheques in
order to cheat the complainant.
iv)   If permitted, there was a possibility of the petitioner fleeing from
the course of justice and not returning to India after release of his
passport.
v)    There was no fundamental right of the petitioner to visit abroad and
the permission to visit or not to visit a foreign country was to be
decided on the basis of facts and circumstances of the case.
The petitioner filed a Criminal revision against the order
dated 16.12.2020 in the Court of Sessions Judge, Rewari. Before the
Sessions Court, apart from reiterating the averments and arguments raised
before the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Rewari, it was further argued that
the petitioner would return by 30th of January, 2021. Since, the period
earlier sought was fast elapsing and the application of the petitioner had
not been allowed by the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Rewari, thus, the
revised permission to visit USA for a period ranging from 09.01.2021 to
30.01.2021 was sought. The said revision petition was also dismissed
primarily on the following grounds:-
1)     The petitioner was not cooperating in the investigation of the case.
2)     The petition under Section 482 of Cr.P.C., challenging the grant of
anticipatory bail to the petitioner, was pending before this Court.
3)     If permitted, there was a possibility of the petitioner fleeing from
the course of justice and not returning to India after release of his
passport.
The abovesaid two orders are the subject matter of challenge
in the present petition.
Learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner has vehemently
argued that the reasons given by the Courts below for rejection of the
application of the petitioner are either non-existent as on the present date,
or are irrelevant, or are against the settled principle of law. It has been
submitted that the primary reason of rejection given by both the Courts
below was the pendency of CRM-M-33202-2020 which had been filed by
the complainant-Joginder Singh against the order of grant of anticipatory
bail to the petitioner and the said fact is no more relevant inasmuch as this
Court vide judgment dated 01.09.2021 has dismissed the said petition
filed by Joginder Singh. Reference has been made to the said order which
has been annexed as Annexure P-17. It has been pointed out that while
dismissing the said petition, all the aspects, moreso the aspect with
respect to the fact that two purchase orders were placed on 17.10.2019, as
well as the fact that the petitioner had not allegedly joined the
investigation, have already been considered and the said grounds have
been rejected, after noticing the fact that the said two purchase orders
dated 17.10.2019 were in fact cancelled after the petitioner had learnt the
true import of the order dated 24.09.2019 and after considering the order
dated 04.01.2021 passed by the Sessions Judge, Rewari vide which the
application for cancellation of bail of the petitioner moved by the State,
had been withdrawn by stating that the petitioner and other co-accused
had joined the investigation. Specific reference has been made to the said
order which has been reproduced in the order dated 01.09.2021. It has
been submitted that the reading of the said order would show that the
factum of pendency of CRM-M-33202-2020 and non-cooperating in
investigation and also the allegations based on the merits of the case
against the petitioner, cannot possibly come in the way of the petitioner in
being granted the permission to go abroad. It is further submitted that it is
the fundamental right of every citizen of India, enshrined under Articles
19 and 21 of the Constitution of India, to move freely and to travel freely,
including foreign travel, and thus, the same cannot be illegally curbed. It
is submitted that the wife of the petitioner as well as son of the petitioner
are both residing abroad and the petitioner has every right to travel
abroad for conjugal union. Learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner has
also further submitted that the question of non-cooperating in the
investigation would not arise inasmuch as in the present case, the challan
has already been filed after the completion of the investigation. Learned
Senior Counsel for the petitioner has also relied upon the judgment of the
Hon’ble Supreme Court titled Parvez NoordinLokhandwalla Vs. State of
Maharashtra and another, reported as (2020)10 SCC 77 to contend that
even at the appellate stage and at the stage of petition having been filed
under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C., the relief with respect to the petitioner
travelling abroad can be granted even in case the time period for which
the initial travel was sought has elapsed, moreso, when the cause
survives. In the present case, it is submitted that since the primary cause
was re-union with the family, thus, cause survives even in case, the
period mentioned before the Chief Judicial Magistrate i.e. 18.12.2020 to
10.01.2021 as also revised period mentioned before the Sessions Court
i.e. 09.01.2021 to 30.01.2021, has elapsed.
Learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner has submitted that
in fact, in addition to the abovesaid reasons, there is an additional reason
for which it is necessary for the petitioner to go abroad. For the said
purpose, reference has been made to the order dated 16.06.2021 passed
by the Coordinate Bench of this Court. In the said order, it had been
contended that for maintaining the validity of the green card, which has
been issued in favour of the petitioner, the petitioner is required to visit
America and failing the same, serious prejudice would be caused to the
rights of the petitioner. Learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner has
drawn the attention of this Court to Annexure P-6 which is the permanent
resident card of the petitioner, specifically stating that the said card would
expire on 06.04.2023 and also prima facie proving the petitioner to be a
permanent resident of USA since 02.04.2011. Further reference has been
made to Annexure P-14 wherein Chapter-3 of the US Citizenship and
Immigration Services has been provided. Specific reference has been
made to Clause 1 which appears at page 205 of CRM-31171-2021 and
the relevant portion of the said clause has been reproduced hereinbelow:-
“1.   Absence of More than 6 Months (but Less than
An absence of more than 6 months (more than
180 days) but less than 1 year (less than 365 days)
during the period for which continuous residence is
required (also called “the statutory period”) is
presumed to break the continuity of such residence.
This includes any absence that takes place during the
statutory period before the applicant files the
naturalization application and any absence between
the filing of the application and the applicant’s
admission to citizenship.”
On the basis of the said clause, it has been submitted that the
absence of more than 6 months but less than one year, during the period
for which continuous residence is required, is presumed to be a break in
the continuity of such residence. On this aspect, further reference has also
been made to Parvez Noordin Lokhandwalla’s case (Supra) in order to
state that as per the US Immigration and Nationality Act, 1952, the
person concerned has to return for a short period for revalidating the
green card. Specific reference has been made to sub-Clause (ii) of Clause
(C) of the conditions prescribed. Relevant portion of the said judgment of
Hon’ble Supreme Court in the abovesaid case containing the said
condition is reproduced hereinbelow: -
“On 26 June 2020, a Single Judge (Justice S. K.
Shinde) expressed his inability to take up the IA for
relaxation of the conditions attached to the grant of
interim bail since the order dated 19 May 2020 had been
passed by Justice A. S. Gadkari. The contention of the
appellant, it may be noted, has been that under the
conditions prescribed by the US Immigration and
Nationality Act 1952, he has to return for a short period
for revalidating the Green Card. Among them are the
“(C) An alien lawfully admitted for permanent
residence in the United States shall not be regarded as
seeking an admission into the United States for
purposes of the immigration laws unless the alien-
(i) has abandoned or relinquished that status,
(ii) has been absent from the United States for
a continuous period in excess of 180 days,
(iii) has engaged in illegal activity after
having departed the United States,
(iv) has departed from the United States while
under legal process seeking removal of the
alien from the United States, including
removal proceedings under this chapter and
extradition proceedings,
(v) has committed an offense identified in
section 1182(a)(2) of this title, unless since
such offense the alien has been granted relief
under section 1182(h) or 1229b(a) of this title,
or is attempting to enter at a time or place
other than as designated by immigration
officers or has not been admitted to the United
States after inspection and authorization by an
immigration officer.”
On the basis of the abovementioned condition, it has been
submitted that serious prejudice would be caused to the rights of the
petitioner with respect to his permanent residency in the USA, if he is not
granted the said permission.
Learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner has further
submitted that in fact, the wife of the petitioner had to undergo an
operation for removal of her appendix and for the said aspect, the
petitioner has referred to the medical record (Annexure P-5).
Per contra, learned counsel for the State as well as learned
Senior Counsel for the complainant-Joginder Singh, have vehemently
opposed the present petition. It has been submitted that the petitioner has
been constantly changing the period for which the petitioner wishes to go
abroad. Initially the said period was 18.12.2020 to 10.01.2021 and during
the course of revision filed, it was changed to the period ranging from
09.01.2021 to 30.01.2021. It has been pointed out that at the first stage,
reason stated for going abroad was conjugal union. In the present petition
filed under Section 482 of Cr.P.C., however, additional reasons have been
given which were never agitated before the first Court or before the
revisional Court. The pleas with respect to the petitioner being a green
card holder or his wife having to be operated for removal of her appendix,
were never the points which were agitated before the Courts below. It is
further submitted that in fact, the wife of the petitioner has already
undergone the said operation and has now recovered and thus, the said
point cannot be taken to permit the petitioner to go abroad.
Learned Senior counsel for the Complainant and State have
laid much emphasis on the fact that the plea of the petitioner is not bona
fide and there is every possibility that the petitioner would not come back
to India in case he is granted the permission to go abroad. It is submitted
that the wife and son of the petitioner are citizens of America and that the
petitioner has no property in India. Further, no details of bank accounts
are forthcoming. It is further submitted that the amount due to the
complainant is to the extent of Rs.1,85,50,286/-. Further reference has
been made to Annexures C1 and C2 which have been filed alongwith
CRM-34170-2021. In Annexure C1, reference has been made to
paragraph 2 to highlight the fact that there are as many as 41 cases
pending against the petitioner and the company in question i.e., M/s
Indsur Global Limited, under Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments
Act, 1881 (hereinafter to be referred as “the Act of 1881”) in various
courts in Mumbai, Ahmedabad, Gurugram and Rewari. It is contended
that the approximate aggregate value of dispute in the said cases is Rs.25
crores. Further reference has also been made to Annexure C2 which is
order dated 28.07.2021 in which, in the case titled TCI Freight Vs. Indsur
Global i.e. complaint No.3 of 2018, non-bailable warrants have been
issued to accused Nos.2 to 4 for 04.01.2022. It is the contention of
learned Senior Counsel for the complainant that the said accused Nos.2 to
4 includes the present petitioner, although, the complaint in the said case
under Section 138 of the Act of 1881 is not available. Reliance has been
placed upon judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Srichand P.
Hinduja Vs. State through CBI, New Delhi reported as 2002 (3) RCR
(Criminal)186 to contend that in the abovesaid case, even where the
permission to go abroad was granted, the petitioners were directed to
execute a bond for a sum of Rs.15 crores each with a bank guarantee for
the like amount to the satisfaction of the Special Judge, in addition to the
other conditions. It is submitted that in the said case, the entire dispute
was with respect to an amount of Rs.1437 crores but the kickback amount
was of Rs.64 crores. It is submitted that in the present case, the petitioner
whose wife and son are residing abroad, and does not have any property
in India and is also facing several cases, in all likelihood, would not come
to India in case permission to go abroad is granted.
Learned counsel for the State has further highlighted that
even assuming, the petitioner is to be allowed to go abroad, then also,
apart from other conditions,the petitioner should be directed to give a
local surety inasmuch as the petitioner is residing in Mumbai and the FIR
has been registered in Rewari. However, the fact that in the present case,
challan has been presented, has not been disputed.
Learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner, in rebuttal to the
said argument, has submitted that as far as the reliance on order dated
28.07.2021 (Annexure C-2) vide which the non-bailable warrants have
been issued, is sought to be placed by the Senior Counsel for the
complainant, the said case has already been compromised and for that,
reference has been made to the order dated 13.10.2021, which has been
sent through Whatsapp and the same is taken on record. The said order is
reproduced hereinbelow: -
Present:-     Ms. Manju Rani, counsel for complainant.
File put up on application for withdrawal the present
complaint filed on behalf of complainant. By separate
statement of complainant counsel Ms. Manju Rani stated that
on the instruction of complainant company, he does not want
to pursue the present complaint. Kindly same be dismissed as
withdrawn. In view of statement, complainant counsel is
allowed to withdraw the present complaint. File be consigned
to the record room after due compliance.
Announced in Daily Lok Adalat;                (Sarita Solanki)
Further, to rebut the reliance sought to be placed by the
opposing counsel on the Chart as mentioned in Para 2 of Annexure C1, it
has been stated that from the said chart, it is nowhere coming out that the
petitioner is also an accused in the said cases, nor any fact or document
has been produced to show that the petitioner is personally responsible
for any amount as is stated to be outstanding. It is stated that the figure
which has been given by learned Senior Counsel for the complainant, to
the effect that the dispute in the said cases is about Rs.25 crores, is not
even remotely borne out from the record. No documents in support of the
said Chart have been annexed other than Annexure C2 regarding which a
specific answer has already been given. No objections have been taken
with respect to the pendency of the said cases before the Courts below, as
the allegations with respect to the alleged dishonor of two cheques which
were raised before the Courts below were with respect to the dispute with
the complainant and the said cheques were also dishonoured as the same
were sought to be encashed at the time when the order of admission of
insolvency had already been passed and thus, the cheques could not have
been credited. Further, with respect to the outstanding amount of
Rs.1,85,50,286/-, it has been argued that the same has been considered by
this Court in its order dated 01.09.2021 passed in CRM-M-33202-2020
and that the complainant representing his company M/s Yashu Iron
Private Limited had lodged his complaint before the Interim Resolution
Professional (hereinafter to be referred as “IRP”) and the same figures at
Sr. No.4 in Column No.B under the heading “Operational Creditors” and
the amount claimed by the company of the complainant therein is
Rs.1,85,50,286/-. Further reference has also been made with respect to
independent forensic audit of the company so as to state that no fraud was
found to have been committed as per the provisions of IBC, 2016 and that
the purchase orders were also in the name of the petitioner company and
not in the individual name of the petitioner or the other accused.
With respect to the argument raised by the learned Senior
Counsel for the complainant and the State to the effect that the petitioner
would not come back to India in case the permission to go abroad is
granted, learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner has submitted that the
petitioner undertakes to abide by all the conditions which are imposed by
this Court and also assures the Court that the petitioner would return and
in addition to the same, has submitted that the father and the mother of
the petitioner are residing in India and the mother of the petitioner is
ready to give a surety in favour of the petitioner and that the mother of
the petitioner has immovable property worth approximately Rs.35 to
Rs.45 lacs which the petitioner and his mother are also ready to furnish as
security and in case this Court desires,then an amount of Rs.5,00,000/-
can also be furnished in the form of a bank guarantee by the petitioner.
With respect to the local surety, reference has been made to Chapter 33 of
the Cr.P.C., moreso Section 441 of Cr.P.C. to contend that no such
conditions have been imposed under Section 441 of Cr.P.C. and thus, it
has been prayed that the petitioner, who is residing in Mumbai, would not
possibly be able to get a local surety in Rewari. It has been submitted that
in the present case, an amount of Rs.1,85,50,286/- is recoverable against
the company in question, for which the proceedings are pending and apart
from the argument which has been raised with respect to 41 other cases, it
has been submitted that it is the dispute in the present case which is to be
primarily seen by this Court while allowing an application, as has been
moved in the present case. Reference has been made to judgment dated
28.09.2018 passed in CRM-M-41608-2018 titled Paramjit Kaur Vs.
State of Punjab to show that in the said case, the petitioner was permitted
to go abroad on the execution of a personal bond in the sum of
Rs.5,00,000/- with the undertaking that the petitioner was to report back
on or before 15.02.2019 and also with further right to the trial Court/Duty
Magistrate to impose any further conditions. Reference has also been
made to judgment dated 20.04.2018 passed by the Coordinate Bench of
this Court in CRM-M-15550-2018 titled Surender Singla Vs. State of
Haryana in which permission to travel abroad was granted subject to
deposit of Rs.2,00,000/- with the trial Court in addition to the undertaking
specifying conditions of forfeiture.
This Court has heard the learned counsel for the parties and
has perused the record.
On the basis of the observations made in the impugned
orders, the objections raised by the learned Senior Counsel for the
complainant and learned counsel for the State and also the arguments
raised by the learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner, the following
issues/factors arise for consideration in the present case: -
1)     Pendency of CRM-M-33202-2020 filed by the complainant-
Joginder Singh against the order of the Sessions Judge granting
anticipatory bail to the petitioner.
2)     Alleged non-cooperation of the petitioner in the investigation.
3)     Merits of the allegations made against the petitioner, moreso with
respect to the placing of two purchase orders after the Board of
Directors had been suspended vide order dated 24.09.2019 by the
4)     Change of period with respect to which permission is sought for
going abroad inasmuch as before the Chief Judicial Magistrate,
period was stated to be from 18.12.2020 to 10.01.2021 and before
the Sessions Court, it was stated to be from 09.01.2021 to
30.01.2021 and in the present petition, it is stated to be 30 days
from the date of receiving the passport.
5)     The question as to whether the Petitioner has a right to go abroad
based on the pleas raised in the present petition.
6)     In case, permission is to be granted, then the conditions, which are
required to be imposed on the petitioner so that the petitioner
would not flee from the course of justice.
The said issues/factors are being taken up for discussion
(1). Pendency of CRM-M-33202-2020 filed by the complainant-
Joginder Singh against the order of the Sessions Judge granting
anticipatory bail to the petitioner,
(2). Alleged non-cooperation of the petitioner in the investigation &
(3). Merits of the allegations made against the petitioner, moreso with
respect to placing of two purchase orders after the Board of Directors
had been suspended vide order dated 24.09.2019 by the NCLT): -
The petition bearing No.CRM-M-33202-2020, had been
dismissed by this Court vide judgment dated 01.09.2021. While deciding
the said case, the aspect with respect to the alleged non-cooperation of the
petitioner in the investigation of the case had also been considered. The
merits of the case, including the allegations with respect to two purchase
orders having been placed by the petitioner after the Board of Directors
had been suspended vide order dated 24.09.2019 by the NCLT, had also
been considered. The relevant portion of the judgment dated 01.09.2021
is reproduced hereinbelow: -
It has been observed in the impugned order that the
two purchase orders dated 17.10.2019, which were
placed on behalf of the accused-company had been
cancelled on learning of the actual impact of the Order
passed by the NCLT, Mumbai and no goods were ever
supplied to the accused persons by the complainant party
on the basis of the above two orders. The said fact is not
disputed before this Court. It is further observed in the
impugned Order that all documents relating to the case
are in the office of the accused-company which is now
under the control of the IRP. It was also observed that
the custodial interrogation is not required because the
entire case is based upon documentary evidence.
Conditions with respect to furnishing of bonds to the
satisfaction of the Investigating Officer and not to leave
the country without prior permission of the Court and
other conditions have also been imposed. The Sessions
Judge, Rewari has referred to the facts of the case as well
as, arguments raised by both sides and has granted
anticipatory bail by a reasoned order. This Court finds
that there is no circumstance much less, strong or
overwhelming circumstance to set aside the impugned
It is further observed that with respect to every
argument raised/allegation made by the Learned Senior
Counsel    for       the   Petitioner,there is   a    plausible
argument/defence put forth by the Learned Senior
Counsel for the Respondent No. 3 to 5. With respect to
the argument on behalf of the Petitioner that the two
purchase orders were given on17.10.2019, i.e. after the
passing of the Order dated 24.09.2019, it has been
argued on behalf of the Respondent no 3 to 5 that
admittedly, no goods were received in pursuance of the
same and the said orders were cancelled after the Order
passed by the NCLT, Mumbai was uploaded on the
website and the true impact of the same was understood
and in case, the accused persons had any fraudulent
intention, then they would not have written Letters
dated30.10.2019          and    20.11.2019    informing     the
complainant-company about the passing of the aforesaid
orders.
From the above, it is apparent that for every
argument/allegation         raised,   there is   a    plausible
argument/defense put up. This Court does not wish to
give an affirmative finding on the same, lest, it would
prejudice the case of either of the parties. For the
present, suffice it would to say, that the present case is
based on documents and has civil tappings and the
custodial interrogation of the Respondent Nos. 3 to
5would not be required and there is no circumstance
much less,overwhelming circumstance to interfere with
the well-reasoned order passed by the Sessions Judge.
Before parting, this Court wishes to point out that
the aspect of non-joining of investigation has been duly
defended by the Respondent Nos.3 to 5 by making a
reference to the Order dated 04.01.2021 (Annexure R3/1)
vide which the prosecution had withdrawn their
application for cancellation of bail by stating that the
respondent nos.3 to 5 have joined the investigation. The
relevant portion of the said order dated 04.01.2021 is
reproduced hereinbelow:
“State of Haryana Vs. Amit Sureshmal Lodha etc.
Present:-Sh. Harpal Singh, Public Prosecutor for
theState.
respondents/accused        appeared   in person. ASI
Sandeep Kumar with learned Public Prosecutor for
the State vide his separate statement stated that the
respondents in the present case have already joined
into investigation and in view of the same, they do
not wish to pursue with the application for
cancellation of bail of applicants/accused Amit
Sureshmal Lodha, Sureshmal Lodha and Indu Lodha
and withdrawn the same. Heard. In view of the
statement,present application for cancellation of
bail stands dismissed as withdrawn. File be
consigned to record room after due compliance.
Moreover, the          Learned Senior Counsel      for
Respondent nos. 3 to5 has stated that the Respondent
Nos. 3 to 5 are and will always be ready to join the
investigation and to cooperate with the Investigating
Officer. Further, a period of 8 months has elapsed since
the passing of the impugned order and there are no
allegations against the answering respondents that they
are either trying to influence the witnesses or have
misused the concession of anticipatory bail granted to
them.”
A perusal of the order reproduced hereinabove would show
that reliance has also been placed upon the order dated 04.01.2021 vide
which the prosecution had withdrawn their application for cancellation of
bail by stating that the petitioner and other co-accused had joined the
investigation. Moreover, it is an admitted case of both the parties that in
the present case, the investigation has been completed and the challan has
been filed. Further, on the question of merits, the allegations in the
present case are not such so as to disentitle the petitioner to travel abroad.
Thus, the first three issues are decided in favour of the petitioner and it is
held that the said three issues would not come in the way of the petitioner
being granted the permission to travel abroad.
ISSUE NO.4. Change of period with respect to which permission is
sought for going abroad inasmuch as before the Chief Judicial
Magistrate, period was stated to be from 18.12.2020 to 10.01.2021 and
before the Sessions Court, it was stated to be from 09.01.2021 to
30.01.2021 and in the present petition, it is stated to be 30 days from the
date of receiving the passport: -
In para 2 of the judgment passed in Parvez Noordin
Lokhandwalla’s case (Supra), the Hon’ble Supreme Court has
categorically observed that though the time period for which the appellant
therein had sought permission to travel abroad had lapsed, the cause
survived and thus, in the said case, the appellant therein was permitted to
travel abroad. Para 2 of the said judgment is reproduced hereinbelow:-
“2.   The High Court declined to relax the conditions
imposed by it for the grant of interim bail on the ground that
an FIR has been registered against the appellant. Though
the period during which the appellant sought to travel
abroad has lapsed, the cause survives. The appeal raises
interesting   issues       about the   interface   between      the
fundamental right to travel abroad and its curtailment under
a judicial order as an incident to regulate conditions
governing the grant of bail.”
In the present case, the primary plea raised by the petitioner
is to meet his wife and son who are residing in USA. The said cause was
existing at the time of filing of the application at the fist stage, at the time
of arguments in the revision petition, as well as in the present petition.
The cause thus, survives. Moreover, the petitioner cannot be deprived of
his right to travel abroad and meet his family members, merely on
account of the fact that the period for which he had initially sought the
said permission, has lapsed. In the present case, the visit was not for a
specific function/event, upon the finishing of which,the cause would
cease to survive. For instance, in case a person has to travel abroad to
attend the marriage of a near and dear one and the marriage has already
been performed or to participate in a particular event and the said event
has already taken place, then the cause, depending upon the facts and
circumstances of the case, would have invariably lapsed. Thus, the said
issue No.4 is also decided in favour of the petitioner.
ISSUE NO.5: The question as to whether the Petitioner has a right to
go abroad based on the pleas raised in the present petition.
In the present case, the petitioner had initially made a prayer
to go abroad primarily on the ground of conjugal union since he is an
overseas Indian Citizen and his wife as well as his son are residing in
Utah, a state in USA,at the address 584E, Southfork Drive, Draper, UT-
84020 and also on account of the wife of the petitioner having undergone
an operation for removal of her appendix for which reliance has been
placed upon the medical record (Annexure P-5) and subsequently, an
additional factor, with respect to petitioner being a permanent resident of
United States of America and the said residency having an expiration date
of 06.04.2023 and in order to keep his rights of said residency alive, him
being required to visit USA,has for the first time been raised in the
present petition filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C.. For substantiating the
prejudice that might be caused to the petitioner, reference has been made
to Chapter-3 of the US Citizenship and Immigration Services (Annexure
P-14) as well as the judgment of Hon’ble the Supreme Court in Parvez
Noordin Lokhandwalla’s case (Supra), relevant portion of which has been
reproduced hereinabove.
Learned Senior Counsel for the complainant and learned
counsel for the State have raised an objection to the raising of an
additional plea by the Petitioner in the present petition filed under Section
482 Cr.P.C. This Court is of the view that the pleas which were raised
before the Courts below were in fact, sufficient to entitle the petitioner to
travel abroad inasmuch as it is the right of every individual to meet his
wife and son, residing abroad and the said right could not be curtailed, on
account of pendency of a criminal case against the individual, as the
petitioner in this case. The said right, however, is to be regulated by
imposing suitable conditions for securing his presence during the trial.
This Court, in the case of UtkarshPahwa Vs. Assistant
Director (PMLA), Directorate of Enforcement, reported as 2019(1) Law
Herald 870, had, after considering several judgments on the
issue,observed that it can be safely concluded that in normal
circumstances, permission could be granted to the petitioner to travel
abroad as the right to travel abroad is his fundamental right but the same
is to be regulated by imposing conditions. The relevant portion of the said
judgment is reproduced hereinbelow: -
“5     The law governing the question of grant of permission
to the petitioner for travelling abroad during the pendency of
the trial has been elaborately discussed by this Court in
authority of Paramjit Kaur vs. State of Punjab's case (supra)
in which reliance was placed on Srichand P. Hinduja Versus
State through CBI, New Delhi 2002(3) RCR (Criminal) 186
(SC), Arun Kapoor vs. State of Haryana 2004(4) RCR
(Criminal) 594 (P&H), Brij Bhushan Singal vs. Central
Bureau of Investigation 1994(3) RCR (Crl.) 498 (P&H),
Anjal Kumar @ Angel Kumar vs. State of Punjab 2010(1)
RCR (Criminal) 201 and Naginder Singh Rana vs. State of
Punjab 2004(3) RCR (Criminal) 912 and on the basis of the
said authoritative pronouncements of the Hon'ble Apex
Court and this Court, it can be safely concluded that in
normal circumstances, permission can be granted to the
petitioner to travel abroad being his fundamental right to
travel abroad, but the conditions are to be imposed for
regulating and securing his presence during the trial.
6.     Keeping in view the said ratio of the aforesaid
authority of Paramjit Kaur vs. State of Punjab's case
(supra), which is applicable to the facts of the present case,
in which also the permission has been sought by the
petitioner to travel abroad for a short duration for attending
the marriage ceremony of his childhood friends and the
supporting documents have also been placed on record, I
grant permission to petitioner Utkarsh Pahwa to travel
abroad for attending the marriage ceremony of his
childhood friends Jay at Bangkok during the period from
25.1.2019 to 28.1.2019 and marriage ceremony of Medha
Alhuwalia at Turkey from 08.2.2019 to 09.2.2019 subject to
following conditions:-
(i)     that the petitioner shall not seek extension of
the period of his stay abroad at any ground
whatsoever except in case of medical emergency and
shall return to India from 1st trip by 29.1.2019 and by
10.2.2019 from the second trip.
(ii)     that the petitioner shall not visit any other
country except Thailand and Turkey.
(iii)    that the petitioner shall not in any manner
tamper with the evidence of the prosecution;
(iv)      that the petitioner shall submit copy of his
passport before visit and on return, within one week
shall produce his passport in the court for placing on
record its copy in respect of his said visit record;
(v)     that the petitioner shall execute FDR/bank
guarantee to the tune of Rs. 40 Lacs. This amount
shall be returned to the petitioner when he will come
back from his trips.
7.        Resultantly, petition is allowed in the above terms
and the impugned order dated 2.1.2019 is set aside.
8.       Since the main case has been decided, the pending
The Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in judgment titled
Satish Chandra Verma Vs. Union of India and others, reported as 2019
(2) SCT 741, has also held that the right to travel abroad is an important
basic human right and the said right also extends to private life- marriage,
family and friendship. Relevant portion of the said judgment is
reproduced hereinbelow: -
“5.    The right to travel abroad is an important basic human
right for it nourishes independent and self-determining
creative character of the individual, not only by extending
his freedoms of action, but also by extending the scope of his
experience. The right also extends to private life; marriage,
family and friendship are humanities which can be rarely
affected through refusal of freedom to go abroad and clearly
show that this freedom is a genuine human right. (See Mrs.
Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India and Another (1978) 1 SCC
248). In the said judgment, there is a reference to the words
of Justice Douglas in Kent v. Dulles 357 US 116 which are
“Freedom to go abroad has much social value and
represents the basic human right of great significance.”
Although, in the said case, there were no criminal
proceedings pending against the appellant therein and the denial to go
abroad was on account of lack of vigilance credence but the aforesaid
observation of the Hon’ble Supreme Court is very relevant as it
highlighted the right to freedom to travel. In the present case, although,
the pleas raised by the petitioner before the Courts below, have been
considered to be sufficient by this Court so as to entitle the petitioner to
travel abroad, but it is always open to this Court while exercising its
powers under Section 482 of Cr.P.C. to consider any additional/ancillary
plea, and thus, in this case, the same may be considered so as to grant
permission to the petitioner to travel abroad. The additional plea raised
with respect to the petitioner being a permanent resident of USA since
02.04.2011 which is to expire on 06.04.2023, as is apparent from
Annexure P-6, as also on the basis of the relevant Chapter of the US
Citizenship and Immigration Services, as also the judgment of Hon’ble
the Supreme Court in Parvez Noordin Lokhandwalla’s case (Supra), goes
to show that non-grant of the said permission to the petitioner to go
abroad could cause prejudice to the right of the petitioner with respect to
his permanent residency. Thus, the said issue is also decided in favour of
the petitioner.
ISSUE NO.6: In case, permission is to be granted, then the conditions,
which are required to be imposed on the petitioner so that the petitioner
whould not flee from the course of justice.
Learned Senior Counsel for the complainant as well as
learned counsel for the State have very vehemently stated that in the
present case, the primary ground for opposing the application for
permission to go abroad is that it is certain that the petitioner would not
come back to India, in case permission is granted to the petitioner to go
abroad. On the said aspect, it has been highlighted that the wife and son
of the petitioner are citizens of America and the petitioner is a permanent
resident of U.S. since 02.04.2011 and that the petitioner does not have
any immovable property in India. It is further highlighted that, as is
apparent, there is no substantial amount in the bank accounts of the
petitioner and since there are several cases pending against the petitioner,
there is every possibility that the petitioner has filed the present
application just to flee from the country, never to come back. The
complainant has stated that an amount of Rs.1,85,50,286/- is due to the
complainant and there are 41 cases pending against the petitioner and the
company in question i.e., M/s Indsur Global Limited under Section 138 of
the Act of 1881 in various Courtsin Mumbai, Ahmedabad, Gurugram and
Rewari. It is submitted that the value of dispute in the said cases is Rs.25
crores. Reference has been made to Annexure C1, wherein the details of
the said 41 cases are given. Para 2 of the said Annexure C1 is reproduced
“2.    That the applicant, with the leave of this Hon'ble
Court, prays to place on record additional facts regarding
41 criminal cases pending against the petitioner and the
petitioner's company, as listed in the table below:-
Sr. Court               Case    type/Case Title as                    N.D.O.H.
It has been further submitted that the Hon’ble Supreme Court
in Srichand P. Hinduja’s case (Supra), had imposed conditions to the
effect that the petitioners therein were directed to execute a bond for a
sum of Rs.15 crores each with a bank guarantee for the like amount to the
satisfaction of the Special Judge in addition to the other conditions.
Relevant portion of para 3 and para 7 of the said judgment are reproduced
“3.    For this purpose it was pointed out to the High
Court, that if the accused are permitted to go abroad, it
would affect the smooth progress of the trial and there
are reasonable grounds to believe that they would not
return back to India to face the trial. It is also pointed
out that the appellants were Indian Nationals at the time
of registration of the FIR and thereafter they have
acquired British and Swiss Nationalities.
7. Considering the facts and circumstances, for the time
being as an interim measure, the appellants, namely,
Mr. Srichand P. Hinduja (in Crl. Appeal No...... of 2001
@ SLP (Crl) 1828/2001) and Mr. Gopichand P. Hinduja
(in Crl. Appeal No..... of 2001 @ SLP (Crl) No. 1829 of
2001) are permitted to go abroad on the following
1.      Both the appellants would execute a bond
for a sum of Rs. 15 crores (rupees fifteen crores)
each with a bank guarantee for the like amount
to the satisfaction of the Special Judge;
2.      On their behalf counsel will remain present
on the date of posting of the matter and would
not ask for adjournment on the ground that the
appellants are not present in India.
3.       The appellants will remain present before
the Special Judge as and when their presence is
needed in the case.
4.       If there is any violation of the aforesaid
conditions, it would be open to the Special Judge
to pass appropriate orders for cancellation of
bail of the appellants.
8.      In any case, this order would not adversely
affect further proceedings in the trial Court and
the Court will deal with the matter without being
influenced in any way by this order or any
observations made in the order passed by the
9.       This interim measure is upto 20th August,
2001 and the matter be listed before this Court
on 7th August, 2001 for further hearing and
directions.
On the other hand, learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner
has relied upon judgment of the Coordinate Bench of this Court in
Paramjit Kaur’s case (Supra), wherein the petitioner was permitted to go
abroad on the execution of only one personal bond in a sum of
Rs.5,00,000/- with an undertaking that she would report back on or
before 15.02.2019. Further, reference has also been made to Surender
Singla’s case (Supra) to state that in the said case, permission was granted
subject to deposit of only Rs.2,00,000/- with the trial Court.
This Court has considered the arguments of the counsel for
the parties on the present issue, which is of utmost importance. The
amount due to the complainant is stated to be Rs.1,85,50,286/-. This
Court is aware of the fact that it is a debatable issue as to whether the
petitioner would be personally liable to pay the said amount or not or if it
is the company in question which has to pay the said amount. There are
41 cases under Section 138 of the Act of 1881 stated to be pending
against the petitioner and the company M/s Indsur Global Limited and the
amount involved in the same is stated to be Rs.25 crores by the learned
Senior Counsel for the complainant. Although, learned Senior Counsel
for the complainant has not been able to produce the complaints filed
under Section 138 of the Act of 1881, which would have enabled this
Court to come to a prima facie conclusion as to what is the total amount
due and to what extent is the liability of the petitioner, however, on the
other hand, even the learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner has not
produced anything to affirmatively controvert the fact that the petitioner
is an accused in the said 41 cases. The company in which the petitioner
was on the Board of Directors, can be seen to be accused No.1 in the said
complaints under Section 138 of the Act of 1881. There are other parties
who have been made accused in the said cases, as is apparent from the
title of the cases. In case, the petitioner is not involved in the said cases,
even then it was incumbent upon the petitioner to produce the documents
substantiating the same. Learned Senior Counsel for the complainant has
referred to the order dated 28.07.2021 vide which non-bailable warrants
had been issued to accused Nos.2 to 4 in complaint No.3 of 2018 titled as
TCI Fright Vs. Indsur Global (Annexure C-2), to show that there are three
more accused in Complaint No.3 of 2018, in addition to the Company in
question, which are stated to be the petitioner, his mother and his father.
While rebutting the said aspect, the Learned Senior Counsel for the
Petitioner has referred to the order dated 13.10.2021 (which has been
reproduced hereinabove), to state that the matter has been compromised
but has not disputed the fact that the Petitioner was one of the three
accused in the said complaint. Thus, while imposing conditions, this
Court cannot be oblivious of the fact that there are 41 cases under Section
138 of the Act of 1881, as has been detailed hereinabove. In Srichand P.
Hinduja’s case (Supra), a bond for a sum of Rs.15 crores each with a bank
guarantee for the like amount to the satisfaction of the Special Judge was
sought from the appellants who were granted the permission to go abroad
on the said conditions. The said conditions were imposed with respect to
a case in which the dispute was stated be involving an amount of Rs.1437
crores and the alleged kickback was of Rs.64 crores. Thus, the said
conditions cannot ipso facto be applied to the present case. Reliance
placed by the learned Senior counsel for the petitioner on Paramjit Kaur’s
case (Supra) to contend that only a personal bond amounting to
Rs.5,00,000/- was sought from the Petitioner in the said case, does not
further the case of the petitioner inasmuch as in the said case, there was
no argument raised that the petitioner therein had several cases against
her nor any outstanding amount had been stated with respect to which
fraud or cheating at the hands of the petitioner therein could be alleged,
nor it had been stated that the petitioner therein did not have any
immovable property in India. In fact, in the said case, the petitioner
therein had earlier gone to Canada and had returned to India in
accordance with the permission granted and the conditions imposed and
even the proceedings in the trial Court as well as in the civil litigation had
been stayed. In fact, in the case of Brij Bhushan Singal, which was
considered in the said case, the security sought from the accused therein
was for a sum of Rs.25 lacs. Even in Surender Singla’s case (Supra),
relied upon by the learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner, neither there
were any details of the amount with respect to which the Petitioner had
allegedly committed cheating or fraud, nor there were any details of any
case against the petitioner, rather it had come out that the petitioner and
his family members had property in India and that earlier when the trial
Court had granted him the permission to travel abroad, he had returned to
India within the stipulated time. In the judgment passed by the
Coordinate Bench of this Court in Utkarsh Pahwa’s case (Supra), the
relevant portion of which has been reproduced hereinabove, the petitioner
therein had been directed to execute FDR/bank guarantee to the tune of
Rs.40 lacs even in a case where it was argued by the petitioner that he had
sufficient liquid assets and immovable property in India and although,
there were no serious objections raised with respect to the financial status
of the petitioner therein. Further, another Coordinate Bench of this Court
in Paramjit Singh and others Vs. State of Punjab, CRM-3400-2011,
decided on 23.02.2011 had granted permission to the petitioner therein to
go abroad while imposing conditions including the condition/undertaking
to the effect that in the event of failure to return from abroad, he would
have no objection if the land measuring 64 kanals 9 marlas, which was
owned by the petitioner therein, would be attached and disposed of in
accordance with law. Relevant portion of the said judgment is reproduced
Learned counsel for the appellant-applicant has also stated
that the land measuring 64 Kanals which is owned by the
appellant-applicant is of substantial value and he is ready to
keep the same as security for his return from England after a
period of two months.
(i) That the appellant-applicant shall execute a personal
bond and surety in the sum of Rs.5 lacs to the satisfaction of
the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Jalandhar with an
undertaking to appear in Court soon after the expiry of two
months from the date he shall leave the country. (ii) The
appellant-applicant shall bind himself that he shall return
from abroad and appear before the learned Chief Judicial
Magistrate, Jalandhar. The appellant-applicant shall furnish
one surety in the sum of Rs.5 lacs to the satisfaction of the
learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Jalandhar for his visit
abroad and then to appear before the said Court. (iii) The
appellant-applicant shall file an undertaking that in the
event of his failure to return from abroad, he would have
no objection if the land measuring 64 Kanals 9 Marlas as
mentioned in the Jambandi for the year 2004-05 (Annexure
P5) is attached and disposed of in accordance with law. On
return from abroad, the conditions as imposed upon the
appellant-applicant        for going     abroad will  become
inoperative and the appellant-applicant shall continue to be
bound by the old bonds and sureties that have been furnished
by him while being released on bail on 30.11.2010.”
In another case, titled Dr. Mangal Singh Sandhu Vs. State
of Punjab, reported as2018(2) Law Herald 1077, the Coordinate Bench
of this Court, while allowing the petitioner to go abroad, directed the
petitioner therein to execute a personal bond and surety in the sum of
Rs.50 lacs each to the satisfaction of the trial Court. Relevant portion of
the said order is reproduced hereinbelow: -
“16. In the totality of the circumstances, prayer of the
petitioner seeking permission to proceed to Canada is
accepted to the extent of according permission to proceed
abroad upto 28.04.2018.
17.      Petitioner shall execute a personal bond and a
surety in the sum of Rs.50 lacs each to the satisfaction of
the trial Court, with an undertaking to appear immediately
after the expiry of the period that he has been permitted to
travel abroad i.e. after 28.04.2018.
18.      Pursuant to the view taken by this Court, the order
dated 01.02.2018 passed by the trial Court at Annexure P-8
is set aside.”
This Court is required to draw a balance between the right of
the petitioner to travel abroad and also right of the prosecution to duly
prosecute the petitioner so as to prevent him from evading the trial. From
perusal of the various judgments passed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court of
India as well as this Court, it is clear that paramount consideration is
given to the conditions imposed upon the persons who have been granted
the permission to go abroad, so as to ensure that they do not flee from
In the present case, keeping in view the facts and
circumstances, moreso the fact that the petitioner does not own any
property in his own name in India and the wife and son of the petitioner
also reside abroad and also keeping in view the offer made by learned
Senior Counsel for the petitioner so as to prove his bonafide, the
petitioner is allowed to go abroad for a period of one month subject to the
following conditions: -
1)     The petitioner shall furnish two sureties in the sum of Rs.40 lacs
each to the satisfaction of the concerned trial Court/Duty
Magistrate for ensuring his return from abroad and appearance
before the Court.
2)     After the acceptance of the surety, the petitioner would indicate the
30 day period for which the petitioner wishes to go abroad, to the
concerned trial Court/Duty Magistrate. The said period of one
month should fall within the period of two months starting from the
date of present order. The concerned trial Court/Duty Magistrate
shall permit the petitioner to go abroad for a period of one month as
indicated by the petitioner in case, the said period of one month is
falling within two months from the date of this order and in case,
the sureties so given are to the satisfaction of the concerned
Magistrate/trial Court and in case, the petitioner also complies with
the other conditions as mentioned in the present order.
3)  The petitioner shall give an undertaking that the petitioner shall
return from abroad on the date so specified and appear before the
concerned trial Court/Duty Magistrate for the purpose of trial and
would not seek any extension with respect to the same.
4)  Upon the acceptance of the sureties and also upon giving the
undertaking, as directed aforesaid and after specifying the date of
return in the aforesaid manner, the passport of the petitioner shall
be released to him and he would be permitted to go abroad.
5)  During the period of the petitioner being abroad, the personal
appearance of the petitioner shall be exempted and the petitioner
shall be permitted to appear through his counsel. However, the
petitioner would not be entitled to raise the objection that the
evidence had been led in his absence.
6)  The petitioner shall not dispute his identity.
7)  The petitioner shall not in any manner tamper with the evidence of
the prosecution.
8)     The petitioner shall not visit any other country except USA, during
the said period for which the permission to travel abroad has been
granted by this Court.
9)     The petitioner on returning, within five days from the date of
return, shall produce his passport before the concerned trial
10)    On return, the petitioner shall continue to be bound by the old
conditions which were imposed while releasing the petitioner on
bail and the conditions imposed for his going abroad, as have been
detailed in this order, shall cease to operate.
Accordingly, Issue No. 6 stands decided, and the present
petition is disposed of in the abovesaid terms.
All the pending miscellaneous applications, if any, shall also
stand disposed of in view of the abovesaid judgment.