2. This first appeal under Section 19 of the Family Courts Act, 1984 has
been filed praying to set aside the judgment dated 04.08.2022 and the
decree dated 12.08.2022 in Matrimonial Case No.188 of 2015
(Azizurrahman vs. Hamidunnisha @ Sharifunnisha) passed by the
Principal Judge, Family Court, Sant Kabir Nagar whereby the
plaintiff’s suit for restoration of conjugal rights, has been dismissed.
3. Briefly stated facts of the present case are that the defendant-
respondent/ wife was married with the plaintiff-appellant/ husband on
12.05.1999. The defendant-respondent has only one sister and no
brother. The other sister had died. Thus, the defendant-respondent is the
only surviving issue of her father. From the wedlock of the plaintiff-
appellant and the defendant-respondent, four children were born, out of
which one has died and thus, two sons and one daughter remain
surviving children of the plaintiff-appellant and defendant respondent.
The father of the defendant-respondent has gifted his immovable
property to the defendant-respondent and she is living with her old
father who is stated to be more then 93 years old and is looking all his
care. The plaintiff-appellant has contracted second marriage and
suppressed the fact, but the fact of second marriage and also that some
children were born from the wedlock with the second wife, was
admitted by own witnesses of the plaintiff-appellant. The plaintiff-
appellant/ husband has admittedly neither told the defendant-
respondent/ wife either about his intention to contract second
marriage nor explained the defendant-respondent that he shall give
equal love, affection and treatment to both the wives. Briefly, on
these facts the impugned judgement has been passed which has been
challenged by the plaintiff appellant-husband.
4. We have carefully considered the submissions of the appellant
and perused the appeal.
5. Sura 4 Ayat 3 of the Holy Quran throws light on second marriage
by a Muslim, which is reproduced below:
6. In the case of Dilbar Habib Siddiqui Vs. State of U.P. and
Others 2010 (69) ACC 997 a Division Bench of this Court held in
"Thus for a valid muslim marriage both the spouses have to be muslim.
In the present writ petition this condition is not satisfied as the writ
petition lacks credible and accountable material in this respect on
which reliance can be placed.
Coming to another limb of argument raised by counsel for the
petitioner that a muslim man is entitled to marry four time, we once
again revert back to recognised treatises. We find that Sura 4 Ayat 3 of
The Holy Quran provides for giving due care and provisions for a
Muslim women. The said Ayat, as is referred to in the treatise by
I.Mulla, is referred to below:-
"(vi) Number of wives- If ye fear that ye shall not be able to deal justly
with the orphans ( orphan wives and their property); marry woman of
your choice, two or three or four; But if you fear that ye shall not be
able to deal justly (with them), then only one...........that would be more
suitable to prevent you from doing injustice."
From the perusal of above Ayats it is abundantly clear that bigamy is
not sanctified unless a man can do justice to orphans. The said Ayat
mandates all Muslims men to 'deal justly with orphans and then they
can marry women of their choice two or three or four but if they fear
that they will not be able to deal justly with them then only one. We
are of the view, that such a religious mandate has been given to all the
Muslims for a greater social purpose. If a Muslim man is not capable of
fostering his wife and children then he cannot be allowed the liberty to
marry other women as that will be against the said Sura 4 -Ayat-3.This
aspect of the matter should not vex our mind further as the same came
up before the apex court as well in Javed And Others versus State of
Haryana: AIR 2003 SC 3057 and therefore we conclude this aspect of
the submission by referring to the words of the apex court in that
decision, which are as follows:-
"The Muslim Law permits marrying four women. The personal law
nowhere mandates or dictates it as a duty to perform four marriages.
No religious scripture or authority provides that marrying less than
four women or abstaining from procreating a child from each and every
wife in case of permitted bigamy or polygamy would be irreligious or
offensive to the dictates of the religion. The question of the impugned
provision of Haryana Act being violative of Art. 25 does not arise."
(Emphasis supplied by us)
7. In Itwari vs. Smt. Asghari and others, AIR 1960 All. 684
(Paras-7, 9, 11, 16 and 18), this court considered the question of
restitution of conjugal rights by a Muslim husband against his first
wife and held, as under:
“7. It follows, therefore, that, in a suit for restitution of conjugal rights
by a Muslim husband against the first wife after he has taken a second,
if the Court after a review of the evidence feels that the circumstances
reveal that in taking a second wife the husband has been guilty of such
conduct as to make it inequitable for the Court to compel the first wife
to live with him, it will refuse relief.
9. Muslim Law permits polygamy but has never encouraged it. The
sanction for polygamy among Muslim is traced to the Koran IV. 3,
"If Ye fear that ye cannot do justice between orphans, then marry what
seems good to you of women, by twos, or threes, or fours or if ye fear
that ye cannot be equitable, then only one, or what your right hand
possesses."
This injunction was really a restrictive measure and reduced the
number of wives to four at a time; it imposed a ceiling on conjugal
greed which prevailed among males on an extensive scale. The right to
four wives appears to have been qualified by a 'better not' advice, and
husbands were enjoined to restrict themselves to one wife if they could
not be impartial between several wives -- an impossible condition
according to several Muslim jurists, who rely on it for their argument
that Muslim Law in practice discourages polygamy.
11. I am, therefore, of the opinion that Muslim Law as enforced in India
has considered polygamy as an institution to be tolerated but not
encouraged, and has not conferred upon the husband any fundamental
right to compel the first wife to share his consortium with another
woman in all circumstances. A Muslim husband has the legal right to
take a second wife even while the first marriage subsists, but if he does
so, and then seeks the assistance of the Civil Court to compel the first
wife to live with him against her wishes on pain of severe penalties
including attachment of property, she is entitled to raise the question
whether the court, as a court of equity, ought to compel her to submit to
co-habitation with such a husband. In that case the circumstances in
which his second, marriage took place are relevant and material in
deciding whether his conduct in taking a second wife was in itself an
act of cruelty to the first.
16. Mr. Kazmi relied on an observation of the late Sir Din Shah Mulla
in his Principles of Mohammedan Law, 14th edition page 246, that:
"cruelty, when it is of such a character as to render it unsafe for the
wife to return to her dominion, is a valid defence"
to a suit for restitution of conjugal rights by the husband. Learned
counsel argued that cruelty which would fall short of this standard is no
defence. I do not read any such meaning in that eminent author's
observation which is really borrowed from the judgment of the Privy
Council in Shamsunnissa Begum's case, 11 Moo Ind App 551. But I
have indicated that the Privy Council observed in that case that the
Mohammedan Law is not very different from the English Law on the
question of cruelty.
The Court will grant the equitable relief of restitution in accordance
with the social conscience of the Muslim community, though always
regarding the fundamental principles of the Mohammedan Law in the
matter of marriage and other relations as sacrosanct. That law has
always permitted and continues to permit a Mohammedan to marry
several wives upto the limit of four. But the exercise of this right has
never been encouraged and if the husband, after taking a second wife
against the wishes of the first, also wants the assistance of the Civil
Court to compel the first to live with him, the Court will respect the
sanctity of the second marriage, but it will not compel the first wife,
against her wishes, to live with the husband under the altered
circumstances and share his consortium with another, woman if it
concludes, on a review of the evidence, that it will be inequitable to
compel her to do so.
18. Even in the absence of satisfactory proof of the husband's cruelty,
the Court will not pass a decree for restitution in favour of the husband
if, on the evidence, it feels that the circumstances are such that it will be
unjust and inequitable to compel her to live with him. In Hamid
Hussain v. Kubra Begum, ILR 40 All 332: (AIR 1918 All 235), a
Division Bench of this Court dismissed a husband's prayer for
restitution on the ground that the parties were on the worst of terms,
that the real reason for the suit was the husband's desire to obtain
possession of the wife's property and the Court was of the opinion that
by a return to her husband's custody the wife's health and safety would
be endangered though there was no satisfactory evidence of physical
In Nawab Bibi v. Allah Ditta, AIR 1924 Lah 188 (2), Shadi Lal C. J. and
Zafar Ali, J. refused relief to a husband who had been married as an
infant to the wife when ,she was a minor but had not even cared to
bring her to live with him even after she had attained the age of
puberty. In Khurshid Begum v. Abdul Rashid, AIR 1926 Nag 234, the
Court refused relief to a husband because it was of the opinion that the
husband and wife had been "on the worst of terms" for years and the
suit had been brought in a struggle for the possession of property.”
8.    Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of A.K. Gopalan Vs. The
State of Madras AIR 1950 SC 27 observed that the people of India
have in exercise of their sovereign will as expressed in the preamble,
adopted the democratic ideals which assures the citizen the dignity
of the individuals and other cherished human values as a means
to the full evolution and expression of his personality, and in
delegating to the legislature, the executive and the judiciary their
respective powers in the Constitution, reserved to themselves certain
fundamental rights, because they have been re-tained by the people
and made paramount to the delegated powers, which has been
translated into positive law in Part III of the Indian Constitution, the
high purpose and spirit of the Preamble as well as the constitutional
significance of a Declaration of Fundamental Rights should be borne
in mind in construing a provision of Part III of the Indian
Constitution. This declaration is the greatest charter of liberty of
which the people of this country may well be proud. The
foundation of this republic have been led on the bedrock of
9.    In Maneka Gandhi Vs. Union of India (1978) 1 SCC 248
and also in the case of Olga Tellies Vs. Bombay Municipal
Corporation (1985) 3 SCC 545, Hon'ble Supreme Court held that
the concept of right to life and personal liberty, granted under Article
21 of the Constitution could include "the right to live with dignity".
10. Concept of equality enshrined in Article 14, concept of non
discrimination on the ground of sex etc. enshrined in Article
15(2) and the concept of right to life and personal liberty which
includes the right to live with dignity as enshrined in Article 21
read with preamble of the Constitution, are the foundation and
the basic features of the Constitution. Breach of any of these, by
any law or practice, shall render such law or practice to be
unconstitutional. Whether it is collective right of citizens or
individual right, both are protected by philosophy and ethos of the
Constitution. In the garb of Personal Law, citizens cannot be
deprived constitutional protection. The equality clause is not merely
the equality before the law but embodies the concept of real and
substantive equality which strikes at the inequalities arising on
account of vast social and economic differentiation. Horizons of the
constitutional law are expanding. The right to life and personal
liberty under Article 21 of the Constitution, has been expanded by
Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Chameli Singh Vs. State of
U.P. 1995 (Supp) 3 SCC 523 by declaring that decent and civilized
life is fundamental right which also includes food, wather and
decent environment. In Francis Coralie vs. Union Territory 1981 (1)
SCC 608 while interpreting Article 21 of the Constitution of India,
Hon'ble Supreme Court held that the right to life includes the right
to live with human dignity and all that goes along with it, namely,
the bare necessaries of life such as adequate nutrition, clothing and
shelter over the head and facilities for reading, writing and
expressing oneself in diverse forms, freely moving about and mixing
and commingling with fellow human beings. The right to life or
personal liberty under Article 21 of the Constitution enlarge its
sweep to encompass human personality in its full blossom. It
includes right to livelihood, better standard of living, hygienic
conditions in the work place and leisure. In Ghisalal (supra), Hon'ble
Supreme Court held that mandate of wife's consent for adoption and
conferring independent right upon a female Hindu to adopt a child,
Parliament sought to achieve one of the facets of the goal of equality
enshrined in the Preamble and reflected in Article 14 read with
Article 15 of the Constitution.
11. In Voluntary Health Association of Punjab (supra), Hon'ble
Supreme Court held that woman has to be regarded as an equal
partner in the life of a man. A society that does not respect its
women, cannot be treated to be civilized. Civilization of a
country is known how it respects its women. It is the requisite of
the present day that people are made aware that it is obligatory to
treat the women with respect and dignity so that humanism in its
conceptual essentiality remains alive.
12. In view of mandate in the Holy Quran it is amply clear that
bigamy is not sanctified unless a man can do justice to orphans, who
in the present set of facts are the respondent and her children. As per
mandate of the Holy Quran as noted above all Muslims men have to
deal justly with the orphans. A married Muslim man having his wife
alive cannot marry with another muslim women, if he cannot deal
justly with the orphan. A mandate has been given that in such
circumstances a Muslim man has to prevent himself to perform
second marriage, if he is not capable of fostering his wife and
children. The religious mandate of Sura 4 Ayat 3 is binding on all
muslim men which specifically mandates all Mulim men to deal
justly with orphans and then they can marry women of their choice
two or three or four but if a Muslim man fears that he will not be
able to deal justly with them then only one. If a muslim man is not
capable of fostering his wife and children then as per above mandate
of Holy Quran, he cannot marry the other woman.
13. Thus, in the absence of any cogent explanation for the second
marriage or in the absence of any explanation to the first wife with
respect to matters aforementioned, the action of the plaintiff-
appellant would amount to cruelty to his first wife. Therefore, it
would be inequitable for the court to compel the first wife against
her wishes to live with such a husband, i.e. the plaintiff-appellant.
14. A Muslim husband has the legal right to take a second wife
even while the first marriage subsists, but if he does so, and then
seeks the assistance of the Civil Court to compel the first wife to
live with him against her wishes on pain of severe penalties, she
is entitled to raise the question whether the court, as a court of
equity, ought to compel her to submit to co-habitation with such
a husband. In that case the circumstances in which his second
marriage took place, are relevant and material in deciding
whether his conduct in taking a second wife was in itself an act
of cruelty to the first.    In other words, if the husband, after
taking a second wife against the wishes of the first, also wants
the assistance of the Civil Court to compel the first to live with
him, the Court will respect the sanctity of the second marriage,
but it will not compel the first wife, against her wishes, to live
with the husband under the altered circumstances and share his
consortium with another woman, if it concludes, on a review of
the evidence, that it will be inequitable to compel her to do so.
Even in the absence of satisfactory proof of the husband's
cruelty, the Court will not pass a decree for restitution in favour
of the husband if, on the evidence, it feels that the circumstances
are such that it will be unjust and inequitable to compel her to
live with him.
15. When the plaintiff-appellant has contracted the second marriage
suppressing this fact from his first wife, then such a conduct of the
plaintiff-appellant amounts to cruelty to his first wife. Under the
circumstances, if the first wife does not wish to live with her
husband-plaintiff appellant, then she cannot be compelled to go with
him in a suit filed by him for restitution of conjugal rights. If the
contention of the plaintiff-appellant/ husband for grant of decree of
conjugal rights is accepted, then from point of view of the
defendant-respondent/wife, it would amount to breach of her
fundamental rights guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution
of India.
16. For all the reasons afore-stated, the present appeal is totally
frivolous and deserves to be dismissed at the admission stage.
Consequently, the appeal is dismissed.