Counsel for Respondent :- Gopal Kumar Srivastava
1. Heard Sri Shireesh Kumar, learned counsel for the petitioner
and Sri Gopal Kumar Srivastava, learned counsel for the
2. By means of this writ petition, the petitioner has assailed the
order dated 16.04.2022 passed by the opposite party No.1
transferring as many as 163 employees in different Zones
serving at Central Bank of India from one place to another. The
petitioner, whose name finds place at serial No.132, has been
transferred from Lucknow to Cooch Behar, Kolkota. The
petitioner has also assailed the order dated 20.04.2022 whereby
he has been directed to be relieved from his present place of
3. The petitioner is serving on the post of Officer (Scale-II) in
Central Bank of India.
4. At the very outset, learned counsel for the petitioner, Sri
Shireesh Kumar, has drawn attention of this Court towards
Annexure No.3 of the writ petition, which is Unique Disability
ID issued by the Competent Authority of the Government of
India relating to wife of the petitioner, namely, Smt. Priya
Chaturvedi, who is permanent disable person having 100%
5. Further attention of this Court has been drawn by learned
counsel for the petitioner towards the policy/norms framed on
Transfer of Mainstream/ Specialized Officer in Scale-I, II & III
of the Bank. Sri Shireesh Kumar has referred para-1.2 of the
aforesaid policy, which reads as under:-
"1.2 In respect of transfers/ posting of physically challenged
officers, with benchmark disability and Officer who is caregiver
of dependent daughter/ son/ parents/ spouse/ brother/ sister
with 'Specified Disability' as certified by the certifying
authority, as a Person with Benchmark Disability, as defined
under Section 2 (r) of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
Act, 2016, in terms of DOPT guidelines O.M.No.42011/3/2014-
Estt (Res) dated 8th October, 2018, bank shall follow the
guidelines issued by Govt. of India from time to time, subject to
administrative constraint."
6. Since one memorandum of DOPT dated 08.10.2018 has
been referred in the aforesaid guideline of the Bank so Sri
Kumar has demonstrated such office memorandum being issued
by the DOPT dated 08.10.2018 which has been annexed as
Annexure No.5 to the writ petition. He has drawn attention of
this Court towards para-3 (i) & (iii) of the aforesaid office
memorandum of DOPT dated 08.10.2018, which read as
"(i) A Government employee who is a care-giver of dependent
daughter/ son/ parents/ spouse/ brother/ sister with Specified
Disability, as certified by the certifying authority as a Person
with Benchmark Disability as defined under Section 2 (r) of the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 may be exempted
from the routine exercise of transfer/rotational transfer subject
to the administrative constraints.
(iii) The term 'Specified Disability' as defined herein is
applicable as grounds only for the purpose of seeking
exemption from routine transfers/ rotational transfer by the
Government employee, who is a care-giver of dependent
daughter/ son/ parents/ spouse/ brother/ sister as stated in
para-3 (i) above."
7. Sri Shireesh Kumar, learned counsel for the petitioner has
submitted that so as to understand the meaning of 'care-giver',
'benchmark disability' and 'permanent disability', the relevant
provision of Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016
(here-in-after referred to as the "Act, 2016") may be perused.
Section 2 (d) of the Act, 2016 defines 'care-giver', Section 2 (r)
defines 'benchmark disability' and Section 2 (s) defines 'person
with disability', for convenience, Section 2 (d), (r) & (s) are
being reproduced here-in-below:-
"2 (d) "care-giver" means any person including parents and
other family Members who with or without payment provides
care, support or assistance to a person with disability;
(r) "person with benchmark disability" means a person with not
less than forty per cent of a specified disability where specified
disability has not been defined in measurable terms and
includes a person with disability where specified disability has
been defined in measurable terms, as certified by the certifying
(s) "person with disability" means a person with long term
physical, mental, intellectual or sensory impairment which, in
interaction with barriers, hinders his full and effective
participation in society equally with others."
8. As per Sri Kumar, the present petitioner being care-giver of
his wife who is permanent disabled, may be given the benefit of
own policy of the Bank vide item No.1.2 (supra). As per the
aforesaid protection, any transfer of employee be it routine
transfer or rotational transfer may be exempted from such
9. Sri Kumar has further submitted that vide office order dated
20.04.2022 (Annexure No.8) the petitioner was directed to get
himself relieved but he has not been relieved as he has not
submitted any application for relieving, as recital to this effect
has been given in para-31 of the writ petition. However in
para-32 of the writ petition, it has been indicated that out of so
many posts of Manager/ Officer in the rank of the petitioner are
vacant in Lucknow Region and the petitioner may be
accommodated against any post in such Region inasmuch as if
he is compelled to submit his joining to Cooch Behar, Kolkata
which is about 1500 KM from Lucknow, he would not be able
to look-after his wife, who is requiring permanent care from her
10. Therefore, Sri Kumar has submitted that the impugned
transfer order, so far as it relates to the petitioner, may be stayed
and the petitioner may be accommodated at anywhere at
Lucknow Region if he may not be permitted to be posted at a
place from where he has been transferred to Cooch Behar,
11. Per contra, Sri Gopal Kumar Srivastava, learned counsel for
the opposite parties has submitted that the present petitioner is
serving at Lucknow Region for the last about 28 years and as
per the same Transfer Policy/ Guidelines, any officer who has
completed 10 years at one place/zone shall be transferred to
another place/zone. Therefore, pursuant to the aforesaid policy
the present petitioner has been transferred from Lucknow Zone
to another zone.
12. Sri Srivastava has further submitted that on earlier occasion
the similar grievance of the petitioner has been considered
sympathetically, therefore, he has been retained at Lucknow
Zone for about 28 years.
13. Sri Srivastava has also submitted that wife of the petitioner
is serving on the post of Telephone Attendant in Secretariat
14. Sri Shireesh Kumar, learned counsel for the petitioner has
not disputed the aforesaid submission of learned counsel for the
opposite parties, however, he has submitted that she has been
given such appointment under the handicapped quota.
15. Sri Srivastava has also apprised the Court that the petitioner
has already been relieved on 09.05.2022 and in his place one
incumbent has already joined, therefore, it may not be possible
for the Bank to permit the petitioner to serve on the same post
at the same place. He has also submitted on the basis of
instructions that in the Lucknow Region almost all the
vacancies are already filled up.
16. Learned counsel for the parties are agreeable that the matter
may be disposed of finally at the admission stage as the
submissions of learned counsel for the parties have been
17. Having heard learned counsel for the parties and having
perused the material available on record, I am of the considered
opinion that if there is any beneficial or compassionate policy to
accommodate any employee for the specific and certain reason,
the same must be abide by in its letter and spirit.
18. Since wife of the petitioner is a permanent disable person
having 100% disability and to look-after and take care of her is
a sole responsibility of the petitioner, then his status shall come
within the meaning of term 'care-giver' as defines under Section
2 (d) of the Act, 2016. On account of disability of wife of the
petitioner, she is a person with the 'benchmark disability' and a
'person with disability' as per the meaning of Section 2 (r) & (s)
of the Act, 2016. If the Competent Authority of the Bank has
transferred the petitioner in compliance of the Transfer Policy/
Guidelines which provides that whosoever has completed 10
years of service at one place shall be transferred from one zone
to another zone, then the same policy also clearly indicates vide
para 1.2 that a transfer/ posting of a spouse etc. of a person with
'benchmark disability' or long term disability, shall be exempted
from routine/ rotational transfer in terms of DOPT Guidelines
dated 08.10.2018. The DOPT Guidelines (supra) clearly
provides that such government employee may be exempted
from routine transfer/ rotational transfer subject to the
administrative constraints. A routine/ rotational transfer, which
has been made in compliance of the guidelines, may not be
considered as administrative constraint. Besides, if the same
policy is providing two separate guidelines, the guideline which
is of beneficial nature shall prevail over the general guidelines
inasmuch as the beneficial guideline is issued to serve a
particular purpose and if such guideline is flouted it may cause
an irreparable loss to a person which, generally, cannot be
compensated in terms of money.
19. Therefore, I do not find any good reason to implement the
policy vide para-3 i.e. 'Rotational Transfer' ignoring the para
1.2 of the same policy (supra). The rotational transfers are
meant for a person who has not been protected by any
compassionate or beneficial policy but if any employee has
been protected from any beneficial or compassionate policy, the
same may not be ignored unless there is any administrative
reason to transfer such person from one zone to another zone.
20. In the present case, the wife of the petitioner is serving on
the post of Telephone Attendant in Secretariat Telephone
Exchange at Lucknow despite having 100% disability and while
discharging her duties on such post she has confidence in the
back of her mind that her husband is residing at Lucknow to
look-after her in a critical situation, if need be, but if the
petitioner is compelled to submit his joining at Cooch Behar
which is about 1500 KM from Lucknow, the wife of the
petitioner may likely to suffer irreparable loss.
21. Now, the question that there is no post available in
Lucknow Region and the petitioner may not be permitted to
serve anywhere at Lucknow Region, I am unable to
comprehend that when the petitioner has earlier been retained at
Lucknow considering his aforesaid grievance then as to why his
grievance has not been considered now inasmuch as the
grievance of the petitioner is of permanent nature.
22. Normally, the transfer is an exigency/ incidence of service
and no courts are ordinarily interfered with the transfer orders
but if such transfer may be avoided for any specific compelling
reason and that reason is unavoidable, the Competent Authority
being model employer should consider such condition
sympathetically. At the same time the transfer may not be
punitive in nature and in the present case if the petitioner is
directed to submit his joining at Cooch Behar, Kolkata, it would
cause irreparable mental pain to him that he would not be able
to look-after and take care of his wife which would cause
irreparable mental injury to her also.
23. Therefore, considering the peculiar facts and circumstances
of the issue in question, I hereby allow the present petition at
the admission stage. The impugned order dated 16.04.2022
(Annexure No.6), so far as it relates to the petitioner, to be more
precise the transfer of the petitioner is concerned, is hereby
quashed.
24. Since in place of petitioner someone has submitted his
joining, as informed by Sri Gopal Kumar Srivastava as per
instructions, therefore, the opposite parties are directed to
accommodate the petitioner at any suitable place at Lucknow
Region, be it in a rural areas or urban areas as per the
convenience of the authorities and appropriate order to that
effect shall be issued forthwith, preferably, within a period of
fifteen days from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this
order. The petitioner is also directed to submit his joining at a
place where he is directed to submit his joining in compliance
of this order forthwith.
Digitally signed by SURESH