This petition has been filed seeking to quash the F.I.R. in Crime
No.275 of 2022, filed against the petitioners, by the first respondent police,
pursuant to the directions of the learned XVIII Metropolitan Magistrate,
Saidapet, for the offence punishable under Section 295A of IPC.
2. The crux of the allegation in the FIR is that the defacto
complainant / second respondent and his friend has watched a movie by
name "Jai Bhim" acted and produced by Mr.Suriya (A2) and directed by
Mr.T.J.Gnanavel (A1) and released in OTT platform. It is projected that as
if it is a real story and that they came to know that it in order to insult and
humiliate the defacto complainant's community and incite communal
violence, the story has been projected as if a Irular community man was
killed by a Sub Inspector of Police named Guru. It is the case of the defacto
complainant that name of Guru has been given to the police officer and in
fact the name Guru refers to the former President of Vanniyar Sangam.
Further, it can be seen that the daily calendar of the Vanniyar Sangam was
also used and thereby FIR has been lodged for an offence punishable under
Section 295A of IPC.
3. The learned counsel appearing for the petitioners vehemently
contended that the film showcases the torture inflicted upon the Irular
community people under police custody. The story is based on a case
conducted before the Madras High Court. The names are not connected with
any particular section or community. The movie was also given appropriate
certificate by the Censor Board. He further contended that absolutely there
is no allegation which attracts the offence under Section 295A of IPC.
Merely on the inference and presumptions of the defacto complainant that
his caste leader's name has been used, the offence under Section 295A of
IPC cannot be invoked.
4. It is the further contention of the learned counsel appearing for the
petitioners that before forwarding the complaint under Section 156(3) of
Cr.P.C., the learned Magistrate ought to have seen that sanction has been
properly obtained for screening the motive from a Statutory Body, whereas,
the learned Magistrate has mechanically forwarded the complaint, which
resulted in lodging of the complaint against the Director and the Producer.
Therefore, he seeks to quash the entire FIR as it is an abuse of process of
5. Whereas, the learned counsel appearing for the defacto
complainant, apart from filing the counter, would submit that in the movie a
caste leader of a particular caste has been projected in a negative manner and
humiliated. The entire movie has instigated violence between two sections
of the society and hence the offence under Section 295A of IPC has been
clearly attracted and at this stage, the FIR cannot be quashed.
6. The learned Additional Public Prosecutor appearing for the first
respondent police would submit that police registered the FIR since there
was a direction under Section 156(3) of Cr.P.C. by the learned XVIII
Metropolitan Magistrate, Saidapet and submitted that he is leaving the
matter to the Court.
7. Heard the learned counsel on either side and also perused the
materials available on record.
8. Normally if there is a prima facie allegation and it discloses a
cognizable offence, the Courts will not interfere with the F.I.R. during
investigation stage. But at the same time, if the F.I.R is lodged on any
assumptions or presumptions without any such incident has occurred or as a
result of some motive, the Court can very well interfere with such F.I.R
while exercising power under Section 482 of Cr.P.C.
9. Perusal of the FIR, it can be seen that the movie called "Jai Bhim"
was released in OTT platform and the second petitioner herein Mr.Suriya has
acted and produced the film and the first petitioner herein Mr.T.J.Gnanavel
has directed the film. It is the case of the defacto complainant that the movie
has been produced only in order to incite caste feelings and violence against
the Vanniyar community. On a perusal of the FIR in its entirety, except
contending that the movie has been projected in such a manner to incite
violence and hostility on a particular community, no specific instance
whatsoever has been stated in the FIR. On the other hand the entire FIR is
only based on the inference and presumptions of the defacto complainant.
10. Admittedly, the movie has been certified by the Censor Board,
which has not been disputed. It is stated that the movie has been mainly
based on the Habeas Corpus Petition (HCP), which was conducted before
this Court in respect of custodial violence.             The movie has been duly
certified. Merely assuming that the name given to a character in the movie
resembles that of the leader of a community, it cannot be presumed that in
fact such projection was made or directed against a particular community.
Merely referring the same name, one cannot assume that the said name is
related to a particular community.
11. As far as in this country, there are many people with similar
name. Merely, because one such name is referred, one cannot assume or
presume that such name is targeted only against a particular community.
Therefore, when the movie has been legally certified by the Censor Board
under the Cinematography Act, 1952 merely on the assumption that the
name given to a particular character related to a particular community and
allow such prosecution for the offence under Section 295A of IPC, then it
will certainly infringe the rights guaranteed under Article 19(1) of the
Constitution of India.
12. Be that as it may, to attract an offence under Section 295A of IPC
there must be a deliberate and malicious intention on the part of the accused
person to outrage the religious feelings of any citizens of India by words
either spoken or written or by signs or by visible representations or
otherwise insults or attempts to insults the religion or the religious beliefs.
The said Section 295A of IPC reads as follows:
"Section    295    A.   Deliberate    and
malicious acts, intended to outrage religious
feelings of any class by insulting its religion or
religious beliefs:-
intention of outraging the religious feelings of
any class of citizens of India, by words, either
spoken or written, or by signs or by visible
representations or otherwise, insults or attempts
to insult the religion or the religious beliefs of
that class, shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may
13. This Court is of the view that when the FIR not even discloses
the nature of the insult which outraged a particular section of the people,
merely on the inferences and presumptions of the defacto complainant the
offence under Section 295A of IPC will not get attracted. If such inference
or presumption of a particular person or some individual is given
importance, no doubt it will curtail the freedom of speech and expression
guaranteed under the Constitution of India.
14. In S.Rangarajan Vs. P.Jagjivan Ram reported in (1989) 2 SCC
574, wherein the case relates to revocation of the 'U Certificate' granted to
the film 'Ore Oru Gramathile', which was an anti-reservation film. There
were protests against this film and it was held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court
that the effect of the so called offending words must be judged from the
standards of reasonable, strong minded, firm and courageous men and not
those of weak and vacillating minds. It was further held that the State cannot
plead its inability to handle the problem of hostile audience. It is its
obligatory duty to prevent it and protect the freedom of expression.
15. In Prakash Jha Productions vs. Union of India, reported in
(2011) 8 S.C.C 372, the case involved was suspension of the Hindi film
‘Aarakshan’ by the State of Uttar Pradesh even after the Censor Certificate
was issued on grounds that it would cause a ‘law and order’ issue. The
Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that the film was to be allowed to be
screened. ‘Law and order’ maintenance was the duty of the State. The Court
held that it is the duty of the State to maintain law and order and therefore,
the State shall maintain it effectively and potentially.
16. In Srishti School of Art, Design & Technology vs Chairperson,
Central Board of Film Certification, reported in 2011 (123) D.R.J. the
makers of the documentary called ‘Had Anhad’ were asked to carry out cuts,
which the petitioner therein protested against. It was held that the cuts
proposed were violative of the petitioner’s right to free speech and
expression and was allowed. The Court observed that the Indian Constitution
provides a democratic space to voice views unacceptable to others but for
the reason it is unacceptable, it cannot be prevented from being expressed. It
was thus held that a book must be read as a whole and the context must not
be ignored and it is reasonable to see what would be the reaction of a
common reader.
17. In LYCA Productions Pvt Ltd vs. Government of Tamil Nadu,
reported in 2014 S.C.C. Online Mad. 1448, the producers of the popular
Tamil commercial feature film ‘Kathi’ were Sri Lankans and the film was
objected to owing to the nationality of its producers. They were forced to
sign an agreement to remove their names from the movie hoardings, which
the police attempted to enforce against them. This Court held agreement not
valid and cannot be enforced. It was observed that the letter of undertaking
cannot be relied upon by the Police, which cannot grant a seal of approval to
such letters of undertaking, as the same tantamount to the creation of a
super-Censor Board. It was further observed that the police should not
permit attempts of such blackmails to succeed, which if allowed, would
automatically lead to extortion and the surrender of power of governance and
the rule of law to a few intolerant people.
18. In Ajay Gautam vs. Union of India, reported in 2015 S.C.C.
Online Del 6479, the movie ‘PK’ was sought to be banned on the grounds
that it hurt the religious sentiments of the Hindus and violated the rights of
the Hindus under Article 19(2) of the Constitution of India. Holding that no
one is captive audience and it is a conscious choice of a viewer, who is free
to avoid watching the film, the case was dismissed.
19. In S.Khushboo vs. Kanniammal, reported in 2010 (5) S.C.C.
600, the quashing of cases filed against the petitioner therein for remarks
made by her on pre-marital sex. This Court observed that a culture of
responsible reading is to be inculcated amongst the prudent readers. Morality
and criminality are far from being co-extensive. An expression of opinion in
favour of non-dogmatic and non-conventional morality has to be tolerated as
the same cannot be a ground to penalize the author.
20. In Sony Pictures vs. State, reported in 2006 3 L.W. 728, the ban
imposed by the State of Tamil Nadu on the English film ‘The Da Vinci
Code’ was challenged. A learned single Judge of this Court observed that
when the State has a duty to prevent all threats of demonstrations and
processions which amount to intimidating the right of freedom of expression,
it cannot plead its inability to handle breach of peace if and when it arises.
The order imposing the ban on the film was thus quashed.
21. Similarly, in Mahendra Singh Dhoni Vs. Yerraguntla
Shyamsundar and another reported in (2017) 7 SCC 760 the Hon'ble
Supreme Court has held in paragraph 6 as follows:
"6. On a perusal of the aforesaid passages, it is
clear as crystal that Section 295A does not stipulate
everything to be penalised and any and every act would
tantamount to insult or attempt to insult the religion or the
religious beliefs of class of citizens. It penalise only those
acts of insults to or those varieties of attempts to insult the
religion or religious belief of a class of citizens which are
perpetrated with the deliberate and malicious intention of
outraging the religious feelings of that class of citizens.
Insults to religion offered unwittingly or carelessly or
without any deliberate or malicious intention to outrage
the religious feelings of that class do not come within the
Section. The Constitution Bench has further clarified that
the said provision only punishes the aggravated form of
insult to religion when it is perpetrated with the deliberate
and malicious intention of outraging the religious feelings
of that class. Emphasis has been laid on the calculated
tendency of the said aggravated form of insult and also to
disrupt the public order to invite the penalty."
22. Considering the above judgments, merely because same name has
been referred to, it cannot be inferred by the defacto complainant that their
religious leader and their community has been portrayed badly in the film.
The defacto complainant is not a captive audience and it is a conscious
choice of the viewer and he is free to avoid watching the film if at all he
feels that the movie is accusing his community.
23. Merely on inference of some sections of the people, the offence
under Section 295A of IPC will not get attracted. Considering the various
pronouncements and also the facts of the case and considering the nature of
the allegations contained in the FIR, this Court is of the view that the offence
under Section 295A of IPC is not attracted.
24. The learned Magistrate   has    forwarded   the    complaint
mechanically without applying his mind. It is also relevant to note that the
learned Magistrate while referring the complaint generally observed that the
complaint discloses some cognizable offence. The learned Magistrate has
not even stated which of the cognizable offence is made out. The learned
Magistrate has mechanically forwarded the complaint for investigation
observing that some cognizable offence has been made out, which is not
valid.
25. Such view of the matter, considering the entire allegations
contained in the FIR, this Court is of the view that offence under Section
295A of IPC is not attracted in this case. Hence, the complaint in Crime
No.275 of 2022 pending on the file of the first respondent police is liable to
be quashed and accordingly quashed. The Criminal Original Petition is
allowed. Consequently, the connected miscellaneous petition is closed.