The petitioner is a resident of Kavaratti Island in the Union
Territory of Lakshadweep. He states that he is presently the elected
Chairperson of Village (Dweep) Panchayat, Kavaratti, representing Ward
This writ petition is filed challenging Ext.P3 notification issued by
the Administrator, Union Territory of Lakshadweep, declaring the local
areas comprising of villages or a group of villages specified in the said
notification to be Panchayat areas for the purpose of the Lakshadweep
Panchayat Regulations, 2022 (hereinafter referred to as ‘LPR, 2022’ for
the sake of brevity). The petitioner has also sought for issuance of
directions to the 3rd respondent to keep in abeyance all proceedings for
conducting elections to the Gram Panchayat constituted as per Ext.P3
notification till such time as the population for the territorial areas of the
Gram Panchayat constituted in terms of the said notification are
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022               :3:
ascertained in accordance with Section 2(t) of LPR, 2022. The petitioner
asserts that Exhibits P3 and P4 notifications and also Exhibit P6 draft
notification are ‘premature’ and ultra vires the provisions of Part IX of the
Constitution of India and Sections 8 and 12 of LPR, 2022.
3. The contentions of the petitioner:
a) Following the insertion of Part IX of the Constitution of India
vide the Constitution (73rd Amendment) Act, 1993, the President of India
has    promulgated     the Lakshadweep      Panchayat    Regulations,   1994
(hereinafter referred to “LPR, 1994” for the sake of brevity), for the
establishment of “Village (Dweep) Panchayat” and District Panchayat in
the Union Territory of Lakshadweep. As per the First Schedule of LPR,
1994, a “Village (Dweep) Panchayat” was constituted for each of the ten
islands specified in the First Schedule of the Regulations. The First
Schedule reads as under:
b)     The petitioner asserts that by virtue of Section 8(1) of LPR,
1994, a “Village (Dweep) Panchayat” for each of the ten islands was
coextensive with the territorial area of the respective islands.
c)     Chapter III of LPR, 1994 deals with Panchayats and their
constitutions. As per the said provision, the Administrator was required to
constitute a “Village (Dweep) Panchayat” on each of the islands specified
in the First Schedule and a District Panchayat for the Union Territory. The
Panchayat was to consist of such number of seats to be filled by persons
chosen by direct election from territorial constituencies in the Panchayat
area as may be notified. The Proviso to section 8(2) provided for the
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022               :5:
distribution of the number of seats, viz a viz, the population of the “Village
(Dweep) Panchayat.” The more populous islands like Androth, Kavaratti,
and Minicoy were allotted more seats as against the less populous islands
taking into account the population as per the 2011 census.
d)     The petitioner states that in the exercise of the powers
conferred by Article 240 of the Constitution of India, the President of India
promulgated LPR, 2022, which came into effect on 26.09.2022. Radical
changes were brought about by the LPR, 2022, and the island-wise
constitution of Village (Dweep) Panchayat, as stipulated vide Section 8(1)
of the LPR, 1994, was done away with, and powers were conferred on the
Administrator to declare any local area to be a Panchayat area. As per
LPR, 2022, the Panchayat area was defined as the territorial area of a
Gram Panchayat declared by the Administrator under Sub Section (1) of
Section 3. The Administrator was conferred under Section 3 of LPR, 2022
to conduct an enquiry and thereafter issue a notification declaring a local
area comprising a Village or a group of Villages or any part or parts
thereof or a combination of any two or more of them to be a Panchayat
area for the purposes of LPR, 2022. The Administrator was also conferred
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022                :6:
with the power to constitute a Gram Sabha by name for each Panchayat
area. On the strength of the powers so conferred, the Administrator
issued Ext.P3 notification on 16.11.2022, declaring the local areas
specified in the said notification to be ‘Panchayat areas’ for the purpose of
LPR, 2022. In Ext.P3 notification, as many as 18 separate Panchayat areas
have been brought into existence in the place of the erstwhile 10 Village
e)     As per Ext.P3 notification, only two Panchayat areas, namely,
Kalpeni and Kiltan, were co-extensive with the territorial area of the said
islands. The six islands of Agatti, Amini, Androth, Kadamath, Kavaratti,
and Minicoy, which among themselves constituted six separate “Village
(Dweep)      Panchayat”    under   LPR,   1994,  have   been     divided and
reconstituted as 15 separate Panchayat areas. Agatti, Androth, Kavaratti,
and Minicoy have been divided into 3 separate Panchayat areas each, and
the islands of Chetlat and Bitra have been joined together so as to
constitute one Panchayat area.
f)     After declaring the Panchayat areas as per Ext.P3 notification,
the Administrator has notified the names of the 18 Gram Sabhas as
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022                :7:
required under sub-section (2) of Section 3 by the very same order.
g)     Thereafter, Ext.P4 notification has been issued declaring the
number of seats to be allotted under Sub Section (2) of Section 12 to
each of the 18 Gram Panchayats and also the number of seats to be
reserved for Women and Scheduled Tribes under Section 12(6) to (8) of
h)      Under Section 12(3) of LPR, 2022, the ratio between the
“Population of the Territorial Areas of a Gram Panchayat” and the number
of seats in that Panchayat to be filled by elections shall so far be as
practicable be the same throughout the Union Territory. Duty is also cast
upon the Administrator under Sub Section (4) of Section 12 to notify the
territorial boundary of each Ward on the basis of the recommendations of
the Election Commission.
i)     The petitioner states that on the strength of the powers
conferred under Section 130 of the LPR, 2022, the Administrator has
framed the Lakshadweep Panchayats (Election Procedure) Rules, 2022
(“LEP Rules,” 2022 for brevity). As per the LEP Rules, 2022, the Election
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022              :8:
Commission, subject to the provisions of Sections 12 and 57 of the LPR,
2022, is to distribute the seats assigned to each Gram Panchayat and
District Panchayat to Single Member Territorial Wards and delimit them on
the basis of the latest census figures. In the exercise of the power
conferred under Section 12(5) of LPR, 2022 and Rule 3(2) of the LEP
Rules 2022, the Election Commission has issued Ext.P6 draft notification
publishing the proposals for the delimitation of Wards of all the 18 Gram
Panchayats constituted as per Ext.P3 notification and has invited
objections.
j)     It is contended that a Gram Panchayat can be constituted
under the provisions of Section 12 of LPR, 2022, and the number of seats
for such Gram Panchayats determined by the Administrator only with
reference to the “Population of the Territorial area of a Gram Panchayat”
as ascertained at the last preceding census of which relevant figures have
been published and not otherwise. It is further contended that under Rule
3 of the LEP Rules, 2022, the delimitation of Wards has to be on the basis
of the latest census figures available for the “Population of the Territorial
area of a Gram Panchayat.” It is stated that the population of the Union
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022               :9:
Territory of Lakshadweep, as ascertained at the last preceding census of
which relevant figures have been published, only furnishes an island-wise
division of the population of the Union Territory and to substantiate the
same, reliance is placed by the petitioner on Ext.P7 data obtained from
the Census India 2011. It is stated that while issuing Ext.P4 notification,
the respondents, instead of using the population data of the Panchayat
area of the newly constituted Gram Panchayats, as ascertained at the last
preceding census, proceeded to rely on the Island wise census, which was
undertaken at the time of the Census India, 2011. According to the
petitioner, Exts. P3, P4, and P6 are premature, and ultra vires the
provisions of Part IX of the Constitution of India and Sections 8 and 12 of
k)     The petitioner asserts that by carrying out an exercise as
aforesaid, the respondents have not granted reservation for women as
provided under sub-section 8 of Section 12 of LPR, 2022. It is stated that
as per the said provision, the number of seats set apart for women shall
not be less than one-half of the total number of seats to be filled by direct
elections in every Gram Panchayat. It is contended that the number of
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022                      :10:
seats reserved for women has been determined on the basis of the
constituencies/ wards/ seats excluding that of the Sarpanch. It is on the
above assertions that the instant writ petition is filed seeking the following
(i)  Issue a writ in the nature of certiorari or such other writ, or the order
or direction calling for the records leading to Ext.P4 and P6 and quash
the same.
(ii) Issue a writ in the nature of mandamus or such other writ, order or
direction commanding the 3rd respondent to keep in abeyance all
proceedings for conducting elections to the Gram Panchayats
constituted vides Exhibit P3 notification till such time as the
populations of the territorial area of the Gram Panchayats constituted
vides the said notification are ascertained in terms of Section 2(t) of
the Lakshadweep Panchayat Regulation, 2022.
iii) Issue a writ in the nature of mandamus or such other writ, order, or
direction restraining the 3rd respondent from proceeding with Exhibit
P6 notification till such time as the populations of the territorial area
of the Gram Panchayats constituted vides Exhibit P3 notification are
ascertained in terms of Section 2(t) of the Lakshadweep Panchayat
iv)  Declare that Exhibit P3 notification is unenforceable in the absence of
a prior notification of the 2nd respondent Administrator under Clause
(zj) of the Lakshadweep Panchayat Regulation, 2002 read with Article
243(g) of the Constitution of India notifying the villages comprising
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022                    :11:
the Panchayat areas declared in the said notification."
4.     The contentions of respondents 1 and 2:
A counter affidavit has been filed by respondents 1 and 2. It is
contended therein that there being no assertion in the writ petition that
either the legal rights or constitutional rights of the petitioner have been
violated, he has no locus standi to maintain the writ petition. The
Administration has given due consideration to the Census data along with
other relevant particulars in the division of Panchayats and to carry out
the delimitation exercise in pursuance thereof. It is stated that the division
of wards, as per LPR, 1994, was carried out based on the Census data
available with respect to each island. No Census data is being maintained
with respect to each Ward at Lakshadweep. In view of the population on
the island, there is no requirement to keep Ward-based data. The Census
data, as reflected in Ext.P7, gives details of households on each island,
and therefore, there is no practical difficulty in the proportional
distribution of Wards with the help of the Electoral list. The Electoral list is
regularly revised by the Election Commission in a scientific manner. The
Administration has given due consideration to the available data, electoral
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022                :12:
roll, geographical compatibility, physical features, existing boundaries of
administrative units, facilities of communication, and public convenience in
terms of the Rules and Regulations in the declaration of the Panchayat
area and wards. Adequate provision has been made for reservations for
women in the seats of Gram Panchayats as per sub-section 7 of Section
12 of LPR, 2022, and in seats of the Sarpanch in terms of sub-section
10(ii) of Section 12 of LPR, 2022. As 9 out of 18 Sarpanches are reserved
for women, the provision for reservation is complied with in its letter and
spirit. Ext.R1(a) Corrigendum has also been issued to ensure that
reservation for women is provided in terms of the LPR, 2022. As per
Article 243L of the Constitution of India, the Union Territory is entitled to
exceptions and modifications from other provisions of the Constitution
while implementing the constitutional provisions regarding Panchayats. In
view of the fact that the LPR, 2022, stands notified by the President of
India, any exception or modification to the other provisions is within the
scope of Article 243L of the Constitution. The contentions raised by the
petitioner in the writ petition cannot be sustained as there is sufficient
scope for rationalization in the constitutional provisions, and Article 243C
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022                 :13:
only prescribes that as far as practicable, the ratio between population
and seats in panchayats be the same throughout the State. The
population of each Panchayat is available as per the 2011 Census since
the census was carried out with respect to each panchayat/island. It is not
at all practicable to have Census data with respect to a newly created
Gram Panchayat or District Panchayat before its creation as the population
data is codified with respect to the existing Panchayat. The Administration
has taken effective steps to keep the ratio between the population of the
territorial area of Gram Panchayat and the number of seats, as far as
practicable, the same throughout the Union Territory. The Administrator
has rightly exercised his powers, and by the said exercise, the residents
would get better representation in the newly created Panchayats. As Rule
3 of LEP Rules, 2022, is subject to Section 12 of LPR, 2022, there cannot
be any insistence on census figures.
In the counter affidavit filed by the 3rd respondent, it is stated that in
view of the fact that the tenure of the Panchayat Committee has expired,
it is essential in the public interest that elections are conducted at the
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022               :14:
earliest. The petitioner has not raised any genuine grievance, and his
intention is only to disrupt the election process. In view of the limited
population of the islands in the Union Territory of Lakshadweep, there is
no requirement to keep Ward-wise data. The Census data, as reflected in
Ext.P7, gives details of households in each island, and therefore, there is
no practical difficulty from the proportionate distribution of population in
the Wards with the help of Electoral lists maintained by the Election
Commission of India. The object/purpose is to ensure the delimitation of
Wards in such a manner to ensure that the population within the limits of
the Panchayat is distributed in equal proportion to the extent possible in
the available wards. It is not essential that the Census data regarding the
population of each ward/constituency be available, and the same alone
can be relied on. Such ward data is not maintained in the Union Territory
as the Census data was not conducted Ward-wise, and the administration
gave consideration to the available data, electoral roll, geographical
compatibility, physical features, existing boundaries of administrative
units, facilities of communication, and public convenience. There are other
criteria than population for carrying out delimitation. Under Article 243L of
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022                :15:
the Constitution of India, the Union Territory is entitled to make
exceptions and modifications to other provisions of the Constitution while
implementing the constitutional provisions regarding Panchayats. Article
243C only prescribes that, as far as practicable, the ratio between
population and seats in panchayats be the same throughout the State.
However, the said provision cannot be interpreted to prevent the
delimitation exercise as such and thereby thwart the election process. If
the contention of the petitioner is accepted, it may lead to a situation
where the formation of new local bodies or delimitation of wards will
become possible only after a fresh census and after availing the
population data for the proposed wards. This would lead to an anomalous
situation and may defeat the very purpose of the existence of Local Self
Government Institutions and may also lead to a situation wherein
elections cannot be conducted at regular intervals.
6.     After the filing of the counter affidavit, the petitioner has filed
an application for amendment seeking to amend the pleadings, grounds,
and reliefs. The petitioner has sought for incorporating a prayer to declare
that Ext.P3 notification is unenforceable in the absence of prior
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022                :16:
notification of the Administrator under clause (zj) of LPR, 2022, r/w Article
243(g) of the Constitution of India notifies the villages comprising the
Panchayat areas declared in the said notification. This Court, by order
dated 01.02.2023, allowed the application. The respondents have filed
additional counter affidavits reiterating their stand.
7.      Contentions raised in the additional counter affidavit
filed by respondents 1 and 2:
It is stated therein that in view of the population of the island, there
is no requirement to keep ward-wise data and the omission thereof will
not create any difficulty for delimitation purpose.      The census data as
reflected in Ext.P7 gives details of households in each island and thereby
there is no practical difficulty for the proportional distribution of wards
with the help of the Electoral list. There is no legal requirement to the
effect that census data should be available with respect to each
ward/constituency. As 9 out of 18 Sarpanches are reserved for women,
there is no merit in the contention that the reservation given to women
would be affected. Under Article 243L, the Union Territory is entitled to
exceptions and in view of the fact that the petitioner has not raised any
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022                :17:
challenge to the LPR,2022, none of the contentions raised can be
sustained. It is stated that it is not practicable to have census data with
respect to a newly created Gram Panchayat or a District Panchayat before
its creation as the population data is codified with respect to existing
Panchayats alone. The administration has taken effective steps to keep
the ratio between the population of the territorial area of Gram Panchayat
and the number of seats to be the same as far as practicable throughout
the Union Territory. There is no requirement for census data either in
Section 3 or in Section 12 and even if it is taken that reference to census
figures has been mentioned in Section 3, the said provision would be
subject to Section 12 of the Regulation.
8.     Contentions raised in the additional counter affidavit
filed on behalf of the 3rd respondent:
The provisions of Section 3(1) of the LPR, 2022, empower the
Administrator of the Union Territory to declare a village or even parts of
different villages or a group of villages as a Panchayat. In that view of the
matter, the territorial integrity of a village is not a relevant or mandatory
aspect to be considered while determining a Panchayat area in the Union
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022               :18:
Territory of Lakshadweep by virtue of Section 3(1) of LPR, 2022. In total
contrast with the situation prevailing while LPR, 1994 was in force, as per
LPR 2022, total flexibility in the matter of determining a Panchayat area is
given to the Administrator in the matter of determining Panchayat area
and even parts of various villages can be included in a Panchayat area.
Even if there are minor omissions in the proceedings so far taken by the
Administration or the Election Commission, the same is liable to be
ignored by adopting de minimis non curat lex. The Union Territory Election
Commission and the Administration have proceeded with the matter
taking into account the population of various islands as per the last
census, it was found that there is serious disparity in the distribution of
seats in various islands and the ratio between the population and the
number of seats was against the spirit of proportional representation
which is sacrosanct. The above disparity was sought to be remedied by
the formation of new Panchayat areas and Gram Sabhas as well as by
delimitation ensuring proportionate representation throughout the Union
Territory. The above exercise was carried out entirely based on the
population data available as per the last census. In order to clarify the
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022               :19:
entire issue, separate tables showing the island-wise population-seats
ratio have been provided as per the previous delimitation and the present
delimitation. It is stated that the comparison of the tables would show
that the present exercise carried out by the Administration is well justified
and it has ensured compliance with Article 243C as well as Section 12(3)
of the new Regulation. It is stated that the action taken is a remedial
action taken in the public interest by imbibing the foundational principle of
constitutional representation. Updated data from the electoral roll has also
been relied on as an additional authentic source and the distribution of
voters equally to the extent possible has been ensured in the delimitation.
9.     Submissions     advanced       by    the    learned    counsel
Sri. P. Deepak, the learned counsel, would painstakingly take this
Court through the constitutional provisions, the LPR, 1994, and the
changes brought about in LPR, 2022. Reiterating the contentions in the
writ petition, the learned counsel submitted that the action taken by the
Administration in dividing the ten existing Village (Dweep) Panchayats
constituted for the ten islands specified in the First Schedule of LPR, 1994
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022                 :20:
into 18 new Gram Panchayats for the purpose of LPR, 2022, without
notifying the village/villages under Section 2(zj) of LPR, 2022, is an
exercise, which cannot be sustained under law. Much reliance is placed on
the judgment rendered by a learned Single Judge of this Court in
Saifudeen v. State of Kerala1, and it is argued that a declaration by
the Administrator under Article 243(g) of the Constitution of India is
mandatory for the formation of a village for the purpose of Part IX of the
Constitution and without such notification, no village comes into
existence. The learned counsel would refer to Chapter III of LPR, 2022
and specifically to Section 12, and it is argued that the Regulation outlines
the process for the election of a Gram Panchayat and its Chairperson,
known as the Sarpanch. The Gram Panchayat is elected by the Gram
Sabha, and the number of seats in the Panchayat is determined by the
Administrator by issuing a notification. However, the ratio between the
population of the territorial area of a Gram Panchayat and the number of
seats to be filled by elections should be the same throughout the Union
Territory. The provisions also mandate that the seats that are reserved for
Scheduled Tribes in every Gram Panchayat and the number of seats
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022                :21:
reserved shall bear the same proportion to the total number of seats to be
filled by direct elections as the population of the Scheduled Tribes in that
Gram Panchayat area bears to the total population of that area.
Additionally, not less than one-half of the total number of seats reserved
for Scheduled Tribes shall be reserved for women belonging to the
Scheduled Tribes. The number of seats to be reserved for Scheduled
Tribes and Women shall be determined by the Administrator. Referring to
Section 2(v), which defines population, it is submitted that population has
been defined to mean the population as ascertained at the last preceding
census of which relevant figures have been published. It is submitted that
there being no population data with regard to village or group of villages,
it is next to impossible to determine the population of the Gram Panchayat
and thereby allot wards. To counter the contentions of the respondents
that the petitioner has no locus standi to approach this Court and raise a
challenge, the learned counsel has relied on the law laid down by the
Apex Court in Fertilizer Corporation, Kamgar Union v. Union of
India2 and that of a Division Bench of this Court in A. Krishnan v.
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022                 :22:
According to the learned counsel, when a public injury has been
committed by the State or a public authority by an act or omission which
is contrary to the constitution or a law, any member of the public can
maintain an action for redressing that public injury, provided he acts bona
fide and not for personal or private gain, or out of political motivation or
other oblique considerations. According to the learned counsel, the
petitioner is a person who is entitled to vote at the election and he is also
the elected Vice President of the Village (Dweep) Panchayat, Kavaratti,
and under no circumstances can the petitioner be regarded as a
meddlesome interloper or a busybody.
Sri. S. Manu, the learned DSGI, submitted that under LPR, 1994,
each revenue village was a separate Panchayat. However, as per LPR,
2022, a drastic change has been brought about. It is contended that the
respondents noticed that there had occurred serious disparity in the
allocation of seats, and it was in the said circumstances that LPR 2022 has
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022               :23:
been brought in place. It is submitted that under Article 243L, the Union
Territory is entitled to make exceptions and modifications from other
provisions of the Constitution while implementing the constitutional
provisions regarding Panchayats. It is pointed out that LPR, 2022, was
notified by the President of India, and any exception or modification to
the above provisions is within the scope of Article 243L of the
Constitution. It is submitted that the Administration is bound to consider
geographical compatibility, physical features, existing boundaries of
existing units, facilities of communication, and public convenience. It is
submitted that population alone is not the criteria for delimitation.
Reliance is placed on Pratap Singh V. Shri Krishna Gupta and Ors.4
and it is argued that the Hon’ble Supreme Court has deprecated the
tendency towards technicalities and it was observed that breach of rules
can be overlooked provided, there is substantial compliance and no
prejudice is caused. Reliance is also placed on Lakshmi Charan Sen
and Ors. v. A K M Hassan Uzaman and Ors5 and it is argued that
orders will have the effect of postponing elections shall not be passed.
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022                 :24:
The elections should be permitted to conclude as early as possible and all
controversial matters and all disputes arising out of elections are to be
postponed. Reliance is placed by the learned DSGI on Anugrah Narain
Singh and Another v. State of UP and Ors.6 and it is argued that
when required data for compliance with the constitutional mandates are
not available from census data during delimitation, authorities can place
reliance on other authentic data. It is submitted that the contention of the
petitioner that delimitation can be resorted only if census data is available
on a village-level basis is preposterous and is liable to be rejected. It is
urged that the number of voters as per the voters' list is essentially
proportionate to the population in the area of the respective wards.
Therefore, the insistence of the petitioner on relying on ward-wise
population data as per census which is not available is only a
hypertechnical argument, which is liable to be ignored. Placing reliance on
the voters list to carry out the election is a legitimate exercise as the same
would be proportionate to the population.
Sri. V. Sajith Kumar has reiterated the contentions advanced by the
learned DSGI. In addition, it is submitted that the petitioner cannot be
said to be a person aggrieved to maintain this writ petition as his legal
rights or his constitutional rights have not been infringed. He is not
prevented from contesting the election. Reliance is placed on Jasbhai
Motibhai Desai v. Roshan Kumar, Haji Bashir Ahmed7 to
substantiate his contention. It is submitted that Article 243C only
prescribes that as far as practicable, the ratio between the population and
seats is made the same throughout the state. It is submitted that the
constitutional provision provides sufficient space for the authority to carry
out the delimitation.
12.    I have heard Sri. P. Deepak, the learned counsel appearing for
the petitioner, Sri. S. Manu, the DSGI, who appeared for respondents 2
and 3,     and Sri. V. Sajith Kumar, the learned counsel appearing for
respondents 1 and 2.
a) Whether the petitioner has the locus standi to maintain this
b)   Whether,    in   the   absence   of  prior  notification   by  the
Administrator under clause (zj) of the LPR, 2022 r/w. Article
243(g) of the Constitution of India notifying the villages
comprising     the   Panchayat   areas   declared    in  the  said
notification, Ext.P3 notification issued under Section 3(1)
declaring the local area comprising of the village or a group of
villages or any part or parts thereof or a combination of any
two or more of them to be a Panchayat area can be said to be
c) Whether Ext.P4 notification issued by the Administrator
allocating seats under Section 12 of LPR, 2022 to the Gram
Panchayats constituted for each such Panchayat areas under
Ext.P3 notification issued under Section 3(1) legally sustainable
in the absence of any data with respect to the population of
the territorial area of the Gram Panchayats as ascertained at
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022                :27:
the last preceding census of which relevant figures have been
d)   If (b) and (c) are decided in favor of the petitioner, whether
Exhibit   P6  notification  publishing  the proposal for the
delimitation of wards of the 18 Gram Panchayths is legal?
e)   Whether, in the absence of a notification issued by the
President under the proviso to Article 243L of the Constitution,
any exceptions and modifications can be made?
Insofar as the locus standi of the petitioner to maintain this writ
petition is concerned, the petitioner has asserted in the writ petition that
he is a resident of Kavaratti Island in the Union Territory of Lakshadweep
and the elected Vice President of the Village (Dweep) Panchayat, Kavaratti
representing Ward. He asserts that he has the locus standi to impugn the
trifurcation of Kavaratti Village (Dweep) Panchayat otherwise than in
accordance with Part IX of the Constitution of India and the LPR, 2022.
Electoral right has been defined to mean under the LEP, 2022 the right of
a person to stand or not to stand or to withdraw or not to withdraw from
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022                       :28:
being a candidate or to vote or to refrain from voting at an election to a
Panchayat. I find from LEP 2022 that Rule 113 confers locus standi to any
individual to call in question any election whether he has voted at such
election or not. In Krishnan v. Kerala State Cooperative Marketing
Federation Ltd.8, a Division Bench of this Court, after analyzing the law
laid down by the Apex Court in Bar Council of Maharashtra v.
M.V.Dabholkar and Ors.9, Jasbhai Motibhai Desai (supra) and
Ghulam Qadir v. Special Tribunal and Ors.10 had held that the legal
principle that can be gleaned from the principles laid down by the Apex
Court as well as this Court is that save for a meddlesome interloper or a
busybody, a person whose interests/rights are in some sense infringed
through the action of another can be seen as an aggrieved person for the
purpose of initiating legal action. It was observed as follows in paragraphs
7 and 8 of the judgment.
7.    On a consideration of the rival submissions, we find force in
the contention of the learned Senior Counsel for the appellant that this
was not a case where the appellant could have been non - suited on
the ground of absence of locus standi. The decisions relied upon by the
learned counsel on either side clearly lay down the tests for
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022                       :29:
determining the circumstances under which a person will fail to qualify
as an 'aggrieved person' for the purposes of litigation. In Bar Council of
Maharashtra v. M. V. Dabholkar and Others, 1975 (2) SCC 702, a seven
Judge Bench of the Supreme Court considered the question as to who
would qualify as a “person aggrieved” in the context of the provisions
of S.38 of the Advocates Act, 1961. The question for consideration was
whether the Bar Council of Maharashtra would fall within the ambit of
the phrase “aggrieved person” for the purposes of maintaining an
appeal against an order passed by the Disciplinary Committee of the
Bar Council of India. In a concurring judgment rendered by Justice V.
R. Krishna Iyer in the said case, it was observed as follows:
“47. The hackneyed phrase, 'person aggrieved', is not
merely of frequent occurrence in Statutes and in the writ
jurisdiction but has come up for judicial consideration in Anglo
American and Indian Courts in a variety of situations and
legislative settings. Notwithstanding the slippery semantics of
such legalese, the Indian legislative draftsmen have continued
to use them, out of linguistic allegiance to the British art and
Indian judges have frequently sought interpretative light from
English authorities of ancient vintage. These 'borrowed'
drafting and interpretative exercises are sometimes inept
when time and country change and the context and text of
the Statute vary. I stress this aspect since much of the time of
the Courts in India is consumed by massive, and sometimes
mechanical, reliance on exotic constructions and default in
evolving legislative simplicity and avoiding interpretative
complexity. At a time when our Courts are on trial for delayed
disposals and mystifying processes, this desideratum becomes
all the more urgent. Otherwise, why should decoding a single
expression - 'person aggrieved' - take two days of learned
In a later decision - Jasbhai Motibhai Desai (supra), a
Bench of four Judges surveyed the English, American and
Indian judgments on the issue of “aggrieved person”, and set
out the tests to be adopted for the purposes of determining
whether a person had the locus standi to apply for a writ of
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022                       :30:
certiorari. The relevant paragraphs of the said judgment read
“36. It will be seen that in the context of locus standi to
apply for a writ of certiorari, an applicant may ordinarily fall in
any of these categories: (i) 'person aggrieved'; (ii) 'stranger';
(iii) busybody or meddlesome interloper. Persons in the last
category are easily distinguishable from those coming under
the first two categories. Such persons interfere in things
which do not concern them. They masquerade as crusaders
for justice. They pretend to act in the name of Pro Bono
Publico, though they have no interest of the public or even of
their own to protect. They indulge in the pastime of meddling
with the judicial process either by force of habit or from
improper motives. Often, they are actuated by a desire to win
notoriety or cheap popularity; while the ulterior intent of
some applicants in this category, may be no more than
spoking the wheels of administration. The High Court should
do well to reject the applications of such busybodies at the
threshold.
37. The distinction between the first and second
categories of applicants, though real, is not always well -
demarcated. The first category has, as it were, two concentric
zones; a solid central zone of certainty, and a grey outer circle
of lessening certainty in a sliding centrifugal scale, with an
outermost nebulous fringe of uncertainty. Applicants falling
within the central zone are those whose legal rights have
been infringed. Such applicants undoubtedly stand in the
category of 'persons aggrieved'. In the grey outer - circle the
bounds which separate the first category from the second,
intermix, interfuse and overlap increasingly in a centrifugal
direction. All persons in this outerzone may not be “persons
aggrieved”.
38. To distinguish such applicants from 'strangers',
among them, some broad tests may be deduced from the
conspectus made above. These tests are not absolute and
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022                     :31:
ultimate. Their efficacy varies according to the circumstances
of the case, including the statutory context in which the
matter falls to be considered. These are: Whether the
applicant is a person whose legal right has been infringed ?
Has he suffered a legal wrong or injury, in the sense that his
interest, recognised by law, has been prejudicially and directly
affected by the act or omission of the authority, complained of
? Is he a person who has suffered a legal grievance, a person
“against whom a decision has been pronounced which has
wrongfully deprived him of something or wrongfully refused
him something, or wrongfully affected his title to something”
? Has he a special and substantial grievance of his own
beyond some grievance or inconvenience suffered by him in
common with the rest of the public ? Was he entitled to
object and be heard by the authority before it took the
impugned action? If so, was he prejudicially affected in the
exercise of that right by the act of usurpation of jurisdiction
on the part of the authority ? Is the Statute, in the context of
which the scope of the words “person aggrieved” is being
considered, a social welfare measure designed to lay down
ethical or professional standards of conduct for the
community ? or is it a Statute dealing with private rights of
particular individuals ?”
The position has been reiterated more recently in
Ghulam Qadir (supra), where, at paragraph 36, it was
“36. There is no dispute regarding the legal proposition
that the rights under Art.226 of the Constitution of India can
be enforced only by an aggrieved person except in the case
where the writ prayed is for habeas corpus or quo warranto.
Another exception in the general rule is the filing of a writ
petition in public interest. The existence of the legal right of
the petitioner which is alleged to have been violated is the
foundation for invoking the jurisdiction of the High Court
under the aforesaid Article. The orthodox rule of
interpretation regarding the locus standi of a person to reach
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022                      :32:
development of constitutional law in our country and the
constitutional Courts have been adopting a liberal approach in
dealing with the cases or dislodging the claim of a litigant
merely on hyper - technical grounds. If a person approaching
the Court can satisfy that the impugned action is likely to
adversely affect his right which is shown to be having source
in some statutory provision, the petition filed by such a
person cannot be rejected on the ground of his having not
the locus standi. In other words, if the person is found to be
not merely a stranger having no right whatsoever to any post
or property, he cannot be non - suited on the ground of his
not having the locus standi.”
8. The legal principle that can be gleaned from the above
decisions is that save for a meddlesome interloper or a busybody, a
person whose interests / rights are in some sense infringed through an
action of an other, can be seen as an aggrieved person for the
purposes of initiating legal action. This is more so when the alleged
offending action is at the instance of the State that is expected to act
fairly in matters of administration. On the facts of the case before us,
we cannot, but, see the appellant, who was a member of the Primary
Society that was affiliated to the MARKETFED, as an aggrieved person,
aggrieved by the appointment of an unqualified person as Managing
Director of the Apex Society. A cultivator of agricultural produce, who
depends on the administration of the Apex Society, for the purposes of
marketing his produce through a marketing hierarchy established with
the Apex Society at the helm, can hardly be seen as a person having
no interest whatsoever in the administration of the Apex Society. We
therefore cannot accept the finding of the learned Single Judge that
the appellant / writ petitioner did not have the locus standi to
challenge the appointment of the 4th respondent as Managing Director
of MARKETFED.
15.    Having considered the principles laid above, I am of the
considered opinion that the petitioner cannot be termed as a busybody or
a meddlesome interloper, and he definitely falls into the category of a
person aggrieved to maintain this writ petition.
16.    As issues (b), (c), and (d) are interconnected, I shall address
those issues together.
17.    It is pursuant to the insertion of Part IX of the Constitution of
India vide the Constitution (73rd Amendment) Act, 1993, that the
President of India, in the exercise of the power conferred under Article
240 of the Constitution, had promulgated the LPR, 1994.
18.    Article 243, as far as it is relevant to this matter, reads thus:
243. Definitions.—In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “district” means a district in a State;
(b) “Gram Sabha” means a body consisting of persons registered in the
electoral rolls relating to a village comprised within the area of
Panchayat at the village level;
(d) “Panchayat” means an institution (by whatever name called) of
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022                      :34:
self-government constituted under Article 243-B, for the rural
(e) “Panchayat area” means the territorial area of a Panchayat;
(f) “population” means the population as ascertained at the last
preceding census of which the relevant figures have been
(g) “village” means a village specified by the Governor by public
notification to be a village for the purposes of this Part and
includes a group of villages so specified.
19.    It would be relevant to note at this juncture that “population”
has been defined under Article 243 as “the population as ascertained at
the last preceding census of which relevant figures have been published.”
The same meaning has been ascribed to the term ‘population’ in Article
55, which provides for the manner in which the President is to be elected;
in Article 81, which provides for the composition of the house of the
people; and in Article 170, which provides for the composition of
legislative Assemblies.
20.    The significance of the usage of the term “population” would
be evident in a careful reading of Article 243C of the Constitution, which
deals with the composition of Panchayats. The said provision reads thus:
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022                       :35:
243-C. Composition of Panchayats.—(1) Subject to the provisions of
this Part, the Legislature of a State may, by law, make provisions with
respect to the composition of Panchayats:
Provided that the ratio between the population of the territorial area
of a Panchayat at any level and the number of seats in such
Panchayat to be filled by election shall, so far as practicable, be the
same throughout the State.
(2) All the seats in a Panchayat shall be filled by persons chosen by
direct election from territorial constituencies in the Panchayat area
and, for this purpose, each Panchayat area shall be divided into
territorial constituencies in such manner that the ratio between the
population of each constituency and the number of seats allotted to
it shall, so far as practicable, be the same throughout the Panchayat
area. (emphasis supplied)
21.     Article 243C of the Indian Constitution, which provides for the
composition of a Panchayat, states that all seats in a Panchayat shall be
filled by persons chosen by direct election from territorial constituencies in
the Panchayat area. For the above purpose, each Panchayat area is
required to be divided into territorial constituencies in such a manner that
the ratio between the population of each constituency and the number of
seats allotted to it shall, so far as practicable, be the same throughout the
Panchayat area. It also states that the ratio between the population of the
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022               :36:
territorial area of a Panchayat at any level and the number of seats in
such Panchayat to be filled by election shall, so far as practicable, be the
same throughout the State. Much probe is not required to understand the
importance of ascertainment of seats in a Panchayat on the basis of the
population count of that Panchayat as the ratio between the population
and the number of seats in a Panchayat has to be the same throughout
the State and in each constituency within a Panchayat area. In other
words, the number of seats allocated to a Panchayat should be
proportional to its population size. This ensures that the representation in
the Panchayat is fair and democratic, and each person's vote has equal
weight, regardless of where they live in the Panchayat area. The intention
is to ensure that accurate population data is available to determine the
number of seats allocated to each Panchayat and constituency, ensuring
that the representation in the Panchayat reflects the demographic
composition of the area. In other words, without an idea as to the
population of the villages comprising the Panchayat area, it would not be
possible to carry out an exercise in terms of Article 243C.
22.    The next provision which may be of relevance to the issues
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022                      :37:
raised herein is Article 243D which speaks about the reservation of seats.
Article 243D reads thus:
243-D. Reservation of seats.—(1) Seats shall be reserved for—
(a) the Scheduled Castes; and
in every Panchayat and the number of seats so reserved shall bear,
as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number of
seats to be filled by direct election in that Panchayat as the
population of the Scheduled Castes in that Panchayat area or of the
Scheduled Tribes in that Panchayat area bears to the total population
of that area and such seats may be allotted by rotation to different
constituencies in a Panchayat.
(2) Not less than one-third of the total number of seats reserved
under clause (1) shall be reserved for women belonging to the
Scheduled Castes or, as the case may be, the Scheduled Tribes.
(3) Not less than one-third (including the number of seats reserved
for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes) of the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in
every Panchayat shall be reserved for women and such seats may be
allotted by rotation to different constituencies in a Panchayat.
(4) The offices of the Chairpersons in the Panchayats at the village or
any other level shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes, the
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022                       :38:
Scheduled Tribes and women in such manner as the Legislature of a
State may, by law, provide:
Provided that the number of offices of Chairpersons reserved for the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the Panchayats at each
level in any State shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same
proportion to the total number of such offices in the Panchayats at
each level as the population of the Scheduled Castes in the State or
of the Scheduled Tribes in the State bears to the total population of
Provided further that not less than one-third of the total number of
offices of Chairpersons in the Panchayats at each level shall be
Provided also that the number of offices reserved under this clause
shall be allotted by rotation to different Panchayats at each level.
(5) The reservation of seats under clauses (1) and (2) and the
reservation of office of Chairpersons (other than the reservation for
women) under clause (4) shall cease to have effect on the expiration
of the period specified in Article 334.
(6) Nothing in this Part shall prevent the Legislature of a State from
making any provision for reservation of seats in any Panchayat or
offices of Chairpersons in the Panchayats at any level in favour of
backward class of citizens.
23.    Article 243D of the Indian Constitution mandates that the
reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in
Panchayats and the number of reserved seats should be proportional to
their population in the respective Panchayat area. Similarly, not less than
one-third of the total number of seats reserved for Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes should be reserved for women belonging to those
communities. It further says that not less than one-third of the total seats
in Panchayats should be reserved for women, including those reserved for
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. The provision further stipulates
that the offices of the Chairpersons in Panchayats at various levels shall
also be reserved for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and women,
as provided by the State legislature. The number of reserved seats and
offices for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and women should be
proportionate to their population in the respective state, and one-third of
the total offices reserved for Chairpersons should be reserved for women.
Overall, the significance of population in this constitutional provision lies in
ensuring equitable representation and participation of marginalized
communities in local governance. By reserving seats and offices in
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022                       :40:
Panchayats for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, and women, the
Constitution aims to address historical injustices and ensure that their
voices are heard in the decision-making process at the grassroots level.
The provision of proportionality to their population also ensures that these
communities have a fair share of representation in panchayats and that
their rights and interests are protected. As held in the case of Article
243C, without an idea of the total population of the Panchayat area and
the population of Scheduled Tribes in that Panchayat area, an exercise in
terms of Article 243D cannot be carried out.
24.      It was in accordance with the above Constitutional Provisions
that LPR, 1994, was promulgated by the President in the year 1994. I
deem it appropriate to extract clauses (i), (m), (n) & (o) of Section 2 of
(i) "Island" means one of the islands mentioned in the First Schedule;
(m) "Panchayat"      means      a Village   (Dweep)   Panchayat    or District
Panchayat,     as   the   case  may   be,  established   under the
provisions of this Regulation;
(n) "Panchayat area" means the territorial area of a panchayat;
(o) "population" means the population as ascertained at the last preceding
census of which the relevant figures have been published.'
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022                     :41:
25.     As per the schedule which has been extracted in paragraph
2(a) of this Judgment, and in terms of Section 8(1), a Village (Dweep)
Panchayat was constituted for each of the ten islands specified in the First
Schedule and reading Section 2(n) and (m) together, it can be seen that
the territorial area of a Panchayat of the Village (Dweep) Panchayats so
constituted was co-extensive with the territorial area of the respective
islands. As per Section (2), the allocation of seats in a Panchayat was
made by taking into account the population of the respective islands. For
instance, the most populous island of Kavaratti had 12 seats, while the
least populous island of Bitra was allotted 3 seats.
26.     In the given context, the analysis of the provisions of LPR 2022
is necessary, particularly those related to Section 2(l) defining general
election, Section 2(o) defining "Gram Panchyath," Section 2(t) defining
"Panchayat area," Section 2(v) defining the population, Section 2(zj)
defining "village," and Section 2(zk) defining "Ward." The relevant
provisions are extracted below for easy reference.
S.2(l) “general election” means the election held under this Regulation for
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022                        :42:
the constitution or the reconstitution of a Panchayat after the
expiry of its terms or otherwise;
S.2(o) "Gram Panchayat" means a Gram Panchayat constituted under this
2(t) "Panchayat area'; means the territorial area of a Gram Panchayat
declared by the administrator under sub­sub-section (1) of section
2(v) “population" means the population as ascertained at the last
preceding     census    of which the relevant figures have been
published.
2(zj) “village” means a village notified by the Administrator, to be a village
for the purpose of this Regulation and includes a group of villages;
2(zk) “Ward” means a body consisting of persons registered in the
electoral rolls relating to ward of a district.
27.     A sea change has been brought about while defining
“Panchayat area” in the LPR, 2022. Under LPR, 1994, “Panchayat area”
was defined to mean the territorial area of a panchayat which, if read
along with Section 8(1) was co-extensive with the territorial area of the
respective island which is included in the First Schedule. However, as per
LPR, 2022, “Panchayat area” was defined to mean the ‘territorial area of a
Gram Panchayat’ declared by the Administrator under sub-section (1) of
28.    Section 3 outlines the process for declaring a local area as a
Panchayat area and constituting a Gram Sabha for each Panchayat area.
The Administrator is required to make an inquiry and declare a local area,
comprising of a village or a group of villages or any part or parts thereof
or a combination of any two or more of them to be a Panchayat area for
the purpose of LPR, 2022 and has also to specify the headquarters. The
Administrator is thereafter required to issue a notification constituting a
Gram Sabha by a name for each Panchayat area.
29.   Section 3, insofar as it is relevant, reads thus:
3. (1) The Administrator shall, after making such inquiry as may be
necessary, by notification, declare a local area, comprising of a village or a
group of villages or any part or parts thereof or a combination of any two
or more of them to be a Panchayat area, for the purposes of this
Regulation and shall also specify its headquarters.
(2) The Administrator shall, by notification, constitute a Gram Sabha by a
name for each Panchayat area.
30.    It is in the exercise of the powers conferred on the
Administrator that Exhibit P3 notification was issued declaring the local
areas specified in the said notification to be ‘Panchayat area” for the
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022               :44:
purpose of LPR, 2022. A perusal of Exhibit P3 notification would reveal
that six islands coming under the schedule, namely Agatti, Amini, Androth,
Kadmath, Kavaratti, and Minicoy, has been divided into 15 separate
Panchayat areas. More specifically, Agatti, Androth, Kavaratti, and Minicoy
have been divided into three separate Panchayat areas each, and the
island of Chetlat and Bitra has been unified to comprise one Panchayat
area. Immediately thereafter, as required to be done under Section 3(2),
the Administrator notified the names of the 18 Gram Sabhas.
31.    In this context, the contention of the petitioner is that Exhibit
P3 notification in the manner issued is unenforceable for the reason that
the population of the territorial area of the Gram Panchayats constituted
vides the said notification has not been ascertained in terms of Section
2(t) of the LPR, 2022.
32.    To get more clarity on the issue, the first page of Exhibit P3
notification as per which the Administrator declared the local area
comprising of a Village or a Group of Villages or any part or parts thereof
or a combination of any two or more of them to be a Panchayat area for
the purpose of the said LPR, 2022 is extracted below for easy reference.
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022 :45:
33.    There cannot be any dispute that Exhibit P3 is issued in the
exercise of the powers conferred under Section 3(1) of LPR, 2022. Agatti
Island has been divided into two Panchayat areas by giving location-based
markings. The respondents have no case that before notifying “North End
to Western Jetty to Shakina Palli” as a Panchayat area, they have
ascertained the population of the Villages or the group of villages
comprising the Panchayat area. In the counter affidavit, the respondents
have taken the stand that they are only in possession of Island wise
Population Data obtained as per Census 2011, and they are not in
possession of population data in respect of the villages or the group of
Villages which are joined together to form a Panchayat area.
34.    The non-availability of population data for the village or group
of villages that comprise the Panchayat area will make the provisions of
Section 12 of the LPR 2022 unworkable.
35.    Section 12, which deals with the constitution of Panchayats,
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022                     :47:
12. (1) As soon as may be, after its constitution, every Gram Sabha
shall elect by direct election an Executive Committee called the
Gram Panchayat and a Chairperson of that Committee to be known
as the Sarpanch.
(2) A Gram Panchayat shall, consist of such number of seats
including the Sarpanch to be filled from such number of wards, as
the Administrator may, by notification, determine.
(3) The ratio between the population of the territorial area of a
Gram Panchayat and the number of seats in that Panchayat to be
filled by election shall, so far as practicable, be the same
throughout the Union territory.
(4) The territorial boundary for each ward shall be notified by the
Administrator on the recommendations of the Election Commission.
(5) Each Gram Panchayat area shall be divided by the Election
Commission into territorial constituencies in such manner that the
ratio between the population of each constituency and the number
of seats allotted to it shall, so far as practicable, be the same
throughout the Gram Panchayat area.
(6) The seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Tribes in every
Gram Panchayat and the number of seats so reserved shall bear, as
nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number of seats
to be filled by direct election in the Gram Panchayat as the
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022                        :48:
population of the Scheduled Tribes in that Gram Panchayat area
bears to the total population of that area and such seats shall be
allotted by the Election Commission by rotation to different
constituencies in a Gram Panchayat, in such manner as may be
Provided that no such reservation shall be necessary if the total
population of the Scheduled Tribes in a Gram Panchayat is less than
half the proportionate population required to fill one seat.
(7) Not less than one-half of the total number of the seats
reserved under subsection (6), shall be reserved for women
belonging to the Scheduled Tribes.
(8) Not less than one-half (including the number of seats reserved
for women belonging to the Scheduled Tribes) of the total number
of seats to be filled by direct election in every Gram Panchayat shall
be reserved for women and such seats may be allotted by the
Election Commission by rotation to different constituencies in a
Gram Panchayat, in such manner as may be prescribed.
(9) The number of seats to be reserved under sub-section (7) and
(8) shall be determined by the Administrator, by an order published
in the Official Gazette.
(i) the number of offices of Sarpanch in the Gram Panchayats for
the Scheduled Tribes which shall bear, as nearly as may be, the
same proportion to the total number of such offices in the Gram
Panchayats as the population of the Scheduled Tribes in the area of
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022                       :49:
Union territory to which this Regulation extends bears to the total
population of such area;
(ii) not less than one-half of the total number of offices of Sarpanch
in the Gram Panchayats for women: Provided that offices reserved
under this sub-section shall be allotted by the Election Commission
by rotation to different Gram Panchayats in such manner as may be
prescribed.
36.     In essence, what Section 12 says is that as soon as the Gram
Sabha is constituted, it must elect the Gram Panchayat and its
Chairperson (the Sarpanch) by direct election. The number of seats in the
Gram Panchayat, including the Sarpanch, will be determined by the
Administrator, and the seats will be filled from the number of Wards
determined by the Administrator. The ratio between the population of the
territorial area of the Gram Panchayat and the number of seats to be filled
by election should be the same throughout the Union territory. The
territorial boundary for each ward will be notified by the Administrator on
the    recommendations          of   the     Election  Commission.         The  Election
Commission        will   divide    the Gram Panchayat area into territorial
constituencies, with each constituency having a population-to-seat ratio
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022               :50:
that is as equal as possible throughout the Gram Panchayat area. Seats
will be reserved for Scheduled Tribes, with the number of reserved seats
bearing the same proportion to the total number of seats in the Gram
Panchayat as the Scheduled Tribe population in that area bears to the
total population, and the seats will be allotted by rotation to different
constituencies in the Gram Panchayat. Not less than one-half of the seats
reserved under sub-section (6) will be reserved for women belonging to
Scheduled Tribes. Not less than one-half of the total number of seats to
be filled by direct election in every Gram Panchayat, including the seats
reserved for women belonging to Scheduled Tribes, will be reserved for
women, and such seats may be allotted by rotation to different
constituencies in the Gram Panchayat. The number of reserved seats for
Scheduled Tribes and women will be determined by the Administrator and
published in the Official Gazette. The number of offices of Sarpanch in the
Gram Panchayats will be reserved for Scheduled Tribes and women in
proportions determined by the Administrator, and these offices will be
allotted by the Election Commission by rotation to different Gram
37.    Immediately thereafter, in the exercise of the powers conferred
on the Administrator under Section 130 of the LPR, 2022, the
Administrator has framed the LEP Rules, 2022. Rule 3 deals with the
Declaration of Panchayat area and the Constitution of Gram Sabha. Rule 3
is of some relevance and the same reads as under:
Rule 3 (1): Subject to the provisions of Section 12 and 57 of
the Regulation, the Election Commission shall distribute the seats
assigned     to each Gram Panchayat, and District panchayat to
single member territorial wards and delimit them on the basis of
the latest census figures having regard to the following provisions,
(a)      All     wards        shall,      as     far     as    practicable,   be
geographically compact areas, and in delimiting them regard shall
be     had      to    physical       features,       existing boundaries      of
administrative        units,     facilities      of communication aid public
(b)           Wards       in    which      seats     are    reserved    for  the
scheduled     Tribes, women belonging to these castes or Tribes
and    women       shall,    as    far    as  practicable,     be distributed in
different parts of the Gram Panchayats and District panchayat and
they shall be rotated by the Commission by draw of lots, so that it is
ensured that seats are           so     reserved in all the         wards of a
gram panchayat and the District panchayat, as the case may be
before such reservation is made in respect of a ward for the second
time.'
38.    Rule 3 (1) of the LEP, 2022 outlines the process by which the
Election Commission shall distribute the seats assigned to each Gram
Panchayat and District Panchayat to single-member territorial wards and
delimit them based on the latest census figures. The rule also highlights
the following provisions that the Election Commission must consider while
delimiting the wards. It says that
a) Wards should be geographically compact areas, and physical
features, existing administrative boundaries, facilities of communication,
and public convenience should be taken into account and
b) Seats reserved for scheduled tribes, women belonging to these
castes or tribes, and women should be distributed in different parts of the
Gram Panchayats and District Panchayat, and they should be rotated by
the Commission by drawing of lots. This is to ensure that seats are
reserved in all the wards of a Gram Panchayat and the District Panchayat
before such reservation is made in respect of a ward for the second time.
39.    It is in the exercise of the powers conferred on the
Administrator under various sub-sections of Section 12 that Exhibit P4
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022              :53:
notification was issued declaring the number of seats to be allotted under
sub-section (2) of Section 12 to each of the 18 Gram Panchayats and also
the number of seats to be reserved for women and scheduled tribes. It
can be seen from Ext.P4 notification that it has been issued not on the
basis of the population of the Panchayat area of the newly constituted
Gram Panchayats as per Ext.P3 notification as ascertained at the last
preceding census of which relevant figures have been published. As a
matter of fact, only the census data of the entire island, which was
undertaken at the time of Census India, 2011, is available even now. As
rightly submitted by Sri. P. Deepak, this was a non-issue while LPR, 1994
was operative as under Section 8(1) of LPR, 1994, a Village (Dweep)
Panchayat was constituted for each of the 10 islands specified in the First
Schedule.     Furthermore, the Panchayat area was defined to mean the
territorial area for Panchayat of the Village (Dweep) Panchayat so
constituted, and it was co-extensive with the territorial area of the
respective islands. I find that Ext.P4 notification allocating seats to the
newly constituted Gram Panchayats have been issued on the basis of the
island-wise census undertaken at the time of Census India 2011. The
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022                :54:
respondents have, in fact, admitted in their counter that there is no
population data available with respect to the population of the territorial
area of the said Gram Panchayats.
40.    Having understood the Constitutional Provisions and the
provisions of the Regulations, we may now turn to the issues highlighted
by the petitioner to substantiate that the exercise carried out by the
respondents is in clear violation of the Constitutional Provisions and the
regulations. Much clarity can be obtained by referring to the chart
produced along with the additional counter. It is stated in the Additional
counter     that  the    Union  Territory   Election   Commission   and   the
Administration have proceeded in the matter taking into account the
population of various islands as per the last census. They have explained
that on an analysis of the distribution of seats/delimitation of wards under
the    previous    regulation, it  was    found    that  there is  ostensible
non-compliance with the requirements under Article 243C of the
Constitution and also Section 12(3) of the LPR, 2022. The table showing
the island-wise population - seat ratio as per the delimitation carried out
in terms of LPR, 1994 is extracted below:
Sl. No.   Island Panchayat   Population       No. of     Proportionate
41.    The respondents have also produced the chart showing the
population-seat ratio as per the delimitation carried out in terms of LPR,
2022. The said chart is extracted below:
Sl. No.    Island Panchayat Population as per   No. of     Proportionate
2011 Census       Wards     representation
42.    No doubt a perusal of the chart produced would at first blush
makes it appear that their endeavor by the Administration and the
Election commission is well justified as it has ensured the compliance of
Article 243C as well as Section 12(3) of the new Regulation. The
respondents have also produced Ext.P6 proposed delimitation of Gram
panchayat, constituencies/wards showing the voter population in each of
the Gram Panchayats by splitting it as wards.
43.    However, on a closer scrutiny, it would be revealed that the
exercise clearly violates the constitutional provisions and also LPR, 2022.
There is absolutely no doubt that if the respondents were acting in terms
of LPR, 2022, the Administrator had to initially act in terms of Rule 3(1).
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022                  :57:
He is expected to carry out an enquiry and thereafter issue a notification
declaring a local area, comprising of a village or a group of villages or any
part or parts thereof or a combination of any two or more of them. This
local area is deemed to be a Panchayat area for the purpose of LPR, 2022.
Thereafter, the headquarters of the Panchayat area has to be specified by
the Administrator. It should be followed up by a notification constituting a
Gram Sabha by a name for each Panchayat area. The Gram Sabha shall
consist of persons registered in the electoral roll relating to a Gram, either
a village or a group of villages. To highlight the issue we can take the case
of Agatti. Agatti has been divided into two Panchayat areas, which are as
under as borne out from Ext.P3.
2.       Agatti       Western Jetty to Shaikinia Palli to Agatti
44.    After carrying out the above exercise, the Administrator in
exercise of powers under sub-section 2 of Section 3 of the LPR, 2022,
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022                     :58:
notified the names of Gram Sabha (Panchayat areas) as under
Sl. No.   Island              Panchayat area              Headquarters
1.       Agatti     North end to Western Jetty to       Lal Bahadu Shastri
2.       Agatti     Western Jetty to Shaikinia Palli to Bhagat Singh
South end (Airport)                 Gram Panchayat
45.    Admittedly, the respondents have no data with regard to the
inhabitant population of each of the Panchayat areas. All that they have is
the population of the entire island of Agtti as obtained from the Census,
46.    Thereafter,   Ext.P4      notification has been issued by the
Administrator in exercise of powers conferred upon him under subsection
(2), (6), (7), (8) and (9) of Section 12 of LPR, 2022 declaring the number
of constituencies/wards and to allocate such number of wards of each
Gram Panchayats to be reserved for Scheduled Tribes, women belonging
to Scheduled Tribes and for general women in the Panchayat area. The
way in which ward was divided and the reserved seats were fixed for each
Panchayat area is based on the voter population as available from the
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022                  :59:
voters' list. No other data is available with the respondents.
Sl.    Name of         No. of   Reserve            ST       Genera       General
47.      After carrying out the above exercise, Ext.P6 notification has
been issued by the Election Commission, the Election Commission has
published its proposal for the delimitation of wards of all Gram Panchayats
and the District Panchayats as detailed in Appendix I and II and
objections have been called for. From Appendix I, it could be seen that
the proposed delimitation of the wards has been on the basis of the
voters' list maintained by the Election Commission and not on the basis of
the inhabitant population.
48.      From the submissions by the learned DSGI, who has appeared
for the Election Commission, I find that the Election Commission has relied
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022                :60:
on the census figures of Census 2011 to decide the number of wards.
They have even stated that the number of voters as per the voters list is
essentially proportionate to the population in the area of the respective
wards. According to the respondents, population data of the Panchayat
area identified as per Ext.P3 is not available. They have stated that to
ensure equalised distribution of population as well as voters in the wards,
the data as per the voters list has been relied upon. I am afraid the
course adopted is contrary to the mandate of Articles 243C and 243D of
the Constitution and also against LPR, 2022. This is because the allocation
of wards to each Gram Panchayat under sub-section (2) of Section 12 is
subject to the provisions of sub-section (3) of Section 12 and Article 243C
of the Constitution of India. Without an exact idea of the population of
the territorial area of the Gram Panchayat, it would not be possible for the
respondents to put in operation either Section 12(2) or Section 12(3) in
tune with Article 243C. To carry out the above exercise, the Administrator
will have to notify the village/villages under Section 2(j) of the LPR, 2022
and those villages can only comprise the newly declared Panchayat area.
A reading of the chart produced along with the additional counter clearly
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022                        :61:
would reveal that the proportionate representation has been made on the
basis of the voters list and not on the inhabitant population of the village
or villages comprising the Panchayat area.
49.    The question of whether ‘one man one vote’ rule operates with
reference to the inhabitant population or voter population had come up
for consideration before a Division Bench of the Gujarat High court in
Rameshchandra Ramanbhai Patel v. Collector of Kheda11. The
observations in paragraph Nos. 23 to 28 are instructive:
23. Apart from the one man-one vote rule receiving recognition at the
hands of Courts, so far as our country is concerned, the principle has
been enshrined even in the Constitution in the matter of election to
the Parliament and State Legislatures. Article 81(1) having provided
for the composition of the House of the People by not more than five
hundred and twenty-five members chosen by direct election from
territorial constituencies in the States and not more than twenty
members to represent the Union territories, chosen in such manner as
Parliament may by law provide, proceeds to lay down in Article 81(2)
that each State shall be allotted a number of seats in the House of the
People in such manner that the ratio between that number and the
population of the State is, so far as practicable, the same for all States
and that each State shall be divided into territorial constituencies in
such manner that the ratio between the population of each
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022                     :62:
constituency and the number of seats allotted to it is, so far as
practicable, the same throughout the State. Similar provision is to be
found in Article 170 in relation to composition of the Legislative
Assemblies and the principle governing the division of each State into
territorial constituencies. The Constitution, of course, recognizes the
deviation from the aforesaid principle in Articles 330 to 333 and
provides for reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes and representation to the Anglo-Indian community in the Union
and State Legislatures. But apart from this, the basic scheme of the
Constitution with regard to election to the union and State
Legislatures is to accept the concept of one man-one vote, la our own
State, two legislations, which are in primateria, also make similar
provision, one by express enactment and the other by necessary
implication. Sub-sections (1) to (4) of Section 20 of the Gujarat
Panchayats Act, 1961, which provide for electoral divisions for the
purposes of elections of members to a gram, nagar, taluka and district
panchayats, as the case may be, in terms provide that the divisions
shall be made in such manner that as far as practicable, the
population of all wards or, as the case may be, all territorial
constituencies is the same and one member is elected from each ward
or constituency, as the case may be. So far as the Bombay Provincial
Municipal Corporations Act, 1949 is concerned, the Division Bench of
this Court, in its decision in Special Civil Application No. 46 of 1971
(supra) read the same principle into Section 452-A(1) by process of
interpretation.
24. It would thus appear that the principle, which must be taken to
have been established beyond doubt or debate, so far as this country
is concerned, is that whenever the statute requires selection of
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022                        :63:
persons to be made by popular election to perform governmental
functions, whether at the Union or State or local level, each vote must
have an equal value and that when members of such elected bodies
are chosen from separate constituencies, each constituency must be
established on a basis which will ensure, as far as practicable, that
equal number of constituents can vote for proportionately equal
number of representatives. The rule is so deeply entrenched in our
election jurisprudence that any deviation therefrom would require
strict justification on rational or permissible grounds and any wrongful
dilution thereof must be jealously guarded against.
25. Against this background, let us consider whether the one man-one
vote rule operates with reference to the inhabitant population or voter
population. In other words, the question for consideration is whether
the underlying concept of this rule is related to the number of voters
or to the number of constituents. It the contention of the petitioners
is accepted, the representation of each ward in the municipal
government would be, as nearly as possible, equal on the basis of
registered voters and not on the basis of population. We are of the
opinion, however, for the reasons which follow, that on this contention
the petitioners must fail.
26. The municipal government and for that matter any other local
Government performs important public functions within the area
under     its    jurisdiction. The    municipality  performs   important
governmental functions which have sufficient impact throughout the
municipal borough and on the inhabitant population of such borough.
The decisive factor for the constitution of such municipal government
must, therefore, be the will of the people, more so when the process
of election is the mode laid down for its composition. It is true that
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022                      :64:
not each and every soul inhabiting the borough is entitled to vote and
that having regard to the qualifications and disqualifications
prescribed in the Act, some out of those souls alone would be eligible
to be entered into the voters' list and qualified for voting. When such
qualified voters vote, however, their votes speak for and on behalf of
the population of the ward in which they reside and their votes are
the expression of the will of such population. The inhabitant
population and not the voter population must, therefore, be the
determinative factor. That apart, the number of voters in a ward
would depend upon numerous variable factors. It may be a matter of
accident, circumstances or design that one ward may have a larger
number of voters in proportion to the population than the other. Take,
for example, the case of a ward the inhabitant population of which
consists largely of persons who, on account of the nature of duties
which they are required to perform, are compelled to live away from
their families. A large number of persons residing in such ward would
be qualified voters and the proportion of qualified voters to the
population would, therefore, be on a much higher side by sheer
accident. Similarly, in wards where the population consists of relatively
backward class people, economically or otherwise, the population may
be large, having regard to lack of family planning or such other
factors. The proportion which the number of qualified voters bears to
the population of such ward may compare unfavourably with a ward
in which more fortunate segments of population reside. This is the
sheer result of circumstances. But apart from the imbalance resulting
from such accidents or circumstances, still greater objection in the
linking of one man-one vote rule to the voting population would arise
from the political device known as the "gerrymander." A voters' list
could always be so manipulated by those with means and in power as
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022                       :65:
to secure unfair advantage by disproportionate representation at the
election. This would not happen if the inhabitant population
ascertained from authentic data is made the foundation of the one
man-one vote rule. It appears to us, therefore, that the petitioners'
contention in this behalf must fail.
27. In this view which -we are taking we are supported not only by
judicial decisions but also by statutory provisions. The American
decisions to which we have referred earlier have largely proceeded
upon the principle that the concept of one man-one vote is linked with
the number of people living in different legislative districts. In
American Jurisprudence, 2nd Edition, Vol.25 in the Chapter relating to
"Election" it has been observed at pages 705 and 706 as under:
Population is the starting point for consideration and the
controlling criterion for judgment in legislative apportionment
controversies.... State constitutions commonly require that
representative districts shall be equal, as nearly as possible, in
population. And the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth
Amendment requires that the seats in both houses of a bicameral
state legislature be apportioned on a population basis. This
means that a state must make an honest and good-faith effort to
construct districts, in both houses of its legislature, as nearly of
equal population as is practicable.
While dealing with election to county and municipal governmental
bodies, the authors of the American Jurisprudence observe at
The equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment
forbids substantial disparities in population among voting districts
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022                       :66:
or units for the election of municipal bodies, and requires
substantial equality in population among voting districts or units
in political sub-divisions, such as cities, counties, or parishes.
At page 712 in the same Treatise, it has been pointed out that
there is some conflict in the judicial decisions in the United States
as to whether inhabitant population constitutes the foundation
for the one man-one vote rule to the exclusion of citizen or voter
population. At page 713, it has been observed:
Although it has been urged that the concept of "one person-one
vote" implicitly means that the validity of an apportionment
scheme is related to voters and not constituents, apportionment
schemes founded on voter population, or on the number of
voters voting at the last gubernatorial election, have been
rejected as unconstitutional, at least where prior apportionment
statutes have been based on constituent or citizen population.
However, it has been held that legislative apportionment on a
registered voter basis is not invidious per se.
It would thus appear that by and large it appears to be
well-settled, so far as the United States is concerned, that the
one man-one vote rule is linked with population rather than with
voters.
28. So far as the judicial opinion in our country is concerned, the
two decisions to which we have made reference earlier also refer
to the principle that representation must be proportional to the
strength of the electorate in an elective process. Of course,
Bhagwati, C.J.'s decision in Special Civil Application No. 465 of
1971 (Vaikunthbhai v. State) sometimes speaks of representation
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022                    :67:
of each area being proportionate to the population of such area
and sometimes of the representation being proportionate to the
strength of voters in such area. But reading the passage from the
learned Judge's decision extracted above as a whole, it appears to
us   that  the   terms   "population"   and   "voters"  are  used
interchangeably and that the real emphasis is on population rather
than on voters.
50.    In order to give effect to the provisions of Articles 243C and
243D of the Constitution, the respondents are required to have an exact
idea as to the population of the territorial area of the Gram Panchayat.
Only on the basis of the inhabitant population can the respondents carry
out the exercise of forming a Panchayat area by joining a village or a
group of villages as mandated under Section 3. The Administrator would
be in a position to constitute a Gram Sabha for each Panchayat area only
thereafter. It is after the constitution of the Gram Sabha, under Section
3(2), the Administrator is required to initiate steps to constitute an
executive committee by direct election which is called the Gram
Panchayat.       It is by direct election that the Sarpanch who is the
Chairperson of the Committee is elected. It is for the Administrator to
issue a notification fixing the number of seats including the Sarpanch to
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022                :68:
be filled from such number of wards. Ward has been defined under
Section 2(zk) to mean a body consisting of persons registered in the
electoral rolls relating to the ward of a District. While fixing the wards and
ascertaining the number of seats in that Panchayat to be filled by election,
the respondents are required to ensure that the ratio between the
population of a territorial area of a Gram Panchayat and the number of
seats in that Panchayat to be filled by Election shall as far as practicable
be the same throughout the Union Territory. Each Gram panchayat is also
to be divided by the Election Commission into territorial constituencies by
ensuring that the ratio between the population of each constituency and
the number of seats allotted to it shall as far as practicable be the same
throughout the Panchayat area. There cannot be any doubt that such an
exercise cannot be carried out if the respondents are not aware of the
population of the villages or the group of villages comprising of the
Panchayat area.
51.    Sri. Sajith, the learned standing counsel appearing for the
Administration had submitted that the Regulations only insist that ratio be
maintained under sections 12(3) and 12(5) only if the same is practicable.
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022              :69:
I am afraid that the said submission cannot be accepted. It only means
that the arithmetical precision need not be insisted with. It does not mean
that the entire provision can be bypassed. Insofar as voter population is
concerned, as held by the Division Bench of the Gujarat High Court in
Rameshchandra Ramanbhai Patel (supra), the inhabitant population
and not the voter population must, therefore, be the determinative factor.
The proportion which the number of qualified voters bears to the
population of such ward may compare unfavourably with a ward in which
more fortunate segments of population reside. A voters' list could always
be so manipulated by those with means and in power as to secure unfair
advantage by disproportionate representation at the election. This would
not happen if the inhabitant population ascertained from authentic data is
made the foundation of the one man-one vote rule.
52.    The constitutional provisions give much emphasis to the
ascertainment of seats in a Panchayat on the basis of the population
count of that Panchayat as the ratio between the population and the
number of seats in a Panchayat has to be the same throughout the State
and in each constituency within a Panchayat area. The number of seats
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022                :70:
allocated to a Panchayat should be proportional to its population size. This
ensures that the representation in the Panchayat is fair and democratic,
and each person's vote has equal weight, regardless of where they live in
the Panchayat area. The intention is to ensure that accurate population
data is available to determine the number of seats allocated to each
Panchayat and constituency, ensuring that the representation in the
Panchayat reflects the demographic composition of the area. The
constitution of the Gram Panchayat is intrinsically subject to the conduct
of the direct election by the Gram Sabha constituted under Section 3 of
LPR, 2022. The allocation of wards/ seats in respect of each Panchayat
area can only be in the manner provided in Article 243 C, read with
Section 12(2) and (3) of the LPR, 2022, that is on the basis of the
population of the territorial area of the Gram panchayat. Without accurate
population data of the Village/group of villages comprising the Panchayat
area, I fail to comprehend the manner in which the ratio between the
population of the territorial area of a Gram Panchayat and the number of
seats in that Panchayat to be filled by election is made, as far as
practicable, the same throughout the Union territory. The Election
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022                :71:
Commission will also have to divide each Panchayat area into territorial
constituencies in such a manner that the ratio between the population of
each constituency and the number of seats allotted to it shall, so far as
practicable, be the same throughout the Gram Panchayat area. This
exercise cannot be carried out without proper population data at the micro
level. Reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and
also that of women cannot be carried out without accurate population
data at the Village or Group of Villages level.
53.    Almost an identical issue had come up for consideration before
this Court in Saifudheen (supra). In that case, writ petitions were filed
challenging the Government Orders by which the State constituted new
Panchayats in different Districts in the State, carving out certain portions
of the existing Panchayats. The process of formation of new Panchayats
was affected through different modes, viz., dividing certain existing
Panchayats or including portions of two or more existing Panchayats. In
some cases, portions of the Wards of existing Panchayats were added to
the newly formed Panchayats. The contention before this Court was that
the formation of all these Panchayats was made by taking portions of the
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022               :72:
existing villages without notifying those portions as a new village under
Article 243(g) of the Constitution of India. A learned Single Judge of this
Court, after considering the constitutional provisions, held that a
declaration by the Governor in the exercise of powers under Article 243(g)
of the Constitution is mandatory for the formation of a Village for the
purpose of Part IX of the Constitution. Without such a declaration, no
Village will come into existence. Therefore, without prior notification,
conferring the status of a village over the area in respect of which a
Panchayat has to be formed, no Village Panchayat can be constituted. It
was also held that if a Village has come into existence on the basis of a
notification   issued    by the  Governor,   then   nothing  prevents     the
Government to form a Panchayat for that Village. However, as the
legislature, in its wisdom, has prescribed a particular method to constitute
a Panchayat as well as for varying the area of existing Panchayats, the
same method has to be adhered to in letter and spirit.
54.    In the case on hand, as can be seen from 2(zj) of LPR, 2022,
Village means a village notified by the Administrator to be a village for the
purpose of the regulation and includes a group of villages. The
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022               :73:
Administrator is required to conduct an enquiry and thereafter issue a
notification declaring a local area comprising a village or a group of
villages or any part or parts thereof or a combination of any two or more
of them to be a Panchayat area. It is only thereafter the Administrator, by
notification, constitutes a Gram Sabha by a name for each Panchayat
area. I am of the considered opinion that due to the total absence of data
with regard to the population as ascertained at the last preceding census
of which relevant figures have been published. Exts.P3 notification
declaring the local area comprising villages, P4 notification as per which
the number of constituencies/wards were declared, and Ext.P6 notification
calling for objections to the proposed delimitation of Gram Panchayat
constituencies/ wards is premature. Going by Ext.P6, delimitation has
been carried out based on the voters in the ward and not on the basis of
the population at the micro level.
55.    I am not impressed with the contention advanced by the
learned DSGI that undue emphasis cannot be given to technicalities and
that this Court should permit the election to go on. The learned DSGI has
also relied on Anugrah Narain (Supra) to contend that when data for
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022                :74:
complying with the constitutional mandate is not available, authorities can
place reliance on other authentic data. I am afraid the submissions
fervently advanced by the learned DSGI, if accepted, would be in blatant
violation of the constitutional provision as well as LPR, 2022. In Anugrah
Narain (supra) the Census figures were not available with the state for
persons belonging to the Backward classes. The State Government had
two choices. Either to say that there will be no reservation for people
belonging to the Backward Classes because the Census figures are not
available or they could have made a survey and counted the number of
people belonging to the Backward Classes and reserve seats for them in
the municipal bodies. The State Government took the latter course and
carried out a survey to ascertain the number of persons belonging to
backward classes. In the case on hand, there is absolutely no data with
regard to inhabitants living in the villages or the group of Villages
constituting the Panchayat area as notified under Exhibit P3. An exercise
carried out on the basis of the voters' list and not on the basis of the
inhabitant population would offer the constitutional provisions and also
the LPR, 2022 and LEP, 2022. I am also not impressed with the contention
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022                :75:
advanced by the learned counsel appearing for the respondents that
Article 243L of the Constitution, would enable the Union Territory to
exceptions and modifications from other provisions of the Constitution.
Proviso to Article 243L only says that the President may by public
notification direct that the provisions of Part IX of the Constitution shall
apply to any Union Territory or part thereof subject to such exception and
modifications as he may specify in the notification. The respondents have
not placed before me any notification issued by the President exempting
any provision or part thereof. The respondents are bound to ensure that
the provisions of Part IX r/w. the relevant provisions of LPR, 2022, and
LEP, 2022 are complied with in its letter and spirit.
In that view of the matter, I am of the considered opinion that the
exercise carried out by the respondents is a premature one. This writ
petition is accordingly ordered as under
a) Ext.P3 notification is ultra vires Section 3(1) of the LPR, 2022 r/w
Article 243(g) of the Constitution of India, as the issuance of Ext.P3
W.P.(C) No. 40183 of 2022                  :76:
is not preceded by a notification issued by the Administrator
notifying the villages under clause (zj) of the LPR, 2022 r/w. Article
243(g) of the Constitution. I hold that Ext.P3, P4, and P6
notifications are ultra vires the provisions of Part IX of the
Constitution of India and Sections 3 and 12 of LPR, 2022 as it is
published in the absence of any data with respect to the population
of the territorial area of the Gram Panchayats, so constituted.
b) Having found Ext.P3 to be ultra vires, Exts.P4 and P6 draft
notifications issued pursuant to the same also cannot be sustained.
c) The respondents are directed to initiate expeditious steps to
ascertain the population of the territorial area of the Gram
Panchayats in terms of Section 2(t) of LPR, 2022, before proceeding
with Exhibit P6 notification and conducting the election to the Gram
Panchayats constituted as per the said notification.