Case :- PUBLIC INTEREST LITIGATION (PIL) No. - 574 of
Respondent :- State of U.P.
Counsel for Petitioner :- Gaurav Kumar Gaur,Abhinav
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Arun Kumar,Ashish
1. We have heard Sri S.V. Raju, learned Additional Solicitor
General of India assisted by Sri Abhishek Sharma, learned
Standing Counsel, Sri Manish Goyal, learned Additional
Advocate General assisted by Sri A.K. Goyal, learned
Additional Chief Standing Counsel, both representing the
State of U.P., Sri S.P. Singh, learned Additional Solicitor
General of India assisted by Sri Purnendu Kumar, learned
Advocate, Sri Tarun Agrawal, learned counsel appearing for
the State Election Commission, Sri Amrendra Nath Singh,
learned Senior Counsel and President of Allahabad High
Singh and Sri A.P. Paul, learned Advocates through video
conferencing.
of U.P., Lucknow, Sri Ramakant Pandey, District Magistrate,
and the Principal Swaroop Rani Nehru Medical College,
Allahabad also appeared through video conferencing and
have been heard.
3. A compliance affidavit has been filed by Sri A.K. Goel,
learned Additional Chief Standing Counsel, High Court,
Allahabad on behalf of the State which is taken on record.
The response filed on behalf of Central government by Sri
Purnendu Kumar Singh, the Central Government Counsel is
also taken on record. The affidavit filed on behalf of State
Election Commission, U.P. is also taken on record. We have
also received the reports of Nodal Officers of various
districts which are also kept on record.
4. Sri Bhanu Bhushan Jauhari, learned Advocate has also filed
an intervention application. Office is directed to allot regular
number to the intervention application.
5. We had in our last order directed the State respondent to
appoint a three member Pandemic Public Grievance
Committee in every district to look into the grievance of
individuals and to redress their respective grievances and
further to look into all the viral news relating to the district
concerned. In the affidavit filed today, a Government Order
dated 13.05.2021 has been brought on record by which three
member committee has been directed to be formed in every
district in compliance of our order. While the modalities of
appointment of committee has been given in the order, it has
not been directed as to how and in what manner the public
grievance committee would redress the grievance of an
individual. We accordingly direct that all the complaints
received by the committee, will be discussed by the
Committee with the District Nodal Officer appointed in
every district by State Government and the Nodal Officer
shall ensure that each and every grievance stands redressed
within 24-48 hours. We also enlarge the scope of Committee
to look into the complaints of supply of oxygen to those who
are in home isolation, the private hospitals and nursing
homes of the district concerned.
6. In compliance to our direction fetching details of the health
infrastructure of five districts qua its population, the reports
obtained from each of the five districts have been brought on
record vide Annexure no. 24 to the affidavit. Upon perusal
of the report submitted by the District Magistrates of the
respective districts, we have no hesitation in observing that
health infrastructure is absolutely insufficient in city areas to
meet the requirement of city population and the rural areas
the Community Health Centres are virtually lacking in
respect of life saving gadgets. In most of the districts, the
Level-3 hospital facilities are not there.
7. We take the example of district Bijnor as a test case to assess
the overall health care system in smaller cities and rural
areas of the State. In district Bijnor the urban population as
per 2011 census is shown to be 925312. We have no doubt in
observing that it must have gone up 25% more by 2021, but
to our utter surprise there is no level-3 hospital in district
Bijnor. The three Government Hospitals have only 150 beds,
whereas, the total of number if BIPAP machines is 5 and
High Flow Nasal Cannula is only 2. Thus, these important
life saving devices in these days of pandemic where lungs
with covid involvement are resulting in serious breathing
problem, are very negligible in number. The rural population
in the Tehsils is around 2755000, again as per 2011 census
and so it must have also increased 25% by now. If we take
the population of rural areas to be 32 lacs then since there
are only 10 Community Health Centres, so one health centre
has the load of 3 lac people and against 3 lac people it has
only 30 beds. Meaning thereby, one CHC can cater the need
of health care to only 0.01% population and there is no
BIPAP machine or High Flow Nasal Cannula available.
Only 17 oxygen concentrators are available with 250 oxygen
cylinders against 300 beds. There is no description as to
what is the capacity of oxygen cylinders and whether in
CHC there are trained hands to operate these oxygen
cylinders and concentrators. The District Magistrate, Bijnor
informed the Court that these facilities were available since
the first wave of Pandemic had hit the State. Meaning
thereby, there has been no further increase in supply of life
saving gadgets to district Bijnor since last one year and thus
the situation has not improved at all in terms of health care
in district Bijnor. These facts therefore, are quite opposed to
the Government’s claim.
8. The number of testing in the urban areas so far has been
26245 since 31.03.2021 till 12.05.2021 and in rural areas it
has been 65491 during the same period. The District
Magistrate, Bijnor informed that testing for Covid was being
done both by RTPCR and Antigen kit in 60:40 ratio. In the
population of 32 lacs, if the testing is done of only 1200
persons and that too in 60:40 ratio then the situation is not
happy. The manner in which the pandemic has hit the rural
areas of the State, the district administration is required to
have a robust way of conducting tests.
9. Thus, the way in which the things have taken shape in
district Bijnor and likewise other four districts whose data is
before us, we have no hesitation in saying that in rural areas
things would not improve in this way. For a rural population
of 32 lacs, as is the case of district Bijnor, every day 4 to 5
thousand tests should be conducted and all the tests should
be through RTPCR. This is the time if we fail to identify a
Covid infected person at the earliest, we are definitely
inviting a third wave. If we have to test 30% of the
population i.e. almost 10 lacs in the rural areas of district
Bijnor within three month’s time, then we will have to
conduct 10000 tests per day, but from the statement made by
the District Magistrate we do not see any such robust testing
in near future in district Bijnor and condition in other four
districts are also same. If this is the state of affairs of five
districts, one can guess where we are leading people of this
State to i.e. third wave of the pandemic.
10.      Therefore, we direct the State Government to
immediately improve and increase the testing methods of the
rural population and the population of small cities and towns
and also provide sufficient health care infrastructure in
compliance of our direction no. 19(iii) of our order dated
11.      In respect of a viral news of one Santosh Kumar
missing from the District Hospital, Meerut, vide annexure
no. 31 of the affidavit, the State has brought on record the
documents pertaining to the inquiry made. A three member
committee submitted a seven point report to the Principal,
Medical College on 12.05.2021 in which it was admitted
that Santosh Kumar aged about 64 years was admitted to
Medical College, Meerut on 21.04.2021 on a reference made
by District Hospital, Ghaziabad and he was kept in isolation
ward. One Dr. Tanishq Utkarsh was on duty at the time of
his admission. It has come in the report that it was around 7-
8 p.m. of 22.04.2021 when the patient had gone to
washroom, he fainted there. Dr. Tulika who was a junior
resident and was on night duty told the committee that
Santosh Kumar, who was in fainted condition, was brought
upon a stretcher and efforts were made to revive him, but he
succumbed and by the time efforts were being made, the
morning team had arrived. However, it was admitted that
team incharge Dr. Anshu, who was on night duty, was not
present. Dr. Tanishq Utkarsh got the body removed from the
place and all efforts to identify the person went in vain. He
could not trace out the file of the patient in isolation ward
and even after counting the number of patients and file, the
dead could not be identified. Thus, it was taken to be a case
of unidentified body and even the team that was on night
duty, could not recognize it and so the body was packed in a
bag and was disposed of. From the narration of facts, as
have emerged out from the inquiry, it comes out to be a case
of high degree carelessness on the part of the doctors who
were on night duty. It is quite surprising that Dr. Tanishq
Utkarsh and his team that was on duty at the time of
admission of patient on 21.04.2021, he himself could not
identify the person. If this is the state of affairs of treatment
at medical College in the city like Meerut then the entire
medical system of the State pertaining to the smaller cities
and villages can only be taken to be like a famous Hindi
saying ‘Ram Bharose’. Surprisingly enough, the action
taken was only that there was of just withholding of annual
increments of the paramedical staff and the doctors. We are
not satisfied the way the State has dealt with this issue. A
patient is admitted to the hospital in an absolute care of
doctors and paramedical staff and if the doctors and para
medical staff adopt such casual approach and show
carelessness in the performance of their duty, then it is a
case of serious misconduct because it is something like
playing with the lives of innocent people. The State needs to
take stern action against those responsible, may be they are
the highest in the ranks. It should compensate the
dependents who have suffered the irreparable loss because
of such carelessness. The Additional Chief Secretary
(Medical and Health), Government of U.P. is therefore,
directed to file an affidavit fixing responsibility in the
matter. An affidavit shall also be filed on behalf of the Chief
Secretary as to what is the stand of the Government and how
it intends to compensate the dependents of the deceased.
Necessary compliance affidavit may be filed within a week.
12.       Now coming to the vaccination issue, the Additional
Solicitor General of India Sri S.P. Singh has informed the
Court that he has filed a comprehensive affidavit of the
Secretary concerned of the Central Government regarding
availability of vaccine in the country.
13.      In view of the above discussions and the fact that the
people of this State have faced the pandemic for over last
three months and are under serious threat of its third wave,
(i)   We need to vaccinate each and every individual in the
(ii) We need to have an excellent medical infrastructure.
14.      So far as the vaccination part is concerned, we have
been informed that a global tender has been invited by the
Uttar Pradesh Government. In addition to what the
Government is doing, the viability of the following may also
be checked.
(i)   Such people who might like to buy the vaccines for
the havenots, may be allowed to do so and may also be
given certain benefits under the Income Tax Act. In the
global tenders, the Government after getting the reasonable
prices may negotiate with the world manufacturers and try
to buy as many vaccines as can be bought from wherever the
vaccines are available.
(ii)  Big business houses who take various advantages
under the taxation laws by donating to various religious
organizations may be asked to divert their funds to vaccines.
(iii) Since the vaccine producing countries are advocating
for expansion of vaccine manufacturing and distribution to
meet the challenge of global health crisis caused by Covid
pandemic and in that process are agreed to the waiver of
intellectual property protection, our central agencies may
give the green signal to various manufacturers who have the
infrastructure to manufacture the vaccines on a large scale so
that they may manufacture vaccines of whichever kind they
feel suitable. The vaccines may be first vigorously tested
and only thereafter may be given out for use by the public.
For this various incentives may be announced.
(iv) Big medical companies which are working in the
country may not have their own vaccines but they may take
the formula from just any of the vaccine manufacturers in
the world and start producing the vaccine. In this way, they
would help the country to meet the shortage of vaccines
which it is facing today. For that matter, one cannot
understand as to why the Government of ours which is a
welfare state is not trying to manufacture the vaccine itself
on a large scale.
15.       These are only suggestions and the viability of having
them may be checked by the Government. By the next date,
a report may be submitted before this Court. While
preparing the report, the Central Government may not
depend on its bureaucrats only. It may use the best brains
which might be available to it.
16.      So far as the medical infrastructure is concerned, in
these few months we have realized that in the manner it
stands today, it is very delicate, fragile and debilitated.
17.      When it cannot meet the medical requirements of our
people in normal times then it definitely had to collapse in
the face of the present pandemic. For the development of the
medical infrastructure, the viability of having the following
may be looked into by the State Government at the highest
level and a report be definitely submitted on the next date by
the Health Secretary of both the Centre and the State.
(i)   All nursing homes should have an oxygen facility on
every bed.
(ii)  Every nursing home/ hospital which has more than 20
beds should have at least 40 per cent beds as Intensive Care
(iii) Of the designated 40 per cent; 25 per cent should have
ventilators, 25 per cent should have High Flow Nasal
Cannula and 50 per cent of the 40 per cent reserved beds
should have bipap machines. This should be made
compulsorily for all the nursing homes/ hospitals in the State
of Uttar Pradesh.
(iv) Every nursing home/ hospital which has more than 30
beds should compulsorily have an oxygen production plant.
(v)    In the State of Uttar Pradesh, we find that apart from
various Institutes like Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute
and the Universities like the King George’s Medical
University and Banaras Hindu University, we have five
more medical colleges in Prayagraj, Agra, Meerut, Kanpur
and Gorakhpur. These Colleges should have enhanced
facilities as are there with the Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate
Institute within a period of four months. Emergency laws
should be applied for the acquisition of land for them. Funds
should be provided to them forthwith so that they graduate
from a medical college to an Institute of the standard of the
Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute. For this there should
also be given a certain extent of autonomy.
(vi) So far as the villages and small urban areas are
concerned, they should be given all kinds of pathology
facilities and treatments should be made available in
Community Health Centres which are at par to the treatment
given by Level-2 hospitals in bigger cities. If a patient
however becomes serious in the rural areas or in small towns
then ambulances with all kinds of Intensive Care Unit
facilities should be provided so that the patient can be
brought to a hospital which has proper medical facilities in a
bigger town.
18.       We suggest that every B Grade and C Grade town of
the State of Uttar Pradesh should be provided with at least
20 ambulances and every village should be provided with at
least 2 ambulances having Intensive Care Unit facilities.
Ambulances should be made available within a period of
one month. With these ambulances patients from smaller
towns and villages can be brought to bigger hospitals in
bigger towns.
19.      The Government should not linger this matter but by
the next date it should come up with a definite report as to
how this upgradation of Medical Colleges shall be done in
four months’ time.
20.      We hereby direct appointment of Nodal Officers by
the District Judges of districts Bijnor, Bahraich, Barabanki,
Firozabad and Deoria in terms of our order dated
27.04.2021. These Nodal Officers shall submit their reports
within a week’s time in the light of directions contained in
our order dated 27.04.2021. The State respondents are also
directed to give the details relating to the above districts in
terms of our order dated 11.05.2021.
21.      The Principal of SRN Hospital shall also apprise about
the working of Centralized Monitoring System of both
Covid and Post Covid Wards including ICUs by the next
date fixed by filing an appropriate affidavit in this regard.
22.       Put up this matter on 22nd May, 2021 at 02:00 pm.
23.       Let a copy of this order be sent within 24 hours to the
Chief Secretary, Government of U.P., Lucknow and
Additional     Chief    Secretary   (Medical     and    Health),
Government of U.P., Lucknow for necessary compliance at
their end.