1.         This appeal has been preferred against the judgment and order
dated 11.09.2015 passed by Additional Sessions Judge/Special Judge
Gangster Court No. 5 Sultanpur, in Gangster Case No. 379 of 2012
(State Vs. Prem Nath and Another) arising out of case crime no.
157/2002, u/s 302/34, 504, 506 IPC, and Section 3(1) of the U.P.
Dehat, District Sultanpur whereby the appellants have been convicted u/
s 302 of IPC for life imprisonment and a fine of Rs. 10,000/- and in
default of fine one year additional imprisonment, u/s 506 IPC for 2 years
rigorous imprisonment and fine of Rs. 1,000/- each and in default of fine
one month additional imprisonment.
2.         The brief facts of the case is worded in the present appeal are
that the FIR was registered on 15.02.2002 at 08:10 a.m. on the basis of
the information provided by the complainant Sri Haivat Ram Yadav S/o
Ramaudaan alleging that on 15.02.2002 at 7 O’ clock in the morning Sri
Haivat Ram along with his brother Latheru Ram had gone to the field to
answer the nature’s call and when they reached the garden/field then
besides the tree the appellants who are two in number being Prem Nath
Yadav S/o Mahaveer Yadav and Sanjay Yadav S/o Ram Niwas were
hiding who are resident of the same village where the complainant is
residing. On account of old rivalry, they suddenly came out from the
place where they were hiding behind the tree and hurled abuses and
threatened to kill the complainant and his brother Latheru Ram S/o
Ramaudaan Yadav and thereafter, they took out their country made
pistol and with the intention of killing the complainant and his brother
fired on account whereof the complainant lie down on the surface but the
brother of the complainant being Latheru Ram sustained bullet injuries
on his stomach as well as left hand and thereafter he became totally
unconscious and fell down. Witnessing the said incident, the
complainant started screaming for help and on that point of time Sher
Bahadur S/o Bhagirathi and one Sri Mahendra Pratap S/o Ram Bahore
who were coming on motorcycle came there and by that time the
villagers also came at the place of occurrence and thereafter, both the
accused had ran away from there while waving country made pistol in
air hurling abuses and threatening to kill all of them.
3.         Consequent to the same, FIR was lodged being case crime no.
157/2002, u/s 504, 506, 307 IPC against the appellants in P.S. Kotwali
4.         As per the records, it reveals that the time of the incident was
somewhere at 7 O’ clock in the morning on 15.02.2002 and thereafter,
the informant brought the deceased who was in injured condition, in his
house whereat number of villagers got assembled and he waited 20-25
minutes for the police to come, however, as nobody has come, so the
complainant accompanied the victim and proceeded for the police
station at 07:30 in the morning in a jeep and the distance of the police
station from the house of the complainant/victim was 8 kms. Thereafter,
the FIR was lodged and the criminal case as referred to above was
registered. It has also come on record that the victim/deceased was put to
medical examination on the same day i.e. 15.02.2002 at 09:20 a.m. in
the police station itself wherein the Blood Pressure was found to be not
recordable, pulse found not palpable and the cause of injury was found
to be fire arm injury, serious in nature. Therefore, the deceased was sent
to District Hospital at Sultanpur as his condition was quite critical
wherein he succumbed to the armed injuries at 09:45 a.m. As the victim
died so section 302 of the IPC was also added and during the course of
the investigation however, Section 3(1) of the U.P. Gangsters and Anti-
Social Activities (Prevention) Act, 1986 was also put to motion. S.I.
Indra Prakash Singh was handed over the investigation. During the
course of investigation he recorded the statement of the witness,
prepared the site plans and also recorded the statement of the deceased
and also got recorded the victim’s dying declaration. After the death of
the victim, the inquest report was prepared and all the formalities
relating to postmortem also conducted.
5.         After concluding the investigation, the investigating officer
submitted a charge sheet against the accused Prem Nath Yadav and
Sanjay Yadav being the appellants. The file of the appellants was
committed to the court of Session being Gangster Case No. 379 of 2012
arising out of case crime no. 157 of 2002. The learned trial court framed
charges against the appellants u/s 302/34, 504, 506 IPC and Section 3(1)
U.P. Gangster Act and Anti Social (Prevention) Act, 1986 accused
denied the charges and claimed to trial.
6.         To bring home the charges, the prosecution produced
following witnesses, namely:-
7.         Apart from the aforesaid witnesses the prosecution submitted
following documents which were proved by adducing the evidence.
1.       Recovery Memo of blood stained sand           Ex.Ka 1
4.       Document Showing Information to Hospital      Ex.Ka 4
10.      Information about the death of the victim in  Ex.Ka. 10
19.      Document pertaining to the cases so litigated Ex.Ka. 19
20.      Papers of case crime no. 331/1998             Ex.Ka. 20
22-28 Document of case crime no. 175/1995, Ex.Ka.22-28
8.         Heard Sri Arun Kumar Mishra, learned counsel for the
appellants and Sri Dhananjay Kumar Singh, learned A.G.A. for the
State-respondents. However, none appeared on behalf of the
complainant to oppose the present appeal.
9.         Learned counsel for the appellants had made manifold
(a) Appellants cannot be held to be guilty of committing of
offences u/s 302/34, 504, 506 IPC and section 3(1) of U.P. Gangster &
Anti-Social Activities (Prevention) Act, 1986, as the very basis for
putting the proceedings into motion culminating into conviction is an
FIR, which is admittedly ante-timed.
(b) As the prosecution has failed to discharge its onus to prove
that there was motive attributable for commission of the offences thus,
the conviction of the appellants is thoroughly unjustified and the
appellants are entitled to be acquitted.
(c) Even, if the version of the prosecution is taken into its face
value, then the nature of the injuries vis-a-vis the site of the occurrence
pursuant to the gun shot, does not in any manner, whatsoever, co-relate
with the offences so sought to be alleged to have been committed by the
(d) Once the appellants have substantiated their defence with
respect to alibi that they were not present at the time when the alleged
occurrence took place while discharging their burden then in absence of
proving it even otherwise there was no occasion to convict the
(e) The theory so propounded by the prosecution while relying
the alleged dying declaration cannot be made the basis to convict the
appellants particularly when the certificate of fitness has not been
obtained from the doctor and the said statement is alleged to have been
taken by the police, which makes it doubtful in nature.
(f) Lastly, defective investigation itself destroys the case of the
prosecution and thus in any eventuality the appellants ought to have
been acquitted in respect of the charges in question.
10.        Learned counsel for the appellants, while elaborating his first
submission with regard to the fact that the FIR so lodged by the
complainant being Haivat Ram S/o Ramaudaan is ante-timed, has sought
to argue that in any case, the time of the occurrence of the incident dated
15.02.2002 cannot be 7 O’ clock in the morning, but it is between 4-5 O’
clock in the morning. Further submission has been made that the real
story is, that the occurrence relating to the death of the deceased was in
between 4-5 O’ clock in the morning of the unlucky day dated
15.02.2002 whereon the deceased died and at that point of time, there
was nobody present and thereafter, the FIR was being sought to be
lodged. In order to buttress the said submission, learned counsel for the
appellants has tried to convince this Court with regard to the fact that it
is hardly possible that once the case of the prosecution, narrated in the
FIR, is taken into its face value, then the sequence of the events would
match so as to implicate the appellants, particularly, in view of the fact
that the FIR is dated 15.02.2002 and in the statement of PW-1/
informant, it has been mentioned that at the time 7 O’ clock in the
morning, the victim along with the deceased had gone from their house
to answer the nature’s call and when they were in the garden/field, the
appellants were alleged to have been hiding behind the tree and when the
complainant and the deceased came within the vicinity of the tree, then
suddenly armed with the country made pistol, the appellants, who are
two in number, started firing and pursuant thereto, the victim/deceased
sustained gunshot injuries in stomach and in the left hand and he fell
down. According to learned counsel for the appellants, in the statement
of PW-1, this much has come that from the field, the complainant
brought his brother and he was stationed in the main door of their house
and thereafter, they waited 20-25 minutes in anticipation that police
would come, but as it did not come, so the complainant took the victim
in a jeep at about 07:30 a.m. to the police station, which is
approximately 8 Kms away from the house and they reached there at
08:00-08:10 a.m. and got the FIR registered. In nutshell, the argument of
the counsel for the appellants is to the extent that the entire story is
cooked up story and the FIR in question is ante-timed, as the death itself
has occurred between 4-5 a.m, but in order to falsely implicate the
appellants, it is being shown to be at 7 O’ clock.
11.        Learned A.G.A. has drawn the attention of the Court towards
the statement of PW 5 being Dr. Anil Kumar Gupta who has conducted
the medical examination of the deceased and according to him, in his
statement so recorded on 18.10.2011, he has specifically stated that the
injuries so sustained by the deceased was at 07:00 AM. According to
learned AGA the chain of event supports the prosecution case as
admittedly at 07:00 a.m. of 15.02.2002 injuries were sustained by the
deceased consequent thereto he was brought to his house and after
waiting for 20-25 minutes the complainant proceeded to take
injured/victim to the police station which was 8 Kms away, in a jeep and
the FIR was registered at 08:10 a.m. and the medical examination being
the injury report was also prepared at 09:20 a.m. and at 09:45 a.m, the
deceased died, which is mentioned in the postmortem report. According
to the learned AGA, there is no inconsistency or contradiction in the
statement so as to suggest that the FIR in question is ante-timed and
merely making the said allegation without proving the same the
appellants cannot absolve themselves.
12.        We have considered the submissions so raised by the
appellants with relation to the theory, so propounded by them relatable
to FIR being ante-timed. The learned counsel for the appellants has also
sought to argue the issue of FIR being ante-timed, but he could not
convince the Court as to how and under what circumstances, the FIR is
ante-timed, merely on asking the same cannot said to be ante-timed, as
for that very purpose, chain of events has to be proved so as to contend
that the FIR is ante-timed. This Court while delving only the question of
ante-timed FIR finds that the chain of the sequence of the events itself
depicts that there is no contradiction or inconsistency in the statements
of the prosecution witnesses and the narration of the allegations in the
FIR so as to suggest that there is ante-timed FIR as even otherwise this
Court finds that the allegation so made in the FIR itself goes to show
that at about 7 O’ clock in the morning, on 15.02.2002, the victim
sustained gunshot injuries, thereafter, he was brought to his house as
already discussed above and after waiting for 20-25 minutes, he was
taken in a jeep to the police station, wherein at 18:10 a.m. the FIR was
lodged. It is a matter of common sense that whenever there happens any
causality or any emergent situation occurs then, obviously, a distance of
8 Kms can easily be covered within half an hour, particularly in a rural
area during early morning hours. The Court further finds that theory of
the FIR being ante-timed has been engineered by the appellants just in
order to save their skin as merely making references to certain facts,
there is nothing on record to link anything, which could suggest that the
FIR is ante-timed particularly when the chain of events and the sequence
itself shows that the injures were sustained by the injured/victim at 7 O’
clock in the morning and at 07:30, after waiting for 20-25 minutes, he
was proceeded to police station and at 08:10 a.m, the FIR was lodged
and the fact regarding the death of the deceased at 07:00 a.m, also finds
place in the statement of PW 5, Dr. Anil Kumar Gupta. The Court
further finds that there is nothing to show in the inquest report that the
FIR is ante-timed, however, rather to the contrary, the inquest report
supports the prosecution version. Hence, there is no reason to disbelieve
or discard the conclusion drawn by the trial court that the FIR is not
13.          The Hon’ble Apex Court in the case of Mahraj Singh Vs.
State of U.P. reported in (1994) 5 SCC 188 in paragraph no. 12 has
“12. FIR in a criminal case and particularly in a murder case is a vital and
valuable piece of evidence for the purpose of appreciating the evidence led
at the trial. The object of insisting upon prompt lodging of the FIR is to
obtain the earliest information regarding the circumstance in which the
crime was committed, including the names of the actual culprits and the
parts played by them, the weapons, if any, used, as also the names of the
eyewitnesses, if any. Delay in lodging the FIR often results in
embellishment, which is a creature of an afterthought. On account of delay,
the FIR not only gets bereft of the advantage of spontaneity, danger also
creeps in of the introduction of a coloured version or exaggerated story.
With a view to determine whether the FIR was lodged at the time it is
alleged to have been recorded, the courts generally look for certain external
checks. One of the checks is the receipt of the copy of the FIR, called a
special report in a murder case, by the local Magistrate. If this report is
received by the Magistrate late it can give rise to an inference that the FIR
was not lodged at the time it is alleged to have been recorded, unless, of
course the prosecution can offer a satisfactory explanation for the delay in
despatching or receipt of the copy of the FIR by the local Magistrate.
Prosecution has led no evidence at all in this behalf. The second external
check equally important is the sending of the copy of the FIR along with the
dead body and its reference in the inquest report. Even though the inquest
report, prepared under Section 174 CrPC, is aimed at serving a statutory
function, to lend credence to the prosecution case, the details of the FIR and
the gist of statements recorded during inquest proceedings get reflected in
the report. The absence of those details is indicative of the fact that the
prosecution story was still in an embryo state and had not been given any
shape and that the FIR came to be recorded later on after due deliberations
and consultations and was then ante-timed to give it the colour of a
promptly lodged FIR. In our opinion, on account of the infirmities as
noticed above, the FIR has lost its value and authenticity and it appears to
us that the same has been 'ante-timed and had not been recorded till the
inquest proceedings were over at the spot by PW 8.”
14.        Yet in the case of Ram Sanjiwan Singh and Others Vs.
State of Bihar reported in (1996) 8 SCC 552 the Hon’ble Apex Court in
paragraph nos. 9 and 10 has observed as under:-
“9.While referring to the main features of the prosecution case in earlier
part of this judgment we have indicated how the assault on deceased
Ramchandra Singh is said to have been mounted by the accused and how
the said incident was allegedly witnessed by the eye-witnesses. To
recapitulate, the prosecution case hinges on the eye-witness account of
P.W.1 Rameshwar Prasad, P.W.3 Gazraj Singh, P.W.4 Shankar Singh and
P.W.5 Sunil Singh. P.Ws.1 and 3 were the body guards of the deceased
while P.W.4 was his nephew and P.W.5, the first informant, was his
grandson. We have been taken through the evidence of these witnesses. We
may state that evidence of these eye-witnesses has been relied upon by the
Trial Court as well as by the High Court by giving cogent reasons. Having
given our anxious consideration to the said evidence once again we find
that their evidence has well stood the test of cross examination and was
rightly accepted by both the aforesaid courts. These witnesses have
supported the prosecution case in all material particulars. The picture
which has been projected from this eye-witness account is to the effect that
on 24th May 1972 at about 6.15 p.m. in front of the co-operative store in
Sakchi Bazar, Jamshedpur while the deceased who was looking after that
store was sitting on the western side of the verandah and was having a
shave from a barber, he became the target of pistol shots and number of
bullets were pumped in his body and in this assault all the present
appellants are clearly indicted by the eye-witness account. It is also shown
that the eye-witnesses who were standing on the eastern side of the
verandah rushed on spot on witnessing this assault the accused who had
come in company with other accused who were ultimately acquitted and for
whose involvement we may not say anything further. Then the deceased in a
profusely bleeding condition was taken to the Tata Memorial Hospital by
P.W.4 Shankar Singh and informant Sunil Singh P.W.5. The Police Sub-
Inspector incharge of Sakchi Police Station who had already received
information regarding the firing in Sakchi Bazar had in the meantime
rushed to the hospital where the deceased was removed and in the hospital
at the earliest opportunity by about 7.00 p.m. he recorded the FIR given by
the informant P.W.5 Sunil Singh. It has to be kept in view that the incident
had taken place by about 6.15 in the evening and thereafter the deceased
profusely bleeding had to be taken in a taxi after getting a taxi from the taxi
stand and on reaching the hospital the deceased was examined by Dr. Saroj
Kumar Das P.W.33 at 6.42 p.m. and he was declared 'Brought dead'. The
doctor had found nine bullet injuries on the person of the deceased. Under
these circumstances the evidence of P.W.44 Prayag Narain who was Office-
In-charge of Sakchi Police Station has to be appreciated. He had broadly
supported the prosecution version in connection with the prompt recording
of FIR at the hospital . His evidence fully supports the version of
complainant P.W.5 Sunil Singh. Prayag Narain P.W.44 stated that from
April 1971 to June 1973 he was Officer In-charge, Sakchi Police Station
and on 24th May 1972 at about 6.20 p.m. at the Police Station he got a
telephonic message that there had been firing in the Sakchi Bazar which
had led to chaos. He made a station diary about it and then left the police
station at about 6.30 p.m. and reached near the TISCO Co-operative Store
which he found deserted although the store was open. He found lot of blood
on the verandah and an upturned chair besmeared with blood. He also
found a small 'katori' meant for shaving and a brush there. He left Ranjit
Singh, Sub-Inspector of Police to guard that place and himself proceeded at
6.55 p.m. to the Tata Memorial Hospital where he met Sunil Singh and got
recorded the 'fardbeyan' of Sunil Singh by Lala Prasad Srivastava. It has to
be appreciated that when Dr. Das P.W.33 declared that the deceased was
brought dead in the hospital it was quite natural on the part of the police
witness P.W.44 to enquire from the complainant Sunil Singh P.W.5 as to
how the incident bed happened and as Sunil Singh had by that time came to
know that his grandfather was already dead he would naturally give his
version about how the incident occurred without being required to further
atrend upon the deceased. Under these circumstances recording of the
'fardbeyan' at 7.00 p.m. is rightly held by both the courts below a prompt
recording of the First Information Report regarding the incident. In this
connection we may also note one strong exception taken by learned senior
counsel Shri Rajender Singh about the recording of FIR. He submitted that
in fact FIR was recorded two days' late, that is, on 26th May 1972 because
by that time a copy of the said FIR is said to have reached the Court of
Judicial Magistrate, 1st Class and, therefore, the alleged recording of the
FIR at 7.00 p.m. in the hospital is a concocted version and an attempt is
made by the prosecution to ante-time and ante-date the FIR. It is not
possible to agree with this contention for the simple reason that nothing
substantial could be brought out in the cross examination either of Sunil
Singh P.W.5 or the witness Prayag Narain P.W.44 to support such a
contention. That apart, there are available on record positive checks by way
of contemporaneous record indicating that the FIR must have been
recorded by 7.00 p.m. in the hospital. It is the evidence or Prayag Narain
P.W.44 that after the 'fardbeyan'was taken down at the hospital at 7.00 p.m.
a formal FIR was registered immediately thereafter in the Police station
and it is in evidence that the said case was registered as Crime Case
No.15/72. The evidence of witness Prayag Narain P.W.44 further shows
that after he reached the hospital and after he recorded the 'fardbeyan' he
went to the morgue and he got performed the inquest Exh.4 over the dead
body in presence of P.W.9 Bharat Singh Mohan Singh P.W.10 and Saatan
Mukhi P.W.23. He found that the beard of the dead body was partly shaved.
So far as the inquest report is concerned it is at Page 518 of the Paper
Book. It is in form No.38 and in the reference column Sakhi Police Station
Case No.15 of 24.5.72 under Sections 148, 149 and 302 IPC and Sections
25(a) and 27 of the Arms Act is clearly mentioned. This shows that by the
time the inquest report was prepared in the morgue of the hospital itself
Criminal Case No.15 was already got registered in the police station on the
basis of 'fardbeyan' of P.W.5 Sunil Singh. This is one positive check of
contemporaneous nature which shows that 'fardbeyan' had seen the light of
the day prior to the preparation of the inquest report itself in the morgue of
the hospital on that night.
10. The second positive check for lending credence to the 'fardbeyan'
recorded at the hospital is supplied by another evidence of
contemporaneous nature being seizure memo which is found at page 538 Of
the Paper book. Evidence of witness prayag Narain P.W.44 shows that from
the hospital he had gone to the site and had got the articles lying on the
scene of offence seized. That seizure list Exh.3 also clearly refers to Sakchi
Police Station Case No.15 dated 24.5.72 on the same lines on which the
inquest report refers to the police case and the nature of the offences for
which the case was registered. The time and date of seizure is shown to be
24th May 1972 at 12.30 o'clock at night. Nothing could be alleged against
the preparation of the seizure list at that time. This also indicates that
investigation which was triggered off pursuant to the recording of the FIR
had resulted in all these subsequent steps during the course of investigation
on the night of 24th May itself and were taken out pursuant to the recording
of the FIR, first 'fardbeyan' at the hospital and then the formal FIR at
Sakchi Police Station. Consequently it could not be said that the FIR was
ante-timed or that it was not recorded as it was tried to be suggested by the
prosecution. If it was registered only on 26th May, 1972 as suggested by the
learned senior counsel for the appellants all the steps taken by the police
pursuant to the recording of the FIR in the evening and night of 24th May,
1972 and which have clearly referred to the recording of the FIR and
registering of the Criminal Case No.15 of 24.5.72 at the police station on
the evening of that day itself would not have transpired at all. It was then
submitted that this FIR had reached the Magistrate's Court only on 26th
May 1972. It is easy to visualize that after all necessary immediate steps
were taken after the recording of the FIR on the evening of 24th May 1972
if the FIR was sent on the next day to the Magistrate's Court it could not be
said that it was in any way delayed. The fact that it was placed before the
Magistrate on 26th May would only indicate that the clerk concerned must
have brought it to the notice of the Magistrate on 26th May 1972 but that
would not necessarily mean that copy of the FIR had not reached the
Magistrate's office on the next day. Consequently it must be held that the
First Information Report was promptly registered at the Police station hot
on the heels of the happening of the incident on the evening of 24th May at
Sakchi Bazar and that FIR reflected almost a contemporaneous account of
what had taken place on spot. That recitals in this FIR clearly indicate that
an assault was mounted on deceased Ramchandra Singh by accused
including the present appellants nos.2 and 5 in Criminal Appeal No.348 of
1985. It had also indicate the involvement of appellants in Criminal Appeal
No.387 of 1985 original accused no.10 Ram Sanjiwan Singh who is said to
have fired pistol shot in air to scare away the public. It is true that FIR did
not mention presence of accused no.6 Ganesh Gwala. But this circumstance
which was heavily relied upon by the learned senior counsel for the
appellants cannot advance the case of the accused any further for the
simple reason that the FIR itself mentioned that there were two other
persons whose names the first informant Sunil Singh did not know. This
version of his in the 'fardbeyan' was fully supported by him at the stage of
trial and nothing substantial could be brought out in his cross examination
to shake this version. Consequently it must be held that the FIR fully
corroborated the eye- witness account deposed to by first informant Sunil
Singh P.W.5 and other eye-witnesses.”
15.           The Hon’ble Apex Court in the above noted judgments has
clearly observed that in order to hold the FIR to be ante-timed or not, it
is to be proved beyond doubt and merely on asking, the same cannot be
held to be ante-timed, particularly when the chain/sequence of the events
itself link so as to suggest that there is no possibility of the FIR to be
ante-timed. As discussed above, the Court finds its inability to subscribe
the argument of the counsel for the appellants that the FIR is ante-timed.
16.           Learned counsel for the appellants has next contended that
there was no motive behind commission of the offence culminating into
conviction and thus, the appellants are entitled to be acquitted. Learned
counsel for the appellants have though made an argument on the said
issue but nothing has been brought on record to substantiate the same.
On the other hand, learned AGA has invited the attention of this Court
towards the discussion made by the trial court while giving specific
finding that there was enmity and rivalry between the parties, which
became the basis of commission of offence.
17.           We have heard the argument of the appellants as well as
learned AGA and perused the record in question and we find that it has
come on record that the father of the complainant and the deceased had
been inherited certain properties from the maternal side of his mother as
per the statements available on record of the appellant no. 1 being Prem
Nath Yadava, who was related to the father of the complainant from the
maternal side as complainant's grandfather (maternal) were 5 brothers,
one of them, whose son was the applicant no. 1 and when certain landed
property was inherited by father of the complainant, then the same
became eyesore of Prem Nath Yadav being appellant no. 1. It has also
come on record that the father of the appellant no. 1 being Sri Mahaveer,
was murdered and criminal proceedings for the offence of murder was
lodged and prosecuted against the deceased, Ram Sumiran and the
complainant and others, which was pending at that point of time and
thereafter, the conviction was made while punishing with 7 years
rigorous imprisonment. One of the issues, which also assumes much
importance, is relatable to the fact that the murder of the father of the
appellant no. 1 being Mahaveer was committed in the year 2001 and the
incident relatable to lodging of the FIR for committing offence against
the appellants is of the year 2002, meaning thereby, it is a clear cut case
of motive being attributed to the appellants, as it is a matter of common
knowledge that whenever a person receives a blow on account of death
of his blood relative, then obviously enmity starts residing in the heart.
Meticulously analyzing the said issue, the trial court has come to the
conclusion that merely because conviction was done in the year 2008
and the same will not matter at all, as what is to be seen is the fact that
the father of the appellant was murdered in the year 2001 and the brother
of the complainant was murdered in the year 2002, which is within a
period of one year approximately.
18.        In the statement, so made u/s 233 (2) Cr.P.C, the appellants
themself have come up with the stand that there is a rivalry with the
victim/complainant and once the same being the position coupled with
the surrounding factors, the entire theory so sought to be propounded by
the learned counsel for the appellants that there were no motive assigned
behind the said offence, is patently misconceived, as this Court has no
hesitation to accept the view taken by the court below and there is no
reason to disbelieve or discard the same.
Surajpal And Ors. Vs. State of Uttarakhand And Anr. reported in
2014 (16) SCC 560 in paragraph no. 16 has observed as under:-
“According to the complainant there was litigation between them and the
accused persons leading to enmity. PW3 Atmaram has also stated that there
was litigation between them and it culminated in the occurrence. Animosity is
a double edged sword. While it can be a basis for false implication, it can also
be a basis for the crime [Ruli Ram & Anr. Vs. State of Haryana (2002) 7 SCC
691; State of Punjab Vs. Sucha Singh & Ors. (2003) 3 SCC 153]. In the
instant case there is no foundation established for the plea of false implication
advanced by the accused and on the other hand evidence shows that enmity
has led to the occurrence. The conviction and sentence imposed on the
appellants is based on proper appreciation of evidence on record and does
not call for any interference.”
20.        In the case of Inder Singh And Ors. Vs. State of Rajasthan
reported in 2015 2 SCC 734 the Hon’ble Apex Court in paragraph no.
19 has observed as under:-
“In that view of settled law, the facts of the present case as alleged in the
FIR and as proved in the court leave no manner of doubt that the group of
persons who chased deceased no.1-Inder Singh and caused his death and
thereafter chased, surrounded and caused death of three more persons
besides causing grievous injuries to the informant-Amar Singh was an
assembly of five or more persons rightfully deserving to be designated as an
unlawful assembly because by its action it showed that its common object
was to commit offence. The subsequent acts clearly show that the unlawful
assembly carried out its common object of committing serious offence of
murder of four persons and grievous injuries to the informant. This Court,
therefore, finds that the courts below committed no error in applying Section
149 of the IPC and convicting the members of the unlawful assembly for
offences under Sections 302 and 307 of the IPC (with the aid of Section 149
IPC). Some argument was advanced on there being lack of any clear motive
but that is not at all necessary or material when the offences have been
proved by clear and cogent evidence including eye-witnesses.”
21.        In the case of Jagtar Singh Vs. State of Haryana reported in
2015 7 SCC 675 the Hon’ble Apex Court in paragraph nos. 17 and 20
“17.Now so far as the issue relating to existence of motive is concerned, we
consider it apposite to reproduce the finding of the High Court on this issue.
“There also, Jagtar Singh appellant is not on firmer footing.
There is plethora of evidence available on record to prove
that the first informant had filed an application for correction
of Girdawari entries and the adjudication announced on the
relevant date by the revenue officer was favourable to him.
There is also material available on record that first informant
had improved the land which he exchanged with the appellant
to redress the grievance of the latter that the quality of the
land which fell to their share in a partition was inferior. It
was after the further exchange, as between the appellants on
the one hand and PW-3 Harbans Singh on the other hand,
that the latter had improved the quality of that land. It was
obvious that the appellants entertained a feeling of envy
towards the first informant and they had an eye upon the
improved land under the cultivation of first informant. The
favourable announcement of the Girdwari correction
provided the proverbial combustible material to the
appellants who have been proved on record to have
announced thereafter that announcement of the verdict of the
revenue officer notwithstanding, they would not allow the
first informant to enter upon the land qua which Khasra
girdwaries entries had been ordered to be corrected. It
cannot, thus be said with any justification that the appellant
had no motive to commit the impugned crime.”
20.In the light of these facts, which are duly proved by the prosecution with
the aid of their eyewitnesses, we find no good ground to differ with the finding
of the High Court and accordingly hold that there was a motive to commit the
offence. We accordingly hold so.”
22.         In the case of Saddik @ Lalo Gulam Hussein Shaikh And
Ors. Vs. State of Gujrat reported in 2016 10 SCC 663 the Hon’ble
Apex Court in paragraph no. 21 has observed as under:-
“21. It is settled legal position that even if the absence of motive, as alleged,
is accepted, that is of no consequence and pales into insignificance when
direct evidence establishes the crime. Therefore, in case there is direct
trustworthy evidence of witnesses as to commission of an offence, the motive
part loses its significance. Therefore, if the genesis of the motive of the
occurrence is not proved, the ocular testimony of the witnesses as to the
occurrence cannot be discarded only on the ground of absence of motive, if
otherwise the evidence is worthy of reliance. [See: Hari Shankar Vs. State of
U.P., (1996) 9 SCC 40; Bikau Pandey & Ors. Vs. State of Bihar, (2003) 12
SCC 616; Abu Thakir & Ors. Vs. State of Tamil Nadu, (2010) 5 SCC 91; State
of U.P. Vs. Kishanpal & Ors., (2008) 16 SCC 73; and Bipin Kumar Mondal
Vs. State of West Bengal, (2010) 12 SCC 91].”
23.         Yet the Hon’ble Apex Court in the case of Raj Gopal Vs.
Muthupandi @ Thavakkalai And Ors. reported in 2017 11 SCC 120
in paragraph no. 14 has observed as under:-
“14.Equally, it is well established that motive does not have to be established
where there is direct evidence. Given the brutal assault made on PW-1 by
criminals, the fact that witnesses have turned hostile can also cut both ways,
as is well known in criminal jurisprudence.”
24.         The proposition of law so culled out by the Hon’ble Apex
Court leads to an inescapable proposition that even lack of any clear
motive is not the material, when the offences are proved by a clear and
cogent evidence including eye witness, and the fact that when there are
enough evidences, both ocular as well documentary, to prove existence
of motive for commission of crime.
25.         Thirdly, the learned counsel for the appellant has laid much
emphasis upon the nature of the wounds of the deceased so as to contend
that not only there is a great inconsistency in the medical examination of
the deceased qua the postmortem report but also in the statements of
PW-3 and PW-5 being the persons, who conducted the postmortem and
prepared the injury report. According to the learned counsel for the
appellant, the injury report, so prepared by PW-5 being Dr. Anil Kumar
Gupta does not show any blackening or sign of any burning/pealing of
the skin, as whereas the report of PW-3 being Dr. M. J. Sharma, who
conducted the postmortem, itself shows that there was blackening or
charring. In nutshell, the argument of the learned counsel for the
appellants is to the extent that once there is no conclusive opinion and
the injury report and postmortem report are self-contradictory, then the
said fact itself shows that the version contained in the FIR itself is false,
concocted and has no basis whatsoever.
26.        Learned AGA on the other hand submitted that the trial court
had analyzed the issue in right perspective and there is no contradiction
in the medico legal report vis-a-vis postmortem report.
27.        We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused
the documents available on record and we find that the view taken by the
court below cannot be faulted, particularly, in view of the fact that the
court below had meticulously analyzed each and every aspect of the
matter and has come to the conclusion that the distance between the
place, where the victim sustained firearm injures and fell down vis-a-vis
the place, where the complainant was present was only four steps being
a short distance and the distance between the place, where the victim
sustained firearm injuries and fell down qua the place, where accused
were hiding, was six steps and similarly, the distance between the place,
where witness, who saw the incident, was present, vis-a-vis the place,
where victim fell down and sustained injures was 40 steps. Though the
court below has taken the view that distance cannot be measured by the
steps as the steps may differ from person to person according to his
height but the logic so advanced by the court below while taking clue
from the site plan, which was prepared by the Investigating Officer was
with relation to the fact that when gun shot injuries are sustained from
the closeness of the person who has fired then blackening occurs near
the injuries.
28.        Here, in the present case, record reveals that there was burning
and blackening, which was noticed by PW-3 being Dr. M.J. Sharma,
who conducted the postmortem and this becomes a crucial fact that it
was a gun shot injury. Even though, much reliance has been placed upon
the injury report, which was prepared by PW-5 being Dr. Anil Kumar
Gupta, but in the opinion contained in the report, it has been mentioned
that the cause of the injury was a firearm injury. Even otherwise, the
injury report cannot be read in isolation, however, the same has to be
read in-conformity and in consonance with the surrounding factors,
evidences including the statements of the witnesses.
29.        Learned counsel for the appellants have argued that there is a
great inconsistency in the version of the prosecution vis-a-vis the
receiving of the injuries, as according to the learned counsel for the
appellants, it has been alleged in the FIR and in the statement in support
thereof, that the deceased sustained injuries in front however, the
deposition of PW 5 Dr. Anil Kumar Gupta who prepared the injury
report reveals that the injury no. 3 was sustained at back, thus, the entire
basis of hold the appellants guilty of commission of the said offence
while convicting, has no legs to stand.
30.        The argument so raised by the learned counsel for the
appellants though appears to be attractive but it is not liable to be
accepted as it has come on record that the deceased was accompanied
with the complainant when the occurrence took place and the distance
between the deceased and complainant was a short distance which was
measured to be four steps and when the complainant saw the appellants
with the country made pistol then the complainant lied down on the
surface and the deceased/victim in order to save himself would have
turned around just to run away while being confronted with the
appellants, who are two in number standing in front of them in close
vicinity. Thus, by no stretch of imagination, the theory propounded by
the counsel for the appellants, can be accepted to be correct, as it is a
matter of common knowledge that once a person is confronted with a
dangerous situation, which is not usual, then it is reflex, which matters
and in order to save the life, human being just tries to run away. The
court below has meticulously analyzed the said issue, while recording
the specific finding that once the complainant tried to save himself while
lying down on the ground then he cannot exactly say as to on which
position either front or back, the gun shot injury were put to motion.
Even otherwise, there is no reason to disbelieve and discard the finding
recorded by the court below, which stands substantiated by facts based
upon the ocular and documentary evidence.
31.        Learned counsel for the appellants has next contended that the
court below has not considered the plea of alibi, as at the time of
occurrence, the appellants were not present. In order to buttress the said
submission, learned counsel for the appellants has argued that the
appellant not no. 1 who happens to be a railway employee and on the
unlucky day, he was engaged in railway station at Haidargarh in
connection with repairing work of electricity along with three other
employees. In order to set up the plea of alibi, the appellants had
produced DW-1 being Sri Surendra Chand Dwivedi Senior Section
Station Superintendent DW-2 and Dayashankar Singh, Technical one
Northern Railway Power House, Sultanpur DW-4 and DW-5 Shyam
Learned counsel for the appellants, while substantiating the plea of alibi,
had argued that from the statement of DW-2 itself, it is clear that he has
deposed that from 13.02.2002 to 15.02.2002, he was posted as Station
Master, Haidargarh and his duty was from 22:00 p.m in the night till
07:30 a.m, however, the electricity in the station colony became
disrupted accordingly, information to the said effect was made to the
Electricity Section, Sultanpur through phone and from Sultanpur four
persons came including the appellant no. 1, arrived at Haidargarh in the
morning on 13.02.2002 and worked from 13 to 14 February, 2002 and
they proceeded to go back to their parent place of posting on 15.02.2002
after getting the certificate on 15.02.2002 at about 07:10-07:15 a.m.
Learned counsel for the appellants has next contended that the statement
of DW-2 itself proves that appellant no. 1 was not present when the
occurrence took place. Learned counsel for the appellants has made
further submission that the certificate, being Ex.Ka-3, issued by the
railways, itself shows that the appellant no. 1 left the workplace at
Haidargarh Railway Station on 15.02.2002 at 07:10-07:15 a.m.
32.        On the other hand, learned AGA has sought to argue that the
plea of alibi so set up by the appellants, is not substantiated as even
otherwise, the applicants were seen to have committed the crime by the
complainant and further the same stands proved through the dying
declaration of the deceased.
33.        We had the occasion to consider the statement of DW-2 as
well as the judgment of trial court and we find that a detailed discussion
has been made by the court below in negating the plea of alibi taken by
the appellants. We find that though DW-2 has deposed that the appellant
no. 1 had come to Haidargarh in connection with electricity problem, but
the said statement does not in any manner, whatsoever, support the
appellants, particularly, in view of the fact that the Ex. Kha-3 happens to
be the certificate. It has come on record that the same is a certificate,
which is prepared by the respective employee (Appellant no. 1) and
further DW-2 only signed the same. DW-5, in his statement, has also
stated that the certificate is prepared by the concerned employee and not
by railway officers. There is a very important issue, which needs to be
noticed that Ex.Kha 3 had been filled by the appellant no. 1 showing the
fact that he had worked at Haidargarh from 13.02.2002 to 14.02.2002
and on 15.02.2002, he proceeded from Haidargarh through S.L. Train,
which commenced its journey from Haidargarh at 07:47 and reached
Akbarganj at 08:28. This Court finds that once a certificate is being
filled by an employee at Haidargarh then how could he give the time
when the train is to reach at Akbarganj as it is not a case of the appellant
that the certificate being Ex.Ka3 was issued in Akbarganj. However,
rather to the contrary, the same was filled in Haidargarh itself. The vital
document, which could have proved the fact as to whether the appellant
was at Haidargarh in connection with an official work so deputed to him,
is a document being the pay sheet. The said document is also prepared
by the official of railways duly verified at all levels. It has also come on
record that the pay sheet was weeded out with the passage of time. It is
not a case also that the appellant was not aware about the
rules/orders/practice prevailing about the time frame of weeding of
document. Here in the present case admittedly the occurrence took place
on 15.02.2002 and it also within the knowledge of the appellant that
criminal case was also going on. Thus, no attempts were made despite
the fact that there is a provision for getting the records preserved in the
wake of practice of being weeded out. The plea of alibi only succeeds if
it is shown that the accused was far away from the place of occurrence at
the relevant point of time and thus, he could not be present at the place,
where the crime was committed.
34.           The Hon’ble Apex Court in the case of Dudh Nath Pandey
Vs. State of U.P. reported in (1981) 2 SCC 166 in paragraph no. 19 has
“Counsel for the appellant pressed hard upon us that the defence evidence
establishes the alibi of the appellant. We think not. The evidence led by the
appellant to show that, at the relevant time, he was on duty at his usual
place of work at Naini has a certain amount of plausibility but that is about
all. The High Court and the Sessions Court have pointed out many a reason
why that evidence cannot be accepted as true. The appellant's colleagues at
the Indian Telephone Industries made a brave bid to save his life by giving
evidence suggesting that he was at his desk at or about the time when the
murder took place and further, that he was arrested from within the factory.
We do not want to attribute motives to them merely because they were
examined by the defence. Defence witnesses are entitled to equal treatment
with those of the prosecution. And, Courts ought to overcome their
traditional, instinctive disbelief in defence witnesses. Quite often, they tell
lies but so do the prosecution witnesses. Granting that D. Ws. 1 to 5 are
right, their evidence, particularly in the light of the evidence of the two
Court witnesses, is insufficient to prove that the appellant could not have
been present near the Hathi Park at about 9-00 A.M. when the murder of
Pappoo was committed. The plea of alibi postulates the physical
impossibility of the presence of the accused at the scene of offence by
reason of his presence at another place. The plea can therefore succeed
only if it is shown that the accused was so far away at the relevant time that
he could not be present at the place where the crime was committed. The
evidence of the defence witnesses, accepting it at its face value, is consistent
with the appellant's presence at the Naini factory at 8-30 A.M. and at the
scene of offence at 9.00 A.M. So short is the distance between the two
points. The workers punch their cards when they enter the factory but when
they leave the factory, they do not have to punch the time of their exit. The
appellant, in all probability, went to the factory at the appointed hour, left it
immediately and went in search of his prey. He knew when, precisely,
Pappoo would return after dropping Ranjana at the school. The appellant
appears to have attempted to go back to his work but that involved the risk
of the time of his re-entry being punched again. That is how he was arrested
at about 2- 30 P.M. while he was loitering near the pan-shop in front of the
factory. There is no truth in the claim that he was arrested from inside the
factory.”
35.         In the case of Binay Kumar Singh Vs. State of Bihar (1997)
1 SCC 283 the Hon’ble Apex Court in paragraph nos. 22 and 23 has
“22. We must bear in mind that alibi not an exception (special or general)
envisaged in the Indian Penal code or any other law. It is only a rule of
evidence recognised in Section 11 of the Evidence Act that facts which are
inconsistent with the fact in issue are relevant. Illustration (A) given under
the provision is worth reproducing in this context:
"The question is whether A committed a crime at Calcutta
on a certain date; the fact that on that date, A was at
23. The Latin word alibi means "elsewhere" and that word is used for
convenience when an accused takes recourse to a defence line that when the
occurrence took place he was so far sway from the place of occurrence that
it is extremely improbable that he would have participated in the crime. It is
basic law that in a criminal case, in which the accused is alleged to have
inflicted physical injury to another person, the burden is on the prosecution
to prove that the accused was present at the scene and has participated in
the crime. The burden would not be lessened by the mere fact that the
accused has adopted the defence of alibi The plea of the accused in such
cases need be considered only when the burden has been discharged by the
prosecution satisfactorily. But once the prosecution succeeds in discharging
the burden it is incumbent on the accused, who adopts the plea of alibi to
prove it with absolute certainty So as to exclude the possibility of his
presence at the place of occurrence. When the presence of the accused at
the scene of occurrence has been established satisfactorily by the
prosecution through reliable evidence, normally the court would be slow to
believe any counter evidence to the effect that he was elsewhere when the
occurrence happened. But if the evidence adduced by the accused is of such
a quality and of such a standard that the court may entertain some
reasonable doubt regarding his presence at the scene when the occurrence
took place, the accused would no doubt, be entitled to the benefit of that
reasonable doubt. For that purpose, it would be a sound proposition to be
laid down that in such circumstances, the burden on the accused is rather
heavy. It follows, therefore, that strict proof is required for establishing the
plea of alibi. This Court has observed so on earlier occasions (vide Dudh
Nath pandey vs state of Utter Pradesh (1981) 2 SCC 166; state of
Maharashtra vs Narsingrao Gangaram Pimple AIR 1984 SC 63).”
36.             The Hon’ble Apex Court in the case of Jayantibhai
Bhenkarbhai Vs. State of Gujrat (2002) 8 SCC 165 in paragraph no.
18 and 19 has observed as under:-
“18. Section 11 of the Evidence Act, 1872 provides that facts not otherwise
relevant are relevant if they are inconsistent with any fact in issue or
relevant fact or if by themselves or in connection with other facts they make
the existence or non-existence of any fact in issue or a relevant fact highly
probable or improbable. Illustration (a) of Section 11 reads as under :
(a) The question is, whether A committed a crime at
[Calcutta], on certain day. The fact that, on that day A was
at [Lahore] is relevant.
The fact that near the time when the crime was committed,
A was at a distance from the place where it was committed,
which would render it highly improbable, though not
impossible, that he committed it, is relevant.
19. The plea of alibi flows from Section 11 and is demonstrated by
illustration (a). Sarkar on Evidence (Fifteenth Edition, p. 258) states the
word 'alibi' is of Latin origin and means "elsewhere". It is a convenient
term used for the defence taken by an accused that when the occurrence
took place he was so far away from the place of occurrence that it is highly
improbable that he would have participated in the crime. Alibi is not an
exception (a special or general) envisaged in the Indian Penal Code or
any other law. It is only a rule of evidence recognized in Section 11 of the
Evidence Act that facts which are inconsistent with the fact in issue are
relevant. The burden of proving commission of offence by the accused so as
to fasten the liability of guilty on him remains on the prosecution and would
not be lessened by the mere fact that the accused had adopted the defence of
alibi. The plead of alibi taken by the accused needs to be considered only
when the burden which lies on the prosecution has been discharged
satisfactorily. If the prosecution has failed in discharging its burden of
proving the commission of crime by the accused beyond any reasonable
doubt, it may not be necessary to go into the question whether the accused
has succeeded in proving the defence of alibi. But once the prosecution
succeeds in discharging its burden then it is incumbent on the accused
taking the plea of alibi to prove it with certainty so as to exclude the
possibility of his presence at the place and time of occurrence. An
obligations is cast on the Court to weigh in scales the evidence adduced by
the prosecution in proving of the guilt of the accused and the evidence
adduced by the accused in proving his defence of alibi. If the evidence
adduced by the accused is of such a quality and of such a standard that the
Court may entertain some reasonable doubt regarding his presence at the
place and time of occurrence, the Court would evaluate the prosecution
evidence to the see if the evidence adduced on behalf of the prosecution
leaves any slot available to fit therein the defence of alibi. The burden of the
accused is undoubtedly heavy. This flows from Section 103 of the Evidence
Act which provides that the burden of proof as to any particular fact lies on
that person who wishes the Court to believe in its existence. However, while
weighing the prosecution case and the defence case, pitted against each
other, if the balance tilts in favour of the accused, the prosecution would
fail and the accused would be entitled to benefit of that reasonable doubt
which would emerge in the mind of the Court.”
37.         In the case of Shaikh Sattar Vs. State of Maharashtra
reported in (2010) 8 SCC 430 the Hon’ble Apex Court in paragraph nos.
34, 35, 36 has observed as under:-
“34. Except for making a bald assertion about his absence from his rented
premises, the appellant miserably failed to give any particulars about any
individual in whose presence, he may have read the Namaj in the morning.
He examined no witness from Chikalthana before whom he may have read
the Koran in the evening prior to the incident. He examined nobody, who
could have seen him in the masjid during the night of the incident.
Therefore, the trial court as also the High Court concluded that this plea of
being away from the rented premises at the relevant time was concocted.
35. Undoubtedly, the burden of establishing the plea of alibi lay upon the
appellant. The appellant herein has miserably failed to bring on record any
facts or circumstances which make the plea of his absence even probable,
let alone, being proved beyond reasonable doubt. The plea of alibi had to
be proved with absolute certainty so as to completely exclude the possibility
of the presence of the appellant in the rented premises at the relevant time.
When a plea of alibi is raised by an accused it is for the accused to establish
the said plea by positive evidence which has not been led in the present
case. We may also notice here at this stage the proposition of law laid down
in the case of Gurpreet Singh Vs. State of Haryana, (2002) 8 SCC 18 as
"This plea of alibi stands disbelieved by both the courts and
since the plea of alibi is a question of fact and since both
the courts concurrently found that fact against the
appellant, the accused, this Court in our view, cannot on an
appeal by special leave go behind the abovenoted
36. But it is also correct that, even though, the plea of alibi of the appellant
is not established, it was for the prosecution to prove the case against the
appellant. To this extent, the submission of the learned counsel for the
appellant was correct. The failure of the plea of alibi would not necessarily
lead to the success of the prosecution case which has to be proved by the
prosecution beyond reasonable doubt. Being aware of the aforesaid
principle of law, trial court as also the High Court examined the
circumstantial evidence to exclude the possibility of the innocence of the
appellant.”
38.         In the case of Jitendra Kumar Vs. State of Haryana
reported in (2012) 6 SCC 204 the Hon’ble Supreme Court has observed
in paragraph no. 64 as under:-
“64. The mere fact that the accused were residents of a village at some
distance would be inconsequential. As per the statement of the witnesses,
both these accused were seen by them in the house of Ratti Ram where the
deceased was murdered. We are also unable to accept the contention that
presence of PW10 and PW11 at the place of occurrence was doubtful and
the statements of these witnesses are not trustworthy.”
39.         In the case of Jumni and Others Vs. State of Haryana
reported in 2014 11 SCC 355 the Hon’ble Supreme Court has observed
in paragraph no. 20 as under:-
“20. It is no doubt true that when an alibi is set up, the burden is on the
accused to lend credence to the defence put up by him or her. However the
approach of the court should not be such as to pick holes in the case of the
accused person. The defence evidence has to be tested like any other
testimony, always keeping in mind that a person is presumed innocent until
he or she is found guilty.”
40.         While analyzing the plea of alibi so sought to be raised by the
appellants, this Court finds that the appellants have not been able to
prove beyond doubt that nobody was present there at the time when the
unlucky occurrence took place, as the circumstances prove otherwise,
which has been already discussed in detail.
41.         Much emphasis has been laid down by the learned counsel for
the appellants that the dying declaration of deceased is not reliable and
the same cannot be put into motion while convicting the appellants.
Elaborating the said submission, learned counsel for the appellants had
argued that in the present case in hand, dying declaration was recorded
by the police personnel and further the certificate of fitness was also not
obtained from the doctor and there is a cloud regarding the fact that as to
whether dying declaration was recorded or not, as according to the
learned counsel for the appellants, the deceased was in a critical
condition and he might have died before recording of the dying
42.         Dying declaration gets its root from Section 32 (1) of the
Evidence Act, 1872, which reads as under:-
“when it relates to cause of death. —When the statement is made by a
person as to the cause of his death, or as to any of the circumstances
of the transaction which resulted in his death, in cases in which the
cause of that person's death comes into question. Such statements are
relevant whether the person who made them was or was not, at the
time when they were made, under expectation of death, and whatever
may be the nature of the proceeding in which the cause of his death
comes into question.”
43.         As per Section 32 (1) of the Evidence Act 1872, whenever the
statement is made by a person as to the cause of his death or as to any of
the circumstances of the transaction, which resulted in his death, such
statements are relevant whether the person, who made them was or was
not, at the time when they were made, under expectation of death.
44.         The Hon’ble Apex court in the case of Paras Yadav and
Others Vs. State of Bihar reported in 1999 2 SCC 126 had the
occasion to consider the contingency, wherein the statement so recorded
by the Sub-Inspector, has been treated as valid dying declaration, the
Hon’ble Apex Court in paragraph nos. 5, 8, 9 and 10 has observed as
“5. The learned Counsel referred to the evidence of P.W. 1, Basgeet Yadav
who has stated that at 8.00 p.m., he rushed to the newly built bridge and
saw Sambhu Yadav lying there and he was bleeding. Sambhu, on being
asked, informed that Paras Yadav, Tulsi and Munshi surrounded him and
Paras gave a chhura blow. Similarly, P.W. 2, Bachu Das stated that he
alongwith Jagannath was going home on bicycle and when they reached at
the distance of 200 yards from Ghogha Chowk, they saw five persons going
away. They were Paras, Munshi, Tulsi and Satan and fifth person could not
be identified. At Ghogha Chowk, they saw Sambhu falling down in an
injured condition. On inquiry, Sambhu told that Munshi, Tulsi and Satan
caught hold of him and Paras gave a Chhura blow. The statement to the
aforesaid effect was made by Sambhu to Sub- Inspector. Similarly, P.W. 4,
Ramchander Raut also stated that he rushed to the place of occurrence after
hearing the noise and found that Sambhu had fallen down on the pitch road.
On inquiry, Sambhu told that he was stabbed by Paras while Tulsi, Munshi
and Satan had caught hold of him. P.W. 5 Kanchan Yadav, deposed
similarly and has stated that Sambhu told him that he was sur-rounded by
Munshi, Tulsi, Satan and Paras and Paras stabbed him on abdomen. He
also deposed it with regard to the enmity between Sambhu and others
accused on account of the land dispute.
8.It has been contended by the learned Counsel for the appellants that the
Investigating Officer has not bothered to record the dying declaration of the
deceased nor the dying declaration is recorded by the Doctor. The Doctor
is also not examined to establish that the deceased was conscious and in a
fit condition to make the statement. It is true that there is negligence on the
part of Investigating Officer. On occasions, such negligence or ommission
may give rise to reasonable doubt which would obviously go in favour of
the accused. But in the present case, the evidence of prosecution witnesses
clearly establishes beyond reasonable doubt that the deceased was
conscious and he was removed to the hospital by bus. All the witnesses
deposed that the deceased was in a fit state of health to make the statements
on the date of incident. He expired only after more than 24 hours. No
justifiable reason is pointed out to disbelieve the evidence of number of
witnesses who rushed to the scene of offence at Ghogha Chowk. Their
evidence does not suffer from any infirmity which would render the dying
declarations as doubtful or unworthy of the evidence. In such a situation,
the lapse on the part of the Investigating Officer should not be taken in
favour of the accused, may be that such lapse is committed designedly or
because of negligence. Hence, the prosecution evidence is required to be
examined de hors such ommissions to find out whether the said evidence is
reliable or not. For this purpose, it would be worthwhile to quote the
following observations of this Court from the case of Ram Bihari Yadav v.
State of Bihar and others, J.T. (1998) 3 SC
290. "In such cases, the story of the prosecution will have
to be examined de hors such ommissions and contaminated
conduct of the officials otherwise the mischief which was
deliberately done would be perpetuated and justice would
be denied to the complainant party and this would
obviously shake the confidence of the people not merely in
the law enforcing agency but also in the administration of
justice."
9. In this view of the matter with regard to Paras Yadav, in our view, there
is no reason to disbelieve the oral dying declaration as deposed by number
of witnesses and as recorded in farbdeyan of deceased Sambhu Yadav. The
farbdeyan was recorded by the Police Sub-Inspector on the scene of
occurrence itself, within few minutes of the occurrence of the incident.
Witnesses also rushed to the scene of offence after hearing hulla gulla. The
medical evidence as deposed by p.w. 11 also corroborates the prosecution
version. Hence, the courts below have rightly convicted Paras Yadav for the
offence punishable under Section 302 I.P.C.
10. The next question would be with regard to the conviction of accused
nos. 2 and 3. that is Satan Yadav and Tulsi Sonar under Section 302 read
with Section 34 I.P.C. In our view the learned Counsel for the appellants
rightly pointed out that the prosecution version with regard to the part
played by accused nos. 2 and 3 is inconsistent. Some witnesses deposed
that the deceased informed that accused nos. 2 and 3 surrounded him
while other witnesses deposed that the deceased told that they gave fist
blows or slaps while some witnesses state that the deceased told that Tulsi
Sonar and Satan Yadav caught hold of the deceased. Considering, the
aforesaid inconsistencies in the dying declaration as deposed by the
witnesses with regard to the part played by accused nos. 2 and 3, and as
there is no direct evidence in our view, it cannot be said that prosecution
has proved beyond reasonable doubt that accused nos. 2 and 3 are guilty
for the offence punishable under Section 302 read with Section 34, I.P.C.
45.         In the case of Laxmi (Smt) Vs. Om Prakash and Others
reported in 2001 6 SCC in paragraph nos. 1 and 30 has observed as
“1. Nemo moriturus praesumitur mentire __ No one at the point of death is
presumed to lie. A man will not meet his Maker with a lie in his mouth __ is
the philosophy in law underlying admittance in evidence of dying
declaration. A dying declaration made by person on the verge of his death
has a special sanctity as at that solemn moment, a person is most unlikely to
make any untrue statement. The shadow of impending death is by itself the
guarantee of the truth of the statement made by the deceased regarding the
causes or circumstances leading to his death. A dying declaration,
therefore, enjoys almost a sacrosanct status, as a piece of evidence, coming
as it does from the mouth of the deceased victim. Once the statement of the
dying person and the evidence of the witnesses testifying to the same passes
the test of careful scrutiny of the Courts, it becomes a very important and a
reliable piece of evidence and if the Court is satisfied that the dying
declaration is true and free from any embellishment such a dying
declaration, by itself, can be sufficient for recording conviction even
without looking for any corroboration__is the statement of law summed up
by this Court in Kundula Bala Subrahmanyam Vs. State of A.P., (1993) 2
SCC 684. The Court added - such a statement, called the dying declaration,
is relevant and admissible in evidence provided it has been made by the
deceased while in a fit mental condition. The above statement of law, by
way of preamble to this judgment, has been necessitated as this appeal,
putting in issue acquittal of the accused respondents from a charge under
Section 302/34 IPC, seeks reversal of the impugned judgment and invites
this court to record a finding of guilty based on the singular evidence of
dying declaration made by the victim. The law is well settled: dying
declaration is admissible in evidence. The admissibility is founded on
principle of necessity. A dying declaration, if found reliable, can form the
basis of conviction. A court of facts is not excluded from acting upon an
uncorroborated dying declaration for finding conviction. A dying
declaration, as a piece of evidence, stands on the same footing as any other
piece of evidence. It has to be judged and appreciated in the light of the
surrounding circumstances and its weight determined by reference to the
principles governing the weighing of evidence. It is, as if the maker of the
dying declaration was present in the court, making a statement, stating the
facts contained in the declaration, with the difference that the declaration is
not a statement on oath and the maker thereof cannot be subjected to cross-
examination. If in a given case a particular dying declaration suffers from
any infirmities, either of its own or as disclosed by other evidence adduced
in the case or circumstances coming to its notice, the court may as a rule of
prudence look for corroboration and if the infirmities be such as render the
dying declaration so infirm as to prick the conscience of the court, the same
may be refused to be accepted as forming safe basis for conviction. In the
case at hand, the dying declarations are five. However, it is not the number
of dying declarations which will weigh with the court. A singular dying
declaration not suffering from any infirmity and found worthy of being
relied on may form the basis of conviction. On the other hand if every
individual dying declaration consisting in a plurality is found to be infirm,
the court would not be persuaded to act thereon merely because the dying
declarations are more than one and apparently consistent.
30. A dying declaration made to a police officer is admissible in evidence,
however, the practice of dying declaration being recorded by investigating
officer has been discouraged and this Court has urged the investigating
officers availing the services of Magistrate for recording dying declaration
if it was possible to do so and the only exception is when the deceased was
in such a precarious condition that there was no other alternative left
except the statement being recorded by the investigating officer or the
police officer later on relied on as dying declaration. In Munnu Raja and
Anr. Vs. The State of Madhya Pradesh - AIR 1976 SC 2199, this Court
observed - investigating officers are naturally interested in the success of
the investigation and the practice of the investigating officer himself
recording a dying declaration during the course of an investigation ought
not to be encouraged. The dying declaration recorded by the investigating
officer in the presence of the doctor and some of the friends and relations of
the deceased was excluded from consideration as failure to requisition the
services of a Magistrate for recording the dying declaration was not
explained. In Dalip Singh Vs. State of Punjab AIR 1979 SC 1173 this Court
has permitted dying declaration recorded by investigating officer being
admitted in evidence and considered on proof that better and more reliable
methods of recording dying declaration of injured person were not feasible
for want of time or facility available. It was held that a dying declaration in
a murder case, though could not be rejected on the ground that it was
recorded by a police officer as the deceased was in a critical condition and
no other person could be available in the village to record the dying
declaration yet the dying declaration was left out of consideration as it
contained a statement which was a bit doubtful.”
46.        Yet in another decision in the case of Laxman Vs. State of
Maharashtra reported in (2002) 6 SCC 710 the Hon’ble Apex Court in
paragraph nos. 3 and 5, has observed as under:-
“3.The juristic theory regarding acceptability of a dying declaration is that
such declaration is made in extremity, when the party is at the point of
death and when every hope of this world is gone, when every motive to
falsehood is silenced, and the man is induced by the most powerful
consideration to speak only the truth. Notwithstanding the same, great
caution must be exercised in considering the weight to be given to this
species of evidence on account of the existence of many circumstances
which may affect their truth. The situation in which a man is on death bed is
so solemn and serene, is the reason in law to accept the veracity of his
statement. It is for this reason the requirements of oath and cross-
examination are dispensed with. Since the accused has no power of cross-
examination, the court insist that the dying declaration should be of such a
nature as to inspire full confidence of the court in its truthfulness and
correctness. The court, however has to always be on guard to see that the
statement of the deceased was not as a result of either tutoring or
prompting or a product of imagination. The court also must further decide
that the deceased was in a fit state of mind and had the opportunity to
observe and identify the assailant. Normally, therefore, the court in order to
satisfy whether the deceased was in a fit mental condition to make the dying
declaration look up to the medical opinion. But where the eyewitnesses state
that the deceased was in a fit and conscious state to make the declaration,
the medical opinion will not prevail, nor can it be said that since there is no
certification of the doctor as to the fitness of the mind of the declarant, the
dying declaration is not acceptable. A dying declaration can be oral or in
writing and in any adequate method of communication whether by words or
by signs or otherwise will suffice provided the indication is positive and
definite. In most cases, however, such statements are made orally before
death ensues and is reduced to writing by someone like a magistrate or a
doctor or a police officer. When it is recorded, no oath is necessary nor is
the presence of a magistrate is absolutely necessary, although to assure
authenticity it is usual to call a magistrate, if available for recording the
statement of a man about to die. There is no requirement of law that a dying
declaration must necessarily be made to a magistrate and when such
statement is recorded by a magistrate there is no specified statutory form
for such recording. Consequently, what evidential value or weight has to be
attached to such statement necessarily depends on the facts and
circumstances of each particular case. What is essentially required is that
the person who records a dying declaration must be satisfied that the
deceased was in a fit state of mind. Where it is proved by the testimony of
the magistrate that the declarant was fit to make the statement even without
examination by the doctor the declaration can be acted upon provided the
court ultimately holds the same to be voluntary and truthful. A certification
by the doctor is essentially a rule of caution and therefore the voluntary and
truthful nature of the declaration can be established otherwise.
5.The court also in the aforesaid case relied upon the decision of this court
in Harjeet Kaur VS. State of Punjab 1999(6) SCC 545 case wherein the
magistrate in his evidence had stated that he had ascertained from the
doctor whether she was in a fit condition to make a statement and obtained
an endorsement to that effect and merely because an endorsement was
made not on the declaration but on the application would not render the
dying declaration suspicious in any manner. For the reasons already
indicated earlier, we have no hesitation in coming to the conclusion that the
observations of this court in Paparambaka Rosamma & Ors. vs.
State of Andhra Pradesh 1999 (7) SCC 695 to the effect that "in the
absence of a medical certification that the injured was in a fit state of mind
at the time of making the declaration, it would be very much risky to accept
the subjective satisfaction of a magistrate who opined that the injured was
in a fit state of mind at the time of making a declaration" has been too
broadly stated and is not the correct enunciation of law. It is indeed a
hyper-technical view that the certification of the doctor was to the effect
that the patient is conscious and there was no certification that the patient
was in a fit state of mind specially when the magistrate categorically stated
in his evidence indicating the questions he had put to the patient and from
the answers elicited was satisfied that the patient was in a fit state of mind
where-after he recorded the dying declaration. Therefore, the judgment of
this court in Paparambaka Rosamma & Ors. vs. State of
Andhra Pradesh 1999 (7) SCC 695 must be held to be not correctly
decided and we affirm the law laid down by this court in Koli Chunilal
Savji & Another vs. State of Gujarat 1999(9) SCC 562 case.”
47.        In the case of Kaliya Vs. Madhya Pradesh reported in 2013
10 SCC 758 the Hon’ble Apex Court in paragraph no. 10, has observed
“10. This Court has examined the issue of putting a thumb impression on
the dying declaration by 100% burnt person in State of Madhya
Pradesh v. Dal Singh & Ors. AIR 2013 SC 2059, and after
considering a large number of cases including Mafabhai Nagarbhai Raval
v. State of Gujarat, AIR 1992 SC 2186; Laxmi v. Om Prakash &
Ors., AIR 2001 SC 2383; and Govindappa & Ors. v. State of
Karnataka, (2010) 6 SCC 533 came to the conclusion as under:-
“The law on the issue can be summarised to the effect that
law does not provide who can record a dying declaration,
nor is there any prescribed form, format, or procedure for
the same. The person who records a dying declaration must
be satisfied that the maker is in a fit state of mind and is
capable of making such a statement. Moreover, the
requirement of a certificate provided by a Doctor in respect
of such state of the deceased, is not essential in every case.
Undoubtedly, the subject of the evidentiary value and
acceptability of a dying declaration, must be approached
with caution for the reason that the maker of such a
statement cannot be subjected to cross-examination.
However, the court may not look for corroboration of a
dying declaration, unless the declaration suffers from any
infirmity.
So far as the question of thumb impression is concerned,
the same depends upon facts, as regards whether the skin of
the thumb that was placed upon the dying declaration was
also burnt. Even in case of such burns in the body, the skin
of a small part of the body, i.e. of the thumb, may remain
intact. Therefore, it is a question of fact regarding whether
the skin of the thumb had in fact been completely burnt, and
if not, whether the ridges and curves had remained intact.”
48.        In the case of State of Madhya Pradesh Vs. Dal Singh And
Ors. reported in 2013 14 SCC 159 the Hon’ble Apex Court in paragraph
nos. 20, 21 has observed as under:-
“20. The law on the issue can be summarised to the effect that law does not
provide who can record a dying declaration, nor is there any prescribed
form, format, or procedure for the same. The person who records a dying
declaration must be satisfied that the maker is in a fit state of mind and is
capable of making such a statement. Moreover, the requirement of a
certificate provided by a Doctor in respect of such state of the deceased, is
not essential in every case.
21. Undoubtedly, the subject of the evidentiary value and acceptability of a
dying declaration, must be approached with caution for the reason that the
maker of such a statement cannot be subjected to cross-examination.
However, the court may not look for corroboration of a dying declaration,
unless the declaration suffers from any infirmity. “
49.        Recently also the Hon’ble Apex Court in the Case of Gulzari
Lal Vs. State of Haryana reported in 2016 4 SCC 583 in paragraph no.
21, 24 has observed as under:-
“21.We find no infirmities with the statements made by the deceased and
recorded by the Head Constable Manphool Singh (PW-7). A valid dying
declaration may be made without obtaining a certificate of fitness of the
declarant by a medical officer. The law regarding the same is well-settled
by this Court in the decision of Laxman v. State of Maharashtra, AIR 2002
SC 2973, wherein this Court observed thus:
"3. There is no requirement of law that a dying declaration
must necessarily be made to a magistrate and when such
statement is recorded by a magistrate there is no specified
statutory form for such recording. Consequently, what
evidential value or weight has to be attached to such
statement necessarily depends on the facts and
circumstances of each particular case. What is essentially
required is that the person who records a dying declaration
must be satisfied that the deceased was in a fit state of
mind. Where it is proved by the testimony of the magistrate
that the declarant was fit to make the statement even
without examination by the doctor the declaration can be
acted upon provided the court ultimately holds the same to
be voluntary and truthful. A certification by the doctor is
essentially a rule of caution and therefore the voluntary
and truthful nature of the declaration can be established
otherwise."
22. Further, clarity on the issue may be established by the judgment of this
Court in the case of Paras Yadav & Ors. v. State of Bihar, 1999(1) SCR 55,
wherein this Court addressed the question regarding the dying declaration
that was not recorded by the doctor and where the doctor had not been
examined to say that the injured was fit to give the statement. It has been
held by this Court as under :
"8....In such a situation, the lapse on the part of the
Investigating Officer should not be taken in favour of the
accused, may be that such lapse is committed designedly or
because of negligence. Hence, the prosecution evidence is
required to be examined de hors such omissions to find out
whether the said evidence is reliable or not."
23. In reference to the position of law laid down by this Court, we find no
reason to question the reliability of the dying declaration of the deceased
for the reason that at the time of recording his statement by Head
Constable, Manphool Singh (PW-7),he was found to be mentally fit to give
his statement regarding the occurrence. Further, evidence of Head
Constable Manphhol Singh (PW-7) was shown to be trustworthy and has
been accepted by the courts below. The view taken by the High Court does
not suffer from any infirmity and the same is in order.
24. The conviction by the High Court was based not only on the statements
made by Maha Singh (deceased) but also on the un-shattered testimony of
the eye- witness Dariya Singh (PW-1) and the statement of the independent
witness Rajinder Singh (PW-11).”
50.         Addressing the issue of dying declaration in the light of law
propounded by the Hon’ble Apex Court as extracted hereinabove, it will
reveal that the incident occurred at 7 O’ clock in the morning on
15.02.2002 and the deceased sustained two firearm injuries, one is on the
stomach and the second is in the left hand. As per the prosecution case,
the deceased was brought to his house and after waiting 20-25 minutes
thereafter, they proceeded for the police station, which was 8 kms away
from the house, in a jeep and then the FIR was lodged at 08:10 a.m.
From the analysis of the statement so recorded by the prosecution
witness, it has come on record that PW-7 being the Sub-Inspector
Indraprakash recorded the dying declaration and according to him, the
deceased named the appellants with respect                     to commission of the
offence. Much argument has been raised from the side of the appellants
that first of all, any statement recorded as a dying declaration by the
police is totally unworthy and secondly, the certificate of doctor was
obtained, thirdly, the deceased was not in a condition to give the
statement and fourthly, no statement had been given by the deceased as
dying declaration.
51.         So far as the question of dying declaration to be recorded by
the police personnel is concerned, the same cannot be outrightly ruled
out, as the Hon’ble Apex Court in a judgment, so extracted hereinabove,
has clearly observed in categorical terms that there is no prescribed
form, format or procedure for recording of dying declaration, but the
only condition is that the person, who records dying declaration, is
satisfied that the maker is in a fit state of mind, capable of making such
statement irrespective of issuance of certificate of fitness by the doctor.
Even otherwise, there is no prohibition that the police personnel should
not record dying declaration, as the position is even otherwise that the
dying declaration was recorded by a police officer is also admissible in
52.        The Court finds from the record that the deceased was brought
to the police station at 08:00-08:10 a.m. on 15.02.2022 and medico legal
report was prepared at 09:20 a.m. and between 09:20 and 09:45 a.m, the
dying declaration was recorded by the police personnel being PW-7,
when the deceased named the appellants, who had committed the
offence. The time for recording the dying declaration was too short to
wait for the Magistrate to arrive or take certificate of fitness from the
doctor as in the case in hand, PW-7 waited either for the doctor or for the
Magistrate to arrive, then by that time, it would have been too late for
recording the dying declaration. This Court has to adopt a pragmatic
approach as this Court cannot travel into the mind of the person, who
was recording the dying declaration, as he was the best suited person to
take decision for recording the dying declaration. Nonetheless, there is
nothing on record to suggest that there was any animosity of PW-7 with
the appellants. There is also no cross-examination conducted by the
defence on the question of dying declaration, particularly, in view of the
fact that the deceased was brought to the police station at 08:00-08:10
a.m. and medico legal examination was conducted at 09:20 a.m. on the
same day giving 25 minutes time to PW-7 to get the dying declaration
recorded and thereafter, victim succumbed at 09:45 a.m.
53.        Dying declaration cannot be merely discarded on the ground
that the same has been recorded by police personnel or certificate of
fitness was not obtained. The court below has thoroughly examined each
and every aspect of the matter and thereafter proceeded to record the
clear cut finding convicting the appellants. Even otherwise, it has come
on record that the deceased sustained gunshot injuries and further the
fact that there is no clinching evidence adduced by the appellants to hold
54.        Lastly, learned counsel for the appellants has argued that there
have been inherent defects in the investigation so conducted by the
Investigating Officer, which go into the root of the matter and thus, the
investigation of the appellants is not sustainable in the eyes of law.
Elaborating the said submission, learned counsel for the appellants has
drawn the attention of the Court towards the fact that first of all, it was
within the knowledge of the Investigation Officer that the plea of alibi
was taken by the appellants in relation to the fact that on the date of
occurrence, the appellants were not present and they were far away at
Haidargarh then the Investigation Officer ought to have examined the
defence witness. Secondly, it was argued that the investigation is
thoroughly defective and has not been conducted as per the provisions
contained under the Cr.P.C., 1973 and read with provisions contained
under the Evidence Act and thus, the appellants are entitled to the
benefit of the same while acquitting from the aforesaid charges.
55.         Though, the argument so raised by the learned counsel for the
appellants appears to be attractive, but it cannot detain the Court any
further as defect in the investigation by itself cannot be a ground for
acquittal and it is the legal obligation of the Court to examine the
prosecution evidence de hors such lapses carefully to find out whether
the said evidence is reliable or not.
56.         The Hon’ble Apex Court in the case of Amar Singh vs.
Balwinder Singh and Others 2003 (2) SCC 518 in paragraph no. 15 has
“15. Coming to the last point regarding certain omissions in the DDR, it has
come in evidence that on the basis of the statement of PW4 Amar Singh, which
was recorded by PW14 Sardara Singh, S.I. in the hospital a formal FIR was
recorded at the Police Station at 9.20 p.m. In accordance with Section 155
Cr.P.C. the contents of the FIR were also entered in the DDR, which
contained the names of the witnesses, weapons of offence and place of
occurrence and it was not very necessary to mention them separately all over
again. It is not the case of the defence that the names of the accused were not
mentioned in the DDR. We fail to understand as to how it was necessary for
the investigation officer to take in his possession the wire gauze of the window
from where A-1 is alleged to have fired. The wire gauze had absolutely no
bearing on the prosecution case and the investigating officer was not
supposed to cut and take out the same from the window where it was fixed. It
would have been certainly better if the investigating agency had sent the fire
arms and the empties to the Forensic Science Laboratory for comparison.
However, the report of the Ballistic Expert would in any case be in the nature
of an expert opinion and the same is not conclusive. The failure of the
investigating officer in sending the fire arms and the empties for comparison
cannot completely throw out the prosecution case when the same is fully
established from the testimony of eye-witnesses whose presence on the spot
cannot be doubted as they all received gun shot injuries in the incident. In
Karnel Singh v. State of M.P. (1995) 5 SCC 518 it was held that in
cases of defective investigation the court has to be circumspect in evaluating
the evidence but it would not be right in acquitting an accused person solely
on account of the defect and to do so would tantamount to playing into the
hands of the investigating officer if the investigation is designedly defective. In
Paras Yadav & Ors. v. State of Bihar (1999) 2 SCC 126 while commenting
upon certain omissions of the investigating agency, it was held that it may be
that such lapse is committed designedly or because of negligence and hence
the prosecution evidence is required to be examined de hors such omissions to
find out whether the said evidence is reliable or not. Similar view was taken in
Ram Bihari Yadav v. State of Bihar (1998) 4 SCC 517 when this Court
observed that in such cases the story of the prosecution will have to be
examined de hors such omissions and contaminated conduct of the officials,
otherwise, the mischief which was deliberately done would be perpetuated
and justice would be denied to the complainant party and this would
obviously shake the confidence of the people not merely in the law enforcing
agency but also in the administration of justice. In our opinion the
circumstances relied upon by the High Court in holding that the investigation
was tainted are not of any substance on which such an inference could be
drawn and in a case like the present one where the prosecution case is fully
established by the direct testimony of the eye-witnesses, which is corroborated
by the medical evidence, any failure or omission of the investigating officer
cannot render the prosecution case doubtful or unworthy of belief.”
57.        In the case of C. Muniappan & Ors. Vs. State of Tamil Nadu
reported in 2010 (9) SCC 567, the Hon’ble Apex Court in Paragraph no.
55 has observed as under :-
“55. There may be highly defective investigation in a case. However, it is to
be examined as to whether there is any lapse by the I.O. and whether due to
such lapse any benefit should be given to the accused. The law on this issue is
well settled that the defect in the investigation by itself cannot be a ground for
acquittal. If primacy is given to such designed or negligent investigations or
to the omissions or lapses by perfunctory investigation, the faith and
confidence of the people in the criminal justice administration would be
eroded. Where there has been negligence on the part of the investigating
agency or omissions, etc. which resulted in defective investigation, there is a
legal obligation on the part of the court to examine the prosecution evidence
de hors such lapses, carefully, to find out whether the said evidence is reliable
or not and to what extent it is reliable and as to whether such lapses affected
the object of finding out the truth. Therefore, the investigation is not the
solitary area for judicial scrutiny in a criminal trial. The conclusion of the
trial in the case cannot be allowed to depend solely on the probity of
investigation. (Vide Chandra Kanth Lakshmi v. State of Maharashtra, AIR
1974 SC 220; Karnel Singh v. State of Madhya Pradesh, (1995) 5 SCC 518;
Ram Bihari Yadav v. State of Bihar, AIR 1998 SC 1850; Paras Yadav v. State
of Bihar, AIR 1999 SC 644; State of Karnataka v. K. Yarappa Reddy, AIR
2000 SC 185; Amar Singh v. Balwinder Singh, AIR 2003 SC 1164; Allarakha
K. Mansuri v. State of Gujarat, AIR 2002 SC 1051; and Ram Bali v. State of
58.        Analysing the factual and legal position as laid down by the
Hon’ble Apex Court while applying the same on the facts of the case,
this Court finds that there might be certain defects in the investigation so
conducted by the Investigating Officer, but the same cannot ipso facto be
a ground to hold that the appellants are not guilty, as even otherwise,
there exists ocular and documentary evidence, which proves that the
appellants have committed the said offence. Notably, there exists dying
declaration of the deceased, statement of PW-1 (complainant) as well as
the relevant fact that the appellants could not produce any evidence to
show that they are entitled to the benefit of alibi and other crucial fact
that the motive stood proved, as it also acted as a catalyst for
commission of the crime.
59.        We are of the opinion that the finding and the conclusion
recorded by the trial court are based on correct appreciation of evidence
and do not suffer from error.
60.        Accordingly, the present appeal fails and is dismissed and the
judgment and order dated 11.9.2015 passed by Additional Sessions
Judge/Special Judge Gangster Court No. 5 Sultanpur, in Gangster Case
No. 379 of 2012 (State Vs. Prem Nath and Another) arising out of case
crime no. 157/2002, u/s 302/34, 504, 506 IPC, and Section 3(1) of the
Kotwali Dehat, District Sultanpur, whereby the appellants have been
convicted u/s 302 of IPC for life imprisonment and a fine of Rs. 10,000/-
and in default of fine one year additional imprisonment, u/s 506 IPC for
2 years rigorous imprisonment and fine of Rs. 1,000/- each and in
default of fine one month additional imprisonment is confirmed.
61.        The appellants shall undergo and serve the remaining sentence
awarded by the trial court concerned.
62.        Let a copy of this order along with original record be
transmitted to the trial court concerned for necessary information and its
compliance.