This petition filed under Section 482 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Cr.P.C.) takes exception to the order
dated 24.08.2021 passed by the Special Judge (PC Act), Ujjain in
Special Case No.4/2018 whereby the application preferred by the
petitioner under Section 311 of the Cr.P.C. is rejected by the Court
02.     In nutshell, the case of the is that he is facing prosecution
under Section 7, 13(1) and 13(2) of the Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988 (PC Act). The case of the prosecution is that petitioner
has received an illegal gratification for executing lease deed in
favour of the complainant. The petitioner at the relevant time was
working as Manager of District Industries Centre at Ujjain where he
was contacted by the complainant for execution of lease deed in his
favour. During this process, the petitioner allegedly demanded an
illegal gratification which resulted into a trap in which petitioner's
hands, pocket and pant were washed in Sodium Carbonate solution
which turned pink. Bottles in which washings were kept, were sent
to the Forensic Science Laboratory, Rau, District – Indore for
03.      In turn, Scientific Officer submitted the report which was
filed before the Court below. During the trial, the defence counsel
cross-examined the prosecution witnesses who entered the witness
box. On the basis of deposition of prosecution witnesses, the
petitioner noticed certain discrepancies and thought it proper to file
an application under Section 311 of the Cr.P.C. for calling the
scientific expert for cross-examination. The said application dated
17.08.2021 was resisted by the prosecution. The Court below by
impugned order dated 24.08.2021 disallowed the said application.
04.      Shri Arvind Gokhale, learned counsel for the petitioner
submitted that Section 311 of the Cr.P.C. is in two parts, first part
gives discretion to the Court to requisition / summon the witness for
cross-examination or not whereas second part is couched in a
mandatory language. To elaborate, it is submitted that a plain
reading of second part of Section 311 of the Cr.P.C. shows that
when an application is filed with a submission that to meet the ends
of justice, it is necessary to summon the witness, the Court has no
option but to summon the relevant witness.
05.      During the Course of hearing, Shri Gokhale fairly submitted
that as per Section 293 of the Cr.P.C., the report of scientific expert
is not required to be proved by bringing him in the witness box.
However, in a case of this nature where the cross-examination of
expert witness is necessary to putforth proper defence of the
petitioner, the Court below should have summoned the said expert
witness. In support of this submission, reliance is placed on the
judgments delivered in the cases of Shri Navin Laxman Tamboli
v/s The State of Maharashtra (Writ Petition No.4326/2021),
Jaipaldas v/s The State of Madhya Pradesh reported in 2006 (1)
M.P.L.J. 506, C.P. Sahu v/s The State of Madhya pradesh
reported in 2005 (3) M.P.L.J. 401, Natashi Singh v/s CBI (State)
(Criminal Appeal No.709/2013), Rameshwar Dayal & Others v/s
State of UP reported in AIR 1978 SC 1558, P Sanjeeva Rao v/s
The State of AP (Criminal Appeal No.874-875 of 2012) and
Jamatraj v/s The State of Maharashtra reported in AIR 1968 SC
06.      The averments of application filed under section 311 of the
Cr.P.C were relied upon to bolster the submission that the Court
below has not taken into account the averments of para no.2,3,6 and
7 of the said application. Unless expert/scientific expert is put to
cross-examination by summoning him in exercise of power under
section 311 of the Cr.P.C, the applicant will not be able to demolish
the case of prosecution and putforth his defense in an effective
07.       Per contra, Shri Vaibhav Jain, learned counsel for the
respondent opposed the prayer and contended that the Court below
has rightly rejected the said application. The petitioner's application
was in fact a dilatory tactics to delay the trial, which is at the stage
of final hearing. The application aforesaid does not contain
justifiable reasons on the strength of which expert witness could
have been requisitioned.
08.       Parties confined their arguments to the extent indicated
09.       Shri Vaibhav Jain further contended that argument relating to
different PH value in different samples of liquid is without any basis.
The expert/scientific report shows that all the relevant samples were
found to be of pink colour. The report nowhere shows that colour of
said liquid in different bottles was different. The liquid was not
classified as pink or light/dark pink. The liquid was simultaneously
kept in different bottles. Scientific expert's presence as a witness is not
at all required.
10.       We have heard learned counsel for the parties at length and
perused the record.
11.       Section 311 of the Cr.P.C reads as under:-
“Power to summon material witness, or examine person
present.- Any Court may, at any stage of any inquiry, trial or
other proceeding under this Code, summon any person in
attendance, though not summoned as a witness, or recall and re-
examine any person already examined; and the Court shall
summon and examine or recall and re-examine any such person if
his evidence appears to it to be essential to the just decision of the
case.”
12.       In view of judgment of the Apex Court in Zahira
Habibullah Sheikh and Anr Vs. State of Gujarat and Ors reported
in (2006) 3 SCC 374, there is no difficulty to hold that the aforesaid
section is in two parts. In the first part, the word employed is
“may”, whereas second part uses “shall”. Consequently, the first
part gives a discretion to the Court whereas the second part is
worded in a mandatory language, which compels the Court to take
steps if new evidence appears to it essential for the just decision of
the case.
13.      The purpose behind insertion of section 311 of the Cr.P.C
in the statute book is that there may not be any failure of justice on
account of mistake of either parties in bringing the valuable
evidence on record or leaving ambiguity on the statement of witness
examined from either side. The litmus test as laid down in Zahira
Habibullah Sheikh (supra) is that whether it is essential to the just
decision of a case to summon a witness. In no necessary terms, it
was made clear by the Apex Court that in the facts of each case it
has to be determined by the Presiding Judge whether new evidence
is essential.
14.      In our considered view, the power flowing from second part
of section 311 of the Cr.P.C cannot be exercised on mere asking.
Merely because it is pleaded that 'in the interest of justice' and 'for
lawful adjudication of matter,' scientific expert should be
summoned, it was not obligatory on the part of Special Judge to
summon the said witness unless it is established with accuracy and
precision that the new evidence is essential in the peculiar facts and
circumstances of the case.
15.      If the application of the petitioner dated 17.08.2021 is
examined, it will be clear that the averments of para 2 are relating to
non-production of Mudda Maal Register. It has nothing to do with
the expert/scientific evidence. Para 3 is related to evidence of
Panch witness Pradeep Shrivastava and has no thread relation with
the scientific evidence. Para 5 and 7 of the application contains
vague and ambiguous averments. The petitioner could not establish
by necessary pleadings as to why the scientific officer needs to be
16.     The Court below in the impugned order relied upon the
judgment of Allahabad High Court in Jose Quintanilla Sascristan
Vs State of UP passed in Cri. Appeal No.757/2018 and the
judgment of the Apex Court in Rajesh Kumar and Ors Vs. State of
NCT of Delhi(2008) 4 SCC 493, in which it was ruled that in view
of section 293 of the Cr.P.C it is not obligatory that an expert who
furnished his opinion on scientific issue should be necessarily made
party to depose in proceedings before the Court. Pertinently, on this
aspect, learned counsel for the petitioner has also not raised any
17.     The singular point needs determination is whether the
petitioner could make out a case in his application under section
311 of the Cr.P.C to summon the scientific expert. Our answer is in
negative because the application does not contain sufficient
pleadings and reasons on the strength of which the power under
section 311 of the Cr.P.C could have been exercised by the Court
18.     The Apex Court way back in Madhu Limaye Vs. State of
Maharashtra reported in (1977) 4 SCC 551 cautioned that power
under section 482 of the Code should be exercised very sparingly to
prevent abuse of process of any Court or otherwise to secure the
ends of justice. In the application under section 311 of the Cr.P.C
the party seeking attendance of new witness needs to plead with
accuracy and precision why the expert witness must be summoned.
As noticed, in the instant case, the averments of application filed by
the petitioner under section 311 of the Cr.P.C do not inspire
19.               Learned Special Judge in our opinion, has taken a plausible
view. Another view is possible, cannot be a ground to interfere
under section 482 of the Cr.P.C. So far judgments cited by learned
counsel for the petitioner are concerned, all the said judgments are
founded upon different facts and circumstances. At the cost of
repetition, as held in Zahira Habibullah Sheikh (supra) whether
new evidence is essential or not depends on the facts of each case.
In the peculiar factual backdrop of certain cases, the Courts have
entertained the application under section 311 of the Cr.P.C. In the
instant case, since the petitioner has miserably failed to establish
necessary ingredients for invoking power under section 311 of the
Cr.P.C, we are unable to hold that the Court below has passed the
order either with material irregularity or illegality. Hence, no case is
made out for interference.
Resultantly, the interference is declined.
The petition is dismissed.