Counsel for Petitioner :- Vijay Kumar Srivastava,Upendra Nath
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Sultan Akhtar
1. This Full Bench has been constituted upon orders of Hon’ble the
Chief Justice pursuant to order dated 28.08.2017 passed by learned
Single Judge in Writ Petition No.14930(S/S) of 2017 whereby the
following two questions have been referred to this Bench:-
(i) Whether in view of the provisions of Government Order dated
17.3.1994, particularly clause 9 thereof, the provisions of the Rules
of 1974 would be application upon the employees of DRDA?
(ii) Whether the judgment of Division Bench in State of U.P. vs.
Ajeet Kumar Shahi, Special Appeal No.714 of 2015, requires
reconsideration in light of the Government Orders dated 17.3.1994
2. The writ petitioner had challenged an order dated 22.05.2017
whereby claim for grant of compassionate appointment under the
U.P. Recruitment of Dependents of Government Servant Dying in
Harness Rules, 1974 (hereinafter referred to as '1974 Rules') was
rejected on the ground that the same are inapplicable in the case of
employees, such as mother of the writ petitioner, who was employed
in the District Rural Development Agency (hereinafter referred to as
DRDA) since the same is a Society registered under the Societies
3. The learned Single Judge has noticed that a Division Bench of this
Court in State of U.P. & others v. Pitamber [Special Appeal
(Defective) No.687 of 2010] had by its judgment and order dated
19.8.2010 held the DRDA to be 'State' within meaning of Article 12
of the Constitution of India but at the same time has also held that
the employees of DRDA do not hold any civil post either under the
State or the Central Government and do not, therefore, come within
purview of the definition ‘government employees’.
4. In the referral order, it has also been noticed that another Division
Bench of this Court in State of U.P. & others v. Ajeet Kumar
Shahi [Special Appeal No.714 of 2015] while following the
judgment in Pitamber (supra), rejected the claim for compassionate
appointment on the ground that the 1974 Rules are inapplicable upon
employees of DRDA since they do not come within definition of
‘government employees’.
5. However, learned Single Judge thereafter referred the matter to a
larger Bench while posing the question whether the judgment
rendered in Ajeet Kumar Shahi (Supra) required reconsideration.
6. The reference was made upon consideration by the learned Single
Judge that the Division Bench in the case of Ajeet Kumar Shahi
(Supra) was apparently not made aware with regard to Government
Order dated 17.3.1994, which provided that in respect of matters of
employment of DRDA employees, for which there is no specific
provision in the said Government Order, such employees would
ordinarily be governed by provisions as are applicable upon
employees of the State Government. The relevant portion of the
order dated 28.08.2017 by learned Single Judge is as follows:-
“7. The reason assigned to hold that Rules of 1974 would not apply upon employees of
DRDA is that employee of DRDA are not the Government Servant. However, while
holding the provision of 1974 Rules to be inapplicable upon the employees of DRDA,
attention of the Division Bench apparently was not invited to the Government Order
dated 17.3.1994, which clearly records that in respect of matters of employment of
DRDA employees, which are not covered by the Government Order dated 17.3.1994,
the persons employed in DRDA would ordinarily be governed by such provisions, as
are applicable upon the employees of the State Government. The provisions contained
in para 6 to 13 of the Government Order dated 17.3.1994 clearly contemplates that in
the matter of such employees, relevant provisions relating to determination of seniority,
application of reservation rules, transfer etc. would all be applicable as are applicable
upon the employees of the State Government. Once such is the position, the Rules of
1974, which are applicable upon the employees of the State Government, would also be
applicable upon the employees of DRDA. Moreover, by a subsequent Government
Order dated 18.7.2016 employees of DRDA have now been absorbed in the department
of Rural Development of the State.”
“8. For the aforesaid reasons, I am of the opinion that the question as to whether
provision of 1974 Rules would apply upon an employee of DRDA needs to be
considered by a Larger Bench.”
7. We have heard Mr. Upendra Nath Mishra, Senior Advocate
assisted by Mr. Neel Kamal Mishra, learned counsel for writ
petitioner and Mr. Kuldeep Pati Tripathi learned Additional Advocate
General assisted by Mr. Vivek Kumar Shukla learned Standing
Counsel for the State of U.P. and learned counsel for DRDA who has
adopted submissions of learned State Counsel.
8. Learned counsel appearing on behalf of petitioner has submitted
that the DRDA was created by various office memorandums of
Government of India and consequent Government Orders by the
State Government. The DRDA is fully funded by the Central and
State Governments and has already been held to be an
instrumentality of State under Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
As such, power of the Central and State Governments to issue
directions and policy guidelines to the DRDA including service
conditions of the employees has been recognised and accepted not
only by the opposite parties but by judgments of this Court as well.
It is submitted that upon creation of DRDA, draft service rules were
made but were never notified. Due to the said fact, although the
DRDAs were set up for different Districts and were separately
registered as Societies under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 but
all the conditions of service of employees of DRDA are governed by
various Government Orders issued by the Government and
departmental     orders   issued   by   the   Commissioner,   Rural
Development for maintaining uniformity in DRDA set up. It is
submitted that the State Government has the power to issue
Government Orders with regard to policy guidelines to the DRDAs
as provided in the bye-laws.
9. Learned counsel for petitioner has submitted that in view of the
fact that no Service Regulations were notified for employees of
DRDA,      the   State   Government,    exercising its  powers   of
superintendence, issued the Government Order dated 17.03.1994 in
which guidelines for conditions of service of the employees were
laid down. It is submitted that paragraph 9 of the said Government
Order clearly provided that the service conditions which are not
specifically provided for in the Government Order would be made
applicable upon employees of the DRDA as they are ordinarily
applicable upon State Government employees. Attention has been
drawn to the fact that subsequently, the employees of the DRDA
have been absorbed in the department of Rural Development of the
State Government vide Government Order dated 18.07.2016 thereby
recognising the fact that not only was the DRDA established as a
permanent department but that the employees thereof were also
functioning on behalf of the State Government.
10. Learned counsel for petitioner has also submitted that the
condition indicated in paragraph 9 of      Government Order dated
17.03.1994 thereafter stood ratified in view of the fact that the same
was adopted by the DRDA , Raebareli vide Resolution dated
02.06.1994. In view of aforesaid, learned counsel appearing for the
petitioner has submitted that the said Government Order dated
17.03.1994 and the resolution dated 02.06.1994 were very relevant
for the purposes of determination of applicability of the 1974 Rules
upon employees of the DRDA but the same were not brought to the
attention of the Division Bench in Ajeet Kumar Shahi (Supra),
which therefore requires to be reconsidered. Learned counsel has
further submitted that the Government Order dated 17.03.1994 and
the resolution dated 02.06.1994 are clearly in the nature of
legislation by reference. He has further submitted that except for the
provisions of compassionate appointment, rest of the service
conditions indicated in the Government Order dated 17.03.1994
have been implemented in the DRDAs throughout the State
irrespective of the fact whether the same was adopted or not. As
such, it is submitted that the State Government cannot approbate and
reprobate at the same time. Learned counsel has relied upon various
judgments in order to buttress his submissions, which shall be
considered subsequently.
11. Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the State has refuted the
submissions of learned counsel for petitioner on the ground that the
petitioner has misconstrued the Government Order dated 17.03.1994
which clearly provides that it would be inapplicable in case of Rules
pertaining to Government Servants made and notified under Article
309 of the Constitution of India and since the 1974 Rules have been
made under Article 309 of the Constitution of India, the same are
exempt from applicability upon employees of DRDAs by virtue of
Government Order dated 17.03.1994 itself.        It has been further
submitted that a reading of the 1974 Rules clearly indicates that it is
applicable only upon Government servants and since it has already
been held and is undisputed that the employees of the DRDAs
employed prior to issuance of Government Order dated 18.07.2016
would not come within the purview of Government servants,
therefore, there is no question of the 1974 Rules being applicable
upon them.
12. Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the State has further
submitted that paragraph 9 of the Government order dated
17.03.1994 is only an enabling provision and would be applicable
only once it is adopted by each and every DRDA in all the Districts.
That having not been done, the same would not automatically apply
throughout the State of U.P. It has been further submitted that Ajeet
Kumar Shahi (Supra) indicates the correct position of law while
following the Division Bench judgment in the case of Pitamber
(supra). It is submitted that the position has thereafter been made
clear by the Government Order dated 10.06.2013 in which also it
has been stated that the 1974 Rules are inapplicable upon employees
13. We have considered the submissions advanced by learned
counsel for the parties and perused the record as well as written
arguments submitted by learned counsel on behalf of petitioner as
well as the State.
14. For the purpose of answering the reference, it would be
worthwhile to examine the creation, establishment and nature of
15. DRDAs have been created in each district of the State under the
directions of the Government of India for ensuring effective and
speedy implementation of all the Central and State Government
programmes      pertaining  to   rural   development.    Before   the
establishment of DRDA in its present form in 1980, the Government
of India issued instructions in the year 1971 for creation of Small
Farmers Development Agency (SFDA) in each district, which was
registered as a Society for implementation of the Central
Government programmes like IRDP etc.
16. Later on, when the IRDP was extended to all the districts of the
State throughout the Country, the Government of India vide
notification dated 4.10.80, decided to set up a single execution
agency at the district level for ensuring effective implementation of
Rural Development Programmes. Formal creation of the DRDA was
contemplated under the office memorandum of the Government of
India dated 24.10.80, which provided that DRDA will be created as a
Society in each district. It was further provided that the DRDA shall
be controlled and governed by the State Government and it will be
headed by the Collector/Deputy Commissioner in each district. Apart
from that, DRDAs were to have full time Executive Officer
preferably a senior scale IAS officer. In the State of U.P., Chief
Development Officer is currently the Executive Director of DRDA.
17. The State Government vide government order dated 24.11.80
created DRDAs in each district. In order to maintain uniformity in
the constitution of all the DRDAs existing in various districts, the
Central Government issued an O.M. dated 10.3.81, whereby
guidelines were issued regarding uniform structure of DRDA.
Consequently, the State Government issued the Government order
dated 10.7.81, whereby a uniform structure of the Governing Body
of the DRDA was provided. Thus, each DRDA is headed by the
District Magistrate, who is the Chairman of the DRDA. The Deputy
Development Commissioner is to be the Vice Chairman of the
DRDA and thereafter eight members were provided, which include
Officer, District Animal Husbandry Officer and Assistant Engineer,
Minor Irrigation. Since the earlier District Officers did not have the
provisions for a Governing Body, hence directions were issued by
the State Government to all the DRDAs to incorporate the aforesaid
uniform Governing Body in their Articles of Association. In this
regard, the Office Memorandum dated 10.3.81 of the Government of
India and the Government order dated 10.7.81 are relevant.
18. In compliance of the aforesaid instructions of the Government of
India dated 10.3.81 as well as the directions issued by the State
Government vide Government order dated 10.7.81, all the DRDAs
prepared almost identical bye-laws. One of such bye-laws which has
been placed before us relating to DRDA, Auraiya, in Rule 5
prescribe establishment and appointment etc., wherein sub-rule (2) of
Rule 5 provides that subject to the approval or under the directions
of the Government of India or State Government from time to time,
the Agency will create new post. Sub-rule (4) of Rule 5 further says
that the directions of the Government orders providing for duties,
responsibilities and powers etc. will be final and if required will have
an overriding effect on the old and existing rule.
19. Rule 14 of the bye-laws provide that every employee of Agency,
whether directly recruited or on deputation from department of State
Government or local body shall be governed by Service Conduct
Rules of the State Government. Rule 15 further clarifies that service
conditions and service rules not covered under Rules 4 to 13 shall be
the same as those applicable on State Government employees.
20. From the aforesaid directions issued by the Government of India
and the State Government and the object for which the DRDAs have
been established in each district with present structure, it is clear that
the State Government has all pervasive control over the
administration of the DRDA and all the DRDAs existing in various
districts of the State have a uniform administrative set up, created by
the State Government under the directions of Central Government.
21. The status of DRDAs was considered by a Division Bench of this
Court in the case of Anoop Rai Jain and others v. State of U.P.
and others [Writ Petition No.458 (S/B) of 2000 and other connected
matters]. The same formed the basis of another Division Bench
judgment in Pitamber (supra) whereunder it was held that the
DRDA is 'State' within meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of
India. The said fact is undisputed between the parties and has been
followed in various subsequent judgments of this Court as well.
However, the said judgment also held that the employees of DRDA
do not hold any civil post under the Government and consequently
are not Government employees.
22. It is on this latter reasoning that the Division Bench in Ajeet
Kumar Shahi (Supra) rejected the claim for compassionate
appointment to dependent of an employee of DRDA holding that the
1974 Rules are applicable only upon Government employees.
23. Since the status of DRDA as 'State' under Article 12 of the
Constitution of India is neither being disputed by the parties nor is a
subject matter of reference, as such, it is not being deliberated upon
by this bench.
Litigational background regarding DRDA employees.
24. Prior to the judgment of Division Bench in Pitamber (supra), a
learned Single Judge in the case of Smt. Reeta Mishra v. State of
U.P. [Writ Petition No.2205(S/S) of 2006] had directed the DRDA to
consider appointment of the writ petitioner therein on compassionate
basis in terms of the 1974 Rules in view of the fact that in an earlier
judgment rendered in Writ Petition No.2280 (S/S) of 2006, the
DRDAs had been declared an instrumentality of State. The learned
Single Judge vide order dated 26.07.2006 quashed the Government
Order dated 22.04.2004 whereunder the benefit of the 1974 Rules to
the employees of DRDA had been denied.
25. Subsequently, another case of Surya Bhan Singh v. State of
U.P. [Writ Petition No.6411(S/S) of 2005] was decided vide order
dated 08.12.2006 in terms of the judgment rendered in Reeta
Mishra (supra). After Surya Bhan Singh was granted appointment
under the 1974 Rules, he was terminated from service, which was
challenged in Writ Petition No.5332 (S/S) of 2007 and was allowed
vide judgment and order dated 27.09.2013. Special Appeal No.33 of
2014 (D) filed by the State of U.P. against the said order was
dismissed vide judgment and order dated 21.07.2014 on the ground
that once the petitioner therein had been appointed on compassionate
basis, it was not open for the authority to terminate his services after
a lapse of six months. Apparently, neither the Government Order
dated 17.03.1994 nor the judgment of Division Bench in Pitamber
(supra) was considered in the matter pertaining to Surya Bhan Singh
since in the meantime judgment in the case of Pitamber (supra)
came to be rendered vide judgment and order dated 19.08.2010.
However, consequent upon judgment rendered in the case of Reeta
Mishra (supra), the cases of dependents of employees of DRDA
continued to be entertained since the Government Order dated
22.04.2004 had been set aside and the judgment in Reeta Mishra
(supra) had become final as no appeal had been preferred by either
26. The situation underwent a change in 2010 with the advent of
Division Bench judgment in the case of Pitamber (supra).
27. In the aforesaid case, Special Appeal had been filed by the State
of U.P. against the judgment and order dated 23.03.2010 passed by a
learned Single Judge in Writ Petition No.10464 of 2009. The issue
in the said case was regarding applicability of Fundamental Rule 56
of the Financial Handbook pertaining to Government servants with
regard to age of superannuation of employees of DRDA.            The
learned Single Judge in his judgment had quashed the notice dated
29.12.2008 holding that the writ petitioner therein would be entitled
to continue up to the age of 60 years as in the case of Government
Servants since the Fundamental Rules would be applicable upon the
employees of DRDA in pursuance of paragraph 9 of the Government
Order dated 17.03.1994.
28. While noticing the background of DRDA regarding its creation,
status and the deep and pervasive control of the State Government,
the Division Bench reached a conclusion that the DRDA would be
'State' within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India
despite being a Society registered under the Societies Registration
Act, 1860. However, the Division Bench relying upon the Supreme
Court Judgment in State of Assam v. Kanank Chandra Dutta
reported in AIR 1967 SC 884 held that the employees of DRDA do
not answer the tests for coming within the purview of a Government
servant since they do not hold any civil post either under the Central
Government or the State Government.         It was held that merely
because an Association falls under the expression ‘instrumentality of
State’ within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution, it would
not make its employees come within the definition of government
employees. It was held that the employees of DRDA are for all
practical purposes employees of the Society who are not holding any
civil post in the services of the State and therefore Rule 56 of the
Fundamental Rules would be inapplicable in their case. The Single
Judge judgment in the case of Kalika Prasad v. State of U.P. &
others [Writ Petition No.45(S/S) of 2005] holding Rule 56 of the
Fundamental Rules to be applicable upon DRDA employees, was
29. The Division Bench held that if the Government Order dated
17.03.1994 was applicable upon the employees of DRDA being
within competence of the State Government to issue the same, it
was also within competence of the State Government to issue the
Government Order dated 09.03.2004 restricting the age of
superannuation. The relevant portion of the judgment is as follows:-
“The learned Judge in Kalika Prasad (supra), has not discussed the reason as to why
F.R. 56 is applicable. If F.R. 56 was applicable because of Guideline No. 2 (10) of
Government Notification dated 17th March, 1994, then it was within the competence of
the State Government to also have issued the Government Order dated 09.03.2004. In
these circumstances, considering the Government Notification dated 09.03.2004, the
age of superannuation of employees of DRDA would be 58 years from that date.
Question (1) is answered in the affirmative.”
Consideration of the case of Ajeet Kumar Shahi (Supra)
30. The said Special Appeal in the case of Ajeet Kumar Shahi
(Supra) arose from judgment and order of a learned Single Judge
dated 24.04.2015 and was particularly with regard to claim for
compassionate appointment under the 1974 Rules. The claim for
compassionate appointment of the writ petitioner therein was
rejected by authorities on the basis of Government Order dated
22.04.2004 whereunder it was provided that the DRDA being a
society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860, its
employees would not come within the purview of the 1974 Rules.
Writ Petition against rejection order was allowed. The Division
Bench noticed the judgment rendered in the case of Reeta Mishra
(supra) and the fact that the said Government Order dated
22.04.2004 had been quashed, which was thereafter followed in
other cases as well. It also noticed the judgment rendered by another
Division Bench in the case of Pitamber (supra) and the fact that the
employees of the DRDA did not hold any civil post in the services of
State and continued to be employees of DRDA which was a society.
In such circumstances, it was held that provisions of Rule 2(a) of the
1974 Rules would not be attracted in the case of employees of
DRDA. The relevant portion of the judgment is as follows:-
“In view of the law which has been laid down by the Division Bench in its judgment
dated 19 August 2010 in Pitamber (supra), it is now a settled principle of law that the
employees of DRDA are not holding civil posts in the services of the State. They
continue to be the employees of DRDA which is a society registered under the Societies
Registration Act, 1860. That being the position, the provisions of Rule 2 (a) of the Rules
of 1974 would not be attracted.”
31. The case of Reeta Mishra (supra) was distinguished on the
ground that it was rendered prior to judgment in Pitamber (supra)
and therefore cannot be considered as laying down any principle of
law as such.         The judgment of Division Bench in Surya Bhan
Singh (supra) was also distinguished on the ground that the issue of
applicability of the 1974 Rules was not being considered by the
Division Bench, which was considering only the fact that once the
writ petitioner therein had been appointed on compassionate basis
then whether his services could be terminated after a lapse of six
months, without complying with the principles of natural justice.
However, a reading of the judgment indicates that neither the
Government Order dated 17.03.1994 nor the resolution dated
02.06.1994 was placed before the Division Bench and as such do not
find any mention therein.
Consideration of Question No.1 :- (i) Whether in view of the
provisions of Government Order dated 17.3.1994, particularly
clause 9 thereof, the provisions of the Rules of 1974 would be
(a) the DRDA is a Society registered under the Societies Registration
Act, 1860 but has nonetheless been held to be 'State' under Article
12 of the Constitution of India, which is an accepted position.
(b) there are no service regulations in any of the DRDAs pertaining
to its employees throughout the State of U.P.
(c) in the absence of service rules, the State Government had issued
notification dated 17.03.1994 indicating the conditions of service
which were to be applicable upon all the employees of DRDA in
uniformity throughout the State of U.P.
(d) consequent upon their establishment, almost identical bye-laws
were framed by the DRDA in all the Districts in which the State
Government has been empowered to issue policy directions and
guidelines for the proper functioning of DRDA throughout the Sate
of U.P. including conditions of service of its employees.
(e) employees of the DRDA throughout the State of U.P. has been
absorbed in the department of Rural Development of the State
Government vide Government Order dated 18.07.2016.
33. Considering the aforesaid factors, the reference has to be
answered regarding applicability of the 1974 Rules upon employees
of DRDA appointed or working prior to issuance of Government
Order dated 18.07.2016 since the said employees after absorption
already have the status of State Government employee upon whom
the 1974 Rules are automatically applicable now.
34. It is an accepted fact that subsequent to creation and
establishment of DRDA, all the DRDAs prepared almost identical
bye-laws pursuant to instructions of the Government of India dated
10.03.1981 and of the State Government dated 10.07.1981. An
exemplar bye-law relating to DRDA, Auraiyya has been placed
before us in which Rule 14 of the bye-laws provides that every
employee of DRDA whether directly recruited or on deputation from
a department of State Government or a local body would be
governed by the service conduct rules of the State Government.
Rule 15 further clarifies that service conditions and service rules not
covered under Rules 4 to 13 of the bye-laws would be the same as
those applicable upon the State Government employees. The bye-
laws of DRDA have already been considered in Pitamber (supra)
“11. There is no dispute that the DRDAs are registered as Societies under the Societies
Registration Act. DRDAs are registered for each District. The Bye-laws provide for a
Governing Body. The powers of the Governing Body has been set out under Bye-law 19
of the Bye-laws. Bye-law 20 provides for other powers conferred on the Governing
Body. Bye-law 35 provides the manner in which the Society can sue or be sued. The
Memorandum of Association of DRDA provides for Working Committee of the
Governing Body, which consists of officers, who hold office in the Working Committee,
by virtue of their posts in Government service. The members of the Society hold the post
of Chairman or Members or the Executive Director by virtue of the posts they hold in
Government service. By virtue of these Bye-laws, the Governing Body can appoint staff
subject to the directions issued by the Central Government/State Government. The State
Government issued Notification dated 17th March, 1994 which provided for the
conditions of service of the employees in respect of employees of DRDA. Once the State
Government has issued directions in exercise of its power, the Governing Body is bound
by the said directions in the matter of appointment of staff. The power to appoint also
includes the power to terminate and/or superannuate.”
35. Similarly bye-law 20 of the bye-laws provides as follows:-
"20. In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions,
(h)      Subject to the direction, if any, of the Government of India/State Government
appoint such staff as may from time to time be necessary for carrying out day to
day affairs of the Society.”
36. From a perusal of the bye-laws, it is apparent that although the
governing body of the DRDA is the appointing authority of its
employees but the same would be subject to the directions issued by
the Central or the State Government. It is pursuant to the said power
of the State Government, which is undisputed, that the notification
dated 17.03.1994 was issued particularly to fill in the void created
due to the fact that no service rules were notified with regard to
employees of the DRDA.
37. The opening paragraphs of Government Order dated 17.03.1994
states that with regard to employees of DRDA, no service rules have
been notified and the DRDA being a registered society, rules framed
for Government employees under Article 309 of the Constitution of
India would be inapplicable. It is further stated that in view of the
said lacuna, directions are being issued by the State Government for
regulating and bringing about uniformity of service conditions of the
DRDA employees since all the DRDAs are registered separately as a
Society in every District.        The relevant paragraphs of the
Government Order dated 17.03.1994 are as follows:-
Þmi;qZDr fo"k; ij eq>s ;g dgus dk funsZ'k gqvk gS fd mRrj
izns'k ds leLr tuinksa eas ftyk xzkE; fodkl vfHkdj.k
jftLVªs'ku vkQ lkslkbVht ,DV dh /kkjk 18 ds v/khu iathd`r
lkslkbVh ds :i esa LFkkfir gS ftlds v/;{k lEcfU/kr tuin ds
ftyk eftLVªsV gksrs gSA izR;sd vfHkdj.k lkslkbVht
jftLVªs'ku ,DV ds v/khu jftLVMZ lkslkbVht gS vkSj mlesa
Lohd`r LVkQ Hkkjr ds lafo/kku ds rgr vuqPNsn 309 esa cuus
okyh lsok fu;ekofy;ksa ls vkPNkfnr ugha gksrs gSA ,slh fLFkfr esa
ftyk xzkE; fodkl vfHkdj.kksa esa fofHkUu inksa ij dkfeZdksa dh HkrhZ
fd;s tkus gsrq LVsV ysosy] rFkk fMfLVªDV ysosy dSMlZ cuk;s tkus
vkSj muesa fu;qDr O;fDr;ksa dh lsok 'krksZ dks fofu;fer djus rFkk
vU; 'krksZ dks tkjh djus ds lEcU/k esa lkekU; lsok fu;ekoyh
cuk;s tkus dk izLrko o"kZ 1989 ls 'kklu ds fopkjk/khu Fkk vkSj
blds fy, dfri; vU; izns'kksa esa fo?keku O;oLFkk dk Hkh v/;;u
2- pwWfd ftyk xzkE; fodkl vfHkdj.k esa dk;Zjr ,oa Hkfo"; es
fu;qDr gksus okys dkfeZdkssa ds osrukfn ij gksus okyk lEiw.kZ O;;
Hkkjr ljdkj rFkk jkT; ljdkj }kjk ogu fd;k tkrk gS vkSj
pwWfd buds ckjs esa dksbZ lsok fu;ekoyh xBu fd;k tkuk lEHko
ugha gks ldk gS vr% izns'k ds leLr ftyk xzkE; fodkl
vfHkdj.kksa esa ,d;irk cuk;s j[kus ds mn~ns'; ls ;g fu.kZ; fy;k
x;k gS fd iz'uxr vfHkdj.kkas esa dkfeZdksa dh fu;qfDr dh izfdz;k
Jksr 'kSf{kd ;ksX;rk vkfn ds fu/kkZj.k rFkk lsok 'krksZ dks ykxw
fd;s tkus ds ckjs esa ,d lkeku; fn'kk funsZ'k 'kklu lrj ls
leLr vfHkdj.kksa ds fy, tkjh dj fn;s tk;s rkfd lEcfU/kr
vfHkdj.k viuh viuh vf/kdkfjr esa rn~uqlkj fu;e vFkok
mifu;e cukdj mls vaxhd`r dj ldsA----------------Þ
38. In terms of bye-laws of the DRDA as noticed herein above and
the pronouncement regarding the authority of State Government to
issue such directions as already noticed in the case of Pitamber
(supra), it is evident that Government Order dated 17.03.1994 would
be binding upon all the DRDAs in the State particularly since the
field pertaining to service conditions of the employees of the DRDA
was unoccupied.
39. It is well settled that the doctrine of ‘occupied field’ would be
applicable in case of subordinate legislation and issuance of
administrative instructions where no rules have been made in terms
of Article 309 of the Constitution of India pertaining to service
conditions. Hon’ble the Supreme Court in A.B. Krishna v. State
of Karnataka, reported in (1998) 3 SCC 495 has held as follows:-
“8. The Fire Services under the State Government were created and established under
the Fire Force Act, 1964 made by the State Legislature. It was in exercise of the power
conferred under Section 39 of the Act that the State Government made Service Rules
regulating the conditions of the Fire Services. Since the Fire Services had been
specially established under an Act of the legislature and the Government, in pursuance
of the power conferred upon it under that Act, has already made Service Rules, any
amendment in the Karnataka Civil Services (General Recruitment) Rules, 1977 would
not affect the special provisions Validly made for the Fire Services. As a matter of fact,
under the scheme of Article 309 of the Constitution, once a legislature intervenes to
enact a law regulating the conditions of service, the power of the Executive, including
the President or the Governor, as the case may be, is totally displaced on the principle
of “doctrine of occupied field”. If, however, any matter is not touched by that
enactment, it will be competent for the Executive to either issue executive instructions
or to make a rule under Article 309 in respect of that matter.”
“9. It is no doubt true that the rule-making authority under Article 309 of the
Constitution and Section 39 of the Act is the same, namely, the Government (to be
precise, the Governor, under Article 309 and the Government under Section 39), but the
two jurisdictions are different. As has been seen above, power under Article 309 cannot
be exercised by the Governor, if the legislature has already made a law and the field is
occupied. In that situation, rules can be made under the law so made by the legislature
and not under Article 309. It has also to be noticed that rules made in exercise of the
rule-making power given under an Act constitute delegated or subordinate legislation,
but the rules under Article 309 cannot be treated to fall in that category and, therefore,
on the principle of “occupied field”, the rules under Article 309 cannot supersede the
rules made by the legislature.”
40. In terms of aforesaid, it is clear that the field pertaining to
conditions of service of employees of the DRDA being unoccupied,
the said void was filled by issuance of Government Order dated
17.03.1994. The provisions pertaining to applicability of service
rules of Government employees upon the employees of the DRDA
have been indicated in sub-paragraphs (6) to (13) of paragraph 2 of
Þ2- ¼6½- lh/kh HkrhZ }kjk fu;qDr deZpkfj;ksa dh T;s"Brk dk fu/kkZj.k
le; le; ij ;Fkk la'kksf/kr m0iz0 ljdkjh lsod T;s"Brk
2- ¼7½-       fofHkUu Js.kh ds inksa ij lh/kh HkrhZ }kjk fu;qDr
O;fDr;ksa ds vuqeU; osrueku ,slk gksxk tSlk ljdkj }kjk le;
le; ij vo/kkfjr fd;k tk;sA bl ekxZ funsZ'k ds izkjEHk gksus ds
tk;sxh] rc rd fd mldk dk;Z vkSj vkjp.k larks"ktud u ik;k
2- ¼9½-       vU; fo"k;ksa dk fofu;eu&mu fo"k;ksa ds lEcU/k esa] tks
fofufnZ"V :i ls bl ekxZ funsZ'k ;k fo'ks"k vkns'kksa ds vUrxZr u
vkrs gks] ftyk xzkE; fodkl vfHkdj.kksa esa fu;qDr O;fDr ,sls
fu;eksa] fofu;eksa vkSj vkns'kksa }kjk fu;af=r gksxs tks jkT; ds
dk;Zdyki ds lEcU/k esa lsokjkr ljdkjh lsodksa ij lkekU;r;k%
2- ¼10½-      vuqlwfpr tkfr] vuqlwfpr tutkfr] fiNM+s oxZ rFkk
vU; Js.kh ds O;fDr;ksa ds fy, lsok esa vkj{k.k ls lEcfU/kr HkrhZ
ds le; izo`Rr ljdkj ds vkns'kksa ds vuqlkj vkj{K.k fd;k
2- ¼11½-      tgkW jkT; ljdkj dk ;g lek/kku gks tk;s fd lh/kh
HkrhZ }kjk fu;qfDr O;fDr;ksa dh lsok dh 'krksZ dks fofu;fer djus
okys fdlh fu;e ds izorZu ls fdlh fof'k"V ekeys esa vuqfpr
dfBukbZ gksrh gS] ;gkW ;g ml ekeys esa ykxw gksus okys
fu;eksa@mifu;eksa eas fdlh ckr ds gksrs gq, Hkh] vkns'k }kjk ml
fu;e dh vis{kkvksa dk ml lhek rd vkSj ,slh 'krksZ ds v/khu
jgrs gq, ftUgsa ;g ekeys esas U;k;laxr vkSj lkE;iw.kZ jhfr ls
dk;Zokgh djus ds fy, vko';d le>s] vfHkeqfDr ;k f'kfFky dj
2- ¼12½-      mRrjkpay ds lHkh 08 ftyk xzkE; fodkl vfHkdj.kksa
esa lh/kh HkrhZ ds leLr inksa dks mRrjkapy {ks= ds vH;fFkZ;ksa esa ls
mi;qDr vH;qfFkZ;ksa }kjk gh Hkjk tk;sxk vkSj bl iz;kstu gsrq mu
inksa ds in/kkjdks dk vius vius lEoxZ esa i`Fkd milEoxZ gksxk]
ijUrq bldk izHkko vuqlwfpr tkfr;ksa] vuqlwfpr tutkfr;ksa vkSj
O;fDr;ksa dh vU; fo'ks"k Jsf.k;ksa ds vH;qfFkZ;ksa ds fy, izkfo/kkfur
2- ¼13½-      ftu inksa ds lEcU/k esa fu;qfDr dk izkf/kdkj Jh
jkT;iky ;k vk;qDr] xkzE; fodkl foHkkx esa fufgr gS] mu inksa ds
in/kkjdksa dks mRrj izns'k ds fdlh Hkh ftyk xzkE; fodkl
41. From the aforesaid provisions, it is apparent that no specific
service condition has been indicated pertaining to compassionate
appointment but a reading of paragraph 2 (9) of the Government
Order indicates that other matters which are not covered specifically
with the Government Order or any other special order pertaining to
employees of      the DRDA would be regulated by such rules,
regulations and orders which generally apply to Government
servants serving with regard to affairs of the State.
42. A reading of the aforesaid paragraph 2(9) of the Government
Order makes it evident that there is no specific exclusion of
compassionate appointment being granted to employees of the
DRDA in terms of       the 1974 Rules.      On the contrary, the said
provision clearly indicates that matters which are not specifically
covered in the Government Order would be regulated and applicable
as per the rules, regulations and orders generally applicable upon
Government servants serving with regard to State affairs. As such, it
is clear that compassionate appointment under the 1974 Rules would
be covered under the said paragraph 2(9) of the Government Order.
43. There is no dispute between the parties that compassionate
appointment under the 1974 Rules constitutes a condition of service.
The expression ‘conditions of service’ means all those conditions
which regulate the holding of a post by a person right from the time
of his appointment till his superannuation and even beyond it
particularly with regard to matters like post-retiral benefits etc.
Hon’ble the Supreme Court in State of Madhya Pradesh and
others v. Shardul Singh reported in 1970 (1) SCC 108 has defined
“9. The expression “conditions of service” means all those conditions which regulate
the holding of a post by a person right from the time of his appointment till his
retirement and even beyond it in matters like pension, etc. ”
44. Similarly, in Vimal Kanwar and others v. Kishore Dan and
others reported in (2013) 7 SCC 476, Hon’ble the Supreme Court
“21. “Compassionate appointment” can be one of the conditions of service of an
employee, if a scheme to that effect is framed by the employer. In case, the employee
dies in harness i.e. while in service leaving behind the dependants, one of the
dependants may request for compassionate appointment to maintain the family of the
deceased employee who dies in harness. This cannot be stated to be an advantage
receivable by the heirs on account of one's death and have no correlation with the
amount receivable under a statute occasioned on account of accidental death.
Compassionate appointment may have nexus with the death of an employee while in
service but it is not necessary that it should have a correlation with the accidental
death. An employee dies in harness even in normal course, due to illness and to
maintain the family of the deceased one of the dependants may be entitled for
compassionate appointment but that cannot be termed as “pecuniary advantage” that
comes under the periphery of the Motor Vehicles Act and any amount received on such
appointment is not liable for deduction for determination of compensation under the
45. From the aforesaid, it is clear that         matters pertaining to
compassionate appointment of employees of the DRDA would
constitute a condition of service as envisaged under Government
Order dated 17.03.1994.
46. Learned counsel for petitioner has drawn attention to the
Government Order with the submission that the same provides
applicability of various rules of service applicable upon Government
servants to be applicable upon employees of the DRDA. Such rules
pertained to appointment, promotion, seniority, reservation etc. It
has been submitted that once the said rules have been made
applicable upon employees of the DRDA pursuant to the
Government Order, then applicability of the 1974 Rules cannot be
denied since the State cannot approbate and reprobate at the same
47. A perusal of the Government Order does make it evident that the
service rules applicable upon Government servants with regard to
appointment, seniority, promotion, reservation etc. have been made
applicable upon employees of the DRDA. Although, the said rules
are specifically mentioned in the Government Order while omitting
any such specific mention with regard to the 1974 Rules but in view
of paragraph 2(9), denial of applicability of the 1974 Rules would
come within the purview of the said doctrine. Once the opposite
parties have provided certain benefits to employees of the DRDA in
terms of the Government Order then it would be impermissible to
permit them to deny the benefits of other service conditions covered
under paragraph 2(9).
48. The phrase ‘approbate and reprobate’ is borrowed from the
Scottish law where it is used to express common law principles of
election that no party can accept and reject the same instrument.
Hon’ble the Supreme Court in Karam Kapahi and others v. Lal
Chand Public Charitable Trust and another, reported in (2010) 4
“53. In the old equity case of Streatfield v. Streatfield [ Wh & TLC, 9th Edn., Vol. I,
1928] this principle has been discussed in words which are so apt and elegant that I
“Election is the obligation imposed upon a party by courts of equity to choose
between two inconsistent or alternative rights or claims in cases where there is a
clear intention of the person from whom he derives one that he should not enjoy
both. Every case of election, therefore, presupposes a plurality of gifts or rights,
with an intention, express or implied, of the party who has a right to control one or
both that one should be a substitute for the other. The party who is to take has a
choice, but he cannot enjoy the benefit of both [ Story, 3rd Edn., p.
452; Dillon v. Parker, (1818) 1 Swans 359 : 36 ER 422; Thellusson v. Woodford,
(1806) 13 Ves 209 : 33 ER 273.] . The principle is stated thus in Jarman on
Wills [ 6th Edn., p. 532; and Farwell on Powers, 3rd Edn., p. 429.] :‘That he who
accepts a benefit under a deed or will must adopt the whole contents of the
instrument, conforming to all its provisions, and renouncing every right
inconsistent with it’ [ See Walpole v. Conway (Lord), 1740 Barn C 153 : 27 ER
593; Kirkham v. Smith, (1749) 1 Ves Sen 258 : 27 ER 1018; Macnamara v. Jones, 1
Bro CC 481 : 28 ER 1251; Blake v. Bunbury, (1792) 4 Bro CC 21 : 29 ER
758; Wintour v. Clifton, 8 De GM & G 641 : 44 ER 537;Codrington v.Codrington,
(1876) LR 7 HL 854 at p. 861; Pitman v. Crum Ewing, 1911 AC 217 at pp. 228, 233
(HL); Brown v. Gregson, 1920 AC 860 at p. 868 : 1920 All ER Rep 730 (HL).] . The
principle of the doctrine of election is now well settled.”
“54. This principle has also been explained by this Court in Nagubai Ammal v. B.
Shama Rao [AIR 1956 SC 593] . Speaking for a three-Judge Bench of this Court,
Venkatarama Ayyar, J. stated in the Report : (AIR p. 602, para 23)
“23. … The doctrine of election is not however confined to instruments. A
person cannot say at one time that a transaction is valid and thereby obtain some
advantage, to which he could only be entitled on the footing that it is valid, and
then turn round and say it is void for the purpose of securing some other
advantage. That is to approbate and reprobate the transaction.
It is clear from the above observations that the maxim that a person cannot
‘approbate and reprobate’ is only one application of the doctrine of election….”
49. Similarly, in M/s New Bihar Biri Leaves Co. and others v.
State of Bihar and others, reported in (1981) 1 SCC 537, the
“48. It is a fundamental principle of general application that if a person of his own
accord, accepts a contract on certain terms and works out the contract, he cannot be
allowed to adhere to and abide by some of the terms of the contract which proved
advantageous to him and repudiate the other terms of the same contract which might be
disadvantageous to him. The maxim is qui approbat non reprobat (one who approbates
cannot reprobate). This principle, though originally borrowed from Scots Law, is now
firmly embodied in English Common Law. According to it, a party to an instrument or
transaction cannot take advantage of one part of a document or transaction and reject
the rest. That is to say, no party can accept and reject the same instrument or
transaction (Per Scrutton, L.J., Verschures Creameries Ltd. v. Hull & Netherlands
Steamship Co. [(1921) 2 KB 608] ; see Douglas Menzies v. Umphelby [1908 AC 224,
232] ; see also stroud's judicial dictionary, Vol. I, p. 169, 3rd Edn.).”
50. In view of the discussions made herein above, it is clear that the
principle of approbate and reprobate would be applicable in the
present circumstance and the opposite parties cannot be permitted to
repudiate the conditions of service which are beneficial to the
employees of the DRDA while applying other similar such service
51. Learned Additional Advocate General appearing on behalf of the
State has submitted that the Government Order dated 17.03.1994 has
been misconstrued by the petitioner since it states that service rules
made under Article 309 of the Constitution of India would not be
applicable upon employees of the DRDA and since the 1974 Rules
have been made under Article 309 of the Constitution of India, the
same thus cannot be made applicable upon employees of the DRDA.
52. With regard to aforesaid submission, the opening paragraphs of
Government Order dated 17.03.1994 would be referable in which the
purpose of issuance of Government Order has been indicated. The
Government Order clearly states that directions are being issued to
regulate and bring about uniformity in service conditions of the
employees of the DRDA because no service conditions for such
employees have been notified as yet and since the DRDA is a
registered Society, the rules made under Article 309 of the
Constitution of India would be inapplicable. It is evident that the
inapplicability of Rules made under Article 309 of the Constitution
of India upon the employees of the DRDA clearly means that Rules
made under Article 309 of the Constitution of India would not
automatically be applicable upon the employees of the DRDA since
it is a registered society. However, there is no legal bar in either
Article 309 of the Constitution of India or under the said
Government Order that beneficial conditions of service pertaining to
Government employees made under Article 309 of the Constitution
of India cannot be extended to a registered society such as DRDA,
which is ‘State’ under Article 12 of the Constitution of India. As
such, the submission of learned counsel for the State is clearly
53. The second submission of the learned State counsel is that the
employees of the DRDA have already been held not to be
government servants since they are not holding any civil posts under
either the Central or the State Governments and, therefore, providing
benefit of the 1974 Rules to employees of the DRDA would amount
to giving them the status of Government servants.
54. The said submission of the learned State Counsel at the very
outset is clearly misconceived. By extending the benefit of 1974
Rules upon employees of the DRDA, it cannot be said by any stretch
of imagination that it would confer the status of Government
employees upon them. Incorporation of the said Rules by reference
merely amounts to providing the benefit of a beneficial legislation.
As such, extending the benefit of compassionate appointment under
the 1974 Rules upon the employees of the DRDA would only have
the effect of providing the said beneficial benefit and not granting
them the status of Government servants.
55. It has been further submitted by the learned State Counsel that
paragraph 2(9) of the Government Order is merely an enabling
provision and would be inapplicable unless it is adopted in all the
DRDAs of the State, which has not been done. With regard to
aforesaid submission, it is seen from the record that the present
matter pertains to District Raebareli where the DRDA vide resolution
dated 02.06.1994 has already adopted the Government Order dated
17.03.1994 in its entirety.
56. Apart from the aforesaid factor, it is also to be noticed that
paragraph 2 of the Government Order clearly indicates that the State
Government has taken a decision to issue guidelines with regard to
service conditions of the employees of the DRDA in order to
regulate and bring about uniformity for the employees in various
DRDAs of the State. It has also been stated that the order is being
issued so that the various DRDAs are able to make rules pertaining
to the same in terms of the directions that are being issued.
57. The aforesaid statement in the Government Order clearly
specifies that the directions issued vide the Government Order would
be applicable across all the DRDAs without exception and would not
be dependent upon its adoption by individual DRDAs.             The
provision enabling the various DRDAs to make rules or sub-rules in
terms of the directions is merely consequential and the directions
issued by the Government Order are not at all dependent upon the
DRDAs adopting the same or making rules in terms thereof.           As
such, the submission of learned State Counsel that the provisions of
the Government Order are only enabling does not appear to be a
correct position, particularly when it is undisputed that other service
rules regarding Government employees are already being enforced
upon the employees of the DRDAs throughout the State without any
specific adoption or Rule having been made thereunder.
58. The last submission of learned State Counsel pertains to the fact
that the DRDA was set up as a temporary organisation as indicated in
Government Order dated 17.03.1994 itself and the staff also being
temporary in nature. Regarding the aforesaid provision, it is also to
be noticed that subsequently, vide Government Order dated
18.07.2016, the employees of the DRDA throughout the State of U.P.
have been absorbed in the Department of Rural Development of the
State Government. Even prior to such absorption, the department is
existing for more than 35 years with its staff having been employed
since then. Such a long period of not only the organisation but its
employees as well cannot be said to be temporary in nature, which is
a fact recognised by the State Government itself by issuance of the
Government Order dated 18.07.2016. As such, the said submission
lacks merit.
59. Another submission of learned State Counsel although not
having been taken in the counter affidavit filed in the writ petition is
being considered since the same has been raised in the written
submissions and is that the State Government subsequently has
issued a Government Order dated 10.06.2013 denying the
applicability of the 1974 Rules upon the employees of the DRDA
and the same has not been challenged.
60. A perusal of the order dated 10.06.2013 filed along with the
written submissions clearly indicates that it is not in the nature of a
Government Order and has merely rejected the representation of one
Smt. Meera Awasthi, wife of late Vijay Kant Awasthi for
compassionate appointment under the 1974 Rules. The rejection of
her claim is merely on the ground that the 1974 Rules are
inapplicable upon the employees of the DRDA. The same cannot be
termed to be a Government Order and is merely in the nature of
decision upon a representation pertaining to one Smt. Meera Awasthi
and was, therefore, not required to be challenged by the present
petitioner. Even otherwise, the ground of rejection indicated in the
order dated 10.06.2013 has already been considered herein above.
61. In view of the aforesaid facts that undisputedly, the State
Government has the power to issue orders such as the Government
Order dated 17.03.1994 in order to fill in the void pertaining to
service conditions of employees of Government Order and also in
view of paragraph 2(9) of the Government Order, it is clear that the
Rules of 1974 would be applicable upon the employees of the
Consideration of Question No.2 :- (ii) Whether the judgment of
Division Bench in State of U.P. vs. Ajeet Kumar Shahi, Special
Appeal No.714 of 2015, requires reconsideration in light of the
Government Orders dated 17.3.1994 and 18.7.2016?
62. In view of the discussions made herein above, particularly with
regard to the importance and applicability of Government Orders
dated 17.03.1994 and 18.07.2016, and the same having escaped
attention of the Division Bench in the case of Ajeet Kumar Shahi
(Supra), it is clear that the aforesaid case required reconsideration.
63. Consequently, the questions referred to this Bench are answered
Question No.1 : In view of the provisions of Government Order
dated 17.03.1994, particularly clause 2(9), the provisions of the U.P.
Recruitment of Dependents of Government Servant Dying in
Harness Rules, 1974 would be applicable upon employees of the
Question No.2 : The judgment of Division Bench in Ajeet Kumar
Shahi (Supra) having been passed in ignorance of Government
Order dated 17.03.1994 is held not to be a good law and is, therefore,
64. The reference is answered accordingly.
65. Registry is directed to place the matter before the appropriate
court dealing with the matter.