The petition for transfer is filed to transfer the HMOP No.392 of 2017
on the file of the Family Court at Salem to Sub Court, Hosur.
2. The marriage between the petitioner and the respondent was
solemnized on 06.04.2014 as per the Hindu Rites and Customs. A male
child was born from and out of the wedlock between the petitioner and the
respondent and now living with the petitioner. Due to misunderstanding, the
petitioner and the respondent are living separately.
3. The learned counsel for the petitioner states that the petitioner was
residing at Salem and at that point of time, she filed a divorce petition in
HMOP No.392 of 2017 on the file of the Family Court at Salem. Thereafter,
the petitioner joined with her aged parents at Hosur and she is unemployed.
The petitioner has to take care of her minor child aged about 7 years and
therefore, she cannot spend, travel and contest the case now pending before
the Family Court at Salem.
4. The learned counsel for the respondent raised an objection by
stating that the petitioner has not produced any document to establish that
she has shifted her residence to Hosur. The present petition is to transfer the
case from the Family Court, Salem to the Sub Court, Hosur and without any
such shifting of residence, the petitioner would not have filed such a
petition and an inference in this regard would be sufficient enough to
consider the transfer petition in the present case. The petitioner has to take
care of 7 years old child and therefore, the present petition is to be
5. The principles regarding transfer petitions, more specifically in the
matters of matrimonial cases, are well settled through the three decisions of
the High Court of Madras, in the following cases:-
(i) The Hon'ble Division Bench of the High Court of Madras in
W.A.No.1181 of 2009, dated 09.07.2010, wherein in paragraphs-21 and 22,
it has been observed as under:-
“21. The domicile or citizenship of the
opposite party is immaterial in a case like this. In
case the marriage was solemnized under Hindu
Law marital relationship is governed by the
Tr.C.M.P.No.48 of 2022
provisions of the Hindu Marriage Act. Therefore,
Section 19 has to be given a purposeful
interpretation. It is the residence of the wife,
which determines the question of jurisdiction, in
case the proceeding was initiated at the instance
of the wife.
22. While considering a provision like
Section 19 (iii-a) of the Hindu Marriage Act, the
objects   and    reasons    which  prompted     the
parliament to incorporate such a provision has
also to be taken note of. Sub Clause (iii-a) was
inserted in Section 19 with a specific purpose.
Experience is the best teacher. The Government
found the difficulties faced by women in the matter
of initiation of matrimonial proceedings. The
report submitted by the Law Commission as well
as National Commission for Women, underlying
the need for such amendment so as to enable the
women to approach the nearest jurisdictional
court to redress their matrimonial grievances,
were also taken note of by the Government.
Therefore such a beneficial provision meant for
the women of our Country should be given a
meaningful interpretation by Courts.”
Tr.C.M.P.No.48 of 2022
(ii) In yet another case in Tr.CMP.Nos.138 and 139 of 2006, dated
30.08.2006, the High Court of Madras has considered the following
judgments of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India:-
“(1) In the case of Mona Aresh Goel vs.
Aresh Satya Goel [(2000) 9 SCC 255], when the
wife pleaded that she was unable to bear the
traveling expenses and even to travel alone and stay
at Bombay, the Supreme Court ordered transfer of
proceedings.
(2) In the case of Geeta Heera vs. Harish
Chander Heera [(2000) 10 SCC 304], the Hon'ble
Supreme Court has held that where the petitioner's
wife has pleaded lack of money, the same has to be
considered.
(3) In the case of Lalita A.Ranga vs. Ajay
Champalal Ranga [(2000) 9 SCC 355], the wife
has filed a petition to transfer the proceedings
initiated by the husband for divorce, at Bombay.
The place of residence of the wife was at Jaipur,
Rajasthan. In that case, the petitioner is having a
small child and that she pleaded difficulty in going
all the way from Jaipur to Bombay to contest the
proceedings from time to time. Considering the
Tr.C.M.P.No.48 of 2022
distance and the difficulties faced by the wife, the
Supreme Court has allowed the transfer petition.
(4) In a decision in Archana Singh vs.
Surendra Bahadur Singh [(2005) 12 SCC 395], the
wife has sought for transfer of matrimonial
proceedings and a divorce petition has been filed by
the respondent's husband at Baikunthpur to be
transferred to Allahabad, where the petitioner's wife
was residing, on the ground that it would be
difficult for her to undertake such long distance
journey, particularly in circumstances, in which she
finds that the proceedings under 5 Section 125
Cr.P.C. was already pending before the Family
Court, Allahabad. Considering the difficulties faced
by the wife and also the long distance journey, the
Honourable Supreme Court was pleased to order
transfer of the proceedings to Allahabad.”
(iii) In a decision made in TR.CMP(MD)No.108 of 2010, dated
03.03.2011, the Madurai Bench of Madras High Court, wherein in
paragraph-18, it has been observed as below:-
“18. It is true that section 19 of the Hindu
Marriage Act, has been amended by insertion of
proviso of (iii)(a) to section 19. Of Course, this
Tr.C.M.P.No.48 of 2022
amended section 19(iii)(a) gives special preference
to the wife to file a petition or defending the case of
the husband before the Court within whose
jurisdiction she resides. The intention of the
Legislator is to safe-guard the interest and rights
of the women, who are being subjected to
harassment and cruelty. But this special preference
conferred under section 19(iii)(a) of the Hindu
Marriage Act shall not be used to wreck vengeance
on the husband. There must be a justifiable cause
to select the jurisdiction of the Court where she
resides.”
6. The learned counsel for the respondent states that the respondent,
being a father is paying the monthly maintenance to the child. It is the
bounded duty of the father to maintain the child, since the wife is
unemployed in the present case. Thus, the respondent is directed to continue
the maintenance payment in the interest of the child.
7. It is brought to the notice of this Court that in many number of the
petitions filed seeking maintenance are either not disposed of nor interim
maintenance has been granted. Apart from the spouse, the interest of the
Tr.C.M.P.No.48 of 2022
minor children are to be taken note of by the Courts, while considering the
applications for grant of maintenance. On account of the matrimonial
dispute between the husband and wife, the right of the child cannot be
8. State being the protector of minor children in certain
circumstances, the social implications in this regard are to be considered by
the courts, while dealing with the maintenance petition. In all such cases,
where the maintenance petitions are filed, the court has to consider the
interest and livelihood of the children and in case the mother, who filed the
maintenance petition is unemployed, then interim maintenance must be
ordered to protect the livelihood of the child in the custody of the mother.
9. In other words, if a prima facie case is made out for grant of
maintenance, then in the absence of any formal petition, an interim
maintenance to be ordered by the Courts considering the status, life style
and the assets possessed by the parties concerned.
Tr.C.M.P.No.48 of 2022
10. Decent life is facet of Article 21 of the Constitution of India. Life
does not mean a mere animal life and the interest of the child is to be of
paramount importance and to be protected by the Courts, whenever the
parents neglect their children. In case of matrimonial dispute, anyone of the
parent is neglecting the child and in such circumstances even in the absence
of any formal petition, the Courts are bound to grant interim maintenance
considering the factors stated above. The principles laid down by the Apex
Court in the case Rajnesh Vs. Neha and another reported in [(2021) 2
SCC 324] is to be followed scrupulously for the purpose of grant of
maintenance, whether interim or otherwise.
11. In view of the facts and circumstances, the Family Courts and the
other Courts dealing with matrimonial matters must ensure that the interest
of the minor children is taken care of and their livelihood is protected by all
possible means. In view of the fact that large number of maintenance
petitions are kept pending by the Courts across the State of Tamil Nadu and
no final orders are passed, this Court is of the considered opinion that in
such circumstances, the Fundamental Rights of the minor children are
infringed on account of such pendencies for an indefinite period. It is
Tr.C.M.P.No.48 of 2022
needless to state that after granting the interim maintenance or otherwise,
the Courts must ensure that the maintenance amount is recovered punctually
and in the event of any failure, stern actions are to be initiated against the
violators. There cannot be any compromise in the matter of protecting the
livelihood of the children and the Courts are expected to show sensitivity in
such issues, where the right of a children are infringed.
12. In view of the facts and circumstances, the HMOP No.392 of
2017 pending on the file of the Family Court, Salem stands transferred to
the Sub-Court, Hosur forthwith. The Family Court, Salem is directed to
transmit the case papers to the Sub-Court, Hosur within a period of four (4)
weeks from the date of receipt of copy of this order.
13. With the abovesaid directions, the Transfer Civil Miscellaneous
Petition stands allowed. However, there shall be no order as to costs.
Consequently, the connected miscellaneous petition is closed.
Tr.C.M.P.No.48 of 2022