This appeal is filed challenging the judgement
and   award    passed    in  MVC     No.3020/2007      dated
05.02.2011 on the file of II Additional District and
Sessions   Judge    and     Additional   MACT,     Belagavi,
questioning     the     liability    and     quantum       of
2.    Factual matrix of the case of the claimants
before the Tribunal is that the claimants invoking
Section    163-A    of Motor    Vehicles    Act    claimed
compensation of Rs.5,00,000/- in respect of death of
Shamrao Patil in a road traffic accident, who died on
02.07.2006 at 6.00 p.m. when he was proceeding on
Hero Honda motorcycle bearing Reg.No.MH-09/AV-
706    and   when   he  came    near  Somali     land   on
Salpewadi-Gargoti road within the limits of Salpewadi
village, at that time a big branch of eucalyptus tree
suddenly fell on the head of the deceased, as a result
of   which    he   had  sustained    grievous     injuries.
Immediately he was shifted to Government hospital,
Gargoti for treatment and he succumbed to injuries
and they have spent an amount of Rs.25,000/-
towards medical treatment and funeral expenses and
the deceased was hale and healthy and was aged
about 44 years on the date of accident. It is further
contended that he was earning Rs.3,300/- by doing
mason work and was maintaining his family and due
to untimely death, the claimants have put to great
mental agony, shock and lost their love and affection
and family also put to financial difficulties.
3.   It is further contended that the accident is
on account of use of motorcycle which is owned by
respondent No.1 and insured with respondent No.2
and hence, claimed compensation.
4.   In pursuance of the clam petition, notice
was ordered and respondent No.1 appeared and filed
objections   denying     the   allegations     and    other
averments made in the claim petition, however it is
admitted   that    the   deceased     being    relative   of
respondent    No.1    has  requested     the    vehicle   of
respondent No.1 to visit the relatives house nearby
village and respondent No.1 on verifying the driving
licence has given his vehicle for his convenient
travelling but unfortunately by act of god the accident
has taken place and he died and there is no fault on
the part of respondent No.1 and if any compensation
payable that should be indemnified by respondent
5.    Respondent No.2-insured denied the age,
occupation and income of the deceased and further
denied the accident. It is also denied that the vehicle
was insured with respondent No.2. It is contended
that compensation claimed is imaginary, excessive,
speculative and disproportionate and also denied
spending of Rs.25,000/- for medical and funeral
expenses. It is further contended that the accident is
because of fall of branch of eucalyptus tree while the
deceased was proceeding in a motorcycle and hence
the company is not liable to pay the compensation.
6.    Based on the pleadings of the parties, the
Tribunal framed four issues and answered issues as
affirmative and directed the Insurance Company to
pay the compensation. The claimant No.3 is examined
as P.W.1 and one witness as P.W.2 and in all produced
documents as per Exs.P.1 to P.7 and respondents did
not choose to examine any witnesses, but only
produced copy of policy which is marked as Ex.R.1.
7.    Being aggrieved by the judgement and
award    of  the   Tribunal,   the   appellant-Insurance
Company has preferred the present appeal by raising
some of the grounds that the judgement and award is
against the material on record. It is contended that
the claim petition is filed under Section 163-A of Motor
Vehicles Act and for the death of rider of the
motorcycle, there cannot be any compensation and
Tribunal has committed an error. It is also contended
that accident has taken place because of fall of big
branch of eucalyptus tree on the head of the deceased
and the same cannot be treated as a motorcycle
accident and hence, the Tribunal ought to have
dismissed the claim petition but erroneously allowed
the same.
8.    The    other count  of  argument      of   the
appellant’s counsel is that the petition is filed under
Section 163-A of Motor Vehicles Act and the Tribunal
ought to have awarded compensation as per the II
schedule of Motor Vehicles Act. The compensation
awarded under the head of funeral expenses, loss of
estate and consortium is on higher side and hence, it
requires interference.
9.    Counsel also contends that the Tribunal has
completely overlooked the material evidence. The
counsel during the course of argument also raised a
contention that the deceased being the relative of the
insured cannot maintain a petition under Section 163-
A of Motor Vehicles Act and the claimants stepped into
the shoes of the owner since the deceased has
borrowed the vehicle from the original owner and
hence, the claimants cannot be recipients and also
beneficiaries under the Contract of Indemnity which is
in existence between the insured and the insurer.
10.    Counsel in support of his argument, relied
upon the judgement of the Apex Court reported in
2020 ACJ 627 in the case of Ramkhiladi and
Another vs. United India Insurance Company
Limited and Another, wherein it is held that when a
petition is filed under Section 163-A of Motor Vehicles
Act by heirs of owner of vehicle or by heirs of
borrower of the vehicle who step into the shoes of the
owner    for   the  death  of  owner   or   borrower    is
maintainable and ultimate liability under Section 163-
A of Motor Vehicles Act is on the owner of the vehicle
and a person cannot be both, a claimant as also a
person on whom the liability falls; Insurance Company
is liable to pay compensation to third party and not
the owner; deceased stepped into the shoes of the
owner and he was not a third party.
11.   Per contra, counsel for the respondents-
claimants in his argument, vehemently contends that
the very argument canvassed by the appellant’s
counsel cannot be accepted. The counsel relied upon
the judgement of Division Bench of this Court reported
in ILR 2003 KAR 4911 in the case of Sulochana
and Others vs. Karnataka State Road Transport
Corporation, wherein also the petition is filed under
Section 163-A of Motor Vehicles Act and facts of the
said case is that A Banyan tree grown on the side of
the road fell on the running bus resulting the death of
three persons including the petitioner. In the case, it
is held that proof of fault can it still be made a basis
and held that all that need be shown by the claimant
in support of the claim is that the injury or death
which is made the basis for the claim arose out of the
use of a motor vehicle, the provision is not intended to
introduce a rule of evidence merely shifting the
burden of proof from the claimant to the owner and
the driver of the vehicle. If the intention of the
parliament behind the introduction of Section 163-A
was to simply shift the burden of proof to the owner
or the driver of the vehicle, the provisions of Section
163-A would have been differently worded, therefore,
this Court has no hesitation in holding that a victim or
legal  heirs  of   a  victim   are  entitled    to  claim
compensation in terms of Section 163-A read with
Schedule II to the Act without either pleading or
proving that the accident in question had resulted
from any act of negligence or default on the part of
the owner or the driver of the vehicle.
12.  In this judgement also Division Bench held
that under Section 163-A, schedule II, expression
“due to accident arising out of use of motor vehicle”,
accident leading to death of the deceased in the
instant case arose out of use of bus owned by
respondent corporation and has given interpretation
by relying the pronouncements of the Apex Court and
referred to several judgements.
13.  The counsel also in support of his argument
relied upon the judgement of the Apex Court reported
in (2004) 5 SCC 385 in the case of Deepal
Girishbhai Soni and Others vs. United India
Insurance Company Limited, Baroda and brought
to notice of this Court para 66, wherein the Apex
Court discussed Section 163-A taking note of the
expression and comes to the conclusion that under
Section 163-A covers cases where even negligence is
on the part of the victim and it is by way of esception
to Section 166 and the concept of social justice has
been duly taken care of.
14.   The    counsel  would     also    vehemently
contend that other than the insured all are became
third parties and mainly relied upon the judgment in
the case of United India Insurance Company
Limited vs. Sunil Kumar and Another reported in
2018 ACJ 1 and in the case of Shivaji and Another
Company Limited and Others reported in 2018
ACJ 2161. Referring to these judgments, the counsel
contends that the deceased become third party since
he is not insured.
15.   The counsel also relied upon the judgement
of Division Bench of this Court passed in MFA
No.8455/2014 and connected appeal and brought to
notice of this Court para 10, wherein it is discussed
with regard to judgments in the cases of Ningamma
and Sadananda Mukhi and referring the judgment of
Sunil Kumar and Shivaji, held that deceased is not the
owner of the motorcycle as against the Insurance
Company he would be treated as a third party and
extracted para 6 of the judgment of Sunil Kumar and
also extracted para 5 of Shivaji and held Insurance
Company is liable and appeal filed by Insurance
Company is dismissed.
16.  The counsel also relied upon the judgement
of Co-ordinate Bench of this Court passed in MFA
No.20323/2010 dated 26.07.2021, wherein by relying
upon the judgements of the Apex Court in Ningamma,
Sunil Kumar, Ramkhiladi and Shivaji, this Court
allowed the petition and set aside the judgment of
Tribunal  in  coming   to  the   conclusion    that   the
claimants stepped into the shoes of the owner cannot
be sustained.
17.  The counsel also relied upon an unreported
judgement        of     this  Court    passed     in    MFA
No.20465/2012 dated 05.06.2017 and contend that
Insurance Company is liable to pay the compensation.
18.  In view of the rival contentions of the
parties,    the     following  points   would    arise   for
i.      Whether the claimants are entitled for
compensation in a case of fall of big
branch of eucalyptus tree on the head of
deceased while he was proceeding on a
ii.      Whether the deceased stepped into the
shoes of the insured as contended by
learned counsel for Insurance Company?
iii.      Whether the deceased would become
third party as contended by learned
counsel for claimants?
iv.     Whether in a case of this situation, the
Insurance Company is liable to pay the
19. Regarding      Point     No.1:     The    main
contention of the appellant-Insurance Company in this
appeal is that petition is filed under Section 163-A of
Motor Vehicles Act and the appellant being the insurer
of the motorcycle cannot be made liable to pay the
compensation for the death of rider of the motorcycle
since the accident has taken place because of fall of
big branch of eucalyptus tree on the head of the
deceased and the same cannot be treated as motor
vehicle accident and hence, this Court has raised point
No.1 for consideration. It is not in dispute that when
the motorcyclist was proceeding in his motorcycle, a
big branch of eucalyptus tree had fallen on the head of
the deceased. The main contention of the Insurance
Company is that the same not comes within the
purview of Section 163-A of Motor Vehicles Act, but
the counsel appearing for the respondents brought to
notice   of  this Court    judgement in       the  case   of
Sulochana, referred supra, wherein also a banyan
tree grown on the side of the road fell on the running
bus resulting in the death of three persons including
the petitioner and taking into note of Section 163-A of
Motor Vehicles Act, not only the Court has to take
note of any act of negligence or default on the part of
the owner or driver of the vehicle and Division Bench
of this Court held that it is evident that the expression
‘arising out of the use of the motor vehicle’ has been
given the widest interpretation by the Apex Court as
also other Courts in the country having regard to the
purpose underlying the motor vehicle legislation.
20.  This  Court     would   like   to   rely   upon
judgement reported in 1991 AIR 1769 in the case of
Shivaji Dayanu Patil & Another vs Smt. Vatschala
Uttam More, the Apex Court taken note of principles
enunciated in the said judgement and given wider
meaning to the word expression ‘arising out of use of
motor vehicle’ and in that case, a petrol tanker was
used for transporting petrol overturned due to collision
with another motor vehicle and hit to the extent that
it became immobile and few hours after the collision,
there was explosion and fire causing injuries to
number of persons who had gathered there to collect
petrol. In the claim petition filed for payment of
compensation on the death of one of such injured
person raised question whether the accident had
arisen out of use of motor vehicle. The Apex Court
considered the question in context of provisions of
Motor Vehicles Act and came to the conclusion that
even when the tanker in question had turned turtle
and could not be moved unless it was once put back
again on wheels yet, explosion resulting in injuries to
people who had gathered to collect petrol was an
accident arising out of use of motor vehicle.
21.   This   Court   would    like    to   rely   upon
judgement in the case of Smt.Rita Devi & Ors vs.
Another reported in AIR 2000 SC 1930, it is a case
of driver of an auto rickshaw was employed by the
owner and in that case he was carrying passengers on
hire. The deceased, a driver of the auto rickshaw, was
duty bound to have accepted the demand of fare
paying passengers to transport them to the place of
their destination. During the course of this duty, if the
passengers had decided to commit an act of felony of
stealing the auto rickshaw and in the course of
achieving   the   said   object  of    stealing   the   auto
rickshaw, they had to eliminate the driver of the auto
rickshaw then it cannot but be said that the death so
caused to the driver of the auto rickshaw was an
accidental murder. The stealing of the auto rickshaw
was the object of the felony and the murder that was
caused in the said process of stealing the auto
rickshaw is only incidental to the act of stealing of the
auto rickshaw. Therefore, it has to be said that on the
facts and circumstances of this case the death of the
deceased was caused accidentally in the process of
committing the theft of the auto rickshaw.
22.  This Court also would like to rely upon the
judgment reported in the case of S. Kaushnuma
Begum and Others vs. The New India Assurance
reported in AIR 2001 SCW 85. In that case, because
of the bursting of the front tyre of the vehicle, the
vehicle appears to have hit the footpath and crushed a
pedestrian. The question that arose was whether a
claim for compensation could be maintained even if
the driver of the vehicle was not proved to be
negligent in driving the vehicle. The Supreme Court
declared that jurisdiction of the Tribunal is not
restricted to decide claims arising out of negligence in
the use of Motor Vehicles. Negligence is only one of
the species of causes of action for making a claim for
compensation in respect of accidents arising out of the
use of motor vehicles.
23.   Having considered the principles laid down
in the judgements referred supra and also the
judgement in the case of Sulochana, wherein it is
held that all that need be shown by the claimant in
support of the claim is that the injury or death which
is made the basis for the claim arose out of the use of
a motor vehicle, the provision is not intended to
introduce a rule of evidence merely shifting the
burden of proof from the claimant to the owner and
the driver of the vehicle. If the intention of the
parliament behind the introduction of Section 163-A
was to simply shift the burden of proof to the owner
or the driver of the vehicle, the provisions of Section
163-A would have been differently worded, therefore,
this court has no hesitation in holding that victim or
legal  heirs  of   a  victim   are  entitled   to  claim
compensation in terms of Section 163-A read with
Schedule II to the Act without either pleading or
proving that the accident in question had resulted
from any act of negligence or default on the part of
the owner or the driver of the vehicle.      Under such
circumstances, the very contention of the Insurance
Company cannot be accepted and hence, point No.1 is
answered in affirmative.
24.  Regarding point Nos.2 & 3: Now the
question before this Court is whether the deceased
stepped into the shoes of the owner as contended by
the learned counsel for Insurance Company and the
contention of the learned counsel for the claimants is
that the deceased would become third party and he
cannot step into the shoes of the insured. Having
taken note of these contentions and on perusal of the
material available on record, admittedly the vehicle
which was involved in the accident is standing in the
name of daughter of the deceased and in the cross-
examination     it   is  admitted      that    Hero    Honda
motorcycle belongs to sister of P.W.1 i.e. daughter of
deceased and hence, it is clear that father was driving
the vehicle belonging to the daughter and eucalyptus
tree fallen down on the head of the father and he
succumbed to injuries.
25.   The    learned    counsel    for    respondents-
claimants in his argument vehemently contend that
even though the deceased is father of insured, he
become third party and relied upon judgement of
Division   Bench     of  this    Court   in   the    case   of
Smt.Lakshmi vs. Sri.Gopal S/o Late Nagegowda
in MFA No.8455/2014, referred supra wherein this
Court in view of principles of law settled in the
judgements in the case of Sunil Kumar and Shivaji,
held that he would be treated as a third party and
having perused the judgement in the case of Sunil
Kumar and also Shivaji, the Apex Court discussed with
regard to negligence is concerned and comes to the
conclusion that the ground of negligence cannot be
urged by Insurance Company even if negligence is on
the part of the victim and nowhere in the judgement
held that the borrower of the vehicles becomes third
party and hence, the contention of the claimants
counsel cannot be accepted.
26.   The counsel also relied upon judgement
passed in MFA No.20323/2010 (Lagamawwa’s case),
wherein also this Court relied upon the judgements in
the  case   of  Ningamma,      Shivaji,   Sunil   Kumar,
Ramkhiladi and Dhanraj and comes to the conclusion
the deceased is not the owner of the vehicle in
question   and   he  is third  party    and    in  those
judgements also nowhere it is held that other than the
insured all are become third party. Hence, the said
judgement cannot be accepted.
27.   The judgements in Sunil Kumar and Shivaji
are prior to the judgement in Ramkhiladi, wherein the
Apex Court held that question was raised whether
claim application under Section 163-A by heirs of
owner of vehicle or by heirs of borrower of vehicle,
who stepped into the shoes of the owner for the death
of owner or borrower is maintainable and the said
question was answered that ultimately liability under
Section 163-A of Motor Vehicles Act is on the owner of
the vehicle and a person cannot be both, a claimant
as also a person on whom the liability falls; Insurance
Company is liable to pay compensation to third party
and not the owner; deceased stepped into the shoes
of the owner and he was not a third party. Hence, in
view of the judgement of the Apex Court in the case
of Ramkhiladi, the very contention of the claimants
counsel cannot be accepted. On the other hand, the
principles laid down in Ramkhiladi favours the
28.  Learned counsel for the claimants also
brought to notice of this Court the judgement in the
case of Deepal, referred supra and brought to notice
of this Court para No.66, wherein it is discussed with
regard to the provisions of Motor Vehicles Act and also
discussed Section 163-A particularly and held that it is
by way of an exception to Section 166 and the
concept of social justice has been duly taken care of
and no doubt in the principles laid down in the
judgement it is distinguished between Section 163-A
and Section 166 and in case the claim petition is
under Section 166, negligence is the criteria for
deciding the claim and in case the claim petition is
under Section 163-A, it covers where even negligence
is on the part of the victim and nowhere it is held that
family members of the insured become third party as
contended by learned counsel for the claimants.
29.   Having perused materials on record, the
father (deceased) stepped into the shoes of the
insured since he has borrowed the vehicle from the
daughter and was driving the motorcycle at the time
of accident which has taken place and he succumbed
to injuries. Hence, point No.2 is answered in favour of
Insurance Company and point No.3 is answered
against the claimants and it cannot be held that the
deceased would become third party as contended by
counsel for claimants.
30.   Regarding point No.4: Now the question
before this Court is whether Insurance Company is
liable to pay the compensation. Having considered the
material on record, admittedly the claim petition is
filed under Section 163-A of Motor Vehicles Act and
negligence is not a criteria while considering the claim
petition under Section 163-A. But, when this Court
has comes to the conclusion that the deceased
stepped into the shoes of the insured who being the
daughter     of  the   deceased     whether    Insurance
Company is liable to pay compensation is a question
that needs to be decided.
31.   In view of Ramkhiladi’s case, if policy
covers the risk of the insured, the company is liable to
pay the compensation on the head of compulsory PA
to owner-cum-driver and in terms of Ex.R.1 for
compulsory PA to owner-cum-driver an amount of
Rs.50/- is collected and the same is not disputed and
the Tribunal failed to take note of the contents of the
document at Ex.R.1 and instead of fastened liability on
Insurance Company to pay entire compensation. In
view of payment of Rs.50/- under the coverage of
compulsory PA to owner-cum-driver and also in view
of judgement in Ramkhiladi, wherein the Apex Court
held that when the additional premium had been paid
towards personal accident cover to owner-cum-driver,
an amount of Rs.1,00,000/- has to be paid to the
heirs of borrower of vehicle, since he stepped into the
shoes of the owner of vehicle. The judgement of
Ramkhiladi is very clear regarding the said aspect in
para Nos.5.8 and 5.9. Hence, claimants are entitled
for an amount of Rs.1,00,000/- since there is explicit
coverage of the insurance under the head of personal
accident cover to insured-cum-driver. Hence, the
Insurance Company is liable to pay compensation of
Rs.1,00,000/- with interest.
32.  In Ramkhiladi’s case, interest at the rate
of 7.5% p.a. is awarded. Hence, it is appropriate to
direct the Insurance Company to pay interest at 7.5%
p.a. from the date of claim petition till realization.
Accordingly, point No.4 is answered.
33.   Regarding point No.5: In view of the
discussions made above, I pass the following:
Appeal   filed  by  the   Insurance   Company     is
allowed in part.
In modification of the impugned judgment and
award passed by the Tribunal, the claimants are
entitled for a sum of Rs.1,00,000/- with interest at
7.5%    p.a.  from   the   date   of claim   petition  till
realization as against Rs.3,62,000/-.
Insurance Company is directed to pay/deposit
the compensation amount along with interest within
six weeks from the date of this order.
Amount in deposit, if any, is ordered to be
transferred to the Tribunal forthwith.
The registry is directed to transmit the trial court
records forthwith.