1.          For a small but urgent issue involves herein, on consent of the
learned counsel for the Parties, this matter is taken up for final disposal at
the fresh admission stage.
2.          This Writ Petition involves inaction of the Public Authority in
the matter of bringing a Record of Rights in favour of a War Widow
involving a land handed over to her on account of death of her husband, a
Soldier fighting for the Nation in the Pak-India War, 1971.
3.            Background involving the case is, the husband of the
Petitioner, Late L/NK M.Chineya (No.13652130) was serving as a
Soldier in the Indian Army. Through the pleading, it has been pleaded,
this Soldier was killed in action in Indo-Pak War, 1971 leaving behind his
Widow and two minor children. Through Annexure-1, the Petitioner-War
Widow of the Ex-Army Personnel killed in Indo-Pak War, 1971, has been
issued with a War Widow Identity Card. There is also pleading that the
Petitioner is in occupation and enjoyment of a piece of land, which has
been allotted in her favour, for the above reason, as claimed in Paragraph-
3 of the Writ Petition, vide Patta bearing No.1211 dated 30.3.1976. Being
a resident of Ganjam, the Petitioner further discloses that the Patta
granted in her favour involving the above land has been destroyed in the
Super-Cyclone taking place in the district of Ganjam in 1999. Through
Annexure-4 series, it has been brought to the notice of this Court that
there has been repeated approach to the Tahasildar, Chatrapur, one on
17.10.2022 followed with a representation to the District Collector even
on 11.11.2022. Through Registered Receipt, photocopy of which are at
Pages-19 & 20 of the Brief, it has been established that such
correspondences have been sent to both the above Authorities through
4.          It is in the above circumstance, Mr.Naik, learned counsel for
the Petitioner claims, considering the above condition of the War-Widow,
an early step should have been taken by the Tahasildar concerned
compelling the Petitioner to approach this Court for a suitable direction. It
is alleged, it is even after bringing such aspect to the notice of the
Collector, there is no development.
5.          Mr.Sahoo, learned Additional Standing Counsel appearing for
the O.Ps. submits, once a detailed representation is already made to the
Tahasildar, Chatrapur, he is duty-bound to show an outcome on the same.
Mr.Sahoo also contended, looking to the status of the Petitioner being a
War Widow, there should have been early attention of such case.
Mr.Sahoo also undertakes to issue necessary instruction to the Tahasildar
concerned to give a lawful disposal to the pending representations at the
instance of the Petitioner, vide Annexure-4 series at the earliest.
6.          Considering the rival contentions of the Parties, this Court
finds, there cannot be any dispute that the Petitioner is a War-
Widow, as established through Annexure-1. There may not be also any
doubt that the Petitioner being a War-Widow, her case must have been
considered entitling her appropriate extent of land. Be that as it may,
considering her own claim that she has been parted away with the land
particulars given herein and however, she is not in possession of the copy
of allotment order, if any, in her favour for loss of the same in the Super-
Cyclone taking place in the District of Ganjam in 1999, this Court finding
this to be a fit case while expressing its anxiety in the inaction of the
Tahasildar, Chatrapur for over two months involving such serious issues
recording the Tahasildar failed in appreciating this not an ordinary case
put up before him and the case involves a War-Widow whose husband
has lost his life for the Nation requesting early attention to such issues.
7.          While expressing its anxiety in showing lackadaisical attitude
of the Officer to such issue, this Court disposes of the Writ Petition
directing the Tahasildar, Chatrapur, O.P.3 to undertake the required
exercise and if necessary, find out the order of allotment, if any, in favour
of the Petitioner from their own Records, further if there is involvement
of the War-Widow is necessary, then the Tahasildar himself may visit the
residence of the War-Widow already aged 80 years involved herein
instead of troubling her to come to his Office to find out all sorts of
solutions involved therein. This Court also clarifies that in the event there
is no material involving allotment of such land after due search, which
should be completed within fifteen days of the order of this Court. Since
the Petitioner claims to be in possession of the particular property for
over several decades, in the event there is no material available
establishing allotment in favour of the Petitioner, there should be a
decision in deciding the land in her occupation and there should be
preparation of Record of Rights accordingly. Entire exercise should be
completed within one and half months of service of copy of this judgment
along with copy of the Brief by the State Counsel. It may also be open to
the Petitioner if possible to serve a copy of this judgment along with copy
of the Writ Petition on the Tahasildar involved at the earliest.
8.           Considering the urgent attention should be given to such
cases, this Court also directs the District Collector, Ganjam, O.P.2 to
oversee the matter and submit a compliance report to the Registry of this
Court within a period of two months.
9.           With the above observation/direction, the Writ Petition stands
disposed of.
10.          A free copy of this order be supplied to the Petitioner herself
and another copy to Mr.Sahoo, learned ASC for his necessary guidance
and advice to the Tahasildar, Chatrapur as well as the Collector, Ganjam.