The respondent has filed a private complaint
u/s.200 of Cr.P.C. for the offence punishable under
Sections 499 and 500 of the Indian Penal Code (‘IPC’
for short) against the petitioners and other accused
alleging that several media entities has spoken ill
about the advocate’s fraternity at large.   The learned
Magistrate after recording the sworn statement of the
complainant took cognizance of the aforesaid offence
and issued summons to the petitioners-accused among
other accused. Taking exception to this, the petitioners
have filed this petition.
2.    Sri. M.S.Shyam      Sundar,  learned   Senior
counsel appearing for the petitioners submits that the
petitioners are not aggrieved persons as defined under
Section 499 of IPC, so as to maintain the complaint for
the offence punishable under Section 499 of IPC.       In
support, he has placed reliance on the decision of the
Hon’ble Apex Court in the case of S.KHUSHBOO Vs.
KANNIAMMAL         AND    ANOTHER     reported   in  AIR
(SC)-2010-0-3196. He further          submits that    the
petitioners-accused Nos.9 and 10 are media entities,
however,     summons      have   been   issued    against
individuals and the same is impermissible.
3.    The respondent-complainant though served
with notice has remained absent.
4.     I have considered the submissions made by
the learned counsel for the petitioners and also perused
the documents annexed to the petition.
5.    The allegation in the complaint is that
sections of Media have spoken ill about the advocate’s
fraternity which amounts to defamation under Section
499 and 500 of IPC.      The Hon’ble Apex Court in the
case of S.Khushboo supra, at para 26 and 27 has held
So   as   to   attract  the    offence
punishable under Sections 499 and 500 of
IPC, ‘an essential element of the cause of
action for defamation that the words
complained of should be published “of the
complainant/plaintiff”. Where he is not
named, the test would be whether the
words    would   reasonably   lead     people
acquainted with him to the conclusion
that he was the person referred to.’
6.    In the present case the allegation is that the
petitioners-accused    have     spoken   ill   about   the
advocate’s fraternity and the words complained of is
not against the complainant in his individual capacity.
Hence, the complainant is not an aggrieved person as
enumerated under Section 198 of Cr.P.C., so as to
maintain the complaint for the offence punishable
under Sections 499 and 500 of IPC. Accordingly, I pass
the following:
ii)   The       impugned         proceedings      in
C.C.NO.1378/2012         pending    on   the file  of the
Additional Civil Judge and JMFC Court, Kundapura,
Udupi District, insofar it relates to accused Nos.9 and
10 is hereby quashed.