M.F.A.(FOREST) No.16 of 2005
Dated this the 6th day of October, 2022
1.    The State, as well as, the Custodian of the
vested     forest,      Palakkad    are   the   appellants   in  this
Miscellaneous First Appeal.             The order under challenge
is the one passed by the Forest Tribunal, Kozhikode
dated     17.12.2003        in  O.A.No.25    of   2001.     The  sole
respondent      herein       preferred  the   Original    Application
under Section 8 of the Kerala Private Forest (Vesting
and Assignments) Act, 1971 for a declaration that the
property scheduled therein is not a private forest and
not vested in the Government; and in the alternative,
for exemption under Sections 3(2) and 3(3) of the Act.
By   the    impugned       order,  the   Tribunal    found  that  the
disputed property is a private forest, which vests with
the Government.           However, the Tribunal also found that
the applicant is entitled to exemption under Section
3(2) of the Act.
2.   Heard      Sri.Nagaraj     Narayanan,   learned   Special
Government       Pleader      (Forest)    and  Sri.   Mohanakannan,
learned     counsel       for   the    respondent.     Perused   the
3.   Learned       Special   Government    Pleader   submitted
that the order under challenge is a non speaking one. No
reason other than a bald statement that the father of
PW1    was   cultivating       the  property    –  a  self   serving
statement – is seen reckoned in the impugned order to
find that the applicant is entitled to exemption under
Section 3(2) of the Act.               Learned Special Government
Pleader submitted that, all what is available in the
property is 7 tamarind trees and 3 Chadachikora trees,
the former aged between 50 – 60 years and latter between
30-35     years.      The Commissioner found that, there are no
signs of any cultivation in the property. This has been
taken     judicial      note    of  in   paragraph   no.10   of  the
impugned order.            However, in disregard of the above
referred circumstances, the Tribunal, without stating
any reason, found that the applicant is entitled for the
exemption.      It    is   also pointed  out   that,  no  record,
whatsoever,       to    show  the  cultivation   in  the  subject
property     was     produced   by   the applicant,   albeit  his
version in cross examination that, he is possessed of
such     records.         Learned  Special   Government   Pleader
emphatically stressed on the burden of proof to pin
point that the same unequivocally is on the applicant
only, in support of which proposition, he relied upon
the following decisions:
(i)        Unreported decision of the High Court in
M.F.A.No.12 of 1980 dated 10.01.1986.
(ii)        State of Kerala v. Thomas [1987(1) KLT
(iii)       State of Kerala v. Kunchiraman [1990(1)
(iv)        State of Kerala v. Chandralekha [1995(2)
(v)        State of Kerala and Another v. Popular
Estate and Another [(2004)12 SCC 434].
4.   Per contra, learned counsel for the respondent
argued to sustain the impugned order.              It was pointed
out that, there was specific pleading in the original
application        as     regards    cultivation    made   by    the
applicant's father, Marutha Boyan, after purchasing the
property in the year 1961, wherein, there is specific
averment with respect to the cultivation of tamarind
trees.      The existence of tamarind trees, though 7 in
number, has been found by the Advocate Commissioner.              It
was also pleaded that, due to the obstruction on the
part of the forest officials, the property could not be
cultivated for two years prior to the death of Marutha
Boyan. Therefore, according to the learned counsel, the
order impugned is fully justified in finding that the
applicant's father was cultivating the property at the
relevant time, wherefore, the applicant is entitled to
the    exemption      under   Section   3(2)  of the   Act.     That
apart,    learned       counsel   took  us  through   the  evidence
tendered      by    PW1    to   highlight   that  the    factum   of
cultivation was very much spoken of by PW1 before the
court, which version remained unchallenged in the cross
examination. As regards the claim of Section 3(3) of the
Act, learned counsel submitted the requirements of a
valid    registered       deed   coupled    with   the   intention   to
cultivate      is     amply    demonstrated     by   the    facts   and
evidence.       On     such   premise,     learned     counsel    seeks
dismissal of the instant appeal.
5.   Having heard the learned counsel appearing on
both     sides,       we    find    considerable     force     in   the
submissions       made     by   the   learned    Special    Government
Pleader.        It    is   shocking    to  note   that,    no   reason,
whatsoever, is stated in the impugned order to find that
the applicant is entitled to the exemption under Section
3(2) of the Act. The Tribunal, in the impugned order,
raised     point       No.4    specifically      dealing     with   the
applicant's       entitlement      for   exemption    under    Sections
3(2) or 3(3) of the Act and considered the said point in
paragraph no.11 of the order. The relevant finding in
paragraph no.11 is extracted herebelow:
“The case of PW1 is that his father has been
cultivating the property with Kora, Chama, groundnut
etc. I therefore hold that the applicant is entitled
to get exemption under Section 3(2) of the Act. Point
found accordingly.”
6.    We   find     that  the    grant  of  exemption   under
Section 3(2) of the Act taking stock of the applicant's
case/claim only, without referring to any evidence in
support thereof, is perverse and unsustainable in law.
7.    In    ascertaining     whether    applicant's   father,
Marutha Boyan was in cultivation of the property, it is
necessary to trace his title and possession over the
schedule      property.      Going    by  the   averments  in   the
original application, the scheduled property, along with
the    other    items,     originally    belonged   to the   Jenmy,
Mannarkkad Moopilsthanam, as per document No.3084/1920.
One Chellan obtained leasehold rights over the schedule
property from the Jenmy and upon his death, Chellan's
rights devolved upon his children.                As per document
no.2475/61,        applicant's     father     Marutha   Boyan   got
assignment of 6 acres of land (schedule property) and it
is    the    applicant's       case   that   his   father    was   in
cultivation       of    the  property.     Simultaneous     with  the
same, the applicant also avers that the property was
purchased and possessed with the intention to cultivate
and there are fruit bearing trees like tamarind planted
in the property. Now, the Advocate Commissioner found in
his report that, there are 7 tamarind trees standing in
the     property,       which   are   aged   50-60    years   and   3
Chadachikoora         trees,    which   are   aged    30-35    years.
Reckoning the age of tamarind trees, the same should
have      been      planted     sometime     during     1950s,    the
Commissioner's          visit    to    the   property     being    on
19.12.2002.        It     is  noteworthy    that   in    1950s,   the
applicant's father has not obtained title or possession
of the property, which he obtained only in the year
1961.      We, therefore, arrive at two conclusions, (i)
the       existence     of  7   tamarind   trees    would   not
indicate any cultivation in the property, and (ii) the
Advocate Commissioner's report would not vouch that the
so called cultivation was made by applicant's father,
8.    We take note of the contention of the learned
Special     Government      Pleader    that  the   burden  of   proof
invariably lies on the applicant.               In Thomas (supra),
Kunhiraman (supra) and in the unreported decision, it
has    been   held     unequivocally     by  3  different   Division
Benches that the burden of proof regarding the exemption
under Section 3(2) of the Act lies upon the applicant
only.      The legal position was reiterated by the Full
Bench     in    Chandralekha       (supra)    with   the   following
“Section 8 makes the position clear that, it
is for the person who claims that the land is not
a private forest or that the private forest has
not vested in the Government to apply before the
Tribunal    for   decision   of  the  dispute.  From  a
reading of the Section, it is apparent that the
person who prefers a claim before the Tribunal
that the property is not private forest or that
it has not vested under the Vesting Act has the
burden to establish his case. As he alone can
produce necessary evidence in support of his case
it can never be held that the onus of proof is on
the State to prove that the land in question is a
private forest.       As the owner of the land has to
prefer his claim before the Tribunal that the
land is not private forest or that the private
forest has not vested in the Government, he has
necessarily to establish that claim as he alone
is in possession of data and materials to prove
his  case.    The   burden   is   squarely  upon  him  to
substantiate his claim.          In State of Kerala v.
Kunhiraman [1990(1) KLT 382] a Division Bench of
this   Court     held   that   the   burden  is  on   the
claimants to prove that the land in question was
not private forest on the appointed law.”
9.    The    seal     of    approval    from   the   Honourable
Supreme Court lies in the judgment in Popular Estate
(supra).        In     paragraph    no.15    of  the   judgment,  the
Supreme Court upheld the proposition laid down by the
Tribunal that it was for the claimant to prove that the
properties in respect of which relief is sought for were
not private forest as defined under the Act.
10. Having        taken     note     of    the    legal    position
referred as above, we will now examine the evidence
tendered by PW1, the applicant.                After referring to the
title obtained by his father, PW1 would state in page
No.3 (towards the end) that tamarind trees are standing
in    the   disputed       property     and    that,    his   father  was
cultivating “groundnut”, “kora”, “chama” etc., in the
disputed property.            He would therefore state that, his
father     purchased       the  property      with   the    intention  to
cultivate and that, he was doing cultivation ever since
its     purchase.       The    above     version     of   PW1    is  seen
challenged        in      the   cross      examination.           It  was
specifically put to him that the tamarind trees were
naturally/spontaneously grown in the property, which,
PW1     however     denied.        To    a  specific      question,   PW1
answered that, he had records to show cultivation in the
subject property. It was also suggested that the lie of
the property is very steep, to which, PW1 would answer
that it is steep.           It is important to note that, apart
from the applicant, who was examined as PW1, none else
was examined in proof of the applicant's case of having
cultivation in the subject property.            We find that the
records produced are not of any help to the applicant in
this regard.         Ext.A1 is the assignment deed and Ext.A2
is the photocopy of the purchase certificate.            Ext.A3 is
the     power    of     attorney  executed   in   favour   of  the
petitioner. Exts.A4 to A10 are building tax receipts,
which would not lend any support to the applicant's
claim that he was cultivating the property and Ext.A11
is an electricity bill. We are of the opinion that the
self-serving,         interested   testimony   of  the   applicant
alone     is   wholly     insufficient  to   establish   that  the
applicant was doing cultivation in the subject property
at the relevant time.          Adequate evidence could have been
adduced by examining a labourer, who had performed some
work in the subject property, in connection with the
cultivation claimed.          Evidence could also have been led
in the form of any agricultural income tax paid or such
other records indicating cultivation, which according to
PW1 was in his possession, but not produced. The above
factual      scenario,          coupled   with    the    findings       in   the
Commissioner's report, would certainly persuade us to
negate the applicant's claim of cultivation over the
property.       The Commissioner found only 7 tamarind trees
and    3   Chadachikora          trees.      He   specifically       reported
that,      there         is   no   indication,      whatsoever,         of   any
cultivation in the schedule property.                   Relevant findings
are extracted here below:
These facts noted by the Advocate Commissioner would cut
at the root of the applicant's claim.                      We are grossly
unhappy      with        the   Tribunal's     finding    in  this       regard,
dehors the fact that the Tribunal took note of the above
aspect      pointed         out   by   the     Commissioner     as      regards
absence of any cultivation in the subject property.
11. Before parting with the judgment, we will also
address      the      scope    and   ambit     of   the   expression
'cultivation' as employed in Section 3(2) of the Act.              The
language employed is “held by an owner under his personal
cultivation”. It is clear that the land in question should
be held by the applicant as its owner and secondly, the
same should have been used for his personal cultivation.
Here, it is necessary to take note of the characteristic
features     of     “cultivation”,     as   distinguished     from   a
spontaneous/natural         growth.       The   term   'cultivation'
implies    a   systematic     agricultural    or  farming   activity,
including      tilling    of   the  soil,    sowing   seeds   of   the
particular crop, nurturing the same by supplying water,
fertilizers, if any, required etc., until the crops are
grown to such extent, so as to reap the produce.               In the
context of evidence, materials in individual support of
the      above      facets     of   cultivation      may     not    be
possible/feasible. However, the state of affairs as on the
cut off date, as culled out from the over all evidence,
facts and circumstances, should indicate, by the yardstick
of preponderance of probability, that the land in question
was in the cultivation of the applicant.             In the given
facts, we find that the spontaneous/natural growth of 6 to
7 tamarind trees or 3 Chadachikora trees will not answer
the requirements of the section, that is to say, the land
in question was held by the applicant as the owner, under
his personal cultivation.
12. As regards the claim under Section 3(3) of the
Act, we notice that the intention for cultivation is
relevant with respect to the time of purchase/transfer
of the property by virtue of a registered deed. Such
intention          to       cultivate     harbored      by      the
purchaser/assignee/lessee          should   be   translated    into
action     within      a  reasonable   time   from  the   date   of
execution      of    the   registered  deed   and  some   acts   in
furtherance of cultivation should have been done. We
have already found while considering the claim under
Section 3(2) that the applicant failed to establish any
cultivation         in    the    subject    property.    In    such
circumstances, the intention, if any, of the applicant's
father in the year 1961 to cultivate the property would
pale into insignificance, de hors and independent of the
fact that no act in furtherance of such intention is
established in evidence. We further note that going by
Section 3(1) of the MPPF Act, alienation of a private
forest by way of sale, mortgage, lease or otherwise
without the previous sanction of the District Collector
is null and void. The applicant has no case that the
subject     property      was  purchased   with   sanction   of  the
District      Collector;       nor  is   any    document    produced
indicating      the     same.   Therefore,    the   requirement   of
holding the property under a 'valid' registered document
is also not satisfied.
In   the    result,     this  appeal   is   allowed   and  the
impugned order of the Tribunal is set aside. The OA will
stand dismissed.