The appellant is the accused in S.C.No.5 of 2007 on the
file of the Special Court (NDPS Act Cases), Vadakara. He was
convicted and sentenced for an offence punishable under
Section 20(b)(ii)(B) of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances Act, 1985 (for short “NDPS Act”). The sentence
imposed was rigorous imprisonment for a period of three
years and a fine of Rs.10,000/- with a default sentence of six
months. The said judgment of conviction and the order of
sentence are under challenge in this appeal filed under
Section 374(2) of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1973.
2.   The allegations against the appellant are that at
about 4.35 p.m. on 01.01.2006, he was found in possession
of 1.250 kg. of Ganja near the Palayam bus stand at
Kozhikode, in violation of the provisions of the NDPS Act.
PW1, the Sub Inspector of Police, Kasaba Police Station, on
receipt of reliable information, reached the spot and caught
the appellant red-handed. On a search, 1.250 kg of Ganja was
found in his possession. After necessary formalities of
Crl.Appeal No.317 of 2008
preparation of seizure mahazar, sampling and sealing of both
samples and the contraband, PW1 arrested the appellant.
3.    During the trial, PWs.1 to 6 were examined and
Exts.P1 to P12 were marked on the side of the prosecution.
Mos.1 to 3 were identified. In the examination of the appellant
under Section 313 (1)(b) of the Code, he took the stand that
he was innocent and the case was foisted against him. No
defence evidence was let in. The learned Special Judge did not
accept the contentions raised by the appellant that he was
innocent and evidence was insufficient to find him guilty.
Accordingly, the appellant was convicted and sentenced.
4.    On 15.02.2008, this appeal was admitted and the
sentence imposed on the appellant was suspended. He was
therefore directed to be released on bail on the conditions
stipulated in that order.
5.    Heard     the learned counsel  appearing   for  the
appellant and also the learned Public Prosecutor.
6.    PW1 is the detecting officer. PW2 is a police
constable accompanied PW1 and witnessed the search of the
Crl.Appeal No.317 of 2008
person of the appellant and the seizure. PW1 while working as
the Sub Inspector of Police, Kasaba Police Station, got the
information that a person was selling Ganja near the bus stand
at Palayam, Kozhikode. After entering the information in the
General Diary and sending a report as stipulated in Section
42(2) of the NDPS Act, went to the spot. The appellant was
found near the Milma booth in the premises of the bus stand at
Palayam. He was informed about his right to have his person
searched in the presence of a Gazetted Officer or a Magistrate.
But he waived that right and endorsed so in Ext.P2 report.
Accordingly, PW1 himself searched the body of the appellant,
whereupon PW1 found Ganja in a plastic cover he was
carrying. PW1 prepared two samples of 50 grams each from
the said Ganja. The samples as well as the remaining Ganja in
the possession of the appellant were packed, labeled and
sealed before seizure as per Ext.P5 seizure mahazar. Recording
the arrest of the appellant, PW1 has prepared Ext.P3 arrest
memo and Ext.P4 inspection memo. In Ext.P3 as well as
Ext.P5, signatures of witnesses were taken.
Crl.Appeal No.317 of 2008
7.    PW2 was the police constable who accompanied
PW1. PW2 also deposed regarding the details of the search
and seizure of the contraband and arrest of the accused. He is
also a signatory to Ext.P5 seizure mahazar. Besides PW2, PW4
was examined by the prosecution to prove the search, seizure
and arrest. He admitted that he had signed Ext.P5 at the
precincts of the Palayam bus stand where he was selling
newspaper. His signature in Ext.P3 as well as Ext.P5 is
admitted to be that of him. He, however, denied having seen
the arrest of the accused and the seizure of any object from
him. Although in regard to the arrest of the accused and
seizure of contraband, he did not support the case of the
prosecution, his evidence would support the evidence of
PWs.1 and 2 regarding the preparation of Exts.P3 and P5 at
the place of occurrence.
8.    Coming back to the police station, PW1 registered
a crime as per Ext.P6, first information report. Without any
delay, the appellant was produced before the court. The
contraband and the samples were also produced before the
Crl.Appeal No.317 of 2008
court without any delay. Ext.P8 is the property list, as per
which the contraband and the samples were produced before
the court.
9.     It is true that there is no independent evidence in
order to prove the arrest of the appellant and seizure of
contraband from his possession. But no inconsistency or
contradiction has been brought out in evidence of PWs.1 and
2 with reference to the said aspects. The documents referred
to above well corroborate the oral testimony of PWs.1 and 2.
In the said circumstances, there is no reason to disbelieve the
oral testimony of PWs.1 and 2 in court.
10.    The Apex Court in Karamjit Singh v. State
(Delhi Administration) [ AIR 2003 SC 1311] held that,-
“The testimony of police personnel should be treated in
the same manner as testimony of any other witness and
there is no principle of law that without corroboration by
independent witnesses their testimony cannot be relied
upon. The presumption that a person acts honestly
applies as much in favour of police personnel as of other
persons and it is not a proper judicial approach to
distrust and suspect them without good grounds. It will
all depend upon the facts and circumstances of each
Crl.Appeal No.317 of 2008
case and no principle of general application can be laid
down.”
11.    In the light of the said principle laid down by the
Apex Court, there is no impediment for relying on the
evidence tendered by PWs.1 and 2 in court. I found that they
are credible witnesses. Therefore, even in the absence of any
independent evidence, they can be believed. It follows that
the prosecution has succeeded in proving that 1.250 kg. of
contraband was seized from the possession of the appellant,
as alleged by the prosecution.
12.    The learned counsel appearing for the appellant
would contend that there has been a slew of procedural
irregularities, resulting in miscarriage of justice, and therefore,
the conviction of the appellant is unsustainable in law. It is
contended that the appellant is a person knowing only Kannada;
whereas, in none of the stages of the investigation or trial, he
was made to know about the proceedings by telling him in his
own language. It is true that in Ext.P2 his signature was taken,
but without his knowing its contents. During the proceedings in
the court also, he was not apprised of the contents of various
Crl.Appeal No.317 of 2008
proceedings by interpreting in his own language as provided in
Sections 279 and 281 of the Code. The learned counsel for the
appellant would point out that the appellant did not know any
language other than Kannada is a fact stated by PW1, and as
such the said lapses resulted in failure of justice, thereby
causing grave prejudice to the appellant.
13.   The objective of Section 279 of the Code is to
safeguard     the   interest of an   accused,   who    does    not
understand the language in which the proceedings of the
court are being conducted. Section 273 of the Code insists
that unless otherwise expressly provided, all evidence taken
in the course of the trial of a case shall be recorded in the
presence of the accused. It is an invariable rule of the fair trial
guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
Section 278 of the Code further binds all the courts
conducting criminal trials to read over evidence recorded from
every witness to such witnesses in the presence of the accused,
unless he appears only through his pleader. A conjoint reading
of these provisions would show that the intention of the
Crl.Appeal No.317 of 2008
Legislature is that the process of recording evidence during a
criminal trial shall be done in the informed presence of the
accused.    His   mere    presence,    without   understanding    the
contents of the proceedings being taken place during the
course of the trial, does not satisfy the requirements of Section
273 of the Code or the principles of a fair trial as envisioned
under Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
14.   Section 279 of the Code reads as follows:
"279. Interpretation of evidence to accused or his pleader.-
(1) Whenever any evidence is given in a language not
understood by the accused, and he is present in Court in
person, it shall be interpreted to him in open Court in a
language understood by him.
(2) If he appears by pleader and the evidence is given in a
language other than the language of the Court, and not
understood by the pleader, it shall be interpreted to such
pleader in that language.
(3) When documents are put for the purpose of formal proof,
it shall be in the discretion of the Court to interpret as much
thereof as appears necessary."
15.   This Section envisages that when the accused is
present in Court in person and evidence is given in any
language not understood by him, it shall be interpreted to him
Crl.Appeal No.317 of 2008
in open Court in a language understood by him. In the case of
oral evidence that is a mandatory requirement, but in the
case of documentary evidence, it is only discretionary. It is
clear from its reading that sub-sections (1) and (2) of Section
279 are mutually exclusive and even in a case the accused is
represented by a counsel it is mandatory that the evidence
shall be interpreted to the accused in a language known to
him if he does not know the language in which the evidence is
16.   Section 281(1) of the Code insists that whenever
the accused is examined by a magistrate or a court, he shall
make a memorandum of the substance of such examination in
the language of the Court. Section 281(4) mandates that such
record shall be shown or read to the accused, or, if he does
not understand the language in which it is written, shall be
interpreted to him in a language which he understands.
17.   I have gone through the records of the case. It is
not certified in the statement of the appellant while recording
his plea to the charge framed against him or in the record of
Crl.Appeal No.317 of 2008
the examination of him under Section 313(1)(b) of the Code
that the matter was translated in Kannada to the appellant. In
none of the records of deposition of the witnesses also there
is no certification that the contents were interpreted to the
appellant in the language known to him or that he knew
Malayalam. It shows that at no stage of the trial an
interpreter    was    engaged   and   the    evidence    or   other
statements were translated in the language of the appellant.
18.   Now, what is the effect of such failure? The Apex
Court in Shivanarayan Kabra v. The State of Madras [AIR
1967 SC 986] considered a similar question. Sub-section (1)
of Section 361 of the Code, 1898, was the provision then in
existence. That provision is in pari materia to sub-section (1)
of Section 279 of the Code, 1973. The Apex Court has held as
“10. xxx      xxx   It was said that the evidence of the
prosecution witnesses was given either in Tamil or in the
English language and the appellant did not know either of the
languages and so he was not able to take part in the trial. Mr.
Naunit Lal contended that there was a breach of the
requirement of Section 361(1) of the Criminal Procedure
Crl.Appeal No.317 of 2008
Code and the trial was vitiated. We do not think there is any
substance in this argument. Even if it is assumed that the
appellant did not know English or Tamil the violation of any of
Section 361(1) of the Criminal Procedure Code was merely an
irregularity and it is not shown in this case that there is any
prejudice caused to the appellant on this account. It is
pointed out by the Sessions Judge that the appellant did not
make any objection at the time the evidence was given and it
appears that he was represented by two eminent advocates –
Sri.V.T. Rangaswami Iyenger and Sri R.Krishnamoorthy Iyer -
in the trial court who knew both these languages and who
would not have allowed the interest of the appellant to be
jeopardized even to the smallest extent. In our opinion, the
irregularity has not resulted in any injustice and the
provisions of Section 537 of the Criminal Procedure Code are
applicable to cure the defect."
19.    In the light of the principle laid down by the Apex
Court in the aforesaid decision in a case where the accused is
defended by a counsel, non-compliance with Section 279(1) or
281(4) of the Code by itself would not render the prosecution
illegal. The non-compliance with Sections 279(1) or 281(4) of the
Code is an irregularity. Unless prejudice is caused to the accused,
that irregularity will not vitiate the trial altogether.
20.    It is seen that at no stage of the trial, the counsel
Crl.Appeal No.317 of 2008
appearing for the appellant has pointed out before the Special
Court that the appellant did not know Malayalam in which
language     the   proceedings  were   recorded.  When     PW1
categorically deposed in court that the appellant knew
Kannada only, it cannot be inferred that he could understand
what was stated to him in Malayalam.
21.   The appellant was represented by a lawyer through
out the proceedings in court. It is seen that he or his lawyer
never complained before the court about the requirement of
translation in Kannada. It is not pointed out by the learned
counsel for the appellant any instance of prejudice caused to
the appellant during the process of trial. As such, it may say
that there occurred no prejudice to him in the process of trial
and for such reason the prosecution need not fail. I, however,
hasten to state in the above context that non-observance of
Section 279(1), 279(2) or 281(4) of the Code may be an
irregularity only, but that is not a permission to violate it. I
may reiterate the view of the this Court in Chalam Sheikh v.
State of Kerala [2020 (4) KLT 164] as to what shall be the
Crl.Appeal No.317 of 2008
procedure to be followed by courts in a similar situation,
which is as follows:
“It is ideal and proper and always desirable to prepare
the questions to be put to the accused in a language in
which the accused is well versed. However, as in the
present case, when the accused is a person who hails
from another part of the country, it may not be possible
to prepare the questions in the language which he
knows. In such cases, the questions have to be
prepared in Malayalam or English and an interpreter or
translator has to be appointed by the Court to interpret
or translate the questions put to the accused and the
answers given by him. What is essential is that the
accused shall clearly understand the questions put to
him so that he could give proper answers. It is also
necessary that the record shall clearly indicate the
procedure adopted by the Court. The Magistrate or the
Judge shall certify at the bottom of the record of
examination that the questions were translated or
interpreted   and  explained to the accused in the
language of the accused. It would also be ideal and
desirable that the interpreter or translator shall, instead
of simply putting his signature in the record of
examination of the accused, make an endorsement that
he has truly and correctly interpreted or translated the
questions and the answers.”
22.  The same procedure shall invariably be followed
while recording plea of the accused to the charge. Similarly,
evidence of each witness examined in the case shall be
interpreted in the language understood by the accused and a
certification to that effect added in the record of deposition.
Whenever an accused who does not know the language in
which the aforesaid proceedings take place, the magistrate or
court is expected to follow the procedure mentioned above.
23.  In this case, apart from such flaws during the
course of the trial, there occurred a glaring glitch while
recording the statement of the appellant in Ext.P2, the
statement of waiver under Section 50 of the NDPS Act.
Section 50 of the NDPS Act is a mandatory provision. Unless
the accused waived his right to be searched before a Gazetted
Officer or a Magistrate, it is the obligation of the searching
officer to have the search in the presence of either a Gazetted
Officer or a Magistrate. In Vijaysinh Chandubha Jadeja v.
State of Gujarat [(2011) 1 SCC 609], a Constitution Bench
of the Apex Court interpreted Section 50 thus:
Crl.Appeal No.317 of 2008
"The mandate of Section 50 is precise and clear, viz. if
the person intended to be searched expresses to the
authorised officer his desire to be taken to the nearest
gazetted officer or the Magistrate, he cannot be
searched till the gazetted officer or the Magistrate, as
the case may be, directs the authorised officer to do so.
In view of the foregoing discussion, we are of the firm
opinion that the object with which right under Section
50(1) of the NDPS Act, by way of a safeguard, has been
conferred on the suspect, viz. to check the misuse of
power, to avoid harm to innocent persons and to
minimise the allegations of planting or foisting of false
cases by the law enforcement agencies, it would be
imperative on the part of the empowered officer to
apprise the person intended to be searched of his right
to be searched before a gazetted officer or a Magistrate.
We have no hesitation in holding that in so far as the
obligation of the authorised officer under Sub-section
(1) of Section 50 of the NDPS Act is concerned, it is
mandatory and requires a strict compliance. Failure to
comply with the provision would render the recovery of
the illicit article suspect and vitiate the conviction if the
same is recorded only on the basis of the recovery of
the illicit article from the person of the accused during
such search.”
24.    PW1 deposed that the appellant was apprised of his
right and as he stated that the presence of Gazetted Officer or
Crl.Appeal No.317 of 2008
a Magistrate was unnecessary, he himself conducted the
search. At the same time, PW1 stated that the appellant knew
Kannada only. The appellant wrote in Ext.P2 also in Kannada.
In the absence of certification in Ext.P2 or a statement of PW1
in court that the appellant was communicated in Kannada
about his right under Section 50 of the NDPS Act, it can only
be   said   that   there  occurred   non-compliance   with   the
provisions of Section 50. In the circumstances, conviction of
the appellant for the offence under Section 20(b)(ii)(B) of the
NDPS Act cannot be sustained. Hence, this appeal is allowed
and the judgment dated 30.01.2008 in S.C.No.5 of 2007 of
the Special Court (NDPS Act Cases), Vadakara, convicting and
sentencing the appellant is set aside. The appellant is
acquitted and set at liberty.