1. Instant Criminal Conviction Appeal is directed by appellant/convict against
the judgment and order dated 12.01.2021 rendered by the court of learned
Principal Sessions Judge Ramban in the case File No. 02/challan bearing
case CNR No. JKRB010000382016 titled State vs Liaqat Ali, whereby,
appellant/convict has been held guilty, convicted and sentenced to undergo
rigorous imprisonment for a period of 20 years for commission of offence
punishable u/s 376 RPC and to pay fine of Rs. 50,000/- and further
sentenced to simple imprisonment for a period of two (2) years for
commission of offence punishable u/s 506 RPC and in default of payment of
fine, appellant/convict has been directed to further undergo simple
imprisonment for the period of 06 months.
2. Aggrieved of and dissatisfied with the impugned judgment, appellant/
convict has questioned it's legality, propriety and correctness and has
sought it's setting aside/quashment on the following grounds:
(i) that the prosecutrix has filed an application for registration of FIR
on 04-12-2011 after the lapse of more than 08 months from the
date of incident, there has been delay in registration of FIR which
has remained unexplained, the learned trial court has not taken a
(ii) that     the prosecutrix has never mentioned in her
statement recorded before the trial court that appellant/convict has
ever committed rape upon her, she has only stated that the
appellant/convict committed "Beparadgi" upon her, which by no
stretch of imagination can be construed as rape;
(iii) that the learned trial court has considered the age of prosecutrix as
16 years and a minor, whereas, prosecutrix has stated before the
trial court that she is illiterate, however, PW-8 Mohd Mudasir a
teacher in Govt. Upper Primary School Digog Ramban has stated
before the trial court that the prosecutrix was admitted in the
school on 16.04.2001 with her date of birth recorded as
12.12.1995, the statements of PW8 Mohd Mudasir and that of the
prosecutrix are totally contradictory to each other regarding date of
birth, therefore, the learned trial court has fallen into an error by
considering the prosecutrix as minor and has wrongly convicted
the appellant/convict by virtue of impugned judgment and order;
(iv) that the material witnesses of the prosecution viz; I.O and doctor
have not been examined by the prosecution which has cast a
serious dent in the credibility and genuineness of the prosecution
3. Sh. Arjun Singh Raju learned counsel for the appellant/convict has
vehemently argued, and has sought the setting aside/quashment of
impugned judgment and the acquittal of appellant/convict on the following
(i) It is argued, that the FIR has been lodged by the prosecutrix on 04-
12-2011 on a written application after a delay of more than 08
months from the date of occurrence, prosecution has not tendered
any plausible explanation for such delay, the learned trial
court has not considered this aspect of delayed FIR which leaves a
mark of doubt to treat the testimony of the prosecutrix as natural
and truthful to inspire confidence which gives rise to sense of
doubt regarding the genuineness and credibility of the prosecution
case.
(ii) It is argued, that the prosecutrix has never mentioned in her
statement recorded before the trial court that appellant/convict has
ever committed rape upon her, she has only stated that the
appellant/convict committed "Beparadgi" upon her, which by no
stretch of imagination can be construed as rape;
(iii) It is moreso argued, that the learned trial court has considered the
age of prosecutrix as 16 years and a minor, whereas, prosecutrix
has stated before the trial court that she is illiterate, however, PW-
8 Mohd Mudasir a teacher in Govt. Upper Primary School Digog
Ramban has stated before the trial court that the prosecutrix was
admitted in the school on 16.04.2001 with her date of birth
recorded as 12.12.1995, the statements of PW8 Mohd Mudasir and
that of the prosecutrix are totally contradictory to each other
regarding date of birth, however, the learned trial court has fallen
into an error by considering the prosecutrix as minor and has
wrongly convicted the appellant/convict by virtue of impugned
judgment and order. Reliance has been placed on (i) 2013 Legal
Eagle (SC) 182 [Rajesh Patel versus State of Jharkhand], (ii)
2009(8) Supreme 20 [Sunil-Appellant versus State of Haryana-
Malik versus State of Haryana];
(iv) It is vehemently argued, that that the material witnesses of the
prosecution viz; I.O and doctor have not been examined by the
prosecution for reasons best known to it, trial court has committed
serious error in relying upon the sole testimony of the prosecutrix
to convict the appellant, for non-examination of I.O & doctor a
serious dent has been cast upon the credibility and genuineness of
the prosecution case. To support his arguments, Ld. Counsel for
appellant/convict has relied upon the decisions reported in, (i)
2012 Legal Eagle (SC) 369 [Rai Sandeep @ Deepu versus State
of NCT of Delhi & (ii) 2017 Legal Eagle (J&K) 615 [State of
J&K versus Sham Singh & Ors.]
4. Sh. Eishaan Dadhichi, learned GA, per contra, has supported the impugned
judgment of conviction awarded by the trial court. He has vehemently
argued, that PW8 Mohd. Mudasir (Govt. teacher) has proved the date of
birth certificate of the prosecutrix as 12.12.1995 and therefore at the time of
occurrence prosecutrix was less than 16 years of age and was a minor, and
even the consent of minor is immaterial, as the prosecutrix in her deposition
before the trial court has categorically admitted the correctness of her
statement recorded before the Judicial Magistrate u/s 164-A Cr.pc during
investigation, and therefore, has proved that she was subjected to
"Beparadgi" and forcible sexual intercourse/rape by the appellant/convict,
which fact also gets confirmed that the prosecutrix delivered a child, and she
in her deposition before the trial court categorically deposed that the child
born to her is the biological child of the appellant/convict. It is argued, that
appellant/convict has not led any rebuttal evidence to disprove that the child
born to the prosecutrix is not his biological child, the impugned judgment is
reasoned one and does not call any interference by the appellate court and
deserves to be upheld/confirmed.
5. In a bid to prove it's case against appellant/convict, prosecution before the
trial court out of total 11 prosecution witnesses has examined only 05
witnesses viz; PW3 Prosecutrix, PW5 Mohd. Sharief, PW6 Abdul Guffar
Bali, PW7 Mohd. Reyaz SPO/654 & PW8 Mohd. Mudasir. Be it noted, that
Zarifa Begum (m/o prosecutrix), PW9 Smt. Reeta Kotwal (MO), PW10
Irfan Wani SI (I.O of initial investigation) & PW11 Sukhdev Singh Jamwal
(Inspector/SHO No. 4364/NGO/I.O who completed the investigation) have
remained unexamined for reasons best known to the prosecution. The
prosecution examined oral witnesses and led documentary evidence as
PWs.       Name of PW                Role/fact which PW is to prove
6. Before coming to the conclusion whether prosecution has successfully
substantiated charges against the appellant/convict beyond hilt and the
impugned judgment of conviction is legally sustainable, we have found it
pertinent to give a brief resume of the evidence tendered by the prosecution
witnesses before the trial court. Relevant portions of the testimonies of the
prosecution witnesses are summarized as under:
PW-3 Prosecutrix (victim) in her examination-in-chief has deposed, that
she knows the accused who is her uncle (Puffa). She is illiterate. Four (4)
years ago accused was running a shop in Magarkote. She was alone in her
house. Accused came in her house and committed her bepardagi and told her
that if she narrated it to someone he would cut her into pieces. She felt
ashamed, therefore, she did not tell it to anyone. When she was having a
child in her womb, her father asked her as to why her belly has swollen, then
she told that it is the child of the accused, thereafter, she gave birth to male
baby. When she was pregnant and was having 7 months child in her womb,
then at that time report was lodged with police. Then police took her before
Judge and got her statement recorded. She has heard the contents of her
statement recorded u/s 164-A Cr.pc, its contents are true and correct, she
identities her thumb impression on it and it is exhibited as Ext.P3. Police has
given the child on her supardari. Supardari memo is true and correct, she
identifies her signature on it and it is exhibited as Ext.P3/1. Her father had
lodged written report in police station. On this written report she has
appended her thumb impression, the same is annexed with the file, its
contents are true and correct, it contains her thumb impression which she
identifies and it is exhibited as Ext.P3/2. Copy of FIR is annexed with the
file, it bears her thumb impression and she identifies it and it is exhibited as
Ext.P3/3. In cross-examination deposes, that her father had lodged report
with Ramsoo police. She has no knowledge from whom the report was got
written as she was in the Varanda and her father had gone inside the room to
lodge the report. Report was submitted to SHO who was having 3 stars. On
the same day when report was lodged FIR was registered. She has never
gone to School, therefore, she has no knowledge on which date report was
lodged, on which date FIR got registered. 4/5 months after lodging report
she gave statement before Judge. Again deposes, that when report was
lodged in police station, she had not given birth to the child. However, after
she gave birth to a child she got recorded her statement before Judge. In the
court police had accompanied her at the time of recording her statement.
When her statement was recorded police was accompanying her. The day on
which accused came in her house and committed wrong act with her, one
month after that, her father had come home and thereafter he had remained
at home. In this regard she has not narrated the occurrence to anyone
because accused had threatened her to cut into pieces, and for the said
reasons/threat she had not narrated the occurrence to her father and mother.
She used to work in the house in presence of her parents. On the day when
her father asked her regarding, her belly, prior to this, none had asked her
anything. One month before the birth of child, police had taken her to the
doctor. Lady Doctor had examined her in the Hospital. Neither police nor
the doctor took her clothes and she had not provided her wearing clothes to
the police. When FIR was lodged accused had absconded and after 5/6
months he was arrested. She does not want the child. The child has been
given to someone by the brother of accused. Her father had brought up the
child for one year. She used to wear Bhurka at home but not at the time
when she used to work. Only one room is in her house where they used to
prepare and take the meals and in the said room, occurrence had taken place.
During the days when she became pregnant none came in her house. Before
the occurrence, accused used to come to their house because he was her
Uncle (Puffa). Before occurrence, she had no illicit relations with the
accused. After registration of FIR, police had come to their house. She had
earlier given statement to police and thereafter before the Judge. Her mother
is alive and is a simple/rustic lady.
PW-5 Mohd Sharief (father of prosecutrix, witness to prove FIR) in
examination-in-chief has deposed, that he identifies the accused. About 3
years ago, he had gone to Srinagar for labour and when he came back, he
saw that abdomen of her daughter was bulky. On enquiry, her daughter had
disclosed that she was pregnant and conceived the child from Liaqat Ali.
Thereafter he filed a report at Ramsoo Police Station. The statement was
recorded in the court. Abdul Guffar was also accompanying him for filing
the report. The objection raised by defence counsel for the exhibiting of
statement recorded under Section 164-A Cr.P.C was over ruled and the
statement of the witness under Section 164-A Cr.P.C was exhibited as
EXTP-5 on the admission of the witness of the contents of the statement
under section 164-A Cr.P.C. The contents of the supardnama of the child
was also admitted by the witness and the same has already been exhibited as
EXTP-3/1. In cross-examination has deposed, that Abdul Guffar has also
put his signatures on EXTP-3/1. He has further stated that he remained in
Kashmir for 06 months. He was working with Ashraf contractor in Kashmir.
No other person from his village was working there. There are two more
houses near his house and he is having cordial relation with them. Report
was filed in the police station and he is unable to say who has written it, as
he is unable to recollect the memory. The statement of the victim was also
recorded in the court. He is an illiterate person and he is unable to say
whether his statement was recorded after 05 months, rather he was brought
by the police for recording his statement. There was no police personnel
while recording his statement by Presiding Officer.
PW-6 Abdul Guffar Bali (witness to seizure of child) in examination-in-
chief has deposed, that he identifies the accused present in the court. The
contents of the seizure memo of child are correct and bears his signature and
the said seizure memo has already been exhibited as EXTP3/1. In cross-
examination has stated that he has signed two papers. The father of the
victim has also signed the said seizure memo of child apart from him. These
documents were prepared after 20/25 days after the registration of FIR.
Child was born out after one and a half month and the said child has been
given on supardnama after two days of his delivery. He has never seen the
victim during pregnancy.
PW-7 Mohd Reyaz SPO/654 (witness to seizure of child) in examination-
in-chief has stated that he identifies the accused. It is on 29.01.2012 he
alongwith PP Incharge Ukhral went to hospital Banihal where the victim
had given a birth to a child. The said child was handed over to the victim on
the supardnama and in this regard documents were prepared. He has also put
his signature as witness on the said memo. Seizure memo of child
appended with the file bears his signature and the contents of the seizure
memo are also correct and exhibited as EXTP 6. The contents of the memo
of supardnama are also correct and it has already been exhibited as EXTP-
3/1. The documents were prepared in the Police Station Ramsoo.
PW-8 Mohd Mudasir (Govt. Teacher in Primary School Digog, witness to
prove D.O.B certificate of prosecutrix/victim) in examination-in-chief
has deposed, that he identifies the victim who is daughter of Mohd Sharief.
He was posted as a teacher in Govt. Upper Primary School Digog. The
victim was admitted in the school on 16.04.2001 and her date of birth has
been written as 12.12.1995 as per admission No. 209. The admission record
of the school was issued which bears the signature of headmaster on
16.05.2012 alongwith his signature. As per original record the contents of
the certificate (Mark-A) issued by him are, correct. In cross-examination
has deposed, that victim was admitted in his school and during those days he
was not posted there. When the certificate was issued neither he was the
admission Incharge nor headmaster. Mr. Devinder Singh was the Incharge
Headmaster. It is correct to say that he has prepared the certificate on the
direction of the police.
8. The 1st argument canvassed by Ld. Counsel for appellant/convict is, that
there has been delay of 8 months in lodging FIR, the delay has remained un-
explained, which leaves a mark of doubt to treat the testimony of prosecutrix
as natural and truthful to inspire confidence, which gives rise to sense of
doubt regarding the genuineness and credibility of the prosecution case.
It is apt to reiterate here, that the first information report (FIR) in a
criminal case is an extremely vital and valuable piece of evidence for the
purpose of corroborating the oral evidence adduced at the trial. The
importance of FIR can hardly be overestimated from the stand point of the
accused. The object of insisting upon prompt lodging of the report to the
police in respect of commission of an offence is to obtain early information
regarding the circumstance in which the crime was committed, the names of
the actual culprits and the part played by them as well as the names of
eyewitnesses present at the scene of occurrence. Delay in lodging the first
information report quite often results in embellishment which is a creature
of afterthought. On account of delay the report not only gets bereft of the
advantage of the spontaneity danger creeps in of the introduction of colored
version, exaggerated account or concocted story as a result of deliberation
and consultation. It is, therefore, essential that the delay in the lodging of
first information report should be satisfactorily explained. Be it clearly
stated, that delay in lodging FIR in cases under Section 376 IPC would
depend upon facts of each case, regard being had to the trauma suffered by
the prosecutrix and various other factors such as fear of social stigma. In the
case in hand, FIR has been lodged on 04-12-2011 after a laps of about 8
months from the date of occurrence i.e. 04-04-2011. It is admitted case of
the prosecution that there is a delay of about 8 months in lodging the FIR.
The prosecutrix has satisfactorily explained the delay that she was under the
threat of being killed by appellant/convict and therefore when her father
came at home from Kashmir and enquired from her regarding her putting on
flesh, she told her father that she is having child of accused in her womb.
The important thing that the court has to bear in mind is that what is lost by
a rape victim is the face. The victim loses value as a person. Ours is a
conservative society and therefore, a women and moreso a young unmarried
women will not put her reputation in peril by alleging falsely about forcible
sexual assault. Hon’ble Supreme Court of India while observing that the
evidence of prosecutrix does not need corroboration for sustaining
conviction of accused where prosecutrix has no motive to falsely implicate
the accused risking her own reputation, in a case law titled State of U.P.—
Appellant Versus Chhoteylal—Respondent [2011 (1) Supreme 418] in para
(22) The important thing that the court has to bear in mind is
that what is lost by a rape victim is face. The victim loses value
as a person. Ours is a conservative society and, therefore, a
woman and moreso a young unmarried woman will not put
her reputation in peril by alleging falsely about forcible
sexual assault. In examining the evidence of the prosecutrix the
courts must be alive to the conditions prevalent in the Indian
society and must not be swayed by beliefs in other countries.
The courts must be sensitive and responsive to the plight of the
female victim of sexual assault. Society’s belief and value
systems need to be kept uppermost in mind as rape is the worst
form of woman’s oppression. A forcible sexual assault brings
in     humiliation,     feeling    of     disgust,    tremendous
emotional scar to a victim and it is, therefore, most unlikely
of a woman, and moreso by a young woman, roping in
attaches to the victim of rape in Indian society ordinarily rules
out the leveling of false accusations. An Indian woman
traditionally will not concoct an untruthful story and bring
charges of rape for the purpose of blackmail, hatred, spite or
revenge. This Court has repeatedly laid down the guidelines as
to how the evidence of the prosecutrix in the crime of rape
should be evaluated by the court. The observations made in the
case of Bharwada Bhoginbhai Hirjibhai v. State of Gujarat
(1983) 3 SCC 217 deserve special mention as, in our view, these
must be kept in mind invariably while dealing with a rape case.
This Court observed as follows:
“9. In the Indian setting, refusal to act on the testimony
of a victim of sexual assault in the absence of
corroboration as a rule, is adding insult to injury. Why
should the evidence of the girl or the woman who
complains of rape or sexual molestation be viewed with
the aid of spectacles fitted with lenses tinged with doubt,
disbelief or suspicion? To do so is to justify the charge of
male chauvinism in a male dominated society. We must
corroboration and subject it to relentless and remorseless
cross- examination. And we must do so with a logical,
and not an opinionated, eye in the light of probabilities
with our feet firmly planted on the soil of India and with
our eyes focused on the Indian horizon. We must not be
mores, its own permissive values, and its own code of life.
Corroboration may be considered essential to establish a
sexual offence in the backdrop of the social ecology of the
western world. It is wholly unnecessary to import the said
concept on a turnkey basis and to transplant it on the
atmosphere, attitudes, mores, responses of the Indian
society, and its profile. The identities of the two worlds
are different. The solution of problems cannot therefore
be identical..........”
Ratio decidendi deduced from the cases law (Supra) makes the legal
proposition abundantly clear, “that evidence of prosecutrix does not need
corroboration for sustaining conviction of accused where the prosecutrix had
no motive to falsely implicate the accused risking her own reputation, a
young unmarried woman will not put her reputation in peril by alleging
falsely about forcible sexual assault, the courts must be sensitive and
responsive to the plight of the female victim of sexual assault, society’s
belief and value systems need to be kept uppermost in mind as rape is the
worst form of woman’s oppression, a forcible sexual assault brings in
humiliation, feeling of disgust, tremendous embarrassment, sense of shame,
trauma and lifelong emotional scar to a victim and it is therefore most
unlikely of a woman and moreso by a young woman roping in somebody
falsely in the crime of rape, in the Indian setting refusal to act on the
testimony of a victim of sexual assault in the absence of corroboration as a
rule is adding insult to injury and therefore the sole testimony of prosecutrix
without corroboration can be relied upon for sustaining conviction against
accused, a woman’s body is not a man’s plaything and he cannot take
advantage of it in order to satisfy his lust and desire by fooling a woman into
consenting to sexual intercourse simply because he wants to indulge in it ”.
We, in view of the settled legal position aforesaid, are of the
opinion, that as the prosecutrix who is minor has no motive to falsely
implicate the appellant/accused risking her own reputation in peril by
alleging falsely about forcible sexual assault by appellant. The delay of 08
months in lodging FIR by the prosecutrix (victim) has been reasonably
explained by her. Arguments portrayed by Ld. Counsel for appellant/convict
that the delay in the case in hand has not been satisfactorily explained by the
prosecutrix, in view of the aforesaid discussion, are not worth acceptance,
the same are repelled, rejected and discarded.
9. The 2nd argument portrayed by Ld. Counsel for appellant/convict is, that the
prosecutrix has never mentioned in her statement recorded before the trial
court that appellant/convict has ever committed rape upon her, she has only
stated that the appellant/convict committed "Beparadgi" upon her, which
by no stretch of imagination can be construed as rape.
We have thoroughly scanned the deposition of the prosecutrix made
by her before the trial court. Prosecutrix/victim (PW-3) in her examination-
in-chief before the trial court has categorically tendered evidence, “that she
was alone in her house, accused came there, committed her bepardagi and
told her that if she narrated the incident/occurrence to anyone he would cut
her into pieces, she felt ashamed and did not tell it to anyone, whereby, she
got pregnant and when her father asked her as to why her belly has got
swollen, she then told her father that she is having a child of the accused in
her womb, whereafter, the report was lodged in police station, her statement
was got recorded by police before Judge u/s 164-A Cr.pc, whose contents
are true and correct.” Deposition of Pw-3 (prosecutrix) made before the trial
court categorically establishes/proves that accused entered in her house and
committed her bepardagi. The word “bepardagi” is Urdu vernacular word
which clearly means to undress or make someone nude. The prosecutrix has
testified the correctness of the contents of her statement recorded u/s 164-A
Cr.pc before Judicial Magistrate during the course of investigation which
clearly establishes/proves that she was subjected to the act of forcible sexual
intercourse/rape by appellant/accused. Needless to say that the statement of
the witness has to be read as a whole and merely by laying a stress on part of
statement on particular word the accused cannot derive any benefit.
Arguments advanced by Ld. Counsel for appellant/convict that the word
“bepardagi” does not mean rape and the prosecutrix nowhere has stated
before the trial court that she was subjected to forcible sexual
intercourse/rape, in view of the cogent, credible and sterling quality of
evidence led by the prosecutrix, are legally unsustainable, repelled, rejected
and discarded.
10.The 3rd argument vehemently urged by learned counsel for the
appellant/convict is, that the learned trial court has considered the age of
prosecutrix as 16 years and a minor, whereas, prosecutrix has stated before
the trial court that she is illiterate, however, PW-8 Mohd Mudasir a teacher
in Govt. Upper Primary School Digog Ramban has stated before the trial
court that the prosecutrix was admitted in the school on 16.04.2001 with her
date of birth recorded as 12.12.1995, the statements of PW8 Mohd Mudasir
and that of the prosecutrix are totally contradictory to each other regarding
date of birth, however, the learned trial court has fallen into an error by
considering the prosecutrix as minor and has wrongly convicted the
appellant/convict by virtue of impugned judgment and order.
There is no doubt that the prosecutrix has stated that she has
never gone to school, but equally true is that the prosecution has examined
PW-8 Mohd Mudasir who was a teacher in Govt. Primary School Digog
Ramban to prove the date of birth certificate of the prosecutrix. Pw-8 Mohd
Mudasir     has    categorically      deposed   before  the   trial court   that
victim/prosecutrix is daughter of PW-5 Mohd. Sharief, she was admitted in
the school on 16.04.2001 with her date of birth written/reflected in the
school admission record as 12.12.1995 as per Admission No. 209 and as
per original record contents of date of birth certificate issued by him (Mark-
A) are correct. Be it noted, that the critical appreciation of the evidence of
PW-8 Mohd Mudasir clearly establishes/proves that the date of birth of the
prosecutrix is 12-12-1995. Nothing has been put by defence counsel to PW-
8 Mohd Mudasir in his cross-examination to disprove/discredit his evidence
that the date of birth of the prosecutrix is not 12-12-1995. Appreciation of
evidence of PW-8 Mohd Mudasir leads to the conclusion that the date of
birth of the prosecutrix is 12-12-1995 and at the time of occurrence on
04.04.2011 her date of birth when calculated comes to 15 years and about
04 months, and therefore, the prosecutrix/victim (PW-3) at the time of
occurrence on 04.04.2011 was minor and under 16 years of age.
In AIR 2018 SUPREME COURT 4212 [State of Madhya Pradesh V.
Preetam] Hon’ble Supreme Court while observing that the testimony of
school teacher and school certificate produced by him to prove the age of
prosecutrix is relevant and authentic document, in paragraphs 11 & 12 held
(11) In our considered view, the answer elucidated in the cross-
examination of Dr. Vasnik (PW-6) cannot be taken as a final opinion on
the age of the prosecutrix (PW-1). It is to be relevant to note that before
the trial court the prosecution has examined Bhaulal (PW-8), Head
master/Head teacher of Primary School Chor Pind Ke Par, District
Balaghat. In his evidence, Bhaulal (PW-8) has stated that the date of
birth of the prosecutrix (PW-1) was 16th May, 1981 which means that
on the date of the occurrence i.e. 6th March, 1993, the prosecutrix (PW-
1) was only aged about 12 years. The trial court has neither acted upon
the evidence of Bhaulal (PW-8) nor on the school certificate on the
ground that the person who has admitted the prosecutrix in the school
was not examined.
(12) In our considered view, the approach of the trial court was not
correct. In each and every case the prosecution cannot be expected to
examine the person who has admitted a student in the school. The
school registers are the authentic documents being maintained in
the official course, entitled to credence of much weight unless
proved otherwise. In our view, considering the evidence of head
master, Bhaulal (PW-8), and the school certificate produced by him i.e.
Ex.P/13-A, age of the victim has to be taken as 12 years at the time of
occurrence.
Ratio of the judgment (Supra) makes the legal proposition abundantly clear,
that School registers are the authentic documents which are maintained in
the official course by a public servant while discharging his official duty are
entitled to credence of much weight unless proved otherwise, and the School
certificate regarding the age of victim/prosecutrix in the case in hand has to
be believed as genuine & authentic document and a relevant fact u/s 35 of
the Evidence Act. Ratio of the judgment (Supra) squarely apply to the facts
of the case in hand. It is pertinent to mention here, that the date of birth
certificate of the prosecutrix/victim (PW-3) Mark-A has been prepared by
PW-8 Mohd Mudasir a Govt. Teacher being a public servant in discharge of
his official duty after comparing it with the original record/register, is a
genuine & authentic document and is a relevant fact admissible u/s 35 of the
Evidence Act, hence, is conclusive proof regarding age of the prosecutrix.
Therefore, the date of birth of the prosecutrix is proved as 12-12-1995 and at
the relevant time of occurrence on 04-4-2011 her age was 15 years and
about 4 months and she was minor. The judgments relied by Ld. Counsel for
appellant/convict reported in (i) 2013 Legal Eagle (SC) 182 [Rajesh Patel
versus State of Jharkhand], (ii) 2009(8) Supreme 20 [Sunil-Appellant
versus State of Haryana-Respondent] & (iii) 2011 Legal Eagle (SC) 523
[Krishan Kumar Malik versus State of Haryana] in view of the facts of the
case in hand and the evidence adduced by the prosecution before the trial
court, are quite distinguishable. Arguments, therefore, putforth by Ld.
Counsel for appellant/convict that the prosecutrix at the time of occurrence
was major and consenting party, are legally unsustainable, repelled, rejected
and discarded.
11.The 4th argument putforth by Ld. Counsel for appellant/convict is, that for
non-examination of material witnesses of the prosecution viz; I.O and
doctor, the prosecution        case has suffered serious dent, which has cast
serious doubt upon the credibility and genuineness of the prosecution case.
It is apt to reiterate here, that Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in a
case law titled Ganga Singh—Appellant Versus State of Madhya
Pradesh—Respondent [(2013) Supreme (SC) 594] held, that where the
accused has failed to prove defence of false implication and where there are
some defects in the investigation, that cannot be ground for acquittal of
accused. Furthermore, a Division Bench of Hon’ble Supreme Court of India
(comprising of K.T. Thomas & A.P. Mishra JJ, their Lordships the then
were the Hon’ble Judges of Supreme Court) in a case law reported in 1999
(4) Crimes 171 (SC) Supreme Court of India [State of Karnataka—
Appellant Versus K. Yarappa Reddy—Respondent)] in a case of murder
trial under section 302 IPC, while appreciating the role of investigating
officer (I/O) held, that criminal justice system should not be made the
casualty for the wrongs committed by the investigating officers, and even if
the investigation is illegal or suspicious, rest of the evidence must be
scrutinized independently otherwise criminal law will plummet to the level
of investigating officer ruling the roost and the court must have
predominance in criminal trials. In the case in hand, I/O’s of the case
namely PW10 Irfan Wani SI (I.O of initial investigation) & PW11 Sukhdev
Singh Jamwal (Inspector/SHO No. 4364/NGO/I.O have not been examined
by the prosecution for reasons best known to it. In terms of the ratios of the
judgments (Supra) the criminal trial should not be made the casualty for the
wrongs committed by the I/O or for the non-examination of the I/O’s if rest
of the evidence is reliable. In the case in hand, PW-3 Prosecutrix/victim in
her deposition before the trial court has categorically proved that she was
subjected to forcible sexual intercourse/rape by appellant/convict. We, in
view of the evidence available on record and settled legal position, are of the
opinion, that as the prosecutrix an unmarried (minor) has no motive to
falsely implicate the appellant/convict risking her own reputation in peril by
alleging falsely about forcible sexual assault by appellant, therefore, even if
the I/O’s, doctor and even the mother of the prosecutrix have remained
unexamined by the prosecution, it does not dent or cast a serious doubt upon
the credibility of sole testimony of the prosecutrix. The judgments relied
upon by the Ld. Counsel for appellant/convict reported in, (i) 2012 Legal
Eagle (SC) 369 [Rai Sandeep @ Deepu versus State of NCT of Delhi & (ii)
2017 Legal Eagle (J&K) 615 [State of J&K versus Sham Singh & Ors.] in
view of the facts of the case and the settled legal position, are of no help to
the appellant/convict.
12. After churning the entire prosecution evidence by us being the first court of
appeal, we are of the considered view that the prosecution has been able to
prove    charges    punishable   under   Sections    376/506    RPC     against
appellant/convict beyond any reasonable doubt, and therefore, his
conviction for the said charges deserve to be upheld. The net result now
surfaces is, that instant appeal stands dismissed. Be it noted, that the trial
court vide it’s judgment of conviction and order dated 12-01-2021 rendered
in case File No. 02/Challan has sentenced appellant/convict to undergo
rigorous imprisonment (RI) for a period of 20 years and to pay fine of Rs.
50000/- for commission of offence u/s 376 RPC and 2 years imprisonment
for commission of offence u/s 506 RPC in default whereof the
appellant/convict shall further undergo simple imprisonment for 6 months
with further direction that the fine deposited by the appellant/convict shall
be paid to the prosecutrix and all the sentences shall run concurrently. It is
pertinent to mention here, that the FIR in the case in hand has been lodged
on 04-12-2011 for commission of offence of rape u/s 376 RPC committed
on 04-04-2011. As per the Jammu & Kashmir Criminal Law Amendment
Act 2013 (Act No. XI of 2014) the maximum punishment for commission of
offence of rape as mandated u/s 376 RPC is rigorous imprisonment for life
and minimum punishment shall not be less than rigorous imprisonment for
10 years and also fine. As the offence of rape has been committed by
appellant/convict in the year 2011, therefore, for imposing sentences upon
appellant/convict the provisions contained before the Amendment Act of
2013 will apply, therefore, for punishment of rape the minimum punishment
shall not be less than 7 years which may extend to life imprisonment or for
10 years and fine also. Ld. Counsel for appellant/convict has strenuously
argued, that at present appellant/convict is having age of 34 years, is a
young married man having wife, children and parents to look after, belongs
to very poor family and is the only bread earning member of his entire
family, therefore, deserves lenient view in imposing sentences. On the
contrary Ld. GA has argued, that the trial court has imposed the sentences
which is proportionate to the crime committed by the appellant. We have
been informed by Ld. Counsel for appellant/convict and Ld. GA that during
the pendency of the trial/appeal the prosecutrix (PW-3) has also solemnized
marriage. Prosecutrix also belongs to a poor family of rural area and her cry
for justice cannot be ignored, as by the crime committed by
appellant/convict, the prosecutrix has suffered physical agony and mental
trauma which is incalculable. Offence of rape is grave in nature and is the
most hated crime in the society. Taking into consideration the mitigating
circumstances projected by the appellant/convict, we take a lenient view and
uphold the conviction, but only modify the sentence of 20 years rigorous
imprisonment imposed upon appellant/convict to minimum sentence of 7
years (RI) for commission of offence of rape u/s 376 RPC without altering
the fine component of Rs. 50000/-. However, the sentence imposed by the
trial court for commission of offence u/s 506 RPC for 2 years simple
imprisonment and fine component shall remain unaltered. Criminal
confirmation reference No. & dated Nil is answered accordingly. Criminal
Conviction Appeal is disposed off and after due compilation under rules
shall be consigned to record. Registry to send the record alongwith copy of
the judgment to the concerned trial court for information. Jail
Superintendent where appellant/convict is presently lodged be also informed
accordingly.