The matter comes upon an application preferred on behalf of
the respondents with the preliminary objection regarding the
maintainability of the present writ petition.
It has been averred in the application that Sections 14 and
15 of the Central Administrative Tribunal Act, 1985 (‘the Act of
(2 of 5)              [CW-7261/2018]
1985’) provide for a specific bar in the matters pertaining to the
recruitment to any All India Service or to any Civil Service of the
Union. It has been submitted that the jurisdiction to decide to
such matters lies with the Central Administrative Tribunal (‘CAT’)
and in terms of Section 15(4), there is a specific bar for exercise
of such jurisdiction by any other Authority or Tribunal.
Section 15(4) of the Act of 1985 reads as under:-
“15. Jurisdiction, powers and authority of State
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby
declared that the jurisdiction, powers and
authority of the Administrative Tribunal for a
State shall not extend to, or be exercisable in
relation to, any matter in relation to which the
jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Central
Administrative         Tribunal            extends  or    is
exercisable.”
Learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon the Hon’ble
Apex Court judgments passed in Union of India & Ors. v. Deep
Chand Pandey and Anr. reported in 1992 (4) SCC 432
(decided on 27.08.1992); Union of India (UOI) & Ors. v.
Parma Nand reported in 1989 (2) SCC 177 (decided on
14.03.1989); judgment passed by High Court of Himachal Pradesh
in Vinod Kumar v. H.R.T.C. & Ors. reported in ILR 1995 1 HP
121 (decided on 30.12.1994) and order of a Co-ordinate Bench of
this Court in S.B. Civil Writ Petition No.5192/2020; Prahalad
Kumawat v. All India Institute of Medical Sciences & Anr.
(decided on 09.09.2020).
Per contra, learned counsel for the respondents relied upon
the judgment passed by the High Court of Delhi in Har Kaur
(3 of 5)               [CW-7261/2018]
Chadha & Ors. v. NCT of Delhi & Ors.; Writ Petiton (Civil)
No.11498/2016 (decided on 05.09.2019). Learned counsel for
the     respondents      submits         that       at     present the   Central
Administrative Tribunal is functioning and therefore, the petitioner
be relegated to the said Authority.
In the present matter, the notices had been issued to the
respondent Authorities on 29.05.2018.
The order dated 29.05.2018 reads as under:-
“It is submitted by the petitioner that this Court
on previous occasions on account of non-availability
of the Bench of Central Administrative Tribunal has
granted indulgence and relies on certain orders and
judgments of Hon’ble Supreme Court and other High
Courts, wherein observations in this regard have
been made.
In view of the submissions made, issue notice.
Issue notice of the stay application also, returnable
in five weeks.
Notices when issued be given ‘dasti’ to the
petitioner/learned counsel for the petitioner.
In the meanwhile and until further orders, the
respondents are directed to keep one post of Section
Supervisor (Examination Quota) vacant while filling
the said posts vide the Departmental Examination
scheduled to be held in June, 2018.”
A perusal of the above order makes it clear that the present
writ petition was entertained by this Court on the ground that the
Bench of the Central Administrative Tribunal was not available/not
functioning at that relevant time.
The application as preferred by the respondents also does
not controvert the said fact that the Tribunal was not functioning
or not available at the time when the present writ petition was
filed. There is no dispute on the position of law that an alternative
remedy does lie before the CAT in the service matters pertaining
(4 of 5)             [CW-7261/2018]
to All India Services or Civil Services governed by the Union. But
in the present matter, it is clear on record that the writ petition
had been entertained only because of the fact that the competent
Authority i.e. the CAT was not functioning/available at the relevant
time. Therefore, any litigant cannot be left remediless. It cannot
be assumed that a litigant would keep waiting for the adjudication
of his disputes, if the competent Forum or the Authority is not
functioning. It cannot also be the intention of the legislation to
make a litigant suffer because of the inaction or lacuna on the part
of the system. The fact of the CAT not functioning at the relevant
time being not disputed, the dismissal of the writ petition at this
stage i.e. after four years of filing of the same and being
entertained by this Court, would not be in the interest of justice
now only on the ground of alternative remedy. It is not because of
any fault on the part of the petitioner that the writ petition had
been filed before this Court and the same being entertained once,
now after a period of four years and after the service of the
notices on the respondents, it would not be appropriate to
relegate the parties to the Tribunal.
So far as the judgments relied on by the learned counsel for
the respondents are concerned, at the cost of the repetition, it
would be appropriate to note that there is no dispute or second
opinion about the fact and the law that the jurisdiction to entertain
the service matters pertaining to All India Services lie with the
Central Administrative Tribunal. But as observed above, because
of the peculiar facts and circumstances of the present case, this
Court is not inclined to accept the application of the respondents
for dismissal of the writ petition on the ground of alternative
(5 of 5)                [CW-7261/2018]
remedy. As held in Har Kaur Chadha’s case (supra), to relegate
the petitioner to an alternative remedy at this stage would
needlessly cause delay and prejudice the petitioner.
In view of the above observations, the application as filed by
the respondents is dismissed.
List the writ petition for filing of reply on 11.07.2022.