1.      The Petitioner before this Court has filed the present writ petition
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India in public interest, praying for
the following reliefs:-
“(a) Issue directions to the respondent no 1 to 3 to
identify the persons who caused damage to public
properties during unlawful protest with respect to the
citizenship (amendment) act, 2019 and to recover the
damages from them.
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 2893/2020                                                Page 1 of 3
(b) To issue directions, thereby setting up an
independent machinery to investigate the damage
caused and to award compensation related thereto.
(c) Issue or pass any writ, direction or order, which
this Hon'ble Court may deem fit and proper under the
facts and circumstances of the case.”
2.      The contention of the Petitioners herein is that a certain group of
protesters damaged public property during protests with respect to the
Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019 and, therefore, the Respondents may be
directed to identify such persons who have caused the said damage to public
property. The Petitioners also pray that an independent machinery may be
set up to investigate the damage so that damage can be assessed and
compensation can be paid.
3.      Respondent No.3 has filed an affidavit in compliance of the Order
dated 21.03.2022. The affidavit reveals that Hon’ble Mr. Justice Sunil Gaur,
a former Judge of this Court has been appointed as the Claim Commissioner
to investigate the damages, and to award compensation relating to the riots
that took place during the protest, which are the subject matter of the present
writ petition. The notification dated 13.04.2020 to that effect has been
placed on record.
4.      So far as the other aspect of registration of criminal cases is
concerned, the affidavit reveals that Delhi Police has filed details of public
property damaged during the protest and as many as 23 FIRs have been
registered in the matter. The stage of criminal case has also been reflected in
the chart. Further, Delhi Police has also quantified the damage caused to the
private property as a result of the protests. It is stated that as many as 518
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 2893/2020                                                 Page 2 of 3
FIRs have been registered. Meaning thereby, the Police has already taken
action in the matter.
5.      In the considered opinion of this Court, once the Claim Commissioner
has already been appointed and is dealing with the issue in question for grant
of compensation and further considering that FIRs have been registered, no
further orders are required to be passed in the present writ petition.
6.      Accordingly, the petition is disposed of, along with pending
application(s), if any.
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 2893/2020                                                 Page 3 of 3