Ms.Pradnya Talekar i/by Talekar and Associates for the petitioners.
Mr.R.N. Dhorde, Special Counsel a/w Mr.D.R. Kale, Government
Pleader for the respondent no.1.
Mr.P.R. Katneshwarkar h/f Mr.S.N. Gaikwad for the respondent no.3.
Mr.R.A. Tambe for the respondent nos.4, 6 to 9 & 13.
Mr.Mazhar A. Jahagirdar for the respondent no.5.
Mr.R. R. Karpe for the respondent no.10.
Mr.R.S. Deshmukh, Senior Counsel i/by D.R. Deshmukh for the
Mr.R.N. Dhorde, Special Counsel a/w Mr.D.R. Kale, Government
Pleader for the respondent no.1.
Mr.P.R. Katneshwarkar h/f Mr.S.N. Gaikwad for the respondent no.4.
Mr.N.L. Jadhav for the respondent no.5.
Mr.Mazhar A. Jahagirdar for the respondent no.8.
Mr.R.A. Tambe for the respondent no.9.
.               The petitioner Uttamrao Rambhaji Shelke in PIL No.98 of
2021 has prayed for quashing and setting aside the impugned order
dated 16th September 2021 passed by the Principal Secretary, Law and
Judiciary Department, Mantralaya, Mumbai appointing the respondent
nos.3 to 14 as Members of Managing Committee of Shree Sai Baba
Sansthan Trust, Shirdi (hereinafter referred to as “the said sansthan trust”)
Taluka Rahata, District Ahmednagar. The petitioner has also prayed for
an order and direction against the State of Maharashtra to constitute a
scrutiny committee headed by a retired Judge of this Court as per Section
21(2)(ii) of the Shree Saibaba Sansthan Trust (Shirdi) Act, 2004 (for
short “the said Act”) by issuing writ of mandamus.
2.              The petitioner Nikil Manohar Dorle has filed PIL No.100
of 2021 which is transferred from Nagpur Bench to this Bench inter
ppn/kvm/vai                              9                pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
alia praying for writ of certiorari for quashing and setting aside the
impugned notification/order dated 16th September 2021 and for other
reliefs. The reliefs sought in both the petitions and the submissions
advanced by both the parties being identical, with the consent of the
parties, the petitions were heard together and are being disposed off by
this common order. Some of the relevant facts for deciding both the PILs
3.              The petitioner in PIL No.98 of 2021 claims to be a
permanent resident of Pimpalwadi, Shirdi, Tal. Rahata, Dist. Ahmednagar
and an ardent devotee of the said sansthan trust. The petitioner also
claims to be a life member as well as patron member of Bhakta Mandal
of the said sansthan trust and claims to have filed several PILs including
PIL No.120 of 2019 which was filed for seeking directions to appoint a
new Managing Committee of the said sansthan trust.
4.              The petitioner in PIL No.100 of 2021 claims to be a social
worker and is a resident of Koradi, Nagpur. The said petitioner claims to
be an ardent devotee and devout follower of Shri Sai Baba, Shirdi. The
petitioner in PIL No.98 of 2021 has given a chequered history of the
management of the said sansthan trust.
5.              According to the petitioner, Shree Sai Baba passed away in
the year 1918. On 13th February 1922, the District Court granted
approval to the scheme of the Sai Baba Sansthan, Shirdi. The
Management committee was to include 5 life-trustees to be appointed by
the District Court who would be ex-officio members in their lifetime
ppn/kvm/vai                            10                 pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
whereas 10 other trustees were to be elected from amongst the Bhakta
Mandal for a term of three years.
6.              It is the case of the petitioner that a body of the five
members was constituted and the immovable property of the trust was
handed over to them, for their lifetime. These life trustees were highly
qualified and accomplished persons from different walks of life and
devotees of Shree Sai Baba. According to the petitioner, in case of
vacancy created in these five life-trustees, a person from amongst the
Bhakta Mandal could have been appointed with prior approval of the
District Court. The first elected body of ten persons from amongst the
Bhakta Mandal was headed by Sant. Ganesh Dattatray Sahastrabuddhe
alias Dasganu Maharaj who was an ardent devotee of Shree Sai Baba.
7.              Shree Sai Baba Sansthan Trust was registered under the
provisions of Bombay Trust Act, 1950 under the name of “Shirdi
Sansthan of Shri Saibaba” at Shirdi, District Ahmednagar, popularly
known as “Shree Shirdi Sai Baba Sansthan Trust of Shirdi” vests in the
Board of Management, under a scheme framed by the City Civil Court,
Bombay in Charity Suit No.3457 of 1960 under its order dated 18 th
October 1982 confirmed by this Court in First Appeal No.320 of 1983
decided on 23rd July 1984. On expiration of the term of five years of
the previous Board of Management of Shirdi Sansthan of Shri Sai Baba
Trust, the Charity Commissioner by an order dated 31 st August 1999,
reconstituted the Board of Management of the said Trust. Two writ
petitions were filed in this Court impugning the order of re-constitution
of the Board of Management dated 31st August 1999. By an order passed
ppn/kvm/vai                               11                   pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
by this Court, appointment of one of the trustees had been quashed and
set aside.
8.              In the year 2004, State of Maharashtra considered it
expedient that the development and management of this important and
popular Trust should not be hampered or in any way suffer by avoidable
litigation, and that there should be a separate law to re-constitute the said
SansthanTrust and to provide for the efficient management of the same by
a Committee directly under the supervision and control of the State
Government to enable the Trust to carry out its charitable activities more
effectively and efficiently and to be able to give more facilities for its
devotees and to undertake wider welfare activities from its surplus funds
for the general public and thus the State Government enacted Shree Sai
Baba Sansthan Trust (Shirdi) Act, 2004. Section 2 (c) defines "Bhakta
Mandal" means the Shree Sai Baba Bhakta Mandal referred and
recognised under section 19.
5. (1) For the purpose of management of the Sansthan Trust, on or
after the appointed day, a Committee to be called "the Shree Sai
Baba Sansthan Management Committee" shall be constituted by
the State Government as provided in sub-section (2).
(2) The State Government shall, by notification in the Official
Gazette, appoint, a Chairman, Vice-Chairman and not more than
[fifteen] other members to constitute the Committee as envisaged
under sub-section (1) Provided that, out of the total number of
members not less than one member shall be a woman and one
ppn/kvm/vai                              12                 pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
member shall be from the socially and economically weaker
sections.
[Provided further that, out of the total number of members, not
less than eight members including the Vice-Chairman, shall be
persons having educational background with professional or
specialized knowledge, qualifications and practical experience
in one or more of the fields such as law, Business Management,
Medicine or Rural Development.]
(3) The President of the Shirdi Nagar Panchayat shall be the ex-
officio member of the Committee.
(4) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the Committee
shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having
perpetual succession and a common seal with power to acquire,
hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and
to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued.
10.             Section 7 of the said Act provides that a member shall be
appointed for a period of three years. Section 8 provides the other
conditions for becoming a member which reads thus :-
8. A person to be appointed as a member of the Committee shall be
(a) the permanent resident of the State of Maharashtra ; and
(b) a devote of Shree Sai Baba and shall, prior to his appointment
as a member make such declaration in the prescribed form.
Section 9 provides as to when member shall be disqualified for
appointment as a deemed member.
11.              Section 10 provides for powers of the State Government to
appoint a new member when an existing member :
(b) is for a continuous period of six months absent from India, without
obtaining leave from the Committee;
(c) leaves India for the purpose of residing abroad;
(d) desires to be relieved;
(e) refuses to act or neglects to perform his duties as such member ;
(f) is removed or his membership is terminated by the State
(g) ceases or is disqualified to be or to continue to be, a member
under any of the provisions of the said Act.
12.              Section 12 of the said Act provides that no act or proceeding
of the Committee shall be invalid by reason only of the existence of any
vacancy amongst its members or any defect in its constitution or in
appointment of any member. Section 17 of the said Act provides duties
and powers of committee. Section 18 of the said Act provides for
constitution of Advisory Council. Section 19 of the said Act provides for
Constitution of Bhakta Mandal.
13.              Section 20 of the said Act provides for the Trust having its
own       fund    to be called “the Shree Sai Baba Sansthan Trust Fund”
(hereinafter referred to as “The trust Fund”) along with provisions to its
constituents and management. Section 21 of the said Act provides that (1)
The Trust Fund shall, subject to the provisions of the Income Tax Act,
1961, be utilised or expended by the Committee for all or any of the
ppn/kvm/vai                             14                 pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
purposes specifically mentioned therein. The said Sansthan Trust is also
empowered to give grant-in-aid to the Government Departments,
Government Corporations, Government Companies or Government
undertakings for providing or augmenting infrastructural facilities such as
bus terminals, railway station, airport and similar infrastructural facilities,
for the convenience of the devotees. The above is the subject to provision
of Sub-section 21(1) wherein the trust may exercise the above mentioned
powers only with previous sanction of the State Government and subject
to such maximum limit and such terms and conditions, as may be
specified by the State Government.
14.             Section 25 of the said Act provides that the State
Government is empowered to frame the said Rules under the said Act.
Section 26        of the said Act provides that the State Government is
empowered to give general directions as to the matters of policy to be
followed by the committee in respect of their powers and duties or in
the matter of administration of the sansthan trust or any matter ancillary
or incidental thereto, and in particular, for any action to be taken for the
purpose of maintaining discipline and order during the festivals in, or
connected with the Temple.
15.             Section 27 of the said Act provides that the State
Government is empowered to           take inspection of any movable or
immovable property, records, correspondence, plans, accounts and other
documents relating to the said Sansthan Trust. Section 28 provides that
the State Government, may, if it is of the opinion that it is necessary or
expendient so to do, call for and examine the record of any proceedings
ppn/kvm/vai                            15                  pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
or decision or order of the Executive Officer or of the Committee with a
view to satisfy itself as to the legality of such proceedings or the
correctness, legality or propriety of any decision or order made
thereunder, and if, in any case, it appears to the State Government, that
any such decision or order should be modified, annulled or reversed or
remitted for reconsideration, it may pass orders accordingly. Under
Section 29 of the said Act, the committee has to prepare the annual
report including the Auditor’s report for each financial year ending on the
31st March showing therein the financial status and the details of income
and expenditure of the Trust and the report of the Scrutiny Committee
together with a detailed list of donee institutions (with full address), to
whom financial assistance was granted by the Trust with information
relating to the object and the amount of such financial assistance, and
submit a copy of the report to the State Government and the Charity
Commissioner not later than the 30th June of that year.
16.             Under Section 30 of the said Act, the State Government is
empowered to suspend or rescind any resolution or order etc. of
committee in certain cases. Under Section 31 of the said Act, the
members and all officers and employees of the Trust shall be deemed to
be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal
Code and section 2(c) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
17.             Under Section 34 of the said Act, the State Government
has powers after conducting due enquiry to dissolve the Committee and
constitute another Committee within a period of six months from the date
of dissolution or supersede the Committee for such period not exceeding
ppn/kvm/vai                            16                 pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
six months, as the State Government may deem fit if the State
Government is of the opinion that the Committee is not competent to
perform, or makes default in performing the duties imposed on it under
the said Act, or exceeds or abuses its powers.
18.              On 23rd August 2004, the State Government appointed a
committee comprising of 16 members of the Managing Committee for a
period of three years as the said Sansthan Trust. It is the case of the
petitioner that the said committee however, was illegally continued by
the State Government for a period of 7 years.
19.              On 13th March 2012, this Court in the said PIL No.18 of
2011 passed an order for constitution of an ad hoc committee to take
charge of the said Sansthan Trust if the State Government failed to
appoint managing committee as per the statute. This Court directed the
State Government to constitute a new “the Shree Sai Baba Sansthan
Management Committee” within a period of 15 days from the date of the
said order. It was provided that on failure of the State Government to
constitute the said Committee within the stipulated time frame of 15 days
in accordance with the provisions of Section 5 of the Act of 2004, this
Court directed that until the State Government constitutes a new
Committee, the affairs of the “Shree Sai Baba Sansthan Trust, Shirdi”
shall be supervised,monitored and looked after by a committee consisting
20.             This Court made it clear that the Principal District judge,
Ahmednagar shall be the Chairman of the said Committee and rest of the
two officers shall be the Members of the said Committee. This Court
directed that in case the State Government fails to constitute a new
Committee within the stipulated period of 15 days from the date of the
said order, “the Shree Sai Baba Sansthan Management Committee”
constituted on 23rd August 2004 is injuncted from functioning as such
and discharging its duties. This Court directed the existing Committee
and the new Committee constituted by this Court not to take any major
financial decision in respect of management of the affairs of the Sansthan
without intimating this Court.
21.             On 28th July, 2016, the State Government issued notification
appointing the trustees of the said Sansthan trust. The said notification
dated 28th July, 2019 was challenged before this Court in Public Interest
Litigation No. 150 of 2016. On 29 th November, 2017, this Court passed a
detailed judgment in Public Interest Litigation No. 102 of 2016 and
disposed off the said Public Interest Litigation and issued various
directions. On 9th October, 2018, Supreme Court did not interfere with
the said judgment delivered by this Court except the directions contained
in paragraphs (V) and (VI) of the said judgment.
22.             The Supreme Court made it clear that the position would
continue for a period of six weeks within which the order of this Court as
affirmed by the Supreme Court will be implemented. The Supreme Court
directed the State Government to implement the directions of this Court
as and when the board is reconstituted after expiry of the terms of the said
committee in July 2019. Contempt Petition bearing (C) no. 418-22 of
ppn/kvm/vai                              18                 pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
2019 against the then Principal Secretary, Law and Judiciary Department
and also the Chief Minister of the Maharashtra came to be filed before the
Supreme Court. The Supreme Court has issued notice in the said
contempt petition. The said proceedings are pending.
23.             On 2nd February, 2019, the then Principal Secretary, Law and
Judiciary Department issued a notification terminating three members of
Gajanan Kirtikar, and (c) Dr.Manisha Shyamsundar Kayande on the basis
of the report of the Four Member Committee on their failure to attend
three consecutive meetings.
24.             Sometime in the year 2019, the petitioner filed a Public
Interest Litigation bearing no.120 of 2019 seeking direction to appoint a
new managing committee of the Sansthan in accordance with the
provisions of law and a further direction to appoint an ad-hoc committee
in the meanwhile.
25.             On 9th October, 2019, this Court in Public Interest Litigation
No. 120 of 2019 appointed an ad-hoc committee consisting of (a) the
Principal District Judge, Ahmednagar, (b) The Chief Executive Officer of
the Sansthan, (c) One Delegatee not below the rank of Assistant Charity
Commissioner to be appointed by the Charity Commissioner of the State
and (d) the Additional Commissioner, Nashik Division, Nashik. It is the
case of the petitioner that on 12th March, 2021, the learned Government
Pleader made a statement before this Court that he would come with the
written instructions with regard to the steps undertaken for the formation
ppn/kvm/vai                             19                 pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
of regular committee and the period within which the regular committee
would be constituted.
26.             On 19th March, 2021, the learned Government Pleader
placed on record the communication stating that the formation of the
Committee of the Sansthan was at the final stage and sought two weeks
time. On 23rd June, 2021 and 7th July, 2021, this Court recorded the
statements made by the learned Government Pleader that the entire
process of finalizing the names of the trustees would be completed within
a period of two weeks.
27.             On 5th July, 2021, the Law and Judiciary Department of the
Government issued a notification amending the Rules framed in 2013 and
published the same in the Government Gazette. The said Rules are
already subject matter of the Writ Petition No. 4143 of 2013.
28.             On 14th January, 2021, this Court passed an order in Public
Interest Litigation No. 22 of 2020 recording a statement made by the
State Government that the formation of the new committee was
constituted. This Court directed that the State Government shall consider
the provisions of sections 5, 8 and 9 of the Shree Saibaba Sansthan Trust
Act, 2004 and the Rules framed thereunder and also the directions of this
Court dated 29th November, 2017 in Public Interest Litigation No. 102 of
2016. This Court directed that the Government shall scrupulously adhere
to the directions referred to in the said order and the expectations of this
Court under order dated 29th November, 2017 in Public Interest Litigation
No. 102 of 2016. This Court disposed off the said                Public Interest
Litigation by the said order.
29.             On 16th September, 2021, the State Government issued a
notification notifying that the said Sansthan Trust appointed 12 persons as
the members of the said Sansthan Trust for the purpose of three years
excluding (ex-officio members) from various categories. The petitioners
filed civil application bearing no. 9738 of 2021 in Public Interest
Litigation No. 120 of 2021 for amendment challenging notification dated
16th September, 2021 in view of the new committee having taken charge
from the old committee.
30.             This Court by order dated 21st September, 2021 prima facie
observed that when this Court had brought an ad-hoc committee into
existence and had empowered it to function and administer the Sansthan,
prima facie, no other managing committee could have dislodged the
committee that was constituted by this Court on the plea of the
Government having declared the formation of the new committee. This
Court adjourned the said civil application on 23 rd September, 2021 and
refrained the new committee which had alleged to have taken charge by
disloading the ad-hoc committee constituted by this Court and from
taking any policy decisions sanctioning expenditure and also refraining
from making any appointments or inducting any new members, if any,
until further orders.
31.             On 23rd September, 2021, this Court passed another order in
Civil Application No. 9738 of 2021. This Court recorded the statement
made by the learned Government Pleader and also the learned counsel for
the Sansthan Trust and continued the restrictions imposed by this Court in
order dated 21st September, 2021 until further orders.
ppn/kvm/vai                             21                   pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
32.             On 4th October, 2021, this Court passed an order in Civil
Application No. 9738 of 2021 and in batch of proceedings. This Court
recorded the statement made by the learned counsel for the petitioner
that the petitioner would prefer the new petition for impugning the
appointment of the committee members. This Court granted liberty to the
petitioner to prefer the proceedings as may be advised and continued the
directions issued in paragraph (8) of the order dated 21st September, 2021
33.             On 19th October, 2021, this Court continued the interim
orders passed on 21st September, 2021 and also the charge of the ad-hoc
committee constituted by this Court to look after the affairs of the
Sansthan Trust and disposed off the Public Interest Litigation No. 120 of
2019 considering the main prayer as infructuous. This Court granted
liberty to the petitioner to challenge the notification dated 16 th September,
2021 in a separate proceeding.
34.             On 30th November, 2021, the Supreme Court in Petition(s)
for Special Leave to Appeal (C) No(s). 17200-17203 of 2021 filed by
Ashutosh Ashkorao Kale & Ors. vs. the State of Maharashtra & Ors.
arising out of the final judgment and orders dated 14th October, 2021 and
20th October, 2021 in Public Interest Litigation No. 98 of 2021 and Public
Interest Litigation No. 100 of 2021 issued notice and stayed operation of
those orders passed by this Court until further orders. The Supreme
Court however made it clear that in the meantime, the said Shree Sai
Baba Sansthan Management Committee shall not take any major policy
decisions or financial decisions except for routine expenses for managing
day to day affairs of the committee. The Supreme Court also clarified
ppn/kvm/vai                              22                pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
that the pendency of the case would not come in the way of the High
Court in disposal of the main matter. Pursuant to the said order passed by
the Supreme Court, these proceedings were heard finally at the admission
stage by consent of parties.
The submissions made on behalf of the petitioner :-
35.             Ms. Talekar, learned counsel for the petitioner invited our
attention to section 2(d) and section 5 of the Shree Sai Baba Sansthan
Act, 2004 read with Rule 3 of the Shree Sai Baba Sansthan Trust (Shirdi)
(Appointment of Members of Management Committee and Forms of
Declaration) Rules, 2013. She submits that it was mandatory on the part
of the State Government to appoint one member from the women
category, one member from the socially and economically weaker section
category and 8 members from four categories of persons possessing
professional or specialized knowledge within the meaning of section 5(2).
36.             It is submitted that since the appointment of the trustees
appointed by the State Government are not in compliance with the said
mandatory requirement, the Committee appointed by the State
Government is not a valid committee and is void-ab-initio. The defect in
appointment of the committee members is not curable. Learned counsel
placed reliance on section 7 of the said Act and submitted that the term of
the office of member of the said committee is for three years and would
commence from the date of appointment.             Section 9 provides for
disqualification of a person to be appointed or for being a member for
various reasons set out therein.
37.             It is submitted that under section 9(f), if a person is guilty of
misconduct or who has been charge-sheeted for the offence involving
moral turpitude or is otherwise found to be unfit is disqualified from
appointment for being a member of the Sansthan Trust. She submits that
if any of the member has incurred any of the disqualifications as provided
in sub-section 9(l) of the said Act, it is the duty of the State Government
to remove such person from membership. The decision of the State
Government for removal of such person from membership is final.
38.             Learned counsel for the petitioner invited our attention to
Rule (3) and would submit that even under the said Rule, the number of
such members of the committee is prescribed as not exceeding 17
including chairman and vice-chairman.             She submits that the State
Government has not appointed any member from the ‘socially and
economically weaker section’ category. Some of the members appointed
are not appointed from the categories specifically prescribed under the
said Rule (3). She submits that Rule (4) provides for qualification for
being a member.
39.             It is submitted that there is a gross violation of Rule (4) also.
Rule (5) provides for the circumstances in which the member can be
disqualified. Rule (6) provides for appointment of members by the State
Government by nomination. A person who is to be appointed as a
member has to make a declaration in Form A to these Rules. Under Rule
(9) of the Rules, a person to be appointed as a member of committee has
to make a declaration under section 8 of the Act in Form B. She relied
upon the Schedule appended to the said Rules providing for minimum
qualification and experience under those category. She submits that the
ppn/kvm/vai                                24                 pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
members appointed by the State Government do not satisfy the minimum
qualification and experience prescribed under the said schedule.
40.             Learned counsel for the petitioner invited our attention to
notification dated 5th July, 2021 thereby amending the said rules 2013.
Clause (h) prescribed under the Rule (5) is deleted by the said
amendment. The qualification and the number of years of experience
earlier prescribed came to be reduced deliberately. It is submitted by the
learned counsel that the number of persons appointed by the State
Government as members of committee are not to the extent of the
numbers required to be appointed under the said Rules and thus the
committee appointed by the State Government is incomplete.
41.             It is submitted that the proviso to Rule (3) (2) of the Rules is
not just empty formality. She submits that the impugned notification thus
deserves to be revoked and set aside being violative of sections 5 and 9 of
the Act and Rules, 3, 5 and 6 of the said Rules. The petitioner is
permanent resident of Nagpur and is a Shri Saibaba devotee. The
petitioner has no personal interest. The public interest litigation filed by
the petitioner is for better management of the trust.
42.             Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the members
who are nominated by the State Government belong to three political
parties i.e. Shivsena, Congress and NCP. Some of the candidates who
have lost elections are appointed as committee members due to political
considerations. There are criminal cases pending against members of the
committee. The appointments should not be of persons having political
documents or affiliation. The directions issued by this Court from time to
ppn/kvm/vai                              25                 pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
time in earlier round of litigations have not been considered while
nominating these members of the committee.
43.             Learned counsel for the petitioner placed reliance on the
observations made by this Court in paragraph (151) regarding
appointment of the politicians. She submits that till 1918 Shri Sai Baba
was alive. In 1954 the idol of Shri Sai Baba was set up at Shirdi. In
1984, this Court framed a scheme Sai Baba Sansthan, Shirdi. The State
Government enacted the said Act in the year 2004. It is submitted that
there is no procedure or mode or manner prescribed or adhered by the
State Government while hand-picking the persons to be appointed as
trustees in the Shirdi Sai Baba Trust having crores of rupees of trust fund
and being a place of faith and worship of millions. She strongly placed
reliance on the observations made by this Court in the judgment dated
29th November, 2017 by the Division Bench of this Court in Public
Interest Litigation No. 102 of 2016.
44.             It is submitted that this Court has clearly held in the said
judgment that the appointments of the members of the committee of the
Sansthan Trust is not an appointment of those members in an
employment. The appointments made by the State Government under
section 5 of the said Act are liable to be tested on the touchstone of
Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India. These appointments are
made to a public office and therefore it amounts to public appointment,
though it may not be a public employment.
45.             Learned counsel strongly placed reliance on the order passed
by this Court on 30th March, 2012 in Public Interest Litigation No.27 of
ppn/kvm/vai                             26                  pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
2012 directing the State Government to frame rules. This Court recorded
that the State Government had issued notification dated 27 th March, 2012
during the pendency of the said petition appointing 15 members as
members of the said managing committee. This Court observed that the
State Government has not complied with the order of this Court on 30 th
April, 2010. This Court recorded the statement made by the petitioner
that many of the persons who have lost either assembly elections, or Zilla
Parishad elections, have been rehabilitated as members of the Managing
Committee of the said Trust. The petitioner had also averred in that
petition that two coalition partners, i.e. INC and NCP who are ruling the
State, while making appointments to the Managing Committee, have
shared the membership of the committee amongst themselves.
46.             This Court in paragraph (19) of the said judgment observed
that the very purpose for which the said Act appears to have been
enacted, namely, to avoid the litigation, is frustrated. When power is
vested with the authority, it must exercise the same for the public good.
This Court expected that the State Government at least to keep the God
away while distributing public largesses. It is submitted that this Court
clearly held that this Act is not meant for rehabilitation of the members of
the ruling political parties who are defeated in elections. This court also
observed that this Court did not find any propriety in appointing the
persons as trustees, against whom criminal cases are pending. This Court
accordingly granted interim relief and continued the ad-hoc committee
appointed by this Court by order dated 13th March, 2012 in Public Interest
Litigation No. 18 of 2011.
47.             Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that Shri
Ashutosh Kale who is appointed as a chairman from Category C (iii) of
Rule 3 (Engineering) is a sitting MLA from Kopargaon Constituency and
belongs to NCP and never practiced in Engineering. He is a full time
dedicated politician. The experience certificate of engineering produced
by him is doubtful since it is issued by a company almost at a distance of
800 km from his college in Boston. He is Vice President of Distillers
Association, Maharashtra State. He is not qualified as per guidelines in
Public Interest Litigation No. 102 of 2016.
48.             It is submitted that Shri Jagdish Sawant belongs to Shivsena
and appointed under Category C (i) of Rule 3 (Law). He is an ex-
corporator from Mumbai and has been charge-sheeted for offences in the
past. The said nomination form is not disputed by him in his affidavit in
reply at page 562-A. She relied upon news item dated 10 th January, 2010
and would submit that the said news item would clearly show that in his
presence the officials of Mumbai Municipal Corporation were beaten.
The said Shri Jagdish Sawant is also not qualified as per guidelines of this
Court in Public Interest Litigation No. 102 of 2016.
49.             It is submitted by the learned counsel that the appointment of
the Smt.Anuradha G. Adik is from Category A of Rule 3 (woman). She
belongs to NCP and is the daughter of an Ex-Minister and a political
figure of NCP. She is the president of Municipal Council, Shrirampur.
She relied upon the news item and would submit that disqualification
proceedings are initiated against Smt.Anuradha Adik for violation of
Rules. The said Smt.Anuradha Adik is also not qualified as per guidelines
of Public Interest Litigation No. 102 of 2016.
50.             Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that Shri Suhas
Aher belongs to INC and has been appointed from Category C (i) of Rule
3 (Law). He has paid membership fees on 6th September, 2021 i.e. a
month prior to the impugned notification when the temple was closed.
His close relatives viz. Shri Sudhir Tambe and Shri Balasaheb Thorat are
leaders in INC. The said Shri Suhash Aher is also thus disqualified.
51.             It is submitted by the learned counsel for the petitioner that
Shri Avinash Dandawante belongs to INC and is appointed from Category
C (iii) of Rule 3 (Engineering). He has no experience of engineering. The
first page of the service-book produced does not show the date of
resignation and it is difficult to infer the actual number of years of
experience.        The said Shri Avinash Dandawante during the work
experience, has also submitted documents showing that he was running a
petrol pump since the year 2006 and is an active party worker of INC.
She submits that Shri Avinash Dandawante is thus not eligible for being a
member of the committee of Sansthan Trust.
52.             Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that Shri Sachin
Gujar also belongs to INC and has been appointed from Category C (iii)
of Rule 3 (Engineering category).          He has been charge-sheeted for
offences in the past. She relied upon such information at page 298 of the
petition.     The said Shri Sachin Gujar has gained experience before
completion of his Degree/Diploma. Diploma in Engineering was availed
by the said Shri Sachin Gujar on the basis of the notification dated 5 th
July, 2021. She submits that the said Shri Sachin Gujar is also thus
disqualified. He is also not eligible.
53.             It is submitted by the learned counsel that Shri Rahul Kanal
belongs to Shivsena and has been appointed from D category and sub-
Rule 3 of Rule 3. The said Shri Rahul Kanal is a close associate of Shri
Aditya Thackeray. She relied upon a paper cutting to show that the
Income Tax Department has conducted raid against the said Shri Rahul
Kanal. The said Shri Rahul Kanal is also thus not eligible for being
appointed as member of the committee of the said Sansthan Trust. She
submits that the said Shri Rahul Kanal has not mentioned anything in his
reply that he was member of the of Bhakta Mandal and thus he could not
have been appointed under ‘D’ Category and under Rule 3(3).
54.             It is submitted by the learned counsel that Shri Suresh Wable
belongs to NCP and was appointed from D category and Rule 3(3). He
was an ex-trustee of the Sansthan Trust and is thus not eligible for
appointment as a member of the Committee of the said trust.
55.             Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that Shri
Jayvantrao Jadhav belongs to NCP and was appointed from D category
and Rule 3(3). He has been charge-sheeted for offences in past. It is
submitted that though he has been acquitted, the offence charge-sheeted is
of moral turpitude. He was a member of the Legislative Council, Nashik.
Shri Jayvantrao Jadhav is also not eligible for the membership of the
committee of the said Sansthan Trust.
56.             Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that Shri
Mahendra Shelke belongs to NCP and was appointed from D Category
and under Rule 3(3). He is director of Shrirampur Sahakari Sangh as
ppn/kvm/vai                               30                pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
well as Doodh Sangh. He is also not eligible according to the petitioner
for appointment as a member of the committee of the said Sansthan Trust.
57.             It is submitted that Shri Eknath Gondkar belongs to INC and
is appointed from D Category and under Rule 3(3). He is an ex-trustee of
the Sansthan and is appointed for the third time as the member of the
Sansthan. He is disqualified under section 9(1)(e) of the said Act for the
reason that when he was member of the committee of the Sansthan which
has appointed his son as a panel advocate of the Sansthan.
58.             It is submitted by the learned counsel that the alternate
remedy under sections 9(2), 30 and 34 of the Act which empowers the
State Government to disqualify the trustees, suspend a resolution passed
by the committee or supersede a committee is not an alternate remedy,
much less, an efficacious alternate remedy. The entire foundation of the
present Public Interest Litigation is that the ruling coalition, whichever
political colour it may be, has since the introduction of the Act of 2004,
appointed political allies for extraneous consideration without exercising
any fair mode and manner of appointment and without verifying their
eligibility to hold a post of such value and stature. There cannot be any
fairplay that can be expected from the ruling party to take an independent
decision under sections 9(2), 30 and 34 of the Act for disqualifying any
member of the managing committee. No man can be a judge in his own
case applies in this case.
59.             It is submitted by the learned counsel that when the District
Court had granted approval to the scheme of the Sai Baba Sansthan
Shirdi on 13th February, 1922, the management committee was to include
ppn/kvm/vai                               31                pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
5 life trustees to be appointed by the District Court who would be ex-
officio members in their lifetime, whereas 10 other trustees were to be
elected from amongst the Bhakta Mandal for a term of three years. These
life trustees were highly qualified and accomplished persons from
different walks of life and devotees of Shri Sai Baba.
60.             One of such person elected was a B.A., LL.B. and was a
Bombay Legislative Member. Another person appointed as a member was
an industrialist. Third person appointed was a professor in Chemistry and
Geology in Science College, Pune. Forth member appointed was a
managing director and secretary of a well known mill at Mumbai. Fifth
member was a resident of Shirdi. The other nine members were either (1)
retired Mamlatdar and First Class Magistrate, (2) from Law Department,
Secretariat Mumbai, (3) retired Solicitor and High Court Lawyer, (4)
Government servant, Pune, (7) British Photo Enlarging Company
Kalbadevi, Mumbai, (8) Zamindar Shirdi and (9) Clerk, loco Department,
61.             It is submitted that all members appointed as members of the
said Sansthan Trust were highly qualified and from different fields
whereas the members now nominated by the State Government are
nothing but politicians without fulfilling any qualification and only those
persons who are close to the politicians in power in the State of
Maharashtra. It is submitted that this Court has ample power to issue
directions to fill the statutory gaps and lacuna and to interfere with the
Government resolution passed by the State Government by removing
these politicians as members of the committee of the said Sansthan Trust.
ppn/kvm/vai                                32               pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
62.             Learned        counsel placed reliance    on     the      following
(1)        Judgment of Supreme Court in case of Securities and
Exchange Board of India vs. Libra Plantation Ltd., 1998 SCC
OnLine Bom 911 (paragraphs 8 and 9)
(2)        Judgment of Supreme Court in case of Union of India vs.
Association for Democratic Reforms and another, (2002) 5 SCC
294 (paragraphs 15, 19, 20, 45, 47 and 48)
(3)        Judgment of Supreme Court in case of Destruction of
Public and Private Properties in Re vs. State of Andhra Pradesh
& Ors., (2009) 5 SCC 212 (paragraphs 19 and 21)
(4)        Judgment of Supreme Court in case of Chairman,
Rajasthan State Road Transport Corporation and Others vs.
Santosh and Others (2013) 7 SCC 94 (paragraphs 15 to 16)
(5)        Judgment of Supreme Court in case of Dayaram vs.
Sudhir Batham & Ors. (2012) 1 SCC 333 (paragraphs 10 to 18)
(6)        Judgment of Supreme Court in case of Amarnath Shrine
in Re vs. Union of India and Others, (2013) 3 SCC 247
(7)        Judgment of Supreme Court in case of Zuari Cement
Limited vs. Regional Director, Employees State Insurance
Corporation, Hyderabad and Others, (2015) 7 SCC 690
63.             Learned counsel placed reliance on section 18 of the said Act
and would submit that the State Government has not yet constituted an
Advisory Council as contemplated under the said Act till date. The State
Government has not issued any regulations under section 18 and 4 of the
ppn/kvm/vai                              33                  pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
said Act. She submits that appointment of Bhakta Mandal under section
19 is not an empty formality. Such Bhakta Mandal was in existence even
prior to 2004. Though regulations under section 19 are formulated, the
same are only on paper. She submits that the term of scrutiny committee
is co-terminus with the term of the managing committee. The prayer for
appointment of scrutiny committee is to have some check on the
members of the committee of the Sansthan Trust.
64.             Learned counsel for the petitioner invited our attention to the
details of the annual income of Sansthan Trust during the accounting year
2011-12 to 2019-20 and would submit that during the work of the Ad-hoc
committee, the income of the Sansthan Trust had increased and the
decisions in the interest of devotees had been taken.
65.             It is submitted by the learned counsel for the petitioner that
the petitioner is a member of the Bhakta Mandal and is an agriculturist
and has filed this Public Interest Litigation in public interest. He invited
our attention to the letter dated 25th December, 2017 from the Chief
Executive Officer calling upon the petitioner to participate in centenary
function as an active member. The petitioner was also issued letters of
appreciation by the Sansthan Trust on 14th October, 1997 and 14th
February, 2000. The petitioner has already been acquitted in the criminal
cases initiated against him.
66.             Mr. Dhorde, learned special counsel for the State invited our
attention to section 5 of the said Act which provides for constitution of
committee for management of the Sansthan Trust and would submit that
the said provision provides for maximum members of the committee as
ppn/kvm/vai                             34                 pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
15 excluding chairman and vice-chairman and further provided the
number of committee members who shall be appointed. He relied upon
the first and second proviso to section 5. Learned Special counsel invited
our attention to various findings recorded and the judgment delivered on
29th November, 2017 in Public Interest Litigation No. 102 of 2016 and
submits that the grounds raised by the petitioner in this Public Interest
Litigation are already considered in great detail in the said judgment and
are already rejected. This Court also construed section 5(2) of the said
Act in paragraph (130) of the said judgment.
67.             It is vehemently urged that this Court recorded the finding
that a political party member can be appointed as a member of the
Sansthan Trust however subject to the fulfillment of the other criteria and
qualification.      In support of this submission, learned special counsel
placed reliance on paragraphs 120, 121, 130 and various submissions
recorded by this Court in the said judgment advanced by the petitioner
therein. He submits that a police verification was already done in case of
Mr.Suresh Haware. This Court recorded the said findings at pages 238
and 239 of the said judgment.          Learned special counsel invited our
attention to the operative part of the said judgment and also the order
passed by the Supreme Court on 9 th October, 2018 refusing to interfere
with the said judgment except the directions contained in paragraphs (v)
and (vi). He states that the directions issued by this Court and partly
modified by the Supreme Court are duly complied with by the State
68.             Learned special counsel placed reliance on section 9(2) of
the said Act and would submit that the State Government has ample
ppn/kvm/vai                              35                  pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
power to remove any person from the membership if it appears to the
State Government that the member has incurred any of the
disqualification provided in sub-section (l) of section (9) after adhering to
the principles of natural justice. It is submitted that the petitioner has not
applied to the State Government for disqualification of any of the
members of the managing committee of the Sansthan Trust. This Court in
the said judgment had made observations against the conduct of the
petitioner mentioning that he had filed multiple PILs.
69.             It is submitted by the learned special counsel that all the
appointments of the members of the committee of the Sansthan Trust are
made by the Government vide notification dated 16 th September, 2021 by
exercising such powers vested with it.         He submits that by the said
notification dated 16th September, 2021, the State Government has
appointed the chairman, vice-chairman and nine other members (total 11)
in the categories mentioned in the said notification. The member at serial
no.12 is the President, Shirdi Nagar Panchayat, who is an ex-officio
70.             It is submitted that considering the notification, the unfilled
categories consist of only one number in “B” category i.e. “Socially and
economically weaker” section, three from “C” category i.e. “persons
possessing professional or specialized knowledge” within the meaning of
second proviso to sub-section 2 of section 5 of the said Act, and 2 from
category “D” i.e. General Category i.e. the persons either be patrons or
life member of Bhakta Mandal. 5 members appointed in this category are
either Patrons or life members of Bhakta Mandal. So also of these 5
ppn/kvm/vai                            36                 pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
members, 3 members are residents of either Shirdi or Ahmednagar
71.             Learned special counsel invited our attention to the
averments made in paragraph (17) of the affidavit in reply filed by the
State Government, affirmed on 27th October, 2021 and would submit that
in respect of each of the member of the managing committee appointed
by the State Government, the State Government has demonstrated that all
of them are duly qualified and are appointed as duly categorized/
prescribed in section 5 read with rules.
72.             Mr.Ashutosh Kale who is chairman of the Sansthan Trust has
been already acquitted. When the ad-hoc committee was appointed by
this Court, several complaints were filed by ad-hoc committee against the
erstwhile committee members. Learned special counsel invited our
attention to the report of the four member committee constituted by the
Government resolution dated 20th November, 2018 to re-visit the
appointment of the members of the managing committee after judgment
of this Court came to be delivered in Public Interest Litigation No. 102 of
2016. The said four member committee opined that except the
appointment of Shri Chandrashekhar Kadam, the appointment of none of
the members appointed in the committee would be disturbed as the said
appointments were rightly made. The said report was given in respect of
the appointment of the members of the managing committee appointed on
73.             Learned special counsel invited our attention to the
notification dated 2nd February, 2019 and would submit that three
ppn/kvm/vai                             37                  pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
members of the said committee Dr. Manisha Shamsundar Kayande, Shri
Ravindra Gajanan Mirlekar and Shri Amol Gajanan Kirtikar ceased to be
the members since they remained absent for three consecutive meeting of
the committee without obtaining leave from the committee as
contemplated under section 7(3) of the Act.
74.             Learned special counsel invited our attention to section 11(2)
of the said Act and would submit that the quorum required for a meeting
of the committee provided is eight under section 11(2). This Court can
issue directions to the State Government to fill up the remaining posts in
the managing committee by appointing members. He submits that the
minimum requirement is for appointment of eight members. He relied
upon section 12 of the said Act and submitted that no Act or proceedings
of the committee can be considered as invalid by reason only of the
existence of any vacancy amongst its members or any defect in its
constitution or in appointment of any member.
75.             Learned special counsel relied upon sections 27 and 28 of
the said Act and submitted that the State Government has ample power to
depute any officer not below the rank of Deputy Secretary to take
inspection of the moveable or immoveable property and records of the
Sansthan Trust and also to call for record of the said Trust. The petitioner
has not made any allegations of any misappropriation of fund of property
of the said Sansthan Trust.
76.             Learned special counsel placed reliance on section 30 and
would submit that the State Government has ample power to suspend or
rescind any resolution or order of the committee of the said Sansthan
ppn/kvm/vai                                 38                pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
Trust in certain cases or even to dissolve the committee and constitute
another committee within a period of six months from the date of
dissolution or supersede committee for such period not exceeding six
months after enquiry.              The said Act is self-contained. The State
Government can exercise powers if any genuine complaint is made in
accordance with law and under the provisions of the said Act.
77.             Learned special counsel placed reliance on the judgment of
Supreme Court in case of Jain Shahar Hindu Vikas Samiti vs. State of
Rajasthan & Ors. (2014) 5 SCC 530 and in particular paragraph 40 in
support of his case that since the said Act is a self contained Act
providing for all mechanisms, this Court shall not interfere with the
resolution passed by the State Government. He placed reliance on
paragraphs 41, 47 and 48 in support of this submission.
78.             Learned counsel for the respondent no.3 submits that this
PIL is not maintainable. His client is a Scholar and an Engineer. His
client has acquired a Bachelor of Engineering degree from the M.I.T.
College, Pune and passed a Master Degree of Science (Information
System) from North Eastern University, Bostan (USA). He submits that
on 5th July, 2012, an American company AEEC issued a certificate of
experience of his client working with the company as certifying that
during the period of his tenure as Trainee Engineer with American
Consultants, Mr.Kale remained dedicated and loyal to his work and
responsibilities with the company”. His client has done an exemplary job
while in his role as a Trainee Engineer at American Consultants and has
always maintained a professional and courteous attitude while in his role
at the said American company.
79.             It is submitted by the learned counsel that his client does not
have any CL-3 of FL-3 license in his individual name. His client does
not have any share in a partnership firm or a private limited company
engaged in the trade of the selling liquor. He is only the Vice President of
Distilleries of Maharashtra State and the ownership is with the sugar
factory and hence on account of his being the Vice President of
Distilleries of Maharashtra State, he cannot be disqualified to be
appointed as member of Sansthan Trust. He relied upon the said CL-1
license and the membership certificate of Maharashtra Distillery
Association annexed at Ex.R-2 collectively.
80.             Learned counsel for the respondent no.11 submits that his
client falls in the category “D” which provides that such person should
be a patron or life member of the Bhakta Mandal. His client is a life
member of Bhakta Mandal. He relied upon a copy of the certificate of life
membership along with receipt issued by the Competent Authority.
81.             Learned counsel for the respondent no.11 submits that his
client is Graduate (B.A.) Social Science and is having a diploma in
Journalism & Mass Communication & Diploma in Printing Technology.
It is submitted by the learned counsel that a Criminal Case No.46 of
2007 was registered under sections 143, 147, 148, 323, 504, 506, 427
against seven persons including the respondent no.11. However, on 6 th
July, 2011, his client came to be acquitted by the Judicial Magistrate First
Class, Nashik. Summary Case no.433 of 2016 and 3439 of 2016 were
registered against the respondent no.11 for social cause and those cases
have been withdrawn by the State, hence respondent no.11 was acquitted
ppn/kvm/vai                              40                pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
on 21st September, 2020. Hence the respondent no.11 was acquitted on
82.             Learned counsel for respondent nos.4, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 13
invited our attention to the allegations made by the petitioner against
these respondents in the PIL. He invited our attention to the additional
affidavit filed by the respondent no.4 affirmed on 18 th April, 2022 and
would submit that the Case No.3768/PW/2005 has been closed under
section 258 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and his client has already
been discharged from the said case by an order dated 20th October, 2011.
83.             It is submitted by the learned counsel that respondent no.4
after obtaining the Sanad has been practicing in City Civil Court,
Sessions Court, Small Causes Court, various Tribunals and also in this
Court. His client has been a life member of the Sansthan Trust for the past
25 years or more. He also annexed a certificate of experience.
84.             Learned counsel submits that the respondent no.6 is a Law
Graduate and has been conferred with the Law Degree in the year 1994
and has been issued a Sanad by the Bar Council of Maharashtra & Goa in
the year 1994. His client is practicing, in Civil, Criminal, Co-operative
Courts in Sangamner Taluka for the last more than 26 years and has
conducted thousands of cases during these period. He relied upon the
certificate issued by Sangamner Taluka Bar Association certifying that
the respondent no.6 has been practicing there since 1994 and has been
enrolled with the Bar Council of Maharashtra & Goa. He also relied upon
the experience certificate issued by the District Judge, Sangamner dated
ppn/kvm/vai                            41                 pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
10th August, 2021. His client is the panel lawyer of Banks and Pat
Sansthans within the Sangamner Taluka and said Institutions have
appreciated the work of his client. His client is also involved in various
social activities.
85.             Learned counsel for the respondent no.7 submits that his
client has been appointed in the category of expert as being an Engineer.
He is holding the qualification of Diploma in Mechanical Engineering
and has been issued a certificate in the year 1993. He has completed MS
IT or Master of Science in Information Technology course. In the year
1993, he joined the services as a Mechanical Engineer with Shri Ganesh
Sahakari Sakhar, Karkhana Ganeshnagar. He was made permanent as an
Assistant Engineer in the year 1997 and from 1 st July, 1997 till 27th
February, 2008 he was a permanent employee of Karkhana.
86.             It is submitted that his client has been granted the
distributorship of HPCL as Oil Distributor for the Ahmednagar Rural
Area and since then he is doing his business. His entire family has been
involved in social causes.
87.             Learned counsel for the respondent no.8 submits that his
client was charge-sheeted in the past for offences though his client was
pursuing public cause regarding discharge of water and has been already
acquitted in those cases. He has also been acquitted in the case regarding
breach of role of conduct of election. There are         no criminal cases
pending against him. The orders of acquittal are annexed at pages 387 to
ppn/kvm/vai                               42                pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
88.             It is submitted that the respondent no.8 has been appointed
in the category of expert being Engineer. He is holding a qualification of
Diploma in Civil Engineering and was permanent employee of Ashok
Sahakari Sakhar Karkhana from 23rd March, 1992 till 25th May, 1998. He
has done the works of Zilla Parishad, Ahmednagar and is a life member
of Sansthan for the past 22 years or more. He is actively involved in
social activities and is the member of the Vigilance Committee
established for distribution of essentials under the State scheme. He is
also the Trustee of Ganesh Devasthan Trust since 2017 and is the
Chairman of Gram Swachata Abhiyan Gujarwadi and                      has received
prestigious The Sant Gadge Baba and              Tukdoji Maharaj Swachaa
Abhiyan Award. He is also the President of Tanta Mukti Abhiyan. He has
six years experience in Engineering field and is actively involved in the
construction business. He was also a supervisor to a construction firm
and now is an advisor to a construction firm.
89.             Learned counsel for the respondent no.8 invited our attention
to the averments made in additional affidavit filed by his client on 20 th
April, 2022 and would submit that his client had appeared for final year
in May, 1991 and out of seven subjects had passed in six subjects and as
he was ill, he could not pass in one subject. Since he was in need of a job,
he had applied for a job at the Karkhana and was given a letter of
appointment. He submitted that there was a typing mistake regarding
probation of work as 23rd March, 1992 to 25th May, 1998”, which should
have been 23rd March, 1992 to 15th May, 1998.
90.             Learned counsel for the respondent no.9 submits that his
client is an ardent devotee of Lord Saibaba and is a life member of the
ppn/kvm/vai                             43                 pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
Sansthan. His client has completed his Bachelor of Commerce from the
Mumbai University and accordingly a Degree has been conferred upon
him in the year 2006. Since 2006, he has been working as a Consultant in
the Hospitality Industry in Mumbai and is actively involved in various
social activities since the past 12 years or more. He has established a
foundation namely “I Love Mumbai” of which he is a President and has
done several other social works. He has been actively                involved in
organizing Plasma donation camps at Nair Hospital and Mahatma Gandhi
Seva Mandir Charitable Trust and he has helped 5000 migrant workers to
reach their respective villages during the pandemic. He has been issued
various certificates of appreciation for social work.
91.             Learned counsel for the respondent no.13 submits that the
trustees appointed by the State Government have taken over several
decisions under Rajiv Gandhi Jeevandai Yojana Major work has been
done by the Sansthan and its 70% beneficiaries were the patients of the
Hospital of the Sansthan. Large number of heart surgeries have been
conducted by the Sansthan Hospital through expert doctors in 24 hours.
The said aspect has been recorded in the Gunnies Book of World Record.
He submits that the petitioner has made various false and incorrect
statements in the petition and is liable to be punishable under section 195
r/w 340 of Code of Criminal Procedure.
92.             It is submitted by the learned counsel that vide resolution
dated 11th December, 2005, several advocates were appointed on the
panel of Sansthan at different places. The son of his client viz. Advocate
Mr.Sandeep E. Gondkar had applied for appointment as a panel advisor
ppn/kvm/vai                                 44               pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
on 31st October, 2005 and was appointed along with other advocates as
panel advisor vide resolution dated 11th December, 2005. During the
tenure of his client as a Trustee of the said Sansthan, no matters were
allotted to his son. The said advocate          Mr.Sandeep E. Gondkar was
allotted matters in High Court in the year 2016 when the respondent
no.13 was not even a trustee of the Sansthan Trust. He submits that the
said advocate Mr.Sandeep E. Gondkar had conducted the cases allotted
to him without charging any fees.
93.             Learned counsel for the respondent no.13 relied upon section
9(1)(e) of the said Act and would submit that even if son of his client
would have been an advocate for the Sansthan that would not be a
disqualification for his appointed as member of Sansthan Trust. Learned
counsel for the respondent no.13 relied upon the judgment delivered by
the Division Bench in PIL No.18 of 2011 and 102 of 2016 filed by
Sachin Gopal Bahage against the State of Maharashtra and others,
delivered on 29th November, 2017 and also on the judgment delivered by
the Supreme Court             in case of Kishore Samrite    vs. State of Uttar
Pradesh & Ors. (2013) 2 SCC 398 and in case of Bhaskar Laxman
Jadhav & Ors. vs. Karmaveer Kakasaheb Wagh Education Society &
94.             Learned counsel for the respondent nos.4, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 13
placed reliance on the judgment of the Supreme Court in case of Kishore
Samrite vs. State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors. (2013) 2 SCC 398 and in
particular paragraphs 32 to 34, the judgment of this Court delivered on
12th October, 2021 in Writ Petition No.5881 of 2020 in case of Samata N.
ppn/kvm/vai                               45                   pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
Bijagari Sahakari Patsantha Limited and Anr. vs. Bharti Sanjay More
& Ors. Learned counsel for the respondent no.13 placed reliance on the
judgment of the Supreme Court in case of Jaipur Shahar Hindu Vikas
Samiti vs. State of Rajasthan & Ors., 2014(5) SCC 530.
95.             Learned counsel for the respondent no.12 submits that his
client was appointed in general category under Rule 3 (3). In PIL No.100
of 2021, there were no allegations against his client made by the
petitioner. There are no specific allegations in the pleading against the
respondent no.12 in PIL No.98 of 2021. Merely because the petitioner
was a member of Doodh Sangh, the same would not disqualify his client
to be a member of the committee of Sansthan Trust. The respondent
no.12 is a resident of Shirdi and is patron member of Bhakta Mandal as is
apparent from the cause title of the petition itself. He is holding a
Bachelor of Science degree i.e. B.Sc. in Agriculture.
96.             It is submitted that his client has satisfied all the criteria for
becoming a member of the Managing Committee under category “D”.
He is not the Director of the so called Shirdi VKSS. He relied upon
various documents annexed to his affidavit in reply filed by his client. He
relied upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in case of Dr.B. Singh vs.
Union of India & Ors. (2004) 3 SCC 363 and would submit that the PIL
filed by the petitioner is not maintainable. He submits that this Court
cannot permit the petitioner to make wild and reckless allegations. He
submits that the newspaper cutting relied upon by the petitioner cannot be
accepted as legally acceptable evidence. Several petitions are filed by the
petitioner against rest of the Sansthan Trustee. Lakhs of rupees are spent
by Sansthan Trust on defending such litigation. He relied upon the
ppn/kvm/vai                              46                pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
judgment of this Court in case of Kiran Anandrao Pawar & Ors. vs.
Company Private Limited & Ors. decided on 14th October 2014 in Writ
Petition Nos.6646 of 2013 and 10407 of 2013 on the issue of
constructive res-judicata and would submit that similar PIL having been
filed earlier having been already dismissed, similar issues could not have
been raised by the petitioner in a fresh PIL.
97.             Learned counsel for the respondent no.5 in PIL No.98 of
2021 and learned counsel for the respondent no.8 in PIL No.100 of 2021
submits that his client has been appointed under “women category”. The
father of the respondent no.5 was not the President of NCP. The
respondent no.5 was directly appointed as President of Municipal Council
of Shrirampur Municipal Council. He submits that the case filed by the
applicant against her client has already been closed. It is submitted that
his client has completed her graduation from Sydenham College of
Commerce and Economics, Bombay and has further studies                                 in
Sydenham         Institute      of Management  Studies     &       Research            &
Entrepreneurship Education, Bombay. She has completed the said post
graduate diploma on 28th October, 1994 and had appeared for PHD
online entrance examination on 7th July, 2019 in the subject of commerce
and management which she had qualified.
98.             Learned counsel for the respondent no.10 submits that there
are no allegations made by the petitioner against his client.
99.             Ms.Talekar, learned counsel for the petitioner in her
rejoinder argument submits that Mr.Sanjay Kale had made a
ppn/kvm/vai                             47                  pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
representation on 17th September, 2021 annexed at page 434 to the State
Government regarding illegal appointments made by the State
Government in respect of the members of the committee of Sansthan
Trust. The said representation has not been considered. She tendered a
chart and submitted that the State Government has not appointed number
of members of Sansthan Trust as required under section 5 of the said Act.
No appointment has been made under the category “Public Health”. The
quorum of eight mentioned in section 11(2) will not indicate number of
members of the committee required to be appointed by the State
Government. She relied upon the operative part of the order passed by the
Division Bench of this Court in PIL No.102 of 2016 and submitted that
the Supreme Court had granted a time line for complying with the
directions issued by this Court. The State Government was directed to
implement the directions issued by this Court. She submits that there was
income tax raid on the respondent no.9, who is a close associate to Aditya
Thakare. A copy of newspaper cutting is tendered across the bar in
support of the submission.
100.            Insofar as the respondent no.13 is concerned, it is submitted
that the respondent no.13 appearing for Sansthan is disqualified under
section 9(1)(e) of the said Act. The question as to whether his son was
paid any fees or not by Sansthan Trust is not very relevant. She submits
that since there was gross illegality committed by the State Government
while decision making process, this Court has ample power to interfere
with the Government Resolution. She submits that there has to be some
guidelines as to how the State Government has to select the managing
committee of the Sansthan Trust in a transparent manner. She relied upon
ppn/kvm/vai                              48                 pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
the judgment annexed at page 216 of the writ petition and would submit
that discrete enquiry has to be made by the State Government before
appointing any person as member of the committee of Sansthan Trust.
101.            It is submitted that the rules have been framed by the State
Government in 2013, and are diluted in the year 2021. The said 2013
Rules are already challenged in a separate petition and the said petition is
still pending. She submits that there is no question of applicability of
principles of constructive res-judicata in the facts of this case. Since the
directions issued by this Court in the earlier PIL have not been complied
with by the State Government while appointing the members of the
managing committee of Sansthan Trust, the petitioner has rightly filed
this PIL. The respondents have not produced the records of the police
verification of any of the members appointed by the State Government as
the committee member.
102.            Insofar as the issue of alternate remedy raised by the
respondents is concerned, it is submitted that the State Government is
very adamant in this matter and has acted in illegal manner and is not
likely to take steps even if the State Government is approached by the
petitioner for redressal of his grievances.
103.            The matter was closed for orders on 21st April, 2022 after
hearing the parties at great length. However, on 9th June, 2022, learned
AGP filed a praecipe for placing the matter on board for certain
directions. The matter was accordingly placed on board on 10th June,
2022 before the same Division Bench. Learned AGP tendered a copy of
the notification dated 1st June, 2022 issued by the State Government
ppn/kvm/vai                             49                 pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
thereby appointing / nominating six members which were remained to be
appointed as trustees of Sansthan Trust. The said praecipe was
vehemently opposed by the petitioner in PIL on the ground that the
matter was already closed for pronouncement of judgment and thus at this
stage the said notification cannot be taken on record.
104.            This Court accordingly passed an order on 10 th June, 2022
that since this Court has already closed the matter for pronouncement of
judgment, this Court did not propose to allow the parties to make
additional submissions or to implead newly appointed trustees on record
at this stage. This Court however, made it clear that if the petitioner in the
PIL proposes to challenge the notification dated 1 st June, 2022, he would
be at liberty to do so. We cannot postpone the pronouncement of
judgment at this stage. This Court accordingly made clear that this Court
would not permit to bring these additional facts on record and to re-hear
the matters at this stage. Roster of this Bench has already been changed
and thus it would also cause inconvenience to the parties and this Bench,
if the matter is required to be reheard on additional factual aspect. This
Court accordingly granted liberty to to the petitioner to file appropriate
proceedings insofar as the notification dated 1st June, 2022 is concerned.
105.            This Court in the judgment dated 29 th November, 2017 in
case of Sachin Gopal Bhanage vs. State of Maharashtra and others in
PIL No.102 of 2016 has dealt with several issues which will have bearing
upon the subject matter of this petition. The said PIL was filed
challenging the order dated 28th July, 2016 issued by the Principal
Secretary, Law & Judicial Department, Government of Maharashtra
ppn/kvm/vai                               50                  pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
appointing 12 members of Shri Saibaba Sansthan Trust, Shirdi on various
grounds. The respondents in the said writ petition had opposed the said
PIL on various grounds including the ground of locus of the petitioners
therein to file the same PIL No.102 of 2016. This Court in the said
judgment did not accept the submission of the respondents challenging
the locus of the petitioners therein to file the said PIL.
106.            The locus of the petitioner in this PIL is also challenged by
the respondents on similar ground. The petitioner in this case claims to be
an ardent devotee of the said Shri Saibaba Sansthan, Shirdi and has filed
several petitions for smooth functioning and managing of the temple
Trust. He was the President from 1984 to 1988 much prior to introduction
of the politicians on the board of the said Sansthan Trust. The petitioner
has given an undertaking that none of his family members nor he himself
would ever accept the post of a trustee of the Sansthan to avoid any
allegations of malafides. The petitioner has filed this petition inter-alia
impugning        the     Government  Resolution     thereby       appointing           the
respondents as the trustees of the Sansthan Trust in public interest and has
filed this petition in public interest. In our view, there is no substance the
objection raised by the respondents challenging the locus of the petitioner
to file this PIL.
107.            In the said judgment in PIL No.102 of 2016, this Court
noticed that the said Sansthan Trust is enacted by the Legislature to re-
constitute a public Trust of Shri Saibaba Sansthan registered under the
provisions of the Maharashtra Public Trusts Act, 1950. The said Trust is
constituted to provide for better management, administration, governance
ppn/kvm/vai                              51                pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
and control of the Trust and to enable it to undertake wider welfare
activities for the public. This Court considered preamble of the said Act
of 2004 and held that the said preamble itself says that the Trust has large
properties and is very popular and is highly revered and has very large
number of devotees all over India. The State Government thus considered
it expedient that the development and management of this important and
popular Trust should not be hampered of in any way suffered by
avoidable litigation and that there should be a separate law to re-
constitute the said Trust and to provide for the efficient management of
the same by a Committee directly under the supervision and control of
the State Government to enable the Trust to carry out its charitable
activities more effectively and efficiently.
108.            After construing various provisions of the said Act, this
Court was of the opinion that considering the status of Saibaba Sansthan
Trust Committee with wide reputation to diverse sections and fields is
expected to be set up by the law. The said Committee manages the affairs
of the said Trust. The affairs have to be managed so as to fulfil the object
and purpose of the Act. The management has to be better than earlier and
the administration, governance and control ought to be carried out in
such manner as would enable the Trust to undertake wider welfare
activities for the public. The development and management of a
important and popular Trust should be hampered or suffered by avoidable
litigation, that there was a necessity to make a special law.
109.            It is held that the persons to be appointed have to be
knowledgeable, qualified and experienced in varied fields are required to
ppn/kvm/vai                               52                 pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
be appointed. The Committee has to perform diverse duties and functions.
It shall be the duty of the Committee to manage the properties and affairs
of the Sansthan Trust efficiently, to make proper arrangement for the
conduct and performance of rituals, worship ceremonies and festivals in
the temple according to the custom and usage, to provide necessary
facilities and amenities to the devotees and to apply the income of the
Trust to the objects and purposes of which the Trust is set up.
110.            It is held that the Committee must be broadbased and truly
representative. It is common ground that devotees visiting the temple are
from India and abroad. All, namely rich or poor, residing in the city or
village, slum or villa throng the temple. It is open to all. In such
circumstances, the State has been conferred with enormous power
coupled with duty. Equally, the Committee exercises the powers vesting
in it to fulfil a corresponding duty. None can seek appointment as a
member of the Committee and much less as of right. The State has to
make the appointment, but consistent with the object and purpose sought
to be achieved by the Act. The power to appoint the member has to be
exercised in such manner that the law is not breached or contravened.
The political affiliations and financial or other association of a similar
nature are out of place.
111.            It is held that    the State Government cannot             appoint a
political party worker, particularly the ruling one or any follower or group
or alliance member. Equally, none can be appointed because he has lot of
financial power or strength, or is a business associate of a influential
political leader. That cannot be the criteria in selecting the members. It
ppn/kvm/vai                            53                  pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
is held by this Court that the membership of the Committee cannot be
viewed as an appointment to a political office or equated with the
appointment on the Board of Directors of a public sector corporation or
body corporates. It is a social obligation which must be discharged with
due respect and reverence to Shri Saibaba and regard to the principles and
values derived from his life and his teachings. He enunciated the spirit of
fraternity, brotherhood, unity and secularism amongst all. He did not
differentiate or discriminate between his followers or devotees and
treated all of them equally.
112.            This Court accordingly held that affiliation or association
with the ruling party as the sole consideration for appointment is
expressly ruled out. This Court however, held that though all politicians
cannot be said to be underserving and unfit it does not mean that only
politicians can be appointed as members. It also does not mean that only
those close to politicians or their relatives can be appointed. This Court
held that the appointments are not political nor can the appointees be
politicians alone. The appointment is apolitical. This Court held that this
is a public office and for holding such an office or post, the best have to
be selected. The power to appoint, therefore, has to be exercised fairly
and reasonably. The power to appoint cannot be exercised arbitrarily or at
the whims and fancies of the Government. The power to appoint has to be
exercised in accordance with the Act. The Act itself obliges the State to
appoint only those eligible for appointment.
113.            This Court clarified that   it is an appointment so as to
perform and discharge a public duty. It is not to be confused with an
ppn/kvm/vai                                 54                 pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
appointment to a civil post under the State Government. It is an
appointment made only after the person is found to be deserving and
worthy of the Trust and confidence reposed in him by the State on behalf
of all the devotees and followers of Shri Saibaba. In making such
appointment, the State Government itself acts as a trustee. The
appointment shall be made in a non-arbitrary, transparent and fair manner.
If the appointments made are dehors the statute and for extraneous
consideration or by applying the tests and factors which are wholly
irrational, then, depending upon the facts and circumstances of each case,
they can be interfered with in writ jurisdiction.
114.            It is the case of the petitioner that the State Government
constituted a Committee in absence of any Rules vide Notification
dated 27th March 2012.             The said Notification was challenged before
this Court in PIL No.27 of 2012 as well as PIL No.133 of 2012. On 30 th
March 2012, this Court granted interim stay to the said Notification
dated 27th Mach 2012 and made various observations about the persons
appointed by the State Government. This Court in the order dated 30 th
March 2012 noted an order dated 30 th April 2010 passed by the
Division Bench of this Court in Civil Application No.2196 of 2009 in WP
No.4640 of 2007 directing that the State Government shall frame the
Rules in light of the provisions of Section 25 of the said Act which
would facilitate effective governance and functioning of the Sansthan.
115.            This Court accordingly directed the State Government to
frame Rules at the earliest. This Court clarified in the said order that the
said order shall not be construed to mean that this Court had approved
that the Managing Committee constituted under Section 5 of the Act of
ppn/kvm/vai                               55                pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
2004 is strictly in accordance with law. This Court granted liberty to the
State Government to consider the issue in respect of the constitution of
the Managing Committee. By the said order, this Court directed the State
Government          to constitute a new "the Shree Sai Baba Sansthan
Management Committee" within a period of 15 days from the date of the
said order. Even after a period almost of 1 year and 11 months being
lapsed from the passing of the said order, the State Government had not
framed or prescribed rules, laying down mode or criteria of qualification,
eligibility, manner etc. for appointment of members of the Committee.
116.            In paragraph 16 of the said order, this Court observed that
Section 5 of the said Act would reveal that it gives unbridled, unguided
and unchanalised powers to the Government to appoint the committee
consisting of not less than 15 members. It was observed that out of total
members, 8 members including the vice chairman, shall be the persons
having educational             background of professional and specialized
qualification etc. It was observed that insofar as 8 members, including the
vice chairman, the proviso to sub-section (2) of Section 5 of the Act,
makes it mandatory that they should be the persons possessing
professional or specialized knowledge, qualifications and practical
experience in one or more of the fields such as law, Business
Health, Medicine, or Rural Development.
117.            It was observed that insofar as remaining members,
including the chairman, the State Government is empowered to appoint
any person without any qualification. This Court noticed that the State
Government had not complied with the order dated 30 th April 2010
ppn/kvm/vai                             56                  pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
directing the State Government to appoint members of the Managing
Committee. This Court referred to the submission made by the learned
counsel for the petitioner that the two coalition partners, i.e. INC and
NCP who are ruling the State, while making appointments to the
Managing Committee, have shared the membership of the committee
amongst themselves.
118.            This Court held that looking at the number of petitions filed
before this Court, it is apparent that the very purpose for which the said
Act appears to have been enacted, namely to avoid litigation, is
frustrated. When power is vested with the authority, it must exercise the
same for the public good. This Court expects the State Government to at
least keep the God away while distributing public largesses. God is not a
fiefdom of ruling coalition. It cannot be disputed that the devotees of Sai
Baba are from all sections of the society and also belong to various
political parties. The State Government thus ought to have framed the
Rules prescribing procedure regarding qualification, mode or manner of
appointment in terms of Section 5 of the said Act. The State is expected
to appoint devotees of shrine as members of the trust, rather than making
the appointments on political considerations and of kiths and kins and
associates of its leaders. The Act is not meant for rehabilitation of the
members of the ruling political parties who are defeated in elections.
119.            This Court noticed that though an attempt had been made to
show that the order passed by this Court on 13 th March 2012 had been
complied with, it was nothing more than an eye-wash in as much as, the
reconstituted committee would reveal that the chairman was the same and
many of the members were either the same or where-ever they were
ppn/kvm/vai                              57                  pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
replaced, such replacement was by close kiths and kins of the members.
This Court expressed that this Court expects the State Government to at
least spare the religious trusts in the matter of distributing public largesse.
This Court accordingly continued the ad hoc committee appointed by
this Court to continue to manage the affairs of the trust until further
orders. It is held that it cannot be disputed that the committee of such
highly placed officers such as Principal District Judge, District Collector
and the Executive Officer would act in the interest of the trust.
120.            It is held that in the State of Maharashtra, wherever the
chairman of religious trust is either the District Collector or Judicial
Officer, the said Trust is functioning in a very efficient manner. The
developmental activities carried out by such Trust headed by such officers
in short period are commendable. Apart from that, when such highly
placed officers head the Trust, there is a least possibility of mal-practices
being indulged into. This Court referred to Tuljapur Devesthan Trust,
in Ahmednagar District in the said order. Pursuant to the order passed by
this Court in Public Interest Litigation No. 18 of 2011 ad-hoc committee
came to be constituted which continued during the period 2011 to 2016
121.            This Court in the said judgment adverted to a judgment of
the Supreme Court in case of State of Punjab and another vs.
Brijeshwar Singh Chahal & Anr. 2016 (6) SCC 1, in which it was held
by the Supreme Court that no appointment of Public Prosecutors or
District Counsel should be made either for pursuing a political purpose
or for giving some undue advantage to a section of the people. The
ppn/kvm/vai                              58                pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
Supreme Court held that the Government and so also all public bodies are
trustees of the power vested in them. Discharge of the Trust reposed in
them in the best possible manner is their primary duty.
122.            This Court in the said judgment held that merely because of
the opinion of the police machinery that the person has no criminal
background does not mean that he is necessarily fit for being appointed as
a member. The State is obliged to determine the issue of unfitness with
reference not merely to pendency of criminal cases or charge-sheets or
findings of misconduct, but must take into consideration the physical
fitness and other matters as well. Merely because a person is physically
fit does not mean that he is not otherwise unfit.
123.            This Court emphasised that a person may not be found guilty
of misconduct and equally there may not be any charge-sheet filed
against him for an offence involving moral turpitude, still, there could be
facets and aspects about his personality, conduct and behaviour in the
society, which would make him otherwise unfit. When one speaks of
candidates possessing merit, that merit does not mean achievements in
terms of obtaining marks at the exam, high rank and academic
qualifications. Merit denotes excellence in the field. In order to be
qualified for being appointed as a member of the Committee of
management, a person should not only be academically qualified, but
must possess such qualities as would render him able and fit for being
appointed. The Government may make enquiries and investigations for
themselves. They may derive inputs from varied sources. Those in-
charge in making appointments, implementing and enforcing the law are
ppn/kvm/vai                              59                 pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
expected to take decisions which may not be to the linking of their
political masters necessarily. They will have to overrule these masters and
make recommendations and record opinion fearlessly. That is expected
from them.
124.            This Court held that     the State Government should not
appoint unqualified and morally unfit persons on the Committee or
recommend their names for appointment or endorse their candidature
merely to please their political masters. If their opinion is then tested
before a Court of law, it is for the Court to decide whether they are wrong
or erroneous or vitiated by extraneous considerations. This Court held
that so long as there is a power conferred in the executive machinery to
decide whether a person is otherwise unfit, then, they are expected to
exercise that power and not surrender their discretion to their political
masters or bosses. This Court accordingly held that the person’s fitness
must be decided independent of his exoneration or non-involvement in
disciplinary or criminal proceedings or the like. The police machinery
cannot control the exercise of their independent power and discretion.
This discretionary power must be exercised judiciously, fairly and not
arbitrarily. Their view and opinion cannot be restricted to the matters
contained in the police verification report. They must go and travel
beyond the same.
125.            This Court in the said judgment held that the appointments
of the trustees which were the subject matter of the PIL were challenged
on various grounds including on the ground that those trustees had
managed to secure the appointment by their political masters alone and
ppn/kvm/vai                              60                pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
that the very proximity was to political leaders or political parties in
power. This Court held that these allegations may have been denied by
private parties. However, their denials cannot be conclusive. The denials
are restricted to political affiliations or connections, but there are other
aspects raised and which, according to the petitioners, make these
appointees unfit for the post.
126.            This Court held that in such a Trust, where the general
atmosphere is spiritual and people from all walks of life visit the place to
seek the blessings of Saibaga, pray for everybody’s wellbeing, there
ought to be no place particularly in the administration and management
for persons with dubious and doubtful record. Public interest and people’s
trust is paramount. The administrators have to be faithful and loyal to the
devotees. They must enjoy their trust and confidence. Hence the State
Government must place the statute in the forefront while deciding the
issue of a person’s fitness for appointment on the Committee.
127.            This Court in the said judgment held that if the State, which
is in a position of a patriarch, is expected to complete the task assigned to
it by the statute, then, this Court has no hesitation in directing it to so
complete it. The allegations cannot be proved because the criminal cases
are not pursued further, but that does not absolve the State of its duty and
obligation under the present law from considering the materials in an
overall manner. It is stated that the State Government must bear in mind
that it is exercising a discretionary power under a statute which is made
specifically for improving the administration of the Shree Saibaba Shirdi
128.            This Court did not accept the arguments of the State
Government that it is only the police verification which is decisive and
based on that if the opinion is recorded and that would suffice for the
purpose of later part of clause (f) of sub-section (1) of section 9, then, it
would be proper to expect from the State whether it has at all verified
these matters and independent of the earlier part of clause (f) of sub-
section (1) of section 9. This Court accordingly held that a person with a
criminal background is definitely unfit but even those against whom there
is no reported incident may be morally unfit. This Court expects the State
and its officials to verify and scrutinise the allegations made against the
proposed trustee by obtaining necessary inputs from social, cultural and
business circles.
129.            This Court held that the State must bear in mind that self
certification by the appointee about his character is wholly irrelevant
when the office is public and equally the duties of the same. It is expected
of such persons to disclose that they have not and are not indulging in
activities which would be detrimental to the interest of the Shirdi
Sansthan on which they seek appointment as a member of the Committee
of Management and that they are not otherwise unfit. This Court held that
it would be entirely for the State to take a decision in the light of this
judgment and equally the observations and findings therein. The State
should also consider the findings and observations in the judgments
rendered by this court in the earlier PILs that no political appointments
should be made or appointments to this Sansthan should not be made
purely for political reasons.
130.            This Court in paragraph 163     of the said judgment also
adverted to the order passed by this Court in Public Interest Litigation
No. 27 of 2012 along with Civil Application No. 3546 of 2012 passed an
order on 30th March, 2012 while making various observations that many
of the persons who have lost either assembly elections, or Zilla Parishad
elections, have been rehabilitated as members of the Managing
Committee of the said Trust. The very purpose of enacting the said Act
namely, to avoid the litigation, is frustrated. When power is vested with
the authority, it must exercise the same for the public good.
131.            This Court held that prima facie it appears that in a non-
transparent manner, ruling alliance has appointed members of the
Committee so as to favour its members who have lost in political election
and for accommodating kiths and kins of its leaders.
132.            This Court in paragraph 164 of the said judgment held that
every single appointment, if running contrary to these observations and
findings so also the conclusions of this Court would have to be
reconsidered. This Court in the said judgment also rejected the arguments
of the State Government merely because the petitioners have not
challenged appointment of particular trustees does not mean that the State
is denuded of its powers under the Act and the Rules and provisions of
which have been interpreted in the said judgment. State Government in
that event is not prevented from taking a decision in accordance with
133.            This Court accordingly directed the State Government to
revisit and reconsider all such cases or appointments, which do not meet
ppn/kvm/vai                                63                pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
the criteria laid down in the Act and the Rules as also are not in
accordance with section 9(1)(f) of the Act would squarely apply. This
Court directed the State Government            to take a proper decision in
accordance with law within a period stipulated in the said judgment. This
Court made various observations in respect of appointment of each of the
trustees by the State Government individually and did not quash and set
aside the impugned notification dated 28 th          July, 2016 because the
Committee has been set up under that notification and found to be
working for nearly one and half year. This Court however clarified that
the appointments made under the impugned notification would have to be
revisited and reconsidered in the light of this judgment and particularly
our interpretation and construction of section 9(1)(f) of the Act.
134.            Supreme Court by an order dated 9th October 2018 in Special
Leave to Appeal (C) Nos.2432-2436 of 2018 filed by the State of
Maharashtra has only set aside part of the order i.e. directions contained
in paragraph (v) and (vi) which read thus :-
“(v) The       State       Government,   while  reconsidering             the
appointments as directed above and within the time
stipulated of two months, shall not be influenced by the
police verification or police report only, but must take into
consideration the allegations in the criminal cases together
with other materials and take an independent and informed
decision.
(vi) The State Government shall reconsider these appointments
and revisit them by preferably setting up an independent and
impartial committee which shall not include those officials
ppn/kvm/vai                              64                   pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
and authorities who had been involved in making the
subject appointments (appointments of respondent nos. 4 to
135.            This Court has to now consider whether the principles
of law laid down by this Court in the said judgment dated 29 th
November 2017 in Public Interest Litigation No.102 of 2016 in case
of Sachin Gopal Bhanage (supra) and the directions issued by this
Court modified by the directions issued by the Supreme Court on
9th October 2018 in Special Leave to Appeal (C) Nos.2432-2436 of
2018 in the proceedings filed by the State of Maharashtra against the
said judgment and orders passed by this Court in earlier PIL relating
to the Sansthan Trust are complied with by the State Government or
not while appointing the respondent nos.3 to 14 as Members of
Managing Committee of the said Sansthan Trust, Shirdi or not. This
Court also has to consider whether these appointments are made in
conformity with the powers prescribed under the said Act.
136.            A perusal of the record indicates that in 1954 the idol of Shri
Sai Baba was set up at Shirdi. In 1984, this Court framed a scheme Sai
Baba Sansthan, Shirdi. The State Government enacted the said Act in the
137.            The Principal Secretary and Senior Legal Advisor to the
Government, appointed 16 members for a period of three years, vide
notification dated 23rd August, 2004. Committee comprises of various
professionals, various devotees of Shree Sai Baba and various other
uncontroversial persons. A perusal of the record however, indicates that
ppn/kvm/vai                             65                  pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
since last 3 terms, the State Government started appointing politicians to
most of these posts without considering the scheme of the Trust and
contrary to the provisions of the said Act which was the subject matter of
the Public Interest Litigations filed by the members of the public.
138.            We are of the view that none of these appointments which
are the subject matter of these Public Interest Litigations are made in
compliance with the directions issued and the conclusions drawn in
paragraphs (i), (ii), (iii) and (iv) and the principles laid down in various
judgments referred aforesaid directed to be complied with by the State
139.            We shall now deal with the case of the respondent nos.3 to
14 which is the subject matter of these Public Interest Litigations. We
have perused the affidavit-in-reply filed by these respondents. The
petitioners in Public Interest Litigations have made specific allegations
against each of these trustees and more particularly that they have
political background, either as sitting MLA or Ex-Corporator or relatives
of former Ministers and a political figure belonging to NCP or relatives
of leaders of some party, close associates of Shri Aditya Thackeray, some
of the trustees having criminal background having been charge-sheeted
for the offence in past and Directors of some political body. None of the
respondents have denied their political connection or that they are closed
to the politicians in power in the State of Maharashtra. We have already
highlighted various portions of the judgment delivered by this Court in
Public Interest Litigation No.102 of 2016 and other connected matters
clearly holding that posts of the trustees in a public trust cannot be filled
ppn/kvm/vai                             66                  pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
up by appointing politicians. In our view, each of the appointments
made by the State Government is contrary to the principles of law laid
down by this Court in the said judgment in Public Interest Litigation
No.102 of 2016 which has attained finality except directions contained in
paragraphs (v) and (vi).
140.            A perusal of the order passed by the Supreme Court on 9 th
October 2018 indicates that directions were issued to the State
Government to implement the directions of this Court as and when the
board is reconstituted after expiry of its present term in July 2019. The
State Government has not bothered to comply with the directions issued
by the Hon’ble Supreme Court by implementing the directions of this
Court in the said judgment dated 29th November 2017.
141.            In so far as the appointment of Shri Ashutosh A. Kale
(respondent no.3 in PIL No.98 of 2021) who was appointed as one of the
trustees is concerned, he is a sitting MLA from Kopargaon Constituency
and belongs to NCP and has never practiced Engineering. He is a full
time dedicated politician. The said respondent has placed reliance on the
certificate of engineering produced to him by the company having a
distance of 800 km from his college in Boston. He has not denied that he
is a sitting MLA and is a full time dedicated politician.
142.     In so far as the appointment of Shri Jagdish Harishchandra Sawant
(respondent no.4 in PIL No.98 of 2021) who was appointed as one of the
trustees is concerned, he belongs to Shivsena. He is an ex-corporator
from Mumbai and has been charge-sheeted for offences in the past.
ppn/kvm/vai                              67                 pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
143.            In so far as the appointment of Ms.Anuradha Govindrao
Adik (respondent no.5 in PIL No.98 of 2021) who was appointed as one
of the trustees is concerned, it is not disputed by her that she belongs to
NCP and is the daughter of an Ex-Minister and a political figure of NCP.
She is the president of Municipal Council, Shrirampur. It appears that
disqualification proceedings were initiated against her for violation of
Rules when she was a President of Municipal Council, Shrirampur.
144.             In so far as the appointment of Shri Suhas Janardhan Aher
(respondent no.6 in PIL No.98 of 2021) who was appointed as one of the
trustees is concerned, it is not disputed by him that he belongs to INC. He
has paid membership fees on 6th September, 2021 i.e. a month prior to the
impugned notification and more particularly when the temple was closed.
His close relatives viz. Shri Sudhir Tambe and Shri Balasaheb Thorat are
leaders in INC.
145.            In so far as the appointment of Shri Avinash Appasaheb
Dandawate (respondent no.7 in PIL No.98 of 2021) who was appointed
as one of the trustees is concerned, it is not disputed by him that he
belongs to INC. His appointment was also challenged on the ground that
he has no experience of engineering. He was running a petrol pump since
the year 2006 and is an active party worker of INC.
146.             In so far as the appointment of Shri Sachin Rangrao Gujar
(respondent no.8 in PIL No.98 of 2021) who was appointed as one of the
trustees is concerned, it is not disputed by him that he belongs to INC and
has been charge-sheeted for offences in the past. He has obtained
ppn/kvm/vai                              68                pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
Diploma in Civil Engineering on the basis of the notification dated 5 th
147.             In so far as the appointment of Shri Rahul Narain Kanal
(respondent no.9 in PIL No.98 of 2021) who was appointed as one of the
trustees is concerned, it is not disputed by him that he belongs to
Shivsena. He is a close associate of Shri Aditya Thackeray. According to
the petitioners, the Income Tax Department had conducted raid against
the said Shri Rahul Kanal.
148.               In so far as the appointment of Shri Suresh Gorkshanath
Wable (respondent no.10 in PIL No.98 of 2021) who was appointed as
one of the trustees is concerned, it is not disputed by him that he belongs
to NCP and was an ex-trustee of the Sansthan Trust.
149.            In so far as the appointment of Shri Jayvantrao Pundlikrao
Jadhav (respondent no.11 in PIL No.98 of 2021) who was appointed as
one of the trustees is concerned, it is not disputed by him that he belongs
to NCP. He has been charge-sheeted for offences in past. Though he has
been acquitted, the offence charge-sheeted is of moral turpitude. He was
a member of the Legislative Council, Nashik.
150.             In so far as the appointment of Shri Mahendra Ganpatrao
Shelke (respondent no.12 in PIL No.98 of 2021) who was appointed as
one of the trustees is concerned, it is not disputed by him that he belongs
to NCP and is director of Shrirampur Sahakari Sangh as well as Doodh
151.            In so far as the appointment of Shri Eknath Bhagchand
Gondkar (respondent no.13 in PIL No.98 of 2021) who was appointed as
one of the trustees is concerned, it is not disputed by him that he belongs
to INC. He is an ex-trustee of the Sansthan. His son was a panel advocate
of the Sansthan Trust. Though the said Eknath Gondkar has disputed in
his affidavit that his son was not briefed in any matter by sansthan trust
when the said Gondkar was a trustee, he did not dispute that his son was a
panel advocate of the said Sansthan Trust.
152.            In so far as various findings rendered by this Court in case
of Sachin Gopal Bhanage (supra) in Public Interest Litigation No.102
of 2016 relied upon by Mr.Dhorde, Special Counsel for the State is
concerned, in our view, the findings and conclusions drawn by this
Court in the said judgment does not advance the case of the respondents
but support the case of the petitioners. An observation in one of the
paragraphs of the said judgment cannot be read in isolation to buttress
the submission that this Court has accepted the arguments of the State
Government that political members can be appointed as members of the
Sansthan Trust. On the contrary, this Court in various judgments relating
to the appointment of trustees of Sansthan Trust has clearly laid down
that politicians shall be kept away from the Sansthan Trust. There is no
substance in the submission made by the learned special counsel that the
appointments are made by the State Government after following the
provisions of the said Act.
153.            Mr.Dhorde, learned Special Counsel for the State does not
dispute that Shri         Ashutosh Ashokrao Kale was charge-sheeted.                   He
however, urged before this Court that the said Shri Ashutosh Ashokrao
ppn/kvm/vai                                70                 pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
Kale who was the Chairman of the Sansthan Trust has been acquitted.
The fact remains that there was serious charges against him.
154.            The respondents trustees have sought to canvass before this
Court that each of them are educated and carrying on business and has
experience in various fields. We are of the opinion that unless these
respondents would have been connected with one or the other political
parties in the State of Maharashtra, they would not have been appointed
as trustees even if they were qualified.
155.            In respect of the respondent no.11, criminal case was
admittedly registered under Sections 143, 147, 148, 323, 504, 506, 427 of
the Indian Penal Code. It is however the case of the respondent no.11
that he was subsequently acquitted by the Judicial Magistrate, First Class,
Nashik. Summary Case no.433 of 2016 and 3439 of 2016 were also
registered against the respondent no.11 for social cause. Though it is the
case of the respondent no.11 that the State Government has withdrawn
those cases, the fact remains that such cases were registered against him.
156.            It is the case of the respondent no.4 that Case No.3768/PW/
2005 has been closed under section 258 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure and the respondent no.4 has already been discharged some
time in the year 2011. The fact that there were serious charges against
him have not been disputed.
157.            In so far as the respondent no.8 is concerned,                  he was
charge-sheeted for the offences though he was pursuing public cause
regarding discharge of water and had already been acquitted in the
ppn/kvm/vai                              71                  pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
matters.      He has also been acquitted in the case of alleging breach of
role of conduct of election. There are no criminal cases pending against
him. He does not however, dispute that he was involved in several cases
punishable under various provisions of the Indian Penal Code. Though
other respondents have tried to place on record that they are involved in
various social activities, they have not disputed that they are affiliated or
involved or associated with the political parties in power in Maharashtra.
158.            In our view, the said Sansthan Trust which is set up with the
purpose of public cause having the properties worth crores of rupees
owned by the said Trust and lakhs of devotees from all over India and
also from some of the other countries is not for accommodating the
politicians either because they are closed to the ruling party or having
lost some election in past.
159.            Supreme Court in case of Public and Private Properties, in
Re vs. State of Madhya Pradesh & Ors. (supra) has held that where there
is power coupled with a duty, laying down of positive directions to do a
particular act in a particular way is justified in cases of (i) enforcement of
fundamental rights; as also (ii) enforce the statute. In our view, this
judgment of the Supreme Court would apply to the facts of this case.
Though the said Act has conferred various powers upon the State
Government coupled with a duty, the State Government has not followed
the provisions of law while passing the resolution whereby appointing the
respondent nos.3 to 14 as trustees of the Sansthan Trust.
160.            Supreme Court in case of Chairman, Rajasthan State Road
Transport Corporation and Ors. vs. Santosh & Ors. (supra) has held that
ppn/kvm/vai                                72                pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
it is permissible for Constitutional Courts to issue directions if the law
does not provide a solution of a problem as an interim measure, till the
proper law is enacted by the legislature. The State Government has
framed rules in the year 2013 relating to said Sansthan Trust. In our view
there are no appropriate provision prescribed for the appointment of the
trustees of the said Sansthan Trust in a fair and transparent manner. Be
that as it may, the State Government has not been following the
provisions of the said Act while appointing the trustees of the said
Sansthan Trust though this Court has repeatedly issued various directions
to the State Government in that regard.
161.            Supreme Court in case of Amarnarth Shrine (supra) has
held that where there is inaction by the executive, for whatever reason,
the judiciary must step in, in pursuance of its constitutional obligation to
provide solution in any case till the time the legislature addresses the
issue. The absence of law and a vacuum or lacunae in law shall be
supplied by judicial dictum.
162.            Supreme Court in case of Zuari Cement Limited (supra) has
held that where a statute          prescribed a procedure to do any Act in
particular manner, it has to be done in that manner and not in any other
manner. In this case, the State Government has not followed the
prescribed procedure under the said Act.
163.            Supreme Court in case of Jaipur Shahar Hindu Vikas
Samiti (supra) relied upon by the learned counsel for the respondent no.3
has held that the scope of Public Interest Litigation while dealing with the
management of religious institutions is very limited. It is always better
ppn/kvm/vai                              73                  pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
not to entertain a public interest litigation simply on the basis of affidavits
of the parties. The public trusts and religious institutions are governed by
particular legislation which provide for a proper mechanism for
adjudication of disputes relating to the properties of the trust and their
management thereof. It is further held that when the interest of number
of public can be protected or dispute can be adjudicated by mechanism
created under a particular statute , the parties should be relegated to
appropriate forum, instead of entertaining the writ petition filed as public
interest litigation.
164.            In our view, this judgment of the Supreme Court will not
apply to the facts of this case. In any event, the State Government itself
has repeatedly not followed the directions issued by this Court while
appointing the trustees to the management of the Sansthan Trust and not
expected to decide any grievance in respect of the appointment of the
trustees in fair manner. The State Government in this case being a judge
in its own cause, the interference of this Court in these circumstances is
warranted. There is no dispute about the law laid down by the Supreme
Court in case of Jaipur Shahar Hindu Vikas Samiti (supra) but the same
is distinguishable on facts.
165.            Supreme Court in case of Swaraj Abhiyan & Anr. (supra)
has held that there is no jurisdictional bar, if conscience of the Court is
pricked in a given case. Public interest litigation is not filed by the
petitioner at the instance of political rival but has been filed in public
interest. Supreme Court in case of Kishore Samrite (supra) relied upon
by the learned counsel for the respondent nos.4, 6 to 9 and 13 laid down
the guidelines of the Court in case there being abuse of process of law by
ppn/kvm/vai                               74                 pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
a litigant. It is held that whenever public interest litigation is invoked, the
Court must examine the petition carefully to ensure that there is genuine
public interest involved. The stream of justice should not be allowed to be
polluted by unscrupulous litigants. There is no dispute about the
principles of law laid down by the Supreme Court in the said judgment.
In this case, the petitioner has made out a case for interference of this
Court in view of the illegalities committed by the State Government in
appointing the respondents as trustees of the Sansthan Trust in violation
of the provisions of the said Act and in total disregard to the directions
issued by this Court. This Court cannot sit as silent spectator in these
166.             Supreme Court in case of Bhaskar Laxman Jadhav & Ors.
(supra) has held that it is the duty of the litigant to disclose all material
facts and the litigant cannot decide which facts are material and which are
not. He must come to the Court with clean hands and disclose all material
facts relating to his case. There is no dispute about this proposition of
law laid down by the Supreme Court. The petitioner has disclosed
sufficient material on record while seeking interference of this Court
with the resolution passed by the State Government while appointing the
respondents trustees of the Sansthan Trust.
167.             This Court in case of Kiran Anandrao Pawar & Ors. (supra)
relied upon by the learned counsel for the respondent no.12 has held that
the public interest litigation is not usual litigation. It ought to be
exceptional . If one PIL is pending, there is no reason or justification for
a second PIL and from the same place and espousing the same cause and
of same residents or citizens. In this case various PIL filed by various
ppn/kvm/vai                             75                 pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
persons impugning the action of the State Government while appointing
the trustees of Sansthan Trust are entertained by this Court having found
tenable in view of the State Government not following the directions
issued by this Court in several judgments relating to the appointment of
the trustees of the Sansthan Trust.
168.            This Court by an order dated 30th March, 2012 in Public
Interest Litigation No.27 of 2012 filed by Mr.Shailesh S.Dethe had
granted interim relief admitting the said PIL. This Court after considering
section 5 of the said Act held that it gives unbridled, unguided and
unchanalised powers to the Government to appoint the committee
consisting of not less than 15 members. Such unguided, unchanalised,
unbridled powers lead to arbitrariness in exercise of the same at the hands
of the authorities concerned. This Court observed that the State
Government had not complied with the earlier order dated 30 th April,
2010 passed by this Court while appointing the new committee which
was subject matter of the said PIL.
169.            This Court held that when power is vested with the authority,
it must exercise the same for the public good. This Court expects the
State Government to at least keep the God away while distributing public
largesses. This Court also observed that there is no propriety in
appointing the persons as trustees, against whom criminal cases are
pending. This Court observed that in a non-transparent manner, ruling
alliance had appointed members of the Committee so as to favour its
members who have lost in political election and for accommodating kiths
and kins of its leaders. The reconstituted committee would reveal that the
chairman was the same and many of the members were either the same or
ppn/kvm/vai                             76                  pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
wherever they were replaced, such replacement was by close kiths and
kins. This Court made a very strong observation that Court expects the
State Government to at least spare the religious trusts in the matter of
distributing public largesse.
170.            Supreme Court in case of Akhil Bhartiya Upbhokta
Congress vs. State of Madhya Pradesh & Others, (2011) 5 SCC 29 held
that the State and/or its agencies/instrumentalities cannot give largesse to
any person according to the sweet will and whims of the political entities
and/or officers of the State. Every action/decision of the State and/or its
agencies/instrumentalities to give largesse or confer benefit must be
founded on a sound, transparent, discernible and well defined policy,
which shall be made known to the public by publication in the Official
Gazette and other recognized modes of publication and such policy must
be implemented/executed by adopting a non- discriminatory and non-
arbitrary method irrespective of the class or category of persons proposed
to be benefited by the policy.
171.            The Supreme Court held that the distribution of largesse like
allotment of land, grant of quota, permit licence etc. by the State and its
agencies/instrumentalities should always be done in a fair and equitable
manner and the element of favoritism or nepotism shall not influence the
exercise of discretion, if any, conferred upon the particular functionary or
officer of the State. In our view, the principles laid down by the Supreme
Court in case of Akhil Bhartiya Upbhokta Congress (supra) can be
extended to the appointment of the trustees of the said Sansthan Trust by
172.            This Court had noticed that in last decades, all the
appointments of the trustees of the said Sansthan Trust made by the ruling
parties are based basically on political consideration and not on merits
which is contrary to the principles laid down by the Supreme Court and
this Court and in gross violation of the provisions conferring such power
upon the State Government under the said Act. The State Government
cannot be allowed to appoint trustees by accommodating or rehabilitating
their own party workers or politicians when other impartial and
meritorious persons who are qualified according to the conditions
prescribed under the said Act are available.
173.            Though this Court has repeatedly laid down such principles
and has warned the State Government not to toe the line of the political
masters by the State Government while appointing the trustees of the
public trust having constituted in the large number of devotees and
members of political while appointing trustees of the said Sansthan Trust,
there has been latest act of favoritism on the part of the State Government
while appointing these trustees on the board of the Sansthan Trust in
violation of the principles laid down by the Supreme Court and this Court
on this issue time and again.
174.            In our view, the appointment of the trustees to such public
trust has to satisfy the test of public interest by keeping the purpose and
intent of creating such trust under the said Act for the betterment of and
in the interest of large members of public devotees of Shri Sai Baba and
not the private interest of the ruling Government to accommodate their
party workers or politicians. The entire purpose and intent of creating
such trust by the State Government under the scheme sanctioned by the
ppn/kvm/vai                              78                  pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
Court is thus ex-facie defeated for the political gains of the party in
175.            This Court in the said order dated 30th March, 2012 passed in
Public Interest Litigation No. 27 of 2012 has observed that the
Committee of Principal District Judge who is the senior-most Judicial
Officer in the District and the District Collector who is the head of the
administration of that district are highly placed officers and would act in
the interest of the trust. It is held that, it cannot be disputed that in the
State of Maharashtra, whenever the chairman of religious trust is either
the District Collector or Judicial Officer, the said trust is functioning in a
very efficient manner. The developmental activities carried out by such
trust headed by such officers in short period are commendable. Apart
from that, when such highly placed officers head the trust, there is a least
possibility of mal-practices being indulged into. This Court also made a
reference in this respect to Tuljapur Devesthan Trust, District
Osmanabad, Saptashrangi Devi Trust, Nashik, Mohata Devi Trust in
176.            Learned counsel for the petitioners placed on record the
income of the said Sansthan Trust when the ad-hoc committee appointed
by this Court was handling the affairs of the said Sansthan Trust as
against the substantial fall in the income of the trust when the trust was in
the management of the trustees appointed by the State Government. In
our view, when the Shirdi Sansthan Trust who has not only devotees from
all over world, but has large properties for the benefits of the large
number of public including devotees, the management shall be in the safe
hands. The trustees shall be appointed on merits obviously after
ppn/kvm/vai                              79                  pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
complying with the qualification criteria prescribed in the said Act. None
of these principles laid down by the Supreme Court and this Court are
complied with by the State Government while appointing the trustees by
the impugned resolution. We expect that there would be appropriate
amendment by the State Government, in the said Act to cast an obligation
to appoint independent and meritorious trustees on recommendation of a
committee preferably headed by a retired High Court Judge and other
reputed and renowned members of public, having requisite qualification
prescribed under the said Act and not because of their close connections
with the ruling party of the State.
177.            In our view in the facts of this case, reliance placed by the
learned special counsel on section 9(2) of the said Act that the State
Government has ample power to remove any person from the
membership if it appears to the State Government that the member has
incurred any of the disqualification is misplaced in view of the fact that
the State Government in this case has not bothered to follow the
principles laid down or the directions issued in series of earlier judgments
on the powers and duties of the State Government on the appointments of
the trustees of the said Sansthan Trust.
178.            Insofar as the submission of learned special counsel that
quorum required for a meeting of the Committee provided as eight under
section 11(2) is concerned, the said provision speaks for itself. Though
the resolution was passed by the State Government appointing the
trustees whose appointments are subject matter of this petition as far back
as on 16th September, 2019, the State Government did not bother to
appoint the remaining member of trustees as prescribed under the said
ppn/kvm/vai                              80                  pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
Act till the arguments of these two Public Interest Litigations were over
and the petitions were closed for orders.
179.            Similarly, reliance placed by the learned special counsel on
section 30 of the said Act to canvass that the State Government has ample
power to suspend or rescind any resolution or order of the Committee of
the Sansthan Trust or even to dissolve the Committee and to constitute
another Committee is concerned, reliance placed on the said provision is
misplaced in the facts of this case. The State Government has committed
vast illegalities in appointing these trustees by disregarding the principles
laid down by this Court in a series of judgments. Learned counsel for the
petitioners are right in their submission that in the facts of this case, the
State Government was not expected to exercise its power to suspend or
rescind the impugned resolution or to dissolve the Committee. In the
facts of this case, the judgment of the Supreme Court in case of Jaipur
Shahar Hindu Vikas Samiti (supra) relied upon by the learned special
counsel for the State thus would not advance the case of the State
180.            It is an admitted position that various resolutions passed by
the State Government appointing the persons as trustees on the said
Sansthan Trust are not only in violation of the principles laid down by
this Court but also in breach of the provisions of the said Act. These
appointments are challenged by the members of public. Large number of
interim applications were required to be filed by various parties including
the said Sansthan Trust causing expenditure of substantial amount by the
said Sansthhan Trust to defend or to file such proceedings arising out of
ppn/kvm/vai                             81                  pil.98-21 wt pil-100-21.doc
the illegal appointments of the trustees of the said Sansthan Trust made
by the State Government. If the State Government would have appointed
independent trustees and not the politicians who are having close
connection with the ruling party, the said Sansthan Trust which is a public
Trust and is a custodian of public money and properties would have saved
huge amount of public money spent on unnecessary litigations.
181.             In our view, the petitioner has made out a case for
interference with the impugned resolution passed by the State
(a) The impugned order dated 16th September 2021 passed by the
Principal Secretary, Law and Judiciary Department, Mantralaya,
Mumbai appointing the respondent nos.3 to 14 as Members of
Managing Committee of Shree Sai Baba Sansthan Trust, Shirdi
Taluka Rahata, District Ahmednagar is quashed and set aside.
(b) We direct the State Government to constitute a new “the Shree Sai
Baba Sansthan Management Committee” within a period of eight
weeks from today in accordance with the provisions of section 5
of the Act of 2004 and in line with the principles laid down by this
Court in the judgments referred to aforesaid.
(c)   We direct that, until the State Government constitutes a new
Committee, the affairs of the “Shree Sai Baba Sansthan Trust,
Shirdi” shall be supervised, monitored and looked after by a
committee consisting of :
(d) The Principal District judge, Ahmednagar shall be the Chairman
of the Committee and rest of the two officers shall be the
Members of the Committee. The Management Committee shall
hold meetings as per the agenda prescribed and as per the
requisition issued by the Principal District Judge, Ahmednagar.
(e)    The ad-hoc committee appointed by this Court would continue
till a new management committee is constituted by the State
Government in the manner prescribed aforesaid.
(f)    The ad-hoc committee appointed by this Court is directed not to
take any major financial decision in respect of the management of
the affairs of the Sansthan without permission of this Court.
(g)    Public Interest Litigation Nos. 98 of 2021 and 100 of 2021 are
allowed in the aforesaid terms. No order as to costs.
(h)    The amount deposited by the petitioners, if any, in these Public
Interest Litigations shall be returned to the petitioners by the
Office within two weeks from today.
183.            At this stage, some of the respondents pray for stay of the
operation of the order passed by this Court today which is vehemently
opposed by Ms.Talekar, learned counsel for the petitioners.
184.            Application for stay of the operation of this order is rejected.
185.            Civil application pending, if any, stands disposed off in view
of disposal of these Public Interest Litigations.