1. This matter is taken up through hybrid mode.
2. Heard    Learned   Counsel   for  the  Petitioner  and
Learned Counsel for the Opposite Parties.
3. The petitioner has filed the present writ application
challenging the inaction of the Opposite parties, more
particularly   the Opposite Party     no.3 (Registrar,
Khallikote Unitary University, Berhampur) in issuing
the impugned advertisement dated 30.03.2022 for
selection to the post of Guest Faculty and further
challenges the order of removal dated 30.04.2022.
4. Shorn of unnecessary details, the substratum of the
matter presented before this Court is that the
petitioner having the requisite qualification was
appointed as Guest Faculty in PG Department of
History on 01.08.2017 and he continued against the
said post till 30.04.2022. However, all of a sudden,
the Opp. Party No.3 issued an advertisement on
30.04.2022 for selection of Guest Faculty in various
disciplines including the discipline of History. After
issuance of such advertisement, the petitioner along
with other Guest Faculties who are working under
the Opp. party No.3 made objections that they had
the requisite qualification as laid down in the
advertisement and there is no purpose/ object of
issuing another advertisement. The Opp. Party No.3
further issued a notice on 30.04.2022 wherein the
Heads of the Department were requested to inform
their respective Guest Faculties over phone not to
attend the duties w.e.f. 01.05.2022. Aggrieved by the
said orders, the aforesaid case has been filed by the
petitioner.
5. Learned Counsel for the petitioner Mr S.P. Nath,
submits that the action of the Opp. Parties in
replacing one set of Guest Faculty with another set of
Guest Faculty is illegal, arbitrary and is contrary to
the well-settled position of law. Moreover, while
disengaging the service of the petitioner principle of
natural justice has not been followed and therefore,
the order of dismissal is bad in the eye of law.
6. Learned Counsel for the petitioner has further relied
on the case of Manish                 Gupta    and Ors.      vs.
President,      Jan     Bhagidari          Samiti   and    Ors1
wherein it has been clearly held that Guest Lecturer
cannot be replaced with another set of Guest
Lecturer and further held that Guest Lecturers would
be    allowed    to    continue       till  regularly  selected
Civil Appeal Nos.3084-3088 of 2022 disposed of 21.04.2022
candidates are appointed. He has contended that the
said judgment is squarely applicable to the case of
the present petitioner and therefore, the impugned
advertisement is liable to be set aside.
Government Advocate submits that the petitioner
does not have any vested right to continue in the said
post.  She    relied  on    the    decision  of  Director,
Institute of Management Development, U.P. Vs.
Pushpa Srivastava (Smt.)2, wherein the Apex Court
held that since the appointment was purely on
contractual and ad hoc basis on consolidated pay for
a fixed period and terminable without notice, when
the appointment came to an end by efflux of time, the
appointee had no right to continue in the post and to
claim regularization in service in the absence of any
rule providing for regularization after the period of
service. A limited relief of directing that the appointee
be permitted on sympathetic consideration to be
continued in service till the end of the concerned
calendar year was issued. This Court noticed that
when the appointment was purely on ad hoc and
contractual basis for a limited period, on the expiry of
the period, the right to remain in the post came to an
end. This Court stated that the view they were taking
was the only view possible and set aside the
judgment of the High Court which had given relief to
the appointee.
8. Similarly, Supreme Court in the case of Secretary,
State Of Karnataka vs Umadevi3 held that:
U.P. Vs. Anil Kumar Mishra and Others4,
a three judge bench of this Court held that
ad hoc appointees/temporary employees
engaged on ad hoc basis and paid on piece-
rate basis for certain clerical work and
discontinued on completion of their task,
were not entitled to reinstatement or
regularization of their services even if their
working period ranged from one to two
years. This decision indicates that if the
engagement was made in a particular work
or in connection with particular project, on
completion of that work or of that project,
those who were temporarily engaged or
employed in that work or project could not
claim any right to continue in service and
the High Court cannot direct that they be
continued or absorbed elsewhere.”
She further submits that a Guest Lecturer is like a
temporary appointee, and hence he has no right to the
post vide State of Uttar Pradesh v. Kaushal Kishore
Shukla5, Triveni Shankar Saxena v. State of U.P6.
9. She further submits that there is no rule of law that a
temporary appointee has a right to continue till a
regularly selected candidate is available. If a regular
selection does not take place for ten years, can the
petitioner continue for 10 years, in that case the
sanctity of appointment of guest faculty shall be
destroyed. This is not the correct legal position, but
the legal position is clear that a temporary appointee
has no right to the post. In other words, he has no
right to continue even for one day, far less having a
right to continue till the regularly selected candidate
is available. The service of a temporary appointee can
be terminated at any time because he has no right to
the post. She strongly disagrees with the contentions
of the learned counsel for the petitioner that the
Guest Lecturers have a right to continue till the
regular selection is made.
10. Heard the counsel for the parties. As submitted by
the Learned Counsel for the State, there is no rule of
law that a temporary appointee has a right to
continue    till  a  regularly    selected    candidate    is
available. The submissions of the Learned Additional
Government       Advocate   seems     to   be  the  correct
position of law, even if contrary view might have been
there in a particular case as has been referred to by
the Counsel for the petitioner citing as a binding
precedent. If in a particular case, having considered
the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case and
the Appellate Court might issue directions without
laying down any principle of law, in that case such
directions cannot be treated as precedents. There is
always a danger in treating them as precedents even
though it is a judicial utterances based on the facts of
particular case.
11. One     cannot    lose   sight    of   the   concept     of
circumstantial flexibility, one additional or different
fact  may    make    a   world    of   difference  between
conclusions in two cases. Disposal of cases by blindly
placing reliance on a decision is improper.
12. The following words of Lord Denning in the matter
of   applying     precedents     have   become    quite
authoritative over the years:
“Each case depends on its own facts and a
close similarity between one case and another
is not enough because even a single
significant detail may alter the entire aspect.
In deciding such cases, one should avoid the
temptation to decide cases (as said by
Cardozo) by matching the colour of one case
against the colour of another. To decide
therefore, on which side of the line a case
falls, the broad resemblance to another case
is not at all decisive. ????. Precedent should
be followed only so far as it marks the path of
justice, but you must cut the dead wood and
trim off the side branches else you will find
yourself lost in thickets and branches. My
plea is to keep the path to justice clear of
obstructions which could impede it".
13. Hence, there cannot be any absolute rule or
principle that one ad hoc or temporary appointee can
never be replaced by another ad hoc or temporary
appointee. For example, if a temporary appointee in
service is incompetent, can he not be allowed to
replace with a competent or more competent person.
This Court sees no reason why the competent person
cannot be appointed in place of the incompetent
person, even if both appointments are ad hoc or
temporary appointees.
14. At the same vein, this Court is of the view that
appointment of Guest Lecturers on a large scale
without regular appointment of teachers is likely to
make a huge dent on the quality of the teaching and
hugely hamper the interests of the students. Further,
the guest faculty/temporary teachers will not be able
to work with a free mind and there will always be a
fear of termination at the whims and fancy of the
principal or Vice-Chancellors.       This Court believes
that students of Odisha deserve good teachers and
quality education. Undeniably, the ad hocism cracks
in the myth of a better and quality education.
15. On the other hand, these ad hoc teachers are
unnecessarily subjected to arbitrary 'hiring and firing'
policy. Most of the ad hoc teachers are educated
unemployed and they are compelled to accept these
jobs with a miserably low pay and on pathetic service
conditions. The ad hoc teachers and teaching regime
is a pointer to the facts that the Government is
exploiting the situation sans a sound personnel policy
and hits by Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of
India.   Such   a   status    quoist  approach   directly
contradicts the essence of a State. It is imperative
that the State Government should appoint more and
more regular teachers in the educational institutions
of the State and adhocism need to be shifted to a
permanent system.
16. From the conspectus of factual matrix, this Court is
of the opinion that the position of a guest lecturer,
being contractual in nature cannot be vested with the
right of continuation. The appointment and tenure of
the individual in this case is based on the policy of
the institution and the Courts cannot interfere in
such matters. It is the prerogative of the institution to
allow him to continue or discontinue on the basis of
their performance, conduct etc. as it is not a regular
post. The so-called equity arising out of the temporary
employment and seeking continuation, per se does
not sustain, as court should be precluded from
issuing any order of continuation.
17. Having    considered    the    matter   in   aforesaid
perspective and guided by the precedents cited
hereinabove, this Court rejects the petition.
18. The Writ Petition is, accordingly, disposed of in
terms of the above directions. There shall be no order
as to costs.