2.      The Appellant before this Court is a registered medical practitioner who is presently
working as an Associate Professor and the Head of Dermatology Department, in the
Government Omandurar Medical College, Chennai. In the past, she has held the post of
Assistant Professor and Civil Surgeon at Royapettah Medical College. It is permissible for
her under the law to practice medicine when she is not performing her official duties. The
Appellant, in her individual and independent capacity was carrying on her medical practice
at a premises which is No. 87, Red Hills Road (North), Villivakkam, at Chennai. It is here
that she could be consulted and where she meets and examines her patients.
3.     An inspection was made on the above premises by the Drugs Inspector, Villivakkam
Range on 16.03.2016. As per inspection report, the Drugs Inspector found the following
medicines in the inner room of her premises.
The Drugs Inspector also referred to certain sale bills of medicines which are as follows:
Sr.No.      Bill No. & Date       Name of the Drug     Qty. Sold
4.     The Drugs Inspector thereafter moved an application for obtaining sanction from
the office of the Director of Drugs Control, Tamil Nadu, Chennai-06 on 22.09.2016 which
was given to him on 23.01.2018. Consequently, the Drugs Inspector filed a complaint
before the Court of X Metropolitan Magistrate, Egmore, for prosecuting the Appellant
under Section 18(c) of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 punishable under Section
27(b)(ii) of the Act.
5.     Aggrieved by these proceedings, the Appellant filed an application under Section
482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 before the High Court of Madras for quashing
the criminal proceedings. Her petition was dismissed by the Ld. Single Judge on
21.06.2022. Aggrieved by this, the Appellant has filed Special Leave Petition before this
Court against the order of the Single Judge.
6.       Under Section 18 of Drugs and Cosmetics Act 1940, a prohibition has been imposed
as to the manufacture, sale etc. of certain drugs and cosmetics. Section 18 reads as
18. Prohibition of manufacture and sale of certain drugs and cosmetics. — From such date
as may be fixed by the State Government by notification in the Official Gazette in this behalf, no
person shall himself or by any other person on his behalf—
(b)      [sell or stock or exhibit or offer for sale,] or distributeany drug [or cosmetic] which has been
imported or manufactured in contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or any rule made
(c)      [manufacture for sale or for distribution, or sell, orstock or exhibit or offer for sale,] or
distribute any drug [or cosmetic], except under, and in accordance with the conditions of, a licence
issued for such purpose under this Chapter:
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to the manufacture, subject to prescribed
conditions, of small quantities of any drug for the purpose of examination, test or analysis:
Provided further that the [Central Government] may, after consultation with the Board, by
notification in the Official Gazette, permit, subject to any conditions specified in the notification,
the [manufacture for sale or for distribution, sale, stocking or exhibiting or offering for sale] or
distribution of any drug or class of drugs not being of standard quality.
The punishment for contravention of Section 18(c) is provided under Section 27(b)(ii) which reads
27. Penalty for manufacture, sale, etc., of drugs in contravention of this Chapter— Whoever,
himself or by any other person on his behalf, manufactures for sale or for distribution, or sells, or
stocks or exhibits or offers for sale or distributes—
(ii) without a valid licence as required under clause (c) of section 18, shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which shall [not be less than three years but which may extend to five
years and with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees or three times the value of the
drugs confiscated, whichever is more]:
Provided that the Court may, for any adequate and special reasons to be recorded in the
judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of [less than three years and of fine of
less than one lakh rupees];
7.       As we can see the prohibition under Section 18(c) is on the manufacturing,
distribution, stocking or exhibition of medicines for the purposes of sale. The charge in the
present case is that the Appellant had “stocked” medicines for “sale”. The entire emphasis
is on “sale” of these medicines. This is evident from the sanction being sought by the Drug
Inspector from the office of the Director, Drugs Control, Tamil Nadu wherein as per the
sanction letter dated 23.01.2018, he had said that the Appellant be prosecuted for the
“Section 18(c) of Drugs and Cosmetics Act 1940 for having ∙stocked drugs for sale and sold the
drugs without having a valid drug license, which is punishable under section 27(b)(ii) of the said
Thus, as per the prosecution she had stocked the drugs and sold them. What the Director
of Drugs Control and the High Court lost sight of is the fact that the Appellant is a registered
medical practitioner, her area of specialization being dermatology. She has an M.D. (DVL)
degree in this specialisation. It is not a case that she had opened a shop in her premises
from where she was selling drugs and cosmetics across the counter! It is possible that
she was distributing these drugs to her patients for emergency uses and thus she is
protected by the Act itself. Schedule (K) which is a part of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules,
1945 provides an exemption which we shall examine hereafter.
8.       Under Section 33 of the Act, the Central Government can make rules which have
to be laid before the Parliament for its ratification under Section 38 of the Act. These rules
have been framed which is known as Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1940. Rule 123 of the
rules exempts certain drugs from the provisions of Chapter IV of the Act (which includes
both Section 18 and Section 27 referred above, which are penal provisions), under certain
conditions Rule 123 reads as under:
“123. The drugs specified in Schedule K shall be exempted from the provisions of Chapter IV of
the Act and the rules made thereunder to the extent and subject to the conditions specified in that
Entry No. 5 under Schedule (K) are the drugs which are supplied by a registered medical
practitioner with which we are presently concerned. The relevant provision of Schedule
Class of Drugs                                     Extent and Conditions of Exemptions
5. Drugs supplied by a registered medical All the provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and
practitioner to his own patient or any drug the Rules made thereunder, subject to the
specified in Schedule C supplied by a following conditions:
registered medical practitioner at the request [1. The drugs shall be purchased only from a
of another such practitioner if it is specially dealer or a manufacturer licensed under these
prepared with reference to the condition and rules, and records of such purchases showing
for the use of an individual patient provided the the names and quantities of such drugs,
registered medical practitioner is not (a) together with their batch numbers and names
keeping an open shop or (b) selling across the and addresses of the manufacturers shall be
counter or (c) engaged in the importation, maintained. Such records shall be open to
manufacture, distribution or sale of drugs in inspection by an Inspector appointed under
India to a degree which render him liable to the the Act, who may, if necessary, make
provisions of Chapter IV of the Act and the enquiries about purchases of the drugs and
rules thereunder.                                  may also take samples for test.]
It is not the case of the prosecution that the Appellant was selling drugs from an open
shop across the counter. She is a senior doctor who is engaged as an Associate Professor
and Head of Department, Dermatology in a Government Medical College, and being a
medical practitioner, under certain conditions, she is also protected under the law which
has been referred to above.
9.     Considering the small quantity of medicines, most of which are in the category of
lotions and ointments, it cannot be said by any stretch of imagination that such medicines
could be ‘stocked’ for sale and would come in the category of stocking of medicines for
the purpose of sale. When small quantity of medicine has been found in the premises of
a registered medical practitioner, it would not amount to selling their medicines across the
counter in an open shop. In fact, this is not even the allegation against the Appellant.
Undoubtedly, the provisions of Section 18 and 27 are relevant provisions under the law,
which have a social purpose, which is to protect ordinary citizens from being exploited
inter alia, by unethical medical practitioners, and for this reason the punishment under
Section 27 can extend up to 5 years under the law, and has a minimum punishment of 3
years. But given the facts and circumstances of the case and considering that the
Appellant is a registered medical practitioner, along with the fact that the quantity of
medicines which have been seized is extremely small, a quantity which can be easily
found in the house or a consultation room of a doctor, in our considered view no offence
is made out in the present case. In fact, an exception has been created under Schedule
‘K’ read with Rule 123 to the rules, the appellant ought to have been given the benefit of
these provisions and such a registered medical practitioner should not have been allowed
to face a trial where in all likelihood the prosecution would have failed to prove its case
beyond reasonable doubt. The learned single judge while dismissing the application under
Section 482 Cr.P.C of the appellant has relied upon a decision of this Court:
"9. It is too late in the day to seek reference to any authority for the proposition that while invoking
the power under Section 482 Cr.P.C. for quashing a complaint or a charge, the Court should not
embark upon an enquiry into the validity of the evidence available. All that the Court should see
is as to whether there are allegations in the complaint which form the basis for the ingredients
that constitute certain offences complained of The Court may also be entitled to see {i) whether
the preconditions requisite for taking cognizance have been complied with or not; and {ii) whether
the allegations contained in the complaint, even if accepted in entirety, would not constitute the
13. A look at the complaint filed by the appellant would show that the appellant had incorporated
the ingredients necessary for prosecuting the respondents for the offences alleged. The question
whether the appellant will be able to prove the allegations in a manner known to law would arise
only at a later stage ... ... ........ ..... "
10.      But what the High Court failed to consider, however, is the provisions contained in
Rule 123 read with Schedule ‘K’ to the 1945 Rules and when admittedly it is not the case
of the prosecution that the drugs which were seized were being sold in an open shop
across the counter. Since this was not being done as visualized above, and an exception
is created under the law in favour of the medical practitioner where the drugs given in
Schedule ‘K’ would be exempted from the purview of Chapter 4 of the Act, we are of the
considered view that prosecution against the Appellant is unwarranted.
11.      The backbone of the Respondent’s case is the sales bills with the list of 18 drugs
seized from the premises of the Appellant. However, the details of the sales bills and
seized drugs in the Show Cause Notice issued by the Respondent it is seen that the sales
bills are not even for the medicines which have been seized by the Respondent.
12.      On the contrary, upon being served with the Show Cause Notice, the Appellant was
directed, under Section 18-A, to reveal the name and addresses of persons from whom
she obtained the drugs which were seized. In compliance with the same, Appellant has
produced multiple invoices from pharmaceutical shops to show her bonafides. Further,
upon inspection of the drugs by the Drugs Testing Laboratory, Tamil Nadu they returned
a finding that the drugs were of ‘standard quality’ which indicates it is not a case where
the Appellant was operating a shop to sell spurious medicines over the counter.
13.      Another factor which must be considered is that the search was carried out on
16.03.2016 and sanction for prosecution was sought on 22.09.2016 and the sanction
ultimately was given on 23.01.2018. There is no explanation which has been given for this
delay in getting the approval. In the recently decided case of Hasmukhlal D. Vohra and
Anr. v. State of Tamil Nadu1, criminal proceedings were quashed against a Petitioner on
the grounds that the substance in question was not a drug under Indian Pharmacopoeia.
One of the considerations was the delay in the proceedings against which the following
‘25. In the present case, the Respondent has provided no explanation for the extraordinary
delay of more than four years between the initial site inspection, the show cause notice, and the
complaint. In fact, the absence of such an explanation only prompts the Court to infer some
sinister motive behind initiating the criminal proceedings.
26.      While inordinate delay in itself may not be ground for quashing of a criminal complaint, in
such cases, unexplained inordinate delay of such length must be taken into consideration as a
very crucial factor as grounds for quashing a criminal complaint.
27.      While this court does not expect a fullblown investigation at the stage of a criminal
complaint, however, in such cases where the accused has been subjected to the anxiety of a
potential initiation of criminal proceedings for such a length of time, it is only reasonable for the
court to expect bare-minimum evidence from the Investigating Authorities.’
14.      The sanction for prosecution given in the present case appears, prima facie, to
suffer from the vice of non-application of mind. There is no reference to any of the
documents, evidence or the submissions submitted by either of the parties, no reasons
assigned or even an explanation pertaining to the delay which indicates it has been
passed in a mechani cal manner. This Court in the case of Mansukhlal Vithaldas
Chauhan v. State of Gujarat2, highlighted the importance of a prior sanction granted
under Section 197 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 while quashing the criminal
proceedings instituted against a Divisional Accountant engaged with the Medium Irrigation
Project Division, Gujarat. It was observed as follows:
‘19. Since the validity of “sanction” depends on the applicability of mind by the sanctioning
authority to the facts of the case as also the material and evidence collected during investigation,
it necessarily follows that the sanctioning authority has to apply its own independent mind for the
generation of genuine satisfaction whether prosecution has to be sanctioned or not.’
15.      The possession of the drugs is not disputed in this case by either side. However,
this Court in the case of Mohd. Shabir v. State of Maharashtra3 while allowing an appeal
in part and directing the release of an Appellant who had been prosecuted under the
provision 18(c) of the 1940 Act, this Court observed that possession simpliciter would not
itself be an offence but the prosecution had to prove the essential ingredient under Section
27 which was that even a ‘stock’ of the medicine was for sale. It was observed as follows:
‘4. …We, therefore, hold that before a person can be liable for prosecution or conviction under
Section 27(a)(i)(ii) read with Section 18(c) of the Act, it must be proved by the prosecution
affirmatively that he was manufacturing the drugs for sale or was selling the same or had stocked
them or exhibited the articles for sale. The possession simpliciter of the articles does not appear
to be punishable under any of the provisions of the Act. If, therefore, the essential ingredients of
Section 27 are not satisfied the plea of guilty cannot lead the Court to convict the appellant.’
16.      The sanctioning authority had not examined at all whether a practising doctor could
be prosecuted under the facts of the case, considering the small quantity of the drugs and
the exception created in favour of medical practitioner under Rule 123, read with the
Schedule “K”. All these factors ought to have been considered by the sanctioning
authority. Under these circumstances we allow this appeal and set aside the order of the
learned Single Judge of the Madras High Court and quash the criminal proceedings in
Criminal Case No. 7315 of 2018 on the file of X Metropolitan Magistrate, Egmore,