1.     Heard Mr. Abhay Kumar Singh, learned counsel for the petitioners,
Mr. Gagan Mehta, learned counsel for respondent nos.2 & 3 and Mr.
Shailendra Singh, learned Standing Counsel for the State-respondents.
2.     The writ petition has been filed by the petitioners with the following
“(i) Issue a writ order or direction in the nature of certiorari quashing
the impugned result annexed as Annexure No.11 published on the
17.02.2022 by the Respondent no.2 Uttar Pradesh Higher Education
(ii) Issue a writ order or direction in the nature of mandamus
commanding/directing the respondent no.2 to re-evaluate the answer
sheet of the petitioners and declare a fresh result on the basis of re-
evaluation.
(iii Issue a appropriate writ order or direction to the respondent no.2 to
consider the candidature of the petitioners for interview for post of
Assistant Professor of Geography subject.”
3.     In the present writ petition, counter and rejoinder affidavits have been
exchanged between the parties, supplementary counter affidavit has been
filed on behalf of respondent nos.2 & 3 is also taken on record. Both the
parties agree that this petition be disposed of at this stage, without calling for
any further affidavit.
4.     Brief facts of the case are that the respondent-Commission published
an advertisement for filling the vacancies of Assistant Professor in various
subjects. The petitioners being eligible applied for the post of Assistant
Professor in Geography subject. The petitioners appeared in written
examination scheduled on 30.10.2021 and attempted the questions to the
best of their ability and knowledge. After the examination, the answer key
inviting objections from the candidates in case of any wrong answer in the
answer key was published by the respondent-Commission. The question
papers were in four sets i.e. A, B, C, D and the petitioners were given ‘D’
Series of the booklet. The petitioners found that some of the answers given
in the answer key published by respondent- Commission were wrong,
therefore, they raised their objections separately with respect to questions at
serial no. 2, 3, 14, 29, 34, 55, 56, 65, 66 and 79. Without considering the
objections as raised by the petitioners, the final result was published by only
correcting question no. 14 of ‘D’ series of the booklet, as suggested by the
petitioners. Apart from the aforesaid, the Commission has also deleted one
question i.e. question no.36 and corrected one question i.e. question no.43 of
the ‘D’ series of the booklet. The revised and final result of the written paper
of Assistant Professor (Geography) were declared on 11.02.2022 without
correcting the answers as raised in the objections by the petitioners. The
answers of 10 questions as stated above were said to be incorrect relying
upon certain books as placed by the petitioners but respondent-Commission
neither corrected the questions which was wrongly answered by the
Commission in the answer key, as objected by the petitioners nor
communicated the reason behind non consideration of rest 8 questions as
suggested by the petitioners.
5.     The petitioners found that question no. 29 of ‘D’ series of the booklet
had two correct answers but the objection with respect to the same could not
be raised prior to declaration of the result.
6.     The questions which still need to be corrected as per the objections
raised by the petitioners are as follows:-
Which of the following is in pre-active stage of teaching?
As per the answer key, the correct answer is (C) whereas as per the
books of UPKAR Prakashan and another book of Drishti for UGC NET JRF,
available with the petitioner shows that both (B) and (C) answers are correct.
Reflecting teaching is:
(C)Making Association                          (D) Reproduction of thought
As per the answer key, the correct answer is (A) whereas as per the
books of UPKAR Prakashan and another book of Drishti for UGC NET JRF,
available with the petitioner shows that both (A) and (D) answers are
Among the following scholars who first put forth the Global Strategic View
As per the answer key, the correct answer is (A) whereas as per the
relevant pages of books of Political Geography written by Dr. S. Adhikari
and Dr. Ratan Kumar and another book of Political Geography written by
Ramesh Dutta Dikshit as well as by R.C. Tiwari, available with the
petitioner, the correct answer is (B).
Which of the following types of spectrum of Remote Sensing would be best
suited for locating deforestation?
As per the answer key, the correct answer is (D) whereas as per the
relevant pages of books of Principle of Remote Sensing and Geographical
Information System written by Dr. Devidutta Chounial and another book of
Arihant Publication UGC NET as well as TATA McGraw-Hills written by
D.R. Khullar, available to the petitioner, the correct answer is (A) .
Which of the following process is called by alternate wetting and drying of
As per the answer key, the correct answer is (A) whereas as per the
relevant pages of books of Bhuaakriti Vigyan ka Swaroop written by
Savindra Singh, available with the petitioner, the correct answer is (D).
With references to Endogenetic Forces, which of the following statement is/
(1) Extreme event like earthquake and volcanic eruptions are caused by
(2) Tensional Forces cause up warping and down warping
(C)Only 1 and 2                          (D) Neither 1 nor 2
The question paper is in diglot and the answers in hindi language is
different from english language, therefore, the question may be deleted as
there is no mechanism to know in which the language the aspirant has opted.
In case, the said question is not deleted it will create anomaly.
In support of their submission/objection, petitioners have placed
reliance the relevant pages of books of Bhautik Bhoogol ka Swaroop written
by Savindra Singh and another book of Arihant Publication UGC NET.
Which of the following is not correctly matched?
As per the answer key, the correct answer is (D) whereas relying upon
the book of Samudra Vigyan written by Savindra Singh and another book of
Bhautik Bhoogol ka Swaroop written by Savindra Singh, the correct answer
7.      The petitioners are confident and self possessed that in case the
answers as relied upon by the petitioners and raised in their objections, if
taken into consideration, the petitioners will qualify in the written
8.      Learned counsel for the petitioners submits that the petitioners while
raising their objections has placed reliance upon the reliable and renowned
books, therefore, their objections should have been taken into consideration
prior to declaration of the result. The conduct of the respondents to declare
the result without considering the objections of the petitioners amounts to
arbitrariness and hard-heartedness on their part, therefore, he submits that
the selection of the petitioners on the post of Assistant Professor
(Geography) has been denied by not taking into consideration the objections
as raised by the petitioners, which in case done, the petitioners would have
9.      Thus, the present writ petition has been filed with the prayer to direct
the respondents to re-evaluate the answer sheets on the basis of the answers
as given by the petitioners in the objections placed before respondents-
Commission and declare the result of the petitioners accordingly.
10.     On the other hand Mr. Gagan Mehta, learned counsel for respondent
nos. 2 & 3 and Mr. Shailendra Singh, learned Standing Counsel for the State
respondents submit that the relief as prayed on behalf of the petitioners
cannot be granted by this Court while exercising its power under Article 226
of the Constitution of India. The request of the petitioners for re-evaluation
of the answer sheets regarding question no.3, 29, 55, 65, 66 and 79 cannot be
accepted as the correctness of the option given in the answer key is based
upon experts opinion as obtained by the respondent-Commission and in the
opinion of the subject experts, the answer key has been rightly uploaded.
Since the answer key has been examined by the subject experts and the
petitioners have not pleaded mala fide as against the respondents, as such no
judicial review would lie and the writ petition is liable to be dismissed.
11.    Learned      counsel      for   respondent-Commission            has   specifically
mentioned that panel of examiners and experts is an independent body as the
same has been constituted under Regulation 12 of the U.P. High Education
Service Commission (Procedure for Selection of Teachers) Regulations,
2014, which reads as follows:-
“(1) The Chairman Examination Committee shall prepare for every
subject, a list of persons qualified for appointment as examiners and
submit the same for approval fo the Commission, such list shall be
revised at least once in every two years:
Provided that a person included in the previous list shall be eligible for
inclusion in the revised list.
(2) The list referred in sub-section (1) shall contain, as far as possible,
information about the persons included therein regard to their academic
qualifications, teaching experience at the degree and the postgraduate
levels or professional experience and, the particulars, of the earlier
examinations conducted by the Commission in which they acted as
examiners.
(3) The Chairman Examination Committee shall, with the prior approval
of the Commission, appoint Paper Setters and Moderators from amongst
the persons included in the list referred to in sub-section (1).
(4) In making such appointments every care shall be taken to ensure that
no person as so appointed who was found guilty of misconduct by any
university, Government or Government body, or against whom any
inquiries or investigations are pending or allegations of misconduct, or
whose integrity is doubtful. Any person whose work as Head Examiner,
Paper Setter or Valuer is found to be unsatisfactory by the Commission
shall not be reappointed for that purpose.”
12.    The examiners as well as experts being an independent body, their
decision cannot be interfered as the same is given after proper consultation
and research. They further submit that in case of any mistake, the benefit of
change in the answer key is given to each and every candidate, after
following due process. The change in the tentative answer key can be made
only after the expert opinion, the Commission takes into consideration the
objections as raised by the candidates and after placing the same before the
experts, the answer key is uploaded. The deletion of answer can be possible
only after the experts opinion and benefit of deleted question is given to each
and every candidate, in such a manner that there is no discrepancy or
discrimination with any candidates.
13.   As regards the issue regarding discrepancy between English and Hindi
version, the instruction no.15 of the question booklet itself provides that the
English version will be taken as final, Instruction No.15, reads as follows:-
In case of any discrepancy between the English and Hindi version,
English version will be taken as final.”
14.   They further submit that the objections as raised by the candidates to
the answer key was taken into consideration and the duly appointed experts
of the subjects submitted their opinion on the same before the Commission
placing reliance upon books like fundamentals of remote sensing by George
Joseph and physical Geography by Sunil Singh from which specially
question no.55, 65, 66 and 79 were verified.
15.   Only after taking into consideration the experts opinion, after
considering the objections raised by the candidates, the final key was
published on 11.02.2022.
16.   Lastly, learned counsel for respondents submit that there is no
provision of re-evaluation, therefore, the re-evaluation of answer sheets
cannot be permitted as prayed by the petitioners. In support of their
submission, they relying upon the judgement of High Court of Tripura Vs.
Tirtha Sarathi Mukherjee and Others, reported in 2009 II SCALE 708, H.P.
Service Commission Vs. Mukesh Thakur and Others, reported in AIR 2010
SC 2620 and Ran Vijay Singh and Others Vs. State of U.P. and Others,
reported in AIR 2018 SC 52.
17.    Therefore, learned counsel for respondents submit that the writ
petition is not maintainable and the same is liable to be dismissed.
18.    I have considered the submissions made on behalf of learned counsel
for the parties and have gone through the records of the present writ petition.
19.    Learned counsel for the petitioners has not brought to this Court’s
attention any Rules, Regulations or any guidelines framed by the
respondents, notification or circular issued by the respondents or any
authority of law that may permit re-evaluation.
20.    The issue of re-evaluation of answer book or sheet is no more res
integra. This issue has been considered by the Apex Court in the case of
Maharashtra State Board of Secondary and Higher Secondary Education &
Anr. Vs. Paritosh Bhupesh Kurmarsheth & Ors., reported in AIR 1984 SC
1543, wherein the Apex Court rejected the contention that in absence of
provision for re-evaluation, a direction to this effect can be issued by the
Court. The Apex Court further held that even the policy decision
incorporated in the Rules/Regulations providing for rechecking/ verification/
re-evaluation cannot be challenged unless there are grounds to show that the
policy itself is in violation of some statutory provision. The Apex Court held
"In our opinion, this approach made by the High Court was not correct
or proper because the question whether a particular piece of delegated
legislation - whether a rule or regulation or other type of statutory
instrument - is in excess of the power of subordinate legislation
conferred on the delegate as to be determined with reference only to the
specific provisions contained in the relevant statute conferring the
power to make the rule, regulation, etc. and also the object and purpose
of the Act as can be gathered from the various provisions of the
enactment. It would be wholly wrong for the court to substitute its own
opinion for that of the legislature or its delegate as to what principle or
policy would best serve the objects and purposes of the Act and to sit in
judgment over the wisdom and effectiveness or otherwise of the policy
laid down by the regulation-making body and declare a regulation to be
ultra vires merely on the ground that, in the view of the Court, the
impugned provisions will not help to serve the object and purpose of
the Act. So long as the body entrusted with the task of framing the rules
or regulations acts within the scope of the authority conferred on it, in
the sense that the rules or regulations made by it have a rational nexus
with the object and purpose of the Statute, the court should not concern
itself with the wisdom or efficaciousness of such rules or regulations. It
is exclusively within the province of the legislature and its delegate to
determine, as a matter of policy, how the provisions of the Statute can
best be implemented and what measures, substantive as well as
procedural would have to be incorporated in the rules or regulations for
the efficacious achievement of the objects and purposes of the Act. It is
not for the Court to examine the merits or demerits of such a policy
because its scrutiny has to be limited to the question as to whether the
impugned regulations fall within the scope of the regulation-making
power conferred on the delegate by the Statute.
In our opinion, the aforesaid approach made by the High Court is
wholly incorrect and fallacious. The Court cannot sit in judgment over
the wisdom of the policy evolved by the legislature and the subordinate
regulation-making body. It may be a wise policy which will fully
effectuate the purpose of the enactment or it may be lacking in
effectiveness and hence calling for revision and improvement. But any
draw-backs in the policy incorporated in a rule or regulation will not
render it ultra vires and the Court cannot strike it down on the ground
that in its opinion, it is not a wise or prudent policy, but is even a
foolish one, and that it will not really serve to effectuate the purposes of
the Act. The legislature and its delegate are the sole repositories of the
power to decide what policy should be pursued in relation to matters
covered by the Act and there is no scope for interference by the Court
unless the particular provision impugned before it can be said to suffer
from any legal infirmity in the sense of its being wholly beyond the
scope of the regulation-making power or its being inconsistent with any
of the provisions of the parent enactment or in violation of any of the
limitations imposed by the Constitution."
21.    This view referred to above has been approved, relied upon and
reiterated by the Apex Court in the case of Pramod Kumar Srivastava Vs.
Chairman, Bihar Public Service Commission, Patna & Ors, reported in J.T.
2004 SC 380 observing as under:
"Under the relevant rules of the Commission, there is no provision
wherein a candidate may be entitled to ask for re-evaluation of his
answer-book. There is a provision for scrutiny only wherein the answer-
books are seen for the purpose of checking whether all the answers
given by a candidate have been examined and whether there has been
any mistake in the totalling of marks of each question and nothing them
correctly on the first cover page of the answer-book. There is no dispute
that after scrutiny no mistake was found in the marks awarded to the
appellant in the General Science paper. In the absence of any provision
for re-evaluation of answer-books in the relevant rules, no candidate in
an examination has got any right whatsoever to claim or ask for re-
evaluation of his marks."
22.    This Court feels that sympathy or compassion does not play any role
in the matter of directing or not directing re-evaluation of an answer sheets.
The law is well settled that the burden is on the candidates, not only to
demonstrate that the key answer is incorrect but also to show that it is a
glaring mistake which is totally apparent and no inferential process or
reasoning is required to show that the key answer is wrong. The
Constitutional Courts must exercise great restrain in such matters and should
be reluctant to entertain a plea challenging the correctness of the key
answers. The Court should not over step its jurisdiction by giving the
directions for re-evaluation which would amount to judicially reviewing the
decision of the expert in the field.
23.    The legal position in this respect has been summarised in case of Ran
Vijay Singh and Ors. Vs. State of U.P. and Ors., reported in (2018) 2 SCC
“30. The law on the subject is therefore, quite clear and we only
propose to highlight a few significant conclusions. They are:
30.1. If a statute, Rule or Regulation governing an examination permits
the re-evaluation of an answer sheet or scrutiny of an answer sheet as a
matter of right, then the authority conducting the examination may
30.2. If a statute, Rule or Regulation governing an examination does
not permit re-evaluation or scrutiny of an answer sheet (as distinct from
prohibiting it) then the court may permit re-evaluation or scrutiny only
if it is demonstrated very clearly, without any “inferential process of
reasoning or by a process of rationalisation” and only in rare or
exceptional cases that a material error has been committed;
30.3. The court should not at all re-evaluate or scrutinise the answer
sheets of a candidate—it has no expertise in the matter and academic
matters are best left to academics;
30.4. The court should presume the correctness of the key answers and
proceed on that assumption; and
30.5. In the event of a doubt, the benefit should go to the examination
authority rather than to the candidate.”
24.    Undoubtedly, the Courts cannot judicially review the expert opinion
unless and until the key answer is patently wrong.
25.    There is no doubt that the candidates put in dreadful efforts while
preparing for an examination, it must not be unremembered that even the
examination authorities as well as experts put in equally great efforts to
successfully conduct the examination, therefore the Court must consider the
internal checks and balances put in place by the examination authorities
before interfering with the efforts put in by the candidates who have
successfully participated in the examination and the examination authorities.
26.    Therefore, the Court should restrain in interfering with the efforts put
in by the candidates as well as the examination authorities unless and until
the mistake is apparent on the face of record and no research has to be done
in proving the same, as the same will be an unending process resulting in
uncertainty and confusion.
27.    Keeping in mind the aforesaid, the Court in case of U.P.P.S.C. and
Ors. Vs. Rahul Singh and Ors. reported in AIR 2018 SC 2861 has observed
“Unless the candidate demonstrate that the key answers are patently
wrong on the fact of it, the Courts cannot enter into the academic field,
weigh the pros cons of the arguments given by both sides and then
come to the conclusion as to which of the answer is better or more
correct.”
28.    Indubitably, conducting and holding of examinations in a most fitting
and fair manner is peremptory and is solemn duty of examining body to
provide for fair procedure, rules, regulations or bye-laws, keeping in mind
that the career and fate of the students depends upon the result of the
29.    A Constitution Bench of the Apex Court in the case of University of
Mysore Vs. C.D. Govinda Rao & Anr., reported in AIR 1965 SC 491, has
held that where the decision under challenge has been taken by the
Committee of Expert, "normally the Courts should be slow to interfere with
the opinion expressed by the experts" unless there are allegations of mala
fide against any of the Members of the Expert Committee. The Court further
"........It would normally be wise and safe for the Courts to leave the
decisions of academic matters to experts who are more familiar with
the problems they face than Courts.....…"
30.    It is settled law that when a decision is taken by the Committee of
Expert having high academic qualifications and long experience in the
specialised field, the Courts should not normally interfere in the matters
unless there are compelling circumstances for doing so.
31.    The aforesaid issue is also well settled in view of the judgement of
Apex Court in case of Bihar Staff Selection Commission Vs. Arun
Kumar ,reported in (2020) 6 SCC 362. There are otherwise catena of
judgements of Supreme Court holding that in the competitive selection test,
prayer for re-evaluation of marks cannot be accepted unless a rule for it
32.    Taking into consideration the settled position of law in the matters
where the answer key is disputed, this Court in case of Jitendra Singh Vs.
Union of India and Another, passed in Writ C No. 53877 of 2017, has held
that the Court has to proceed on the assumption and presumption that the
answer key is correct as the same is based on experts opinion given by the
persons specialised. In the event of any doubt, benefit should go to the
examination authority rather than to the candidate. It is with a rider that the
Court should not re-evaluate or scrutinize the answer sheets of the
candidates as it has no expertise in the matter, the academic matters are best
left to the academicians there being no scope of judicial review in the matter.
33.         Appropriately, considering the capitulations made by learned counsel
for respondent no.2 and law laid down by the Apex Court, established
position of law, this Court finds no good ground to interfere in the present
petition, the same is accordingly dismissed.