The hearing has been conducted through hybrid mode (physical
and virtual hearing).
1. The petitioners impugn the order dated 24.10.2019 passed by
the learned Additional Rent Controller („ARC‟), Patiala House
Courts, New Delhi, granting the respondent-tenant Leave to
Defend, in the petitioner‟s application seeking the tenant‟s
eviction under section 14(1) (e) of the Delhi Rent Control Act,
1958. Since 1983, the tenant is in occupation of the tenanted
premises comprising two rooms- one large and one small, one
pantry, one wash room and an open area in the rear portion of
the building numbered as 82/10, First Floor, Tolstoy Lane,
RC.REV. 158/2020                                          Page 1 of 28
Janpath, New Delhi. The property is located in New Delhi‟s
most prestigious commercial area. The tenanted area marked in
the site plan filed with the eviction petition is reproduced
RC.REV. 158/2020                                        Page 2 of 28
2. The      son  and   daughter-in-law     of  petitioner    no.1      are
professionals. Since 2009 the son is a practicing advocate in
Delhi, his wife is a Chartered Accountant. They are dependent
upon petitioner no. 1 for their office accommodation and would
like to be provided the same at the earliest so that they can
firmly establish and augment their professional career.
According to them, there can be no other place more suitable,
convenient and a more prestigious, address than the tenanted
premises which lies in the heart of New Delhi, i.e. Connaught
3. There is no dispute qua the existence of landlord-tenant
relationship. The petitioners/landlords have brought on record
documents to show their right and title in the property. It has
been mentioned in the impugned order as under:
4. In support of their case, petitioners have filed the
documents viz. Copy of ID proof of petitioner, copy of
memorandum, copy of rent receipts, copy of the cheque,
copy of the letter dated 19.02.1997, copy of the lease
deed, copy of lease deed : 2008, copy of lease deed dated
14.02.2011, copy of memorandum of agreement dated
07.06.2013, copy of Will dated 13.06.2013, copy of
settlement agreement dated 23.08.2013, copy of lease
deed dated 30.08.2013, copy of cheque, copy of
graduation degree alongwith certificates, copy of the site
photograph, copy of the site plan map. …”
4. The sole reason why the leave to defend was granted is that the
tenants     had   made   out    a   triable  case    apropos        the
RC.REV. 158/2020                                             Page 3 of 28
petitioners/landlords having alternate accommodation in the
vicinity.
5. In the leave to defend application, the respondent/tenant has
contended that the landlord owns: i) a property bearing no.2,
Commissioner Lane, Civil Lines, Delhi -110054, where four
people reside, ii) property nos. 82 & 84 Tolstoy Lane, Janpath,
which are composite properties and there are a lot of vacant
portions available therein; iii) petitioner no.1 is “stated to be
occupying” 200 sq. ft. of area on the ground floor of property
bearing no. 82, Tolstoy Lane, Janpath; iv) the petitioners have
let out 2673 sq. ft. of the first floor to a tenant and some portion
to ICICI Bank on the ground floor and; v) the petitioners also
own a property in Bazar Sitaram, Delhi.
6. It is the tenant‟s contention that the leave to defend has rightly
been granted because the landlord is seeking additional
accommodation whereas, he is already in possession of alternate
vacant space in the same building one unit-room on the ground
floor, which was earlier occupied by the bank, now stands
vacated.
7. In the eviction petition, the petitioners/landlords have
elaborately explained the reason why the shop on the ground
floor, albeit larger in size, than the tenanted premises, is not
suitable. It has averred as under:
“...(xii) The petitioners submit that so far as the rear
portion of property bearing no.82, Janpath, New
Delhi is concerned it is submitted that there is a
vacant shop available on the Ground Floor, however,
RC.REV. 158/2020                                               Page 4 of 28
the same is not suitable to the son of the petitioner
no.1 for the reason that the entire Tolstoy Lane is
over-crowded and the said lane is mainly used for
parking purposes. Besides, right in front of the shop
there is a huge electricity transformer being used by
the NDMC Department for transmission of electricity,
also known as the „Electricity Sub Station‟. Due to this
there is constant movements of electricity vehicles,
cars of officials etc. The petitioners submit that
adjoining to the said shop there is a restaurant which
is being visited by number of patrons.
(xiii) The petitioners submit that the son of the
petitioner no.1 is carrying on his professional
activities and the space available in the form of a shop
on the ground floor is not suitable on account of
disturbances      created by       NDMC electricity
transformer, parking of cars, various visitors to the
restaurants and other ships situated in Tolstoy Lane.
The petitioners further submit that there is no toilet,
bathroom available along with that space on the
Ground Floor portion. Even otherwise for son of the
petitioner no.1 tenanted space is most suitable...”
8. According to the tenant, the eviction petition admits, that the
landlord is in possession of 1440 sq. ft of commercial space, (in
the middle portion of the ground floor); that if the entrance to
the 1440 sq. ft. area on the ground floor is considered
unattractive, inconvenient and an impediment then the same
factors would be applicable to the tenanted premises also,
because entrance to the tenanted premises is from the same rear
lane.
9. The landlord says that the vacant shop on the ground floor is not
suitable for the professional consultancy services of the
RC.REV. 158/2020                                             Page 5 of 28
dependent children, who need the tenanted premises for
lawyers and a Chartered Accountant office.
10.The front portion of premises/building was leased out to Bank
of Rajasthan (now „ICICI Bank‟) for utilisation as a Service
Branch. It did not require any bank customers to visit the said
office. The back portion does not have a washroom and/or other
basic necessities for a lawyer‟s office. The front portion of the
said premises continues to be let out to the said Bank.
Convenient access from the front portion to the back portion of
1440 sq. ft would be contingent upon permission being given by
the occupant (Bank). Surely, for security concerns and
otherwise for obviating any situation of chaos, the lessee Bank
will not allow unknown entities, persons or visitors to enter the
erstwhile „service area‟, located in the middle area. The said
1440 sq. ft. could best be used as an extension of the front
office.
11. Petitioner no.1 submits that all the other portions of 82, Tolstoy
Lane, Janpath are occupied by his brother (petitioner no.2 in the
impugned order); and the latter cannot be asked to vacate his
own premises, simply to accommodate the bona-fide needs of
the children of petitioner no.1. It is asserted that the
requirements/need of the son and daughter-in-law of petitioner
no.1 stands proven.
12.The learned counsel for the respondent/tenant submits that two
shops which were lying vacant with the landlord at the time of
filing of the eviction petition could well have been utilized for
RC.REV. 158/2020                                             Page 6 of 28
13.The eviction petitioners had disclosed the details of the these
shops in the building owned by them as under:-
“...(xiv). The petitioners submit that the other area on the
ground floor which is shown in green colour is at present
in possession and occupation of brother of the petitioners,
namely, Sh. Sharad Gupta. It is submitted that m terms of
the oral settlement arrived at· amongst the petitioners,
their brother Sharad Gupta and their mother along with
the other family members the entire property bearing
No.82 Janpath, New Delhi came to the share of the
petitioners and it was expected that after execution of the
above mentioned settlement agreement the brother of the
petitioners or his own would vacate and hand over the
said portion under his possession. However, till date he
has neither vacated nor handed over possession to the
petitioners which led to filing of a suit seeking recovery,
of possession in the Hon'ble High Court. Besides, there
are three small shops, two admeasuring 72 square feet
and one ad measuring 50 square feet, available on the
passage on the rear
side ground floor of property bearing No.82, Janpath,
New Delhi. Out of these three shops, one. shop on the
right side of the stair case which is admeasuring 72
square feet, has been given on rent to M /s Bharti Airtel
by Smt. Shakuntla Gupta vide lease deed dated
14.02.2011 for a period of 9 years and after her death the
rent is being paid to the petitioners. The said space is not
suitable for office purposes and the said shop is used only
to keep servers by Bharti Airtel and the same remains
locked. most of the time. The other two shops
admeasuring 72 square feet and 50 Square feet
respectively are not at all suitable for office purposes.
The said two shops are very small in size to be put to use
for office purposes 'and there is no attached toilet & we
and for this reasons the said shops are lying vacant for
the last several years ...”
14.The learned Senior Counsel for the petitioners/landlords submits
that the two shops which are said to be available with the
petitioners/landlords are so small that a table and a chair could
barely be fitted into it, let alone the same being used as an office
for consultation by a lawyer or a Chartered Accountant.
Furthermore, the said shop did not have and there is no scope
for constructing a toilet nor does it have any conference room or
waiting room or a space for office staff, pantry and other
amenities, which are necessary for a modern day law office
and/or a CA office. The size of the said shops and their not
having an attached toilet, is not controverted in the leave to
defend.
15.It is settled law that apropos suitability of tenanted premises for
the landlords‟ bona fide need, the landlord is the best judge. It is
the prerogative of the landlord to determine the suitability of the
land/space available with him for the need espoused. The tenant
cannot dictate to or instruct a landlord as to how and which
property of the latter should be used for which purpose. This
stands settled in Sarla Ahuja v. United Insurance Company Ltd.
(1998) 8 SCC 119, which held inter alia, as under:
14. The crux of the ground envisaged in clause (e) of
Section 14(1) of the Act is that the requirement of the
landlord for occupation of the tenanted premises must be
bona fide. When a landlord asserts that he requires his
building for his own occupation, the Rent Controller shall
not proceed on the presumption that the requirement is
RC.REV. 158/2020                                             Page 8 of 28
not bona fide. When other conditions of the clause are
satisfied and when the landlord shows a prima facie case,
it not for the tenant to dictate terms to the landlord as to
how else he can adjust himself without getting possession
of the tenanted premises. While deciding the question of
bona fides of the requirement of the landlord, it is quite
unnecessary to make an endeavour as to how else the
landlord could have adjusted himself.
16.This Court in Sudesh Kumari Soni and Ors. V. Prabha Khanna
and ors., RC.REV. 44/2004 held inter alia as under:
“24.It is often said by courts that it is not for the tenant to
dictate terms to the landlord as to how else he can adjust
himself without getting possession of the tenanted
premises. While deciding the question of bona fides of the
requirement of the landlord it is quite unnecessary to
make an endeavour as to how else the landlord could
have adjusted himself.
25. Suitability has to be seen from the convenience of the
landlord and his family members and on the basis of the
circumstances including their profession, vocation, style
of living, habits and background. Landlord is the best
judge of his residential requirement. In view of well
settled law, I hold that accommodation available with the
petitioner is insufficient as against total family members.
Hence the petitioner has made out a case under Section
14(1)(e) of Delhi Rent Control Act and is entitled for
relief claimed.”
17.The issue to be seen is: whether the space available to the
petitioners/landlords could be considered as suitable for the
purposes for which the tenanted premises is sought. The son of
the petitioner no.1 is a practising lawyer and the daughter-in-
law is a practising Chartered Accountant. Both professionals
RC.REV. 158/2020                                               Page 9 of 28
would require independent units comprising rooms for
lawyers/CAs, conference room, room for juniors, washroom,
pantry, sitting area, reception area, pantry, storage space, etc.
18.The impugned order has not referred to these aspects. It has not
even considered the fact that the properties at Commissioner
Lane, Civil Lines, Delhi is a residential space. The need of the
landlord is a commercial one and the aforesaid property (Civil
lines) is used for residential purpose and it cannot be put to
commercial use. Therefore, ex-facie this property cannot be
considered as being alternate accommodation available with the
landlord.
19.There is nothing better for the petitioner no.1/landlord than to
provide a space in the most prestigious commercial area of the
city, for his dependant son and daughter-in-law to establish their
respective independent practice. The property mentioned in
Bazar Sitaram (Old Delhi) cannot be compared to Connaught
Place. In any case, landlords have denied the availability of any
accommodation in Bazar Sitaram. They say that it is an
ancestral property, in which petitioner no.1 is one of the co-
owners and it is not available to the petitioner no.1 for his
exclusive use nor is it suitable.
20.Surely, the Bazar Sitaram property, is in a narrow lane in Old
Delhi and cannot be compared to an easily accessible
commercial space in the well-known central point of New Delhi
i.e., Connaught Place.
21. The Supreme Court in Anil Bajaj V. Vinod Ahuja, (2014) 15
SCC 610 held, inter alia, as under:
“6. In the present case it is clear that while the landlord
(Appellant 1) is carrying on his business from a shop
premise located in a narrow lane, the tenant is in
occupation of the premises located on the main road
which the landlord considers to be more suitable for his
own business. The materials on record, in fact, disclose
that the landlord had offered to the tenant the premises
located in the narrow lane in exchange for the tenanted
premises which offer was declined by the tenant. It is not
the tenant's case that the landlord, Appellant 1, does not
propose to utilise the tenanted premises from which
eviction is sought for the purposes of his business. It is
also not the tenant's case that the landlord proposes to
rent out/keep vacant the tenanted premises after obtaining
possession thereof or to use the same is any way
inconsistent with the need of the landlord. What the tenant
contends is that the landlord has several other shop
houses from which he is carrying on different businesses
and further that the landlord has other premises from
where the business proposed from the tenanted premises
can be effectively carried out. It would hardly require any
reiteration of the settled principle of law that it is not for
the tenant to dictate to the landlord as to how the
property belonging to the landlord should be utilised by
him for the purpose of his business. Also, the fact that the
landlord is doing business from various other premises
cannot foreclose his right to seek eviction from the
tenanted premises so long as he intends to use the said
tenanted premises for his own business.”
22.The court is persuaded by the petitioners‟ aforesaid argument,
that a law office and/or CA‟s office needs to have certain basic
facilities like the reception area, waiting area, a conference
RC.REV. 158/2020                                             Page 11 of 28
room, lawyers‟ chambers, space for juniors and assisting staff,
washrooms, pantry area, storage area for files, computers and
other space etc.
23.The important element is that the portion now occupied by the
tenant/respondent is a readymade unit which has enough space
for the functioning of a modern day office along with the wash
rooms and pantry area in which the petitioner‟s son, a practicing
advocate can shift into immediately, of course after minor
repairs. Interestingly, the tenant, a Chartered Accountant, is
using the said tenanted premises as his office. He would be
replaced only by another professional, who is dependent upon
the landlord.
24. Photographs filed by the petitioners/landlords show that the
state of entrance of the commercial space admeasuring 1440 sq.
ft, (in the middle portion of the ground floor) is the most
unattractive. The photographs also show that the shops are too
small and abut the rear lane/service lane of the building. The
petitioners say that they are not suitable for the petitioners‟ bona
fide needs as professionals. It is argued that the mere access to
the so-called 1440 sq. ft. (the middle space on the ground floor)
and the two dingy-looking constructed shop-space, would be
sufficient to chase-away any prospective clients of a
professional lawyer or C.A.
25.What the tenant refers to spaces on the ground floor are shops
with a built-up space of 50 sq. ft. or 70 sq. ft. Surely a lawyer‟s
office cannot be run from such constricted space. A decent size
table along with a chair itself would occupy most of the area
and there would be hardly any space for anybody else to sit
inside the shop, let alone provide any chair for any support staff
or juniors. Therefore, the said two shops cannot be considered
as alternate accommodation.
26.The tenant‟s next argument is apropos the maintainability of the
eviction petition itself. He contends that the petition falls foul
of section 14(6) of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958, in as much
as, it was filed prior to five years, having lapsed from the date of
„acquisition     by    transfer‟,   of    the   premises    to     the
petitioners/landlords. Admittedly, the petition was filed on
02.05.2018; the transfer document was executed on 07.06.2013.
Therefore, at first glance, the petition would appear to be pre-
mature by about a month. However, this contention is refuted by
the learned Senior Advocate for the landlords. He submits that
this issue was never raised before the learned Rent Controller.
In any case, the document recording the transfer of interest
and/or title in the said premises was a family settlement deed,
which was registered with Sub-Registrar-VII, Delhi/New Delhi
on 13.06.2013. It records an oral family arrangement which
reads, inter alia, as under:-
“…22. That with a view to not only save the honour of the
family but also to preserve the peace and security of the
family by avoiding litigation, and to further preserve the
properties and to put an end to all the disputes and
differences, which may arise between them, the Parties
hereto, who are members of the same family, on 27 th March,
2013 on the festival of Holi, bonafide arrived at an oral
Family Agreement in respect of all the aforesaid properties.
23. That during those discussions on 27 th March, 2013; the
First Party (Smt. Shakuntala Gupta) expressed her
incapability to continue to manage and maintain the
following three properties which were held in the name of
First Party (Smt. Shakuntala Gupta) since the said First
Party (Smt. Shakuntala Gupta) had become quite weak and
feeble especially due to her old age and the First Party (Smt.
Shakuntala Gupta) expressed her desire that she would like
to continue as the owner of all other properties except the
following three properties:-
(a) Built up Property Bearing Municipal No. 6, Under
Hill Road, Civil Lines, Delhi-110054 (also known as
Civil Lines, Delhi-110054 in the municipal records) ad-
measuring 3410 square yards.
(b) Entire built up Property Bearing No. 82, Janpath,
New Delhi-110001ad-measuring 673 square meters
approximately
(c) 20%(one-fifth) undivided share in built up Property
24. That on 27th March, 2013, it was amicably and
mutually resolved and decided as under:-
(I) That the Second Party (Shri Sanjiv Gupta), Third
Party (Shri Sharad Gupta) and Fourth Party (Shri Vikas
Gupta) will have equal one-third (33.33%) share each in
the following properties:-
(a) Built up Property Bearing Municipal No. 6, Under
Hill Road, Civil Lines, Delhi-110054 (also known as
Civil Lines, Delhi -110054 in the municipal records)
ad-measuring 3410 square yards.
(b) Entire built up Property Bearing No. 82, Janpath,
New Delhi-110001 ad-measuring 673 square meters
approximately.
(II) That the Fifth Party (Smt. Charu Gupta) and Seventh
Party (Smt. Gauri Gupta) will have equal one-half (50%)
share each in the following properties:-
(a)     Entire built up Property Bearing No. 2B,
Lines, Delhi-110054, ad-measuring 892 square yards
approximately.
(b)     Part of built up Property Bearing No. 6,
Lines, Delhi-110054, ad-measuring 380 square yards
approximately.
(III) That the Parties valued the properties and it was
agreed as follows:-
(a) Value of 577 square yards of land alongwith
proportionate built up superstructure in built up
Civil Lines, Delhi-110054 (also known as Property
Lines, Delhi-110054 in the municipal records) is
equivalent to value of 50% undivided share in
following two properties:
(i)     Entire built up Property Bearing No. 2B,
(ii) Part of built up Property Bearing No. 6,
(b) Value of 220 square yards of land alongwith
proportionate built up superstructure in built up
RC.REV. 158/2020                                          Page 19 of 28
Lines, Delhi-110054 (also known as Property Bearing
110054 in the municipal records) is equivalent to value
of one sixth (1/6th) undivided share in entire built up
(IV) That the Seventh Party (Smt. Gauri Gupta) herein
gave up all her rights, title and interest in one half (50 %)
undivided share in (i) Entire built up Property Bearing
Lines, Delhi-110054 and (ii) Part of built up Property
Marg, Civil Lines, Delhi-110054 in favour of the Second
Party (Shri Sanjiv Gupta) herein.
(V) That the Second Party (Shri Sanjiv Gupta) herein
gave up his rights, title and interest to the extent of 577
square yards of land alongwith proportionate built up
superstructure in built up Property Bearing Municipal
known as Property Bearing Municipal No.6B, Under Hill
Road, Civil Lines, Delhi-110054 in the municipal
records) in favour the Seventh Party (Smt. Gauri Gupta)
herein.
(VI) That the Second Party (Shri Sanjiv Gupta) herein
gave up and his rights, title and interest to the extent of
220 square yards of land alongwith proportionate built up
superstructure in built up Property Bearing Municipal
known as Property Bearing Municipal No. 6B, Under Hill
Road, Civil Lines, Delhi-110054 in the municipal
records) in favour of the Third Party (Shri Sharad Gupta)
herein.
(VII) That the Third Party (Shri Sharad Gupta) herein
gave up his rights, title and interest to the extent of one
sixth (1/6th) undivided share in entire built up Property
Bearing No. 82, Janpath, New Delhi-110001 in favour of
the Second Party (Shri Sanjiv Gupta) herein.
(VIII) That the Fourth Party (Shri Vikas Gupta) herein
gave up his rights, title and interest to the extent of 220
RC.REV. 158/2020                                              Page 20 of 28
square yards of land alongwith proportionate built up
superstructure in built up Property Bearing Municipal
known as Property Bearing' Municipal No. 6B, Under
Hill Road, Civil Lines, Deihi-110054 in the municipal
records) in favour of the Third Party (Shri Sharad
Gupta) herein.
(IX). That the Third Party (Shri Sharad Gupta) herein
gave up his rights, title and interest to the extent of one
sixth (1/6th) undivided share in entire built up Property
Bearing No. 82, Janpath, New Delhi-110001 in favour of
the Fourth Party (Shri Vikas Gupta) herein.
(X). That the Entire built up Property Bearing No., 2B,
Delhi-110054. ad-measuring 892 square yards
approximately shall be exclusively owned and possessed
jointly by the Second Party (Shri Sanjiv Gupta) herein
and the Fifth Party (Smt. Charu Gupta) herein to the
extent of one half (50%) share each to the exclusion of
everybody else.
(XI) That the Part of built up Property Bearing No. 6,
Delhi-110054 ad-measuring 380 square yards
approximately shall be exclusively owned and possessed
jointly by the Second Party (Shri Sanjiv Gupta) herein
and the Fifth Party (Smt. Charu Gupta) herein to the
extent of one half (50%) share each to the exclusion of
everybody else.
(XII) That the entire built up Property Bearing No.82,
Janpath, New Delhi - 110001 shall be exclusively owned
and possessed jointly by the Second Party (Shri Sanjiv
Gupta) herein and Fourth Party (Shri Vikas Gupta)
herein to the extent of one half (50 %) share each to the
exclusion of everybody else.
(XIII) That the Second Party (Shri Sanjiv Gupta) herein
shall be the owner to the extent of 340 square yards of
land alongwith proportionate built up superstructure in
built up Property Bearing Municipal No. 6, Under Hill
RC.REV. 158/2020                                           Page 21 of 28
Road, Civil Lines, Delhi-110054 (also known as
Civil Lines, Delhi-110054 in the municipal records).
(XIV). That the Third Party (Shri Sharad Gupta) herein
shall be the owner to the extent of 1577 square yards of
land alongwith proportionate built up superstructure in
built up Property Bearing Municipal No. 6. Under Hill
Road, Civil Lines, Delhi-110054 (also known as
Civil Lines, Delhi-110054 in the municipal records).
However, the Third Party (Shri Sharad Gupta) further
divided this 1577 square yards of land alongwith
proportionate built up superstructure in built up
Civil Lines, Delhi-110054 (also known as Property
Delhi-110054 in the municipal records) within his
immediate, family members in the following
ratio/extent/manner:
(XV). That the Fourth Party (Shri Vikas Gupta) herein
shall be the owner to the extent of 916 square yards of
land alongwith proportionate built up superstructure in
built up Property Bearing Municipal No. 6, Under Hill
Road,. Civil Lines, Delhi-110054 (also known as
Civil Lines, Delhi-110054 in the municipal records).
Additionally the Seventh Party (Smt. Gauri Gupta)
herein shall be the owner to the extent of 577 square
yards of land alongwith proportionate built up
superstructure in built up Property Bearing Municipal
known as Property Bearing Municipal No. 6B, Under
Hill Road, Civil Lines, Delhi-110054 in the municipal
records). However, the Fourth Party (Shri Vikas Gupta)
herein and the Seventh Party (Smt. Gauri Gupta) herein
further divided their 1493 (916+577=1493) square
yards of land alongwith proportionate built up
superstructure in built up Property Bearing Municipal
known as Property Bearing Municipal No. 6B, Under
Hill Road, Civil Lines, Delhi-110054 in the municipal
records) within their immediate family members in the
following ratio/extent/manner:
S.NO        Name                   Extent        of
(XVI) That in view of the Agreement between the family
members, the built up Property Bearing Municipal No. 6,
Under Hill Road Civil Lines, Delhi-110054 (also known
as Property Bearing Municipal No. 6B, Under Hill Road,
Civil Lines, Delhi-110054 in the municipal records)
admeasuring 3410 square yards shall be exclusively
owned and possessed by the Second Party (Shri Sanjiv
Nakul Gupta) and Eleventh Party (Shri Abhinn V. Gupta)
herein to the exclusion of everybody else in the following
ratio/extent/manner:
27.As evident from the above, the said document is a
comprehensive family arrangement which has been made
apropos residential and commercial properties owned by the
family. It was subsequently crystallised and registered as noted
above.
28.The learned Senior Advocate for the petitioners submits that if
any of the parties to the settlement, had any objection to the
settlement having been crystallised on 27.03.2013, then surely,
they would not have signed the document. The petitioners rely
upon the dicta of the Supreme court in Korukonda Chalapathi
Rao v. Korukonda Annapurna Sampath Kumar, 2021 SCC
OnLine SC 847 which reads, inter alia, as under:-
“… 15. There is a long line of judgments of this court
dealing with the question as to whether a family
arrangement is compulsorily registrable. We need only refer
to the case of Kale v. Dy. Director of Consolidation. This
RC.REV. 158/2020                                          Page 25 of 28
Court has summed up the essentials of the family settlement
in the following proposition:
“10. In other words to put the binding effect and the
essentials of a family settlement in a concretised form, the
matter may be reduced into the form of the following
propositions:
“(1) The family settlement must be a bona fide one so as
to resolve family disputes and rival claims by a fair and
equitable division or allotment of properties between the
various members of the family;
(2) The said settlement must be voluntary and should not
be induced by fraud, coercion or undue influence;
(3) The family arrangement may be even oral in which
case no registration is necessary;
(4) It is well settled that registration would be necessary
only if the terms of the family arrangement are reduced into
writing. Here also, a distinction should be made between a
document containing the terms and recitals of a family
arrangement made under the document and a mere
memorandum prepared after the family arrangement had
already been made either for the purpose of the record or
for information of the court for making necessary mutation.
In such a case the memorandum itself does not create or
extinguish any rights in immovable properties and therefore
does not fall within the mischief of Section 17(2) of the
Registration Act and is, therefore, not compulsorily
(5) The members who may be parties to the family
arrangement must have some antecedent title, claim or
interest even a possible claim in the property which is
acknowledged by the parties to the settlement. Even if one of
the parties to the settlement has no title but under the
RC.REV. 158/2020                                              Page 26 of 28
arrangement the other party relinquishes all its claims or
titles in favour of such a person and acknowledges him to be
the sole owner, then the antecedent title must be assumed
and the family arrangement will be upheld and the courts
will find no difficulty in giving assent to the same;
(6) Even if bona fide disputes, present or possible, which
may not involve legal claims are settled by a bona fide
family arrangement which is fair and equitable the family
arrangement is final and binding on the parties to the
settlement...”
29. A family arrangement may be even an oral arrangement, in
which case, no registration is necessary. It is only necessary if
the terms of family arrangement are reduced into writing.
30.In the present case, both aspects are covered. The registered
document clearly records, the date on which the family
arrangement came into existence i.e. 27.03.2013, in which case
the petition having been filed on 02.05.2018, is after five years
of „acquisition by transfer‟ and would not be restricted by
section 14(6) of the DRC Act.
31.For the aforesaid reasons, the court is of the view that the
impugned order has erred in granting leave to defend because
there was no triable issue raised by the tenant, which needed
determination. The petitioners had fairly disclosed all properties
owned by them and the fact that of all those properties none of it
was available nor suitable as alternate accommodation.
RC.REV. 158/2020                                            Page 27 of 28
32.In the circumstances, the impugned order is unsustainable; the
petitioners have made out a case for grant of eviction of the
respondent from the premises.
33.In view of the above, the impugned order dated 24.10.2019
granting the leave to defend to respondent is set aside. Eviction
order is passed in favour of the petitioners and against the
respondent, directing respondent to hand over to the petitioner
the peaceful vacant possession of the property bearing no.82/10,
first floor, Tolstoy Lane, Janpath, New Delhi-110001, as shown
in the site plan annexed with the eviction petition.
34.The petition is accordingly allowed in the above terms.
However, in terms of section 14(7) of the Delhi Rent Control
Act, 1958 this order shall not be executable for a period of six
months from receipt of copy of the order.