Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 5491 of 2019
Counsel for Applicant :- Mohemmed Amir Naqvi,Amjad
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.,A S G,S B Pandey
1.     Heard Sri Jyotindra Mishra, learned Senior Counsel assisted by
Sri Kapil Mishra, learned counsel for the applicant and Sri Anurag
Kumar Singh, learned counsel for the CBI and also perused the
material available on record.
2.     By means of the present bail application, the applicant seeks
bail in Case Crime No.810 of 2018, under Sections 147, 149, 386,
Krishna Nagar, District- Lucknow, during the pendency of trial.
3.     Facts in brief giving rise to the present application are that the
Informant/victim is a resident of Alambagh, Lucknow and engaged in
the real estate business having his office at Gomti Nagar, Lucknow. At
the time of the offence, the accused Atique Ahmad, Ex-Member of
Parliament, Phulpur, Allahabad was detained in Deoria Jail and he had
tried to pressurize the Informant for extortion of money for about two
years and out of fear, the Informant had also given him some amount
as such. The two henchmen of Atique Ahmad, namely, Mohd. Farooq
and Jaki Ahmad had been trying to extort money from the Informant
for about several months. The said two accused persons had also taken
possession of the office of the Informant forcibly and got their names
inducted in the board of the company and procured digital signatures
of the Informant and his sister Aarti Jaiswal. Even after that the
Informant did not transfer any shares of the company to them. On
26.12.2018, another goon of Atique Ahmad took the Informant to
Deoria Jail where Atique Ahmad along with his son Umar and 10-12
other persons were found present. The two accomplices of Atique
Ahmad, namely, Jafarullah and Gulam Sarvar (the present applicant)
had beaten the Informant mercilessly thereby breaking his fingers and
causing him several external and internal injuries. The accused Atique
Ahmad in the jail premises itself got the companies M.J. Infra
Land L.L.P. Private Limited and M.J. Infra State Private Limited
transferred forcibly in the name of his associates Mohd. Farooq and
Jaki Ahmad. The accused Atique Ahmad has even retained the
Fortuner Car of the Informant bearing No. UP-32 JR 1804 with him. It
has also been alleged in the FIR that the accused Atique Ahmad had
obtained signatures of the Informant on blank letter heads including
his resignation letters and also pressurized the Informant to make
forged signatures of his sister on the blank papers. The accused Atique
Ahmad and his associates forcibly obtained the digital signatures of
the   Informant and his sister and thereby got the names of their
associates inducted in all the aforesaid companies.
4.     The instant FIR has been lodged at Police Station- Krishna
Nagar, Lucknow. The Supreme Court of India vide its order dated
23.4.2019 passed in Writ Petition (Civil) No.699 of 2016 in the matter
of Ashwani Kumar Upadhyay and Others Vs. Union of India and
Others transferred the investigation of the case to Central Bureau of
Investigation (CBI) and was also directed to submit quarterly status
report of the investigation to the Court. The main accused Atique
Ahmad was then shifted to Ahmedabad Jail, Gujarat.
5.     Sri Jyotindra Mishra, learned Senior Counsel appearing on
behalf of the applicant has stated that the applicant is being
maliciously prosecuted in the present case. The jurisdiction of the case
falls within the Police Station- Gomti Nagar, Lucknow and not
Krishna Nagar where the instant FIR has been initially lodged.
Learned Senior Counsel has further argued that the statement of the
Informant has been recorded four times by the I.O. and in each of the
subsequent statement, he has improvised from the previous one.
Initially, the two statements were recorded by the local police and the
subsequent two have been recorded by the CBI. Absolutely vague
allegation has been made in the statement of the Informant that the
applicant was present in Deoria Jail with Jafarullah and had even
beaten him up thereby causing grievous hurt to him.
6.     As per the prosecution allegation, one goon of accused Atique
Ahmad had taken Informant forcibly to Deoria Jail by a Fortuner Car
No. UP-32 JR 1804, though it is impossible that a single unarmed
person would forcibly pickup the Informant at Lucknow and take him
to Deoria Jail and during such a long distance from Lucknow to
Deoria Jail, the Informant did not raise any alarm while he had ample
opportunity to do so and resist. The allegation against the applicant is
that his black car was following the said Fortuner car no. UP-32 JR
1804 of the Informant from Lucknow to Deoria Jail. He has dropped
the Informant back 100 metres before his house by his car as the
alleged Fortuner of the Informant was forcibly retained by co-accused
Atique Ahmad. On the way to Deoria Jail, there are six toll booths and
surprisingly, there is no CCTV footage to indicate that the applicant
had followed the said Fortuner car of the Informant. There is nothing
on record to suggest that the applicant was in Deoria jail in
connivance with the jail authorities.
7.     Learned Senior Counsel has also pointed out several
contradictions in the two supplementary statements of the
Informant/victim recorded by the I.O. regarding the complicity of the
applicant. The prosecution version is doubtful, suspicious and cannot
be relied upon.
8.     Learned Senior Counsel for the applicant has next contended
that the charge-sheet has already been filed in the matter and the trial
is not going forward and not even the charge has been framed against
the applicant. The CBI is also not interested in getting the trial
concluded expeditiously as on the last three occasions, the public
prosecutor of the CBI was not present in the Court and the case was
adjourned only on this ground.
9.     Learned Senior Counsel for the applicant has also relied upon
the judgement of Supreme Court passed in the case of Union of India
versus K.A. Najeeb1, and the relevant para-16 reads as under:-
"16. This Court has clarified in numerous judgments that the
liberty guaranteed by Part III of the Constitution would cover
within its protective ambit not only due procedure and fairness
but also access to justice and a speedy trial. In Supreme Court
Legal Aid Committee Representing Undertrial Prisoners v.
Union of India, it was held that undertrials cannot indefinitely
be detained pending trial. Ideally, no person ought to suffer
adverse consequences of his acts unless the same is established
before a neutral arbiter. However, owing to the practicalities of
real life where to secure an effective trial and to ameliorate the
risk to society in case a potential criminal is left at large
pending trial, Courts are tasked with deciding whether an
individual ought to be released pending trial or not. Once it is
obvious that a timely trial would not be possible and the
accused has suffered incarceration for a significant period of
time, Courts would ordinarily be obligated to enlarge them on
bail."
10.    Learned Senior Counsel for the applicant has also submitted
that the four co-accused persons, namely, Irfan, Nitesh Mishra,
Mahendra Kumar Singh and Pawan Kumar Singh, have already been
enlarged on bail by the court concerned passed in Bail Application
Nos. 7363 of 2019, 12768 of 2021, 14713 of 2021 and 1786 of 2021,
vide     orders   dated   30.11.2021,   10.12.2021     and   15.12.2021,
respectively. The applicant is languishing in jail since 18.2.2019
having no criminal history to his credit, deserves to be released on
bail. In case, the applicant is released on bail, he will not misuse the
liberty of bail and shall cooperate with the trial.
11.     Per contra, Sri Anurag Kumar Singh, learned counsel for the
CBI has vehemently opposed the bail prayer of the applicant on the
ground that it was the applicant who had beaten the Informant in jail
premises along with one Jafarullah. After retaining the alleged
Fortuner car by Atique Ahmad, the Informant was sent back to his
house in the car of applicant being kidnapped by the co-accused
Gulam Moinuddeen Siddiqui. The applicant is named in the FIR and
his name has also come up in every statement of the victim. There is
no contradiction or discrepancy in the statement of the Informant with
regard to the applicant.
12.     Learned counsel for the CBI has further argued that the
applicant and the co-accused persons are dreaded criminals of the area
and out of their fear, the Informant could not dare to depose against
them. Several witnesses have been put under Witness Protection
Programme. He has further argued that looking at the seriousness and
gravity of the subject matter, the investigation was entrusted to CBI
by the order of Supreme Court and also the main accused Atique
Ahmad has been shifted to Ahmedabad Jail, Gujarat. The local police
had also filed charge-sheet against the applicant. The applicant along
with other co-accused persons had also forced the Informant to put his
sister's forged signature on blank papers/letterheads.
13.     Learned counsel for the CBI has further submitted that the case
of the applicant is not at par with the other co-accused persons who
have been enlarged on bail. The trial could not proceed further owing
to Covid-19. The offence is not against a particular person, but against
the society as a whole. Investigation is pending against the jail
officials involved in the said offence.
14.     Learned counsel has fairly conceded the fact that there is no
criminal history of the applicant but has stated that he is the main
associate of co-accused Atique Ahmad who had been five times
M.L.A., once an M.P. and a notorious criminal, against whom 106
cases are pending trial including the heinous offences and out of his
fear, the FIR has been lodged after a delay. There is every likelihood
that he shall misuse the liberty of bail as he is an influential person
and the main associate of Atique Ahmad, therefore, he does not
deserve any indulgence. In case, the applicant is released on bail, he
will misuse the liberty of bail by extending threat and intimidation to
the prosecution witnesses.
15.     It would be inappropriate to discuss the evidence in depth at this
stage because it is likely to influence the trial court but from the
perusal of the evidence collected during investigation and the charge-
sheet, it appears that the complicity of the applicant is well established
by the statements of the Informant. The applicant had followed the
alleged Fortuner car of the Informant to Deoria Jail and beaten him up
in jail premises coercing him to sign the papers and had dropped him
back near his house.
16.     In the changing social circumstances, it has now become
obvious that nobody dares to depose against the dreaded and hardened
criminals out of fear. The Informant, who himself is a victim could
garner some courage as some point of time to depose against such
high profile criminals. The crime seems to have been committed after
a well orchestrated plan to deprive the Informant/victim of his
valuable assets and the culpability of applicant cannot be ruled out
from the evidence adduced.
17.     It is quite clear that an order of bail cannot be granted in an
arbitrary or fanciful manner. A ratio decidendi of the judgement of the
Apex Court in Anil Kumar Yadav Vs. State (N.C.T.) of Delhi and
another2, has stated that in serious crimes, the mere fact that the
accused is in custody for more than one year, may not be a relevant
consideration to release the accused on bail.
18.     Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, the nature
of offence, severity of offence, threat perception of the witnesses,
complicity of accused, involvement of higher echelons of society as
well as the rival submissions advanced by the learned counsel for the
parties and without expressing any opinion on the merits of the case, I
am not inclined to release the applicant on bail.
19.     Accordingly, the bail application of the applicant is rejected.
20.     It is clarified that the observations made herein are limited to
the facts brought in by the parties pertaining to the disposal of bail
application and the said observations shall have no bearing on the
merits of the case during trial.
21.     However, it is directed that every endeavor shall be made by the
trial court to conclude the trial expeditiously, if there is no other legal
impediment.