1.     The instant petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India has been filed on behalf of the petitioner seeking the following
“A) direct the Respondent Corporation for
consideration of the case of the son of the
Petitioner, being dependant of the deceased
employee, in terms of the binding settlement dated
13.4.1983 and Employees Superannuation Benefit
W.P.(C) 5538/2015                                           Page 1 of 18
Scheme of the Respondent Corporation as
applicable on the date of death of the Husband of
the Petitioner i.e. 23.4.2008 and on the date of
submitting option for employment to the son of the
Petitioner i.e. on 5.5.2008,and
B) to quash the communication dated 22.7.2008
and 29.6.2012 made by the respondent Corporation
to the petitioner and
C) direct the Respondent Corporation to grant
pension to the Petitioner at the rate of 42.5 % of the
2.    The brief facts of the case are that:
 Petitioner is the wife of Sh. Mahinder Paswan, who was an
employee      of   Hindustan   Petroleum     Corporation   Ltd,
Marketing Division and expired on 5th April 2008, while in
service due to a Road accident.
 On 19th April 2008, the wife of deceased, applied for
compassionate appointment of her son Ravinder Paswan.
 On 5th May 2008, the Petitioner gave an option letter to the
Respondent Corporation, wherein out of three options
available, she took an option under Rule 7(b) (ii)/ 8A of the
Scheme‟) wherein she was entitled to the benefits as her
deceased      husband    would    have     received   had    he
superannuated.
 Vide letter dated 22nd July 2008, the Respondent Corporation
informed the Petitioner that since 1998, they have not been
offering employment to dependants of any of the deceased
employees for compassionate employment.
 On 9th September 2008, the Respondent Corporation issued a
letter to the petitioner advising her to change her Scheme
Option from 7(b) (ii)/ 8A to either 7(a) or 7 (b)(i).
 On 29th June 2012, the Respondent Corporation informed the
petitioner that the scheme for compassionate appointment to
the dependant of the employee, in the event of death of his
service has been withdrawn. Therefore, her request for
compassionate appointment to her son could not be acceded
 On 29th November 2013, the Petitioner again made a
representation to the Respondent Corporation for providing
her son compassionate appointment in accordance with
option taken by her.
 On 11th December 2013, the Respondent Corporation in their
reply informed the petitioner that she was given hundred
percent of last drawn salary as per the option taken by her
under the Scheme and hence, her son is not entitled to the
benefit for the compassionate employment.
 The petitioner is now before this court praying that her son‟s
case may be considered for compassionate employment by
the Respondent Corporation.
3.     Learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner
submitted that Respondent Corporation accepted the option taken by
the petitioner and has accordingly been paying last drawn salary of her
deceased husband to the petitioner till 31st January 2014. However,
despite having accepted the option under Rule 7(b)(ii)/8A of the
Scheme, the Respondent Corporation has failed to give appointment to
the petitioner‟s son as envisaged under the aforesaid Rules.
4.     It is submitted that Respondent Corporation is bound by Clause
24 of the settlement made between the corporation and its workmen
represented by the unions, wherein the „employment of workmen
dependents‟ is mentioned and the petitioner‟s case falls within the
ambit of said Clause.
5.     It is submitted that the Respondent contrary to the written rules
of the Scheme on the date of death, i.e. 5 th April 2008, or the date of
nomination for employment of petitioner's son, i.e. 20 th May 2008,
denied the employment to the son of the Petitioner after withholding,
from April 2008 to 28th February 2014, statutory benefits of gross
amount of Rs. 15,35,771/- under the pension scheme which had been
released on 28th February 2014 without petitioner‟s consent.
6.     It is submitted that on one hand Respondent corporation is
selectively applying the provisions of option under rule 7(b)(ii)/8A
under the scheme and to retain the money in the SBFS Trust as per the
option, but on the other hand is declining the appointment to the
family member of the deceased employee under the scheme, which is
not permissible under the law.
7.     It is submitted that despite explicit rule under clause 7(b)(ii)/8A
of the Scheme, the respondent failed to give any reasonable cause for
arbitrarily refusing the rights of the petitioner guaranteed under the
Scheme. It is further submitted that there was no notice/circular/rule
declaring the discontinuance of the employment policy under the
Scheme neither at the time when the deceased husband of the
petitioner entered into this employment scheme nor when the
petitioner opted for availing the option under rule7(b)(ii)/8A.
8.     It is further submitted that the discontinuance of policy of
employment did not exist at all before 2013 and the denial of
employment to petitioner‟s son was borne out of reasons extraneous to
the stipulations contained in clause 7(b)/8A of the Scheme and are
also in direct violation of Article 14 and Article 21 of the Constitution
of India.
9.     It   is  submitted    that   the  Respondent      vide   letter  no
HRD:ABP:DED dated 22nd July 2008 informed the petitioner that
HPCL has not offered employment to any of the dependents of the
deceased employees since 1998, whereas, it is pertinent to mention
that the beneficiaries under the said policy have been an arbitrary
choice of HPCL and is in violation of Article 14 of the Indian
10.    In support of his arguments learned Counsel appearing on
behalf of the Petitioner has relied on the following judgments:
a. State Bank of India & Anr vs Raj Kumar (2010) 11 SCC 661,
wherein the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India held:
W.P.(C) 5538/2015                                            Page 5 of 18
"On other hand if a scheme provides that on the
death of an employee, if a dependent family
member is entitled to appointment merely on
making of an application, whether any vacancy
exists or not, and without the need to need to fulfil
any eligibility criteria, then the scheme creates a
right in favour of the applicant, on making the
application and the scheme that was in force at
the time when the application for compassionate
appointment was filed, will apply"
b. Director of Education (Secondary) v Pushpendra Kumar
(1998) 5 SCC 192), wherein the Hon'ble Supreme Court of
India observed that:
"8. The object underlying a provision for grant of
compassionate employment is to enable the
family of the deceased employee to tide over the
sudden crisis resulting due to death of the bread
earner which has left the family in penury and
without any means of livelihood. Out of pure
humanitarian consideration and having regard to
the fact that unless some source of livelihood is
provided, the family would not be able to make
both ends meet, a provision is made for giving
gainful appointment to one of the dependants of
the deceased who may be eligible for such
appointment..."
11.    It is therefore prayed that, in light of above facts and
circumstances, the communication dated 22nd July 2008 and 29th June
2012 be quashed and Respondent Corporation shall be directed to
consider the case of the petitioner‟s son for the purpose of providing
compassionate employment in terms of binding settlement and the
12.     Per Contra, Learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the
respondent submitted that the petitioner has already been given all the
benefits, as opted by her and the present petition has been filed only as
an afterthought.
13.     It is submitted that the petitioner had submitted option letter
dated 5th May 2008 to the Respondent Corporation wherein she took
an option under "Rule 7(b)(ii)/ 8A (100% benefit till employment is
given)" of the 'Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd. Employee's
Superannuation Benefit Fund Scheme'. It is vehemently submitted that
an amount of Rs. 58,88,990/- (including EPF, Gratuity, Annuity,
Pension GPAI Etc.) was given by the Respondent Corporation to the
Petitioner in lieu of the option letter submitted.
14.     It is submitted that as far as consideration of the case of the son
of the petitioner for compassionate appointment in terms of the
settlement dated 13th April 1983 and under old Scheme of HPCL is
concerned, HPCL/ Respondent Corporation has withdrawn the scheme
of providing appointment on compassionate grounds in August, 2004
itself. Respondent Corporation has no such Scheme in place to provide
employment to spouse/dependent family members on compassionate
grounds, on death of an employee while in service.
15.     It is submitted that petitioner has applied for compassionate
employment of her son on 19th April 2008 and vide various
communications, the petitioner has been duly intimated that as a
matter of policy, the option of compassionate employment in the
Respondent Corporation of an eligible dependent – spouse/son/
W.P.(C) 5538/2015                                             Page 7 of 18
daughter in the event of the death of an employee while in the service
has been withdrawn with effect from August 2004.
16.    It is vehemently submitted that the claim of petitioner with
regard to employment under the clause 24.1 of the Settlement dated
13th April 1983 and under clause “B” of settlement dated 27 th June
1984 has lost its validity as it has been duly communicated by the
Corporation to the petitioner that the above mentioned settlements
have been superseded vide Memorandum of Settlement dated 11 th
January 1989 (effective from May, 1988) wherein the Scheme had
been formulated.
17.    It is further submitted that just by opting for the appointment
under compassionate grounds of benefit under the old “HPCL
Employees SBFS” which was a result of settlement between the
Management and All India Unions, petitioner is not entitled to claim
benefits under the Settlement of 1983 and 1984, which stood
impliedly superseded. However, despite of having no provision
practically available for the appointment on compassionate grounds,
the Respondent Corporation gave just and proper response to her
claims.
18.    In support of his arguments, learned Senior Counsel appearing
on behalf of the Respondent has relied on the judgment of Hon‟ble
Supreme Court in the case of State Bank of India & Ors. Vs. Raj
Kumar, (2010) 11 SCC 661, wherein it was observed that:
“8. It is now well settled that appointment on
compassionate grounds is not a source of
recruitment. On the other hand it is an exception
to the general rule that recruitment to public
W.P.(C) 5538/2015                                         Page 8 of 18
services should be on the basis of merit, by an
open invitation providing equal opportunity to all
eligible persons to participate in the selection
process. The dependants of employees, who die in
harness, do not have any special claim or right to
employment, except by way of the concession that
may be extended by the employer under the rules
or by a separate scheme, to enable the family of
the deceased to get over the sudden financial
crisis. The claim for compassionate appointment
is therefore traceable only to the scheme framed
by the employer for such employment and there is
no right whatsoever outside such scheme. An
appointment under the scheme can be made only
if the scheme is in force and not after it is
abolished/ withdrawn. It follows therefore that
when a scheme is abolished, any pending
application seeking appointment under the
scheme will also cease to exist, unless saved. The
mere fact that an application was made when the
scheme was in force, will not by itself create a
right in favour of the applicant.”
19.   It is submitted that there are no illegalities or error in the
communications dated 22nd July 2008 and 29th June 2012 and
therefore, the instant petitioner is devoid of any merits and is to be
dismissed.
20.   Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
21.   Before going into the merits of the instant case, it is relevant to
mention the relevant rules of HPCL Employees‟ Superannuation
Benefit Fund Scheme, which are reproduced herein under:
“7. Benefits on death while in service:
W.P.(C) 5538/2015                                           Page 9 of 18
(a) On death of a member while in service, the
beneficiary will be entitled to benefit at the
maximum rate of 40% of last drawn salary of the
member as if the deceased member had not died
but had superannuated with 32 years of
reckonable service; the benefit being payable from
the month following the date of the death of the
member for 15 years certain or the lifetime of the
beneficiary whichever is later. If the beneficiary
dies within the said period of 15 years certain
mentioned above, the benefit will be payable to the
nominee of the beneficiary till the completion of
the said period of 15 years.
(b) On the death of a married member while in service
the beneficiary or if there are more beneficiaries
than one, all the beneficiaries together
* if none of the beneficiaries shall be in the
employment of the Corporation and if the
beneficiary or all the beneficiaries so nominated
shall also be the beneficiary/beneficiaries
nominated by the member to receive benefits of the
Provident Fund, Gratuity, Leave Encashment and
payments under Group Insurance Scheme may, as
an alternative to sub-rule (a) above and not later
than 180 days of the death of the member, exercise
in writing irrevocably any one of the following
(i) to receive an amount equal to the last drawn
salary of the deceased member from the month
following the date of the death of the member till
the notional date (as hereinafter defined) upon the
beneficiary making over to the Corporation as
being entitled to do so the following payments due
W.P.(C) 5538/2015                                          Page 10 of 18
to the deceased member at the date of his death,
(aa) the full Provident Fund standing to the credit of
the deceased employee;
(bb) the full Gratuity due to the deceased employee;
(cc) all payments on account of Leave Encashment
standing to the credit of the deceased employee;
(dd) all payments under the Group Insurance Scheme,
with instructions to the Corporation.
(ee) to hold the same on Fixed Deposit;
(ff) to transfer to the Superannuation Benefit Fund the
net amount of all interest accruing from time to
time on the fixed deposit until the notional date
after deducting at source Income-tax as applicable
on such interest and deposit such tax in
(gg) to hand over to the beneficiary the full corpus
(without interest) standing in the Fixed Deposit
Account on the notional date;
and upon the beneficiary/all, the beneficiaries
consenting to the Corporation making over to the
Trustees any other payment which under the
Corporation policy is payable by reason of the
death of the employee. Thereafter on and from the
notional date the Trustees shall pay to the
beneficiary benefit as it the deceased member had
not died but has superannuated based upon his
actual years of reckonable service, such benefit
being payable for fifteen years certain or for the
lifetime of the beneficiary, whichever is later, If the
beneficiary dies within the said period of fifteen
years certain, the benefits will be payable to be
nominee of the beneficiary till the completion of
the said period of fifteen years.
(ii) Opting for employment in the Corporation of
Eligible, dependent spouse/son/daughter of the
deceased member fulfilling the required
recruitment criteria at the entry level vacancy, sub
employment to be provided by the Corporation
within 3 years from the date of such option being
exercised and to receive benefit under the Scheme
as if the deceased member had not died but had
superannuated, based upon his actual years of
reckonable service, such benefits being payable
from the month following the date of the death of
the member for fifteen years certain or the lifetime
of the beneficiary whichever is later, If the
beneficiary dies within the said period of fifteen
years certain, the benefit will be payable to the
nominee of the beneficiary till the completion of
the said period of fifteen years.
c) On the death of a married member while in service,
no benefit shall be paid/made over to the
beneficiary/ beneficiaries until the beneficiary or if
there are more beneficiaries than one beneficiary,
all the beneficiaries shall have tint irrevocably
exercised in writing the option mentioned in sub-
rule (a) & (b) above
PROVIDED HOWEVER that upon the exercise of
such option the benefits shall be paid but without
interest/made          available        to        the
beneficiary/beneficiaries as if the option had been
exercised on the date of the death of the deceased
member PROVIDED FURTHER that if the
beneficiary /all the beneficiaries shall not exercise
such option in writing within 180 days of the date
of the death of the married member, the
beneficiary/beneficiaries shall be deemed to have
W.P.(C) 5538/2015                                            Page 12 of 18
irrevocably opted for the benefits mentioned in
sub-rule (a) above.
(d) The notional date referred to in this rule shall
mean the date on which the deceased employee
would have superannuated if his earlier death had
not intervened.
(e) For the purpose of this rule the provisions of sub-
rule (b) of Rule (6) shall not apply.
8. (A) At the time of death of an employee, not having
an employable dependent member, the beneficiary
will be permitted to exercise option as provided in
Rule-7(b) and in the event employment is provided
to dependent member subsequently, the provisions
of Rule-7(b) will cease to operate and the
beneficiary will be governed by Rule- 7(2).”
22.     In the case of Treasuries in Karnataka v. V. Somyashree,
(2021) SCC OnLine SC 704, the Hon‟ble Supreme Court has laid
down the principle for granting appointment on compassionate
grounds, which are as follows:
“17. … It is further observed that the dependent of
the deceased Government employee are made
eligible by virtue of the policy on compassionate
appointment and they must fulfill the norms laid
down by the State's policy. It is further observed
and held that the norms prevailing on the date of
the consideration of the application should be the
basis for consideration of claim of compassionate
appointment. A dependent of a government
employee, in the absence of any vested right
accruing on the death of the government employee,
W.P.(C) 5538/2015                                           Page 13 of 18
can only demand consideration of his/her
application. It is further observed he/she is,
however, entitled to seek consideration in
accordance with the norms as applicable on the
day of death of the Government employee. The law
laid down by this Court in the aforesaid decision
on grant of appointment on compassionate ground
can be summarized as under:
(i)    that the compassionate appointment is an
exception to the general rule;
(ii)   that no aspirant has a right to
compassionate appointment;
(iii)  the appointment to any public post in the
service of the State has to be made on the
basis of the principle in accordance with
Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of
(iv)   appointment on compassionate ground can
be made only on fulfilling the norms laid
down by the State's policy and/or
satisfaction of the eligibility criteria as per
(v)    the norms prevailing on the date of the
consideration of the application should be
the basis for consideration of claim for
compassionate appointment.”
In cases where dependants of an employee dying in harness and
leaving his family in penury and without any means of livelihood, a
provision is being made in the rules to provide gainful employment to
one of the dependants of the deceased who may be eligible for such
employment. The object behind granting compassionate employment
is thus to enable the family to tide over sudden crisis.
W.P.(C) 5538/2015                                             Page 14 of 18
23.   The letter dated 7th August 2008 issued by the General Manager
Hindustan Petroleum to the Under Secretary, Government of India,
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas, is reproduced herein as under:
Government of India
Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas
Sub: VIP Ref. No.200801063/Dy. No. 7837 dated
27/6/2008 - Request for employment on compassionate
grounds- Shri Ravinder, Son of late Shri Mahender
This has reference to letter dated 24/6/2008 from the
Hon'ble Member of Parliament, Shri Sajjan Kumar
addressed to Shri Murli Deora, Hon'ble Minister of
Petroleum & Natural Gas, enclosing representation from
Smt. Manju Devi regarding employment of her son, Shri
Ravinder, on compassionate grounds.
In this regard, we wish to clarify that as a matter of
policy, the option of compassionate employment in the
Corporation of an eligible dependent - spouse/son/
daughter, in the event of the death of an employee, while
in service has been withdrawn, with effect from August
2004, keeping in view, the surplus manpower position
and the need to improve productivity levels in an
increasingly competitive market. In fact, in the Marketing
Division of the Corporation, there has been no
W.P.(C) 5538/2015                                        Page 15 of 18
recruitment in the non-management/Workmen category,
in the last few years.
The above position has been explained to Smt. Manju
Devi by the company officials at Shakurbasti/New Delhi
and she has also been advised to exercise other available
options as per the Rules of the Corporation.
In view of the above, we regret our inability to consider
the request of Smt. Manju Devi, for employment of her
son, in the Corporation.
24.    The letter dated 29th June 2012 issued by Respondent to the
petitioner, also reiterated the fact that the Scheme for compassionate
employment has been withdrawn.
25.    In the instant case, the petitioner is seeking compassionate
employment for her son under the Rule 7(b)(ii)/8A of the Scheme.
The petitioner sought the benefits of the scheme in the year 2008,
after her husband expired, however, the scheme was withdrawn and
discontinued by the respondent corporation in the year 2004. The fact
of the discontinuation of the scheme was duly intimated to the
petitioner vide letters dated 7th August 2008 and 29th June 2012.
Despite the communications, the petitioner sought to avail the
benefits of the scheme which in fact did not exist at that time.
26.    Moreover, the petitioner was given an option to choose from
the three Schemes of the Respondent Corporation when she first
W.P.(C) 5538/2015                                            Page 16 of 18
approached it after her husband expired and she, with her own will
and volition, opted for the benefits under Rule 7(b)(ii)/8A of the
Scheme. By virtue of the Scheme opted by her, she was entitled to
100 per cent benefit as her husband would have received, had he
superannuated. Accordingly, the petitioner had received a sum of
over Rs. 58 lakhs. It was only after having opted for benefits under
Rule 7(b)(ii)/8A of the Scheme, that she approached Respondent
Corporation seeking compassionate employment for her son. It is
found that after waiving the other options as given to her by the
Respondent Corporation, she could not have sought to avail the
benefit at a later stage.
27.    The whole object behind granting compassionate employment
is to enable the family to tide over the sudden crisis. Appointment on
compassionate ground offered to a dependant of a deceased employee
is an exception to the said rule. It is a concession and not a right. The
petitioner had availed the monetary benefits, under the scheme opted
by her, to the tune of Rs. 58 lakhs. Having received such benefits, the
family of the deceased service man would have survived and revived
from the crisis that took upon them by surprise. After the effects of
such crisis mitigated by the reason of her opting the scheme under
Rule 7(b)(ii)/8A, the petitioner did not have the entitlement to
approach under the Scheme of compassionate employment since the
very purpose of the scheme was surpassed.
29.    In light of the arguments advanced, material perused as well as
the fact that the respondent has withdrawn the scheme under which the
W.P.(C) 5538/2015                                           Page 17 of 18
petitioner is seeking benefit and that she, with her own free will, chose
to avail benefits of another scheme, by which she has received a sum
of over Rs. 58 lakhs, this Court does not find any cogent reason or
ground to allow the instant petition and grant the relief as prayed for
by the petitioner. The Respondent Corporation after computation has
already paid the petitioner Rs. 58,88,990/-, including last drawn salary
from May 2008 to January 2014, EPF, Gratuity, Annuity, Pension
GPAI etc., and no further benefit remains to be reaped by the
petitioner from the Respondent Corporation.
30.    Keeping in view the aforesaid discussions, the instant petition is
dismissed for being devoid of any merit.
31.    Pending application, if any, also stands disposed of.