submitted that now it has become difficult to manage the
financial affairs and she is not able to look after the said
properties i.e. plots and is not in a condition to earn for their
living.       He    has further   submitted   that    the    paramount
consideration being the welfare of the child, after the sad
demise of the father,         the appellant -     mother being less
educated is not in a position to earn for their living and in
absence of any other source of earning, the properties, which
are jointly owned with the minor alongwith the share of other
co-owners, are required to be sold off. It is further submitted
that it has not been stated in the application made to the
competent Court nor in the deposition of appellant no.1 before
the Court that the minor child is studying in Standard 12 th
Science stream, who took his exam in March, 2022.                         The
further course of his studies and the expected expenses
thereof would be determined only after the result of Standard
12th .     He has further submitted that one of the reasons
assigned by the Court below that instead of seeking permission
to sell off the share of minor, the mother could sell her share of
property or put it on rent is not practical and feasible solution
as it is jointly owned with other owners. It is further submitted
that anybody would intend to purchase the property from all
the joint owners not only the share of a part owner and looking
at the nature of properties being plots, it cannot be put on
rent, and therefore, it is submitted         that the said reasons
assigned by the learned Judge to deny the permission is not
[3.1]           He has   further   requested   that the necessary
permission be granted on suitable conditions to safeguard the
interest of minor and the sale proceeds may be ordered to be
deposited in the Fixed Deposit till the minor turns major, which
would be within six months hereof.               Therefore, he has
submitted that necessary permission, as sought for, keeping
in mind the welfare of the child, be granted to sell off the
properties as mentioned in the application and in the
deposition before the Court below.               In support of his
submission, he has placed reliance on the decision of the
Kerala High Court Bench at Ernakulam rendered in MFA No.133
of 2009 decided on 22.06.2009 by the Division Bench of it,
more particularly, paragraph 8 thereof, which again quotes a
paragraph from another decision referred to in it wherein it is
mentioned that when a minor child was given education, food
and clothing and all the requirements are fulfilled, in absence
of anything brought out or suggested that the natural guardian
have any adverse interest or any other motive in selling the
property of the minor, normally permission should be granted
to sell off the share of the minor.
[4.0]           Having  heard  the      learned  advocate          for     the
appellants as also going through the impugned order as also
the documents annexed with it, it is undisputed that as on date
minor is about 17 ½ years.            The application made to the
concerned Court lacks in material detail so as to the expenses
either spent, required to be spent in the present or future.
[4.1]           The judgement referred to and relied on by the
learned advocate for the appellants wherein father had
assigned his property to the minor, which was required to be
sold off in the facts of that case if Court came to the conclusion
that after examining the evidence available on record before
that Court and grant any permission, it cannot be argued as a
proposition that since mother being natural guardian of the
minor her application seeking permission to sell off the
property of the minor should not be looked at with any
suspicion.       As such, the said argument is without any merit
because such permission is not refused based on any suspicion
but because of lack of necessary details, which are required to
considered for grant of permission, and therefore, the said
authority is not applicable in the present case, and therefore,
the said submission is also rejected.
[4.2]           As observed by the learned Judge in the impugned
order that since the minor is still in the lower class, considering
his age to be 16 years, at the time of presenting it, there is no
question       of   selling the   properties  for    the     education,
maintenance and welfare of the child. The learned Judge has
also taken note of the fact that in which standard the minor is
studying is not finding place in her application or the
deposition. Merely mentioning it in written submission that
minor is studying in Standard 12th Science Stream, no further
material that what amount was spent towards his studies or his
educational performance in the Science stream not only in
Standard 12th but in Standard 11th also, is placed before the
Court so as to assess even the prospective expenses to be
borne by the mother – appellant no.1 in near future.
[4.3]           Not only, no details about the occupation of the
husband who died, is mentioned except he doing agricultural
work whereas details mentioned in the application with regard
to purchase of a land and getting it converted into NA
alongwith two other partners shows that husband was dealing
in at least non-agricultural properties to a sizeable extent. A
possibility cannot be ruled out that he must be a builder
purchasing the agricultural land getting it converted into NA
alongwith other partners and selling off NA plots and if he
himself was not constructing the same.         At the same time,
there is no averments either in the application or in the
deposition with regard to the earning of the husband or the
savings left by him including the details of the bank accounts
of the deceased husband. There is also no mention about the
fact that what other properties, except mentioned in the
application are there in the name of the husband either
independently or jointly with even the family members.                     In
absence of all those necessary and material details, the refusal
of permission to sell off the share of the minor appears to be
correct. Permitting anything to be brought on record now by
way of additional evidence as suggested by the learned
advocate for the appellants would be filling up of lacuna found
in the case pleaded by the appellants, and therefore, at this
stage, it cannot be permitted. If law permits, appellants may
apply again with all necessary details if at all the necessity still
continues but no such permission, while exercising appellate
jurisdiction over the said order, can be granted in the present
case when all       the material facts as aforesaid lacks in the
application as also the deposition, and therefore, there is no
reason to entertain this Appeal. Hence, this Appeal is rejected.