1)     By this common order, above titled two petitions filed by the
petitioner, one challenging order dated 15.12.2021 passed by learned
Additional Sessions Judge, Anantnag, whereby charges for offences
under Section 8/20/29 of NDPS Act have been framed against the
petitioner and the other one seeking bail in the case arising out of FIR
No.15/2021 of Police Station Crime Branch, Kashmir for the offences
under Section 8/20/29 of the NDPS Act, are proposed to be disposed
2)     As per the case projected in the charge sheet on 14.03.2021,
Anti Narcotics Task Force (hereinafter referred to as ANTF) received
a specific information through reliable sources that in the truck
bearing    No.JK02AB-6744, driven by co-accused Suresh Kumar,
contraband substance “Charas” has been concealed and that the drug
peddler is going to deliver the same outside the Valley. It was also
conveyed that the said driver has parked the vehicle in question at
Khanabal Qazigund road near Mirbazar Alstop.
3)     On the basis of aforesaid information, the FIR (supra) came to
be registered in Police Station, Crime Branch, Srinagar, and
investigation of the case was set into motion. The services of the
Executive Magistrate and the officials from Legal Metrology
Department were requisitioned and a photographer was also called on
spot. On reaching the desired location, the ANTF found the vehicle in
question parked near Mir Filling Station at Alstop, Mir Bazar. The
driver of the truck disclosed his name as Suresh Kumar and he was
served with a notice under Section 50 of NDPS Act for his personal
search in presence of Magistrate/Gazetted officer. As per the option of
the driver, he was subjected to search in presence of an Executive
Magistrate. Certain articles and cash amount of Rs.5400/ were
recovered from the personal search of the driver whereafter he was
put under arrest. During questioning, driver Suresh Kumar made a
disclosure statement that he had collected 32 packets of charas from
some person at Sangam Bijbehara at the behest of owner of the truck,
the petitioner herein, and that he has concealed the same inside the
windows of the truck in question. Accordingly, the memo of
disclosure was prepared and in pursuance of the said disclosure, 32
packets of charas like substance were recovered in presence of the
Executive Magistrate from the place disclosed by the co-accused
Suresh Kumar. The recovered charas was found to be weighing 32
kilos and 969 grams. The samples were sealed and sent to FSL for
their examination. The statements of the witnesses under Section 161
of the Cr. P. C were recorded. After investigation of the case, offences
under Section 8/20/29 of NDPS Act were found established against
the petitioner and co-accused Suresh Kumar. The petitioner was
arrested on 02.08.2021. Certain other aspects are stated to be still
under investigation and it has been submitted in the challan that
supplementary charge sheet shall be filed upon completion of
investigation on these aspects.
4)     After presentation of the challan, the learned trial court
considered the material on record and also heard the parties,
whereafter impugned order dated 15.12.2021 came to be passed
whereby charges for offences under Section 8/20/29 of NDPS Act
have been framed against the petitioner and co-accused Suresh
5)     It appears that the petitioner had approached the trial court for
grant of bail but his bail application has been dismissed by the learned
Additional Sessions Judge vide his order dated 01.01.2022.
6)     The petitioner has challenged the impugned order of framing of
charge on the ground that the only material connecting the petitioner
with the alleged crime is the confessional statement of co-accused
Suresh Kumar, which is not admissible in evidence. It has been
submitted that there is no other material on record of the charge sheet
that would connect the petitioner with the alleged crime. Thus,
according to the petitioner, the order of framing of charge against him
is not sustainable in law. On the same ground it has been submitted
that the petitioner is entitled to grant of bail.
7)     The respondent Crime Branch has filed its reply to the bail
application in which, besides narrating the facts mentioned in the
charge sheet, it has been prayed that the bail application of the
petitioner be dismissed.
8)     I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the
material on record.
9)     As already noted, the main and only contention raised by
learned counsel for the petitioner is that the petitioner has been
implicated on the basis of the confessional statement of a co-accused
which is not admissible in evidence and, as such, no case is made out
for framing charge against him. In this regard, the Learned counsel
has relied upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of
Hari Charan Kurmi and Jogia Hajam and State of Bihar, AIR 1964
SC 1184, and judgment of this Court in the case of Rayees Ahmad
Dar vs. UT of J&K & Ors (Bail App No.05/2022 decided on
10)    There is no quarrel with the proposition of law that a
confessional statement of an accused is not admissible in evidence
against a co-accused. The law in this regard is well settled. The
question arises as to whether in the instant case the petitioner has been
implicated only on the basis of the confessional statement of the co-
11)    If we have a look at the challan, a disclosure statement has been
made by co-accused Suresh Kumar. In his disclosure statement, he has
stated that he obtained the delivery of recovered charas from some
person at the behest of the petitioner and that he has concealed the
said charas at a particular place inside his truck. Pursuant to the
aforesaid disclosure, the charas has been recovered from that
particualr place. Section 27 of the Evidence Act is an exception to the
rule that confession before a police officer is inadmissible in evidence.
It provides that when any fact is deposed to as discovered in
consequence of information received from a person accused of any
offence     in the custody of a police officer, so much of such
information, whether it amounts to a confession or not, as relates
distinctly to the fact thereby disovered, may be proved. Thus, a
confessional statement made by an accused in the custody of police
which leads to discovery of a fact is admissible in evidence. Thus, the
statement of the co-accused Suresh Kumar, to the extent it relates to
the recovery of charas that had been concealed inside the truck, is
definitely admissible in evidence. There is also material on record
which substantiates the fact that the petitioner happens to be the
owner of the truck in question.
12)    Apart from the above, during the investigation of the case, the
investigating agency has collected call data record of cell phone that
was in use of the petitioner as also of the cell phone that was in the
use of the co-accused Suresh Kumar at the relevant time. As per this
call data record, the petitioner was in touch with co-accused Suresh
Kumar during the relevant time and they have exchanged as many as
seven calls during this period. Thus, it cannot be stated that the
petitioner has been implicated in the alleged crime only on the basis of
confessional statement of co-accused Suresh Kumar. In the instant
case, besides there being recovery of contraband substance pursuant to
the disclosure statement of the co-accused Suresh Kumar, there are
other    circumstances     which    includes  communication     between
petitioner and the co-accused and the fact that the petitioner happens
to be the owner of the vehicle from which the contraband substance
was recovered.
13)    It is a settled law that while considering the case for charge or
discharge of an accused, the court is not required to enter into deeper
appreciation of the facts. The evidence and the material available
before the trial court is not to be scanned and evaluated in the manner
as if the court has to find whether the accused has committed the
offence or he is innocent. At the stage of framing of charge, the court
has only to consider the material for framing opinion as to whether
prima facie offence is committed which would require the accused to
be put on trial. A strong suspicion is enough to suggest commission of
offence by an accused. At the stage of framing of charge, the court has
to merely sift the evidence in order to find out whether or not there are
sufficient grounds for proceeding against the accused. A meticulous
examination of the record, in order to find whether the accused can be
held guilty on the basis of the said material, is not to be undertaken.
14)    In view of the aforenoted settled principle of law, it can safely
be stated that there is sufficient material on record of the challan to
connect the petitioner with the alleged crime. The trial court was,
therefore, justified in framing the charge against the petitioner and
putting him to trial. The jurisdiction of this court to interfere with an
order of framing of charge is very limited and in the absence of any
grave illegality or perversity in the order framing charge against the
petitioner, this Court would be reluctant to interfere with the said
15)    That takes us to the application of the petitioner seeking bail.
Since the order of framing charge for commission of offences under
Section 8/20/29 of NDPS Act passed by the learned trial court has
been upheld, it is to be presumed that the petitioner has been prima
facie found to be involved in the conspiracy relating to possession of
commercial quantity of contraband. Thus, the petitioner is deemed to
have committed the same offence as has been committed by the co-
accused. Therefore, the rigour of Section 37 of the NDPS Act would
get attracted to the case of the petitioner as well.
16)    Section 37 of the NDPS Act clearly provides that in cases
involving offences relating to possession of commercial quantity of
contraband substances, in addition to the restrictions imposed by the
Code of Criminal Procedure for grant of bail, certain other conditions
have been imposed on the power of the Court to grant bail. These
conditions include a prior notice to be issued to the Public Prosecutor
so as to give him an opportunity to oppose the bail application.
Further, for granting bail to the accused, the Court has to be satisfied
that there are reasonable grounds for believing that the person seeking
bail is not guilty of such offence and that he is not likely to commit
any offence while on bail.
17)    The term “reasonable grounds” appearing in Section 37 of the
NDPS Act has been interpreted to mean that the Court has to be
satisfied that there are credible and plausible grounds for believing
that the accused is not involved in the offence.
18)      The Supreme Court has recently in the case of Narcotics
Control Bureau vs. Mohit Aggarwal, 2022 Live Law (SC) 613, after
relying upon its earlier judgments on the subject, observed as under:
“14. To sum up, the expression “reasonable
credible, plausible and grounds for the Court
to believe that the accused person is not guilty
of the alleged offence. For arriving at any
such conclusion, such facts and circumstances
must exist in a case that can persuade the
Dove-tailed with the aforesaid satisfaction is
an additional consideration that the accused
person is unlikely to commit any offence
context of the Section 37 of the Act, the Court
is not required to record a finding that the
accused person is not guilty. The Court is also
not expected to weigh the evidence for
arriving at a finding as to whether the accused
has committed an offence under the NDPS
Act or not. The entire exercise that the Court
is expected to undertake at this stage is for the
limited purpose of releasing him on bail.
19)   In the light of the afore-quoted law laid down by the Supreme
Court, let us now analyse the facts of the instant case. As already
noted, the petitioner’s involvement in the alleged crime is not based
only upon the confessional statement of the co-accused but it is also
based upon the fact that the recovery of contraband substance has
been effected pursuant to the disclosure statement made by the co-
accused making it admissible in evidence under Section 27 of the
Evidence Act. Besides this, the petitioner happens to be the owner of
the vehicle in question from which the contraband substance was
recovered and there is also material on record to show that he was in
constant touch on telephone with the co-accused during the relevant
period. Thus, it cannot be stated that there are reasonable grounds for
believing that the petitioner is not involved in the alleged crime. The
petitioner, as such, is not entitled to grant of bail at this stage.
20)     For the foregoing reasons, I do not find any merit in both these
petitions. The same are, accordingly, dismissed.
Whether the order is speaking: Yes/No