1.  In the instant petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution, the
petitioner prays for grant of following reliefs:
I.     By a writ of certiorari order no. 1197 of 2022 dated 09.9.2022 may be
II.    By a writ of mandamus the respondents be directed to regularize the
services of the petitioner from the date of entitlement as recommended
by the Empowered Committee and approved by the Executive
Committee in terms of the Srinagar Municipal Corporation Class-IV
III.   Allow the petitioner to continue as Media Officer along with all
consequential benefits till settlement of the case for regularization;
IV.    To grant all the service benefits including seniority, monetary dues
etc. retrospectively from the date of entitlement;
V.     To produce the record pertaining to the service case of the petitioner;
VI.    The respondents be burdened and directed to pay exemplary
damages/compensation of Rs. 50 lakhs to the petitioner for loss,
inconvenience, harassment and metal agony suffered by the petitioner.
2.        The case set up by the petitioner on the basis of which the reliefs
aforesaid are being prayed would reveal that the petitioner being
Post-Graduate in Mass Communication with specialization in
Electronic Media & Public Relations came to be          engaged in the
respondent- Srinagar Municipal Corporation (hereinafter for short „the
Corporation‟) as Media Assistant on consolidated wages for a period of
six months with one day break vide order no. 1451 of 2011 dated
26.7.2011 after responding to an advertisement notification no.
SMC/PS/JCA/595-99 dated 16.6.2011 issued by the Corporation.
3.   A post-facto sanction is stated to have been granted by the Corporation to
the date of engagement of the petitioner with effect from 6.7.2011 in
terms of order no. Estt. (G) 5026-28 dated 3.10.2011.
4.   The initial engagement of the petitioner is stated to have been extended
by the Corporation with periodical enhancement in the monthly
remuneration by issuance of various office orders from time to time up
till the year 2012.
5.   It is being stated that on account of continuous service rendered by the
petitioner in the Corporation for a period of seven years, the petitioner
acquired a right of regularisation in terms of Regulation 5 of the
Provision) Regulations, 2014 (hereinafter for short the Regulations of
2014), as a consequence whereof the Commissioner of the corporation is
stated to have addressed a communication to respondent no. 1 vide
endorsement no. SMC/PS/Com/190 dated 10.1.2019 elucidating the
right to regularization of the petitioner on account of her continuous
service rendered against the post of a Librarian.
6.    It is being next stated that the case of the petitioner for regularisation
came to be recommended by the Empowered Committee under rules,
and consequently approved by the Executive Committee of the
Corporation as reflected in the minutes of meeting of the Executive
Committee held on 20.11.2021.
7.    It is being further stated that the Corporation has been regularising the
services of similarly situated eligible employees under the Regulation of
2014 against various class IV posts, including some similarly situated
employees working as computer personnel in the Corporation who had
filed SWP no. 1974/2016 before this court and earned judgment thereof
on 10.7.2017 from this court.
8.    It is being next stated that the service of the petitioner have been
recurring in nature being continuously utilised by the Corporation,
entitling the petitioner to regularization on account of her having
attained eligibility in terms of Regulation 5 of Regulations 2014, for
which the petitioner have had represented before the Corporation.
9.    It is being further stated that the Corporation instead of regularising the
services of the petitioner, issued order bearing no. 1197 of 2022 dated
9.9.2022 impugned in the instant petition terminating the engagement of
the petitioner.
10.   The instant petition is being maintained by the petitioner inter alia on the
grounds that the order impugned is veiled and punitive in substance,
inflicted on the petitioner only to dilute her right to regularisation of her
services; and that the said action has been taken by the respondents in
aberration of the procedure established by law while circumventing the
principles of natural justice.
It is also urged that there has been no disciplinary action
pending or initiated against the petitioner and that the petitioner has
been subjected to disengagement in absence of the same on the pretext
of temporary nature of service and that the procedural safeguards
enshrined under the Constitution against illegal action of termination or
disengagement is conferred to the employees pursuant to the holding of
a civil post and that in the presence of recommendations of the
Empowered Committee recommending the services of the petitioner for
regularization, the petitioner has guaranteed right which could not have
been neutralized by the respondents by resort to the disengagement of
the service without ascribing any reasonable explanation.
It is further urged that the impugned order operates
clandestinely, in a punitive manner and in effect is dismissal without
issuing a show cause notice to the petitioner while resorting to
vindictive action, stigmatizing the career of the petitioner and that the
impugned order is bereft of any justification or reasoning, and same is
reckless and colourable in its form and content.
It is being further urged that the Commissioner of the
Corporation had no jurisdiction to neutralize the functions of the
Governing Council of the Corporation and to disengage the services of
the petitioner in violation of constitutional, legal and procedural
safeguards and the principles of natural justice.
It is further urged that the petitioner has been subjected to
victimization and demoralization though having been inducted in the
corporation on the basis of academic and tactical proficiency and, as
such, the respondents were estopped from disengaging the petitioner in
absence of any plausible reason.
It is further urged that the petitioner had a right to hold the post
which could not have been abridged arbitrarily and in contravention of
due course of law. It is further urged that the impugned order has visited
the petitioner with civil consequences causing severe breach and a likely
persisting loss. It is also urged that the petitioner had a legitimate
expectation with regard to confirmation of her service for having acted
on the representation of the respondents in response to offer for
engagement.
It is lastly urged that the respondents had no right or authority
to dispense with the service of the petitioner unilaterally on any pretext
including the professed performance indicated in the impugned order
having violated Articles 14, 16 and 21 of the Constitution.
11.   Per contra, in their objections filed by the respondents to the petition, it
is averred that the petitioner was engaged on consolidated wages as
Media Assistant in the Corporation initially for a period of six months
with one day break after every 89 days subject to the condition that the
engagement was purely on temporary basis and terminable at any
time.
12.   It is being further stated in the objections that the services of the
petitioner were extended for a period of six months with effect from
27.1.2022 on the same terms and conditions as envisaged in the initial
engagement order and that a permanent employee of the Corporation
namely Idrees Aqail came to be posted as incharge Public Relations
Officer to deal with the media related matters, thus no longer requiring
the services of the petitioner.
13.    It has been further averred in the objection that no post of Media
Assistant had been advertised in pursuance whereof the petitioner came
to be engaged, instead the advertisement notice in question was issued
for hiring the services of the expert to launch awareness campaign.
14.    It is further stated that the petitioner was not eligible as per the terms of
the advertisement notice not being possessed of the requisite
qualification and experience, yet came to be engaged de hors the terms
and conditions of the advertisement notice.
15.    It is being further stated in the objection that in terms of Regulations of
2014, for an appointee to be considered for regularization the initial
engagement has to be against a post in the Corporation and since the
engagement of the petitioner was not against a post borne on the cadre
of the Corporation, as such, the case of the petitioner for regularization
recommended by the Empowered Committee /Executive Committee,
came to be rejected the said recommendation being subject to the rules
and regulations.
Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
16.   Mr. Salih Pirzada, learned counsel for the petitioner, while reiterating the
contentions raised and grounds urged in the petition would forcefully
contend that the petitioner was entitled to protection under Article 311
of Constitution before disengagement of her services. Learned counsel
would also insist that the petitioner was entitled for regularization of her
services upon completion of seven years of service in the corporation in
terms of Regulations of 2014 but in order to deprive the petitioner of
said guaranteed right, the respondents disengaged her services.
17.   Mr. Mohsin Qadiri, senior counsel, appearing for the respondents while
controverting and resisting the submissions made by the counsel for the
petitioner, would contend that the initial engagement of the petitioner
was illegal and in essence was backdoor in nature. Mr. Qadri would
submit that the petitioner was not holding any post in the corporation
notwithstanding her illegal appointment but had been offered an
assignment of an expert in pursuance of the advertisement notice though
having been labelled as Media Assistant, a non-existent post nor either
sanctioned or borne on the establishment of the Corporation. Mr. Qadri,
would thus, contend that the provisions of Article 311 of the
Constriction were not applicable to the petitioner and that the petitioner
was not entitled to regularization of her services under any law, rules
and regulations much less under the Regulations of 2014.
18.   Having regard to the nature of controversy involved in the matter
coupled with the submissions made by appearing counsel for the parties,
following two issues emerge for the consideration and adjudication of
Whether the petitioner was holding a post in the
Corporation upon her engagement in pursuance of
advertisement notice dated 16.06.2011 read with her initial
order of engagement dated 26.7.2011 or any other
subsequent order thereto, and as such before disengaging
her   engagement,     the   petitioner   was       entitled    to
protection/constitutional safeguard enshrined under Article
311 of the Constitution
Whether the petitioner on the basis of her engagement in
the Corporation in pursuance of advertisement notice dated
16.06.2011 read with her initial order of engagement dated
26.7.2011 or any other subsequent orders thereto as also on
the basis of the recommendations made by the Empowered
Committee/Executive              Committee         became        entitled      to
regularization of her service under any law including the
Regulations of 2014.
Article 311 of the Constitution being relevant and germane herein, a
reference here under to the same becomes imperative:
Article 311: Dismissal, removal or reduction in rank of persons employed
in civil capacities under the Union or a State
(1) No person who is a member of a civil service of the Union or
an all India service or a civil service of a State or holds a civil post
under the Union or a State shall be dismissed or removed by a
authority subordinate to that by which he was appointed
(2) No such person as aforesaid shall be dismissed or removed or
reduced in rank except after an inquiry in which he has been
informed of the charges against him and given a reasonable
opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges Provided
that where it is proposed after such inquiry, to impose upon him
any such penalty, such penalty may be imposed on the basis of
the evidence adduced during such inquiry and it shall not be
necessary to give such person any opportunity of making
representation on the penalty proposed: Provided further that
this clause shall not apply
(a) where a person is dismissed or removed or reduced in
rank on the ground of conduct which has led to his
conviction on a criminal charge; or
(b) where the authority Empowered to dismiss or remove
a person or to reduce him in rank ins satisfied that for
some reason, to be recorded by that authority in writing, it
is not reasonably practicable to hold such inquiry; or
(c) where the President or the Governor, as the case may
be, is satisfied that in the interest of the security of the
State, it is not expedient to hold such inquiry
(3) If, in respect of any such person as aforesaid, a question arises
whether it is reasonably practicable to hold such inquiry as is
referred to in clause ( 2 ), the decision thereon of the authority
Empowered to dismiss or remove such person or to reduce him in
A plain reading of the aforesaid provision would reveal that it affords
a safeguard to an employee against arbitrary dismissal, removal or
reduction in rank. It provides a protection against dismissal, or removal
by an authority subordinate to the appointing authority and against such
a penalty being imposed without giving the delinquent official an
opportunity defending himself. It also emanates from the provision
supra that it extends to all persons holding a civil post under the Union
or a State, including members of all India services and State services.
Thus, the expression civil post appearing in the Article is significant. As
has been held by the Apex Court, in “State of Assam Vs. Kanak
Dr. Sumitra Dash (AIR 2004 SC 2530)”. a “post” in this context has
been held to denote an “office” and a post under the State has been held
to be an office or position to which duties in connection with the affairs
of the State are attached, an office or a position to which a person is
appointed and which exists apart from and independent of the holder of
the post. Thus, unless there is a post (civil post) against which a
person is appointed, provisions of Article 311 cannot said to be
attracted.
19.    It is settled and significant to mention here that though a statutory
Corporation being a juristic entity separate from the State, its employee
may not said to be holding a civil post under the State so as to attract
Article 311. The fact that a statutory Corporation, exercising statutory
powers may be a “State” within the purview of Article 12 of the
Constitution, however, would not necessarily lead to the conclusion that
its employees hold a civil post under the State as the questions under the
two provisions i.e. Article 311 and Article 12 being different. The Apex
Court in case titled as “Satish Chandra vs. Union of India, reported
in AIR 1953 SC 250” has held that where a person is engaged in a
statutory corporation on the basis of a special contract upon certain
terms and conditions, Article 311 has no application as the engagement
of the person would be an ordinary case of a contract terminated under
its stipulated terms and conditions.
20.    Keeping in mind the aforesaid legal position and reverting back to the
case in hand it is not in dispute that the petitioner herein came to be
engaged as an expert in pursuance to advertisement notice dated
16.06.2011 though the engagement had been named as of a Media
Assistant, however, not being admitted by the respondents to be a
sanctioned post borne on the establishment of the Corporation and not
having being denied by the petitioner.
Perusal of the advertisement notice as also the initial order of
the engagement of the petitioner dated 26.07.2011 would lend support
to the aforesaid position that the petitioner came to be hired as an
awareness campaign expert regarding importance of maintenance of
sanitation, avoiding use of polythene and other related matters to save
environment and consequently got engaged thereto on consolidated and
temporary basis terminable at any time. The said engagement of the
petitioner as an expert cannot per-se said to be her engagement against
a post in absence of any material produced by the petitioner as also in
presence of the specific stand taken by the respondents in this regard
that the engagement was never ever against any post. The said
contention of the respondents in this behalf also lends support in view of
the case setup by the petitioner herself asserting in the petition that her
case for regularization came to be considered, recommended and
approved by the Empowered Committee/ Executive Committee against
available class IV vacancy and prior to that against the post of
Librarian. The engagement of the petitioner seemingly is an ordinary
case of a service contract terminable at any time under the terms
provided therein the engagement order. Thus, the case setup by the
petitioner and the contention of the counsel for the petitioner urged in
this regard in general and the applicability of the provisions of Article
311 of the Constitution in particular therefore, is not entertainable in
law. The judgements of the Apex Court reported in AIR 1984 SC 636,
AIR 1958 SC 36 and AIR 1967 SC 884, relied upon by the counsel for
the petitioner in view of aforesaid analysis do not lend any support to
the case of the petitioner. The issue no. 1 supra is accordingly
decided.
It is pertinent to mention here that the petitioner besides raising
aforesaid issue also alleged violation of principle of natural justice by
the respondents while disengaging her services, as such, it becomes
imperative to deal herewith the said issue as well. It is settled law that
principles of natural justice is one of the basic pillars of justice which
means that no one should be condemned unheard and that wherever
possible principles of natural justice have to be followed. It is also well
settled that the principles of natural justice cannot be put in any
straitjacket formula. The principles may not be applicable in a given
case depending upon the fact situation obtaining in a case. The
principles of natural justice cannot be applied in a vacuum.                It is
significant to mention here that as per the record made available by the
respondents with their objections, the petitioner has been engaged
though in pursuance of advertisement notice dated 16.06.2011 yet in the
selection list has been figuring at serial no. 6 having been found not
qualified scoring 20 points out of 100 as against 5 other qualified
candidates having much more merit than the petitioner with 50.5,
78.4, 45.4, 60.4 and 48.5 points. The said engagement of the petitioner
seemingly has been tainted, faulty and illegal and in essence a backdoor
therefore, not attracting the principles of natural justice as has been held
by the Apex Court in case titled as “Ashok Kumar Sonkar Vs. Union
of India and Ors. Reported in 2007 (4) SCC 54”.
While dealing with the instant issue a reference to the relevant clauses of
the Regulation of 2014 supra become necessary here under:-
2(h) Post: - means a post borne on the establishment of the Corporation in the
cadre of Class-IV categories like peons, orderlies, farash, safaiwallas,
mushkies, summon server, sampler, workshop helper, chowkidar, gardener,
boatmen, slaughter house worker, cattle catcher, cleaner and similar posts
created by the Competent Authority from time to time on need basis;
(d) Consolidated appointee,: -    means a person who has been appointed
against any post under the Corporation on consolidated monthly salary/wages;
(e) Contractual appointee: - means a person who has been appointed on
contract basis against any post under the Corporation;
(f) Ad hoc appointee: - means a person appointed on ad hoc basis against
3. Application of the Regulation. - These Regulations shall apply to Safaiwallas
and Class-IV posts under (Sic) Corporation as are held by any person having
been appointed on ad hoc contractual basis including those appointed on
consolidated salary/wages; provided that such appointments have been made by
the Competent Authority on need basis but shall not apply to-
(a) Persons appointed on tenure posts co-terminus with the life of the project or
scheme of the State or Central Government, as the case may be ;
(b) Part-time or seasonal employees.
Explanation to Rule (3). - Provided that only Safaiwalla and Class-IV posts shall
be utilized for purpose of adjustment/regularization of the consolidated workers
engaged from time to time and having completed seven years of continuous
service.
5. Regularization of contractual, consolidated and ad hoc appointee. -
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any rule/regulations for the
time being in force, the ad hoc, contractual or consolidated appointees shall be
regularized on the fulfillment of the following conditions:-
(i) That he has been appointed/engaged as consolidated tad hod contractual
worker by the Competent Authority on need basis;
(ii) That he continues as such on the appointed day;
(iii) That he possessed the requisite qualifications and eligibility for the post
on the day of his initial appointment on contractual, or consolidated basis
as prescribed under the recruitment rules governing the service or post;
(iv) That no disciplinary or criminal proceedings are pending against him on
(v) That he has completed seven years of continuous service as such on the
(vi) Regularization shall be done against clear vacant post:
Provided that the regularization of the eligible ad hoc, contractual or consolidated
employees under these regulations shall have effect only from the date of such
regularization irrespective of the fact that such appointees have completed more
than seven years of service on the appointed day or thereafter but before such
Provided further that any contractual or consolidated appointee who is in-
service but who has not completed seven years of service on the
appointed day shall continue as such till completion of seven
years and shall thereafter be entitled to regularization under
these regulations.
A bare perusal of Regulations supra would manifestly tend to
show that same are applicable to and for regularization of eligible
consolidated, contractual and ad hoc employees eligible for
regularization against the post of Safaiwala, class-IV post and other
class IV posts upon having completed seven years of continuous
service as per the eligibility prescribe in Regulation supra. Therefore,
in order to be eligible for regularization, a consolidated, contractual
or ad hoc appointee ought to have been engaged against a post in the
Corporation borne on the cadre of the corporation and also possessed
of requisite qualification and eligibility as provided therein the
21.    Risking repetition, indisputably, the services of the petitioner came to be
hired as an expert on consolidated wages for launching awareness and
not against any post borne on the establishment of the Corporation
notwithstanding the styling of the expert as Media Assistant. In presence
of the explicit and specific stand taken by the respondents that the
petitioner was not engaged against a post as also the non-existence of the
post of Media Assistant in the corporation having admittedly not been
controverted or denied by the petitioner, the claim for regularization
lodged by the petitioner (notwithstanding, the disengagement of her
services in terms of the impugned order)           under and in terms of
Regulations of 2014 cannot said but to be grossly misconceived solely on
the premise that the Regulations of 2014 prima facie are not applicable to
the petitioner for not holding any post as envisaged in the Regulations of
2014, even though the case of the petitioner was recommended/approved
by the Empowered Committee/Executive Committee respectively as the
said recommendation, approval in law would pale into insignificance. It
is pertinent to note here that the claim of the petitioner for her
regularization as per the stand taken by the respondents in their
objections stands rejected in terms of order dated 7.11.2022.
Even otherwise as well, the claim of the petitioner for
regularization of services is not worth consideration in view of the
settled position of law laid down by the Apex court in case titled as
Secretary, State of Karnataka and others vs. Umadevi and others
reported in 2006 (4) SCC 1, and in CIVIL APPEAL Nos. 5689 -
5690 of 2021, titled as “Union of India and Ors. Vs. Ilmo and
Anr.” dated 07.10.2021 wherein at paras 36 and 43 and 8.5
respectively following has been laid down as under:
“36.    While directing that appointments, temporary or casual, be
regularized or made permanent, courts are swayed by the fact that the
concerned person has worked for some time and in some cases for a
considerable length of time. It is not as if the person who accepts an
engagement either temporary or casual in nature, is not aware of the
nature of his employment. He accepts the employment with eyes open. It
may be true that he is not in a position to bargain -- not at arms length --
since he might have been searching for some employment so as to eke
out his livelihood and accepts whatever he gets. But on that ground
alone, it would not be appropriate to jettison the constitutional scheme
of appointment and to take the view that a person who has temporarily
or casually got employed should be directed to be continued
permanently. By doing so, it will be creating another mode of public
appointment which is not permissible. If the court were to void a
contractual employment of this nature on the ground that the parties
were not having equal bargaining power, that too would not enable the
court to grant any relief to that employee. A total embargo on such
casual or temporary employment is not possible, given the exigencies of
administration and if imposed, would only mean that some people who
at least get employment temporarily, contractually or casually, would not
be getting even that employment when securing of such employment
brings at least some succor to them. After all, innumerable citizens of our
vast country are in search of employment and one is not compelled to
accept a casual or temporary employment if one is not inclined to go in
for such an employment. It is in that context that one has to proceed on
the basis that the employment was accepted fully knowing the nature of
it and the consequences flowing from it. In other words, even while
accepting the employment, the person concerned knows the nature of
his employment. It is not an appointment to a post in the real sense of
the term. The claim acquired by him in the post in which he is temporarily
employed or the interest in that post cannot be considered to be of such
a magnitude as to enable the giving up of the procedure established, for
making regular appointments to available posts in the services of the
State. The argument that since one has been working for some time in
the post, it will not be just to discontinue him, even though he was aware
of the nature of the employment when he first took it up, is not one that
would enable the jettisoning of the procedure established by law for
public employment and would have to fail when tested on the
touchstone of constitutionality and equality of opportunity enshrined
in Article 14 of the Constitution of India.”
“43. Normally, what is sought for by such temporary employees when
they approach the court, is the issue of a writ of mandamus directing the
employer, the State or its instrumentalities, to absorb them in permanent
service or to allow them to continue. In this context, the question arises
whether a mandamus could be issued in favour of such persons. At this
juncture, it will be proper to refer to the decision of the Constitution
Bench of this Court in Dr. Rai Shivendra Bahadur Vs. The Governing Body
of the Nalanda College [(1962) Supp. 2 SCR 144]. That case arose out of a
refusal to promote the writ petitioner therein as the Principal of a
college. This Court held that in order that a mandamus may issue to
compel the authorities to do something, it must be shown that the
statute imposes a legal duty on the authority and the aggrieved party had
a legal right under the statute or rule to enforce it. This classical position
continues and a mandamus could not be issued in favour of the
employees directing the government to make them permanent since the
employees cannot show that they have an enforceable legal right to be
permanently absorbed or that the State has a legal duty to make them
permanent.”
“8.5 Even the regularization policy to regularize the services of the
employees working on temporary status and/or casual labourers is a
policy decision and in judicial review the Court cannot issue Mandamus
and/or issue mandatory directions to do so. In the case of R. S. Bhonde
and Ors. (supra), it is observed and held by this Court that the status of
permanency cannot be granted when there is no post.--------------“.
It is also significant to mention here that the petitioner in the
petition has also pressed into service the doctrine of legitimate
expectation on the premise that the said doctrine is applicable to her
case in view of the representation made by the respondents while
engaging her and recommending her case for regularization. The said
plea being connected with issue no. 2 supra is, as such, dealt with
here. So far as the said plea of application of doctrine of legitimate
expectation urged by the petitioner in the petition to her case is
concerned, same as well having regard to the facts and circumstances
of the case is not attracted as it is settled that legitimate expectation
does not mean illegitimate flight of fancy. The said plea raised by the
petitioner is misdirected and non sustainable in law.
22.         Thus the claim of the petitioner for regularization as lodged in the
petition in view of the aforesaid analysis is held to be legally not tenable.
Accordingly, issue no. 2 supra shall stand settled.
23.         For what has been observed, considered and analyzed hereinabove, the
petition entails dismissal. Accordingly petition is dismissed.
Whether the order is reportable:     Yes/No