Counsel for Petitioner :- Shishir Pradhan
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.
1. Heard Sri Shishir Pradhan, learned counsel for the petitioner
and Dr. Udai Veer Singh, learned Additional Chief Standing
Counsel for the State-opposite party.
2. The present writ petition is directed against the order dated
17.2.2003 passed by the Motor Accident Claim Tribunal/VIth
Additional District Judge, Raebareli (for short ‘the Tribunal’) in
Misc. Case No.1 of 2002, United Insurance Company Limited
Vs. Smt. Mithilesh Sharma, whereby the application filed by
the petitioner-Insurance Company to recall the award dated
29.8.2001 passed in Claim Petition No.198 of 1999 was
dismissed along with application filed for condonaton of delay
in filing the application under Order 9 Rule 13 CPC.
3. Opposite party no.2 along with her five minor children filed
Claim Petition No.198 of 1999 before the Tribunal, Raebareli as
the husband of opposite party no.2 had died in an accident. The
said claim petition was contested by the Insurance Company.
The Insurance Company had filed written statement to the
claim petition. However, it appears that later on, counsel for the
Insurance Company abstained and did not appear in the claim
petition. The Tribunal vide ex-parte judgement and award dated
29.8.2001 awarded compensation to the tune of Rs.11,94,472/-
with 10% simple interest per annum in favour of opposite party
4. After the award, the Insurance Company filed an application
under Order 9 Rule 13 CPC along with an application for
condonation of delay under Section 5 of the Indian Limitation
Act on 19.12.2001. The Tribunal vide impugned order dated
17.2.2003 had not only rejected the application for condonation
of delay in filing the application under Order 9 Rule 13 CPC,
but also dismissed the said application filed under Section 5 of
the Indian Limitation Act and directed for initiation of
proceedings under Section 340 Cr.P.C. against the Insurance
Company as allegedly they had fabricated the documents filed
in support of the application.
5. This Court has perused the impugned order and does not find
that the Tribunal did commit any error of jurisdiction or law.
The impugned order passed by the Tribunal is well reasoned
order. The Tribunal has specifically recorded that despite the
knowledge of the ex-parte judgement and award dated
29.8.2001, no immediate steps were taken by the Insurance
Company for filing the application under Order 9 Rule 13 CPC.
The application was dated 19.12.2001. Affidavit in support of
the application was prepared on 19.1.2002. The application
dated 19.12.2001 was filed only on 19.1.2002. In view of the
aforesaid, the application filed for condonation of delay in filing
the application under Order 9 Rule 13 CPC was dismissed and
the application for recall of the order was also dismissed.
6. This is the second writ petition filed by the Insurance
Company before this Court. Earlier the Insurance Company had
approached this Court by filing Writ Petition No.68 (MS) of
2003 against the recovery certificate issued in pursuance of the
award passed by the Tribunal.
7. It is very unfortunate that the victims have not been paid the
compensation, which was awarded to them way back in the
year 2001. This Court on 26.3.2003 had stayed the impugned
order without recording any reason whatsoever. The order dated
26.3.2003 is reproduced below:-
Issue notice to opposite parties no.1 and 2.
The operation of the impugned award contained in Annexure No.1 to
the writ petition is stayed till next listing."
8. It is really painful to notice that the victims, whose bread
earner had died leaving behind widow and five children, had to
suffer so much because of the pendency of this writ petition
before this Court for almost 20 years.
9. In view thereof, the writ petition is dismissed without being
any merit and substance. Petitioner-Insurance Company is
directed to deposit the entire amount of the compensation along
with interest as directed by the Tribunal within a period of one
month from today in the Tribunal. In case the amount as
directed, is not deposited, the District Magistrate, Raebareli
shall proceed against the petitioner-Insurance Company to
recover the amount of award along with interest as arrears of
land revenue and deposit the same in the Tribunal. However, if
the amount and interest in pursuance to the award has already
been paid, then the District Magistrate is not required to
proceed for recovery. The Tribunal will verify this fact and then
pass appropriate orders, if necessary.
10. Since the petitioner-Insurance Company has kept the
litigation alive for almost 20 years before this Court, the
Insurance Company is saddled with cost of Rs.5,00,000/-
(Rupees Five Lakhs) to be deposited with the Tribunal within a
period of ten days, which should also be disbursed in favour of
the claimants-opposite party no.2 after due verification. This
exemplary cost has been imposed on the Insurance Company as
they had made the complainant and her five minor children
suffer beyond imagination. If the money awarded was paid on
time, the victims could have built up their lives.
11. Let a copy of this order be forwarded to the Motor Accident
Claims Tribunal, Raebareli and the District Magistrate,
Raebareli for compliance forthwith.