1)     The petitioners have challenged the complaint filed by
respondent Drugs Inspector against them and the co-accused before
the Court of Chief Judicial Magistrate, Srinagar, alleging commission
of offences under Section 18(a)(i) read with Section 27(d) of the
Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.
2)     It appears that on 26.04.2013, sample of a drug, namely, Zargo-
manufacturing date 10/2012, expiry date 9/2014, manufactured by
petitioner No.1, was lifted from the premises of co-accused EFF AAY
Srinagar, by the respondent Drugs Inspector. One portion of the sealed
sample of the drug was sent to the Government Analyst i.e., Regional
Drugs Testing Laboratory, Sector 39-C, Chandigarh, and vide report
dated 26.06.2013, it was reported that the drug in question is of
standard quality.
3)     Vide order dated 10.09.2013, passed by a Division Bench of
this Court in PILNo.6/2013 titled Dr. Nisar ul Hassan and another vs.
State of J&K and Ors., general directions were issued that the samples
collected by Drug Inspectors be sent to more than one laboratories for
testing so as to dispel any impression of error or any other extraneous
consideration. Accordingly, the respondent Drugs Inspector sent
sample of the drug in question to Central Drugs Laboratory, Kolkata,
for re-analysis through the court of Judicial Magistrate, 1 st Class,
Jammu. As per the test report issued by Central Drugs Laboratory,
Kolkata, on 28.02.2014, the sample in question was found to be of not
a standard quality. Accordingly, the prosecution was launched against
the petitioners who happen to be the manufacturers of the drug in
question and the co-accused by filing a complaint before the Court of
Chief Judicial Magistrate, Jammu, which later on came to be
presented before the Court of Chief Judicial Magistrate, Srinagar.
4)     The petitioners have challenged the impugned complaint and
the order passed by the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Srinagar,
whereby process has been issued against them, on the grounds that the
manufacturer has a statutory right to controvert the report of the
Government Analyst by adducing evidence but in this case said right
of the petitioners has been violated. It has been contended that the
respondent Drugs Inspector has not issued any notice to the petitioners
under Section 23 and 25 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act nor a portion
of the sample was sent to the petitioners. It has been contended that
the impugned complaint has been filed by the respondent Drugs
Inspector at a time when there was no time left for the date of expiry
of the drug in question and, as such, the petitioners had no opportunity
of applying to the Court with a request for re-analysis of the sample.
According to the petitioners, on this ground alone the prosecution is
liable to be quashed in terms of the law settled by the Supreme Court
on the issue. It has been contended that under the garb of the orders of
the High Court, the statutory protection given to a manufacturer
cannot be taken away. It is also contended that even otherwise the
variation in the content of the drug in question is not of a significant
nature as would make the drug spurious and, as such, it was not open
to the respondent Drugs Inspector to launch prosecution against the
5)     I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the
material on record including the trial court record.
6)     There can be no dispute to the fact that that manufacturer of a
drug has a statutory right to adduce evidence in controversion of the
report of the Government Analyst and he has to exercise this right
within 28 days of receipt of copy of the report. Once this intension is
notified by the manufacturer, the sample of the drug produced before
the Magistrate has to be sent for testing or analysis to the Central
Drugs Laboratory. There is no dispute to the legal position that if
violation of this right has taken place because of the circumstances
attributable to the prosecution, the prosecution against the accused
manufacturer is liable to be quashed.
7)     If we have a look at the facts of the instant case, as per the
report of the Government Analyst, Chandigarh, the sample of the drug
manufactured by the petitioners was found to be of standard quality.
Thus, there was no occasion for the respondent Drugs Inspector to
issue a notice to the petitioners in terms of sub-section (2) of Section
25 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act which provides for furnishing of a
copy of the report to the manufacturer or the person from whom the
sample was taken. Since the sample was found to be of standard
quality, as such, there was no occasion for the petitioners to notify
their intension of adducing evidence in controversion of the report.
8)     In the instant case after receipt of the report of the Government
Analyst, Chandigarh, the sample was sent for re-analysis to Central
Drugs Laboratory, Kolkata, under the directions of the High Court.
The question that arises for consideration is as to whether in such
circumstances, when the sample has been tested by the Central Drugs
Laboratory, a manufacturer or any other person has a right to seek a
direction for re-analysis of the sample. In this regard it is necessary to
have a look at the relevant provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act,
1940. Sub-section (4) of Section 25 of the said Act provides for re-
analysis of the sample after receipt of the Government Analyst’s
report. It reads as under:
(4) Unless the sample has already been tested or analysed
in the Central Drugs Laboratory, where a person has under
sub-section (3) notified his intention of adducing evidence
in controversion of a Government Analyst’s report, the
Court may, of its own motion or in its discretion at the
request either of the complainant or the accused cause the
sample of the drug produced before the Magistrate under
sub-section (4) of section 23 to be sent for test or analysis
to the said Laboratory, which shall make the test or
analysis and report in writing signed by or under the
authority of, the Director of the Central Drugs Laboratory
the result thereof, and such report shall be conclusive
evidence of the facts stated therein.
9)     From a perusal of the aforesaid provision, it is clear that once a
manufacturer or the person from whom the sample was taken notifies
his intention of adducing evidence in controversion of the report of
Government Analyst, the sample of the drug has to be sent for test or
analysis to the Central Drugs Laboratory and once such report is
received, the same becomes conclusive evidence of the facts stated
therein. But the difficulty arises in a case where the sample has
already been analyzed by the Central Drugs Laboratory. The provision
begins with the expression “unless the sample has already been tested
or analyzed in the Central Drugs Laboratory” meaning thereby that if
the sample has already been tested or analyzed in the Central Drugs
Laboratory, the same cannot be sent for re-analysis again to the same
laboratory or to any other laboratory. It is to be noted that in the
instant case, the sample has been sent to Central Drugs Laboratory,
Kolkata, pursuant to the directions of the High Court.
10)    The question whether there is any bar to sending of sample of
drugs directly to the Central Drugs Laboratory came up for
consideration before the Supreme Court in the case of Ram Shankar
Misra vs. State of U.P, (1980) 1 SCC255. The Court after interpreting
the provisions contained in Section 25 (4) of the Act observed as
“4. The mode prescribed under Section 25(4) is one
method of sending it to the Director of the Central
Drugs Laboratory. The other method is by the Drugs
Inspector sending it direct as contemplated under the
first part of Section 25(1). It is significant that Sub-
section (4) of Section 25 starts with the words "unless
the sample has already been tested or analysed in the
Central Drugs Laboratory." These words clearly
indicate that apart from the mode prescribed
in Section 25(4), the sample can be sent for analysis to
the Central Drugs Laboratory.”
11)    From the aforesaid ratio laid down by the Supreme Court, it is
clear that there is no prohibition in the Act or the Rules barring the
inspector from sending the sample directly to the Central Drugs
Laboratory and, as such, the contention of the petitioners that by
sending the sample to the Central Drugs Laboratory, Kolkata, in terms
of the Court directions is not in accordance with law, does not hold
any merit.
12)    Another question which falls for determination is as to whether
the right of a person from whom the sample has been collected or of
the manufacturer of the drug to adduce evidence in controversion of
the report of Central Drugs Laboratory would get defeated and
violated once the sample is sent directly for analysis to the said
laboratory. This contention was raised before the Supreme Court in
Ram Shankar Misra’s case (supra). The Court repelled the said
contention by observing as under:
“….The submission is that by sending the sample
straight to the Director, Central Drugs Laboratory,
Calcutta, the appellant was deprived of his right
under Section 25(4) of requesting the Court to send the
sample for analysis by the Central Drugs Laboratory. We
do not see any substance in this contention. Section
25(1) deals with the reports of Government
Analyst. Section 25(1) provides that the Government
Analyst to whom a sample of any drug or cosmetic has
been submitted for test or analysis, shall deliver to the
Inspector submitting it a signed report in triplicate in the
prescribed form. The sub-section contemplates two
modes of sending samples one by sending the drug for
test or under Sub-section (4) of Section 23. There is no
restriction as to how a sample of the drug or cosmetic
has to be submitted by the Drugs Inspector. Section
25(4) contemplates sending of the sample through the
Court. It provides that unless the sample has already
been tested or analysed in the Central Drugs
Laboratory, where a person has under Sub-section (3)
notified his intention of adducing evidence in
controversion of Government Analyst's report at the
request either of the complainant or the accused cause
the sample of the drug or cosmetic produced before the
Magistrate under Sub-section (4) of Section 23 to be
sent for test or analysis to the laboratory.”
13)    In Amery Pharmaceuticals and Another vs. State of Rajasthan,
(2001) 4 SCC 382, a contention was raised before the Supreme Court
that non supply of one portion of the sample to the manufacturer, who
was joined as an accused in the complaint, has resulted in depriving
him of a valuable right to test the correctness of the report of the
Government Analyst. It was submitted that the consequence of such
non-supply was that the conclusiveness attached by law regarding the
findings mentioned by the Government Analyst was lost and the
report of the Government Analyst would not be binding on the
manufacturer. It was argued that the conclusiveness of the report of
the Government Analyst would nail the manufacturer with the
findings in the report as he would otherwise be disabled from
controverting the said findings because he had no right to challenge
such findings due to the absence of a portion of the sample with him.
14)    The Supreme Court dealt with the aforesaid contentions by
“24. The extent of the implication of the words
"such evidence shall be conclusive" as employed
in Section 25(3) of the Act has to be understood
now. Section 4 of the Evidence Act says that when
one fact is declared by the said Act to be conclusive
proof of another "the court shall, on proof of one
fact, regard the other as proved, and shall not allow
evidence to be given for the purpose of disproving
it." The expression "conclusive evidence" employed
in Section 25(3) of the Act cannot have a different
implication as the legislative intention cannot be
different. Such an import as for the word
"conclusive" in the interpretation of statutory
provisions has now come to stay. If so, what would
happen if the manufacturer is disabled from
challenging the facts contained in the document
which would visit him with drastic consequences
when he is arraigned in a trial. Any legal provision
which snarls an indicted person without affording
any remedy to him to disprove an item of evidence
which could nail him down cannot be approved as
consistent with the philosophy enshrined in Article
21 of the Constitution. The first effort which courts
should embark upon in such a situation is to use the
power of interpretation to dilute it to make the
provision amenable to Article 21.
interpretation as would avert the consequences of
depriving an accused of any remedy against such
evidence. He must have the right to disprove or
controvert the facts stated in such a document at
least at the first tier. It is possible to interpret the
provisions in such a way as to make a remedy
available to him. When so interpreted the position
is thus: The conclusiveness meant in section 25(3) of
the Act need be read in juxtaposition with the
persons referred to in the sub-section. In other
words, if any of the persons who receives a copy of
the report of the Government Analyst fails to notify
his intention to adduce evidence in controversion of
the facts stated in the report within a period of 28
days of the receipt of the report, then such report of
the Government Analyst could become conclusive
evidence regarding the facts stated therein as
against such persons. But as for an accused, like the
manufacturer in the present case, who is not
entitled to be supplied with a copy of the report of
the Government Analyst, he must have the liberty
to challenge the correctness of the facts stated in
the report by resorting to any other modes by which
such facts can be disproved. He can also avail
himself of the remedy indicated in sub-section (4)
of Section 25 of the Act by requesting the court to
send the other portion of the sample remaining in
the court to be tested at the Central Drugs
compulsion to cause the said sample to be so tested
if the request is made after a long delay. It is for
that purpose that a discretion has been conferred
on the court to decide whether such sample should
be sent to the Central Drugs Laboratory on the
strength of such request. However, once the sample
is tested at the Central Drugs Laboratory and a
report as envisaged in Section 25(4) of the Act is
produced in court the conclusiveness mentioned in
that sub-section would become incontrovertible.”
15)    The Supreme Court further went on to observe as under:
“When the provision can be interpreted in such a way
as to avert absurd consequences in the manner
indicated above it is not congenial to the interest of
criminal justice to acquit the manufacturers of
forbidden medicines or drugs on a technical ground
that there is a lacuna in the legislation by not
supplying copy of the report of the Government
Analyst to the manufacturer in certain situations. To
adopt the course of acquitting such offending
manufacturers only on the legislative lacuna (if at all it
is lacuna) would be hazardous to public health and the
lives of the patients to whom drugs are prescribed by
medical practitioners would be in jeopardy. Hence,
when the legislative provision is capable of being
interpreted as we did now, the courts need not feel
helpless in administering criminal justice in accordance
with the objects sought to be achieved by the statute.
16)    From the foregoing analysis of law on the subject, it is clear
that while a manufacturer has a valuable right of getting the sample
re-tested/re-analyzed by the Central Drugs Laboratory so as to adduce
evidence in controversion of the report of the Government Analyst but
once the sample has been tested by the Central Drugs Laboratory,
there is no occasion for sending the sample again for testing to the
same laboratory. It has been further laid down by the Supreme Court
in the aforequoted judgment, that the conclusiveness meant in Section
25(3) of the Act has reference to the person referred to in the said sub-
section, meaning thereby that the facts stated in the report of the
Government Analyst would become conclusive only against the
person who despite having been provided a copy of the report, has
failed to notify his intention to adduce evidence regarding facts stated
therein within a period of 28 days. This conclusiveness of the facts
stated in the report would not come into play in a case where the
manufacturer or any other person has either not been provided the
copy of the report or where such manufacturer or person had no
occasion to notify his intention to adduce evidence in controversion of
the report. In view of the above, the question whether in a particular
case, conclusiveness is to be attached to the report of the Central
Drugs Laboratory and whether valuable right of a manufacturer to
adduce evidence in controversion of the report would get violated in a
particular case depends upon the facts and circumstances peculiar to
that case.
17)    In case, like the present one, the manufacturers/petitioners were
not provided the copy of the report of the CDL, Kolkata, or if at all
the same was provided, the petitioners/manufacturers could not ask
for reanalysis of the sample as the same had already been tested by
Central Drugs Laboratory. Therefore, the report would not be
conclusive against the petitioners. The petitioners would be at liberty
to adduce evidence in controversion of the said report before the trial
court. In these circumstances no prejudice has been caused to the
petitioners even if the complaint has been filed when the shelf life of
the drug in question was due to expire or because in the circumstances
explained hereinbefore, they could not seek reanalysis of the sample
of the drug in question. The report of the CDL, Kolkata, as already
stated, in the facts and circumstances of the case is not conclusive
against the petitioners and they have a right to controvert the same by
leading evidence before the trial court. However, the fact that the
petitioners herein are disabled from seeking reanalysis of the sample,
in the facts and circumstances of the instant case, does not offer a
ground to question the proceedings against them.
18)    Apart from the above, the principle that right to adduce
evidence against the report of the Government Analyst is violated can
be applied to cases where conduct of the prosecution has resulted in
denial of opportunity to the manufacturer to exercise this right.
Different considerations would arise if the right gets frustrated for the
reasons for which the prosecution is not responsible.
19)    In the instant case, the sample was sent to Central Drugs
Laboratory under the directions of the High Court. The first report of
the Government Analyst was in favour of the petitioners, as such,
there was no occasion for the respondents to invite the petitioners to
adduce evidence in controversion of the said report. Once the report of
the Central Drugs Laboratory was received, there was no provision for
the re-analysis of the sample and, as such, the respondent Drugs
Inspector had no obligation to give opportunity to the petitioners to
adduce evidence in controversion of the said report. So, it is not a case
where the prosecution is to be blamed for not providing an
opportunity to the petitioners to seek reanalysis of the sample. The
contention of the petitioners that their aforesaid right has been
violated due to the reasons attributable to the prosecution. is without
any merit.
20)     It has been contended by the petitioners that even as per the
report of the CDL, Kolkata, variation in the content of the drug in
question is not of such significance as would entail criminal
prosecution of the petitioners. In this regard, it is to be noted that the
question whether the variation in the content of the drug was of
significant nature or otherwise is a matter of trial and the same can be
determined only after examining the expert who has analyzed the
sample of the drug. This Court cannot act as an expert to determine
this question in these proceedings.
21)     For the foregoing reasons, I do not find any merit in this
petition. The same is, accordingly, dismissed.
22)     The trial court record along with copy of this judgment be sent
to the trial court.