Apprehending arrest in a non-bailable offence, a cine artist
cum producer has approached this Court seeking pre-arrest bail
under section 438 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, (for
short the Cr.P.C). Petitioner alleges that the ingredients of the
offences are not made out and hence his liberty ought not to be
curtailed, unless and until he is found guilty in accordance with
the procedure established by law.
2.   On 22.04.2022, on the basis of information received
from an actress alleging several instances of rape committed on
her by the petitioner, Crime No.515 of 2022 of Ernakulam Town
South Police Station was registered. A statement was also given
by the victim under Section 164 Cr.P.C on 23.04.2022. The
petitioner is alleged to have committed rape on the victim with
the promise of marriage, twice during her menstrual periods and
on other occasions, after causing physical injuries and without
her consent. The prosecution further alleges that, on coming to
know about the registration of the crime, petitioner went abroad
in an attempt to flee from the hands of law and sitting in the
comfort of another country, instituted this bail application under
section 438 of Cr.P.C.
3.   Petitioner, on the other hand, denies the allegation of
rape as wholly false and pleaded that the accusation is only a
machination of the victim who was upset on getting information
that another actress was decided to be cast as a heroine, by the
Director of that movie, in a new movie project proposed to be
produced by the petitioner. The survivor even expressed her ire
at the new heroine in front of many people, on 18-04-2022. It
was also pleaded that evidence of the nature of relationship
between the petitioner and the survivor is available in plenty, on
the mobile phones through WhatsApp messages and Instagram
chats and other documents. It is alleged that, by quirky conduct,
a consensual relationship is projected as rape.
4.    Sri.S.Rajeev,  learned    counsel for  the   petitioner
contended that though the allegations of rape are alleged to
have occurred between 16.03.2022 to 14.04.2022, the victim
never rushed to a police station and on the other hand she gave
the complainant only on 22.04.2022. It was submitted that
petitioner left for Dubai on a pre-planned trip and that,
subsequent to his return under the protection of an order from
this Court, he has been subjected to interrogation for more than
38    hours.    Petitioner  contends   that  he   has     voluntarily
surrendered the two mobile phones in his possession and has
also handed over all documents available with him. On the
aforesaid basis, it was urged that further custodial interrogation
of the petitioner was not warranted and that he is willing to co-
operate with the investigation.
5. The learned Counsel also argued that an acquaintance
with the victim from 2018 onwards slowly turned into a
relationship with instances of consensual sex. Further, the
consensual sexual relationship was done with the knowledge that
petitioner was a married man and therefore the offences alleged
are not made out at all. On behalf of the petitioner, it was further
contended that the numerous WhatsApp messages between the
petitioner and the survivor will reveal the nature of their
relationship. The phones having been already handed over to the
police, even the deleted messages between 16-03-2022 to
31-03-2022, which were deleted before the present allegations
cropped up, can also be retrieved by scientific analysis, for which
the mobile phones have already been forwarded.
6. Sri. Grashious Kuriakose, the learned Additional General
of Prosecutions vehemently opposed the grant of pre-arrest bail
and submitted that the practice of filing applications for bail
sitting outside the country, should not be entertained. He further
submitted that the investigation has collected evidence against
the petitioner and the offences alleged being serious and
heinous, grant of pre-arrest bail will not only prejudice the
investigation but will also send a wrong signal to the society. The
Senior Counsel further contended that the presumption under
section 114A of the Evidence Act, 1872 clearly applies to the
instant case and hence the principle of presumption of innocence
stands superseded. It was urged that the victim is an upcoming
film actress who acted in a movie produced by the petitioner,
which happens to be the only movie in which she has acted to
date, had looked upon the accused as an elder colleague and
implicitly trusted him, but, he misused the trust and exploited
her, thereby revealing his true colour of a ‘wolf in a sheep’s
clothing’. According to the prosecution, the cumulative effect of
all the above leans against the grant of pre-arrest bail and on the
other hand, custodial interrogation of the petitioner is required,
7.  The learned Additional General of Prosecution further
contended that the investigation so far has revealed that the
petitioner was in the habit of developing sexual relationships
with women in distress. He further contended that though
petitioner had surrendered his mobile phone to the investigating
team, the messages from 16-03-2022 till 31.03.2022, were
completely erased, which compels the investigation to doubt the
veracity of the contentions now being put forth by the petitioner.
Apart from the above, it was also argued that the petitioner
came on Facebook live, revealing the identity of the victim,
making her a laughing stock and even threatened to prosecute
her. It was also asserted that the gravity of the allegations, the
conduct of the accused, apart from the requirement to conduct a
test identification parade as well as his potency test are areas
which     require   custodial  interrogation.    He concluded    by
submitting that even the subsequent conduct, after registration
of the crime, should disentitle the petitioner to any relief in this
8. Sri. M.R.Rajesh, learned counsel appearing on behalf of
the victim argued with great elan that petitioner had misused
and abused the trust reposed on him by her and that even
during her menstrual periods, ignoring her repeated objections,
forced himself upon her. As a novice artist, her objections were
easily subdued and she could not prevent the repeated intrusions
into her bodily autonomy and was subjected to repeated sexual
assaults. The learned counsel also submitted that the victim had
approached the police within eight days of the last assault, which
itself shows the veracity of her allegations and hence, this was
not a fit case for the grant of pre-arrest bail.
9. Adv.M.R.Rajesh, further argued that the modus operandi
adopted by the petitioner by building up confidence and trust in
the victim as a powerful actor and producer of movies created an
aura of faith and thereafter sexually abused the victim. It was
further pointed out that though the accused had come out in the
public, revealing the identity of the victim and even stated that
he retains the WhatsApp messages, but curiously, the documents
produced show absence/deletion of such messages from the
mobile phones for the period till 31.03.2022. The learned counsel
further argued that the selective deletion of WhatsApp messages
is crucial, considering the victim’s statement that on 16.03.2022
she was brutally raped after forcing her to consume red wine.
The learned counsel further contended that without custodial
interrogation, the investigation will not be able to unravel the
clear picture that happened from 16.03.2022 onwards and that
the   manipulation    of   evidence    by deleting   the   WhatsApp
messages indicates the extent to which the accused could go to
destroy the evidence. In such circumstances, the benefit of pre-
arrest bail ought not to be granted.
10.   Exhaustive arguments were raised by all the counsel
with the aid of numerous judgments. However, this Court
reminds itself that this is an application for anticipatory bail. The
nuances of ‘consent’ under the Indian Penal Code or of ‘rape’ are
not to be deliberated upon at this stage, lest it prejudices either
side, at the time of trial. In this phase of legal proceedings, this
Court is only to consider the competing claims of liberty of an
individual guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution of
India as against the power of investigation of the police against a
person accused of a serious crime.
11.    However,   before   considering  the   merits   of  this
application, it is essential to advert to the preliminary objection
raised by the respondents on the maintainability of this bail
application. When the application was filed, petitioner was not in
the country. It was alleged that petitioner fled from India after
coming to know of the registration of the crime. Noticing the
intention of the petitioner to subject himself to the jurisdiction of
this Court, an interim order was issued ‘not to arrest the
petitioner’. On that basis, petitioner returned and is presently in
12. Since the question regarding the maintainability of an
application for pre-arrest bail while the applicant is residing
outside the country, arises quite often, the said issue is
considered. On the basis of decisions in Souda Beevi and
Another v. S.I. of Police and Others (2011 (3) KHC 795) and
Shafi S.M. v. State of Kerala and Another (2020 (4) KHC
510) it was argued that the presence of the petitioner outside
the country disentitles the applicant to seek pre-arrest bail.
13. A reading of the aforementioned two decisions shows
that such an absolute restriction has not been laid down by this
Court. On the other hand, all that those two decisions say is
that, atleast before the final hearing, the Court must be
convinced that the applicant is within the jurisdiction of the Court
so that the conditions if any imposed, could be effectively
14. Section 438 Cr.P.C does not contain a restrictive
mandate that a person residing outside the country cannot file
an application for anticipatory bail. It is possible that a person
can apprehend arrest even outside the country for an offence
that occurred in India. With the advancement in investigative
technology      and communication,       the various   agencies   of
investigation could even be deployed to arrest a person outside
the country. An apprehension of arrest can arise even while the
applicant is residing outside the country. Thus, when a bonafide
apprehension exists, the statute confers power on such a person
to seek protection from arrest. In the absence of any restrictive
clauses in S.438, restricting the right of a person residing outside
the country from filing an application for pre-arrest bail, court
cannot read into the provision such a restriction which the
legislature did not incorporate.
15. In the decisions in Sushila Aggarwal and Others v.
State (NCT of Delhi) and Another [(2020) 5 SCC 1], as well
as Shri Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia and Others v. State of
Punjab [(1980) 2 SCC 565], it was held that courts cannot read
into section 438 Cr.P.C. a restriction, which the legislature had
not thought it fit to impose. In fact, the Court deprecated the
practice of an over-generous infusion of constraints into section
438 and even observed that such restrictions can make the
provision itself constitutionally vulnerable. Therefore, I am of the
considered view that an application for pre-arrest bail can be
filed even by a person residing outside the country.        However,
the only limitation is that prior to the final hearing, the applicant
must be inside the country to enable the court to impose and
enforce conditions contemplated under the statutory provisions.
16. Section 438 Cr.P.C has conferred a discretionary right
on the higher courts to consider whether a pre-arrest bail ought
to be granted under the particular circumstances of the case.
The discretion conferred upon the superior courts of law, though
not controlled by any specific guidelines, the same is not to be
exercised arbitrarily. Law adjures such courts to utilize their
trained discretion while considering an application for pre-arrest
17.     Though, as mentioned earlier, numerous decisions
were cited by either side, some old and some recent, a narrative
of all those decisions is not required since the position of law is
classically illustrated in two judgments, both of which are
Constitution Bench judgments.
18. In Shri Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia and Others v. State
of Punjab [(1980) 2 SCC 565], mentioned earlier, the Supreme
Court, after noticing the object behind the incorporation of
section 438 Cr.P.C held that the said section is a procedural
provision which is concerned with the personal liberty of an
individual, who is entitled to the benefit of the presumption of
innocence since he is not, on the date of his application for
anticipatory bail, convicted of the offence in respect of which he
seeks bail. After noticing that the crimes, the criminals and even
the    complainants    can    occasionally   possess    extraordinary
features, in which the powerful processes of criminal law could
be perverted for achieving extraneous ends, the Supreme Court
observed that it is to meet such situations also that the provision
for grant of anticipatory bail was introduced into the Code of
1973. It was even noted that a developed jurisprudence of bail is
integral to a socially sensitized judicial process, especially in the
light of the guarantee of personal liberty of an accused. {See the
decision in Gudikanti Narasimhulu v. Public Prosecutor
[(1978) 1 SCC 240] also}.
19. Again in a recent judgment, another Constitution Bench
of the Supreme Court in Sushila Aggarwal and Others v.
State (NCT of Delhi) and Another [(2020) 5 SCC 1], has,
after considering the entire gamut of the law relating to
anticipatory bail came to twelve significant conclusions in
paragraph 92 of the said judgment. Five of those conclusions
which are relevant are extracted below:
“92.4.  Courts   ought   to    be generally guided   by
considerations such as the nature and gravity of the
offences, the role attributed to the applicant, and the
facts of the case, while considering whether to grant
anticipatory bail, or refuse it. Whether to grant or not is
a matter of discretion; equally whether and if so, what
kind of special conditions are to be imposed (or not
imposed) are dependent on facts of the case, and
subject to the discretion of the court.
92.5. Anticipatory bail granted can, depending on the
conduct and behavior of the accused, continue after filing
of the charge-sheet till end of trial.
92.6. An order of anticipatory bail should not be
“blanket” in the sense that it should not enable the
accused to commit further offences and claim relief of
indefinite protection from arrest. It should be confined
to the offence or incident, for which apprehension of
arrest is sought, in relation to a specific incident. It
cannot operate in respect of a future incident that
involves commission of an offence.
92.7. An order of anticipatory bail does not in any
manner limit or restrict the rights or duties of the police
or investigating agency, to investigate into the charges
against the person who seeks and is granted pre-arrest
bail.
92.8. The observations in Sibbia regarding “limited
custody”    or   “deemed      custody”    to  facilitate the
requirements of the investigative authority, would be
sufficient for the purpose of fulfilling the provisions of
Section 27, in the event of recovery of an article, or
discovery of a fact, which is relatable to a statement
made during such event (i.e. deemed custody). In such
event, there is no question (or necessity) of asking the
accused to separately surrender and seek regular bail.”
20. The above decisions thus hold that while considering an
application for anticipatory bail, the court must be guided by
considerations such as nature and gravity of the offences, the
role attributed to the applicant, facts of the case, the character
of evidence, position and status of the accused with reference to
the victim and witnesses, the likelihood of the accused fleeing
from justice and repeating the offences, the possibility of the
accused tampering with the evidence and obstructing the course
of justice.
21. While considering an application for bail, Court must
take care not to enter into a meticulous examination of the
materials collected or comment on the same. Courts must also
avoid scrutinizing feminine conduct from a masculine point of
view. Myths, stereotyping and even generalisation, which are all
different forms of bias, must be avoided. As observed in Aparna
Bhat and Others v. State of Madhya Pradesh and Another
[(2021) SCC OnLine SC 230], the stereotyped notions of
chastity, resistance to rape, having visible physical injuries,
behaving in a certain way, reporting the offence immediately, etc
are all rape myths. Notwithstanding the above, care must be
taken to avoid consensual relationships being converted into
instances of rape. Thus, each case presents its own factual
scenario and therefore certain grounds peculiar to each case can
be taken into account.
22. Viewed in the perspective of the principles referred
above, this Court called for the case diary of the investigation, to
satisfy itself whether anticipatory bail can be granted to the
petitioner    or not.  In  Chidambaram       P.   v.  Director    of
Enforcement [(2019) 9 SCC 24], it was observed that the court
can peruse the case diary, even before the trial begins for
various purposes, including at the stage of considering an
application for pre-arrest bail. Conscious of the need to avoid
meticulous analysis of materials collected by the investigation, as
revealed from the case diary, I refrain from discussing those in
23. From the materials collected and on an appreciation of
the arguments made across the Bar, the following circumstances
are taken note of, for the purpose of this application:
(a) The survivor was aware that the petitioner was a
married man and that he is continuing in the marriage for
the sake of his child.
(b) Petitioner being involved in a subsisting marriage,
there was no possibility of a legal marriage with the
survivor at present.
(c) During the period from 16-03-2022 till 14-04-2022,
the survivor was not under any form of confinement.
(d)   The   petitioner  and   the   survivor  have   been
communicating with each other through WhatsApp and
Instagram consistently and in plenty.
(e)  The    available  messages   (from   31-03-2022   to
17-04-2022) between the petitioner and the survivor
prima facie convey an intense relationship between them.
(f) While the petitioner deleted the messages from
16-03-2022 till 30-03-2022 from his phones, the survivor
also deleted all messages between them, for the entire
period in question.
(g) Mobile communications between the petitioner and
survivor atleast from 31-03-2022 till 17-04-2022 do not
refer to any instances of sexual assault.
(h) Petitioner has already been questioned for 38 hours
and he has handed over to the investigating officer, his
two mobile phones, allegedly used by him during the
period.
(i) The mobile phones of the petitioner as well as the
survivor have been sent for examination to the forensic
science laboratory and it is informed that even the
deleted WhatsApp and Instagram messages/chats can be
retrieved.
(j) Petitioner did not include the survivor in a proposed
new movie and another actress has been chosen as a
heroine, which came to the knowledge of the survivor
after 15-04-2022 and she shouted at the petitioner on
(k) Petitioner’s wife had filed a case against him in 2018
alleging inter-alia, domestic violence and promiscuous
behaviour, however, the complaint was withdrawn within
few weeks.
(l) Petitioner’s passport has already been impounded and
24. The above-noted circumstances cannot be ignored while
arriving at the conclusion on whether the petitioner should be
given the benefit of pre-arrest bail or not.
25. Though the learned Additional Director General of
Prosecution and the learned counsel for the survivor laid great
emphasis on the presumptions available under section 114(a) as
well as under section 53(a) of the Evidence Act 1872, I am of the
view that at the stage of considering the grant of pre-arrest bail,
those    provisions  cannot     be  given    undue preference. The
presumptions provided under section 114(a) and section 53(a)
are rebuttable. Further, as the provisions themselves indicate,
those presumptions will arise only when substantive evidence is
adduced in a court of law i.e; at the stage of trial. Time has
therefore not yet reached to apply those presumptions.
26.     On   a   consideration      of  the  above-mentioned
circumstances, I am of the view that petitioner ought to be given
the benefit of pre-arrest bail, subject to the condition of limited
custody to the investigating officer, as contemplated in the
decision of the Supreme Court in Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia’s
case (supra) and in Susheela Aggarwal’s case (supra).
27. Accordingly, I allow this application for pre-arrest bail
on the following conditions:
(1)      The    petitioner shall   surrender   before the
Investigating Officer on 27-06-2022 at 09.00 AM for
interrogation.
(2)    The petitioner can be interrogated for the next
seven days i.e; from 27-06-2022            till 03-07-2022
(inclusive) from 09.00 AM till 06.00 PM every day, if
required. The petitioner shall be deemed to be under
custody during the aforesaid period for facilitating the
requirements of investigation.
(3)    If the Investigating Officer intends to arrest the
petitioner, then he shall be released on bail on the
petitioner executing a bond for Rs.5,00,000/- (Rupees
Five Lakhs only) with two solvent sureties each for the
like sum before the Investigating Officer.
(4)     Petitioner shall appear before the Investigating
Officer as and when called for.
(5)    Petitioner shall not contact or interact with the
victim or any of the witnesses.
(6)    Petitioner shall not indulge in any form of attack
through the social media or other modes against the
victim or her family.
(7)     Petitioner shall not leave the State of Kerala
without prior permission of the jurisdictional court and
shall co-operate with the investigation.
(8) Petitioner shall not commit any other offence while
he is on bail.
(9) Though petitioner’s passport has been impounded,
he shall surrender his passport as and when he is
issued with a fresh one or if the impounding is
cancelled, as the case may be.