1.               The main challenge in this writ petition under Article 32 of the
constitution of India is to the legality and validity of the action of
constituting a Delimitation Commission for the Union Territory of
Jammu and Kashmir under provisions of the Delimitation Act, 2002
and the exercise of delimitation undertaken by the Commission.
The Constitution (Application to Jammu and Kashmir) Order,
2019 bearing C.O. No.272 was issued by the Hon’ble President of
India on 5th August 2019. The said order was issued in the exercise of
powers conferred by clause (1) of Article 370 of the Constitution of
India. The said order directed that all the provisions of the
Constitution, as amended from time to time, shall apply in relation to
the State of Jammu and Kashmir, subject to modifications made to
Article 367 as set out in the said order. By the said order, Clause (4)
was added to Article 367 providing that the expression “Constituent
Assembly of the State referred to in clause (2)” in the proviso to clause
(3) of Article 370 of the Constitution, shall be read as “Legislative
Assembly of the State”. On 6th August 2019, a declaration under
Clause (3) of Article 370 of the Constitution bearing C.O.No.273 was
made by the Hon’ble President of India on the recommendation of the
Parliament, by which it was declared that all the clauses of Article 370
shall cease to be operative.
3.    The Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 2019 (for short,
‘the J&K Reorganisation Act’) was enacted which provided for the
reorganisation of the State of Jammu and Kashmir by dividing it into
two Union Territories. A new Union Territory of Ladakh was created
comprising territories of Kargil and Leh Districts in the erstwhile State
of Jammu and Kashmir. The Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir
(for short, ‘the Union Territory of J & K) was formed comprising the
existing State of Jammu and Kashmir other than Kargil and Leh
Districts. The J&K Reorganisation Act came into force with effect from
31st October 2019. By virtue of Section 13 thereof, Article 239A of the
Constitution of India which was earlier applicable only to the Union
Territory of Puducherry, became applicable to the Union Territory of J
& K. Article 239A confers a power on the Parliament to enact a law for
creating a legislature for the Union Territory.
4.    The Delimitation Act, 2002 which was not applicable to the
erstwhile State of Jammu and Kashmir, was made applicable by virtue
of Section 62 of the J&K Reorganisation Act to the newly formed Union
Territory of J&K. On 6th March 2020, the Central Government
constituted a Delimitation Commission under Section 3 of the
Delimitation Act, 2002 for the purpose of delimitation of Assembly and
Parliamentary Constituencies in the Union Territory of J & K as well
as the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur and Nagaland.
The Commission was headed by a retired Judge of this Court. The
Election Commissioner and the State Election Commissioner were
made ex-officio members of the Delimitation Commission. The term of
appointment of the Chairperson was fixed as one year. By a
notification dated 3rd March 2021, the earlier notification dated 6 th
March 2020 appointing the Delimitation Commission was amended by
deleting the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur and
Nagaland from the purview of the Delimitation Commission. By the
same notification, the term of the Chairperson was extended to two
years. The notification dated 6th March 2020 was further amended by
a notification dated 21st February 2022 by providing that the term of
the Chairperson shall be for two years and two months.
5.    Sub-Section (1) of Section 60 of the J&K Reorganisation Act
provides that the number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of Union
Territory of J & K shall be increased from 107 to 114. Sub-Section (4)
of Section 14 provides that 24 seats in the Legislative Assembly of the
Union territory of J & K shall remain vacant and shall not be taken
into account for reckoning the total membership of the Assembly.
6.    Very wide and sweeping prayers have been made in the present
writ petition invoking Article 32 of the Constitution of India. The first
challenge is to the provision regarding the increase in the number of
seats in the Legislative Assembly of Union territory of J & K. The
second challenge is to the modification made of the notification dated
6th March 2020 by deleting the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam,
Manipur and Nagaland from the purview of the
Delimitation Commission. The third challenge is to the constitution of
the Delimitation Commission itself under the notification dated 6 th
March 2020. The challenge is on the ground that after the
Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order,
2008 (for short “the Delimitation Order of 2008”) was issued by the
Election Commission of India, the existing Delimitation Commission
was wound up and therefore, it was inappropriate and illegal to
constitute a new Delimitation Commission. The petitioners contended
that the Delimitation Commission has been appointed under the
notification dated 6th March 2020 by usurping the jurisdiction of the
Election Commission of India (for short, ‘the Election Commission) and
therefore, the constitution of the Delimitation Commission was ultra
vires the provisions of sub-Sections (2) and (5) of Section 60 of the
J&K Reorganisation Act. There is also a challenge to the constitution
of the Delimitation Commission on the ground of infringement of
clause (3) of Article 170 as well as Articles 14, 19 and 21 of the
7.    We may note here that on 13th May 2022, this Court recorded a
submission of Shri Ravi Shankar Jandhyala, the learned senior
counsel appearing for the petitioners that the petitioners are not
seeking to assail abrogation of Article 370 of the Constitution. In view
of this statement, this Court observed that certain allegations made on
that behalf in the pleadings are to be ignored. This Court also noted
that the challenge really was to the exercise undertaken in respect of
the delimitation pursuant to the notification dated 6th March 2020 as
amended by further notifications dated 3rd March 2021 and 21st
8.    A counter affidavit has been filed by the Union of India pointing
out that during the pendency of this writ petition, on 5 th May 2022, a
notification has been published by the Delimitation Commission in the
exercise of powers under sub-Section (2) of Section 4 and sub-Section
(2) of Section 9 of the Delimitation Act, 2002 containing the order of
the delimitation of Assembly Constituencies of the Union territory of J
& K and Parliamentary Constituencies. It is also pointed out that by a
further order dated 20th May 2022, the Central Government exercised
powers under sub-Sections (2) and (3) of Section 62 of the J&K
Reorganisation Act appointing 20th May 2022 as the date on which
order dated 5th May 2022 issued by the Delimitation Commission shall
come into force. The counter affidavit also notes that earlier, a draft
order was published by the Delimitation Commission on 14 th March
2022 containing proposals for delimitation of the Constituencies, and
objections and suggestions to it were invited. Copies of the
notifications/orders dated 5th May 2022 and 20th May 2022 have been
placed on record by the Election Commission – Respondent no.5.
There is a rejoinder filed by the petitioners dealing with the counter
affidavits filed by the Union of India and the Election Commission.
9.    Shri Ravi Shankar Jandhyala, the learned senior counsel
appearing for the petitioners has made detailed submissions. The
summary of his submissions is as under:
(a)    That the 2nd proviso to clause (3) of Article 170 of the
Constitution lays down that until the figures for the first
census taken after the year 2026 have been published, it shall
not be necessary to readjust the total number of seats in the
Legislative Assembly readjusted on the basis of the 1971
census and the division into territorial constituencies as may
be readjusted on the basis of 2001 census. The exercise
undertaken of delimitation/readjustment of the Assembly and
Parliamentary Constituencies of Union Territory of J & K by
appointing the Delimitation Commission under the impugned
notification dated 6th March 2020 is completely in violation of
2nd proviso to clause (3) of Article 170.    Similarly, the 3 rd
proviso to Article 82 imposes an embargo on the readjustment
of allocation of seats in the House of the People readjusted on
the basis of the 1971 census and the division of States into
territorial constituencies as may be readjusted on the basis of
the 2001 census till the figures of the first census conducted
after 2026 are available. A similar embargo has been imposed
by Articles 330 and 332 of the Constitution on reserving the
seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes till figures of
the first census conducted after 2026 are available;
(b) Earlier, the embargo was applicable till figures of the first
census taken after the year 2000 were available.          It was
modified by the Constitution (84 th Amendment Act, 2001) by
substituting    the  year   2026    for  the  year   2000.   The
Government cannot undermine the objects and reasons for
(c) Till the figures of the first census conducted after the year
2026 become available, the number of members of the
Legislative Assembly of the States remains the same.
Therefore, the effort to divide the Union territory of J & K into
territorial constituencies was illegal and uncalled for;
(d) Though the petitioners may not have challenged the validity
of Section 62 of the J&K Reorganisation Act, the same is
violative of clause (3) of Article 170 of the Constitution and
therefore,   the   provisions    of  Section   62    cannot   be
implemented.      He    submitted    that    the    number     of
Constituencies in Legislative Assemblies of the State can be
readjusted only in accordance with Article 170 and in
particular, the 2nd proviso to clause (3) thereof, and therefore,
any attempt to make any readjustment of the constituencies
of the Union Territory of J & K violates Article 170.        The
constitution of the Legislative Assembly of the Union
Territory of J & K must remain the same till the figures of the
first census conducted after the year 2026 are made
(e) In view of Articles 82 and 83, constituencies of the House of
the People for the Union territory of J & K cannot be
reconstituted without the publication of the results of the
first census conducted after the year 2026;
(f)The opinion rendered by the learned Attorney General for
India on 6th July 2016 concerning the implementation of
Section 26 of the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014
(for short, ‘the 2014 Act’) is very relevant. The learned
Attorney General for India opined that there was a conflict
between Section 26 of the 2014 Act and Article 170 of the
Constitution and therefore, Article 170 will prevail. It was
submitted that the said opinion will govern the relevant
provisions of the J&K Reorganisation Act as well;
(g) A non-obstante clause in a statute cannot override the
provisions of the Constitution. Reliance was placed upon a
decision of this Court in the case of Engineering Kamgar
Union v. Electro Steel Casting1 on this behalf;
(h) The delimitation order of 2008 published by the Election
Commission cannot be deviated from. The guidelines issued
by the Election Commission are very relevant on this behalf;
(i) As under Section 62 of the J&K Reorganisation Act, the work
of    delimitation  has    been  entrusted  to   the   Election
Commission, the notification dated 6th March 2020 which
permits Delimitation Commission to undertake the said
exercise, is completely illegal;
(j) It is a settled law that this Court can take judicial notice of
the proceedings of the Houses of Parliament. A question was
asked in the Lok Sabha by a Hon’ble Member regarding
undertaking the delimitation of the constituencies in the State
of Telangana along with the Union territory of J & K.        The
answer given by Shri Nityanand Rai, the Hon’ble Minister of
State in the Ministry of Home Affairs on 3rd August 2021 to
the question was that the total number of seats in the
Assembly of each State will be readjusted after the first
census is published after the year 2026;
(k) In  any   event,   the   appointment    of   the   Delimitation
Commission under the order dated 6 th March 2020 is
completely contrary to Section 3 of the Delimitation Act which
provides   that   the   Delimitation   Commission      shall   be
constituted at the earliest. Sub-Section (6) of Section 10 of the
Delimitation Act, 2002 requires the Delimitation Commission
to complete the exercise and to publish orders under sub-
Section (1) of Section 10, not later than 31 st July 2008.
Hence, the orders passed by the Delimitation Commission
constituted under the notification dated 6th March 2020 are in
complete violation of the mandate of sub-Section (6) of Section
(l) The Delimitation Act, 2002 contemplates the constitution of
a    single  Delimitation    Commission     and   not    multiple
Commissions.      He   would,    therefore,  submit    that   the
constitution of the Delimitation Commission is completely
(m) The States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur and
Nagaland were illegally excluded from the purview of the
notification dated 6th March 2020. The said action was taken
on the basis of the letter dated 22 nd February 2021 addressed
by the Deputy Secretary of the Ministry of Home Affairs,
stating that considering the litigations pending concerning the
delimitation exercise in North-Eastern States, the delimitation
exercise should not be undertaken in the said States.        The
earlier notification cannot be modified on the basis of the
views of a Deputy Secretary. The Union of India and the
Election Commission cannot apply different yardsticks to
different States. There was no reason to exclude the other
States included in the notification dated 6th March 2020;
(n) Sections 59 to 63 of the J&K Reorganisation Act are not
only violative of the express provisions of the Constitution but
also contradictory to each other. These Sections confer the
power of delimitation both on the Election Commission and
the Delimitation Commission which makes these Sections
completely illegal. Sub-Section (1)(b) of Section 11 of the
Delimitation Act, 2002 permits the Election Commission to
make any changes in the boundary, area, or the extent of any
constituency as described in the delimitation order already
issued and published;
(o) The act of omission of the words “but does not include the
State of Jammu and Kashmir” from Section 2(f) of the
Delimitation Act, 2002 by sub-Section (1) of Section 62 of the
J&K    Reorganisation    Act   infringes  Article 14   of  the
Constitution of India;
(p) Consolidation of all the delimitation orders was already
made by the Election Commission in accordance with Section
9 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950;
(q) Articles 2 to 4 of the Constitution are subject to other
provisions of the Constitution and the provisions of the said
Articles cannot override the Constitutional scheme; and
(r) Notwithstanding the orders dated 5th May 2020 and 20th
May 2022 passed in the exercise of powers under sub-Section
(1) of Section 10 of the Delimitation Act, 2002, the present
writ petition is maintainable. The decision of the Constitution
Bench of this Court in the case of Meghraj Kothari v.
Delimitation Commission & Ors.2 will have no application to
the facts of the present case.
10. Shri Tushar Mehta, the learned Solicitor General of India
appearing for the Union of India has made the following submissions:
(a)      Writ petition suffers from delay and latches as the
Delimitation Commission was constituted by the impugned
notification dated 6th March 2020. The notification was
amended on 3rd March 2021 by deleting the States of
Arunachal     Pradesh,    Assam,    Manipur    and   Nagaland.
Thereafter, on 14th March 2022, a draft delimitation order was
published by the Commission. As late as on 28 th March 2022,
the present petition has been filed. For challenging the
notification dated 6th March 2020, the present writ petition
has been filed after a lapse of more than two years;
(b) During the pendency of this petition, the delimitation order
under sub-Section (1) of Section 10 of the Delimitation Act,
2002 has been issued by the Delimitation Commission which
has been brought into force with effect from 20 th March 2022;
(c) Under sub-Section (2) of Section 10 of the Delimitation Act,
2002, there is a complete bar on any Court questioning the
order passed under sub-Section (1) of Section 10. In view of
the decision of the Constitution Bench in the case of Meghraj
Kothari2, the bar under sub-Section (2) of Section 10 is
applicable also to a remedy under Article 226 of the
Constitution. Article 329 also creates a bar on interference by
Courts in the matters of validity of any law relating to the
delimitation of constituencies. An order of delimitation of
constituencies has been held to be a law and therefore, now
the orders dated 5th May 2020 and 20th May 2022 cannot be
(d)Sections 60 and 62 of the J&K Reorganisation Act operate in
different fields. Section 60 generally refers to the delimitation
of constituencies and Section 62 deals with the delimitation of
constituencies on the basis of census figures of the 2011
census. He pointed out that sub-Section (1) of Section 60
which    confers   power   on   the  Election    Commission     of
delimitation uses the word “may” whereas Section 62 uses the
(e)   The Election Commission by a letter dated 2nd September
2019 informed the Government of India that since the
Delimitation Commission is constituted under Section 62 of
the    J&K   Reorganisation     Act  which  is  carrying   out
readjustment of Parliamentary and Legislative Assembly
constituencies,    it  was  not   necessary for  the  Election
Commission to undertake the exercise under Section 60 of the
(f)   Article 3 specifically empowers Parliament by law to form a
new State/Union Territory and the said law referred to in
Article 3 must provide for the appropriate amendments to the
First Schedule and Fourth Schedule for giving effect to the
provisions of the law. Clause (2) of Article 4 specifically
provides that no such law shall be deemed to be an
amendment of the Constitution for the purpose of Article 368.
Reliance was placed upon a decision of the Constitution
Bench in the case of Mangal Singh & Anr. v. Union of
India3 on this behalf; and
(g) Clauses (3) of Articles 81 and Article 170 do not apply to the
Union territories at all.
11.   The learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioners by way
of rejoinder urged that though there may not be any specific challenge
in the present petition to the validity of the provisions of the J&K
Reorganisation Act, the said challenge can always be inferred. He
submitted that the issues of inconsistency between the Constitutional
provisions and the provisions of the J&K Reorganisation Act have not
been answered by the learned Solicitor General of India.
Developments concerning the State of Jammu and Kashmir in the
12. (a) On 5th August 2019, the Constitution (Application to Jammu &
Kashmir) Order, 2019 (for short ‘the 2019 Presidential Order’)
was promulgated by the Hon’ble President of India in the
exercise of powers under clause (1) of Article 370 of the
Constitution of India.      The said order was issued in
concurrence with the Government of the State of Jammu and
Kashmir. Clause (2) of the 2019 Presidential Order provided
that all the provisions of the Constitution of India, as
amended from time to time, shall apply in relation to the State
of   Jammu     and    Kashmir    subject   to   exceptions  and
modifications set out in the said order. Clause (4) was added
by the said Order to Article 367 in relation to the State of
Jammu and Kashmir which provided that the expression
“Constituent Assembly of the State referred to in clause (2)” in
the proviso to clause (3) of Article 370 of the Constitution
shall be read as “Legislative Assembly of the State”. The 2019
Presidential order was brought into force with immediate
(b)    The second important development was the declaration
under Clause (3) of Article 370 of the Constitution (for short
‘the said declaration’) made by the Hon’ble President on the
recommendation of the Parliament. It was declared that from
6th August 2019, all clauses of Article 370 shall cease to be
operative, subject to the exceptions incorporated in the said
declaration. It was provided therein that notwithstanding
anything contained to the contrary in Articles 152 and 308 as
well as any other Article of the Constitution or any other
provision of the Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir or any
law, all the provisions of the Constitution of India as amended
from time to time shall apply to the State of Jammu and
(c)   Thus, in view of the 2019 Presidential Order and the said
declaration, with effect from 6 th August 2019, all the
provisions of the Constitution of India became applicable to
the State of Jammu and Kashmir except the modifications
provided in the 2019 Presidential Order. As a result of the
said declaration and the 2019 Presidential Order, the special
status of the State of Jammu and Kashmir under the
Constitution by virtue of Article 370 virtually came to an end;
(d) Another important development that followed was the
enactment of the J&K Reorganisation Act which received the
assent of the Hon’ble President on 9 th August 2019. 31st
October 2019 was fixed as the appointed day under the J&K
Reorganisation Act by the Central Government. By virtue of
Sections 3 and 4 thereof, with effect from 31st October 2019, a
new Union Territory came into existence known as the Union
Territory of Ladakh. The said Union Territory comprises of the
areas covered by Kargil and Leh districts. From the appointed
day, the Union Territory of J & K was also created. The said
Union Territory comprises of the territories of the erstwhile
State of Jammu and Kashmir except the area covered by the
Union Territory of Ladakh. Thus, with effect from 31 st October
2019, the State of Jammu and Kashmir ceased to exist and
the Union Territories of Ladakh, as well as Jammu &
Kashmir, were brought into existence;
(e). The Delimitation Act, 2002 became applicable to the
Union territory of J & K as the definition of “State” in clause (f)
of Section 2 thereof includes the Union Territories having a
Legislative Assembly.      In addition, many other Central
enactments incorporated in Table-1 of the Fifth Schedule to
the J&K Reorganisation Act became applicable to the Union
(f) The Representation of the People Act, 1951 (for short ‘the
RP Act of 1951’) was not applicable to the elections to fill in
the seats in either House of Parliament in the State of Jammu
and Kashmir and the House of Legislature of the said State.
An amendment was carried out to the RP Act of 1951 by the
J&K Reorganisation Act by which the provisions of the RP Act
of 1951 were made applicable to both the newly created Union
Territories.    Prior  to that,   The   Jammu      and   Kashmir
Representation of the People Act, 1957 (for short “J&K R.P
Act”) was applicable to the State. We may note here that as
the Representation of the People Act, 1950 (for short ‘the RP
Act of 1950’), was applicable to the State of Jammu and
Kashmir, the same continues to apply to the two newly
created Union Territories;
(g) By virtue of Section 13 of the J&K Reorganisation Act, the
provisions contained in Article 239A which were earlier
applicable only to the Union Territory of Puducherry were
made applicable to the Union Territory of J and K.        Article
239A, inter alia, provides that Parliament may by law create a
body to function as a legislature of the Union Territory of
The issue of the validity of provisions of the J&K Reorganisation
13.   We may note here that during the course of the hearing of
submissions     of the learned senior       counsel appearing    for  the
petitioners, he attempted to assail the validity of certain provisions of
the J&K Reorganisation Act. Therefore, we pointed out to him that
there is no challenge incorporated in the present writ petition to the
constitutional    validity  of  any    of the  provisions  of  the   J&K
Reorganisation Act.      The initial response of the senior counsel was
that he does not wish to challenge the provisions. However,
subsequently, he submitted that the challenge to the relevant
provisions of the J&K Reorganisation Act is implicit in this writ
14.   There cannot be any doubt that when a party wants to challenge
the constitutional validity of a statute, he must plead in detail the
grounds on which the validity of the statute is sought to be
challenged. In absence of the specific pleadings to that effect, Court
cannot go into the issue of the validity of statutory provisions. The
Constitutional Courts cannot interfere with the law made by the
Legislature unless it is specifically challenged by incorporating specific
grounds of challenge in the pleadings. The reason is that there is
always a presumption of the constitutionality of laws. The burden is
always on the person alleging unconstitutionality to prove it. For that
purpose, the challenge has to be specifically pleaded by setting out the
specific grounds on which the challenge is made.         A Constitutional
Court cannot casually interfere with legislation made by a competent
Legislature only by drawing an inference from the pleadings that the
challenge to the validity is implicit. The State gets a proper
opportunity to defend the legislation only if the State is made aware of
the grounds on which the legislation is sought to be challenged.
15.   Though an opportunity was available to the petitioners to
challenge the provisions of the J&K Reorganisation Act, the petitioners
have chosen not to do so. We may also note here that the petitioners
are also not questioning the 2019 Presidential Order and the said
declaration. Therefore, we will have to proceed on the footing that the
2019 Presidential Order, the said declaration and the provisions of the
J&K Reorganisation Act are valid. It is in this context that the
submissions made across the Bar will have to be appreciated.
Findings on the challenges in the Writ Petition
16.   The Constitution makes a clear distinction between the States
and Union Territories as can be seen from Article 1 and the First
Schedule. Part V of the Constitution deals with the Union. Chapter II
of Part V deals with Parliament. Part VI deals with the States. Chapter
III of Part VI deals with the State Legislature. Part VIII of the
Constitution independently deals with the Union Territories.
17.   Article 3 provides that Parliament may by law form new States
and alter the areas, boundaries or names of the existing States. The
explanation I provides that in clauses (a) to (e) of Article 3, a “State”
includes “Union Territory”. Thus, Explanation I makes it amply clear
that the power of Parliament under Clause (a) of Article 3, to make a
law to form a new State or to alter a boundary of a State includes a
power to make a law to form a new Union Territory. Explanation II
clarifies that the power conferred by clause (a) on Parliament to enact
the law to form a new State includes a power to form a Union Territory
by uniting parts of any State or Union Territory to any other State or
Union Territory. Clause (1) of Article 4 provides that any law made by
Parliament as provided in Article 3 shall contain such provisions for
the amendment of the First Schedule (containing the list of States and
Union Territories) and Fourth Schedule (containing allocation of seats
in the Council of States) as may be necessary for the purposes of
giving effect to the provisions of the law. Such a law may also contain
such supplemental, incidental and consequential provisions including
provisions as to representation in Parliament and in the Legislature or
Legislatures of the State or States affected by such law as Parliament
may deem necessary. Clause (2) of Article 4 clarifies that no such law
made by Article 3 shall be deemed to be an amendment of the
Constitution for the purposes of Article 368.       By the same law, a
provision can be made as to the representation in Parliament and in
the legislature of the Union Territory created by such law. The
Constitution Bench in the case of Mangal Singh3 has held that the
power under Article 4 is wide enough even to reduce the total
members of the Legislative Assembly below the minimum prescribed
by clause (1) of Article 170.
18.   Firstly, we will deal with the issue of applicability of Article 170
having the title “Composition of the Legislative Assemblies” to the
Union Territory of J & K. Article 170 forms part of Chapter III under
the title “The State Legislature”. Chapter III has been incorporated in
Part VI of the Constitution which deals with the States. Much
emphasis was laid on the violation of the provisions contained in the
second Proviso to Clause (3) of Article 170 by the learned counsel
appearing for the petitioners.    But we may note here that the said
Article does not deal with the legislatures of Union Territory at all.
Articles 239A and 239AA which are included in Part VIII of the
Constitution are the Articles that deal with the creation of a body to
function as legislature and Council of Ministers for certain Union
Territories. For the sake of convenience, we are reproducing Article
239A which reads thus:
“239A. Creation of local Legislatures or Council of
Ministers or both for certain Union territories -- (1)
Parliament may by law create [for the Union territory
(a) a body, whether elected or partly
nominated and partly elected, to function as a
Legislature for the Union territory, or
(b) a Council of Ministers, or both with such
constitution, powers and functions, in each case,
as may be specified in the law.
(2) Any such law as is referred to in clause (1) shall
not be deemed to be an amendment of this
Constitution for the purposes of article 368
notwithstanding that it contains any provision
which amends or has the effect of amending this
Article 239A as it originally stood provided that Parliament may by law
create for the Union Territory of Puducherry a body to function as a
Legislature for the Union Territory or a Council of Ministers or both.
Such a body to act as a Legislature of the Union Territory covered by
Article 239A may be elected or partly nominated and partly elected.
By virtue of Section 13 of the J&K Reorganisation Act, with effect from
31st October 2019, Article 239A became applicable to the Union
Territory of J and K. As noted by clause (2) of Article 239A, the law
contemplated by clause (1) of Article 239A shall not be deemed to be
an amendment to the Constitution for the purposes of Article 368
notwithstanding that it contains any provision which amends or has
the effect of amending the Constitution.
19.     On a conjoint reading of Articles 3,4 and 239A, we find that:-
a) Parliament by making a law can convert an existing State into
one or more Union territories;
for the Union territories of Puducherry and J&K. Accordingly,
sub-Section (2) of Section 14 of the J & K Reorganisation Act
provides that there shall be a Legislative Assembly for the
Union Territory of J & K.; and
c) Even if the law made by Parliament creating a body of
legislature for Union territories of Puducherry and J&K has
the effect of amending certain parts of the Constitution, it
shall not be deemed to be an amendment of the Constitution
for the purposes of Article 368.
20.   Now coming to the J&K Reorganisation Act, it is apparent that
the said law has been made by Parliament in the exercise of powers
under Articles 3,4 and 239A. The said law created two Union
territories in place of the State of Jammu and Kashmir. The said law
provides for the amendment of the First and Fourth schedule for
giving effect to its provisions. Section 13 provides for amendment of
Article 239A for applying the same to the Union territory of J & K.
Section 13 is a supplemental and consequential provision made by
Parliament as provided in clause (1) of Article 4 for the purposes of
giving effect to the creation of the new Union territory of J and K. In
view of clause (2) of Article 4, though Section 13 has the effect of
amending Article 239A, it will not be affected by Article 368 of the
21.   Under sub-section (2) of Section 14 of the J&K Reorganisation
Act, a Legislative Assembly for the Union territory of J and K has been
created. Sub-section (3) provides that the total number of seats in the
Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of J & K to be filled by the
persons chosen by direct election shall be 107. Clause (a) of sub-
section (4) of Section 14 provides that 24 seats in the Legislative
Assembly of the said Union territory shall remain vacant until the area
of the Union Territory under the occupation of Pakistan ceases to be
so occupied. We may note here that under the Constitution of Jammu
and Kashmir, the seats in the State Legislative Assembly excluding 24
seats earmarked for Pakistan occupied territory were 87 out of which
7 seats were reserved for Scheduled Castes and Schedule Tribes.
22.   As far as the number of constituencies is concerned, we must
also refer to Part V of the J&K Reorganisation Act having the title
“Delimitation of Constituencies”.      Sub-section (1) of Section 60
provides that the number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of the
Union territory of J & K shall be increased from 107 to 114. However,
the excluded 24 seats covered by Pakistan occupied territory remain
the same. Thus, the total number of seats available now for holding
elections to the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of J & K is
23.    Hence, as far as the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory
of J & K is concerned, Article 170 will have no application as it forms a
part of Chapter III of Part VI which deals with only the State
Legislature. It has no application to the Legislatures of Union
Territories. The reason is that the Legislative Assemblies of the
concerned Union Territories will be governed by the law made by the
Parliament in accordance with Article 239A and not by the provisions
of Chapter III of Part VI.     As Article 170 is not applicable to the
Legislature of the Union Territory of J & K, the main thrust of the
argument that certain provisions of the J&K Reorganisation Act and
actions taken thereunder are in conflict with Article 170 and in
particular Clause (3) thereof is clearly misconceived and deserves to be
24.   Now, we come to the issue of delimitation of constituencies of the
Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of J and K. There were two
earlier enactments dealing with the establishment of the Delimitation
Commission. The first one was the Delimitation Commission Act, 1962
and the second one was the Delimitation Act, 1972. Both the Acts
were not applicable to the State of Jammu and Kashmir as the
definition of the State incorporated in both Acts specifically excluded
the State of Jammu and Kashmir.         The same is the case with the
Delimitation Act, 2002. We may note here that Section 3 of the J&K
RP Act laid down the requirement of the establishment of the
Delimitation Commission which provided that the Delimitation
Commission shall distribute the seats in the Legislative Assembly to
single member territorial constituencies and delimit them having
regard to various factors mentioned in sub-section (2) of Section 3.
Section 4-B of the J&K RP Act provided for the Delimitation
Commission      to   pass  an  order   regarding   the   delimitation   of
constituencies and publish the same. In fact, the Delimitation of
Assembly    Constituencies    Order,  1995    was   issued   which    was
applicable to the State of Jammu and Kashmir. Section 4-C of the J&K
RP Act conferred power on the Election Commission to correct any
printing mistakes in the final order of the Delimitation Commission or
any error or omission. The Election Commission was also empowered
to make amendments when the boundaries or names of any district or
any territorial division mentioned in the final order of the Delimitation
Commission were altered.
25.    By virtue of sub-section (5) of Section 14 of the J&K
Reorganisation Act, the said Delimitation Order of 1995 was amended
as provided in the Third Schedule thereof. The Third Schedule
contains the details of the amendments to the delimitation of the
assembly constituencies made by the said Delimitation Order of 1995
in relation to the existing 83 assembly constituencies out of a total
107 as provided in sub-section (3) of Section 14. 24 constituencies
covered by the Pakistan occupied area were obviously not covered by
the Delimitation Order. Thus, by virtue of sub-section (5) of Section
14, the delimitation of 83 constituencies of the Legislative Assembly of
the Union Territory of J & K was incorporated in the form of the Third
Schedule which sets out the boundaries of and the areas incorporated
in the new individual 83 constituencies.
26.  Now we come to Part V of the of J&K Reorganisation Act which
deals with the Delimitation of Constituencies. By virtue of clause (a) of
sub-section (1) of Section 62, the provisions of the Delimitation Act,
2002 were made applicable to the Union Territory of J & K with effect
from 31st October 2019.       For the sake of convenience, we are
reproducing Sections 60 to 63 of the J&K Reorganisation Act which
60. (1) Without prejudice to sub-sections (3) of
section 14 of this Act, the number of seats in the
Legislative Assembly of Union territory of Jammu &
Kashmir shall be increased from 107 to 114, and
delimitation of the constituencies may be
determined by the Election Commission in the
manner hereinafter provided—
(a) the number of seats to be reserved for the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the
Legislative Assembly, having regard to the relevant
provisions of the Constitution;
(b) the assembly constituencies into which the
Union territory shall be divided, the extent of each
of such constituencies and in which of them seats
shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes or for the
Scheduled Tribes; and
description of the extent of the parliamentary
constituencies in each Union territory that may be
necessary or expedient.
(2) In determining the matters referred to in clauses (b)
and (c) of sub-section (1), the Election Commission
shall have regard to the following provisions, namely:—
(a) all the constituencies shall be single-member
(b) all constituencies shall, as far as practicable, be
geographically compact areas, and in delimiting them,
regard shall be had to physical features, existing
boundaries of administrative units, facilities of
communication and conveniences to the public; and
(c) constituencies in which seats are reserved for the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes shall, as
far as practicable, be located in areas where the
proportion of their population to the total population is
the largest.
(3) The Election Commission shall, for the purpose of
assisting it in the performance of its functions under
sub-section (1), associate with itself as associate
members, four persons as the Central Government may
by order specify, being persons who are the members of
the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of
Jammu & Kashmir or four members of the House of the
People representing the Union territory of Jammu and
Provided that none of the associate members shall have
a right to vote or to sign any decision of the Election
(4) If, owing to death or resignation, the office of an
associate member falls vacant, it shall be filled as far as
practicable, in accordance with the provisions of sub-
(a) publish its proposals for the delimitation of
constituencies together with the dissenting proposals, if
any, of any associate member who desires publication
thereof in the Official Gazette and in such other
manner as the Commission may consider fit, together
with a notice inviting objections and suggestions in
relation to the proposals and specifying a date on or
after which the proposals will be further considered by
(b) consider all objections and suggestions which may
have been received by it before the date so specified;
(c) after considering all objections and suggestions
which may have been received by it before the date so
specified, determine by one or more orders the
delimitation of constituencies and cause such order or
orders to be published in the Official Gazette, and there
upon such publication, the order or orders shall have
the full force of law and shall not be called in question
in any court.
(6) As soon as may be after such publication, every
such order relating to assembly constituencies shall be
laid before the Legislative Assembly of the Union
territory of Jammu and Kashmir.
61. (1) The Election Commission may by notification in
(a) correct any printing mistakes in any order made
under section 60 or any error arising therein from
inadvertent slip or omission; and
(b) where the boundaries or name of any territorial
division mentioned in any such order or orders is or are
altered, make such amendments as appear to it to be
necessary or expedient for bringing such order up-to-
(2) Every notification under this section relating to an
assembly constituency shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is issued, before the Legislative Assembly.
62.     (1) On       and    from    the appointed      day,
notwithstanding the publication of orders under sub-
section (1) of section 10 of the Delimitation Act, 2002 or
anything contained in sub-section (2) or sub-section (4)
of the said section, the Delimitation Act, 2002 shall
be deemed to have been amended as provided
(a) in section 2(f), the words “but does not include
the State of Jammu and Kashmir” shall be omitted;
(b) for the purpose of delimitation of Assembly and
Parliamentary Constituencies, the words and figure
“census held in the year 2001”, wherever occurring,
shall be construed as words and figure “census held
in the year 2011”.
(2) Readjustment of the constituencies as provided
under section 60 in the successor Union territory of
Jammu & Kashmir into Assembly Constituencies,
shall be carried by the Delimitation Commission, to
be constituted under the Delimitation Act, 2002 as
amended by this Act, and shall take effect from
such date as the Central Government may, by order,
published in the Official Gazette, specify.
(3) Readjustment of the constituencies as provided
under section 11 in the successor Union territory of
Jammu          &     Kashmir       into      Parliamentary
Constituencies, shall be carried by the Delimitation
Commission,        to    be     constituted    under    the
Delimitation Act, 2002 as amended by this Act, and
shall take effect from such date as the Central
Government may, by order, published in the Official
Gazette, specify.
63. Special provisions as to readjustment of
Assembly and Parliamentary Constituencies.—
Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 59 to
61, until the relevant figures for the first census taken
after the year 2026 have been published, it shall not
be necessary to readjust the division of successor
Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir into Assembly
and Parliamentary Constituencies and any reference
to the “latest census figures” in this Part shall be
construed as a reference to the 2011 census figures.”
27.   As noted earlier, the delimitation of 83 constituencies of the
Union Territory was made under the J&K Reorganisation Act and was
incorporated in the Third Schedule as provided in sub-section (5) of
Section 14. By virtue of the mandate of sub-section (1) of Section 60,
the total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of the Union
Territory was required to be increased from 107 to 114. Thus, by
excluding 24 seats from Pakistan occupied areas, the mandate was to
increase the seats from 83 to 90. For giving effect to the increase in
the number of seats as aforesaid, the exercise of delimitation for
dividing the Union Territory into 90 constituencies and determining
the number of seats to be reserved for Scheduled Castes and Schedule
Tribes was required to be undertaken. Sub-section (1) of Section 60
provides that the said delimitation exercise may be undertaken by the
Election Commission. However, sub-section (2) of Section 62 provides
that the readjustment of the constituencies as provided under Section
60 in the successor Union Territory of J & K into assembly
constituencies shall be carried out by the Delimitation Commission to
be constituted under the Delimitation Act, 2002 as amended by the
J&K Reorganisation Act. Sub-section (1) of Section 60, as noted
earlier, provides that the exercise of the division of the newly
constituted Union Territory into 90 assembly constituencies and
providing for reservation may be undertaken by the Election
Commission. However, the purport of Section 62 is that if a
Delimitation Commission is constituted under the Delimitation Act
2002, the exercise provided by clauses (a) to (c) of sub-section (1) of
Section 60 shall be carried out by the Delimitation Commission.
However, sub-section (2) of Section 62 refers to the readjustment of
the constituencies. But, the purport of sub-section (2) of Section 62 is
that the readjustment means the creation of 90 constituencies in the
newly set up Union territory. Thus, the process of readjustment
contemplated by sub-section (2) of Section 62 is nothing but the
exercise of delimitation under sub-section (1) of Section 60.
28.   If we see the provisions of the Delimitation Act 2002, it indicates
what is readjustment. Section 4 reads thus:-
“4. Duties of the Commission.—(1) The readjustment
made, on the basis of the census figures as ascertained
at the census held in the year 1971 by the Delimitation
Commission constituted under section 3 of the
Delimitation Act, 1972 (76 of 1972), of the allocation of
seats in the House of the People to the several States
and the total number of seats in the Legislative
Assembly of each State shall be deemed to be the
readjustment made by the Commission for the
purposes of this Act.
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (1) and
any other law for the time being in force, the
Commission shall readjust the division of each
State into territorial constituencies for the purpose
of elections to the House of the People and to the
State Legislative Assembly on the basis of the
census figures as ascertained at the census held in
Provided that where on such readjustment only one
seat is allocated in the House of the People to a State,
the whole of that State shall form one territorial
constituency for the purpose of elections to the House
of the People from that State.”
What is important to note is that by virtue of Clause (b) of sub-section
(1) of Section 62 of the J&K Reorganisation Act, the year 2001 stands
substituted by the year 2011 in relation to the Legislative Assembly of
the Union Territory of J & K.
29.   Under Section 9 of the Delimitation Act, 2002, a specific power
has been conferred on the Delimitation Commission of conducting the
Delimitation exercise. Section 9 reads thus:
“9. Delimitation of constituencies.— (1) The
Commission shall, in the manner herein provided,
then, distribute the seats in the House of the People
allocated to each State and the seats assigned to
the Legislative Assembly of each State as readjusted
on the basis of 1971 census to single-member
territorial constituencies and delimit them on the
basis of the census figures as ascertained, at the
census held in the year [2001], having regard to the
provisions of the Constitution, the provisions of the Act
specified in section 8 and the following provisions,
(a) all constituencies shall, as far as practicable, be
geographically compact areas, and in delimiting them
regard shall be had to physical features, existing
boundaries of administrative units, facilities of
communication and public convenience;
(b) every assembly constituency shall be so delimited as
to fall wholly within one parliamentary constituency;
(c) constituencies in which seats are reserved for the
Scheduled Castes shall be distributed in different parts
of the State and located, as far as practicable, in those
areas where the proportion of their population to the
total is comparatively large; and
(d) constituencies in which seats are reserved for the
Scheduled Tribes shall, as far as practicable, be located
in areas where the proportion of their population to the
total is the largest.
(a) publish its proposals for the delimitation of
constituencies, together with the dissenting proposals,
if any, of any associate member who desires publication
thereof, in the Gazette of India and in the Official
Gazettes of all the States concerned and also in such
other manner as it thinks fit;
(b) specify a date on or after which the proposals shall
be further considered by it;
(c) consider all objections and suggestions which may
have been received by it before the date so specified,
and for the purpose of such consideration, hold one or
more public sittings at such place or places in each
State as it thinks fit; and
(d) thereafter by one or more orders determine—
(i) the delimitation of parliamentary constituencies; and
(ii) the delimitation of assembly constituencies, of each
As noted earlier, by virtue of clause (b) of sub-section (1) of
Section 62 of the J&K Reorganisation Act, the year 2001 appearing in
sub-section (1) of Section 9 of the Delimitation Act, 2002 will have to
be read as 2011. Therefore, the Delimitation Commission established
under the Order dated 6th March 2020 had to undertake the exercise of
delimitation or readjustment on the basis of the census figures of 2011
as the earlier exercise of delimitation of the constituencies of the
erstwhile State was not made on the basis of the census figures of
2011. For the reasons stated above, there is nothing illegal about the
exercise of delimitation/readjustment of the constituencies undertaken
by the Delimitation Commission for the purposes of dividing the Union
Territory into 90 constituencies on the basis of the 2011 census
30.   Before we deal with the issue of the legality of the appointment of
the Delimitation Commission, we must deal with parliamentary
constituencies in the newly created Union Territories of J&K and
Ladakh. In the First Schedule to the RP Act of 1950, a total of 6 seats
were allocated to the erstwhile State of Jammu and Kashmir with no
reservation for Scheduled Castes and Schedule Tribes. Section 10 of
the J&K Reorganisation Act provides that out of the 6 seats allocated
to the erstwhile State, 5 will be allocated to the Union Territory of J &
K and one will be to the Union Territory of Ladakh. That is how
Section 11 provides thereof that the Delimitation of Parliamentary
Constituencies Order, 1976 stands amended as provided in the
Second Schedule of the said Act. Thus, the delimitation of the five
parliamentary constituencies of the Union Territory of J & K and one
constituency of the Union Territory of Ladakh was made by virtue of
Section 11 as provided in the Second Schedule.
31.   We have already quoted Section 60 of the J&K Reorganisation
Act. Clause (c) of sub-section (1) thereof provides that considering the
increase in the number of seats of the Legislative Assembly, the
adjustments in the boundaries and description of the extent of the
Parliamentary Constituencies in each Union Territory may be made by
the Election Commission. Sub-section (3) of Section 62 provides that
readjustment of the constituencies as provided in Section 11 in the
successor Union Territories into Parliamentary Constituencies shall be
carried out by the Delimitation Commission. The readjustment
referred to in sub-section (3) of Section 62 is the adjustment of
boundaries and description of the extent of the Parliamentary
Constituencies as provided in sub-section (1) of Section 60.        This
became     necessary    as   a    result    of   the   requirement    of
readjustment/delimitation of 90 constituencies of the Legislative
Assembly. Therefore, there is no illegality associated with the
delimitation/readjustment of Parliamentary constituencies of the
Union Territory of J & K undertaken by the Delimitation Commission.
The legality of the appointment of the Delimitation Commission
by the Notification of 6th March 2020
32.  The impugned notification dated 6th March 2020 constituting the
Delimitation Commission reads thus:
S.O. 1015 (E). – In exercise of the powers conferred by
Section 3 of the Delimitation Act, 2002 (33 of 2002), the Central
Government hereby constitutes the Delimitation Commission for
the purpose of delimitation of Assembly and Parliamentary
constituencies in the Union territory of Jammu & Kashmir and
the States of Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur and Nagaland,
consisting of the following member, namely:-
Election Commissioner                 - Member, (ex officio)
(iii)The State Election Commissioner of
2. The appointment of Justice (Retd.) Ranjana Prakash Desai
shall be for a period of one year from the date of the publication
of this notification in the Official Gazette or till further orders,
whichever is earlier.
3. The said Delimitation Commission shall delimit the
(i)    of the Union territory of Jammu & Kashmir in
accordance with the provisions of Part V of the Jammu &
Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 2019 (34 of 2019) and the
provisions of the Delimitation Act, 2002 (33 of 2002).
(ii)   of the States of Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur
and Nagaland in accordance with the provisions of the
Delimitation act, 2002 (33 of 2002).”
Hence, it is obvious that when the said notification requires the
Delimitation Commission to undertake the exercise of the delimitation
of Assembly and Parliamentary Constituencies in the Union Territory
of J & K, it refers to the exercise of readjustment as provided in sub-
section (2) and (3) of Section 62 which is nothing but delimitation
exercise contemplated by sub-section (1) of Section 60 due to the
reason of the increase in the membership of the Legislative Assembly
from 83 to 90. Moreover, the readjustment was necessary to be made
on the basis of the census figures of the 2011 census as contemplated
by Section 4 and sub-section (1) of Section 9 of the Delimitation Act,
2002 as amended by clause (b) of sub-section (1) of Section 62 of the
33.   One of the contentions raised by the petitioners is that the
Delimitation Act, 2002 contemplates the constitution of only one
Delimitation Commission and not more than one. As noted earlier, the
Delimitation Act, 2002 was made applicable for the first time to the
State of Jammu and Kashmir with effect from 31 st October 2019. Even
the Delimitation Acts of 1962 and 1972 were not applicable to the
State of Jammu and Kashmir. By virtue of the J&K Reorganisation
Act, not only provisions of the Delimitation Act, 2002 were made
applicable to the Union Territory of J & K, but a mandatory duty of
readjustment of the constituencies in the Union Territory both of the
Legislative Assembly and Parliament was entrusted to the Delimitation
Commission by sub-Sections (2) and (3) of Section 62. Till 31 st October
2019, the Delimitation Commission for the State/Union Territory of J
& K under the Delimitation Act, 2002 could not have been established
as the said enactment was not made applicable to the State of Jammu
and Kashmir till then.
34.  Sub-section (6) of Section 10 of the Delimitation Act, 2002 reads
“10. Publication of orders and their date of
operation.—
(6) The Commission shall endeavour to complete and
publish each of its orders referred to in sub-section (1)
in the manner provided in that sub-section, 2 [within a
period not later than 31st day of July, 2008] under
section 3.”
Sub-section (6) uses the word “endeavour”. Section 10A of the
Delimitation Act, 2002 itself indicates that the time limit of 31 st July
2008 fixed under sub-Section (6) of Section 10 is not sacrosanct as it
confers a power on the Hon’ble President to defer the delimitation
exercise in a State under certain circumstances. Thus, the time limit
provided in sub-section (6) of Section 10 was never intended to be
mandatory. While amending Section 2(f) of the Delimitation Act by the
J&K Reorganisation Act, sub-section (6) of Section 10 has not been
amended for enlarging the period provided thereunder. However, the
intention of the legislature as reflected in sub-sections (2) and (3) of
Section 62 of the J&K Reorganisation Act is crystal clear. The very fact
that the duty of making the readjustment as per sub-sections (2) and
(3) of Section 62 on the basis of the 2011 census figures has been
entrusted to the Delimitation Commission suggests that the legislature
intended that the Delimitation Commission for the Union Territory of
Jammu & Kashmir will remain unaffected by the requirement of
completing the exercise by the end of July 2008. The provisions of
sub-Sections (2) and (3) of Section 62 will have to be interpreted in a
manner that gives effect to the intention of the legislature. If it is held
that due to the failure of the legislature to modify the time limit
provided in sub-Section (6) of Section 10 of the Delimitation Act, 2002,
the Central Government is powerless to appoint a Delimitation
Commission for the newly created Union territory, the provisions of
Section 62 of the J&K Reorganisation Act will be rendered nugatory. A
statute cannot be interpreted in a manner that will render some of its
provisions otiose. A statute must be construed and interpreted in such
a manner as to make it workable. Therefore, the argument based on
sub-Section (6) of Section 10 of the Delimitation Act 2002 will have to
be rejected.
35.   Articles 2 and 3 of the Constitution enable the Parliament to
create new States and Union territories. Accordingly, the two new
Union territories have been created. The J&K Reorganisation Act
which created the two new Union territories assigns the role of
readjustment of constituencies to the Delimitation Commission under
the Delimitation Act, 2002. Article 4 of the Constitution permits the
Parliament to incorporate such provisions in the law made in
accordance with Article 3 for the formation of new States and Union
territories, which may be necessary to give effect to the provisions of
the law. Such a law may also contain provisions as to representations
in Parliament and in the Legislature of the State or States affected by
such law. Therefore, such law which is made under Article 3 can
always provide for readjustment of the Constituencies in the newly
constituted States or Union territories through the Delimitation
Commission. Hence, we hold that there is no illegality associated with
the   establishment   of  the  Delimitation  Commission     under   the
impugned Order dated 6th March 2020.
36.   Under the notification dated 6th March 2020, the appointment of
the Chairperson of the Delimitation Commission who was a retired
Judge of this Court was for a period of one year. By the notification
dated 3rd March 2021, the said period was extended up to two years.
By the third impugned notification dated 21 st February 2022, the said
period of two years was extended to two years and two months. Once
the Delimitation Commission was established, there is nothing wrong
if the Central Government extended the period of appointment of the
Chairperson till the task of delimitation/readjustment was completed.
The Delimitation Act, 2002 is silent about the term of the appointment
of the Chairperson.
Exclusion of the North-Eastern States from the purview of the
notification dated 6th March 2020
37.   Another challenge which is seriously pressed is to that part of the
second impugned notification dated 31st March 2021 by which the
States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur and Nagaland were
excluded from the purview of the Delimitation Commission constituted
under the notification dated 6th March 2020. In the counter affidavit
filed by the Union of India, reliance has been placed on the letter
dated 22nd February 2021 issued by the Deputy Secretary (NE-III),
Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India. In paragraphs 5 and 6
of the counter affidavit, it is stated that the Delimitation Commission
set up on 12th July 2002 under the Chairmanship of a retired Judge of
this Court had completed the delimitation exercise in respect of the
entire country except for four North-Eastern States of Assam,
Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur and Nagaland. It is stated that
delimitation of these four States was deferred due to security reasons.
Section 10A of the Delimitation Act, 2002 permitted such a course to
be adopted. Though these four States were a part of the notification
dated 6th March 2020, it is stated in the letter dated 22 nd February
2021 that there were number of petitions pending in this Court as well
as in the Manipur High Court concerning delimitation exercise in
North-Eastern States and that in the Court cases, discrepancies in
census figures of 2001 in relation to these States were pointed out. In
fact, it is stated that a number of notices have been issued regarding
the said discrepancies. Therefore, the said letter was issued with the
approval of the competent authority in which it was stated that it may
not be conducive to grant an extension for the process of delimitation
in the four North-Eastern States. The term of the Chairman of the
Delimitation Commission constituted under the first impugned
notification dated 6th march 2020 was to expire on 5 th March 2021. In
view of the aforesaid letter, while extending the term of the Chairman
by one more year by the second impugned notification dated 3 rd March
2021, the said four States were excluded. Thus, in effect, the term of
the Delimitation Commission constituted under the notification dated
6th March 2020 was extended by a period of one year only in relation
to the Union territory of J & K. By the third impugned notification, the
period was further extended by a period of two months. Section 10A of
the Delimitation Act, 2002 itself permits the postponement of the
exercise of delimitation in certain contingencies.       Moreover, the
position and the status of the newly created Union Territory of J&K
under the Constitution is completely different from the four North-
Eastern States. In its applicability to the Union Territory of J & K,
Sections 4 and 9 of the Delimitation Act, 2002 stand amended by
requiring readjustment to be carried out on the basis of the census
figures of 2011. In case of the North Eastern States, there is no such
amendment. Therefore, two unequal cannot be treated as equals.
Hence, the argument based on the violation of Constitutional
provisions including Article 14 deserves to be rejected.
38.   The learned counsel appearing for the petitioners did not dispute
that the draft order of delimitation was issued on 14 th March 2022.
The final order was issued on 5th May 2022 which was brought into
force with effect from 20th May 2022. While accepting that he has not
challenged these subsequent orders, the learned counsel submitted
that the petitioners cannot challenge the said order in view of sub-
Section (2) of Section 10 which lays down that every such order shall
have the force of law and shall not be called in question in any Court.
In fact, the learned Solicitor General by relying upon a decision of the
Constitution Bench in the case of Megharaj Kothari2 urged that the
intention of the legislature is that once an order passed by the
Delimitation Commission is published in accordance with sub-Section
(1) of Section 10, the same are treated as law, which cannot be
questioned in any Court. In paragraph 21 of the said decision, the
Constitution Bench held that though orders passed under Sections 8
and 9 of the Delimitation Act, 2002 in accordance with sub-Section (1)
of Section 10 are not part of an act of the Parliament but its effect
would be the same. In any event, the order of the Delimitation
Commission has not been questioned in this petition.
39.   We may note here that there is a great deal of substance in the
argument of the learned Solicitor General that the challenge to the
notification dated 6th March 2020 was belatedly made by filing the
present petition on 28th March 2022 and for the said delay, there is no
valid explanation.     Moreover, the notification dated 6th March 2020
was    substantially    acted  upon      by completing     the  exercise  of
delimitation as the draft Order was also published on 14 th March
40.   In the writ petition, the first prayer is for challenging the increase
in number of seats from 107 to 114. The said provision is made by
sub-Section (1) of Section 60. Without challenging the legality of any of
the provisions of the J&K Reorganisation Act, it is contended that the
Act of increasing the number of seats is violative of Articles 81, 82,
170, 330 and 332 of the Constitution of India. Article 81 deals with
the composition of the House of the People; Article 82 deals with the
readjustment and allocation of seats of the House of Parliament after
the census and Article 170 deals with legislatures of the States. None
of these provisions deal with the Legislature of any Union territory.
Article 330 deals with the reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes in the House of the People. Article 332 deals
with the reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes in the Legislative Assemblies of the States.           Both these
provisions do not deal with reservation of seats for the House of
legislature of Union Territories. In any case, even assuming that
Article 332 can be applied to the reservation of seats for Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the Legislatures of Union territories, it
is not shown how the act of increasing the total number of seats in the
legislature will offend Article 332, so long as the reservation is
maintained as per the formula provided under Article 332.
41.   Another argument sought to be made is that the provision made
for 114 seats in the legislature of the newly constituted Union
Territory of J & K is illegal. This submission calls for no consideration
as there is no challenge to the validity of sub-section (1) of Section 60
of the J&K Reorganisation Act.
42.   Another argument was canvassed that the Delimitation Order of
2008 published by the Election Commission cannot be deviated from.
The perusal of the said Order shows that it reproduces the
delimitation    of  the  Parliamentary   and    Legislative   Assembly
Constituencies made by the Delimitation of Parliamentary and
Assembly Constituencies Orders of 1976 and 1995 for the State of
Jammu and Kashmir. Both the orders of 1976 and 1995 have been
expressly modified by the J&K Reorganisation Act by virtue of Sections
11(4) and 14(5) as provided in the second and third Schedules thereto.
Hence, the argument deserves to be rejected.
43.   The petitioners have overlooked the fact that clause (b) of sub-
Section (1) of Section 62 of the J&K Reorganisation Act has further
amended the Delimitation Act, 2002 by providing that words and
figures ‘census held in the year 2001’ appearing in the Delimitation
Act shall be construed as ‘census held in the year 2011’. To its
application to the Union territory of J & K, the year 2001 in sub-
section (1) of Section 9 of the Delimitation Act, 2002 has been
substituted by the year 2011 and therefore, distribution of seats in the
House of the People and seats assigned to the Legislative Assembly
will have to be readjusted on the basis of 2011 census and the
delimitation will have to be carried out on the basis of the figures of
the census held in the year 2011. The effect of Section 63 is that once
the exercise of readjustment/delimitation is made on the basis of 2011
census figures, the same will be frozen till the relevant figures of the
first census taken after 2026 are available. Therefore, the exercise of
delimitation/readjustment of the seats in the Union Territory of J & K
was required to be made by the Delimitation Commission on the basis
of the figures of the 2011 census. In view of Section 63, further
readjustment can be carried out only after the publication of figures
from the census held after the year 2026.
44.   Reliance placed on the opinion of the learned Attorney General of
India is misplaced as it deals only with the provisions of the A.P.
Reorganisation Act, 2014.      The petitioners cannot rely upon the
answer given by Hon’ble Minister in the Lok Sabha as it deals with
delimitation of Constituencies in Telangana in the context of Article
170. In any event, the said opinion as well as the answer given by the
Hon’ble Minister have no bearing on the interpretation of the J&K
45.   A vague attempt was made by the learned senior counsel
appearing for the petitioners to submit that the exercise which is
undertaken for the newly created Union territory of J & K was not
undertaken on the basis of the Uttar Pradesh Reorganisation Act,
2000 and Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014. In both the Acts,
there is no provision which is pari materia with clause (b) of sub-
Section (1) of Section 62 of the J&K Reorganisation Act which
amended the       provisions   of the  Delimitation   Act 2002 in      its
applicability to the newly formed Union Territories by substituting the
year 2001 with 2011.
46.   Thus, there is absolutely no merit in any of the contentions
raised by the petitioners. We may, however, clarify that the findings
rendered in the judgment are on the footing that the exercise of power
made in the year 2019 under clauses (1) and (3) of Article 370 of the
Constitution is valid. We are aware that the issue of the validity of the
exercise of the said powers is the subject matter of petitions pending
before this Court. Therefore, we have not dealt with the issue of
validity. Nothing stated in this judgment shall be construed as giving
our imprimatur to the exercise of powers under clauses (1) and (3) of
Article 370 of the Constitution.
47.   Hence, writ petition is dismissed with no order as to costs.