Case :- PUBLIC INTEREST LITIGATION (PIL) No. - 2349 of
Counsel for Petitioner :- Suo Moto,Gaurav Bishan,R.K.
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Krishna Agarawal
Instant PIL was entertained by this court upon being apprised
about disruption of power supply in Prayagraj, on account of strike
by the employees of State Power/Electricity Units. Cognizance
was also taken with regard to similar disruption in other districts of
the State, later. Directions have been issued in the matter from time
to time. It would be apposite to refer to the following orders passed
in the matter on 06.12.2022:-
"Taking notice of disruption in supply of electricity in some areas
of the city of Prayagraj, these proceedings were drawn suo moto
to ensure maintenance of power supply. In connection therewith,
an order was passed on 03.12.2022 requiring the presence of
Additional Chief Power Secretary, Government of U.P. in Court.
On being apprised by the Additional Chief Power Secretary that in
a meeting with the representatives of the Employees' Union of the
various Generation, Transmission and Distribution Companies
certain issues had been resolved and the representatives of the
employees have agreed to defer the strike and join back to their
duties immediately, the matter was adjourned to December, 06,
2022 with a specific observation that if the power supply is still
disrupted in any other city of the State and has not yet been
restored, the same shall be restored in the minimum possible time.
Today, when this matter was taken up, Sri Manish Goel, learned
Additional Advocate General appearing for the State, apprised us
of certain decisions taken in the meeting held on 03.12.2022
between Vidyut Karmchari Sanyukt Sangharsh Samiti, U.P., a
body representing the employees of the Power Department
including Power Corporation, and the Power Minister as well as
other high ranking officers of the State.
The minutes of the meeting and the decisions taken therein have
been placed before us.
From the minutes produced, it appears that consensus has been
arrived on 14 points and, as a result whereof, the Employees'
Union has decided to defer the strike for a period of fifteen days. It
appears from the minutes of the meeting dated 03.12.2022 that on
their request the department has taken a decision to withdraw
show cause notices and orders relating to suspension, removal
from service and other coercive disciplinary measures which it
had adopted against the striking employees.
The aforesaid minutes of the meeting gives us an impression that
the employees of the power department are arm-twisting the
Department having little regard that disruption of essential
services is a very serious issue and is not to be tolerated. The
situation therefore needs to be dealt with in a firm manner.
In such circumstances, we deem it appropriate to issue notice to
the representatives of Employees' Union so that whenever the
matter is listed next, they are given opportunity of being heard.
At this stage, Sri Manish Goel has informed us that the
representative body of the Employees' Union, which is currently
interacting with the administration, is "Vidyut Karmchari Sanyukt
Sangharsh Samiti having its office at 41/557, Dr. Tufail Ahamad
In view of the above, we deem it appropriate to direct that notice
of these proceedings be served upon the aforesaid Union through
its General Secretary. The service of notice shall be effected
through the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Lucknow within a week
from today.
List this matter again on 16.12.2022. It is expected that the Power
Department shall ensure that the power supply is not disrupted
and if it is disrupted in any manner, then strict action is taken.
Let this order be communicated to the Chief Judicial Magistrate,
Lucknow by the Registrar (Compliance) today itself."
Office report shows that notices upon the Sanyukt Sangharsh
Samiti has been served through the Chief Judicial Magistrate,
Lucknow, but none has entered appearance on their behalf, in this
petition, till now.
The matter is listed before us today upon a mention made before
the Hon'ble Senior Judge on an application filed by Sri Vibhu Rai,
Advocate, who submits that the order passed by this court on
06.12.2022 has been violated and that the direction issued by this
court on 06.12.2022 for power supply not to be disrupted has been
brazenly defied.
Alongwith the application filed today, a resolution of the Vidyut
Karmachari Sanyukt Sangharsh Samiti, U.P. dated 16th March,
2023 is annexed, as per which 27 lac electricity workers in the
State have gone on 72 hours strike. Protests are planned
throughout the State and if any electricity worker is arrested then
the protest/strike is proposed to be made indefinite. Various
demands of workers are highlighted. Office bearers of the
Sangarsh Samiti have also addressed the gathering of electricity
workers. The press note issued by the Sangarsh Samiti on 16th
March, 2023 shows that the protests shall continue unless demands
of the employees are met. The strike has commenced w.e.f. 10:00
p.m. on 16.03.2023. Copies of newspaper report have also been
annexed to show that even in the Electricity Sub-Station which
caters to the High Court Premises also, there are no employees
available and it is the Magistrate and police personnel who are
guarding the Sub-Station and managing the supply of electricity.
The newspaper report also contains photographs of Mayohal Sub-
Station near Public Service Commission office, wherein also none
of the employees are available.
Learned counsel submits that the Board Examinations are going on
in almost all districts of the State and the strike call by the
Employees' Union, contrary to the directions issued in the present
PIL not only violates the orders passed in the present petition but
has the effect of virtually obstructing all spheres of activity in the
State of Uttar Pradesh including the working of courts. Learned
counsel submits that in the event the Employees' Association had
some grievance left, they could have approached this court in
terms of the order passed previously and raise their grievance but
their action in going on strike at the cost of grave public
inconvenience cannot be countenanced.
It is also urged that on account of the strike call the generation of
power in Anpara and Obra units of Thermal Power Corporation
has also been severely curtailed. The employees of the Electricity
Department are also not available in the State Load Dispatch
Centre, which controls the power grid. It is urged that crisis of
unmanageable proportions has occasioned on account of
irresponsible act of the employees, who have acted contrary to the
orders passed by this court.
Sri Manish Goyal, learned Additional Advocate General for the
State submits that the State is making alternative arrangements by
requisitioning staff from NTPC, National Grid Corporation and
other Central bodies. He further points out that action under the
Essential Services Maintenance Act (ESMA) has also been
initiated against the guilty employees/officials.
From what has been placed before us, a serious situation is shown
to have arisen which requires immediate attention. Since the issue
is otherwise subjudice before this court, we are not inclined to
endorse the action of employees in going on State wide strike,
instead of availing the remedy of highlighting their grievance in
the present petition. Even if there is substance in the demand
raised by the workers, yet, the entire State cannot be put to severe
constraints by jeopardizing overwhelming public interest. Such act
of workers violates the direction of this court for not disrupting
power supply. Even national interest is compromised on account of
reduction in the generation of power in different power generating
units of the State. Thus, Prima facie disobedience of this court's
order dated 06.12.2022 is indicated.
Since the Employees' Association has not entered appearance
despite the previous orders passed by this Court and service of
notice upon it, we are left with no option but to issue notices to the
Employees' Association and its office bearers for initiation of
contempt proceedings against them.
Let notices be issued to Sri Shailendra Dubey, Organizer of Vidyut
Karmachari Sanyukt Sangarsh Samiti, U.P. as well as the office
bearers named in the press release dated 16th March, 2023 namely,
Rafeeq Ahmad, Mohd. Iliyas, Sri R.K. Singh and Sri Devendra
Pandey through the Sangarsh Samiti who have actively
participated in convening of the strike call.
Considering the urgency involved in the matter, bailable warrants
are issued to the aforesaid office bearers of the Union by the Chief
Judicial Magistrate, Lucknow requiring their presence before this
Court at 10:00 a.m. on 20th March, 2023 through the Vidyut
Karmchari Sanyukt Sangharsh Samiti having its office at 41/557,
The State authorities shall also ensure that appropriate action as
may be permissible in law be taken against the erring
officials/employees so as to ensure compliance of the previous
orders passed by this court on 06.12.2022, and report compliance
of the action taken in the matter by then. An affidavit of the
Additional Chief Secretary of the Department concerned would be
placed on record by then.
List on Monday i.e. 20.03.2023 at 10:00 a.m. before the
appropriate court.