Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No.7719 of 2022
Counsel for Opposite Party :- Kuldeep Srivastava,Shiv P. Shukla
1.     Heard Mr. Rizwan, learned counsel for the applicant and Sri
Kuldeep Srivastava, learned counsel for the Enforcement Directorate.
2.     As per learned counsel for the applicant, the present applicant is
in jail since 10.03.2022 in ECIR No.ECIR/02/HIU/2018, under
Sections 3, 4 & 70 of the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002,
Police Station – Directorate of Enforcement, APJ Abdul Kalam Road,
3.     Learned counsel for the applicant has submitted that the present
applicant has been falsely implicated in the case by the Enforcement
Directorate (hereinafter referred to as "E.D.") inasmuch as no case is
made out against the accused-applicant under Section 3 of the
Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 (hereinafter referred to as
"the PMLA"), which is punishable under Section 4 of the PMLA.
4.     Learned counsel for the applicant has submitted that the offence
of money laundering as defined under Section 3 of the PMLA
specifically posits that whosoever 'directly or indirectly attempts to
indulge or knowingly assists or knowingly is a party or is actually
involved in any process or activity connected with the proceeds of
crime including its concealment, possession, acquisition or use and
projecting or claiming it as untainted property shall be guilty of
offence of money laundering.
5.     Learned counsel has further submitted that the definition of
'proceeds of crime’ is provided under Section 2 (u) of the Act which
means “any property derived or obtained, directly or indirectly, by any
person as a result of criminal activity relating to a scheduled offence
or the nature of any such property”.
6.     Therefore, the commission of the scheduled/predicate offence
by way of which ‘any property derived or obtained, directly or
indirectly is a mandatory requirement for a 'property’ to become
'proceeds of crime’. In support of his argument, learned counsel for
the applicant has referred para-251 of the Vijay Madanlal
Choudhary and Others Vs. Union of India and Others, 2022 SCC
OnLine SC 929, which is being reproduced herein below:-
"251. The “proceeds of crime” being the core of the
ingredients constituting the offence of money-laundering,
that expression needs to be construed strictly. In that, all
properties recovered or attached by the investigating agency
in connection with the criminal activity relating to a
scheduled offence under the general law cannot be regarded
as proceeds of crime. There may be cases where the
property involved in the commission of scheduled offence
attached by the investigating agency dealing with that
offence, cannot be wholly or partly regarded as proceeds of
crime within the meaning of Section 2(1)(u) of the 2002 Act
— so long as the whole or some portion of the property has
been derived or obtained by any person “as a result of”
criminal activity relating to the stated scheduled offence. To
be proceeds of crime, therefore, the property must be
derived or obtained, directly or indirectly, “as a result of”
criminal activity relating to a scheduled offence. To put it
differently, the vehicle used in commission of scheduled
offence may be attached as property in the concerned case
(crime), it may still not be proceeds of crime within the
meaning of Section 2(1)(u) of the 2002 Act. Similarly,
possession of unaccounted property acquired by legal means
may be actionable for tax violation and yet, will not be
regarded as proceeds of crime unless the concerned tax
legislation prescribes such violation as an offence and such
offence is included in the Schedule of the 2002 Act. For
being regarded as proceeds of crime, the property
associated with the scheduled offence must have been
derived or obtained by a person “as a result of” criminal
activity relating to the concerned scheduled offence. This
distinction must be borne in mind while reckoning any
property referred to in the scheduled offence as proceeds of
crime for the purpose of the 2002 Act. Dealing with
proceeds of crime by way of any process or activity
constitutes offence of money-laundering under Section 3 of
the Act.”
7.     Learned counsel for the applicant has submitted that there are
three predicate offences relating to the issue in question wherein the
present applicant was not named. FIR No.276/2013 [1st Predicate
Offence'] dated 23.04.2013 against 22 persons was registered under
Sections 143, 147, 153B r/w 149 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860;
Section 5 (1) (a) r/w 25 (1) (a) of the Arms Act, 1959; Section 4 & 5
of the Explosives Substances Act, 1908 and Section 18 of the
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967. The said case emanating
from the FIR stands closed up to the Hon'ble Supreme Court vide its
orders dated 13.04.2017 and 04.07.2017 in SLP (Criminal) Nos. 4511-
4513 of 2017 and 2875 of 2017 respectively. Further,           FIR No.
199/2020 dated 07.10.2020 [2nd Predicate Offence'], has been
registered U/s 153A/295A/124A of the Indian Penal Code, 1860; 17
and 18 of UAPA and 65/72/76 of the Information Technology Act,
2002. FIR No.04/2021 dated 16.02.2021 [3rd Predicate Offence'] has
been registered U/s 120B and 121A of the IPC; Sections 13, 16, 18
and 20 of UAPA; Section 3, 4, and 5 of the Explosives Substances
Act and Section 3 and 25 of the Arms Act against Anshad
Badharudeen and Firoz Khan.
8.     Learned counsel for the applicant has reiterated that the present
applicant is not an accused in any of the aforesaid three predicate
offences. However, he has been arrested on 10.03.2022 pursuant to
the ECIR in question.
9.     Under the provisions of Sections 44 and 45 of PMLA, the E.D.
has filed complaint and supplementary complaint under Sections 3, 4
& 70 of the PMLA dated 06.02.2021 and 06.05.2022 respectively.
The aforesaid complaint has been filed against five accused persons,
Kappan and Mohd. Alam. However, pursuant to the supplementary
complaint four individuals/ entities have been made accused by the
E.D. i.e Abdul Razak Peediyakkal (present accused-applicant), Ashraf
Khadir alias Ashraf MK, Munnar Villa Vista Pvt. Ltd., Tamar India
Spices Pvt. Ltd. Learned counsel for the applicant has fairly indicated
the allegations against the present applicant in para-12 of the bail
application, which reads as under:-
"12. The following principal allegations and the case set up
against the Applicant/Accused in the Supplementary
Complaint is as under:
I. The purported 1st and 2nd Predicate Offence (s) are the
very basis on which the Applicant/Accused is being
investigated in the present Complaint and Supplementary
Complaint i.e. the same set of offences which the
Ernakulum Judgement finds no substance in order to
enlarge the main conspirator on bail;
II. Admittedly, the Applicant/Accused is a long-time
member of an organization known as Popular Front of
India [PFI] and purportedly 12 cases have been registered
against the PFI, in which admittedly the Accused/Applicant
III. Apparently, in terms of the investigation a residential
plot viz. Munnar Villa Vista Project [Project], Munnar,
Kerala is being developed with a motive to launder money
and the Applicant/Accused is the largest shareholder of the
IV. In terms of Supplementary Complaint, the Project has
revealed certain discrepancies/irregularities in its funding
mentioned therein. There is no allegation as regards the
Applicant/Accused as regards the certain discrepancies/
irregularities in the funding of the Project. It is submitted
that there per force cannot be any allegation against the
Applicant/Accused inasmuch he is only a shareholder in the
Project and has neither managerial nor directorial role
thereto. True Copy of the Company Master Date of
Company 'Munnar Villa Vista Private Limited' as available
on www.mca.nic.in is annexed herewith and marked as
ANNEXURE A-6. True Copies of the minutes of the Board
meeting dated 30.07.2018 and 01.07.2020 of Company
'Munnar Villa Vista Private Limited' is annexed herewith
and marked as ANNEXURE A-7 [COLLY];
V. It is submitted that a bare reading of the table at Para 8
of the Supplementary Complaint establishes the following:
a) Monies amounting to Rs.33,72,043/- have been
transferred from 11.07.2012 to 10.06.2020 to Rehab India
b) These are legitimate transactions through RTGS/NEFT,
emanating from the coffers of the Applicant/Accused;
c) There is no averment that the said monies have been
derived from the commission of any predicate/scheduled
offence, let alone 1st Predicate Offence;
d) In any case the commission of the 2nd and 3rd so called
Predicate Offence took place after the transactions of the
Applicant/Accused dated 11.07.2012 to 10.06.2020,
therefore, the 2nd and 3 ‘predicate offences cannot per
force lead to 'proceeds of crime’.
VI. Furthermore, a reading of Paras 8.3 to 8.7 nowhere
delineates, how the monies transferred by the
Applicant/Accused emanate out of any Predicate Offence;
VII. The Applicant/Accused further submits that he has no
business interests in Qatar, Malaysia and Switzerland. The
Applicant/Accused only has business interests in Abu
Dhabi. True Copy of the business interests of the Applicant/
Accused are annexed herewith and marked as ANNEXURE
10.    Learned counsel has further submitted that the main conspirator
in terms of para-10 of the complaint, namely, K.A. Rauf Sherif was
enlarged on bail by the Special Court for PMLA Cases under the
PMLA, at Ernakulam, Kerala on 12.02.2021. He has also submitted
that the E.D. vide e-mail dated 20.12.2021 asked the accused-
applicant to appear before it at New Delhi on 27.12.2021 with the
requisite documents. In response thereto, the accused-applicant vide e-
mail dated 20.12.2021 requested from the E.D. to summon him in his
Cochin office. Thereafter, the accused-applicant received further
summons dated 14.02.2022 to appear in New Delhi on 19.02.2022 and
the accused-applicant promptly appeared before the authorities at New
Delhi. However, the E.D. has arrested the present applicant on
10.03.2022 from Calicut Airport without having any cogent reasons.
Thereafter, he was sent to the judicial custody on 16.03.2022.
11.    Learned counsel for the applicant has referred various
judgments of the Apex Court to submit that it is a trite law that there
exist three main factors while granting bail to any accused person i.e.
(a) the accused shall not tamper with the evidence; (b) the accused
shall not influence the witness(s) and (c) the accused shall not be at
flight risk, therefore, gravity of offence cannot be the sole ground to
deny bail. Learned counsel for the applicant has submitted that the
present applicant undertakes that if he is released on bail, he shall
abide by all terms and conditions of the bail order and shall not
misuse the liberty of bail.
12.    Learned counsel for the applicant has drawn attention of this
Court towards the order dated 23.12.2022 passed by this Court in
Criminal Misc. Bail Application No.13642 of 2022 whereby co-
accused Sidhique Kappan has been granted bail. Therefore, learned
counsel has submitted that since co-accused Sidhique Kappan has
been enlarged on bail, therefore, the present applicant may also be
enlarged on bail on the basis of principles of parity.
13.    Per contra, Sri Kuldeep Srivastava, learned counsel for the E.D.
has submitted that during PMLA investigation, the fact emerged that
the funds amounting to Rs.1.36 Crore, raised/collected abroad by the
office bearers/ members/ activists of PFI, CFI and their related
organizations, were routed to the Bank Accounts of K.A. Rauf Sherif,
the National General Secretary of CFI. Further, the investigation
against PFI has so far revealed that more than Rs.100 Crore have been
deposited in the accounts of PFI and its related entities over the years.
It has come into the notice of the Investigating Agency that foreign
funds have been remitted to India through hawala/ underground
channels and through remittance sent to the accounts of members/
activists/office bearers of PFI/CFI and other related organizations.
14.    Initially, active participation of five accused persons have been
noticed thorough reliable evidences and materials whose names have
been indicated in the first complaint but after further investigation,
name of the present applicant came into the notice, therefore, in the
supplementary complaint, the applicant has been made accused.
Pursuant to the exercise           being undertaken through further
investigation, role of the present applicant, who is a PFI member
based in Kerala and Abu Dhabi, for doing the aforesaid illegal
activities has been emerged. Thereafter, he has been issued summons
to cooperate in the investigation. Since the present applicant is based
at Abu Dhabi and is indulged in the aforesaid illegal activities i.e.
remitting funds to PFI through hawala or other underground channels,
therefore, he has not properly cooperated in the investigation, rather
has stated time and again that the explanation so sought by the E.D.
would be replied by his Chartered Accountant. As per admission of
the present applicant before the E.D., he has stated that he became the
member of PFI in 2014-15 and is still a member. He was made
Divisional President in June, 2021, later he resigned from such post
in December, 2021. He used to contribute to PFI in the form of
monthly subscription. On being asked from him whether he had given
any money in any other organization, he stated that he had donated
money to Rehab India Foundation (hereinafter referred to as “RIF”) as
Zakath and has not remembered the exact amount but the same could
be obtained from his Bank statement accounts.
15.    As per Sri Srivatastava, learned counsel for the E.D., the
applicant has admitted that though he was based in Abu Dhabi, he was
still made the Director of Thejus in 2010. It has been noticed by the
Investigating Agency that the accused-applicant has transferred a huge
sum of Rs.33,72,043.00 over the period 11.07.2012 to 22.07.2020 to
RIF. He explained that he had donated the aforesaid money to RIF as
Jakath. Sri Srivastava has drawn attention of this Court towards para-7
of the complaint wherein the brief summary of result of investigation
under PMLA relating to the present applicant has been given, which
goes to show that the present applicant has transferred a substantial
amount to Rehab India Foundation through three Bank accounts; one
from HDFC Bank and two from South Indian Bank vide two separate
Bank accounts. Sri Srivastava has also drawn attention of this Court
towards the remaining paragraph of para-7 of the complaint, more
particularly, para 7.10, which explains “raising of funds abroad and
their transfer to India through illegal channels”. Para 7.10 (i) (ii) &
(iii) indicates that the fund amounting to Rs.10 Crore in two
installments were transferred by the present applicant to another PFI
member Mohamed Ashraf            Pilasheri of Calicut and that the
explanation of proposal to buy a plot was a mere afterthought and
pretext used by the applicant to conceal the true nature of movement
of funds. Relevant extracts of the documents have been shown in the
16.    Therefore, Sri Srivastava has stated that role of the present
applicant is so serious and he being a big businessman based in Abu
Dhabi, if released on bail, may abscond or may influence the trial
proceedings as the trial is pending consideration before the learned
trial court where the charges have been framed. He has also submitted
that the role of the present applicant is altogether different from that of
co-accused Sidhique Kappan, who has been granted bail by this Court
on 23.12.2022 inasmuch as the role assigned to Sidhique Kappan is in
respect of hatching criminal conspiracy with K.A. Rauf Sherif. Except
the allegation that Rs.5,000/- were transferred in the Bank account of
co-accused Atikur Rahman, there is no other transaction either in the
Bank account of Sidhique Kappan or in the Bank account of co-
17.    Sri Srivastava has also submitted that if the bail of the present
applicant is considered, satisfaction in respect of Section 45 of PMLA
may be given inasmuch as unless the twin conditions mentioned under
Section 45 of the PMLA are satisfied, the bail may not be granted.
Therefore, Sri Srivastava has submitted that the present applicant may
not take the aid of the dictum of the Apex Court in re; Vijay
Madanlal Choudhary (supra) inasmuch as the law has been settled
that even if any person is not named in the predicate offence(s), even
then if his complicity comes into notice during investigation relating
to the offence of E.D., he may very well be implicated.
18.    Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the material
available on record.
19.    At the very outset, it would be appropriate to indicate Sections
2 (u), 3 & 4 of the PMLA, which reads as under:-
“2 (u). “proceeds of crime” means any property derived
or obtained, directly or indirectly, by any person as a
result of criminal activity relating to a scheduled offence
or the value of any such property.
3. Offence of money-laundering.—Whosoever directly
or indirectly attempts to indulge or knowingly assists or
knowingly is a party or is actually involved in any
process or activity connected with the proceeds of crime
and projecting it as untainted property shall be guilty of
offence of money-laundering.
4. Punishment for money-laundering.—Whoever
commits the offence of money-laundering shall be
punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which
shall not be less than three years but which may extend
to seven years and shall also be liable to fine which may
extend to five lakh rupees:
Provided that where the proceeds of crime involved in
money-laundering relates to any offence specified under
paragraph 2 of Part A of the Schedule, the provisions of
this section shall have effect as if for the words “which
may extend to seven years”, the words “which may
extend to ten years” had been substituted.”
20.   The aforesaid provisions of law have been aptly interpreted by
the High Court of Bombay in re; Babulal Verma and Another Vs.
Enforcement Directorate and Another, 2021 SCC OnLine Bom
392, from paragraphs 29 to 34, which are being reproduced
“29. The language of Sections 3 and 4 of PMLA,
makes it absolutely clear that, the investigation of an
offence under Section 3, which is punishable under
Section 4, is not dependent upon the ultimate result of the
Predicate/Scheduled Offence. In other words, it is a
totally independent investigation as defined and
contemplated under Section 2(na), of an offence
committed under Section 3 of the said Act.
specific object i.e. to track and investigate cases of
money-laundering. Therefore, after lodgment of
Predicate/Scheduled Offence, its ultimate result will not
have any bearing on the lodgment/investigation of a
crime under the PMLA and the offence under the PMLA
will survive and stand alone on its own. A
Predicate/Scheduled Offence is necessary only for
registration of crime/launching prosecution under PMLA
and once a crime is registered under the PMLA, then the
ED has to take it to its logical end, as contemplated
under Section 44 of the Act.
31. The PMLA itself, does not provide for any
contingency like the case in hand and argued by the
learned counsel for the Applicants. Section 44(b) only
provides for filing of a complaint or submission of a
closure report by the Investigating Agency under PMLA
and none else.
32. If the contention of the learned counsel for the
Applicants that, once the foundation is removed, the
structure/work thereon falls is accepted, then it will have
frustrating effect on the intention of Legislature in
enacting the PMLA. The observations of the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in the case of State of Punjab v. Davinder
Pal Singh Bhullar, (supra) in paragraph No. 107 and
Sanjaysingh Ramrao Chavan (Supra) in para No. 17 are
in context of the facts of the said case and pertaining to
the offences under the provisions of IPC and P.C. Act
and therefore, the same cannot be applied to the case in
hand which arises out of a special statute namely PMLA
enacted by the Legislature with an avowed object.
33. Hypothetically, ‘an accused’ in a
Predicate/Scheduled Offence is highly influential either
monetarily or by muscle power and by use of his
influence gets the base offence, compromised or
compounded to avoid further investigation by ED i.e.
money laundering or the trail of proceeds of crime by
him, either in the Predicate/Scheduled Offence or any of
the activities revealed therefrom. And, if the aforestated
contention of the learned counsel for the Applicants is
accepted, it will put to an end to the independent
investigation of ED i.e. certainly not the intention of
Legislature in enacting the PMLA. Therefore, if the
contention of the learned counsel for the Applicants is
accepted, in that event, it would be easiest mode for the
accused in a case under PMLA to scuttle and/or put an
end to the investigation under the PMLA. Therefore, the
said contention needs to be rejected.
34. In view of the aforesaid discussion, it is clear
that, even if the Investigating Agency investigating a
Scheduled Offence has filed closure report in it and the
Court of competent jurisdiction has accepted it, it will
not wipe out or cease to continue the investigation of
Respondent No. 1 (ED) in the offence of money-
laundering being investigated by it. The investigation of
Respondent No. 1 will continue on its own till it reaches
the stage as contemplated under Section 44 of the
21. It is clear that a person may not be involved in original criminal
activity that had resulted in generation of proceed of crime but he can
join the main accused either as abettor or conspirator for committing
the offence of money laundering by helping him in laundering the
proceed of crime. Therefore, just because the applicant was not named
or not prosecuted for the predicate offence, his prosecution for money
laundering cannot be said to be illegal. Para-271 in re; Vijay
Madanlal Choudhary (supra) is being reproduced herein below:-
“271. As mentioned earlier, the rudimentary
understanding of ‘money-laundering’ is that there are
three generally accepted stages to money-laundering, they
(a) Placement : which is to move the funds from direct
association of the crime.
(b) Layering : which is disguising the trail to foil pursuit.
(c) Integration : which is making the money available to
the criminal from what seem to be legitimate sources.”
22.    Notably, the Apex Court in re; Vijay Madanlal Choudhary
(supra) has held that provision in the form of Section 45 of PMLA, as
applicable post amendment of 2018, is reasonable and has direct
nexus with the purposes and objects sought to be achieved by the
PMLA to combat the menace of money laundering having
transnational consequences including impacting the financial systems
and sovereignty and integrity of the country. While granting bail of
an accused person, twin conditions of Section 45 of the PMLA will
have to be adhered to.
23.    For the convenience, Section 45 of the PMLA is being
reproduced hereunder:-
“45. Offences to be cognizable and non-bailable.—(1)
[Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), no person
accused of an offence [under this Act] shall be released
on bail or on his own bond unless—]
opportunity to oppose the application for such release;
(ii) where the Public Prosecutor opposes the
application, the court is satisfied that there are
reasonable grounds for believing that he is not guilty of
such offence and that he is not likely to commit any
offence while on bail:
Provided that a person who is under the age of
sixteen years or is a woman or is sick or infirm [or is
accused either on his own or along with other co-
accused of money-laundering a sum of less than one
crore rupees], may be released on bail, if the special
Provided further that the Special Court shall not
take cognizance of any offence punishable under section
4 except upon a complaint in writing made by—
(ii) any officer of the Central Government or State
Government authorised in writing in this behalf by the
Central Government by a general or a special order
made in this behalf by that Government.
[(1-A) Notwithstanding anything contained in the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), or any
other provision of this Act, no police officer shall
investigate into an offence under this Act unless
specifically authorised, by the Central Government by a
general or special order, and, subject to such conditions
as may be prescribed.]
(2) The limitation on granting of bail specified in
[***] of sub-section (1) is in addition to the limitations
under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)
or any other law for the time being in force on granting
of bail.”
24.     Considering the facts and circumstances of the issue in
question, the bail application of the present applicant does not qualify
the twin conditions of Section 45 of the PMLA inasmuch as at this
stage it cannot be observed that the present applicant has not
committed the offence for which the complaint has been filed against
him. The proceed of crime is also in crores. The applicant is based at
Abu Dhabi. The factum of guilt can be proved or disproved before the
learned trial court. Learned counsel for the E.D. has informed that the
trial in the present case is going on with good pace and the same may
likely be concluded very soon, therefore, I am not inclined to grant
bail to the present applicant, rather I would like to issue direction to
the learned trial court to conclude the trial with expedition.
25.     So far as claim of parity with co-accused Sidhique Kappan is
concerned, the role assigned to Sidhique Kappan is in respect of
hatching criminal conspiracy with K.A. Rauf Sherif. Except the
allegation that Rs.5,000/- were transferred in the Bank account of co-
accused Atikur Rahman, there is no other transaction either in the
Bank account of Sidhique Kappan or in the Bank account of co-
accused whereas the role of the present applicant is altogether
different from that of co-accused Sidhique Kappan as the present
applicant is based at Abu Dhabi and the proceed of crime is in crores,
therefore, the present applicant cannot claim parity with co-accused
26.     Accordingly, the bail application is rejected.
27.     Learned trial court is directed to conclude the trial with
expedition, preferably within a period of six months by fixing short
date and no unnecessary adjournment shall be given to any of the
parties. If any of the parties do not cooperate in the trial proceedings,
the learned trial court may take any appropriate coercive steps in
accordance with law.
28.     Liberty is given to the applicant to file another bail application,
if the trial is not concluded within the aforesaid stipulated time.
29.     It is made clear that I have not entered into merits of the issue,
therefore, learned trial court shall conduct and conclude the trial
without being influenced from any observation or finding of this order
as the observations are only confined to the disposal of this bail
application.