Dated this the 25th day of January, 2023
Crl.M.C.No.6415 of 2022 is a petition filed under Section 482
of the Code of Criminal Procedure (`Cr.P.C' for short) to quash
Annexure A12 complaint pending as S.T.No.792/2018 before the
Judicial First Class Magistrate Court-I, Pala. The same petitioner
has filed Crl.M.C.No.6421 of 2022 to quash Annexure-A12
complaint pending as S.T.No.783/2018. The identical prayers in
these Crl.M.Cs are as under:
“For these and other grounds that may be urged at the
time of hearing, this Hon'ble Court may be pleased to quash
Annexure-A12 complaint and the subsequent proceedings in
S.T.No.792/2018 pending before the JFCM-I Court Pala.”
2.    The petitioner is the accused in the above cases, where
the 2nd respondent is the complainant.
3.    Heard the learned counsel for the petitioner as well as
the learned counsel appearing for the 2nd respondent and the learned
4.    The learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the
petitioner     herein   filed   CMP.Nos.436/2020       and  437/2020
respectively in S.T.No.783/2018 and 792/2018 on 27.01.2020,
challenging maintainability of the above cases where the petitioner
alleged to have committed offences punishable under Section 138
of the Negotiable Instruments Act (`N.I Act' for short) on the
allegation that cheque for Rs.15,00,000/- and Rs.11,00,000/- each
in the above complaints got dishonoured when the same were
presented for collection. It is argued further that in this matter
admittedly the 2nd respondent herein/the complainant is a person
suffering from mental inability/insanity and in order to prove the
same, the learned counsel for the petitioner given emphasis to
Annexure-A1, copy of the medical certificate dated 22.03.2016,
issued by Malankara Orthodox Syrian Church Medical College
Hospital, produced by the 1st respondent herein when he canvassed
bail in a Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act crime,
registered against him, by filing Annexure-A2 bail application. It
is submitted by the learned counsel further that though petitions
were filed before the Magistrate Court to hold an inquiry into the
mental state of the 2nd respondent, the same was dismissed by
Annexure-A6 order dated 27.08.2021. When revision was filed
before the Sessions Court, the Sessions Court also dismissed the
said petition. He also argued that this Court issued a direction
earlier to expedite the trial and disposal of the above cases and,
thereafter, this Court extended the time for disposal as per
Annexure-A7 order in I.A.No.1/2021 in O.P(Crl.) No.161 and 163
of 2021. It is also submitted that, earlier, petitions were filed to
quash the complaints and the said plea was dismissed by this Court
as per the common order in Crl.M.C.Nos.6475/2018 and
6564/2018 dated 24.01.2019. He also submitted that there are
certain negative observations against the petitioner in the said
order, but the same has no binding effect since the petitioner filed
S.L.P 4279-4280/2019 before the Apex Court and the Apex Court
dismissed the S.L.P with the observation that “the trial shall be
conducted without being influenced by the observations made by
5.     The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that if
mental insanity of the 2nd respondent (complainant) is proved on a
proper enquiry, the same is akin to absence of the 2nd respondent
(complainant) in the eye of law, since a mentally ill person is
incompetent to enter into contract with the petitioner. Further if the
mental insanity is proved, the issuance of cheque as alleged in the
complaint and the transaction dealt with therein would not have
any legal effect, because of the insanity of the petitioner. It is fairly
conceded by the learned counsel for the petitioner that even though
there is no provision in the Code of Criminal Procedure to enquire
into the mental state of the complainant, the principles governing
enquiry contemplated under Order 32 of the Code of Civil
Procedure should be followed in such cases also, though these
provisions have no direct application in criminal proceedings. He
has placed a decision on this point, viz. [1965 KHC 173], Mariam
& Ors. v. Varghese, where this Court considered the mode of
enquiry in relation to the mental state of the accused. According to
the learned counsel for the petitioner, the offence alleged under
Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act is not one in the
nature of criminal proceedings and the same can be said to be a
`civil sheep' in a `criminal wolf's clothing. The learned counsel
pointed out the said observation of the Apex Court in the decision
reported in [2017 (5) KHC 177 : (2018) 1 SCC 560 : 2017 (4) KLT
444 : AIR 2017 SC 4594], Meters and Instruments (P) Ltd. v.
Kanchan Mehta, where, while summarising the objective of
allowing compounding of an offence under Section 138 of the N.I
Act, it has been held as under:
“18.2. The object of the provision being primarily
compensatory, punitive element being mainly with the
object of enforcing the compensatory element, compounding
at the initial stage has to be encouraged but is not debarred
at later stage subject to appropriate compensation as may
be found acceptable to the parties or the Court.”
6.    Similarly, the decision reported in [2021 KHC 6120 :
: AIR 2021 SC 1308], P.Mohanraj & Ors. v. Shah Brothers Ispat
Private Limited of the Apex Court also has been placed, wherein it
was held as under:
“53.       A perusal of the judgment in Ishwarlal
Bhagwandas [S.A.L. Narayan Row v. Ishwarlal Bhagwandas,
1966 (1) SCR 190 : AIR 1965 SC 1818] would show that a civil
proceeding is not necessarily a proceeding which begins with
the filing of a suit and culminates in execution of a decree. It
would include a revenue proceeding as well as a writ petition
filed under Art.226 of the Constitution, if the reliefs therein are
to enforce rights of a civil nature.      Interestingly, criminal
proceedings are stated to be proceedings in which the larger
interest of the State is concerned. Given these tests, it is clear
that a S.138 proceeding can be said to be a “civil sheep” in a
“criminal wolf's” clothing, as it is interest of the victim that is
sought to be protected, the larger interest of the State being
subsumed in the victim alone moving a Court in cheque
bouncing cases, as has been by us in the analysis made herein
above of Chapter XVII of the Negotiable Instruments Act.”
7.      Epitomizing the argument, the learned counsel for the
petitioner submitted that Annexure-A1 medical certificate shows
that the 2nd respondent herein is a mentally ill person. As such,
enquiry into his mental status is absolutely necessary before
proceeding for trial and, therefore, the petitions are liable to be
8.      Whereas the learned counsel for the 2nd respondent
vehemently opposed the said contentions. According to the learned
counsel, it is true that when the 2nd respondent was booked in a
N.D.P.S Act crime, he had filed Annexure-A2 bail application
through his counsel and in the said bail application, the counsel
raised a contention that the 2nd respondent is a person diagnosed to
have bipolar affective mental disorder and was under treatment for
episodic psychiatric illness for the last more than 8 years and the
same was supported by Annexure-A1 medical certificate. But there
is no convincing materials to show that the 2nd respondent is a
person suffering from mental insanity so that he could not control
his affairs or he has incapacity to file the complaints and to contest
the cases. He also submitted that in Crl.M.C.Nos.6475/2018 and
6564/2018 also, as per ground No.G, mental insanity is alleged as
the ground for quashing the complaint.           This Court as per
Annexure-A10 order, dismissed the said plea. The said finding was
challenged before the Apex Court and as per Annexure-A11 order,
the Apex Court also upheld the finding of this Court with
observation that, the trial shall be concluded without being
influenced by the observations made by the High Court.            The
learned counsel also argued that as of now the 2 nd respondent, who
is the accused in the N.D.P.S crime, is facing/defending trial as an
ordinary person and there are documents to prove the same.
9.     The learned counsel for the 2nd respondent placed
documents in open court and in so far as receipt of the said
documents, the other side did not raise any objection. However, I
directed the learned counsel for the 2nd respondent to produce the
documents in the manner provided by law and accordingly he had
filed Crl.M.Appl.No.1/2023 with prayer to receive documents
produced as Annexure-R2(a) to R(d) as additional documents.
Since no objection is raised by the other side, those documents are
10. While crystallising the rival arguments, the vital
questions arise for consideration are:
(1)    whether there are prima facie materials before this Court
to see that the 2nd respondent is a mentally ill person?
(2)    If the prayer herein is barred by res judicata or
constructive res judicata?
11. In this matter, the learned counsel for the 2nd respondent
raised a specific contention that this petition is barred by res
judicata or by constructive res judicata on the submission that the
petitioner raised contention regarding mental disorder of the 2nd
respondent as ground No.H in Crl.M.C.No.6475/2018, copy of
which is produced as Ext.R2(b) and the same was dismissed by this
Court as per order dated 24.01.2019. Therefore the allegation of
mental insanity now raised was virtually found against the
petitioner. Therefore, the same contention is barred by res judicata
or constructive res judicata.
12. Whereas it is submitted by the learned counsel for the
petitioner that res judicata and constructive res judicata have no
application in criminal proceedings and in an appropriate case, the
bar under Section 300 of Cr.P.C would apply.
13. The first question to be decided herein is whether the
plea of res judicata and constructive res judicata would apply in
criminal proceedings? The second question is whether res judicata
or constructive res judicata is substantiated in the instant case?
14. In this connection I am inclined to refer Annexure-
R2(b), copy of the memorandum of Crl.M.C.No.6475/2018.
Ground No.H raised in Annexure-R2(b) is as under:
“the 2nd respondent is having mental disorders, by
which he cannot be legally represented before any court”.
15. It is submitted by the learned counsel for the 2nd
respondent that the principles of res judicata and constructive res
judicata would squarely apply in criminal proceedings as well, and
in support of this contention, the learned counsel for the 2nd
respondent placed a decision of this Court reported in
[Manu/KE/0880/2016], P.Reghuthaman v. State of Kerala & Ors.
16. I have perused the above judgment. In paragraph 7 of
the judgment, this Court was called upon to answer application of
res judicata or constructive res judicata in criminal proceedings. In
para.7 of the judgment, this Court, after referring precedents
referred to in para.8, held that principles of res judicata and
constructive res judicata would squarely apply to criminal
proceedings also. Para.7 and 8 of the above judgment are extracted
“7.   This Court, while entertaining the matter, had
raised a doubt whether the decision rendered by this Court in
Raghunathan (supra) will operate as res judicata or
constructive res judicata as far as the present writ petition is
concerned. The learned Senior Counsel by relying on t he
decision in Superintendent and Remembrancer of Legal
Affairs,   West   Bengal   v.   Mohan     Singh    and   Others
[MANU/SC/0223/1974 : AIR 1975 SC 1002] followed in
Devendra & Ors. v. State of Uttar Pradesh and another
[MANU/SC/0941/2009 : (2009) 7 SCC 495], emphatically
argued that when change of circumstance is there, the earlier
decision in the Crl.M.C. will not operate as res judicata in the
present matter, since much waters have flown under the bridge
after the decision in the Crl.M.C. It has also been argued on
the basis of Devendra (supra) that the principles of res judicata
have no application in a criminal proceeding and that the
principles of res judicata as adumbrated in Section 11 of the
Code of Civil Procedure or the general principles thereof will
have no application in a case of this nature.
8.    This Court respectfully disagree with the aforesaid
argument highlighted by the learned Senior Counsel.          This
Court had occasion to consider the said question while dealing
with Crl.R.P.No.1512/2015 of this Court. The said question
relating to application of principles of res judicata and
constructive res judicata was considered elaborately by the
Apex Court in Bhagat Ram and another v. State of Rajasthan
and another [MANU/SC/0090/1972 : (1972) 2 SCC 466],
which was followed by His Lordship Justice H.R. Khanna in
State of Rajasthan v. Tarachand Jain [MANU/SC/0194/1973 :
AIR 1973 SC 2131]. It was repeatedly held that principles of
res judicata and constructive res judicata are squarely
applicable to criminal proceedings also.      The decisions in
Bhagat Ram (supra) and Tarachand Jain (supra) were clearly
approved by the Constitution Bench of the Apex Court, it is no
more open for any further debate.”
17. Therefore, the law is well settled that the principles of
res judicata and constructive res judicata would squarely apply in
criminal proceedings as well, and it is equally settled that where a
person, who is convicted or acquitted, not to be tried for same
offence since the said trial is barred under Section 300 of Cr.P.C.
Further the same is double jeopardy, which is prohibited.
18. Reverting back to the discussion in order to find out
whether the prayer herein is barred by res judicata or constructive
res judicata. I have perused Annexure-A10 order of this Court in
Crl.M.C.Nos.6475 and 6564/2018 In the said order, in paragraph
Nos.7 and 8, this Court observed that the learned counsel for the
petitioner gone to the extent of alleging mental disorder to the 2 nd
respondent on the strength of a medical certificate handed over
across the bar and contended that the proceedings initiated based
on Annexure-A1 complaint would not sustain and the same were
liable to be quashed. But this Court negatived the contention by
concluding that in a proceedings initiated under Section 482 of
Cr.P.C to quash a complaint, this Court was required to see whether
a prima facie case was made out or not and it was found that there
is a prima facie case and, therefore, complaint could not be
19. Thus it appears that virtually the plea of mental disorder
raised as ground H was considered by this Court, and negatived
while holding that the complaint could not be quashed for none of
the reasons raised in Crl.M.C.Nos.6475 and 6564 of 2018. It is
interesting to note that the petitioner herein took the matter before
the Apex Court and the Apex Court also dismissed the petition
allowing trial of the matters as per the order extracted herein above.
Therefore, the contention raised by the 2 nd respondent to the effect
that these petitions are barred by principles of res judicata or
constructive res judicata is liable to be accepted and I do so.
20. Deeming that prayers herein are not barred either by res
judicata or constructive res judicata, it is relevant to extract the
medical certificate, to which, heavy reliance has been given by the
learned counsel for the petitioner. The same reads as under:
“To Whomsoever concerned
This is to certify that Mr.Jacob RV Jose (Hosp
Kottayam is on treatment from our Psychiatry department since
31/5/2012.     He has h/o episodic psychiatric illness of total
duration 8 yrs.    Episodes s/o disturbed sleep inability over
activity, increased socialization and making new friends, going
off to faraway places and staying in flats and hotels,
distractibility and impulsivity, increased money spending on
tobacco smoking amounting to harmful use. He has optimum
functioning during the inter-episodic periods.
Patient was diagnosed to have Bipolar Affective Disorder
with Comorbit Harmful use of Tobacco. He is currently on T.
Divaa OD (1 gram 0-0-1) T. Lithosun SR (400 mg) 0-0-2 and T
Arpizol (15 mg) 0-0-1. He needs to continue medications on a
prolonged basis and parodical OP reviews are necessary.”
21. Similarly, the learned counsel for the petitioner placed
reliance on paragraphs 3 and 4 of Annexure-A2, copy of the bail
application filed in the above N.D.P.S case vide Crime
No.318/2016 of Ernakulam Town South Police Station. The same
is to the following effect:
“3.   It is respectfully submitted that the allegations in
the crime are false and innocent in the matter. As a matter of
fact, petitioner is diagnosed to have been suffering from
`Bipolar Affective Mental Disorder' and under treatment for
episodic psychiatric illness for the last more than eight years.
The petitioner had been under the treatment of Dr.Nisha.A, the
Assistant Professor in the Department of Psychiatry, Malankara
The treatment certificate of the Petitioner is produced herewith
as Annexure 1.      As per the certificate issued, the peculiar
behaviour of the petitioner includes over activity, increased
socialization and making new friends, going off to faraway
places and staying in hotel rooms and increased money
spending. The said behavior is stated to be `optimum' during
the `interepisodic' periods.    The petitioner is under regular
medication and currently prescribed with T.Divaa OD (1 gm) 0-
0-1, T. Lithosun SR (400 mg) 0-0-2 and T. Arpizol (15 mg) 0-0-
1.   The true copy of the medical prescription issued to the
Petitioner from the Medical College is produced herewith as
Annexure II. The medicines as prescribed above are at heavy
dosage and to be regularly consumed by the Petitioner
discontinuance of which would result in his mental break down.
Petitioner was required to be under constant medical checkup
and attention of the experienced medical practitioner in the
Medical College Hospital who is thorough with his background.
4.     Further, the petitioner herein belongs to a reputed family
in his locality at Pala and also the younger son of his parents
who are retired professors and also the grandson of Late RV
Thomas, the then member of the Indian Constituent Assembly
and First Speaker of Travancore-Cochin State Legislative
Council. The parents of the petitioner are the president and
secretary respectively of Scrony Educational Charitable Trust
which is running an `Arts and Science' College at Kottayam
affiliated to the Mahatma Gandhi University from the year 2012
onwards and presently having 250 students in their rolls.
Petitioner is designated as the Vice President of the governing
body of the said trust.         The petitioner is not actively
participating in the day to day activities of the trust and the
college on account of the mental abnormalities and disorders
faced by him.”
22.      It is relevant to note that CMP.Nos.436/2020 and
437/2020 were filed by the petitioner herein to enquire into the
mental capacity of the 2nd respondent, based on Annexure-A1 and
A2. As per Annexure-A6 order, the learned Magistrate dismissed
the application holding that the medical certificate produced before
the Sessions Court certifying that the petitioner was diagnosed to
have been suffering from Bipolar Affective Mental Disorder and co
marbid harmful use to tobacco and he is currently on T.Divaa OD
and he needs to continue medication on a prolonged basis etc.,
cannot be considered for the purpose of holding an inquiry and the
petitioner's right to adduce evidence against the 2 nd respondent
complainant with regard to the said contention was reserved while
dismissing the application. When the same was challenged before
the Sessions Court, revision also was dismissed as per Annexure-
A11 order.
23. In this connection, Annexure-R2(a) produced by the
learned counsel for the 2nd respondent also assumes significance.
The same would go to show that the 2 nd respondent is an accused in
S.C.No.832/2016 on the files of the VIIth Additional District and
Sessions Court, Ernakulam.          Annexure-R2(a) depicts the
proceedings from 11.01.2017 till 11.01.2023.      Annexure-R2(a)
would go to show that the 2nd respondent, being the 2nd accused in
the above case, has been before the VII th Additional District and
Sessions Court, Ernakulam to face trial and where he did not raise
a contention that he had any mental insanity so as to face trial and
now the matter stands posted for evidence.
24. Similarly, it has to be held that Annexure-A1 medical
certificate produced by the then counsel for the 2nd respondent,
while canvassing regular bail in a serious criminal offence, shall
not be the foundation to hold that the 2 nd respondent is a person
having mental insanity, as contended by the petitioner herein.
Therefore, the prayer herein to quash the complaints on the said
ground, after suffering defeat before this Court in an earlier
Crl.M.C, which was upheld by the Apex Court, is found to be
unwarranted, rather not justified.
For the above reasons, these petitions must fail and are
accordingly dismissed.