1.     This petition assails an order dated 07th December, 2019, passed
in CS 81/2019, (B Kalyana Raman vs. Rashi Mishra), by the learned
Additional District Judge (“the learned ADJ”), in which the present
petitioner was the defendant and the present respondent was the
plaintiff.
2.     The impugned order adjudicates three applications preferred by
the petitioner as the defendant before the learned ADJ, under Order
VII Rule 11 and Section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
(CPC), and under Section 340 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973, (Cr PC).      Additionally, the impugned order strikes off the
defence of the petitioner, purportedly in exercise of jurisdiction under
the proviso to Order XV-A(1) of the CPC.
3.     The petitioner is before this Court assailing all four decisions as
contained in the impugned order.
4.     CS 81/2019 was filed by the respondent against the petitioner,
seeking eviction of the petitioner from the premises of the respondent.
The respondent’s case in the suit was that the petitioner was the
respondent’s tenant vide lease deed dated 22nd February, 2017,
followed by a rent agreement for a further period executed on 04th
January, 2018. On the petitioner failing to vacate the premises despite
the expiry of tenancy as so extended, the respondent filed CS 81/2019
against the petitioner seeking possession, permanent injunction and
damages.
5.     In the said application under Order VII Rule 11, CPC
proceedings, the petitioner filed an application under Order VII, Rule
11, submitting that the respondent had concealed a lease deed dated
18th November, 2018, and that, if the lease deed were taken into
account, the plaint would be liable to be dismissed.
6.     The learned ADJ has held that an application under Order VII
Rule 11, could be decided only on the basis of the averments
contained in the plaint, and averments contained in the written
statement or documents that the defendant sought to place on record
could not be taken into account while adjudicating an application
under Order VII, Rule 11. This position is unexceptional, as it stands
settled inter alia by Saleem Bhai v. State of Maharashtra1 and
Madanuri Sri Rama Chandra Murthy v. Syed Jalal2.
7.        As such, there is no occasion for the Court to interfere with the
said decision of the learned ADJ in so far as it dismisses the
petitioner’s application under Order VII Rule 11, CPC.
Application under Section 340, Cr PC
8.        The petitioner additionally moved an application under Section
340, CrPC, for initiation of proceedings against the respondent for
perjury, for having suppressed the aforesaid lease deed dated 18 th
November, 2018. The learned ADJ has rejected this application as
pre-mature, opining that the issue of perjury could not be decided at an
initial stage and would require leading of evidence. For this purpose,
the learned ADJ has relied on the judgment of this Court in Vinedale
Distilleries Ltd. v. S.K. Aggarwal3, which holds that, till the lis
between the parties is adjudicated, the Court could not arrive at a
finding of falsehood.
9.        Learned Counsel for the petitioner fairly acknowledges that
there is no infirmity in this decision of the learned ADJ as the aspect
of perjury could be decided only after evidence is led.
10.       As such, there is no reason for this Court to interfere with the
aforesaid decision of the learned ADJ on the application of the
11.     The third application of the petitioner, which was rejected by
the learned ADJ, was for waiver of costs of ₹ 3,000/-, earlier imposed
by the learned ADJ vide order dated 21st October, 2019. The learned
ADJ, has, in rejecting the said application, noted that the costs were
imposed for delay in filing the written statement. He has observed
that, though summons of the suit had been served on the petitioner on
11th May, 2019, the written statement was filed, “after more than five
months on 14.10.2019”. Two medical certificates which were filed by
the petitioner to explain the delay, have been regarded by him as
insufficient.
12.     It appears that, actually, the written statement was filed on 14 th
August, 2019, and not on 14th October, 2019. Learned Counsel for the
respondent has fairly acknowledged this position but submits that,
even treating the date as 14th August, 2019, the written statement was,
nonetheless, delayed.
13.     Be that as it may, as the decision not to waive costs was
predicated on the premise that the written statement was filed on 14th
October, 2019, whereas it was actually filed on 14 th August, 2019, the
direction for payment of costs has necessarily to be set aside being
based on an erroneous factual premise. As such, to the extent that the
learned ADJ has dismissed the petitioners’ application under Section
151, CPC, for waiver of costs, the impugned order warrants
14.    The fourth decision of the learned ADJ, contained in the
impugned order and under challenge in these proceedings, at the
instance of the petitioner, has been taken under Order XVA (1).
15.    Order XVA (1) and (2) of the CPC read thus:
(1)     In any suit by a owner/lessor for eviction of an
unauthorized occupant/lessee or for the recovery of rent and
future mesne profits from him, the defendant shall deposit
such amount as the court may direct on account of arrears
upto the date of the order (within such time as the court may
fix) and thereafter continue to deposit in each succeeding
month the rent claimed in the suit as the court may direct. The
defendant shall continue to deposit such amount till the
decision of the suit unless otherwise directed.
In the event of any default in making the deposit as aforesaid,
the Court may subject to the provisions of sub-rule (2) strike
off the defence.
(2)     Before passing an order for striking off the defence, the
court shall serve notice on the defendant or his Advocate to
show cause as to why the defence should not be struck off,
and the Court shall consider any such cause, if shown in order
to decide as to whether the defendant should be relieved from
an order striking off the defence.”
16.    The learned ADJ has noted that, vide order dated 23rd October,
2019, passed under Order XVA (1), the petitioner had been directed to
pay arrears of rent with effect from February, 2019, at the rate of ₹
24,000/- per month and to continue to pay the same month by month.
No payment had, however, been made despite the said order been
passed.
17.     Learned Counsel for the petitioner – as the defendant before the
learned ADJ – sought to justify the default in payment on the ground
that the petitioner had preferred a counter claim and that the arrears of
rent would be adjustable against the amount claimed in the counter
claim. The learned ADJ has rejected this submission, observing that
the counter claim was for damages and legal expenses and damages
were a matter of adjudication and could not be regarded as a matter of
right. That apart, no order awarding damages to the petitioner had
been passed, so that, as per the learned ADJ, default in payment of
rent, as directed in the order dated 23rd October, 2019, could not be
justified on the ground of a counter claim for damages having been
preferred by the petitioner.     Further observing that there was no
undertaking forthcoming, from the petitioner, to cure the default in
payment of arrears of rent, the learned ADJ has proceeded to hold that
the Court had no option but to strike off the petitioners’ defence and
has ordered accordingly.
18.     I have already held, in Madho Singh Chauhan v. Smriti4, that
an order for striking off of the petitioners’ defence under Order XVA
(1) is statutorily subject to Order XVA(2). Read in conjunction, mere
default in payment of rent as directed by the Court under Order
XVA(1) cannot, ipso facto, justify passing of an order striking off the
defence of the defaulting tenant. The Court is statutorily bound, under
Order XVA (2) to, prior to passing of an order striking off the defence,
serve a notice on the defaulting tenant, to show cause as to why the
defence should not be struck off and, to consider the cause, if any,
shown by the tenant in that regard. This is an exercise which, having
been statutorily incorporated in public interest and in the interests of
compliance with the principles of natural justice and fair play, has to
be treated as mandatory and non-negotiable.
19.        In the present case, learned Counsel for the respondent, is also
candid in acknowledging that no show cause notice under Order XVA
(2) had been issued to the petitioner before his defence was struck off
by the learned ADJ. He, nonetheless, points out that the petitioner had
been granted an opportunity to explain the default in payment of rent
and that the petitioners’ explanation in that regard was considered by
the learned ADJ, before taking a decision to strike off the petitioners’
defence.
20.        I have, in Madho Singh Chauhan4, already taken a view that
grant of such opportunity during hearing is not sufficient to constitute
compliance with Order XVA (2). It is trite, from Taylor v. Taylor5,
then Nazir Ahmed v. King Emperor6 and State of UP v. Singhara
Singh7, that where the law requires an act to be done in a particular
manner, it has to be done in that manner, or not done at all.
21.    As such, for non-compliance with the provisions of Order
XVA(2), the impugned order, striking off the petitioners’ defence
cannot sustain having been taken without following the discipline
envisaged in Order XVA (2). It is accordingly quashed and set aside.
22.    The application of the respondent under Order XVA, for
striking of the petitioners’ defence, is accordingly remanded to the
learned ADJ, to further proceed with the application in accordance
with law and in accordance with the observations contained
hereinabove.
23.    In view of the aforesaid discussion, the petition is disposed of
by (i) upholding the impugned order dated 07th December, 2019,
passed by the learned ADJ in so far as it rejects the petitioners’
application under Order VII Rule 11 of the CPC and Section 340, Cr
PC, (ii) setting aside the impugned order in so far as it rejects the
petitioner’s application under Section 151, CPC for waiver of costs of
₹ 3,000/- earlier imposed by the learned ADJ, which application, shall,
therefore, stand allowed, and (iii) setting aside the decision to strike
off the petitioners’ defence and remanding the application filed by the
respondent in that regard under Order XVA, CPC to the learned ADJ,
for a consideration de novo in the light of the observations contained
hereinabove.
24.   The petition stands accordingly partly allowed in the aforesaid
terms with no orders as to costs.