Trial Court Case Order dated 13-4-2018, passed in CMP No.445/4 of
Number           2016 and computers No.759/2016 in Case No.17/4
of 2016 and C.N. No.29/2016, whereby learned
JMFC had granted monthly maintenance of
Rs.2000/- to the applicant Wife.
Criminal        No.5/10 of 2018 dismissed on 1-10-2018, by the
Revision before learned Sessions Judge, Bilaspur, H.P.
The petitioner's wife had filed an application under Section
125 CrPC, seeking monthly maintenance from the petitioner-husband. In
the application, she averred that they had solemnized marriage on
22.09.2000 at Bilaspur. At the time of the wedding, she was a widow
with three children. On his persuasion, she agreed to marry him. In the
beginning, her marital life was good, but later on, his attitude changed,
which led to discord, and he even withdrew his financial support. He
would spend money on liquor instead of giving it to her and her children.
Furthermore, he would abuse, assault, and beat the petitioner on
trivial matters. Given such behavior and the absence of financial support,
it became impossible for her to reside with him in his house.
Consequently, she was forced to shift to the house of her first husband,
where Subhash Chand neither paid visit nor gave any money. The wife
also alleged that her second husband is a driver by profession and earns
sufficient money.
H   3.   The husband filed a reply and took a specific stand that Krishani
Devi has played fraud upon him by preparing false documents with the
connivance of the Notary Public. He stated that although the marriage is
claimed to be solemnized on 22.09.2000, the certificate was allegedly
obtained on 23.07.2010. Subhash Chand also claimed that Krishani Devi,
in connivance with the priest of temple Lord Shri Laxmi Narayan Ji,
Bilaspur, prepared false documents and affidavit. He further stated that
she is still drawing benefits, which is being given to widows, and, as
such, her drawing such benefits would show that she never solemnized
marriage with him.
Vide above captioned order dated 18.04.2018, learned JMFC,
granted interim maintenance to the wife by observing as under:-
“An assiduous perusal of the contents of the
application as well as reply reflects that applicant is
legally wedded wife of the respondent and further the
applicant has alleged that she has no source of income
to maintain herself. Though respondent has disputed
the factum of marriage whereas respondent has not
denied this fact that the applicant is unable to maintain
herself. The question that whether the marriage
between the parties has been legally solemnized only
will be decided when both parties to lis lead cogent
and convincing evidence. At this stage applicant able
to established prima-facie case in her favour. Since the
applicant has prima facie established that fact of
marriage, as such, the respondent who is able bodied
Cperson and having good earning capacity under the
legal as well as moral obligation to maintain his
legally wedded wife to protect her from becoming
destitute and respondent can easily spare Rs.2000/- per
ig  h         month to provide interim maintenance to his legally
wedded wife, who has no source of income. As such,
the respondent is directed to pay Rs.2000/- per month
as interim maintenance to the applicant from the date
of this order. Application disposed of accordingly.”
H   5.   The husband challenged the said order by filing criminal revision in
the Court of learned Sessions Judge, Bilaspur. Vide above captioned
order, the learned Sessions Judge, did not find merits in the petition and
dismissed the same.
6.   Challenging both the orders, the husband is now before this Court
by filing the instant petition under Section 482 of CrPC.
7.   In the petition, a letter written to Krishani Devi to Pradhan has been
annexed as Annexure P-3, in which she allegedly declared herself as a
widow of Suresh Kumar. Similarly, a receipt of a grant of concerned
Panchayat of Rs.12000/- has been annexed, in which Krishani Devi
showed her as a widow of Suresh Kumar. In another document of the
Ministry of Social Justice annexed as Annexure P-4, she disclosed
herself to be a widow.
Mr. Tara Singh Chauhan, learned counsel for the petitioner, argued
that Krishani Devi defrauded Subhash Chand by showing her his legally
wedded wife to claim maintenance.
On the contrary, Ms. Seema Azad, Advocate, appointed as a Legal
Aid Counsel to defend the respondent-wife Krishani Devi, argued that
the courts have granted only interim maintenance and the element of
fraud, etc., are subject to proof in evidence and cross-examination. She
argued that law provides for interim maintenance an immediate remedy
for sustenance. She further argued that a meager amount had been
granted, whereas the husband worked with HRTC as a driver.
H   10. S. 125 (1) (a) of CrPC provides a grant of maintenance to the wife,
unable to maintain herself. Section 18 of the Hindu Adoptions and
Maintenance Act, 1956, mandates a wife’s lifetime maintenance rights
from her husband. During the proceeding’s pendency, the Proviso to S.
125 CrPC empowers the Magistrate to order monthly allowance for the
interim maintenance and the expenses of such proceeding. The following
provisions of S. 18(2) of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act,
1956 entitles a wife to live separately from her husband without
forfeiting her claim to maintenance-
(a) if he is guilty of desertion, that is to say, of
her consent or against her wish, or of wilfully
abandoning her without reasonable cause and without
(b) if he has treated her with such cruelty as to cause a
reasonable apprehension in her mind that it will be
harmful or injurious to live with her husband;
(g) if there is any other cause justifying her living
separately.
11. In Mohd Ahmed Khan v. Shah Bano Begum, (1985) 2 SCC 556,
Para 8, Constitutional Bench of Hon’ble Supreme Court held that Sir
James- Fitz James Stephen who piloted the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1872 as a Legal Member of the Viceroy's Council, described the
precursor of Chapter IX of the Code in which Section 125 occurs, as 'a
mode of preventing vagrancy or at least of preventing its consequences'.
12. In Ramesh Chander Kaushal v. Veena Kaushal, AIR 1978 SC 1807,
Hon’ble Supreme Court holds, “[9]. This provision is a measure of social
justice and specially enacted to protect women and children and falls
within the constitutional sweep of Article 15 (3) reinforced by Article
39. We have no doubt that sections of statutes calling for construction by
H   courts are not petrified print but vibrant words with social functions to
fulfil. The brooding presence of the constitutional empathy for the
weaker sections like women and children must inform interpretation if it
has to have social relevance. So viewed, it is possible to the selective in
picking out that interpretation out of two alternatives which advances the
cause - the cause of the derelicts.”
13. In Savitri v. Govind Singh Rawat, 1985 (4) SCC 337, Hon’ble
[5]. The jurisdiction of a Magistrate under Chapter IX
of the Code is not strictly a criminal jurisdiction. While
passing an order under that Chapter asking a person to
pay maintenance to his wife, child or parent, as the
case may be, the Magistrate is not imposing any
punishment on such person for a crime committed by
him. Chapter IX of the Code contains a summary
remedy for securing some reasonable sum by way of
maintenance, subject to a decree, if any, which may be
made in a civil Court in a given case provided the
Personal Law applicable to the person concerned
authorises the enforcement of any such right to
maintenance. The Code, however, provides a quick
remedy to protect the applicant against starvation and
to tide over immediate difficulties. Chapter IX of the
Code does not in reality create any serious new
obligation unknown to Indian social life.
C[6]. In view of the foregoing it is the duty of the Court
to interpret the provisions in Chap. IX of the Code in
such a way that the construction placed on them would
not defeat the very object of the legislation. In the
ig  h        absence of any express prohibition, it is appropriate to
construe the provisions in Chapter IX as conferring an
implied power on the Magistrate to direct the person
against whom an application is made under S. 125 of
the Code to pay some reasonable sum by way of
H            maintenance to the applicant pending final disposal of
the application. It is quite common that applications
made under S. 125 of the Code also take several
months for being disposed of finally. In order to enjoy
the fruits of the proceedings under S. 125, the applicant
should be alive till the date of the final order and that
the applicant can do in a large number of cases only if
an order for payment of interim maintenance is passed
by the Court. Every Court must be deemed to possess
by necessary intendment all such powers as are
necessary to make its orders effective. This principle is
embodied in the maxim 'ubi aliquidconceditur,
conceditur et id sine quo res ipsaesse non potest
(Where anything is conceded, there is conceded also
anything without which the thing itself cannot exist.)
Vide Earl Jowitt's Dictionary of English Law 1959
Edn. P. 1797). Whenever anything is required to be.P.
done by law and it is found impossible to do that thing
unless something not authorised in express terms be
also done then that something else will be supplied by
necessary intendment. Such a construction though it
may not always be admissible in the present case
however would advance the object of the legislation
under consideration. A contrary view is likely to result
in grave hardship to the applicant, who may have no
means to subsist until the final order is passed. There is
no room for the apprehension that the recognition of
such implied power would lead to the passing of
interim orders in a large number of cases where the
liability to pay maintenance may not exist. It is quite
possible that such contingency may arise in a few cases
but the prejudice caused thereby to the person against
whom it is made is minimal as it can be set right
quickly after hearing both the parties. The Magistrate
may, however, insist upon an affidavit being filed by or
on behalf of the applicant concerned stating the
grounds in support of the claim for interim
ig  hmaintenance to satisfy himself that there is a prima
facie case for making such an order. Such an order may
also be made in an appropriate case ex parte pending
service of notice of the application subject to any
modification or even an order of cancellation that may
H    be passed after the respondent is heard. If a civil Court
can pass such interim orders on affidavits, there is no
reason why a Magistrate should not rely on them for
the purpose of issuing directions regarding payment of
interim maintenance. The affidavit may be treated as
supplying prima facie proof of the case of the
applicant. If the allegations in the application or the
affidavit are not true, it is always open to the person
against whom such an order is made to show that the
order is unsustainable. Having regard to the nature of
the jurisdiction exercised by a Magistrate under S. 125
of the Code, we feel that the said provision should be
interpreted as conferring power by necessary
implication on the Magistrate to pass an order directing
a person against whom an application is made under it
to pay a reasonable sum by way of interim
maintenance subject to the other conditions referred to
the pending final disposal of the application. In taking
this view we have also taken note of the provisions of
S. 7(2)(a) of the Family Courts Act, 1984 (Act No. 66
of 1984) passed recently by Parliament proposing to
transfer the jurisdiction exercisable by Magistrates
under S. 125 of the Code to the Family Courts
constituted under the said Act.
14. In SavitabenSomabhaiBhatiya v. State of Gujarat, (2005) 3 SCC
636, Hon’ble Supreme Court holds,
[18] It may be noted at this juncture that the legislature
considered it necessary to include within the scope of
the provision an illegitimate child, but it has not done
so with respect to woman not lawfully married.
However, desirable it may be, as contended by learned
CCounsel for the appellant to take note of the plight of
the unfortunate woman, the legislative intent being
clearly reflected in Sec. 125 of the Code, there is no
scope for enlarging its scope by introducing any
ig  h         artificial definition to include woman not lawfully
married in the expression 'wife'.
[19] As noted by this Court in Vimala (K.) v.
Veeraswamy (K.), 1991 (2) SCC 375, when a plea of
H             subsisting marriage is raised by the respondent-
husband it has to be satisfactorily proved by tendering
evidence to substantiate that he was already married.
15. In Mohd Ali alias Barket Ram v. Mt Sakina Begum alias Shakuntla,
26-5-1943, Lahore High Court observed, “[2]. There is ample authority
for the proposition that Section 488 provides only a speedy remedy
against starvation for a deserted wife or child, that it is only a summary
procedure which does not cover entirely the same ground as the civil
liability of a husband or father under his personal law to maintain his
wife or child, and that when substantial issues of civil law are raised
between the parties their remedy lies only in the civil Courts: In re
Kandasami Chetty A.I.R. 1926 Mad. 346, M. Bulteel v. Emperor (37)
alia.”
1937 M.W.N. 1127 and Chantan v. C. MathuA.I.R. 1917 Mad. 276 inter
16. Granting interim maintenance is similar to giving first aid. Chapter
IX of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, provides a quick remedy by a
summary procedure to protect the applicant against starvation and tide
over immediate difficulties by a deserted wife or children to secure some
reasonable sum by way of maintenance. S. 125 (1) (a) of CrPC provides
a grant of maintenance to the wife, unable to maintain herself. Proviso to
S. 125 CrPC empowers the Magistrate to order monthly allowance for
the interim maintenance and also the expenses of such proceeding during
its pendency. The foundation of the measures of social Justice enacted
by the Legislature lay beneath the sweep of Article 15 (3) of the
Constitution of India. It fulfills the concept of a welfare State in a vibrant
democracy by safeguarding wives and children and preventing them
from the modes of vagrancy and its consequences. Given above, it would
be appropriate for the Courts to direct the person against whom an
H   application is made under S. 125 of the Code to pay some reasonable
sum by way of maintenance to the applicant pending final disposal of the
application.
17. The contents of the wife's application, which is supported by her
affidavit, primafacie make out just grounds for the wife to live separately
and that she could not sustain financially, making out a case for interim
maintenance. Although the marriage has been challenged as never
solemnized yet it is subject to proof. In the present petition, the Court is
concerned with interim maintenance and nothing more, nothing beyond.
There is neither any illegality nor the maintenance beyond the
petitioner's means; as such, there are no merits in the present petition.
Furthermore, if the Court concludes that Krishani Devi played fraud
upon Subhash Chand, it would undoubtedly have consequences. Given
above, the impugned orders are well reasoned and call for no
interference.
19. In the facts and circumstances peculiar to this case, the petitioner
fails to make out a case at this stage. However, this order shall not
prohibit any of the parties to seek legal remedies under section 127 CrPC
in accordance with law.
20. I express gratitude to Ms. Seema Azad Advocate, Ld. Legal Aid
Counsel, for excellent assistance.
Petition dismissed. Pending applications, if any, are also closed.