Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. WRIT PETITION No. - 1699 of 2022
Petitioner :- Taslimun Nisha Alias Tanu Arya And Another
Respondent :- State Of U.P. Trhu. Its Prin. Secy. Home Civil Sectt. Lko.
Counsel for Petitioner :- Parashu Ram Kanaujia
Counsel for Respondent :- G.A.
Hon'ble Arvind Kumar Mishra-I,J.
Hon'ble Manish Mathur,J.
Both the petitioners are present in Court and they have been
identified by their counsel Mr. Parashu Ram Kanaujiya. Both
the petitioners are major and they have entered into nuptial
knot.
Copy of the marriage certificate issued by Arya Samaj
Safedabad, Barabanki dated 09.03.2022 has been annexed as
Annexure no.2. The date of birth of petitioner no.1 is
06.01.2004 as per High School Certificate/ Mark-sheet for the
year 2019 and the date of birth of petitioner no.2 is 09.07.1998
as per Mark-sheet/ Certificate of High School Examination
2013 copies whereof are annnexed as Annexure no.3 to this
petition.
Now claim that a false and concocted FIR under Section 366
IPC has been lodged by father of petitioner no.1 Mr.
Mohammad Said and a case has been registered at Case Crime
No.0075 of 2022 at Police Station Amethi, District Amethi, the
applicants fear that they may be arrested by police their
fundamental rights shall be infringed.
However considering the fact that the High School Certificate
produced before us to indicate that the petitioners are major and
it being so, the petitioners shall not be arrested, unless and until
the copies of High School Certificate of both petitioners are
found to be fake and cannot be believed so and for this, the
Investigating Officer must record reasons in detail in the case
diary after recording statement of the authority concerned
which purportedly issued the certificate and unless and until
that is done, it cannot be deemed merely on the asking that the
truth unravelled before this Court in shape of High School
Certificate appears to be not genuine and in case after
investigation the truth comes out either way then course of
action open to the Investigation Officer should be followed and
it being so fair investigation is expected.
It is noticeable and a reminder to the police that in case of proof
                                      of age of victim of an offence under Sections 363, 366 IPC etc.
                                      the age becomes prime consideration and the police authority
                                      concerned must determine about the veracity and the
                                      authenticity of the documents which are available to them so as
                                      to assess first the age and so is the case of free will of the victim
                                      and in case it is found that the victim of her own free will being
                                      major has taken any step for her life then due course of law
                                      should prevail and no one should be unnecessary put to any
                                      harassment.
                                      With the aforesaid direction, the petition is disposed of.
Location: High Court of Judicature at
