The appellant has preferred the present Appeal under Section
374 of Cr.P.C., being aggrieved by judgment dated 06.8.2012 passed
by the Additional Sessions Judge, Dhar in S.T. No.144/2012,
whereby the appellant has been convicted for offence punishable
:2:                                    Cr.A.No.1132 of 2012
under Sections 376(2)(F) of the I.P.C. and sentenced him to undergo
life imprisonment with fine of Rs.25,000/- and in default of
payment of fine, one year additional rigorous imprisonment.
02.     In brief, the facts giving rise to the present appeal are that, on
25.12.2011, the First Information Report was lodged by the mother
of the victim under Section 376(2)(f) of the IPC alleging rape of her
minor daughter (hereinafter referred to as “S”) aged three years by
the appellant Pappu s/o Dhannutar Yadav on 20.12.2011. It was
stated in the FIR that the complainant resides in Shanti Dhaam
colony in the house of one Rajkumari and the appellant also resides
in the adjacent house where at around 4.00 o'clock on 20.12.2011,
when the complainant and the mother of the appellant Sunita were
sitting in the courtyard, whereas the appellant Pappu Yadav was
sleeping in the front room of his house on the ground. As the
Complainant's daughter S was also sleeping in her lap, hence
appellant's mother told her to put S in her house only and thus, the
complainant put her daughter besides the appellant who was also
sleeping in the room. She has also stated that at that time her
daughter was not wearing the underwear.. After around an hour
when the complainant went back to take back her daughter, she
found that her daughter was almost unconscious and when she took
her up in her arms, her arms got smeared with blood as S was
bleeding profusely from her private parts. The complainant did not
lodge the FIR immediately out of fear of her husband and and also
advised not to do so by the mother of the appellant. However, as the
:3:                                  Cr.A.No.1132 of 2012
incident was eating her out,the complainant could not bear it any
more and informed about the incident to her husband and brothers
and finally lodged the report on 25.12.2011. After the report was
lodged, the appellant was arrested on 27.12.2011 and the victim “S”
was also got examined by the doctor in which it was found that “S”
was sexually assaulted. After completion of the investigation, the
charge sheet was filed and the evidence was led in the trial court.
The learned Judge of the trial court, after recording the evidence,
has convicted the appellant, and sentenced him to undergo life
imprisonment with fine clause. Being aggrieved, the present appeal
has been preferred by the appellant.
03.     Counsel appearing for the appellant has submitted that the
appellant has been falsely implicated in the case as the learned
Judge of the trial court has not appreciated the evidence on record in
its proper perspective. It is further submitted that although the
M.L.C. of the victim is positive which is also in respect of the
articles seized from the possession of the victim girl however, the
underwear of the victim has also been seized despite the fact that
even according to the FIR lodged by “C”- the mother of the victim,
she has clearly stated that at the time when she put her daughter to
sleep near the appellant when he was also sleeping, her daughter had
not worn any underwear. Thus, it is submitted that this fact in itself
is sufficient to draw an adverse inference against the prosecution
story. It is further submitted that the FIR itself has been lodged after
a period of five days and if the victim was so bleeding heavily, it
:4:                               Cr.A.No.1132 of 2012
was not possible for the complainant to hide it for fear of her
husband. It is also submitted that it was not possible that a person
who commit rape on a girl like that and she would not scream,
whereas even according to story of the prosecution, the mother of
the victim was sitting just outside the house and according to the
complainant P.w./1 this distance was only 20 feet. This witness in
para 14 of her statement has also admitted that the police has not
seized any underwear of the victim. Thus, it is submitted that when
the F.S.L. report also contains underwear of the victim which also
has the semen marks and human spermatozoa, it cannot be relied
upon hence, the appellant be acquitted. In the alternative, it is also
submitted that the appellant is lodged in jail since last around 10
years and considering the aforesaid quality of evidence available
against him, his sentence may be reduced to 10 years which is the
minimum sentence under Section 376(2)(f) of the IPC and which
period the appellant has already undergone.
04.       On the other hand, Counsel appearing for the State has
opposed the prayer and it is submitted that no case for interference
is made out as the learned Judge of the trial court had rightly
appreciated the evidence on record.
05.       Heard the counsel for the parties and also perused the
06.       From the record, it is apparent that the victim “S”, a three
year old girl was subjected to sexual assault which is apparent from
the deposition of P.w./8 Dr.Asha Pawaiya, who has stated that she
:5:                                  Cr.A.No.1132 of 2012
examined the victim on 25.12.2011, at Bhoj District Hospital, Dhar
where she was posted as Gynaecologist and according to her, the
victim had no visible external injury however, on internal
examination, it was found that her hymen was ruptured and it was
also swollen and she was also complaining of pain. The Doctor has
also stated that she seized the underwear which the victim had worn
at the time of the incident and also prepared the slides of the victim.
The Doctor has also denied that such an injury can be caused by
falling on the ground or that the victim herself can cause such an
injury to her private part. She had given her opinion vide Ex.P/16
that the victim's hymen was ruptured wherein she has also
mentioned that internal pain by the victim is suggestive of
penetration and in her cross examination, she has stated that vide
Ex.P/16, the opinion which she has given means that an attempt of
rape was made on the victim.
07.      The aforesaid physical evidence is supported by the
testimony of the P.w./1 “C”, mother of the victim, who has also
reiterated her earlier version that she put her daughter by the side of
the appellant who was sleeping on the ground and when she went
back to take her after half an hour, she found that the appellant had
kept his face covered with bedding but when she took her daughter
in her arms, her hands had blood on them as her daughter was
bleeding from her private parts profusely. She took her daughter to
the appellant's mother Sunita, but she asked her to keep quite and
also brought Boroplus and put it on the private part of S. She also
:6:                                 Cr.A.No.1132 of 2012
gave a tablet to the victim saying it to be a painkiller. Sunita also
told her not to say the incident to anybody otherwise she would face
serious consequences of the same. However, after suffering the the
trauma that her daughter was undergoing, after around 4-5 days,
“C” informed about the incident to her sister-in-law Geeta and
thereafter her brother and husband also came to know about it and
the FIR. She has admitted that the frock and banyan which the
victim had worn at the time of the incident had blood on them but
she had washed them and thereafter as demanded by the police she
had also handed over the said cloths to them. She has admitted that
they had cordial relations with the family of the appellant. A
suggestion has also been given to her that she had borrowed
Rs.500/-from the father of the appellant to which she has stated she
had taken only Rs.50/- from him and has also denied that she had
also demanded Rs. 5,000/- from the present appellant and on his
refusal, she has threatened him of falsely implicating in some case.
She has also admitted that the appellant's mother had put Boroplus
on the victim is not mentioned in the FIR and her the police
statement Ex.D/1. She has denied that the victim had suffered such
an injury on her private part while she was playing in the house.
Barring some minor omissions and contradictions, this witness has
stood her ground.
08.       P.w./2- “B” happens to be the father of the victim and has
stated that his wife initially did not inform him about the incident.
However, since around 4-5 days his daughter was not keeping well
:7:                                Cr.A.No.1132 of 2012
hence he asked his wife and then only it was informed to him that
the appellant has committed rape on “S”.
09.      P.w./3-Pushpendra, an independent witness, resides in front
of the house of the complainant and has stated that when he came to
know about the appellant's crime he also talked to his father but the
appellant told him that they should leave the locality or face serious
consequences. He had also accompanied the complainant party to
the police station at the time when the FIR was lodged.
10.       P.w./7 Keshav Rao Patil, the Investigating Officer, who has
seized the bedding on which the appellant was sleeping had seen
some semen marks on it, however, in the F.S.L. report the aforesaid
bedding does not find mention.
11.        On perusal of the record, we find that it is true that the
victim was also not wearing the underwear at the time of the
incident. In such circumstances, it is rather intriguing as to why in
the F.S.L. report the underwear of the victim is found to have the
semen marks and the human spermatozoa.           However, the other
articles seized from her including her slides are found to be
contained semen marks and human spermatozoa and P.w./8 Dr. Asha
Pawaiya in her cross-examination has also admitted that the human
spermatozoa can survive more than 32 hours in the private part of
the human being. There is no question put to her that if the cloths of
a raped victim are washed in that case no human spermatozoa can
be found.
12.     Be that as it may, we are otherwise satisfied with the
:8:                                 Cr.A.No.1132 of 2012
testimony of the P.w./8 Dr. Asha Pawaiya regarding the sexual
assault made on the victim “S” and has no reason to disbelieve the
deposition of P.w./1, the mother of the victim and her dilemma in
going to the police station straight away. This Court has also no
reason to disbelieve the story of the mother of the victim and it is
not possible that only for a sum of Rs.50/- or Rs.5000/- a false
narration will be made specially when the victim S's internal injuries
also supports the factum of rape on the victim. In such
circumstances, we do not have any hesitation to come to a
conclusion that the victim “S” was raped by the present appellant
who was only three years old at the time of the incident.
13.      So far as the sentence part of the appellant is concerned, the
Supreme Court in the case of Shyam Narian vs. State of Delhi
reported as (2013) 7 SCC 77, in similar circumstances, has affirmed
the Life imprisonment awarded to the accused in case of a rape of 8
years old victim. The relevant paras of the judgment read as under:-
“25. Keeping in view the aforesaid enunciation of
law, the obtaining factual matrix, the brutality reflected
in the commission of crime, the response expected from
the courts by the society and the rampant uninhibited
exposure of the bestial nature of pervert minds, we are
required to address whether the rigorous punishment for
life imposed on the appellant is excessive or deserves to
be modified. The learned counsel for the appellant would
submit that the appellant has four children and if the
sentence is maintained, not only his life but also the life
of his children would be ruined. The other ground that is
urged is the background of impecuniosity. In essence,
leniency is sought on the base of aforesaid mitigating
factors.
26. It is seemly to note that the legislature, while
prescribing a minimum sentence for a term which shall
not be less than ten years, has also provided that the
sentence may be extended up to life. The legislature, in
its wisdom, has left it to the discretion of the court.
Almost for the last three decades, this Court has been
expressing its agony and distress pertaining to the
increased rate of crimes against women. The eight year
old girl, who was supposed to spend time in
cheerfulness, was dealt with animal passion and her
dignity and purity of physical frame was shattered. The
plight of the child and the shock suffered by her can be
well visualised. The torment on the child has the
potentiality to corrode the poise and equanimity of any
civilised society. The age-old wise saying that “child is a
gift of the providence” enters into the realm of absurdity.
The young girl, with efflux of time, would grow with a
traumatic experience, an unforgettable shame. She shall
always be haunted by the memory replete with heavy
crush of disaster constantly echoing the chill air of the
past forcing her to a state of nightmarish melancholia.
She may not be able to assert the honour of a woman for
no fault of hers.
27. Respect for reputation of women in the society
shows the basic civility of a civilised society. No
member of society can afford to conceive the idea that he
can create a hollow in the honour of a woman. Such
thinking is not only lamentable but also deplorable. It
would not be an exaggeration to say that the thought of
sullying the physical frame of a woman is the demolition
of the accepted civilised norm i.e. “physical morality”. In
such a sphere, impetuosity has no room. The youthful
excitement has no place. It should be paramount in
everyone’s mind that, on the one hand, society as a
whole cannot preach from the pulpit about social,
economic and political equality of the sexes and, on the
other, some perverted members of the same society
dehumanise the woman by attacking her body and
ruining her chastity. It is an assault on the individuality
and inherent dignity of a woman with the mindset that
:10:                                  Cr.A.No.1132 of 2012
she should be elegantly servile to men. Rape is a
monstrous burial of her dignity in the darkness. It is a
crime against the holy body of a woman and the soul of
the society and such a crime is aggravated by the manner
in which it has been committed. We have emphasised on
the manner because, in the present case, the victim is an
eight year old girl who possibly would be deprived of the
dreams of “Spring of Life” and might be psychologically
compelled to remain in the “Torment of Winter”. When
she suffers, the collective at large also suffers. Such a
singular crime creates an atmosphere of fear which is
historically abhorred by the society. It demands just
punishment from the court and to such a demand, the
courts of law are bound to respond within legal
parameters. It is a demand for justice and the award of
punishment has to be in consonance with the legislative
command and the discretion vested in the court.
28.The mitigating factors put forth by the learned
counsel for the appellant are meant to invite mercy but
we are disposed to think that the factual matrix cannot
allow the rainbow of mercy to magistrate. Our judicial
discretion impels us to maintain the sentence of rigorous
imprisonment for life and, hence, we sustain the
judgment of conviction and the order of sentence passed
by the High Court.”
14.      Testing the facts of the case at hand on the anvil of the
aforesaid dictum of the Supreme Court, this Court finds that the
victim in the preset case was a girl aged 3 years only, who was
ravished by the appellant in whom the mother of the victim had
shown full confidence when she left her daughter asleep along side
him, assuming that her daughter would be in safe custody of the
appellant, aged around 22 years but little did she know that
appellant would not only break her faith but would also leave an
:11:                              Cr.A.No.1132 of 2012
indelible mark of devastation on the mind and body of the victim, in
such circumstances, the rights and plight of the victim and her
family members cannot be lost sight of, and thus, we find that the
Life imprisonment awarded to the appellant is by no means severe
or excessive.     Accordingly, the present appeal being devoid of
merits, stands dismissed.
Digitally signed by MONI RAJU
Smt. Sharmila Sharma, learned counsel for the appellant.
Shri Sudhanshu Vyas, learned Panel Lawyer for the
respondent/State.