In re : UTP Dipak Joshi @ Jaisi @ Jaishi, S/o
Champakha Jaisi, lodged in Dum Dum Central
Mr. V. Tripathy         …for the High Court Admn.
Mr. Nazir Ahamed …for the SLSA.
Mr. Subhrojyoti Ghosh …for the Relative of
Mr. Hirak Sinha for the Consulate General of Nepal.
Mr. Debasish Ghosh          …for the State.
The learned 1st Additional District & Sessions Judge,
Darjeeling where Sessions Case No.31 of 1981 is pending,
will trace out the records and send it to this Court through
a special messenger within a period of two days without
fail.
List   this  matter   for  further  consideration on
18.3.2021 at the top.
Registrar General is directed to communicate this
order forthwith telephonically and by email or other mode
to the Court below.
1.     This matter relates to an Under Trial Prisoner
who, going by the report of the West Bengal State
Legal Services Authority; for short, “SLSA” and the
Directorate of Correctional Services; for short, “DCS”,
is in the Dum Dum Central Correctional Home for
nearly 41 years by now.
2.     The   Department     of  Psychology,   University
Colleges of Science, Technology and Agriculture,
Calcutta University through Dr. Manisha Dasgupta,
Associate Professor and Dr. Somdeb Mitra, assessed
the said under trial prisoner; for short, “UTP”, namely,
Dipak Joshi @ Jaisi @ Jaishi and has stated that his
IQ level indicates that his current mental age in terms
of intellectual functioning is around 9 years and 9
months. That is the report given by that University
Department on 11.01.2021 upon the presentation of
Dipak Joshi @ Jaisi @ Jaishi before them with the
intervention of SLSA.
3.     From the material papers, we find that the UTP
is to stand trial for an offence punishable under
Section 302 of IPC.
4.     Following the efforts taken by the SLSA and the
Officers under its command and through different
other supporting Institutions, the Consulate General
of Nepal has placed on record, the fact that the
whereabouts of the near relatives of the UTP have been
traced out and his mother is 90 years of age. It is also
submitted on behalf of the Consulate General of Nepal
in India at Kolkata that the Consulate is requested to
do the needful to support the affairs of the UTP.
5.     An affidavit has been placed on record by
Prakash Chandra Sharma Timsina. He states that he
is the elder son of the UTP’s uncle. UTP and Prakash
Chandra Sharma Timsina are stated to be the
grandchildren of late Premlal Timsina. Therefore,
Prakash Chandra Sharma Timsina is a near relative of
the UTP.
6.     On the basis of the materials on record, we see
that after the assessment of the UTP’s mental status,
sometime in January, 1982, when he was found to be
not mentally fit to stand trial, there is no contrary
report at any point of time even as of now before the
Court of Session where the case is pending for trial.
7.     In the aforesaid view of the matter, we do not see
that any useful purpose will subserve the ends of
justice by continuing to detain    UTP Dipak Joshi @
Jaisi @ Jaishi in the Correctional Home. We are,
therefore, of the view that in exercise of authority
under Section 482 of Cr.P.C. and Articles 226 and 227
of the Constitution of India; and, also applying the
substance of the directions given by the Hon’ble
Supreme Court of India in News Item “38 years in
jail without trial” published in Hindustan Times,
In Re Vs. Union of India, reported in (2007) 15 SCC
18, the UTP Dipak Joshi @ Jaisi @ Jaishi, S/o
Champakha Jaisi could be entrusted to the custody of
his near relative, Prakash Chandra Sharma Timsina
who has filed an affidavit and application seeking
release of UTP Dipak Joshi @ Jaisi @ Jaishi, S/o
Champakha      Jaisi. This    course  will  also  be  in
consonance with the power of the Court to grant bail
pending trial.
8.     For the aforesaid reasons, it is ordered that the
UTP namely Dipak Joshi @ Jaisi @ Jaishi, S/o
Champakha      Jaisi,  now     housed   in  Dum    Dum
Correctional Home in connection with Sessions Case
No.31 of 1981 in the First Additional District &
Sessions Judges, Darjeeling is released from the
Correctional Home and entrusted to the custody of
Prakash Chandra Sharma Timsina. It is impossible
and impermissible to direct the UTP to execute any
bond in view of the deficit in his mental capacity. Ends
of justice will be satisfied if his release is supported by
a simple bond executed by the aforementioned,
Prakash Chandra Sharma Timsina in favour of the
Registrar General of this Court undertaking to produce
the UTP as and when directed by this Court. That
bond should be attested by Mr. Satish Thapa, Office
Secretary of Consulate General of Nepal in India at
Kolkata. Upon such bond being executed to the
satisfaction of the Registrar General at the earliest,
preferably today or tomorrow, the Dum Dum Central
Correction Home shall release the said person into the
custody of Prakash Chandra Sharma Timsina who will
execute requisite receipt to the Dum Dum Central
Correctional Home upon taking charge of the said
UTP.     Prakash     Chandra      Sharma      Timsina   will
thereupon keep the Consulate General of Nepal in
India at Kolkata updated once in six months, until
otherwise ordered, with requisite inputs as may be
required at that end regarding the affairs of UTP. Upon
his release, we direct that all Statutory Authorities will
ensure and do the needful to facilitate the transit of
UTP Dipak Joshi @ Jaisi @ Jaishi to Nepal under the
aegis of the Consulate General of Nepal in India at