For the Petitioner
Whether approved for reporting?1 Yes
C                            Advocate with Mr. Piar Chand and
General with Mr. Vinod Thakur,
and Mr. Rajat Chauhan, Law
Officer, for respondent Nos.1 and
Advocate, for respondent No.3.
The instant petition has been filed for grant of the
following substantive reliefs:-
Whether the reporters of the local papers may be allowed to see the Judgment?Yes
“i)        That an appropriate writ, order or direction may very
kindly be issued to respondent No.1 and 2 to issue the
necessary notification bringing parity in the pay scales of
employees of this High Court registry with their counter
parts in Punjab and Haryana High Court, by further directing
the respondent No.1 and 2 to grant 20% hike in the pay
scales (grade pay) of the employees of the registry of High
Court       of Himachal Pradesh w.e.f. 01.01.2006, with all
consequential benefits of pay, arrears etc., in the interest of
law and justice and communication dated 19.12.2017
(Annexure P-18) may very kindly be quashed and set aside.
1(a).      That the decision as taken in the meeting held on
24 July, 2019 which is Annexure P-19 to the Writ Petition
may also very kindly be quashed and set aside, in the
interest of law and justice.”
2.     C    A single Bench of the Punjab and Haryana High Court
in its decision rendered in CWP No. 15833 of 2009 titled as Hari
Mohan Dixit and others vs. Punjab and Haryana High Court,
Chandigarh and others, decided on 10.02.2011 directed the Union
H   of India to consider the recommendations made by three Judges’
Committee which had been accorded approval                   by     Hon’ble the
Chief Justice of the Punjab and Haryana High Court and take an
appropriate decision in accordance with law and especially keeping
in view the guiding principles reiterated in Union of India vs.
S.B. Vohra & Ors. (2004) 2 SCC 150. It was pursuant to these
directions that the Government of India eventually granted 20% hike
in the pay scales (Grade Pay).         The Government of India              vide
memorandum dated 27.02.2012 granted hike of 20% in the existing
pay including    Grade Pay to the employees
memorandum and serving in Punjab and Haryana High Court with
effect from 01.01.2006.
One of the Welfare Associations of the Himachal
accordingly made a      representation
11.04.2012 claiming therein the same and similar benefits on the
basis of the Hari Mohan Dixit’s case (supra).
On receipt      of such representation, the matter was
placed before     a Committee consisting             of three
Hon’ble Judges, who after taking into consideration the entirety of
facts and circumstances submitted a report that it was                       the
prerogative of Hon’ble the Chief Justice to independently consider
the matter and to make recommendations for grant of benefits to the
employees of this High Court. The Hon’ble Chief Justice thereafter
H   made the note “recommended” “Address the govt.” on 28.04.2012.
5.          Accordingly, the Registrar General of this Court sent a
communication to the Government requesting the Government to
take up the matter with the Finance Department and issue the
necessary notification bringing parity in the pay scales of the
employees of this Court Registry with their counter-parts with the
Punjab and Haryana High Court.
After the receipt of such communication, the Office of
the Principal Secretary (Home) called upon the High Court to
hike   had been granted
supply legible copy of the letter dated 27.02.2012 vide which 20%
to the employees of the Punjab and
Haryana High Court with effect from 01.01.2006.           The same was
duly supplied by this High Court and in addition thereto, another
communication   ouwas sent by the High Court            to the Principal
Secretary (Home) requesting him to expedite
reminder dated 29.08.2012.
C    It is only then that for the first time the Department of
vide   communication     dated     05.11.2012          sought        a
comprehensive proposal along with details of financial implications.
The query of the Department of Home vide communication dated
05.11.2012 with regard to financial implications was duly attended to
H   by the High Court     by sending a communication dated 15/17 th
December, 2012. However, the Department of Home again sent a
communication dated 21.08.2013 raising therein             certain      other
queries. These queries were duly attended to vide communication
dated 24/26th December, 2013.
8.          The Department of Home then sent a communication
dated 05.04.2014 to the Registrar General of this Court wherein a
reference was made to Rule 6 of the Himachal Pradesh Officers
and Members of the Staff (Recruitment, Condition of Service,
Conduct and Appeal), Rules, 2003 and a question was raised as to
how without carrying out an amendment in the Rules, the hike of
response    thereto,   the
20% could be granted to the employees of this High Court.
Registrar      General        addressed
communication ou to the Chief Secretary of the State of Himachal
Pradesh pointing out in detail the entire issue. This was followed by
a letter from the Registrar General wherein a detailed background
of the case was given and it had been pointed out that the State of
Himachal Pradesh right from           its inception      on attaining the
statehood in 1971 had been following the State of Punjab insofar
as the pay scales, allowances and other amenities are concerned
as the State Government        had not constituted its own                  Pay
H   Commission so far. The nomenclature of posts in High Court of
Himachal Pradesh is also the same as in the High Court of Punjab
and Haryana. Even the nature of duties and responsibilities of the
employees of both the High Courts are undisputedly the same
and identical and that the working of the High Court is altogether
different from the Departments and Offices of the Government.
9.            It is pointed out that the background of the hike given
in the pay scales is that the pay scales of the Clerks working in the
Subordinate Courts were enhanced in every State including the
State of Punjab and Haryana by adopting the recommendations of
the Shetty Pay Commission, as a result whereof, an anomaly arose
between the pay of the Clerks of the Subordinate Courts and the
High Courts.      In simple words,    H the Clerks working in the
Subordinate Courts started to draw more pay than their counter
parts in the High Court.
It was thereafter that the Clerks of the Punjab and
Haryana High Court made a representation to Hon’ble the Chief
Justice of the said High Court requesting to remove the anomaly by
bringing parity in the pay scales of the Clerks of the High Court with
those of the Subordinate Courts. It was then that Hon’ble the Chief
Justice     of the said High Court     constituted a three Judges’
Committee to examine the matter, who, in turn, recommended that
H   the demand of the Clerks of the High Court was justified and that
their pay    deserved to be brought at par with the Clerks of the
11.           It was also recommended that the pay scales of other
categories of the employees of the High Court is also deserved to
be hiked by 20% of the existing pay with effect from 01.01.2006 so
that no more anomalies           arise        in the pay structures of the
employees.      The recommendations of the Committee                    were duly
accepted by Hon’ble the Chief Justice and the same were made to
the   Union of India for acceptance and for issuing necessary
memorandum in this behalf.
It is only when the recommendations were not acted
Haryana High Court filed
upon that the Association of the employees of the Punjab and
the aforesaid writ petition which was
allowed      andou   the    Union        of     India     finally      issued        a
notification/memorandum whereby an additional pay at the rate of
20% of the pay drawn (i.e. pay in the Pay Band+ Grade Pay) was
granted to the categories mentioned therein. In addition to that, an
additional pay of 10% of pay drawn ( i.e. pay in the Pay Band +
Grade Pay) was also granted in terms of the letter issued by the
Ministry of Law and Justice         dated 15.10.2012 to the categories
from the level of Secretary up to the level of Registrar.               Further, in
H   terms of the letter dated 18.07.2012, 20% additional pay was also
given to the following left out categories:
Sr.No. Name of the Post           Corresponding          Pay Grade         Pay     (in
13.           It was further pointed out that the issue with regard to
20% hike in pay was taken up by this High Court with the Ministry
of Law and Justice, Government of India, New Delhi, in the year
2014 and in response thereto, the said Ministry vide letter dated
06.03.2014 advised the Registry that in view of the provision of
Article 229(2) of the Constitution of India, any proposal for revision of
pay scales of the High Court needs to be processed by the State
Government of Himachal Pradesh. Lastly, it was pointed that the
duties, responsibilities and work         of the Judiciary throughout the
Country are more arduous and somewhat similar in nature. The
quantum of work undertaken by the Officers/Officials concerned as
well as the extent of work ethos like efficiency, promptitude and
probity etc. required from them is of the highest order.
14.           It was bearing in mind these aspects that the Shetty
Pay Commission had recommended different pay scales to the
Judicial Officers and staff of the Subordinate Courts than that of the
15.           It is averred that the State Authorities despite the matter
having been discussed at the highest level still kept on lingering the
matter   on    one     pretext   or   the   other    and      ultimately       vide
communication        dated   19.12.2017 (Annexure P-18) rejected the
proposal submitted by the High Court mainly on the ground that the
employees of the High Court had already been granted enhanced
pay scales (Pay-Band and Grade Pay) with effect from 01.10.2012
which is higher and equal
at par with the pay scales of other State Government employees
to the pay scales granted to the six
categories on the recommendations of Shetty Pay Commission.
It is also pointed out that the granting of special
increment to certain categories of employees of Subordinate Courts
with effect from 01.04.2003 could not be construed as an anomaly
particularly in the pay scales.   Special increment has been granted
as a measure personal to an employee and his pay scale has not
been changed. In addition to that, it was pointed out that special
increment to the Subordinate Court employees has been granted
on the recommendations of the Shetty Pay Commission which is
applicable to the Subordinate Court employees in the State.
17.           As regards parity, it was claimed         that normally the
State of Himachal Pradesh takes into account the recommendations
H   of the Punjab Pay Commission pay scales in respect of its
employees, but the same are implemented                       with suitable
modifications as the Government of Himachal Pradesh has its own
staffing pattern of service and R&P Rules, method of recruitment,
prescribed     educational    qualification,     geographical/traditional
conditions,   natural,   administrative   implications       and      financial
resources. While allowing any financial benefit, creation of posts or
revision of pay scales,        the State Government gathers various
informations       on   that   particular   issue    from
Governments/other Institutions and it is only thereafter that a
decision is taken.
It has also been claimed that the Punjab and Haryana
High Court is under the control of Government of India being part
of UT administration and not in the State of Punjab and involvement
of Rule 6, parity of granting any financial benefits to the H.P. High
Court employees always remained at par with the employees of
H.P. Government and not with the Punjab and Haryana High Court
employees.      Consequently, all the employees of the H.P. High
are getting     the same pay scales and other allowances/
financial benefits as are admissible to the
corresponding
posts in H.P. Secretariat including Secretariat
Pay/allowance and Special Pay.           These extra       financial benefits
H   which also form the part of pensionary benefits are not being paid
to the employees of similar categories of employees in Subordinate
Offices of Government as well as Subordinate Judiciary where the
service conditions/pay scales of Subordinate Judiciary employees
are governed      by the H.P. Subordinate Courts’ Employees (Pay
Allowance and other Conditions of Service) Amendment Act, 2005.
These    employees         are    not    being    paid         any     Secretariat
Pay/Allowance or Special Pay etc. The High Court employees are
already getting higher
pay than the Subordinate Judiciary
employees due to allowing of Secretariat Pay and Special Pay. The
Secretariat Pay/Special Pay along with Dearness
Allowance is much higher than the amount of Special Increment
allowed at the rate of 3% to the Subordinate Judiciary employees by
the Shetty Pay Commission.
Lastly, it is claimed that the Hon’ble Supreme Court in
Appeal (Civil) No.2033 of 1996 titled State of Himachal Pradesh
vs. P.D. Attri and others, decided on 11.02.1999, had clearly held
that the claim of the employees therein was not based on any
constitutional   or any other legal provisions whereby they could
claim parity with the posts similarly designated in Punjab for grant
of pay scales from the same date. It was then concluded that since
there is no      anomaly    in the pay scales             of H.P. High Court
H   employees vis-a-vis Subordinate Courts’ employees of Himachal
Pradesh, their representation was rejected. As regards the matter of
party of pay scales of High Court employees, it is always with the
State Government employees as laid down in Rule 6.
20.           On 03.12.2018, a Coordinate Bench                    of this Court
passed the following order:-
“One of us (Justice Chander Bhusan Barowalia, J.)
has dealt with this matter in the capacity of Registrar
General     (In-charge),      however,     since
correspondence has been made with the respondent-State
in this regard, therefore, neither learned Addl. Advocate
General nor the petitioner have any objection, in case this
Bench continues with further proceedings in this writ
petition.
On hearing this matter for some time, it transpired that
with the implementation of Shetty Commission report, the
staff in various cadre(s) working in Subordinate Courts in the
State is getting more pay and allowances as compared to
the   employees     in     corresponding      cadre(s)        on    the
establishment of the Registry of the High Court. An
anomalous situation has thus arisen on account of the staff
in the subordinate Courts is drawing higher salary as
C  compared to their counterparts on the establishment of the
Registry of this Court. Such an anomalous situation has also
occurred in other States on implementation of the Shetty
ig  h   Commission report with respect to staff working in the
Subordinate Courts, including adjoining States of Punjab
and Haryana. The High Court of Punjab and Haryana, vide
H       judgment dated 10.2.2011 passed in CWP No. 15833 of
2009 titled Hari Mohan Dixit & ors. Vs. Punjab and Haryana
High Court, Chandigarh & ors. had directed Union of India to
consider the recommendation made by Three Judges’
Committee qua enhancement of the salary of the Staff
working in the Registry of the High Court at par with their
counter parts in the District Judiciary. In Punjab and
Haryana High Court, the employees in various categories
have been given the hike in their salary as is apparent from
the perusal of Annexure      R-3/F (colly.) (pages 89 to 92 of
the record). We have further been informed that similar relief
has been granted to the employees in various categories
working in other High Courts also in the country. In the High
Court of Himachal Pradesh also, this matter has been
considered by the Administrative Committee comprising
Hon’ble Chief Justice and two senior most Judges which
has recommended to pay the salary to the employees of the
High Court at par their counterparts in the District Judiciary.
The recommendation so made has also been approved by
the Hon’ble Chief Justice and the matter taken up with the
respondent-State.
Being so and also that the prayer made in the writ
petition, prima-facie is genuine and bonafide, we hope and
trust that the respondents instead of inviting judgment in this
matter must consider the relief sought in this writ petition in
C    the light of the material available on record. Learned Addl.
Advocate General prays for and is granted four weeks’ time
to do the needful. List on 2.1.2019.
ig  h                 An authenticated copy of this order be supplied to
learned Addl. Advocate General for compliance.”
21.         Now, adverting to the reply filed on behalf of the High
H   Court, it has been stated that the representation dated 11.04.2012
made by the H.P. Employees Welfare Association, High Court of
H.P. was referred to the Committee consisting of three Hon’ble
Judges as per the orders of Hon’ble the Chief Justice.              The three
Hon’ble Judges’ Committee considered the representation along
with judgment passed by the Punjab and Haryana High Court and
thereafter it was concluded by the Hon’ble Committee that it is the
prerogative of Hon’ble the Chief Justice to independently consider
the matter and to make recommendations for grant of benefits to
the employees of the High Court of H.P. The report of the Hon’ble
Committee dated 23.04.2012 was placed before Hon’ble the Chief
Justice, who, in turn, was pleased to direct the matter to be taken
up with the State Government.       HThe High Court has otherwise
supported the claim of the petitioner by stating that the State of
Himachal Pradesh     has been following the State of Punjab                 in
matters of pay scales and allowances to its employees from the very
inception.
C     It is also claimed that the nature of duties and
responsibilities of the employees of the Punjab and Haryana High
Court and those of this High Court are same and identical. Even
the nomenclature of posts existing in both the High Courts is also
same and similar. It has also been stated that pursuant               to the
H   judgment dated 10.02.2011 delivered in Hari Mohan Dixit’s case
(supra), the Government of      India vide memorandum                  dated
27.02.2012 has granted hike of 20% in the existing pay including
grade pay to the employees specified and serving in Punjab and
Haryana High Court with effect from 01.01.2006 and the matter in
respect of left out categories was under consideration with the
Union of India and States of Punjab and Haryana.
It has been further averred that the State Government
was also apprised of the mandate of the Hon’ble Supreme Court
of India in S.B. Vohra’s case (supra) wherein the Hon’ble Supreme
Court inter alia has held that the independence of the High Court
is an essential feature for the working of the democratic form of
Government in the Country and, therefore, an absolute control has
been vested in the High Court over its staff which should be free
from interference from the Government subject, of course, to the
limitations as imposed under Article 229 of the Constitution of India.
Rest of the averments regarding sending         of the comprehensive
proposal along with details of the financial implications involved in
the case has not been denied. In addition thereto, it has been
submitted that the High Court had also sent a letter to the Registrar
General of the Punjab and Haryana High Court requesting him to
H   supply copy of the order regarding sanction of 20% and 10% hike
along with latest copy    of the pay scales and grade pay of the
employees of the Punjab and Haryana High Court.
24.         The matter was also taken up by the High Court with
the Secretary to the Government of India vide letter dated 24/26 th
December, 2013 requesting for intervention by the Ministry of Law
and Justice to bring parity in the pay scales and allowances vis-a-
vis their counter-parts serving in the High Court of Punjab and
India addressed a letter      dated
However, the Deputy Secretary to the Government of
06.03.2014 and stated that any
proposal for revision in the pay scales of the employees of the
High Court of Himachal Pradesh needs to be processed by the
State Government of Himachal Pradesh.
The Secretary (Home) vide letter             dated 05.04.2014
informed the High Court that the matter had been taken up with
the Finance Department which had observed that an additional
increment granted to the employees of the Subordinate Courts with
effect from 01.01.2012 does not constitute an anomaly in the pay
scales of employees of Himachal Pradesh High Court. However,
thereafter a detailed information was sought
(Home) on the following points:
by the Secretary
“(i)     It may be informed if there is any anomaly in the pay
H               scales     of employees of H.P. High Court vis-a-vis the
Subordinate Courts in Himachal Pradesh?
(ii)     Whether there is any anomaly in the pay scales of
employees of H.P. High Court with the equivalent posts in
the State Government?
(iii)    Details of categories in which anomaly exist vis-a-
vis the similar     category   of employees          in the State
26.         In response, the High Court invited the attention of the
Chief Secretary to the Government of Himachal Pradesh vide D.O.
dated 02.06.2014 regarding the long pending demand
grant of 20% and 10% hike and also informed that the information
sought vide communication dated 05.04.2014 was uncalled for as
the same had been supplied earlier.          However, despite this,
respondent No.1 issued a reminder in the matter for supply of the
information, though the same was already available with it.
However, the High Court again sent the required information vide
letter dated 06/10.09.2014.
It is further averred that the matter regarding the grant
of an additional pay was also discussed in the meeting of Hon’ble
the Chief Minister and Hon’ble the Chief Justice held on 30.10.2014
and it was resolved that the matter would be examined by the
State in consultation     with the Registry of the High               Court.
Thereafter, the High Court sent       a letter dated 18/20.12.2014
H   requesting the Chief Secretary to the Government of Himachal
Pradesh to take steps to examine the matter in consultation with
the Registry of this High Court. This was followed by another letter
dated 15/17.10.2015 wherein it was mentioned           that the Hon’ble
Chief Justice had already made recommendations which in terms
of the judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in P.D. Attri’s case
(supra) were not only required to be considered but due weightage
also required to be given by the Government.
As per further averments, it has been stated that the
High Court had been repeatedly taking up the matter with the State
the concerned Secretaries
Government, but to no avail. It was ultimately during the meeting of
of the State Government and the
Registrars of this High Court held on 12.05.2017, it was resolved
that a meeting of the representatives of the High Court and State
Government be held on 16.05.2017 to examine the issue regarding
20% hike in the pay scales of the employees of the High Court.
Accordingly, the meeting was held on 16.05.2017, but the
representation made by the High Court was turned down by the
29.         Now as regards     the State Government, it has been
sued through its Secretary (Home) and Secretary (Finance) and a
joint reply has been filed by them wherein a number of preliminary
H   submissions have been made and the same and similar grounds,
as were raised in the rejection order dated 19.12.2017 (Annexure
P-18) have been raised.
30.         On merits,    it has been averred that        20% hike         as
allowed by the Punjab and Haryana High Court is not a part of any
pay scale and, therefore, it needed a thorough examination at the
State Government level which has been done and it is thereafter it
was found that this extra financial benefit of 20% hike in the salaries
has no basis for allowing it to the H.P. High Court employees. It is
again reiterated that the Punjab and Haryana High Court is under
the control of Government of India being part of UT Administration
and not in the State of Punjab. In view of the existing rules, no case
for parity for granting any financial benefit to the H.P. High Court
employees with those of the employees of the Punjab and Haryana
does not arise as     there has been always a parity
amongst the employees of the H.P. High Court with the employees
of the H.P. Government/Secretariat and not with the employees of
the Punjab and Haryana High Court.
According to these respondents, the higher post in the
Subordinate Courts is the Superintendent Grade-I and Personal
Assistant to whom higher pay scales and special increment have
been granted      on the recommendations            of the Shetty Pay
H   Commission and, therefore, there is no question of the so-called
anomaly in the pay scales of incumbents of higher posts above
Superintendent    Grade-I/S.O./P.S. in the H.P. High Court.                It is
averred that the proposal as submitted by the High Court for grant
of increase in salaries is not based on any anomaly arisen between
the employees of the High Court and the Subordinate Courts and
since the employees of the High Court draw salaries at par with the
State Government, the question of parity also does not arise.
32.           Lastly, it has been    reiterated
that the High Court
employees having equivalence with the employees of the H.P.
Secretariat    are already getting
of  higher pay scales than the
Subordinate Judiciary employees due to allowing of                Secretariat
Pay/Special Pay.     The amount of      HSecretariat      Pay/Special Pay
along with Dearness Allowance is also countable for pensionary
benefits (due to which they are also getting higher amount of
as compared to their          counter-parts in Subordinate
Judiciary) and is much higher than the amount of special increment
allowed at the rate of 3% to the Subordinate Judiciary employees by
the Shetty Pay Commission.
33.           It is contended by Shri Sanjeev Bhushan, Senior
Advocate, assisted by Shri Piar Chand and Shri Sohail Khan,
Advocates, for the petitioner that the respondent-State has been
H   completely oblivious to the provisions contained in Article 229 of
the Constitution of India under which Hon’ble the Chief Justice of
the High Court has the prerogative powers to fix scales of pay of the
Officers and staff of the High Court and the Government has to
only allocate financial sanction thereof.
34.           On the other hand,       the learned Advocate General
would argue that no case is made out for interference as the
employees of the High Court have been placed at par with the
employees of the State Government and are getting the same pay
to the State Government employees.              The learned
Advocate General would further argue that in any case difference
in the pay scales being recommended by Hon’ble the Chief Justice
would create an anomaly.
On the other hand, Shri J.L. Bhardwaj, Senior Advocate,
assisted by Ms. Dhanvanti, Advocate, for the High Court
that the State    Government     was un-necessarily
frivolous objections by sending queries          which were
warranted under the law nor were required. These objections were
clearly beyond their jurisdiction as is clear from a plain reading of
Article 229 of the Constitution of India. He would further argue that
the State Government was required to give due deference to the
H   recommendations made by Hon’ble the Chief Justice and approved
the recommendations unless such approval has been granted as a
matter of course.
36.           We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and
have gone through the material placed on record.
37.         At the outset, it would be necessary to refer to Article
229 of the Constitution of India which reads as under:
“229. Officers and servants and the expenses of High
(1) Appointments of officers and servants of a High Court
shall be made by the Chief Justice of the Court or such other
Judge or officer of the Court as he may direct:
Provided that the Governor of the State may by rule require
that in such cases as may be specified in the rule no person
not already attached to the Court shall be appointed to any
office connected with the Court save after consultation with
the State Public Service Commission
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made by the
Legislature of the State, the conditions of service of officers
and servants of a High Court shall be such as may be
C    prescribed by rules made by the Chief Justice of the Court or
by some other Judge or officer of the Court authorised by the
Chief Justice to make rules for the purpose:
ig  h           Provided that the rules made under this clause shall, so far
as they relate to salaries, allowances, leave or pensions,
require the approval of the Governor of the State
(3) The administrative expenses of a High Court, including
H               all salaries, allowances and pensions payable to or in
respect of the officers and servants of the court, shall be
charged upon the Consolidated Fund of the State, and any
fees or other moneys taken by the Court shall form part of
that Fund.”
38.         The provisions of Article 229(2) of the Constitution of
India has been a subject-matter of interpretation by the Hon’ble
Supreme Court in its various judgments.
In M. Gurumoorthy vs. Accountant General, Assam
and Nagaland and others, (1971) 2 SCC 137, the Hon’ble
Supreme Court held that the Governors’ approval must be sought
to that extent the Government
because the finance has to be provided by the Government and
has to approve it.         The Hon’ble
Supreme Court further held that Hon’ble the Chief Justice has
exclusive powers under Clause (1) read with Clause (2) of Article
229 of the Constitution not only in the matter of appointments but
also with regard to prescribing the conditions of service of officers
and servants of a High Court and further held as under:
ig  h           “The unequivocal purpose and obvious intention of the
framers of the Constitution in enacting Article 229 is that in
the matter of appointments of officers and servants of a High
Court it is the Chief Justice or his nominee who is to be the
H               supreme authority and there can be no interference by the
executive except to the limited extent that is provided in the
Article. This was essentially to secure and maintain the
independence of the High Courts. The anxiety of the
constitution makers to achieve that object is fully shown by
putting the administrative expenses of a High Court
including all salaries, allowances and pension payable to or
in respect of officers and servants of the court at the same
level as the salaries and allowances of the judges of the
High Court nor can the amount of any expenditure so
charged be varied even by the legislature. Clause (1) read
with clause (2) of Article 229 confers exclusive power not
only in the matter of appointments but also with regard to
prescribing the conditions of service of officers and servants
of a High Court by Rules on the Chief Justice of the Court.
This is subject to any legislation by the State legislature but
only in respect of conditions of service. In the matter of
appointments even the legislature cannot abridge or modify
the powers conferred on the Chief Justice under clause (1).
The approval of the Governor, as noticed in the matter of
Rules, is confined only to such rules as relate to salaries,
allowances, leave or pension. All other rules in respect of
conditions of service do not require his approval.”
In State     of    Andhra Pradesh and Anr. vs. T.
Gopalakrishnan Murthi and others
Hon’ble Supreme Court         held that
(1976) 2 SCC 883, the
Government under Article 229 of the Constitution is not a formality
and further held as under:
“One should expect in the fitness and in view of the spirit
H               of Article 229 that ordinarily and generally the approval
should be accorded. But surely it is wrong to say that the
approval is a mere formality and in no case it is open to
the Government to refuse to accord their approval.”
41.         The Hon’ble Supreme Court in Employees Welfare
Association vs. Union of India and Another (1989) 4 SCC 187
held that when a Rule is framed by the Chief Justice, it should
ordinarily be approved since the rule has been framed by a very
high dignitary and should be looked upon with respect unless there
Supreme Court further held as under:
was a good reason for not approving the reasons and the Hon’ble
“So far as the Supreme Court and the High Courts are
concerned, the Chief Justice of India and the Chief Justice of
the concerned High Court, are empowered to frame rules
subject to this that when the rules are framed by the Chief
Justice of India or by the Chief Justice of the High Court
relating to salaries, allowances, leave or pensions, the
approval of the President of India or the Governor, as the
case may, is required. It is apparent that the Chief Justice of
India and the Chief Justice of the High Court have been
placed at a higher level in regard to the framing of rules
C   containing the conditions of service. It is true that the
President of India cannot be compelled to grant approval to
the rules framed by the Chief Justice of India relating to
ig  h          salaries, allowances, leave or pensions, but it is equally true
that when such rules have been framed by a very high
dignitary of the State, it should be looked upon with respect
and unless there is very good reason not to grant approval,
H              the approval should always be granted. If the President of
India is of the view that the approval cannot be granted, he
cannot straightway refuse to grant such approval, but before
doing so, there must be exchange of thoughts between the
President of India and the Chief Justice of India.”
42.        In the High Court of Judicature for Rajasthan vs.
Ramesh Chandra Paliwal and             Another (1998) 3 SSC 72, the
Hon’ble Supreme Court held as under:
“Since, under the Constitution, Chief Justice has also the
power to make rules regulating the conditions of service of
the officers and servants of the High Court, it is obvious that
he can also prescribe the scale of salary payable for a
particular post. This would also include the power to revise
the scale of pay. Since such a rule would involve finance, it
has been provided in the Constitution that it will require the
approval of the Governor which, in other words, means the
State Government. This Court in State of Andhra Pradesh &
Anr. vs. T. Gopalakrishnan Murthi & Ors. AIR 1976 SC 123 =
1976 (1) SCR 1008, had expressed the hope that "one
should accept in the fitness of things and in view of the spirit
C    of Article 229 that the approval, ordinarily and generally,
would be accorded." This was reiterated by this Court in
ig  h          Supreme Court Employees Welfare Association vs. Union of
187. We again reiterate the hope and feel that once the
Chief Justice, in the interest of High Court administration,
H              has taken a progressive step specially to ameliorate the
service conditions of the officers and staff working under him,
the State Government would hardly raise any objection to
the sanction of creation of posts or fixation of salary payable
for that post or the recommendation for revision of scale of
pay if the scale of pay of the equivalent post in the
Government has been revised.”
43.        The Hon’ble Supreme Court in State of Maharashtra
vs. Association of Court Stenos, P.A. P.S. and another (2002) 2
SCC 141 further held as under:
“Under the Constitution of India, appointment of officers and
servants of a High Court is required to be made by the Chief
Justice of the High Court or such other Judge or officer of the
Court as the Chief Justice directs. The Conditions of Service
of such officers and servants of the High Court could be
governed by a set of rules made by the Chief Justice of the
High Court and even the salaries and allowances, leave or
pension of such officers could be determined by a set of
rules to be framed by the Chief Justice, but so far as it
relates to salary and allowances etc., it requires approval of
the Governor of the State. This is apparent from the Article
229 of the Constitution. On a plain reading of Article 229(2),
C    it is apparent that the Chief Justice is the sole authority for
fixing the salaries etc of the employees of the High Court,
ig  h          subject to the rules made under the said Article. Needless to
mention, rules made by the Chief Justice will be subject to
the provisions of any law made by the Legislature of the
State. In view of proviso to sub-Article (2) of Article 229, any
H              rule relating to the salaries, allowances, leave or pension of
the employees of the High Court would require the approval
of the Governor, before the same can be enforced. The
approval of the Governor, therefore, is a condition precedent
to the validity of the rules made by the Chief Justice and the
so-called approval of the Governor is not on his discretion,
but being advised by the Government. It would, therefore, be
logical to hold that apart from any power conferred by the
Rules framed under Article 229, the Government cannot fix
the salary or authorise any particular pay scale of an
employee of the High Court.”
44.         Similar view was expressed by the Hon’ble Supreme.P
Court in the case of High Court Employees Welfare Association, .
Calcutta and others vs. State of W.B. and others (2004) 1 SCC
334. Further, in S.B. Vohra’s case (supra), the Hon’ble Supreme
Court held as under:                   H
“Independence of the High Court is an essential feature for
working of the democratic form of the Government in the
country. An absolute control, therefore, have been vested in
the High Court over its staff which would be free from
interference from the Government subject of course to the
limitations imposed by the said provision. There cannot be,
C    however, any doubt whatsoever that while exercising such a
power the Chief Justice of the High Court would only be
bound by the limitation contained in Clause 2 of the Article
ig  h           229 of the Constitution of India and the proviso appended
thereto. Approval of the President/Governor of the State is,
thus, required to be obtained in relation to the Rules
containing provisions as regard, salary, allowances, leave or
H               promotion. It is trite that such approval should ordinarily be
granted as a matter of course.”
45.         In light of the aforesaid judgments of the Hon’ble
Supreme Court, it is clear that the rules can be framed by Hon’ble
the Chief Justice with regard to conditions of service of employees,
officers of the High Court and the same are normally treated as final
and conclusive except with regard to salary, allowances, leave or
pension which require approval of his Excellency the Governor and
financial liability of the State.
the reasons for requiring such approval is the involvement of the
Article 229 (3) of the Constitution of India contemplates
that the administrative expenses of a High Court including salaries,
allowances and pensions payable to or in respect of the officers and
servants of the Court, shall be charged upon a Consolidated Fund of
the State and as per Article 203 of the Constitution, such
administrative expenses shall not be submitted to the vote of the
Legislative Assembly.      Obviously, this provision was incorporated
mainly to maintain the independence of the Judiciary. The Hon’ble
Supreme Court while interpreting the proviso to Article 229(2) of
the Constitution has held that the approval was required from his
Excellency the Governor in matters relating to salaries, allowances,
leave or pensions etc.
H   47.           The Hon’ble Supreme Court         further held         that his
Excellency the Governor cannot be compelled to grant approval,
but, further held that whenever Hon’ble the Chief Justice, who is a
very high dignitary of the State frames such rules, it should be
looked upon      with   respect unless there are      strong and cogent
reasons for not approving. The Hon’ble Supreme Court further went
on to say that if approval cannot be granted, his Excellency the
Governor could not straightway refuse to grant such approval, but
before doing so, there must be an exchange of thoughts between
the State Government and Hon’ble the Chief Justice of the High
As observed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in S.B.
essential feature for the working
Vohra’s case (supra) that the independence of the High Court is an
of the    democratic form of the
Government in the Country and that absolute control was vested in
the High Court over its staff which is free from interference from the
Government subject to the limitations imposed under the proviso.
C  The Hon’ble Supreme Court has categorically held that
the State Government is only required to grant approval with regard
to    the   salaries,   allowances,    leave    or    pension.
Government, however, cannot refuse to accord approval solely on
the ground that, if the pay scale is approved, it will cause financial
H   implications. If this ground is allowed to be taken, it will give a handle
to the State Government to deny approval on each and every
occasion whenever the matter comes up before it with regard to the
approval relating to the pay scales, salaries, allowances, leave,
pension etc. and the High Court would be saddled with a begging
bowl in its hands, which was never the intention of the framers of the
It is apparent that in order to maintain the independence
of the judiciary, the framers of the Constitution thought it wise and
expedient to make a provision as contained in Clause (3) of Article
229 of the Constitution. It is not sufficient for the State Government
to refuse to grant an approval on the strength of financial constraint.
In S.B. Vohra’s case (supra), the Hon’ble Supreme Court has held
that financial implications cannot be made a ground to disapprove
the rules. The Hon’ble Supreme Court held as under:
“It has to be further borne in mind that it is not always helpful
to raise the question of financial implications vis-a-vis the
C        effect of grant of a particular scale of pay to the officers of
the High Court on the ground that the same would have
ig  h               adverse effect on the other employees of the State. Scale of
pay is fixed on certain norms; one of them being the
quantum of work undertaken by the officers concerned as
well as the extent of efficiency, integrity etc. required to be
H                   maintained by the holder of such office. This aspect of the
matter has been highlighted by this Court in the case of the
judicial officers in All India Judges' Association v. Union of
India as well as the report of the Shetty Commission.”
Calcutta and Ors. vs. State of W.B. and Ors., (2004) 1 SCC 334,
(supra), the Hon’ble Supreme Court held as under:
“The Government will have to bear in mind the special nature
of the work done in the High Court which the Chief Justice
and his colleagues alone could really appreciate. If the
Government does not desire to meet the needs of the High
Court., the administration of the High Court will face severe
crisis.”
The Hon’ble Supreme Court, in the light of the aforesaid
decisions also held that before refusing to grant approval, there
should be an exchange of thoughts between the Chief Justice and
the State Government. In the present case, the Court finds that a
Committee was constituted comprising of officers of the High Court
and that of the State Government. A perusal of the minutes of this
High Power Committee indicates the narrow mindset of the State
Government. The only hurdle before the State Government appears
that the parity granted pursuant to the resolution of the Chief
Justices and the Chief Ministers in the year 1962 would be
disturbed, in the event a higher pay scale is granted and that, it
H   would also create financial problems. It is also apparent that the
State Government is insisting that the pay scale of the Class IV
employees should be similar to the pay scale of the Class IV
employees of the State Government.
53.         The Hon’ble Supreme Court in Supreme Court
Employees’ Welfare Association vs. Union of India and Another
1993 Supp (3) SCC 727 considered the question of grant of same
pay scales and benefits to the employees working in the Supreme
Court at par with the employees working in the Delhi High Court and
“15. It appears before the Committee on behalf of Ministry
of Finance an anomaly was pointed out which has been
stated as follows:
"(A) The Punjab High court pay scale of Rs. 400-600
extended to junior Clerks of the Delhi High court, w. e. f
January 1, 1978 had been fixed after absorbing the dearness
allowance calculated at C. P. I. 320.
(B) Even so, the dearness allowance was given to the Junior
clerks of Delhi High court at the central government rates
which had been calculated over and above the basic pay
C    fixed as on 1/01/1993 taking the then existing C. P. I. 200 as
(C) The Punjab High court pay scale of Rs. 300-430
ig  h           accorded to class IV employees of the Delhi High court was
again arrived at after absorbing the dearness allowance
calculated at C. P. I. 320 as on 1/01/1978 and even so the
dearness allowance was given to them at the central
H               government rates which was calculated over and above the
basic pay fixed on 1/01/1973 taking C. P. I. 200 as the basis.
(D) As a result their pay scales were higher than what was
legitimately   due   to    the   corresponding       posts     in    the
government of India and that had resulted in double payment
of dearness allowance for 120 points of C. P. I, and this had
resulted in an anomaly, namely, the Class IV employees of
the Delhi High court and of the Supreme court to whom
similar benefits were extended pursuant to the interim order
of this court were drawing a higher salary which works out to
rs 159 more as on 1/01/1978 and Rs. 308. 00 more as on
1/01/1986, compared with the salary accorded to Class IV
employees in the service of the central government and their
salary is even more than the pay of l. D. Cs. in central
government service.
(E) The Junior Clerks of the Delhi High court and of the
Supreme court to whom the pay scales of the Delhi High
court were extended pursuant to the interim order of this
court have been drawing a higher salary which works out to
Rs. 159. 00 more than the corresponding central government
employees as on 1/01/1978 and by Rs. 356. 00 as on
(F) That the confirming of similar pay scales to Junior Clerks
and class IV employees on the establishment of this court by
the rules to be made by the chief justice of India under Article
C  146 results in great disparity between the pay scales of the
corresponding posts under the central government and this
will constitute a ground for the central government
ig  h   employees to demand parity in the pay scales, i. e. pay
scales accorded to the corresponding employees of the
Delhi High ourt and the Supreme court and this will result in
H       enormous financial liability on the central government."
16. We first remove the anomaly in the recommendation
made by the committee in respect of the post of Private
Secretaries to the Registrars of the Supreme court and
which is the subject-matter of Interlocutory application No. 5
of 1992. The Committee in its recommendation has allowed
the pay scale of Rs. 3000-4500 in respect of the posts of
Section officer, Librarian, court Master and Sr. Assistant
Librarian but has recommended the pay scale to Private
secretary to the Registrar at Rs. 2300-3700. A perusal of the
pay scales as recommended by the Fourth pay Commission
itself at Item No.11 shows that the Section Officer, librarian,
Private secretary to the chief justice, Private secretary to the
Judges, Private secretary to Registrar, court Master, and Sr.
Assistant librarian have been given the pay scale of Rs.
2300-3700. This clearly shows that the post of Private
secretary to Registrar was kept equivalent to the other posts
of Section Officer, court Master etc., as already mentioned
above and fixed in the same pay scale of Rs. 2300-3700.
The committee of Judges have recommended the increased
pay scale of Rs 3000-4500 in case of Section Officer,
Librarian, court Master and Sr. Assistant Librarian who were
fixed in the pay scale of Rs. 2300-3700 by the Fourth Pay
Commission. The post of Private secretary to the Registrar
being also in the pay scale of Rs. 2300-3700 should be
C  entitled to the pay scale of Rs. 3000-4500. It may also be
noted that even on 1/01/1986 from which date the
recommendations of the Fourth Pay Commission has been
ig  h   made to be effective. Private secretary to Registrar was in
the same pay scale of Rs. 775-1200 as given to Section
Officer, Librarian, Private secretary to the chief justice,
H       Private secretary to the Judges, court master and Sr.
Assistant Librarian. Thus in the circumstances mentioned
above when all the other officers who were in the pay scale
of Rs. 775- 1200 as on 1/01/1986 and fixed in the pay scale
of Rs. 2300-3700 even by the Fourth Pay Commission have
been recommended the pay scale of Rs. 3000-4500 by the
Committee of Judges, the Private secretary to the Registrar
has also become entitled to the same pay scale of Rs.3000-
4500. The Interlocutory Application No. 5 of 1992 in Writ
petition (Civil) No. 801 of 1986 stands disposed of in the
manner indicated above.
17. Taking the recommendations of the Committee of Judges
as a base, we would now dispose of the other interim
applications mentioned above. In Interlocutory Application
No. 4 of 1992 filed by the Junior 3 stenographers it has been
contended that the Junior Clerks of Delhi High court have
been fixed in the pay scale of Rs. 1350-2200 from January I,
1986. By an order of this court dated 18/04/1991 the Junior
Clerks of this court have also been granted a similar pay
scale of Rs. 1350-2200, w. e. f. 1/01/1986. It has been
submitted that the post of Junior stenographer is a
promotional post from Junior Clerks. In the Third Pay
commission the Junior Stenographers were fixed in the pay
scale of Rs 330-560 which was also the pay scale of Senior
Clerks. So far as the junior Clerks are concerned they were
C  fixed in the pay scale of Rs. 260- 400 by the Third Pay
Commission.    The    Committee     of    Judges       have
recommended the pay scale of Rs. 1400-2300 to the Junior
ig  h   Stenographers treating them at par with Senior Clerks of this
court who are equivalent to upper Division Clerks of the
Delhi High court. It has been contended on behalf of the
H       Junior Stenographers that they are also entitled to the pay
scale of Rs. 1400-2300 as already recommended by the
Committee. We find force in the above contention. The
Senior Clerks of this court have been treated equivalent to U.
D. Cs. of Delhi High court who have been allowed the pay
scale of Rs.1400-2300 and the Junior Stenographers being
treated at par with the Senior Clerks of this court have been
rightly placed by the Committee in the pay scale of Rs. 1400-
2300. It may also be noted that the Junior Clerks have
already been allowed the pay scale of Rs 1350-2200 and as
such the Junior Stenographers of this court, who are on a
higher post than the Junior Clerks, are entitled to the pay
scale of Rs. 1400-2300 as recommended by the Committee
of Judges. The interlocutory Application No. 4 of 1992 in Writ
Petition (Civil) No. 801 of 1986 filed by the Junior
Stenographers stands disposed of in the manner indicated
above.
18. As regards Interlocutory Application No. 3 of 1992 in Writ
petition (Civil) No. 801 of 1986 filed by the Supreme court
Employees welfare Association it has been prayed that in
view of the order passed by the High court of Delhi directing
payment of the pay scale of Rs. 3000- 4500, w. e. f.
1/01/1986 to the court Masters, Superintendents and other
categories of employees of the said court, the staff holding
corresponding posts in this court should also be allowed the
C  aforesaid pay scales by way of interim measure till the rules
are framed under Article 146 of the Constitution.
19.   It may be worthwhile to note that the Committee of
ig  h   Judges have already recommended the pay scale of rs
3000-4500 in the case of section Officer, Librarian, court
Master, Sr. Assistant Librarian to bring them at par with the
H       incumbents holding corresponding posts of superintendent,
Librarian and Court Master in the Delhi High court. The
committee of Judges have also recommended new pay
scale of Rs. 3300-4800 in case of the posts of Assistant
Registrar, Principal Private secretary to the chief justice of
India, Assistant Editor, Supreme court reports, Chief
Librarian, Assistant Registrar-cum-Private secretary to the
chief Justice of India, Assistant Registrar-cum-Private
secretary to the judges and Assistant Registrar-cum-Private
secretary to the Registrar- general of this court. The said
new pay scale has been recommended in view of the fact
that the lower post of Section Officer, Librarian, court Master
and Sr. Assistant Librarian have been fixed in the pay scale
of Rs.3000-4500. It is needless to mention that in the
aforesaid category of posts for which the pay scale of Rs.
3000-4500 has been recommended, one more category of
Private secretary to Registrar shall be added which have
already been dealt above while disposing of Interlocutory
application No. 5 of 1992. Thus we direct that the
recommendation made by the Committee of Judges for
granting the pay scale of Rs. 3000-4500 and a new pay
scale of Rs.3300-4800 for the posts mentioned therein may
be given by way of interim measure from the month of March
1993 subject to the rules made by the chief justice of India
under Article 146 of the Constitution.
C  20. It may be noted that the Delhi High court by order dated
14/11/1991 in Writ Petition No. 2756 of 1991 had allowed the
pay scale of Rs. 3000-4500 from 1/01/1986 to the court
ig  h   Masters, and Superintendents of Delhi High court and the
Special Leave Petitions no. 2594 of 1992 filed against the
judgment of the High court having been dismissed on
H       25/03/1992 by this court and the same having become final,
the employees in the Supreme court are justified in claiming
the pay scale of Rs. 3000-4500 from 1/01/1986. Same is the
position in the case of Junior Stenographer. The Chief
Justice may consider and if deem appropriate direct that the
payment of arrears can be made by deposit of the whole
arrears or part in General Provident Fund or by way of
suitable instalments as the case may be by taking note of the
financial involvement in consultation with the government.
We are making it clear that we are not giving any direction in
this regard and the chief Justice while framing the rules
under Article 146 ofthe Constitution shall be free to consider
and pass appropriate orders as regards the arrears.
Interlocutory Application Nos. 2 and 3 in Writ Petition (Civil)
above.
No. 801 of 1986 stand disposed of in the manner indicated
21. Interlocutory Application No. 2 of 1992 in Writ Petition
(Civil) no. 1201 of 1986 has been filed by the Supreme court
Class IV employees Welfare Association claiming the pay
scale of Rs. 975-1660 as allowed to such employees by the
Delhi High court vide its judgment dated 4/11/1991 in Civil
Writ No. 3464 of 1990. The Committee of Judges have
recommended the aforesaid pay scale to Peon, Farash and
safaiwala employed in the Supreme court fixing them at par
with corresponding post of Peon, Farash and Sweeper in the
C  Delhi High court. The Committee of Judges have also
recommended the new and higher pay scale of Rs. 1000-
1750 to Daftry and Jamadar employed in the Supreme a
ig  h   court in view of the fact that these posts are promotional
posts and are entitled to higher pay scale as the lower pay
scale of Rs. 975-1660 has been recommended to Peon,
H       Farash and Safaiwala. We direct that the pay scales as
recommended by the Committee of Judges may be given
from the month of March 1993 by way of interim measure. It
may be noted that the Union of India has already filed
special leave petition under Article 136 of the Constitution
before this court against the decision of the Delhi high court
dated 4/11/1991 passed in Civil Writ Petition No. 3464 of
1990. The said special leave petition is still pending for
consideration. We, therefore, direct that the grant of the
above-mentioned pay scales of Rs. 975-1660 to the Peon,
Frash and Safaiwala and the pay scale of Rs. 1000-1750 to
Daftry and Jamadar from March 1993 shall be subject to the
decision of the special leave petition filed by the Union of
India against the judgment of Delhi High court dated
4/11/1991. This disposes of the Interlocutory Application No.
2 of 1992 in Writ petition (Civil) No. 1201 of 1986. As regards
arrears from January I, 1986 the chief justice shall pass
appropriate orders.
22. It has been mentioned in the report submitted by the
Committee of judges that in view of the constraints of the
interim orders passed by this court from time to time the
Committee has recommended that the Chief justice of India
can make rules under Article 146 of the Constitution of India
if the limitations of the interim orders are lifted by the court
on the judicial side. We consider the oppositeness of such
C    recommendation made by the Committee. We therefore,
make it clear that the Chief Justice of India is free to make
rules in exercise of powers under Article 146 of the
ig  h          constitution of India without any constraint and irrespective of
any interim orders passed on 25/07/1986, 14/08/1986,
14/11/1986 and 5/01/1987.
H              23. With the above observations we dispose of all the
interlocutory applications as mentioned above.”
54.        It was by virtue      of judicial pronouncement that the
Hon’ble Supreme Court in the aforesaid judgment granted benefit
to the employees working in the Supreme Court at par with the
employees, who were working in the High Court at Delhi. In the
matter of payment of salary, the Hon’ble Supreme Court further
observed that there did not appear to be any justification that the
holders of the corresponding posts in the High Court of Delhi were
getting scales of pay pursuant to the orders aforesaid, however,
those scales could not be denied to the corresponding posts of
the Hon’ble Supreme Court till the rules came into force.
At this stage, it may be observed that it is not only the
employees of Delhi, Punjab and Haryana High Courts alone, but
even the employees working in Gujarat, Karnataka and Madras High
Courts where the employees are getting a hike pursuant to the
judicial pronouncements.
As regards the question of parity of pay of the staff of
the High Court being at par with the District Judiciary pursuant to
the recommendations of the Shetty Pay Commission, the question
is no longer res integra and has been decided in favour of the staff
of the High Court in view of the judgments delivered by the various
High Courts. (Refer: Adeline Rodrigues and others vs. State of
H   Maharashtra and others (2013) 5 AIR Bombay 1207 : (2013) 6
Maharashtra Law Journal 14, State of West Bengal and others
vs. The High Court Employees’ Welfare Association and others
Association and others vs. State of Tripura and others                in Writ
Petition (Civil)   Case No.71 of 2015, decided on 11.08.2016,
Kishan Pilley and others vs.         State of Madhya Pradesh and
others in Writ Petition No. 7058 of 2016, decided on 28.04.2017,
Kumar vs. High Court of Kerala, Writ Petition (Civil) 30000 of
2016, decided on 09.01.2018).
But, this is only a secondary issue as the main issue is
with regard to recommendations made by Hon’ble the Chief Justice
of this High Court calling upon the respondents to issue necessary
notification    ou
bringing about    parity in the    pay scales of            the
employees of this High Court with their counter parts in the Punjab
and Haryana High Court on the basis of the judgment rendered in
Hari Mohan Dixit’s case (supra).
Surprisingly, the State Government has rejected the
ground    of parity    of the employees     working in the Himachal
Pradesh High Court with that of the Punjab and Haryana High Court
by claiming that there is no such parity that too without assigning
H   any reason whatsoever. The State has not given any reasons why
the High Court employees of the State cannot be granted upgraded
pay scales at par with the High Court of Punjab and Haryana. They
have not even made any comparison between the nature of duties
discharged by the employees          of the High Court of Himachal
Pradesh with other High Court employees to get scales of pay at
par with the employees of the Punjab and Haryana High Court. The
respondent-State was duty bound to reach at a decision by taking
taken into account
into account the relevant considerations and should not have
the wholly irrelevant and extraneous
considerations.
The State has clearly misdirected themselves on a point
of law, more particularly, being completely oblivious
provisions contained in Article 229 of the Constitution of India.
It is not the answer that the official respondents acted
bonafide or that they bestowed         painstaking consideration.
reasons as given by the official respondents are not good reasons
as the relevant factors have been kept out of consideration and
irrelevant considerations    were made the basis           of the decision
61.         As regards the applicability of the judgment                 of the
Hon’ble Supreme Court in P.D. Attri’s case (supra), admittedly, the
H   claim of the employees therein was not based on any constitutional
or any other legal provisions whereby they could claim parity with
the posts similarly designated in Punjab for grant of pay scales from
the same date. It was in that background that the Hon’ble Supreme
Court had observed as under:
“5. The case of the respondents is not based on any
Constitutional or any other legal provisions when they claim
parity with the posts similarly designated in the Punjab &
Haryana High Court and their pay-scales from the same
date. They do not allege any violation of any Constitutional
provision or any other provision of law. They say it is so
because of "accepted policy and common practice" which
according to them are undisputed. We do not think we can
import such vague principles while interpreting the provisions
of law. India is a union of States. Each State has its own
individualistic way of governance under the Constitution.
One State is not bound to follow the rules and regulations
applicable to the employees of the other State or if it had
adopted the same rules and regulations, it is not bound to
follow every change brought in the rules and regulations in
the other State. The question then arises before us is if the
C  State of Himachal Pradesh has to follow every change
brought in the States of Punjab & Haryana in regard to the
rules and regulations applicable to the employees in the
ig  h   States of Punjab & Haryana. The answer has to be in
negative. No argument is needed for that as anyone having
basic knowledge of the Constitution would not argue
H       otherwise. True, the State as per "policy and practice" had
been adopting the same pay-scales for the employees of the
High Court as sanctioned from time to time for the
employees of the Punjab & Haryana High Court and it may
even now follow to grant pay-scales but is certainly not
bound to follow. No law commands it to do so.
6.     The State of Punjab was reorganised into States of
Punjab, Haryana and Himachal Pradesh, to begin with, was
a Union Territory and was given the status of full statehood in
1970. Since employees of the composite States of Punjab
were taken in various Departments of the State of Himachal
Pradesh in order to safeguard the seniority, pay-scales etc.,
the State of Himachal Pradesh followed the Punjab pattern
of pay-scales. After attaining the status of full statehood,
High Court of Himachal Pradesh formulated its own rules
and regulations for its employees. It adopted the pattern of
Punjab & Haryana High Court rules of their employees.
When Punjab & Haryana High Court gave effect to certain
portion of its Rules from 25.9.1985 by notification dated
23.1.1986 as a result of which redesignation of the posts of
Senior Translators and Junior Translators were equated to
the posts in Punjab Civil Secretariat, the Himachal Pradesh
High Court similar effect was given to in its rules for its
employees. When the Punjab & Haryana High Court gave
effect to those rules from 23.1.1975, the State Government
C  did not agree to the recommendations of the Chief Justice of
the Himachal Pradesh High Court to follow the same suit. It
is true that till now, Himachal Pradesh High Court has been
ig  h   following the rules applicable to the employees of the Punjab
& Haryana High Court and it may go on following those rules
as may be amended by the Punjab & Haryana High Court
H       from time to time, but certainly it is not bound to so follow. No
law commands the State Government to follow the rules
applicable to the employees of the Punjab & Haryana High
Court to the employees of the Himachal Pradesh High Court.
That being the position, it is not necessary for us to examine
different qualifications for appointment to the posts of Senior
Translators and Junior Translators that may exist between
Punjab & Haryana High Court and the Himachal Pradesh
High   Court    and    also   as     to    the    mode       of    their
recruitment/placement in the service. Moreover, any change
in the pay- scales following Punjab & Haryana High Court
can set in motion chain reaction for other employees which
may give rise to multiplicity of litigation among various
categories of employees. Rules of each High Court have to
be examined independently. There cannot be any such law
that Himachal Pradesh High Court has to suo motu follow
the same rules as applicable to the employees working in the
Thus, what has been stated by the Hon’ble Supreme
Court is that one State is not bound to follow the rules and
regulations applicable to the employees of another State since the
budget sanction or allocation to a particular head differ from State
to State. Moreover, the Central Government has more resources of
its own. Hence, the granting of benefits by the Central Government
cannot be compared with that of the States.
63.          The ratio of the judgment in P.D. Attri’s case (supra) is
not at all applicable to the facts of the instant case, more particularly,
H   when the recommendations in the instant case have been made in
exercise of the powers vested with Hon’ble the Chief Justice under
Article 229 of the Constitution of India and as mentioned above the
recommendations so made are based upon a judgment in Hari
Mohan Dixit’s case (supra). Here, the petitioner is not simply
claiming parity with its counter parts in the Punjab and Haryana High
Court, but is armed with the judgment rendered by the Punjab and
Haryana High Court in Hari Mohan Dixit’s case (supra) and hosts
of other judgments already referred to hereinabove.
Thus, from the above stated factual and legal position,
it is quite evident that the decision making process while passing
order (Annexure P-19) suffers from non-consideration of material
and official respondents have otherwise considered the material
which was wholly irrelevant. The said decision, therefore, cannot
withstand judicial scrutiny.
In the instant case, report of the Hon’ble Committee
was placed before Hon’ble the Chief Justice for consideration and
orders and Hon’ble the Chief Justice recommended the same in its
powers conferred upon him under Article 229 of the Constitution of
India.   Since, no rules were   framed under Article 229(2) of the
Constitution of India relating to     the conditions of service of
employees of      the Himachal Pradesh High Court, therefore, in
H   absence of a statutory rule, the proposal itself has to be treated as
a rule within the meaning of Article 229(2) of the Constitution of
66.          In coming to such conclusion, we are duly supported
and fortified by the Full Bench decision of the Bombay High Court
in the case of Chandrakant Sakharam Karkhanis and others vs.
State of Maharashtra and others, AIR 1977 Bombay 193 wherein
it has been held as follows:
“31-32…….Circulars, Orders or Resolutions or parts thereof
laying down the rules or principles of general application,
which have to be observed in the recruitment or fixation of
seniority of Government servants generally or a particular
class of them, and which have been duly authenticated by a
signature under the endorsement "By order and in the name
of the Governor of Maharashtra" and intended to be
applicable straightway are or amount to the rules framed in
exercise of the powers conferred under the proviso to Article
309 of the Constitution of India, although the said Circulars,
Orders or Resolutions do not expressly state that the same
are made or issued in exercise of the powers conferred
under the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India
C     and are not published in the Government Gazette.”
In view of the aforesaid discussion, even a                   letter,
memorandum or circular so issued on behalf of Hon’ble the Chief
Justice of the High Court to the State Government is essentially
required to be treated as the one issued in exercise of the powers
H   under Article 229 of the Constitution of India.
68.          Here, it would be apposite to take note of the Division
Bench judgment of the       Gujarat High Court in the case of High
Court of Gujarat vs. K.K. Parmer 1992 (2) GLH (DB) 379 wherein
it was held that Article 229 (2) of the Constitution of India nowhere
prescribes or indicates any particular form in which the rule should
be framed nor does it prescribe any formality required to be gone
through. Even though the decision is not expressed in the form or
in words in which the rule is framed or an order is issued, the same
amounts to a rule framed in exercise of the powers conferred
under Article 229(2) of the Constitution of India.
At this stage, it would also be necessary to take note
of a decision of the Division Bench of the Karnataka High Court in
Writ Appeal No. 4411 of 2011 case titled Nijaguni vs. The High
Court of Karnataka and another, decided on 12.10.2011, wherein
it was held that the recommendatory letter with model pay scale
attached thereto by way of an annexure in itself is to be taken as a
rule and the Government is required to act on the same as if it was
rule framed by Hon’ble the Chief Justice in exercise of the
powers under Article 229(2) of the Constitution of India.
70.          This decision of the Karnataka High Court was also
affirmed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Civil Appeal No. 5914-
H   5915 of 2012     case titled State of Karnataka vs. Nijaguni and
others vide order dated 18.11.2015 which reads as thus:
“1. These appeals are directed against the judgment(s)
and order(s) passed by the High Court          of Karnataka at
Bangalore in Writ     Appeal No. 4411 of 2011, dated
12.10.2011 and Review Petition No. 63 of 2012, dated
2.         We have heard learned counsel for the parties to
the lis.
After going through the judgment(s) and order (s)
passed by the High Court and the material available on
record we see no infirmity in the impugned judgment(s) and
Appeals are dismissed.
order(s) passed by the High Court. Accordingly, the Civil
As a sequel to the above, the interim stay granted
by this Court on 13.08.2012 stands vacated.
Application(s) for impleadment are dismissed.”
The Division Bench of the Karnataka High Court after
elaborate consideration of the rival submissions held that in spite of
the recommendations made by Hon’ble the Chief Justice of the High
Court of Karnataka way back on 06.10.2004, the Government had
not taken any steps to implement the recommendations. It was
also held that the recommendations of Hon’ble the Chief Justice of
the High Court should         ordinarily be approved by the State and
refusal thereof must be for strong and adequate reasons and one
H   cannot treat the same lightly.
72.          After concluding so, the Division Bench of the High
Court allowed the writ appeal and set aside the order passed by
the learned single Judge on 12.10.2011. It needs to be noticed that
despite the orders of the Hon’ble Supreme Court dismissing the
appeal filed by the State of Karnataka, Contempt Petitions in C.C.C.
(Civil) Nos. 1241 and 1244 of 2016 were filed before the Division
Bench of the Karnataka High Court.
The Division Bench of the Karnataka High Court vide
its order dated 14.07.2017 held that the State Government had not
to    drop the   contempt
complied with the order dated 12.10.2011 and, therefore, refused
proceedings.      Even this        order dated
14.07.2017 was again unsuccessfully assailed by the Government
of Karnataka before the Hon’ble Supreme Court.
The Hon’ble Supreme Court vide its order                    dated
18.09.2017 not only dismissed the SLP, but also directed the State
Government to accordingly implement         the order of the Division
Bench of the Karnataka High Court within a period of four months.
It was pursuant to these orders that the State Government
thereafter issued   a government order on 11.01.2018 conferring
Central Government Pay Scales to the employees of the State of
Karnataka. Similar benefits have already been extended to the
H   employees of the Punjab and Haryana High Court pursuant to the
directions passed by the learned single Judge in the case of Hari
Mohan Dixit’s case (supra).
75.          Moreover, there is nothing on record to suggest that the
recommendations made by Hon’ble the Chief Justice were in any
way arbitrary or that the relevant factors have not been considered.
76.          The Hon’ble Chief Justice asked the High Court to
recommend the grant of benefits to the employees of the High
the State Government. Therefore, in such circumstances,
Court and asked the concerned Registry to take up the matter with
recommendations made by Hon’ble the Chief Justice of the High
Court cannot be said to be without application of mind.
The respondents appear to have been totally oblivious
of the fact that it was the Hon’ble Supreme Court that in the case of
State of Maharashtra vs. Association of Stenographers AIR
2002 SC 555 had directed the Registrar General of the Supreme
Court to issue a circular that the High Courts can have their own
pay scales to its employees after considering the special nature of
their duties and functions.
78.          The State Government further appears to have been
totally oblivious to the fact that it is Hon’ble the Chief Justice and
the Hon’ble companion Judges of the High Court, who are better
H   equipped to assess the requirements of the High Court staff and
servants.   The decision      so taken by Hon’ble      the Chief Justice
cannot be lightly discarded or sidelined. Moreover, the High Court
staff and servants render the services which are quite different from
the services rendered      by the staff of the Secretariat.          Further,
neither the High Court staff/servants nor Secretariat staff can, as a
matter of right, demand increase in salary. This power to pay
pension, allowance and leave is vested with Hon’ble                    the Chief
Justice of the High Court for the staff and servants.
As far as the nature of duties and responsibilities
shouldered by the staff of the State Secretariat and the High Court
are concerned,                    vast difference.         Unlike, the State
Secretariat, the staff of the High CourtH          have to strive hard to
accomplish the given task as is other contended by the learned
Senior Counsel for the petitioner.          This submission needs to be
considered and analyzed to arrive at an appropriate decision. The
duty hours of the staff of the High Court normally and invariably
get stretched and extended to odd hours and they are more often
than not required to work till late in the night.
80.          It is needless to mention that most of the
assigned to the staff of the High Court                  is required to be
accomplished and/or completed in a time bound manner and cannot
H   be delayed. Such nature of work is required to be discharged by
the employees        of the High Court from the date of                         the
commencement        of their service till    their retirement.        Therefore,
when a comparison is made between the nature of the work
discharged by the staff of the Judiciary on the whole with that of the
staff of the State Secretariat, there is vast difference. Therefore,
fixation of same scale of pay to the staff of the State Secretariat
and the staff of the High Court is not warranted taking into account
the peculiar nature
Noticeably, a similar contention was raised before the
it was contended             that the
employees of the various High Courts draw wages and pay scales
equivalent to the Central Government employees or even more.
The comparative statement produced by the employees was also
reproduced in the judgment of the Division Bench of the Karanataka
High Court. On comparing the scale of pay as also the nature of
work and responsibilities and the working hours of the employees of
the High Court of Karnataka, the Division Bench held that the work
that is required to be turned out by the employees of the High Court,
more particularly, the Senior Judgment Writers, Judgment Writers,
Stenographers etc. is not only time bound but the employees of
H   the High Court are made to work beyond normal office hours.
82.          All these aspects of the matter have been eloquently set
out and dealt with by the Division Bench of the Madras High Court
in R.N. Arul Jothi and others         vs. Principal Secretary              to
and another 2020 Labour and Industrial Cases 3324, when the
Madras High Court proceeded to observe as under:-
“76. In the order of refusal dated 29.01.2019, which is
challenged in WP No. 21586 of 2019, the Government has
mainly reiterated that the revision of pay scales of the staff of
the Madras High Court is always determined in the Pay
Commission/Pay Panels. It was also reasoned that the
revision of pay of the staff of the Madras High Court was
recently given effect to on the basis of the recommendations
made by the Official Committee constituted for the purpose
of giving effect to the Seventh Pay Commission. While so,
any change in the revision of pay of the members of the staff
of the High Court, will have a spiraling and cascading effect
on the pay scale of the staff of the State Secretariat as well
as other Departments of the Government. It was also
C    reasoned that the pay structure of the staff members of the
Madras High Court cannot be compared with the Delhi High
Court, where the pay structure is different and the expenses
ig  h          of which are borne by the Central Government, which has its
own resources at its command. Thus, it is evident that the
order of rejection mainly proceeds on the footing that the
revision of scale of pay, if effected to the staff of the Madras
H              High Court, will have a spiralling and cascading effect on the
pay scales of the staff of the Secretariat and other wings of
the Department and it will lead to multiplicity of claims by
others. This reason in the impugned order cannot be
accepted for more than one reason. First of all, the
comparison between the scale of pay between the staff of
the High Court and the State Secretariat, cannot be made.
The nature of work discharged by the staff of the High Court
is not akin to or comparable with the nature of work
discharged by the members of the State Secretariat. This
has been reiterated time and again by this Court as well as
the Honourable Supreme court. In one of the decisions
rendered by the Honourable Supreme Court in the case of
SAIL vs. Dibyendu Bhattacharya, 2011 11 SCC 122, it was
held by the Honourable Supreme Court that granting parity in
pay scales depends upon the comparative evaluation of job
and equation of posts. It was also held in that judgment that
the functions may be the same, but the skills and
responsibilities may be really and substantially different.
Since the Chief Justice of the High Court is better
equipped to assess the requirements of High Court staff
and servants, the decision taken by the Chief Justice of
the High Court cannot be ignored by citing the spiralling
and cascading effect. The High Court staff and servants
render service which are quite different from the service
C  rendered by the staff of the Secretariat. Further, neither
the High Court staff/ servants nor Secretariat staff can,
as a matter of right, demand increase in salary.
ig  h   Constitutionally, the power to fix pay, allowance,
pension, leave etc., is vested with the Chief Justice of
the High Court for the staff and servants. The framers of
H       the Constitution, have in their wisdom, bestowed the
powers to fix salary and allowance of such staff and
servants by Rules with the Chief Justice of the High
77. As far as the nature of duties and responsibilities
shouldered by the staff of the State Secretariat and the
High Courts, there is a vast difference. It is the
contention of the learned Senior Counsel appearing for
the petitioners that unlike the State Secretariat, the staff
of the High Courts have to strive hard to accomplish the
given task. This submission of the learned Senior
Counsel appearing for the petitioners needs to be
considered and analysed to arrive at appropriate
decision. The duty hours of the staff of the High Court
normally get stretched and extended to odd hours and
they are required to work quite often till late in the night.
It is needless to mention that most of the work assigned
to the staff of the Madras High Court, are to be
accomplished and/or completed in a time-bound manner
and it cannot be delayed. Such nature of work is
required to be discharged by the employees in the High
Court from the date of commencement of their service
till their retirement. Therefore, when a comparison is
made between the nature of work discharged by the
staff of the Judiciary on the whole, with the staff of the
C  State Secretariat, there is vast difference. Therefore,
fixation of same scale of pay to the staff of the State
Secretariat and the staff of the High Court, is not
ig  h   warranted taking into account the peculiar nature of
work expected out of the staff of the Judiciary. It is in the
light of the above traits and characteristic, the Staff
H       Grievance Committee made a comparison of the pay
scale prevailing among the staff of the various High
Courts and not among the staff of the various State
Secretariat. The Staff Grievance Committee has also
concluded that the pay pattern prevailing in the Delhi
High Court is suitable for being adopted to the staff of
the Madras High Court and accordingly, a report was
filed before the Honourable Chief Justice of Madras High
83.         Earlier to that the Karnataka High Court while dealing
with the similar issue drew up a comparative statement produced
by the employees which was also reproduced in the judgment. On.
comparing the scales of pay as also the
of            nature of work and
responsibilities and working hours of the employees of the High
Court of Karnataka, the Division Bench held that the work that is
required to be turned out by the employees of the High Court, more
particularly, the Senior Judgment writers, Judgment Writers,
Stenographers etc., is not only time-bound and even the employees
of the High Court are made to work beyond the normal office hours.
These observations have been applied by the Madras High Court
and the same squarely apply to the facts and circumstances of the
instant case also.
84.         We otherwise see no reason why the State Government
should not follow the      pattern of pay of the Delhi High Court.
H   After-all, prior to establishment of the present High Court on 25 th
January, 1971,       on   attainment    of   statehood,      it   was      being
administered by the Delhi High Court, Himachal Bench, at Shimla
and earlier to that the Punjab High Court. This is evident from the
history of the High Court of Himachal Pradesh as given in the
official website, the relevant portion whereof reads as under:
“The Princely States in Pre Independence India had different
systems of Administration and set of laws. In most of the
Princely States, the administration was run on the whims of
the Rulers or the Wazirs and their saying were considered to
be the law. Himachal Pradesh was formed as a result of
integration of 26 Shimla and 4 Punjab hill States into a
Centrally Administered Area on April 15, 1948. On 1 st April,
1954, the parts of Bilaspur were also merged with Himachal
Pradesh having its Headquarters at Shimla, which was
headed by the Chief Commissioner. The first Chief
Commissioner was Mr. N.C. Mehta and he was assisted by
his deputy Mr. E. Penderal Moon, ICS. On September 30,
1948, an advisory council was formed for the advice of the
Chief Commissioner for administrative functions. The Central
Government promulgated the Himachal Pradesh (Courts)
Order, 1948 on 15th August, 1948. As per Paragragh 3 of
C  this Order, the Court of Judicial Commissioner was
established for Himachal Pradesh and the Court was housed
ig  h   at "Harvingtan" (Kelston area, Shimla). It was vested with the
powers of a High Court under the Judicial Commissioner's
Court Act, 1950. Besides the Court of Judicial Commissioner,
two Courts of District and Sessions Judges and 27
H       subordinate Courts were also set up. The Court of Judicial
commissioner started functioning on August 15, 1948 and in
the same year, two Courts of District and Sessions Judges
were also established. The Punjab High Court rules and
orders with suitable amendments were made applicable to
the courts in Himachal Pradesh. On April 29, 1967, two more
District and Sessions Judges Courts for Shimla and Kangra
were established. However in the year 1966, the Delhi High
Court Act was enacted by the Government of India w.e.f.
May 1, 1967. The Central Government of India extended the
operation of the said Act to the Union Territory of Himachal
functioning   in   old   High    Court
Pradesh, replacing the Court of Judicial Commissioner by
the Himachal Bench of Delhi High Court, at Shimla. It started
building.     known      as
"Ravenswood". At that time, Hon'ble Mr. Justice K. S. Hegde
was the Chief Justice of the Delhi High Court. Hon'ble Mr.
Justice S. K. Kapoor and Hon'ble Mr. Justice Hardayal Hardy
constituted the first circuit bench of the Delhi High Court
which held Court at Ravenswood (Shimla). Himachal
Pradesh attained Statehood in the year, 1971, and
established its own High Court with Headquarters at
"Ravenswood", Shimla, having one Hon'ble Chief Justice
and two Hon'ble Judges. The first Chief Justice of the High
Court of Himachal Pradesh was Hon'ble Mr. Justice M. H.
Beg and the other two Hon'ble Judges were Hon'ble Mr.
C    Justice D. B. Lal and Hon'ble Mr. Justice C. R. Thakur.”
Thus, the comparison of the pay pattern is among the
various High Courts in this Country. The nature of duties discharged
by the employees     of High Court        is different     and it cannot be
H   compared with the duties and responsibilities shouldered by the
employees     in the State Secretariat or other Departments of the
86.         Therefore, in such circumstances, the endeavour of the
State in trying to draw a parity in the nature and duties of the
employees     of the High Court vis-a-vis the employees of the
Secretariat and other Departments, while rejecting the case of the
petitioner, cannot be accepted and is rejected being devoid of any
merit.
The recommendations of Hon’ble the Chief Justice are
required to be placed for approval of His Excellency the Governor
of Himachal Pradesh and the same should not have been rejected
unless there are strong and cogent reasons for refusal of the same.
A decision on the scales of pay to be granted to the
employees of the High Court ignoring the recommendations of
Hon’ble the Chief Justice is completely impermissible going by the
decision of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in S.B.Vohra’s case (supra).
We have no hesitation in holding that the consideration of the claim
of the employees of the High Court as if they were the employees
of the component departments of the Government is completely
unsustainable and bad in law.
89.         We are of the considered view that the Chief Secretary
to the Government of Himachal Pradesh ought to have placed the
H   recommendations of Hon’ble the Chief Justice of this High Court
before His Excellency the Governor of Himachal Pradesh for
approval on the principle of comity. The recommendations so made
by Hon’ble the Chief Justice of this High Court ought not to have
been filtered   at any level lower than that of His Excellency the
Governor of Himachal Pradesh. Since this course was admittedly
not followed by the respondent-State, therefore, the decision taken
by them    in the meeting held on           24.07.2019 (Annexure P-19)
refusing to accede to the recommendations made by Hon’ble the
Chief Justice is set aside.
In light of the aforesaid discussion, we are clearly of the
view that the proposal sent by the High Court could not have been
rejected by the State Government and due deference had to be
accorded to the same. Once, Hon’ble the Chief Justice in the
interest of High Court Administration had taken a progressive step
specially to ameliorate the service conditions of the Officers and
staff working under him, the State Government should not and ought
not to have raised any objection to such recommendations unless
there were very good reasons for not granting the approval which
do not exist in the instant case.
91.          What would then be the further course of action
required to be drawn in the instant case is clearly laid down by the
H   Hon’ble Supreme Court in three Hon’ble Judge Bench decision in
State of Rajasthan and others vs. Ramesh Chandra Mundra
and others (2020) 20 SCC 163 in paragraph 28 which reads as
“28. The scheme of Article 229 of the Constitution of India
obviously   requires a joint    consideration of the proposal
which the Chief Justice         may make            in regard to
appointment, conditions of service, etc. in accordance with
the Rules.     Undoubtedly,
decision which has financial implications and that decision
cannot be      questioned                         .
by any authority, the financial
which such decision may           have imposed,
should receive due consideration at the hands of the
State Government and eventually the Governor……”
As noticed above, the petitioner is claiming 20% hike in
the pay scales (Grade Pay) on the basis of the judgment rendered
by Punjab and Haryana High Court in Hari Mohan Dixit’s case
(supra) whereby the Union of India was directed to consider the
recommendations made by three Judges’ Committee which had
been accorded approval by Hon’ble the Chief Justice of the Punjab
and Haryana High Court and to take an appropriate decision in
accordance with law and especially keeping in view                the guiding
principles reiterated in S.B. Vohra’s case (supra). It was pursuant
to these directions that the Government of India eventually granted
H   20% hike in the pay scales (Grade Pay). The Government of India
vide memorandum dated 27.02.2012 granted hike of 20% in the
existing pay including Grade Pay to the employees specified in the
memorandum and serving in Punjab and Haryana High Court with
effect from 01.01.2006.
93.          This is an issue which is required to be analyzed and
examined by a Committee as held by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in
others vs. State of West Bengal and others (2004) 1 SCC 334
(supra), wherein it was held as under:
“11. The Government will have to bear in mind the special
nature of the work done in the High Court which the Chief
Justice and his colleagues alone could really appreciate. If
the Government does not desire to meet the needs of the
High Court, the administration of the High Court will face
severe crisis. Hence, a special Pay Commission consisting
of Judges and Administrators shall be constituted by the
Chief Justice in consultation with the Government to make a
report and on receipt of such report, the Chief Justice and
C    the Government shall thrash out the problem and work out
an appropriate formula in regard to pay scales to be fixed for
the High Court employees. Let such action be taken within
six months from today.”
In light of the aforesaid discussion, we deem it
appropriate to direct that this judgment be placed before Hon’ble the
H   Chief Justice of this High Court to constitute a Committee consisting
of at least two Hon’ble Judges of this High Court, Additional Chief
Secretary (Home), Additional Chief Secretary (Finance) to the
Government of Himachal Pradesh, Principal Secretary, Law, to the
Government of Himachal Pradesh or any other person, Registrar
General, Registrar (Vigilance) and Registrar (Judicial) of this High
Court and two representatives      of the Petitioner-Association. The
Hon’ble Committee shall go into the details with respect to grant of
hike as per prayer clause of the petition keeping in view the nature
of duties and responsibilities discharged by the staff working under
various cadres in the adjoining High Courts of Punjab and Haryana
and Delhi before recommending the pay pattern as was done by
the Division Bench of the Madras High Court in R.N. Arul Jothi’s
case (supra). Since, Article 229 of the Constitution of India
contemplates   ou
framing of    rules     for salary, allowance, leave or
pension etc., Hon’ble the Chief Justice may empower the Hon’ble
Committee to frame the appropriate rules for the aforesaid purpose
for the future. The above exercise may be completed preferably
within a period of four months. Ordered accordingly.
95.          The writ petition is accordingly allowed in the aforesaid
terms, leaving the parties to bear their own costs. Pending
application(s), if any, also stands disposed of.
H   96.          For compliance to come up on 10.05.2023.