Heard the learned counsel appearing for the
petitioners and the learned High Court Government
Pleader appearing for the respondent-State.
2.    This petition is filed under Section 482 of
Cr.P.C., praying this Court to quash the order of the Civil
Judge and JMFC, Muddebihal, dated 13.07.2018 passed
in C.C.No.167/2018 (Crime No.107/2018 of Muddebihal
Police Station) taking cognizance against the petitioners
for the offences punishable under Section 171H of IPC
and Section 3 of the Karnataka Open Places (Prevention
of Disfigurement) Act, 1981 (for short ‘the Act’).
3.    Factual matrix of the case         is that the
complaint is lodged by one Basavaraj stating that he
was deputed for election duty on the eve of assembly
elections during the year 2018.        He was performing
flying squad duty in Muddebihal Assembly constituency
along with other officials by forming six teams on
20.04.2018.      It  is also alleged     that  a candidate
belonging to Indian National Congress had come to
Tahsildar office, Muddebihal, for filing nomination papers
and some vehicles had accompanied him to Tahsildar’s
office displaying stickers containing symbol and flag of
Indian National Congress.    It is further alleged that he
along with his team members inspected the said vehicles
and noticed that stickers displaying palm symbol of
Indian    National  Congress    was     displayed  on  the
motorcycle and flags of Indian National Congress were
tied to Bolero vehicle and Tata Ace vehicle. It is also
alleged that the same was done without any permission
and they have violated the Election Code of Conduct.
Hence, the case has been registered, the police have
investigated the matter and filed charge sheet.
4.   The   learned  counsel    appearing  for  the
petitioners would vehemently contend that first of all,
Act invoked i.e., the Karnataka Open Places (Prevention
of  Disfigurement)    Act, 1981    is  not applicable  to
Muddebihal and the said Act is applicable only in respect
of particular places. Unless the same is notified in
respect of particular place of Muddebihal, the police
ought not to have initiated proceedings against the
petitioners under Section 3 of the Act.      The learned
counsel also submits that the respondents have also
invoked Section 171H of IPC. The complaint is not filed
under Section 195 of Cr.P.C., but the case has been
registered against the petitioners and based on the
police report, cognizance was also taken.       The learned
counsel also would submit that when non-cognizable
offence is invoked, it requires permission from the
learned Magistrate under Section 155(2) of Cr.P.C., and
hence, it requires interference of this Court.
5.   Per    contra,   the   learned     High   Court
Government Pleader appearing for the respondent-State
would submit that the election was declared in respect
of Muddebihal assembly constituency in 2018. When the
election notification was issued by the State, the order
was passed by the District Election Officer and District
Magistrate, Vijayapura dated 31.03.2018 appointing
flying   squads   and   the   same   includes    Muddebihal
Constituency. The learned counsel also relied upon the
order of the State Government dated 10.04.2018 and so
also the revised order dated 31.03.2018 appointing
officers consisting of flying squads. The learned counsel
also relied upon the Notification of Election Commission
of India dated 02.05.2018 wherein it is clarified that as
per Section 126(1)(b) of the Representative of People
Act, 1951, there shall not be displaying of any stickers
and flags of any particularly party and the said act is in
violation of the same and there is no specific notification
for applying the above Act but election notification is
issued.   It is not in dispute that the petitioners herein
came to the Tahsildar’s office in vehicles displaying
stickers and flags of a particular party. Hence, the
proceedings initiated against the petitioners cannot be
6.    Having heard the learned counsel appearing
for   the   petitioners  and   the  learned   High    Court
Government Pleader appearing for the respondent-State
and on perusal of the records, it is evident that a case
was registered against the petitioners under Section
171H of IPC and Section 3 of the Act. The learned
counsel also relied upon several judgments and those
judgments are in respect of Section 171H of IPC and no
doubt for the said offence a private complaint has to be
filed under Section 195 of Cr.P.C. But, in the case on
hand, Section 3 of the Act is also invoked.         Having
considered the said Act particularly, according to Section
8 of the Act, any offence punishable under the Act shall
be deemed to be a cognizable offence within the
meaning of the code. Having considered the same, no
doubt   offence    invoked  against   the   petitioners  is
cognizable offence. But the question is whether the
above Act is applicable to Muddebihal or not. Section 1
“1. Short title and commencement.-
(1) This Act may be called the Karnataka
force in the cities of Bangalore, Mysore,
Hubli-Dharwar, Mangalore and Belgaum
constituted   or   continued  under    the
1976 or under any other law, on the
municipalities, notified areas, sanitary
boards, constituted or continued under
the Karnataka Municipalities Act, 1964
or under any other law, or in any other
local area, on such date, as the State
appoint and different dates may be
appointed in respect of different areas.”
Reading of Section 1(2)(i) of the Act makes it clear
that the Act is applicable for the cities viz., Bangalore,
Mysore,    Hubli-Dharwar,      Mangalore    and    Belgaum
constituted or continued under the Karnataka Municipal
Corporation Act, 1976 or under any other law,        on the
fifth day of May, 1981 and Section (1)(2)(ii) of the Act
says that the same come into force in the municipalities,
notified areas, sanitary boards, constituted or continued
under the Karnataka Municipalities Act, 1964 or under
any other law, or in any other local area, on such date,
as the State Government may by notification appoint
and different dates may be appointed in respect of
different areas.
7.    But, no such Notification was issued in
respect of Muddebihal. The Notification was issued on
09.07.1991 vide Karnataka Gazette dated 08.08.1991
including Gulbarga, apart from the above cities. But, no
other notifications are issued.     When such being the
facts and circumstances of the case, unless the Act is
applicable to particular city and municipal area, the
initiation  of   proceedings   under  the   said  Act    is
unsustainable under law.     This Court in an unreported
order passed in Criminal Petition No.505/2017 along
with     connected   matters    dated   20.06.2018    also
considered      similar  issue    and   observed   that  no
notification    was   issued   particularly  in  respect of
respective municipal area and quashed the initiation of
proceedings invoking the provisions of the Karnataka
Open Places (Prevention of Disfigurement) Act, 1981.
8.     With regard to the other offence under
Section 171H of IPC is concerned, this Court would like
to extract very provision of Section 171H of IPC, which
connection with an election.— Whoever
without the general or special authority in
writing of a candidate incurs or authorises
expenses on account of the holding of any
public meeting, or upon any advertisement,
circular or publication, or in any other way
whatsoever for the purpose of promoting or
procuring the election of such candidate,
shall be punished with fine which may extend
Provided that if any person having
incurred any such expenses not exceeding
the amount of ten rupees without authority
obtains within ten days from the date on
which   such   expenses were     incurred    the
approval in writing of the candidate, he shall
be deemed to have incurred such expenses
with the authority of the candidate.”
9.    Section   171H    of IPC  deals    with   illegal
payments in connection with an election. But, in the
case on hand, the allegation against the petitioners is
that they came in vehicles with flag of political party and
no allegations with     regard to illegal payments in
connection with election are found in the complaint.
Under the circumstances, very initiation of proceedings
against the petitioners is nothing but an abuse of
process of law.     Hence, it is appropriate to exercise
power under Section 482 of Cr.P.C., or otherwise it leads
to miscarriage of justice.
10.   On perusal of the contents of the column
No.17 of the charge sheet, it is clear that allegation
made against the petitioners is that without permission
while filing the nomination, they came with flag, stickers
and photos displaying symbol of particular political
party. No allegation of illegal payments in connection
with election is made. Having considered the allegation
made in the complaint as well as in the charge sheet, it
does not attract offence under Section 171H of IPC and
so also Section 3 of the Act as there is no notification.
First of all, complaint averments and charge sheet
averments do not attract the offences invoked and apart
from that, the above Act is not applicable to Muddebihal
and without any notification for application of the Act,
proceedings has been initiated. The contention of the
State that the election was declared in terms of the
notification of Election Commission of India is not in
dispute and election squad appointed is also not in
dispute. The documents placed by the State substantiate
the same. But the fact is that very initiation of
proceedings against the petitioners is not sustainable in
the eye of law, as there was no notification for
applicability of the above Act to Muddebihal and also no
ingredients of offence under Section 171H of IPC.
11.    In view of the observations made above, I
The petition is allowed.
The proceedings initiated against the petitioners
herein for the offences punishable under Sections 171H
of IPC and Section 3 of the Karnataka Open Places
(Prevention of Disfigurement) Act 1981 and taking of
cognizance by the learned Magistrate vide order dated
13.07.2018 in C.C.No.167/2018 is hereby quashed.