2.     Supplementary affidavit filed today is taken on record.
3.     Heard Shri V.P. Srivastava, learned Senior Counsel assisted by
Ms. Swati Agrawal Srivastava, counsel for the applicant and Shri Anil
Tiwari, learned Senior Counsel assisted by Shri Anurag Shukla,
counsel for the informant as well as Shri Vibhav Anand Singh, learned
A.G.A. for the State.
4.     By means of the present bail application, the applicant seeks
bail in Case Crime No.462 of 2020, under Section 3(1) of Uttar
Pradesh Gangsters and Anti-Social Activities (Prevention) Act, 1986,
Police Station- Auraiya, District- Auraiya, during the pendency of
5.     As per prosecution story, Ram Sahai, Station House Officer,
P.S. Auraiya, District Auraiya alongwith other colleagues, in an
official duty, was checking the vehicles and was involved in
maintaining peace and order in the area and also to maintain lock-
down in lieu of Covid-19 conditions by the order dated 11.07.2020 of
District Magistrate. He received an information that Kamlesh Pathak
is running an organized and active gang in the area as its’ leader. The
members of the said gang are (i) Ramu Pathak (ii), Santosh Pathak,
Sonu @ Lovkush, (viii) Asheesh Dubey, (ix) Shivam Awasthi and (x)
Ravindra @ Lalla Chaubey. The said leader of the gang Kamlesh
Pathak alongwith all the aforesaid members is involved in garnering
illegal ransom, illegally possessing government land, fighting, firing
and other illegal criminal activities etc. The applicant and his gang is
not afraid of firing in broad day light. The members of the gang had
got the various cases instituted against them settled in the light of the
said terror. Nobody dares to depose on oath in court against them
whereby all those cases get culminated into acquittals.
6.     On 15.03.2020, Kamlesh Pathak and his gang members had
caused day light murder of advocate Manju Chaubey and his sister
Sudha Chaubey to take illegal possession of land. The public at large
are so much terrified of the members of the gang that nobody dares to
come forward and speak or make a statement against them. Leaving
them free, shall be against the interest of the public at large. The
members of the gang keep on committing the offences referred in
Sections 16, 17 and 22 of the U.P. Gangsters and Anti-Social
Activities (Prevention) Act. Thus they usurped the properties of others
and even get instituted false cases against them. It will be in the
interest of public at large to book the members of the gang under the
U.P. Gangsters and Anti-Social Activities (Prevention) Act, 1986.
Thus, in view to put an end to the said anti-social activities of the
gang, a gang chart has been prepared by him on 26.02.2020, which
was sent for the sanction before the learned District Magistrate,
Auraiya. After receiving the sanction from the office of the District
Magistrate, Auraiya, the aforesaid eleven members of the gang were
booked under Section 3(1) of U.P. Gangsters and Anti-Social
7.     Learned Senior Counsel for the applicant has stated that he has
been booked owing to the political rivalry and has nothing to do with
the said offence. Learned Senior Counsel has further stated that the
applicant has been granted bail in the predicate offence in Case Crime
Number 189 of 2020 under sections 147, 148, 149, 302, 307, 506 IPC
and Section 7 of Criminal Law Amendment Act, Police Station
Kotwali Auraiya, District Auraiya. Learned Senior Counsel has further
stated that the bail of the applicant has even been rejected under
Section 25/27 of Arms Act by the court concerned in Case Crime No.
190 of 2022.
8.     Learned Senior Counsel has further stated that the said criminal
history stands explained as the applicant is on bail in the case no.1
mentioned in the gang-chat and the bail application in the case No.2
mentioned in the gang-charge i.e. Case Crime No.190 of 2022 is being
pressed alongwith this bail application only. Learned Senior Counsel
has further stated that all the certified copies with respect to the
criminal antecedents have been filed. In all, 37 cases have been
instituted against the applicant. Learned Senior Counsel has further
stated that, as mentioned in paragraph 3 of the supplementary affidavit
filed today, the closure report has been filed in twelve cases from
serial number 3 to 14 and the same have been accepted by the courts
9.     Learned Senior Counsel has further stated that the applicant has
been acquitted in sixteen cases i.e. from serial number 15 to 30. Three
cases, that have been explained at serial number 31 to 33, have been
withdrawn by the State. Learned Senior Counsel has further stated
that the two cases, mentioned at serial number 34 and 35, are not
proceeding any further as there is no detail on record about those
cases and in two other cases, mentioned at serial number 36 and 37,
the applicant has been enlarged on bail. Learned Senior Counsel has
further stated that thus in effect only four cases could be stated to be
pending against the applicant. Learned Senior Counsel has also
referred to the letter sent by the Senior Consultant at Centre jail, Agra
to the Senior Superintendent of jail whereby it has been mentioned
that the applicant was suffering from K/C/O T2 DM (Type-2 Diabetes
mellitus) with systemic hypertension with anxiety neurosis. Learned
Senior Counsel has further stated that the applicant was sent to the
S.N. medical College, Agra where several tests were undertaken and
then he was referred to King George's Medical College, Lucknow
whereby he was examined and his E.C.G., 2D Eco and T.M.T. tests
were undertaken and C.T. coronary angiography was referred to be
conducted with respect to the applicant. Learned Senior Counsel has
further stated that the applicant is a patient suffering from cardio
vascular disease and being a senior citizen is entitled for bail.
10.    Learned Senior Counsel has further stated that he has been
booked out of political vendetta as he is an ex-MLA and ex-minister
belonging to the Samajwadi Party and is against the current political
set up.
11.     Learned Senior Counsel has further stated there is no actus
reus, which implies the guilty act, assigned to the applicant. Learned
Senior Counsel has further stated that the rules have been framed in
Uttar Pradesh Gangsters and Anti-Social Activities (Prevention) Act in
the year 2021 and the present FIR is of the year 2020, as such the said
rules are not applicable to the applicant. Learned Senior Counsel has
further stated that the applicant is not a previous convict. The
ingredients of Section 19 sub-clause 4 stands fulfilled and the
applicant is entitled for bail. Several other submissions have been
made on behalf of the applicant to demonstrate the falsity of the
allegations made against him. The circumstances which, as per
counsel, led to the false implication of the applicant have also been
touched upon at length. The criminal history assigned to the applicant
stands explained. The applicant is languishing in jail since
16.03.2020. In case, the applicant is released on bail, he will not
misuse the liberty of bail.
12.     Learned Senior Counsel has placed much reliance on the
judgment of this Court passed in the case of Akbar vs. State of U.P.1,
whereby it has been opined that at the time of trial if the delinquent
has been acquitted, the same cannot be considered as a part of his
criminal antecedents. To which, he has referred the Government Order
of the Director General of Police, Uttar Pradesh dated 20.11.2003.
13.     Learned Senior Counsel has further placed much reliance on the
judgment of this Court passed in the case of Ashok Dixit vs. state of
U.P. and Another2, stating that the provisions of the Act cannot be
used as a weapon to wreck vengeance or harass or intimidate innocent
citizens or to settle scores on political rivals. The relevant para 75 is
being reproduced as under:-
“75. But nevertheless we must sound a note of caution.
Provision of the Act cannot be used as a weapon to wreak
vengeance or harass or intimidate innocent citizens or to
settle scores on political or other fronts. The prosecution
has to bear in mind that it has to bring home the guilt.
Then, there is a further provision for appeal. Thus, the
power of judicial review of this Court has been preserved.
It is ultimately found that a person was proceeded with in
sheer bad faith out of malice and by way of political
vendetta the authorities do not enjoy any immunity under
Section 22 of the Act. This immunity is confined only to
acts done in good faith.”
14.      Learned Senior Counsel has also placed much reliance on the
judgment of Apex Court passed in the case of Dharmendra Kirthal vs.
State of U.P. and Another3, whereby it has been opined that personal
liberty has its own glory and is to be put on a pedestal in trial to try
offenders, it is controlled by the concept of “rational liberty”. In
essence, liberty of an individual should not be allowed to be eroded
but every individual has an obligation to see that he does not violate
the laws of the land or affect others’ lawful liberty to lose his own.
15. Learned Senior Counsel has also placed reliance on the judgment
of this Court passed in Criminal Misc. Bail Application No.4691 of
2022 (Zeba Rizwan vs. State of U.P.) dated 23.05.2022, whereby the
locus of the counsel for the victim in the predicate offence was
questioned and it was opined that allowing him to argue the matter
shall open a pandora’s box.
16.    Per contra, learned Senior Counsel for the informant in the
predicate offence and learned A.G.A. have vehemently opposed the
bail application on the ground that the applicant is the person who
very much qualifies to the definition of gangster defined under the Act
and it has been at the outset stated that the bail granted to the applicant
in the predicate offence of Section 302 IPC is without jurisdiction and
has been challenged in the Apex Court by filing Special Leave to
Appeal (crl.) No(s). 6080 of 2022 dated 13.04.2022.
17.     Learned Senior Counsel has further stated that the applicant is
the name of terror in the area and his muscle power is but evident
from the fact that no witnesses did ever dare to depose against him in
court and almost all of them have turned hostile leading to his
18.    Learned Senior Counsel has further stated that the predicate
offence is a broad day light murder of an advocate and his sister at
3:00 PM and two other persons were injured in it. The bail granted is
challenged, as such the applicant is not entitled for bail. Learned
Senior Counsel has further stated that the influence of the applicant is
but evident from the factum that the closure report has been filed in
twelve cases by the police which include attempt to murder, forgery
and attempt to dacoity etc.
19.      Learned Senior Counsel has further stated that the
supplementary affidavit filed today on behalf of the applicant is based
on false facts and a perjury has been committed in it as the cases
referred as acquittal cases in it at serial nos.25, 26 and 29 have been
withdrawn, as such may have been listed in the column of withdrawn
State cases. Thus, in all six cases have been withdrawn by the State.
The trial is going on in the predicate offence and there is every
likelihood of applicant influencing the witnesses as he has the long
criminal antecedents.
20. Learned Senior Counsel has further stated that even the criminal
history of two cases has not been explained whereby it has been stated
that the cases are not proceedings any further. This cannot be
considered as a proper explanation of the said criminal history. The
bail of the applicant in Case Crime No.190 of 2020, under Section
25/27 of Arms Act is still pending and is being argued today in this
21.     Learned Senior Counsel has further placed much reliance on
the judgment of this Court passed in Criminal Misc. Bail Application
No.23584 of 2014 (Rohit @ Rohit Yadav vs. State of U.P.) dated
06.08.2014, whereby the counsel for the informant in the predicate
offence was permitted to oppose the bail application.
22.    The latin term ‘actus reus’ implies guilty act. Thus, it is the
physical component of crime. It is true that there can be no offence
without a criminal act. We have to consider mens rea alongwith actus
reus. Actus reus is latin for guilty act and mens rea is latin for guilty
mind. Both elements are required for the criminal act to be complete.
The actus reus and the mens rea are to be inferred from the contents
of the allegations made by the prosecution whereby the applicant is
stated to be having criminal antecedents and in the said predicate
offence, the applicant is stated to have exhorted the other co-accused
persons to fire at the deceased and injured persons. Thus, the element
of actus reus and mens rea are present in the said case and being a
leader of the gang, the same find place in the present case also.
23.    With respect to a gangster, an inference can be drawn from the
circumstances. The delinquent herein is a legislature aka an Ex-
minister, but the same cannot absolve him of the activities committed
24.    It is true that under normal circumstances, if otherwise the case
of the delinquent for bail is made out, the criminal antecedents are not
to be considered, but herein the gravity of offence and the criminal
antecedents that too the cases of murder, attempt to murder, attempt to
dacoity and forgery etc. weigh against the applicant.
25.    It is true that there is a possibility of misuse of the legislations
that too depends on the person executing it. The present case does not
seem to be a misuse of the act and the applicant having such a large
criminal antecedents and being the head of the gang is not entitled for
26.    From the perusal of the record, I do not find that there are
reasonable grounds for believing that the applicant is not guilty of
such offence and that he is not likely to commit any offence while on
bail as is the requirement of Section 19(4) of the Act.
27.    Considering the submissions advanced by the counsel for the
parties, nature of allegations, gravity of offence and all attending facts
and circumstances of case, the Court is of the opinion that it is not a fit
case for bail. Hence, the bail application of applicant is hereby
28.   However, it is directed that the aforesaid case pending before
the trial court be decided expeditiously, if there is no legal
impediment.
29.   It is clarified that the observations made herein are limited to
the facts brought in by the parties pertaining to the disposal of bail
application and the said observations shall have no bearing on the
merits of the case during trial.