Through: Mr. S.F.Qadri, Sr. Advocate with
1. Through the medium of present petitions filed under Section 482 Cr.
PC, petitioners have challenged two FIRs lodged against each other
i.e., FIR No. 24/2022 for the commission of offences punishable
under Sections 452, 392, 506 IPC registered with Police Station
Pahalgam against petitioner in CrM(M) No. 104/2022 and FIR
No.15/2022 for the offence punishable under Sections 323, 447, 307
IPC registered with Police Station Nowhatta Srinagar, against
petitioners in CRM(M) No. 263/2022.
2. Brief facts of the case giving rise to filing of aforesaid petitions
arising out of the impugned FIRs are that the petitioners and the
respondents in the aforementioned petitions happened to be the
business partners, running Hotel business under the name ‘M/S Hotel
Royal Hilton’, however, on some business dispute between the
parties, the partnership came to be dissolved w.e.f., 09.04.2021 by
virtue of dissolution issued by Sheikh Feroz Ahmad- petitioner in
CRM(M)       No.   104/2022.    Consequently,    the  petition  under
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 came to be filed before the
court of learned Additional District Judge (Bank Cases) Srinagar,
wherein certain orders came to be passed restraining the erstwhile
partners from operating the Bank accounts of the Firm without
permission of the Court. In this regard a civil suit, for grant of
permanent injunction, was also filed by the erstwhile partners before
the court of learned Additional District Judge Anantnag, wherein it
has been admitted that Sheikh Feroz Ahmad- petitioner in CRM(M)
No. 104/2022 is having 20% share in the property in question.
3. Argument of learned counsel for the contesting parties is that the
dispute between the parties of the erstwhile Firm was purely of a
civil nature but unfortunately the same has been given a criminal
colour by filing the impugned FIRs. This Court, vide order dated
13.04.2022 passed in CRM(M) No. 104/2022, stayed the
investigation in the FIR No. 24/2022.
4. Parties, by virtue of both the petitions filed against each other, are
seeking quashment of the aforesaid impugned FIRs.
5. During the pendency of both the petitions, subsequent development
has taken place i.e., parties have entered into compromise after they
unanimously decided to put the entire controversy to rest. In this
regard application bearing CrlM No. 798/2022 came to be filed and
in order to settle the issues, fresh deed of reconstitution of
partnership business has been incorporated, copy whereof is annexed
with the said application.
6. In terms of order dated 18.07.2022, this Court, in proof of the terms
of compromise, directed the parties to get their statements recorded
before the learned Registrar Judicial. Accordingly, statements were
recorded and are placed on record.
7. On perusal of the statements already recorded of the parties, all in
one voice have stated that they have entered into compromise and
have no grievance against each other; further they have stated that
they do not want to prosecute the criminal cases against each other,
thus, seek disposal of the aforesaid petitions in light of the said
compromise.
8. Heard learned counsel for the parties, perused the material placed on
record and considered.
9. A question, in view of the aforesaid factual position, has arisen as to
whether this Court has power to quash the proceedings, particularly
when some of the offences alleged to have been committed by the
parties, are non-compoundable in nature.
10. Learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioners in both the
petitions have relied upon certain judgments, more particularly,
Supreme Court judgment titled Gian Singh Vs. State of Punjab &
Anr. reported as (2012) 10 SCC 303. While considering the aspect
of whether the High Court has power to quash the proceedings when
some of the offences alleged to have been committed which are non-
compoundable in nature, the Apex Court has observed as follows :-
"57. The position that emerges from the above
discussion can be summarised thus:
the power of the High Court in quashing a
criminal proceeding or FIR or complaint in
exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is distinct and
different from the power given to a criminal court
for compounding the offences under Section
320 of the Code. Inherent power is of wide
plenitude with no statutory limitation but it has to
be exercised in accord with the guideline
engrafted in such power viz;
(ii)   to prevent abuse of the process of any
In what cases power to quash the criminal
proceeding or complaint or F.I.R may be
exercised where the offender and victim have
settled their dispute would depend on the facts
and circumstances of each case and no category
can be prescribed. However, before exercise of
such power, the High Court must have due
regard to the nature and gravity of the crime.
Heinous and serious offences of mental depravity
or offences like murder, rape, dacoity, etc. cannot
be fittingly quashed even though the victim or
victim's family and the offender have settled the
dispute. Such offences are not private in nature
and have serious impact on society. Similarly, any
compromise between the victim and offender in
relation to the offences under special statutes
like Prevention of Corruption Act or the offences
committed by public servants while working
in that capacity etc. cannot provide for any basis
for quashing criminal proceedings involving such
offences.    But   the   criminal    cases    having
overwhelmingly and pre- dominatingly civil
flavour stand on different footing for the
purposes of quashing, particularly the offences
arising from commercial, financial, mercantile,
civil, partnership or such like transactions or the
offences arising out of matrimony relating to
dowry, etc. or the family disputes where the
wrong is basically private or personal in nature
and the parties have resolved their entire dispute.
In this category of cases, High Court may quash
criminal proceedings if in its view, because of the
compromise between the offender and victim, the
possibility of conviction is remote and bleak and
continuation of criminal case would put accused
to great oppression and prejudice and extreme
injustice would be caused to him by not quashing
the criminal case despite full and complete
settlement and compromise with the victim. In
other words, the High Court must consider
whether it would be unfair or contrary to the
interest of justice to continue with the criminal
proceeding or continuation of the criminal
proceeding would tantamount to abuse of process
of law despite settlement and compromise
between the victim and wrongdoer and whether to
secure the ends of justice, it is appropriate that
criminal case is put to an end and if the answer to
the above question(s) is in affirmative, the High
Court shall be well within its jurisdiction to quash
the criminal proceeding.."
11. Per contra, Mr. Sajad Ashraf, learned GA, opposed the plea raised
by the petitioners as complainant and accused and has relied upon
the judgment of the Supreme Court of India in ‘State of Rajasthan
v. Shambhu Kewat reported as (2014) 4 SCC 149’, wherein it was
held that an offence under Section 307 IPC is a serious offence and
ordinarily should not be quashed by the High Court while exercising
its powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C on the ground that the parties
have settled their disputes. The Supreme Court observed as under:-
“15. We are not prepared to say that the
crime alleged to have been committed by
the accused persons was a crime against an
individual, on the other hand it was a crime
against the society at large. Criminal law is
designed as a mechanism for achieving
social control and its purpose is the
regulation of conduct and activities within
the society. Why Section 307 IPC is held to
be    non-compoundable,      is   because the
Code has identified which conduct should
be brought within the ambit of non-
compoundable offences. Such provisions
are not meant just to protect the individual
but the society as a whole. The High Court
was not right in thinking that it was only an
injury to the person and since the accused
persons (sic victims) had received the
monetary compensation and settled the
matter, the crime as against them was
wiped off. Criminal justice system has a
larger objective to achieve, that is, safety
and protection of the people at large and it
would be a lesson not only to the offender,
but to the individuals at large so that such
crimes would not be committed by any one
and money would not be a substitute for the
crime    committed    against   the   society.
Taking a lenient view on a serious offence
like the present, will leave a wrong
impression about the criminal justice
system and will encourage further criminal
acts, which will endanger the peaceful co-
existence and welfare of the society at
large." (emphasis supplied)
12. Hon’ble Supreme Court in ‘Narinder Singh v. State of
Punjab reported as (2014) 6 SCC 466’, after noticing the
judgment in State of Rajasthan v. Shambhu Kewat (supra)
quashed the proceedings under Section 307 IPC and
observed as under:-
circumstances, this Court has approved the
quashing of proceedings under Section
307 IPC whereas in some other cases, it is
held that as the offence is of serious nature
such proceedings cannot be quashed.
Though in each of the aforesaid cases the
view taken by this Court may be justified on
its own facts, at the same time this Court
owes an explanation as to why two different
approaches are adopted in various cases.
The law declared by this Court in the form
of judgments becomes binding precedent
for the High Courts and the subordinate
courts, to follow under Article 141 of the
Constitution of India. Stare decisis is the
fundamental principle of judicial decision-
making which requires "certainty" too in
law so that in a given set of facts the course
of action which law shall take is discernible
and predictable. Unless that is achieved, the
very doctrine of stare decisis will lose its
significance. The related objective of the
doctrine of stare decisis is to put a curb on
the personal preferences and priors of
individual Judges. In a way, it achieves
equality of treatment as well, inasmuch as
two different persons faced with similar
circumstances would be given identical
treatment at the hands of law. It has,
therefore, support from the human sense of
justice as well. The force of precedent in
the law is heightened, in the words of Karl
Llewellyn,    by   "that    curious,   almost
universal sense of justice which urges that
all men are to be treated alike in like
23. As there is a close relation between
equality and justice, it should be clearly
discernible as to how the two prosecutions
under Section 307 IPC are different in
nature and therefore are given different
treatment. With this ideal objective in mind,
we are proceeding to discuss the subject at
length. It is for this reason we deem it
appropriate to lay down some distinct,
definite and clear guidelines which can be
kept in mind by the High Courts to take a
view as to under what circumstances it
should accept the settlement between the
parties and quash the proceedings and
under what circumstances it should refrain
from doing so. We make it clear that
though there would be a general discussion
in this behalf as well, the matter is
examined in the context of the offence
24. The two rival parties have amicably
settled the disputes between themselves and
buried the hatchet. Not only this, they say
that since they are neighbours, they want to
live like good neighbours and that was the
reason for restoring friendly ties. In such a
scenario,    should   the   court    give  its
imprimatur to such a settlement? The
answer depends on various incidental
aspects which need serious discourse. The
legislators have categorically recognised
that those offences which are covered by
the provisions of Section 320 of the Code
are concededly those which not only do not
fall within the category of heinous crimes
but also which are personal between the
parties. Therefore, this provision recognises
where there is a compromise between the
parties, the court is to act at the said
compromise and quash the proceedings.
However, even in respect of such offences
not covered within the four corners
of Section 320 of the Code, the High Court
is given power under Section 482 of the
Code to accept the compromise between the
parties and quash the proceedings. The
guiding factor is as to whether the ends of
justice would justify such exercise of
power, both the ultimate consequences may
be acquittal or dismissal of indictment. This
is so recognised in various judgments taken
note of above." (emphasis supplied)
13. In view of the conflict between the two afore-stated
judgments, the matter was considered by a larger
Bench of Hon’ble Supreme Court in case titled
‘State of M.P. v. Laxmi Narayan reported as
(2019) 5 SCC 688’, and resolved the conflict by
observing as under:
"15.4. Offences under Section 307 IPC and
the Arms Act, etc. would fall in the category
of heinous and serious offences and
therefore are to be treated as crime against
the society and not against the individual
alone,     and     therefore,    the    criminal
proceedings for the offence under Section
307 IPC and/or the Arms Act, etc. which
have a serious impact on the society cannot
be    quashed      in    exercise   of   powers
ground that the parties have resolved their
entire     dispute      amongst      themselves.
However, the High Court would not rest its
decision merely because there is a mention
of Section 307 IPC in the FIR or the
charge is framed under this provision. It
would be open to the High Court to
examine as to whether incorporation
of Section 307 IPC is there, for the sake of
it or the prosecution has collected sufficient
evidence, which if proved, would lead to
framing the charge under Section 307 IPC.
For this purpose, it would be open to the
High Court to go by the nature of injury
sustained, whether such injury is inflicted
on the vital/delicate parts of the body,
nature of weapons used, etc. However, such
an exercise by the High Court would be
permissible only after the evidence is
collected    after    investigation    and   the
charge-sheet is filed/charge is framed
and/or during the trial. Such exercise is not
permissible when the matter is still under
investigation.    Therefore,   the   ultimate
conclusion in paras 29.6 and 29.7 of the
decision of this Court in Narinder Singh
[Narinder Singh v. State of Punjab, (2014)
6 SCC 466 : (2014) 3 SCC (Cri) 54] should
be read harmoniously and to be read as a
whole and in the circumstances stated
hereinabove."
14. Though accusation of offence under Section 307 IPC is a serious
offence as the accused person(s) attempted to take the life of another
person/victim, at the same time the court cannot be oblivious to hard
realities that many times whenever there is a quarrel between the
parties leading to physical commotion and sustaining of injury by
either or both the parties, there is a tendency to give it a slant of an
offence under Section 307 IPC as well. Therefore, only because
FIR/charge-sheet incorporates the provision of Section 307 IPC
would not, by itself, be a ground to reject the petition under Section
482 of the Code and refuse to accept the settlement between the
parties. I am, therefore, of the opinion that while taking a call as to
whether compromise in such cases should be effected or not, this
Court should go by the nature of injury sustained, the portion of the
bodies where the injuries were inflicted (namely whether injuries are
caused at the vital/delicate parts of the body) and the nature of
weapons used etc. On that basis, if it is found that there is a strong
possibility of proving the charge under Section 307 IPC, once the
evidence to that effect is led and injuries proved, the Court should
not accept settlement between the parties.
15. On perusal of FIR No. 15/2022 registered at Police Station
Nowhatta Srinagar on 07.04.2022 for the commission of offences
under Sections 447/323 IPC, the complainant had alleged that he
was assaulted ruthlessly by the accused on 24.03.2022, however, he
was saved by his employees. He did not state anything about any
injury on his person. There was also delay of about two weeks in
lodging FIR. The offences punishable under Sections 307, 506, 427,
34 IPC were added later. It appears that the complainant had not
received any injury on any vital part of his body so as to constitute
attempt to murder punishable under Section 307 IPC, otherwise he
could have mentioned this fact, in his statement given to the police
at the time of lodging of FIR, that too after two weeks of the alleged
occurrence. In such a situation there cannot be any chance of
conviction under Section 307 IPC, even after trial before the court.
16. Learned GA, on asking of the Court, has produced the case-diary
and on its perusal it has been found that since the registration of the
case in the month of April 2022, the complainant has not responded
to the repeated reminders for being produced before the court of
learned Magistrate for recording his statement in terms of Section
164 Cr PC, as a persecution witness. It has also been found that the
complainant/victim also failed to co-operate during investigation and
to produce any medical proof with regard to any injury on his person
as alleged in the FIR.
17. Learned senior counsel for the petitioners have contended that since
the parties have settled all the issues, therefore, continuance of the
proceedings in the criminal cases arising out of the impugned FIRs
are not in the interest of the parties. It is also averred that so far as
the criminal cases are concerned, the same could not be compounded
because some of the offences disclosed therein are non-
compoundable in nature. It is in these circumstances that the
petitioners have approached this Court for seeking quashment of the
FIRs and the investigation proceedings.
18. On perusal of the aforesaid observations of the Supreme Court in
Gian Singh case (supra), Narinder Singh case (supra) and Laxmi
Narayan case (supra), it is crystal clear that the dispute, where the
wrong is basically private or personal in nature and the parties have
resolved their entire dispute, the High Court will be within its
jurisdiction to quash the criminal proceedings, if it is known that
because of the compromise arrived at between the parties, there is
remote possibility of securing conviction of the accused. In fact, in
such cases, the Supreme Court has clearly observed that it would
amount to extreme injustice, if despite settlement having been
arrived at by the parties, the criminal proceedings are allowed to
continue.
19. Going by the facts of the instant case, it is obvious that the parties-
business partners, have entered into a settlement that has been acted
upon by the parties, inasmuch as the cases lodged by the parties
against each other have been withdrawn/compromised. Merely
because one of the offences i.e. offence under Section 307 IPC is a
serious offence, if an end is not put to the criminal proceedings, it
would amount to grave injustice to the parties particularly when the
compromise has been arrived at between the parties. The
continuance of criminal proceedings against the parties, in these
circumstances, will be nothing but an abuse of process of law. In this
view of the matter, there is no legal impediment in quashing the
proceedings against the parties even in respect of the offence under
Section 307 IPC, to secure the ends of justice.
20. The admitted position of the case is that both the parties have
amicably settled the disputes between themselves and buried the
hatchet. Not only this, they say that since they are close relatives
having joint properties at various places within and outside J&K,
they want to live like good relatives and that was the reason for
restoring brotherly ties. In such a scenario, this Court is under
obligation to give its imprimatur to such a settlement.
21. Having regard to the aforesaid discussions and legal sanctity as also
in the larger interests of the society, both the petitions are allowed.
Accordingly, FIR No. 24/2022 for the offences punishable under
Sections 452, 392, 506 IPC registered with Police Station Pahalgam
and FIR No.15/2022 for the offences punishable under Sections 323,
447, 307 IPC registered with Police Station Nowhatta Srinagar, and
the consequent proceedings emanating therefrom, are hereby
quashed.
22. Both the petitions are, accordingly, disposed of along-with all
connected application(s).
Whether the order is reportable:        Yes / No