1.     The present appeal has been filed by appellant under Section 374
read with Section 482 of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (“Cr.P.C.”)
seeking setting aside of the impugned judgment dated 19.03.2009 and
order on sentence dated 30.03.2009 passed by the learned Additional
Sessions Judge-01, South, Patiala House Court, New Delhi in the
Sessions Case No. 124/07 vide which the appellant has been convicted
for the offences punishable under Section 399/402 of the Indian Penal
Code, 1860 (“IPC”) and Section 25 of Arms Act, 1959.
2.     The facts upon which the present FIR was registered are that on
11.07.2007, Sub Inspector K.C. Kaushik alongwith other staff
consisting of Head Constable Pritam Singh, Constable Ram Saran and
Constable Maz Ahmed were on petrolling duty and later, were also
joined by Constable Dev Lagan. A secret information was received by
SI K.C. Kaushik that in MCD/ACC Park, Panchsheel Park, 5-6
miscreants are sitting intending to commit some crime. The information
was passed on to the S.H.O, Police Station Malviya Nagar on
telephone. 4-5 passersby were requested to join raiding party but they
did not join and left without revealing their names and addresses.
Thereafter, SI K.C. Kaushik alongwith raiding team reached at
Badarpur Service Lane near Panchsheel Park near MCD/ACC Park at
about 10.00 PM. SI K.C. Kaushik had directed the raiding party to go to
South West corner carefully and HC Pritam Singh heard the
conversation of accused persons and informed him that five accused
persons were sitting while one had a country made revolver in his hand.
He further revealed that they were talking to each other about tying the
guard of one Sabharwal and then taking away the valuables kept in the
kothi. They were also saying that they will open fire if anyone will raise
alarm. Thereafter, the raiding team surrounded the accused persons but
they started running in different directions. Four accused named
Omkar, Sukhpal, Sunil and Suraj were overpowered. One loaded
country made revolver was recovered from accused Sukhpal. One
buttondar knife was recovered from accused Sunil. One raxine bag was
also recovered from accused Sunil which contained 2.5 metres long
plastic rope and a black coloured cloth. One knife was recovered from
accused Omkar, however, fifth accused had escaped who could not be
arrested by the police. Thereafter, investigation was carried out.
Chargesheet was prepared for offences punishable under Section
399/402 IPC read with Section 25 of Arms Act and charges were
framed against four accused persons mentioned above. Vide the
impugned judgment, four accused persons were convicted for
committing offences punishable under Section 399/402 IPC as well as
under Section 25 of Arms Act. As per prosecution story, no arms were
recovered from accused Suraj, however, he was convicted for offence
punishable under Section 25 of Arms Act.
3.     It is argued by learned counsel for accused/appellant that as per
mandate of Sections 399/402 IPC, the essential ingredient for
commission of offence of dacoity is association of at least five or more
persons whereas in the present case, only four persons were arrested,
and fifth person could not be arrested. It is also stated that this fifth
person could never be found and, therefore, it can be concluded that
there was no fifth person present to constitute the offence in question. It
is also argued that the accused persons were allegedly preparing to
commit dacoity at the house of one Sabharwal by tying his guard,
however, there is no investigation qua the existence of such a person or
house. It is further argued that a perusal of Trial Court Record also
reveals lack of legal assistance rendered to the accused persons
including present appellant during the trial.
4.     Learned APP for the State, on the other hand, argued that the
accused persons have been rightly held guilty of preparation for
committing dacoity. It is also stated that the name of the fifth accused is
mentioned in the disclosure statement, though, the said person had run
away when the raiding party had reached the spot.
5.     The arguments of both the sides have been heard. Records of the
case have also been perused.
6.     In the present case, it is alleged by the prosecution that Head
Constable Pritam Singh had overheard the accused persons making
preparation and hatching conspiracy to commit offence of dacoity at
house of one Sabharwal after tying his guard. However, a perusal of
material on record reveals that neither the place where the accused
persons were allegedly preparing to commit the offence in question was
identified nor the accused were made to point out the same during
investigation. This casts serious doubt on the case of prosecution as to
whether such a person or house was actually situated or located nearby
or even existed for the commission of offence in question.
7.     A perusal of the record also reveals that it is mentioned in the
FIR that during search of present appellant Sunil, five black masks of
cloth as well as plastic rope measuring 2.5 metres were recovered from
him, however, the testimony of all the witnesses examined in the Court
including the testimony of the Investigating Officer is completely silent
on this point. In the testimony, there is nowhere stated that raxine bag,
masks and plastic rope were recovered from the possession of appellant
Sunil. Though the seizure memo regarding the seizure of bag, plastic
rope and masks is on record, the witnesses have neither spoken about it
nor has the said case property been produced before the Court or
identified by any of the witnesses including the Investigating officer.
Since it was not produced before the Court and neither of the witnesses
have spoken about the same despite it being a crucial piece of evidence
against the accused persons, it has made the case of the prosecution
doubtful. The IO has also not explained in his statement or in the FIR,
where the entire proceedings are mentioned, as to how the rope was
measured to be 2.5 metres in length which has been mentioned in the
seizure memo. The above discussion makes it clear that the learned
Trial Court failed to take note of the above said while appreciating
evidence.
8.     The Court while deciding the present appeal also notes that the
learned Trial Court failed to provide effective legal aid to the present
accused/applicant. A perusal of the record of the learned Trial Court
reveals that total five witnesses were examined in the present case who
were police witnesses. None of the witnesses has been cross-examined
in this case and it is mentioned, after examination-in-chief was
conducted of each witness, that:
On 12.07.07 I was posted as Ct. as PP Sheikh Sarai PS
On 12.07.07 I was posted as HC as PP Sheikh Sarai PS
Malviya Nagar. On that day, I alongwith SI K.C. Kaushik, Ct.
Maj Ahmad, Ct. Ram Sharan and myself were on patrolling
duty......
On 12.07.07 I was posted as HC as PP Sheikh Sarai PS
Malviya Nagar and was working as DO from 12 midnight from 8
On the intervening night of 11/12.07.07 I was posted as
ASI at PS Malviya Nagar. On that day the case was marked to
me......
On 12.07.07 I was posted as IC PP Sheikh Sarai PS
Malviya Nagar. On that day I alongwith HC Pritam Singh, Ct.
Maj Ahmed, Ct. Ram Sharan were on patrolling duty......
XXXX by accused Sunil.
9.     This makes it clear that in the present case, opportunity was
granted to the accused persons to cross-examine the witnesses as they
were not represented by their counsel nor were provided legal aid
counsel. But the order dated 03.09.2008 mentions that the accused
persons had requested to be provided with legal aid counsel. However,
prior to that, all the five witnesses in this case stood examined.
10.    Order sheet dated 18.02.2008 only mentions that counsel for
accused was present with the accused. The name of the counsel is not
mentioned and interestingly, two material witnesses i.e. PW1 Constable
Maz Ahmed and PW2 HC Pritam Singh were examined on the said
date. The evidence so recorded on that day does not mention the
presence of their counsel but mentions that opportunity was given to the
accused to cross-examine the witness (evidence mentions “XXXX by
accused. Nil. Opportunity given”). The non cross-examination of the
major witnesses, thus, makes it clear that no counsel was present on
that day as in case the counsel would have been present, it was the duty
of counsel to cross-examine the material witness and in case they were
not examined, it was essential for the learned Trial Court to have
mentioned the name of the counsel and the fact that though the
witnesses were tendered for cross-examination, the counsel for accused
did not avail the said opportunity. Similar is the fact regarding the
examination of PW-3 HC Charan Singh and PW-4 ASI Gopi Chand.
That on the day when PW-5 Investigating Officer was examined, there
is no mention even of the word “accused present with counsel”. The
order sheets, thereafter, do not mention the presence of the counsel
when PW-5 was examined. It is, therefore, clear that it was only on
03.09.2008 when the accused persons requested that they are unable to
engage a lawyer, that Sh. Mittal was appointed as Amicus Curie for
accused persons at State’s expenses. In a nutshell, except at the time of
recording of statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C. and hearing
arguments on sentence, the Amicus Curie was not present, even on the
day when final arguments were heard as his presence is not marked. It
is also not mentioned that he had addressed arguments when the final
arguments were heard on 07.03.2009. Thus, learned Amicus Curie was
not present on the dates fixed for final arguments and also prior to that.
On 04.12.2008, when it is recorded that the accused persons, who had
earlier expressed their desire to lead defence evidence, stated before the
learned Court that they did not want to lead defence evidence, the
learned Amicus Curie was not present. It is, thus, a case where the
accused remained unrepresented and unaided during the entire effective
stages of trial.
11.    Even the Constitution of India guarantees certain fundamental
rights to the accused which stand unfettered during the trial as well as
imposes certain duties upon the State, which are reproduced herein
Article 21 reads as under:
“21. Protection of life and personal liberty.— No person
shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except
according to procedure established by law.”
Article 22 reads as under:
“22. Protection against arrest and detention in certain
cases.— (1) No person who is arrested shall be detained in
custody without being informed, as soon as may be, of the
grounds for such arrest nor shall he be denied the right to
consult, and to be defended by, a legal practitioner of his
choice...”
“39A. Equal justice and free legal aid.—The State shall
secure that the operation of the legal system promotes
justice, on a basis of equal opportunity, and shall, in
particular, provide free legal aid, by suitable legislation or
schemes or in any other way, to ensure that opportunities
for securing justice are not denied to any citizen by reason
of economic or other disabilities.”
12.    The trial in this case for a heinous offence which attracts
punishment upto 10 years was, therefore, conducted in most casual
manner. The Trial Court did not deem it appropriate to appoint any
counsel to defend the appellant/accused, neither when the counsel
engaged by him did not appear at the commencement of the trial (which
is not clear from the order sheets unfortunately), nor at the time of
recording of evidence of the prosecution witnesses. The accused,
therefore, did not have legal aid of a counsel in real sense, at any stage
of trial. Needless to say, the accused was entitled to such legal aid
during the entire period of trial. As already mentioned above, the
appointment of the Amicus Curie was at a much later stage after the
entire evidence had been recorded and even thereafter, learned Amicus
Curie appeared only twice. This Court notes with regret that even at the
stage of final arguments, he was not present to defend the appellant
who he had been asked to defend at the State’s expense. There is no
doubt that right of cross-examination to any accused in a criminal case
to discredit the witnesses and to test veracity of the statement is the
most vital part of a criminal trial.
13.    In the case of Kartar Singh v. State of Punjab, (1994) 3 SCC
569, the Constitution Bench of Hon’ble Apex Court explained the
purpose and importance of cross-examination of a witness. The relevant
observations are as under:
“278. Section 137 of the Evidence Act defines what cross-
examination means and Sections 139 and 145 speak of the
mode of cross-examination with reference to the documents
as well as oral evidence. It is the jurisprudence of law that
cross-examination is an acid-test of the truthfulness of the
statement made by a witness on oath in examination-in-
chief, the objects of which are:-
(1) To destroy or weaken the evidentiary value of the
witness of his adversary;
(2) To elicit facts in favour of the cross-examining lawyer’s
client from the mouth of the witness of the adversary party;
(3) To show that the witness is unworthy of belief by
impeaching the credit of the said witness;
And the questions to be addressed in the course of cross-
examination are to test his veracity; to discover who he is
and what is his position in life; and to shake his credit by
injuring his character”.
14.    The aforesaid view was further reiterated by the Apex Court in
Jayendra Vishnu Thakur v. State of Maharashtra (2009) 7 SCC 104,
wherein it was observed that:
“24. A right to cross-examine a witness, apart from being a
natural right is a statutory right. Section 137 of the
Evidence Act provides for examination-in-chief, cross-
examination and re-examination. Section 138 of the
Evidence Act confers a right on the adverse party to cross-
examine a witness who had been examined in chief, subject
of course to expression of his desire to the said effect. But
indisputably such an opportunity is to be granted. An
accused has not only a valuable right to represent himself,
he has also the right to be informed thereabout. If an
exception is to be carved out, the statute must say so
expressly or the same must be capable of being inferred by
necessary implication. There are statutes like the
Extradition Act, 1962 which excludes taking of evidence
vis-à-vis opinion.”
15.    This Court also notes that it has been laid down by the Hon’ble
Apex Court in catena of judgments that right to a fair trial is included in
the spirit of right to life and personal liberty of a person. The very
object of providing effective legal aid to a person undefended or
unrepresented is to ensure that he gets free, fair and just trial in a
criminal case. The Hon’ble Apex Court in the case of Zahira
Habibullah Sheikh(5) v. State of Gujarat, (2006) 3 SCC 374, has
explained the concept of fair trial to an accused and that it was central
to the administration of justice and the cardinality of protection of
human rights. The observations of Apex Court read as under:
“35. This Court has often emphasised that in a criminal case
the fate of the proceedings cannot always be left entirely in
the hands of the parties, crime being public wrong in breach
and violation of public rights and duties, which affects the
whole community as a community and is harmful to society
in general. The concept of fair trial entails familiar
triangulation of interests of the accused, the victim and the
society and it is the community that acts through the State
and prosecuting agencies. Interest of society is not to be
treated completely with disdain and as persona non grata.
The courts have always been considered to have an
overriding duty to maintain public confidence in the
administration of justice often referred to as the duty to
vindicate and uphold the 'majesty of the law'. Due
administration of justice has always been viewed as a
continuous process, not confined to determination of the
particular case, protecting its ability to function as a court
of law in the future as in the case before it. If a criminal
court is to be an effective instrument in dispensing justice,
the Presiding Judge must cease to be a spectator and a mere
recording machine by becoming a participant in the trial
evincing intelligence, active interest and elicit all relevant
materials necessary for reaching the correct conclusion, to
find out the truth, and administer justice with fairness and
impartiality both to the parties and to the community it
serves. The courts administering criminal justice cannot
turn a blind eye to vexatious or oppressive conduct that has
occurred in relation to proceedings, even if a fair trial is still
possible, except at the risk of undermining the fair name
and standing of the judges as impartial and independent
adjudicators.
36. The principles of rule of law and due process are closely
linked with human rights protection. Such rights can be
protected effectively when a citizen has recourse to the
courts of law. It has to be unmistakably understood that a
trial which is primarily aimed at ascertaining the truth has
to be fair to all concerned. There can be no analytical, all
comprehensive or exhaustive definition of the concept of a
fair trial, and it may have to be determined in seemingly
infinite variety of actual situations with the ultimate object
in mind viz. whether something that was done or said either
before or at the trial deprived the quality of fairness to a
degree where a miscarriage of justice has resulted. It will
not be correct to say that it is only the accused who must be
fairly dealt with That would be turning a Nelson eye to the
needs of society at large and the victims or their family
members and relatives. Each one has an inbuilt right to be
dealt with fairly in a criminal trial. Denial of a fair trial is as
much injustice to the accused as is to the victim and the
society. Fair trial obviously would mean a trial before an
impartial judge, a fair prosecutor and an atmosphere of
judicial calm. Fair trial means a trial in which bias or
prejudice for or against the accused, the witnesses, or the
cause which is being tried is eliminated. If the witnesses get
threatened or are forced to give false evidence that also
would not result in a fair trial. The failure to hear material
witnesses is certainly denial of fair trial.
37. A criminal trial is a judicial examination of the issues in
the case and its purpose is to arrive at a judgment on an
issue as to a fact or relevant facts which may lead to the
discovery of the fact in issue, and obtain proof of such facts
at which the prosecution and the accused have arrived by
their pleadings; the controlling question being the guilt or
innocence of the accused. Since the object is to mete out
justice and to convict the guilty and protect the innocent,
the trial should be a search for the truth and not a bout over
technicalities, and must be conducted under such rules as
will protect the innocent, and punish the guilty. The proof
of charge which has to be beyond reasonable doubt must
depend upon judicial evaluation of the totality of the
evidence, oral and circumstantial, and not by an isolated
scrutiny.”
16.    In M.H. Hoskot v. State of Maharashtra, (1978) 3 SCC 544, the
Hon’ble Supreme Court had expressed as under:
"14. The other ingredient of fair procedure to a prisoner,
who has to seek his liberation through the court process is
lawyer's services. Judicial justice, with procedural
intricacies, legal submissions and critical examination of
evidence, leans upon professional expertise; and a failure of
equal justice under the law is on the cards where such
supportive skill is absent for one side. Our judicature,
moulded by Anglo-American models and our judicial
process, engineered by kindred legal technology, compel
the collaboration of lawyer power for steering the wheels of
equal justice under the law. Free legal services to the needy
is part of the English criminal justice system. And the
American jurist, Prof. Vance of Yale, sounded sense for
India too when he said:
"What does it profit a poor and ignorant man that he is
equal to his strong antagonist before the law if there is
no one to inform him what the law is? Or that the
courts are open to him on the same terms as to all
other persons when he has not the wherewithal to pay
the admission fee?"
17.     Similarly, the observations of Hon’ble Apex Court, on right to
fair trial and effective legal aid, in Mohd Hussain v. State (Govt. of
NCT of Delhi) (2012) 2 SCC 584 are reproduced herein-under:
“13. It will, thus, be seen that the trial court did not think it
proper to appoint any counsel to defend the appellant/
accused, when the counsel engaged by him did not appear
at the commencement of the trial nor at the time of
recording of the evidence of the prosecution witnesses. The
accused did not have the aid of the counsel in any real
sense, although, he was as much entitled to such aid during
the period of trial. The record indicates, as I have already
noticed, that the appointment of learned counsel and her
appearance during the last stages of the trial was rather
proforma than active. It cannot seriously be doubted at this
late date that the right of cross-examination is included in
the right of an accused in a criminal case, to confront the
witnesses against him not only on facts but also to discredit
the witness by showing that his testimony-in-chief was
untrue and unbiased.
16. In my view, every person, therefore, has a right to a fair
trial by a competent court in the spirit of the right to life and
personal liberty. The object and purpose of providing
competent legal aid to undefended and unrepresented
accused persons are to see that the accused gets free and
fair, just and reasonable trial of charge in a criminal case.
24. In the present case, not only the accused was denied the
assistance of a counsel during the trial and such designation
of counsel, as was attempted at a late stage, was either so
indefinite or so close upon the trial as to amount to a denial
of effective and substantial aid in that regard. The Court
ought to have seen to it that in the proceedings before the
court, the accused was dealt with justly and fairly by
keeping in view the cardinal principles that the accused of a
crime is entitled to a counsel which may be necessary for
his defence, as well as to facts as to law. The same
yardstick may not be applicable in respect of economic
offences or where offences are not punishable with
substantive sentence of imprisonment but punishable with
fine only. The fact that the right involved is of such a
character that it cannot be denied without violating those
fundamental principles of liberty and justice which lie at the
base of all our judicial proceedings. The necessity of
counsel was so vital and imperative that the failure of the
trial court to make an effective appointment of a counsel
was a denial of due process of law. It is equally true that the
absence of fair and proper trial would be violation of
fundamental principles of judicial procedure on account of
breach of mandatory provisions of Section 304 of Cr.P.C.
42. While holding the appellant guilty the trial court has not
only relied upon the evidence of the witnesses who have
been cross-examined but also relied upon the evidence of
witnesses who were not cross-examined. The fate of the
criminal trial depends upon the truthfulness or otherwise of
the witnesses and, therefore, it is of paramount importance.
To arrive at the truth, its veracity should be judged and for
that purpose cross- examination is an acid test. It tests the
truthfulness of the statement made by a witness on oath in
examination-in-chief. Its purpose is to elicit facts and
materials to establish that the evidence of witness is fit to be
rejected. The appellant in the present case was denied this
right only because he himself was not trained in law and not
given the assistance of a lawyer to defend him. Poverty also
came in his way to engage a counsel of his choice...”
18.    Despite there being catena of judgments emphasizing the need
and importance of legal aid, no effective legal aid was provided to the
accused persons in present case. Order sheets were written in most
indifferent manner by the learned Trial Court. At most places, the name
of the counsel is not mentioned in the order sheets. The name, presence
or absence of the counsel was not mentioned in any of the evidence
recorded. The problem does not end here. The present case was being
tried for an offence of preparation of dacoity which attracts punishment
upto 10 years. No legal aid was available to the accused almost
throughout the trial, most glaringly, at the time of final arguments and
recording of evidence. The Trial Court itself should have realized the
duty cast on it to provide effective legal aid to an accused who is poor
and marginalized and could not defend himself. The Courts are the
guardians of a person’s liberty and are duty bound by Constitution as
well as their oath to ensure fair trial to an accused which is the
constitutional goal set by the Indian Constitution itself.
19.     Vast sums of money are disbursed to establish legal aid centres,
and State Legal Services Authorities to help those who fail to hire the
best lawyers due to their poverty. Lawyers are empanelled and paid to
prosecute and defend those who are unable to hire lawyers to defend
themselves. Needless to say, lawyers in criminal Courts are absolute
necessity and not luxury.
20.    The right to fair trial is a fundamental right. This noble goal will
fail in case if poor man charged with an offence is unable to defend
himself without lawyer to assist him. As already mentioned above, the
more serious offence, the likely consequences are greater. The Court
should have kept in mind the decision of the Hon’ble Apex court in
Hussainara Khatoon (4) v. State of Bihar (1980) 1 SCC 98. The right
of free legal services is essential ingredient of reasonable, fair and just
procedure for a person accused of an offence and same has been held
implicit in the guarantee of Article 21. It is most unfortunate that
despite such mandate, at times, as in the present case, there is utter
disregard of the decision of the highest Court as well as the
constitutional mandate.
21.     It has been held in the case of Khatri (2) v. State of Bihar (1981)
1 SCC 627 that “legal aid would become merely a fake promise and it
would fail of its purpose, if it were to be left to a poor ignorant and
illiterate accused to ask a for free legal services. The Magistrate or the
Sessions Judge before whom the accused appears must be held to be
under an obligation to inform the accused that if he is unable to engage
the services of a lawyer on account of poverty or indigence, he is
entitled to obtain free legal services at the cost of the State.”
22.     In the present case, the absence of cross-examination has resulted
in gross miscarriage of justice and the Court has to guard against such
an eventuality. It is to be remembered that in India, the absence of fair
and proper trial is not only violation of fundamental principles of
judicial procedure and constitutional mandate, but also violation of
mandatory provisions of Section 304 Cr.P.C. The assistance of a legal
counsel, in a meaningful way, was absent throughout the trial. Judiciary
has a crucial role to play in ensuring enforcement of human rights and
has to meet the great challenge towards making justice accessible in
practical terms to the poor in the country.
23.     It is important to understand the reality of disadvantage of an
individual and ensure proactive steps to prevent injustice by providing
effective legal aid in order to deliver equality in justice. The
constitutional guarantees of free and fair trial should remain meaningful
to the poor of the country and the judiciary has to remain vigilant to
protect the interest of the disadvantaged groups also.
24.    This is a classic case where all cannons of justice were kept aside
while passing the impugned judgment as the accused was not provided
legal aid which he was entitled to get under the Constitution of India as
well as under Cr.P.C. The accused has faced trial for last 15 long years.
At times, though the agony of a person undergoing trial is not
mentioned on the paper while a Judge writes a judgment, the trial which
has been prolonged beyond 15 years is an agony itself. The stress of
facing a criminal trial is punishment unannounced in a case, as the
present one.
25.    Considering the overall facts and circumstances of the case, this
Court’s judicial conscience does not permit to now remand back the
matter and direct the learned Trial Court to again conduct a fresh trial.
In view thereof, the accused is acquitted of all the charges since the trial
in itself was vitiated due to non-assistance of accused by legal aid
counsel, besides existence of several inconsistencies and lacunae in the
case of prosecution before the learned Trial Court.
26.    Bail bond, if any, stands cancelled. Surety stands discharged.
27.    Accordingly, the appeal is allowed in above terms.
28.    A copy of this judgment be circulated by learned Registrar
General of this Court to all the District Courts in Delhi and be also sent
to the learned Director (Academics), Delhi Judicial Academy for doing
the needful.