This     writ     petition      is     filed    seeking
implementation    of   the   following      Clause  in  the
guidelines/policy       circular      No.17.5.82      dated
“(iii)     Service Time at Toll Plazas:
10.6.2 The total number of toll booths and
toll lanes shall be such to ensure a service
time of not more than 10 seconds per vehicle at
peak flow regardless of methodology adopted for
fee collection. If at any time, the queue of
vehicles  in  any   lane  becomes   more  than  100
metres  from   the  toll   booth,   then  the  boom
barrier of that lane shall be lifted and the
free flow of traffic with no tolling be allowed
till  the  queue   comes  within   100m.  For  this
purpose, a yellow line at a distance of 100 m
from Toll booth be marked in each toll lane.
This provision shall be prominently displayed/
informed to the users.”
2.   The petitioner was compelled to seek the
relief due to the loss of valuable time at the
Paliyekkara Toll Plaza, by reason of the long
W.P.(C) No.31341 of 2022
queue of vehicles at all times.                The petitioner
alleges       that     the   delay   on    the  part   of  the
Concessionaire's staff in collecting the toll and
their disputes with the drivers are resulting in
the traffic snarls.
3.    Learned       Counsel     for   the    petitioner
submitted       that     even  after    introduction   of  the
Electronic Toll Collection (ETC) system, there is
disruption in the free flow of traffic.                  It is
contended that in the event of such disruption,
the     Concessionaire/6th        respondent    is   bound  to
permit       the     vehicles   to    pass   through   without
paying toll until normalcy is restored.
4.    The National Highways Authority and the
6th respondent have stoutly denied the allegation
and assert that, after the introduction of ETC
(Fastag),       the     movement   of   traffic   through  the
toll gates has become unhindered and                occasional
delay happens only when vehicles not fitted with
Fastag or without sufficient                balance in their
W.P.(C) No.31341 of 2022
Fastag attempt to pass through the lanes set up
apart      for    vehicles      fitted     with   Fastag.    It  is
contended that            the guidelines relied on by the
petitioner is prospective in nature and cannot be
made applicable to the Paliyekkara Toll Plaza.
5.    While         the     question        whether      the
guidelines          relied     on    by     the   petitioner     is
prospective or not is to be decided later, I am
of      the    considered        opinion       that    the    issue
canvassed in this writ petition, regarding the
loss of time at the Paliyekkara Toll Plaza, call
for immediate intervention. The NHAI itself has
admitted       that     73070    vehicles     are   crossing    the
toll plaza on an average daily. Therefore, any
delay      at   any    of    the  toll     booths   will   have   a
cascading       effect      on   the    movement    of   vehicles,
thereby affecting the lives and livelihoods of
the     commuters,        who   are    made   to   pay   the   toll
based      on    the     promise    to    provide    hassle    free
movement         of      vehicles      through      good    roads.
W.P.(C) No.31341 of 2022
Therefore,          the   Central      Government     ought   to
seriously consider whether penalty can be imposed
against       drivers     using   the     lanes  reserved    for
Fastag vehicles, without fitting Fastag or with
expired       Fastag.     It  is     also   to  be   considered
whether an appropriate amendment could be brought
about to Section 201 of the Motor Vehicles Act,
1998, so as to impose penalty on vehicles causing
obstruction          to  free  flow      of  traffic    at  toll
plazas. The State Government and the State Police
Chief      should      consider   whether     persons    causing
unnecessary          issues   and     obstructions     at   toll
booths could be proceeded against under Section
120 or any other provision of the Kerala Police
Act,     2011.      Be   that  as     it   may,  the   National
Highways       Authority     and     the   Concessionaire    are
bound to device ways and means to ensure smooth
and     uninterpreted       flow   of    traffic   through   the
Paliyekkara         Toll   Plaza     with   immediate    effect,
failing which this Court may have to require the
W.P.(C) No.31341 of 2022
authorities to give effect to the Guidelines in
larger public interest.
The respondents are directed to file counter
affidavits detailing the steps taken in terms of
the above directions.
Post on 17.02.2023 for further consideration.