1. The petitioners have challenged order dated 09.03.2022, passed by
learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Srinagar, whereby transfer
application filed by the petitioners for transfer of case under Section 12
of the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, titled Lateef
Ahmad Rather and Ors vs. Shafeeka Bhat, from the Court of Judicial
Magistrate 1st Class (2nd Additional Munsiff), Srinagar to any other
Court of competent jurisdiction in District Srinagar, has been declined.
2. It is averred in the petition that the petition under Section 12 of the
Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, filed by the
respondent against the petitioners herein, is absolutely false and
frivolous and when the petitioners approached the trial Magistrate for
modification of the order passed by it, the said application was not
decided despite a number of requests having been made by the
petitioners to the learned trial Magistrate. It is further averred that the
remarks of the trial Magistrate against the petitioners have not been in
I attest to the accuracy and
good taste being abusive in nature, which compelled them to approach
the Chief Judicial Magistrate Srinagar with an application for transfer
of the case from the Court of trial Magistrate to any other court of
competent jurisdiction. It is contended that learned Chief Judicial
Magistrate Srinagar, vide the impugned order, rejected the prayer of the
petitioners without understanding the gravity of the matter.
3.    I have learned counsel for the petitioners and perused the impugned
order and the documents annexed to the petition.
4. It appears that the main grouse of the petitioners is that their application
for modification or vacation of order dated 08.11.2021, passed by the
learned trial Magistrate in ex-parte against the petitioners, is not being
considered on its merits expeditiously. It also appears that there has
been some exchange of harsh words between the learned counsel for
the petitioners and the learned Magistrate, which has forced the
petitioners to approach the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Srinagar seeking
transfer of proceedings from the Court of trial Magistrate. The Chief
Judicial Magistrate, has vide the impugned order rightly declined to
transfer the proceedings from the Court of learned trial Magistrate, but,
while doing so, the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate has made certain
sweeping remarks against the advocates by stating that the advocates
level unnecessary allegations against the Judicial Officers in order to
facilitate their personal convenience.
5. There can be no doubt, that the grounds urged by the petitioners,
seeking transfer of their case from the Court of trial Magistrate to any
I attest to the accuracy and
other Court of competent jurisdiction, are not cogent. Merely because
the learned Magistrate has failed to dispose of the application of the
petitioners, is not a ground to transfer the case. It is also not a ground
for transfer of a case if there is exchange of some hot words between
the Court and the counsel. Thus the decision of learned Chief Judicial
Magistrate Srinagar to decline the transfer of the matter from the trial
Magistrate, is legally correct and cannot be interfered with.
6. However, the sweeping remarks that have been made by the learned
Chief Judicial Magistrate, were uncalled for and unnecessary for the
decision of the case. There may be stray incidents where the advocates
have resorted to levelling of allegations against the Judicial Officers in
order to seek transfer of their cases from one Court to other to suit their
convenience, but then this cannot be generalized. The advocates are
the officers of the Court and deserve the same respect and dignity as is
being given to the Judicial Officers and Presiding Officers of the
Courts. Bench and Bar are two wheels of the chariot of justice. Both
are equal and no one is superior to the other. The members of the Bar,
as such, deserve the utmost respect and dignity There may be some
rotten apples in the profession, as is true of every profession, but to say
that the advocates generally adopt these tactics is not the correct
position. The remarks of the Chief Judicial Magistrate, as such, deserve
to be expunged.
7. Accordingly, while upholding the order declining to transfer the case
passed by learned Chief Judicial Magistrate Srinagar, the remarks made
I attest to the accuracy and
by the learned Magistrate against the advocates are expunged and it is
directed that the same shall not form part of the impugned order. A
further direction is issued to the learned trial Magistrate to dispose of
the application of the petitioners for modification of order dated
08.11.2021 expeditiously, preferably within a period of 15 days from
the date a copy of this order is made available to the said Court. Copies
of this order be sent to learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Srinagar and
I attest to the accuracy and