1.     This writ petition raises the important question of the impact
that a moratorium that comes into effect in terms of Section 14 of the
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 20061 would have on the powers
of the Enforcement Directorate2 to enforce an attachment under the
provisions of the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 20023. The
petition raises a challenge to orders of attachment which have been
made by the ED in exercise of powers conferred by the PMLA. While
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                   Page 1 of 124
the writ petition as originally framed had assailed the validity of
Provisional Attachment Orders4 dated 08 July 2020 and 05 August
2020, subsequently and since those orders came to be confirmed by
the Adjudicating Authority, an amendment application was moved
questioning the confirmation orders dated 01 January 2021 and 29
January 2021. The petition has been instituted by the Resolution
Professional5 of Era Infra Engineering Limited6 which was
admitted to insolvency proceedings under the provisions of the IBC.
The challenge to the orders of attachment is essentially founded on the
provisions of Section 14 of the aforesaid enactment with the petitioner
contending that once the moratorium had come into effect, the ED
stood denuded of jurisdiction to exercise powers under the PMLA.
Before proceeding ahead to notice the submissions which have been
addressed, it would be pertinent to notice the following essential facts.
2.     On 19 April 2018, the ED proceeded to freeze 74 bank accounts
of EIEL in purported exercise of powers conferred by Section 102 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 19737. The insolvency proceedings
would be deemed to have commenced on 08 May 2018 when the
petition was admitted and it is this date which would thus constitute
the date of commencement of the Corporate Insolvency Resolution
Process8. Assailing the action initiated by the respondent under
Section 102 of the CrPC, the petitioner preferred W.P.(C)9566/2019
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                               Page 2 of 124
which came to be allowed with the learned Judge quashing the orders
dated 04 October 2018 and 19 April 2018 in terms of which its bank
accounts had been frozen. The learned Judge, however, refrained from
interfering with the order of 07 October 2019 which had been passed
under Section 5 of the PMLA and had provisionally attached certain
properties. The Court shall deal with the aforesaid order hereinafter.
Proceeding further, it may be noted that on 04 October 2018, the
Adjudicating Authority passed an order upholding the freezing of the
bank accounts detailed hereinabove. Thereafter and on 07 October
2019, the respondent proceeded to attach 49 bank accounts of EIEL in
exercise of powers conferred by Section 5 of the PMLA. It was this
order which was left untouched on the first writ petition which had
been filed by the petitioner and was referred to hereinabove.
3.     Aggrieved by the PAO pertaining to the 49 bank accounts of
EIEL, the petitioner filed an application to set aside the same before
the National Company Law Tribunal9. During the pendency of that
challenge, the Adjudicating Authority by its order of 17 March 2020
confirmed the order of attachment. On 21 May 2020, the corporate
debtor is said to have received an income tax refund pertaining to the
assessment year 2015-2016. On 07 July 2020, the petitioner received
an e mail from Axis Bank, with which its bank accounts aforenoted
were maintained, to ascertain whether the debit freeze as imposed by
ED stood lifted. The petitioner was also called upon to ascertain
whether any other attachment orders had come to be passed effecting
the assets of EIEL, the corporate debtor. On 08 July 2020, the
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                Page 3 of 124
respondent attached two tunnel boring machines valued at Rs.
33,71,19,466/- again in exercise of powers conferred under the
PMLA. Aggrieved by the aforesaid action as initiated by the
respondent, the petitioner filed an Interlocutory Application10 before
the NCLT seeking directions for the respondent being restrained from
proceeding further in terms of the order of 08 July 2020 of the
Adjudicating Authority and for them being further restrained from
taking any further action against the assets of EIEL during the
pendency of the proceedings before the NCLT under the IBC.
4.      It appears that in the meanwhile confusion reigned with respect
to the income tax refund which had been received by the petitioner.
That amount is stated to have been credited in the accounts of the
corporate debtor maintained with Axis Bank. Since the petitioner was
apprised by the Axis Bank of a restraint which operated on its right to
deal with the income tax refunds which had been received, the
petitioner preferred a contempt petition before this Court. In the said
contempt petition, on 06 August 2020, counsels appearing for the
respondent are stated to have taken time to obtain instructions and
apprise the Court whether the income tax refund also stood attached in
proceedings under the PMLA. The petitioner alleges that after the
hearing on the aforesaid contempt petition had concluded, the
petitioner was e-mailed a copy of yet another PAO dated 05 August
2020 in terms of which the income tax refund also stood attached. In
view of the aforesaid development, the contempt petition came to be
dismissed on 13 August 2020 with the petitioner being accorded the
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                 Page 4 of 124
liberty to initiate appropriate steps in challenge to the PAO of 05
August 2020. In the meanwhile, on 11 August 2020, the Supreme
Court while dealing with a civil appeal preferred by another creditor
of EIEL, aggrieved by its non-inclusion in the list of operational
creditors, stayed further proceedings in the CIRP. That interim order
was ultimately vacated on 16 November 2020. It is thereafter that the
instant writ petition came to be preferred before the Court.
5.      On 08 April 2021, an interim order was passed by this Court
where after hearing the contentions of respective sides, the Court
directed the ED to create a separate fixed deposit for the amount of
Rs.19,22,11,271/- which had been attached by the said respondent.
The aforesaid fixed deposit was to abide by the final result of the writ
petition. On 01 January 2022, the Adjudicating Authority confirmed
the PAO dated 08 July 2020. The Adjudicating Authority further and
on 29 January 2022 proceeded to confirm the PAO dated 05 August
2020. In the meanwhile, and upon the restraint on the CIRP being
lifted by the Supreme Court, the NCLT extended the resolution period
by 120 days. As would be evident from a reading of the order dated 04
February 2022 of the NCLT, the petitioner is stated to have received
offers from fourteen Prospective Resolution Applicants11. The Court
is informed that the aforesaid PRAs‟ are in the process of conducting
due diligence of the corporate debtor.
6.      On 06 May 2022, the Court took note of certain preliminary
objections which were raised by Mr. Hossain, learned counsel
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                Page 5 of 124
appearing for the ED, who had urged that the writ petition only lays a
challenge to provisional attachment orders when in fact both of which
have subsequently come to be confirmed by the Adjudicating
Authority in terms of its orders of 01 January 2021 and 29 January
2021. Mr. Hossain pointed out that those two orders had not been
assailed in the writ petition. He also referred to the fact that objections
to the aforesaid proceedings as drawn by the ED had also been raised
before the Adjudicating Authority who had proceeded to reject the
same on merits. Mr. Hossain submitted that the said order of the
Adjudicating Authority has also been challenged in the writ petition.
Mr. Hossain further contented that the validity of the PAO
No.07/2020 dated 08 July 2020 had also been questioned before the
NCLT. In view of the aforesaid, it was submitted that the petitioner
could not pursue parallel remedies. The said objection as was
addressed by Mr. Hossain was made without prejudice to his
contention that the NCLT would have no jurisdiction to rule on the
validity of the orders passed under the PMLA in light of the law as
declared by the Supreme Court in Embassy Property Developments
Pvt. Ltd. vs. State of Karnataka12.
7.       On 10 May 2022 and upon hearing Mr. Vashisht, learned Senior
Counsel appearing for the petitioner, at some length in response to the
preliminary objections which had been noticed on the earlier occasion,
the Court granted the prayer made on behalf of the petitioner to be
accorded the liberty to move a formal application seeking addition of
reliefs in the writ petition. The petitioner proceeded to move an
application for amendment thereafter which came to be allowed on 12
May 2022. The respondent concluded their submissions on 29 August
2022 whereafter the matter was closed for judgement on 05 September
2022. While closing proceedings on the petition, the Court had also
granted liberty as sought by learned counsels for parties to place their
Brief Synopsis of Submissions on record. Pursuant to the liberty so
granted, the petitioner submitted their written submissions on 23
September 2022 and the respondent on 07 October 2022.
8.     Having noticed the essential facts, which would be relevant for
the purposes of disposal of the instant writ petition and before
proceeding to consider the arguments addressed on merits, the Court
deems it appropriate to deal with the preliminary objections which
were raised by Mr. Hossain. Mr. Hossain had firstly referred to the
petitioner having filed I.A. No. 2576/2019 before the NCLT and
submitted that an identical prayer for the lifting of the attachment
orders made by the ED had been moved before the said Tribunal.
Learned counsel had also drawn the attention of the Court to the order
dated 26 June 2020 passed on the aforesaid application whereby the
Tribunal had restrained the respondent from realisation of the funds
based on the attachment order, the validity of which was questioned.
It was further contended that the writ petition as it stands has only
impugned the provisional attachment orders dated 08 July 2020 and
05 August 2020. It was further contended that insofar as the PAO
dated 08 July 2020 was concerned, that also formed subject matter of
I.A. No_____/2020 (placed at page 343 of the paper book) in which
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                               Page 7 of 124
too, the petitioners had sought issuance of directions requiring the
respondents to desist from proceeding further with the conformation
of the PAO. It was lastly urged that the orders in terms of the which
the PAO came to be confirmed by the Adjudicating Authority have
also not been assailed in the writ petition.
9.       On behalf of the petitioners, it was contended that the
jurisdiction of the Court to rule upon the challenge which stands
raised in the writ petition would have to be considered bearing in mind
the nature and extent of the jurisdiction which could be exercised
either by the NCLT or the Appellate Tribunal constituted under the
PMLA bearing in mind the principles laid down in Embassy
Property. Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that both the
aforenoted Tribunals exercise jurisdiction over matters entrusted to
them under their respective statutes. It was submitted that they would
thus clearly have no authority to rule on the question which arises and
touches upon the interplay between the provisions and powers
conferred by the IBC and the corresponding power and authority
which stands conferred upon the ED under the PMLA.                     Learned
counsel for the petitioner also drew the attention of the Court to the
conflicting views which had been rendered on the interplay between
IBC and PMLA and referred to the decision in Directorate of
Enforcement vs. Manoj Kumar Agarwal13 which had held that the
Enforcement Directorate would have no jurisdiction to interfere or
interdict proceedings under the IBC once a moratorium came into
effect. Learned counsel also invited the attention of the Court to the
conflicting views which had been expressed in Varrsana Ispat
Limited vs. Deputy Director of Enforcement14 as well as Andhra
Bank vs. Sterling Biotech Limited15, Rotomac Global Private
Limited vs. Deputy Director, Directorate of Enforcement16 on the
one hand and Manoj Kumar Agarwal on the other and contended
that in light of the flux in the legal position, it would but be
appropriate for this Court to effectively rule upon the questions which
arise. The attention of the Court was also drawn to the judgement
rendered by a larger bench of the National Company Law Appellate
Tribunal17 in Kiran Shah v. Enforcement Directorate18 which had
taken a view diametrically opposed to what was held in Manoj
Kumar Agarwal. In view of the aforesaid, it was urged that the
Court should render an authoritative pronouncement on the questions
which arise for determination.
10.      Before proceeding to rule upon the preliminary objections
noticed above, it would be pertinent to note that insofar as I.A. No.
2576/2019 filed before the NCLT is concerned, the said application
does not pertain to the PAOs‟ which have been challenged in the
instant writ petition. The subsequent miscellaneous application which
was moved in respect of the PAO dated 8 July 2020 does not in effect
carry any prayer for its quashing. In any case and in the considered
opinion of this Court, the preliminary objections raised with respect to
proceedings drawn or initiated before the NCLT would have to be
Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No.601, 612, 527 of 2019
examined and evaluated based upon the stand of the respondents
themselves who had contended that the said Tribunal would have no
jurisdiction to rule on the validity of the PAO in light of the
judgement rendered by the Supreme Court in Embassy Property.
This is evident from the minutes of the order dated 06 May 2022,
which is reproduced hereinbelow: -
“In the lead matter being W.P.(C) 9531/2020 after Mr.
Abhinav Vasisht, learned Senior Counsel had concluded his
submissions, Mr. Hossain, learned counsel appearing for the
Directorate has at the outset raised various preliminary objections. It
is contended that the writ petition challenges provisional orders of
attachment when in fact both the impugned attachment orders have
subsequently come to be affirmed by the Adjudicating Authority in
terms of its orders of 1 January 2021 and 29 January 2021. It is
pointed out that there is no challenge made to those two orders in the
writ petition. The Court is further apprised of the fact that the
objections on lines similar to those which were addressed on this
petition were also raised before the Adjudicating Authority and have
since come to be rejected after consideration on merits. That order
which stands placed as Annexure-E to the affidavit filed on behalf of
the Directorate is also not assailed. In view of the above, Mr.
Hossain would contend that the writ petitions as it stands presently
framed is liable to dismissed.
It is lastly pointed out that insofar as the Provisional Order of
Attachment No. 7/2020 is concerned, its validity has also been
questioned before the National Company Law Tribunal [NCLT] by
the petitioner and before which Authority the matter is still pending.
The last of the preliminary objection is addressed without prejudice
to the contention of the Directorate that even the invocation of the
jurisdiction of the NCLT would be barred by law and in light of the
principles laid down by the Supreme Court in Embassy Property
Development Pvt. Ltd. vs. State of Karnataka & Ors. [(2020) 13
SCC 308]. In view of the above, Mr. Hossain would contend that the
petitioner cannot pursue parallel remedies.
Bearing in mind the aforenoted preliminary objections that
are raised, let Mr. Vasisht, learned Senior Counsel respond to the
same.”
11.    In view of the stand as taken by and on behalf of the ED and so
encapsulated in the order of 6 May 2022, the Court notes that the
respondents cannot be permitted to approbate and reprobate. Having
taken the stand that a challenge to orders of attachment made under
the PMLA cannot be considered or ruled upon by the NCLT while
discharging its functions under the IBC, the preliminary objections
which are raised in this regard clearly do not merit acceptance. Once
the respondents have taken the principled stand that the NCLT would
have no jurisdiction to either decide or rule upon the validity of
proceedings initiated under the PMLA, it would be wholly illogical to
dismiss the instant writ petition and thus compel the petitioners to
pursue the applications made and pending before the said tribunal.
The Court also takes note of the orders dated 29 January 2021 and 08
April 2021 passed on the instant writ petition and in which the Court
had clearly recognised the jurisdictional issues which stood raised and
thus merited the writ petition itself being entertained.
12.    The Court further notes that the orders of confirmation passed
by the Adjudicating Authority have been directly assailed and
questioned in terms of the amendment which was permitted and thus
the objection raised on this score is also liable to be negatived. In any
case, this Court is of the considered opinion that in light of the
conflicting views which have been expressed by different Benches of
the NCLT/NCLAT, it is imperative that the Court answer the
questions raised in order to confer clarity and lend a quietus to the
controversy. In view of the aforesaid, the preliminary objections as
raised by Mr. Hossain are negatived.
13.      Proceeding then to the merits of the issues which arise, the
Court firstly proceeds to record the submissions which were addressed
at the behest of the petitioner. Learned counsel for the petitioner firstly
urged that the IBC is a special legislation and a complete code insofar
as insolvency and resolution of a corporate debtor is concerned. It
was submitted that provisions relating to revival and resolution of a
corporate debtor stand engrafted in and controlled by the IBC
exclusively.        Learned counsel placed reliance upon the judgments
rendered in Avani Projects & Infrastructure Limited vs. The
Official Liquidator19 and Jotun India Private Limited vs. PSL
Limited20 to submit that since the subject of resolution of a corporate
debtor is governed exclusively by the IBC which has been duly
recognised to be a special statute, it must consequently be held that its
provisions would have primacy over any other general statute
including the PMLA.
14.      Turning then to the admitted fact that both the IBC as well as
the PMLA adopt and incorporate non obstante clauses in terms of
Sections 238 and 71 respectively, it was argued on behalf of the
petitioner that it would be the IBC and its provisions which would
prevail. It was submitted that IBC being a later statute, would prevail
and override the provisions of the PMLA.                       According to learned
CP 1 of 2016 (High Court of Calcutta)
Company Petition No.434 of 2015 (Bombay High Court)
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                       Page 12 of 124
counsel, the attachment orders as made are thus liable to be tested on
the aforesaid lines.
15.    Turning then to the provisions contained in Section 14 of the
IBC, learned counsel for the petitioner laid stress upon the fact that
section 14(1)(a) places a complete embargo on continuation and
institution of suits or “proceedings” against the corporate debtor and
which may be pending before any court of law, tribunal, arbitration
panel or other authority. It was urged on behalf of the petitioner that
proceedings of attachment that may be initiated under the PMLA are
inherently civil in nature. It was argued that the provisions contained
in Chapter III of the PMLA and which deal with attachment of
properties alleged to have been derived or obtained from proceeds of
crime or value thereof are purely civil in nature and distinct from
proceedings which may otherwise be drawn under the aforesaid
statute under Chapter VII. It becomes pertinent to note that Chapter
VII puts in place provisions for the creation of Special Courts and for
the trial of offences under the PMLA. Learned counsel thus sought to
draw a distinction between the proceedings that may be initiated under
Chapters III and VII of the PMLA and contended that while the
former would be civil in character, those taken in Chapter VII are,
undisputedly, criminal in nature. The submission essentially was that
since the attachment of properties under Sections 5 or 8 contained in
Chapter III of the PMLA are civil proceedings, they would clearly fall
within the ambit of the expression “proceedings” as contained in
Section 14. This contention was premised on the assertion that the
expression “proceedings” would encompass all civil proceedings
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                Page 13 of 124
including those which may be described as quasi criminal and only
exclude those which are inherently and purely criminal in character.
According to learned counsel, it is only the latter which would not be
impacted by the legislative injunction comprised in Section 14.
16.    Learned counsel then laid stress upon the objects of Section 14
and submitted that the said provision had come to be introduced on the
statute book in order to ensure that the CIRP could proceed
unhindered and without any action being taken against the corporate
debtor or its assets. Learned counsel contended that Section 14 is
essentially designed to ensure that the assets and properties of the
corporate debtor are duly preserved and no coercive steps are taken
against them during the pendency of the CIRP. According to learned
counsel, the objectives underlying Section 14 are liable to be gathered
from the Report of the Insolvency Law Committee, February 2020
and more particularly Paras 8.2 and 8.11 thereof, which are extracted
“8.2. The moratorium under Section 14 is intended to keep “the
corporate debtor's assets together during the insolvency resolution
process and facilitating orderly completion of the processes
envisaged during the insolvency resolution process and ensuring
that the company may continue as a going concern while the
creditors take a view on resolution of default.” Keeping the
corporate debtor running as a going concern during the CIRP helps
in achieving resolution as a going concern as well, which is likely
to maximize value for all stakeholders. In other jurisdictions too, a
moratorium may be put in place on the advent of formal insolvency
proceedings, including liquidation and reorganization proceedings.
The UNCITRAL Guide notes that a moratorium is critical during
reorganization proceedings since it “facilitates the continued
operation of the business and allows the debtor a breathing space
to organize its affairs, time for preparation and approval of a
reorganization plan and for other steps such as shedding
unprofitable activities and onerous contracts, where appropriate.”
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                   Page 14 of 124
8.11. Further, the purpose of the moratorium is to keep the assets of
the debtor together for successful insolvency resolution, and it does
not bar all actions, especially where countervailing public policy
concerns are involved. For instance, criminal proceedings are not
considered to be barred by the moratorium, since they do not
constitute “money claims or recovery” proceedings. In this regard,
the Committee also noted that in some jurisdictions, laws allow
“regulatory claims, such as those which are not designed to collect
money for the estate but to protect vital and urgent public interests,
restraining activities causing environmental damage or activities
that are detrimental to public health and safety” to be continued
during the moratorium period.”
17.      The petitioners also sought to draw sustenance from the
following observations as made by the Supreme Court in its recent
decision of P. Mohanraj vs. M/s. Shah Brothers Ispat Pvt. Ltd.21
“32. Viewed from another point of view, clause (b) of Section 14(1)
also makes it clear that during the moratorium period, any transfer,
encumbrance, alienation, or disposal by the corporate debtor of any
of its assets or any legal right or beneficial interest therein being also
interdicted, yet a liability in the form of compensation payable under
Section 138 would somehow escape the dragnet of Section 14(1).
While Section 14(1)(a) refers to monetary liabilities of the corporate
debtor, Section 14(1)(b) refers to the corporate debtors‟ assets, and
together, these two clauses form a scheme which shields the
corporate debtor from pecuniary attacks against it in the moratorium
period so that the corporate debtor gets breathing space to continue
as a going concern in order to ultimately rehabilitate itself. Any
crack in this shield is bound to have adverse consequences, given the
object of Section 14, and cannot, by any process of interpretation, be
allowed to occur.”
In view of the aforesaid and bearing in mind the fact that the
proceedings initiated under the PMLA are civil in character, learned
counsel contended that the PAOs‟ impugned herein cannot be
sustained.
18.    Turning then to Section 32A of the IBC, it was urged that it
would be wholly incorrect to assume or assert that the assets of the
corporate debtor stand protected from attachment only after the stages
which are contemplated in the aforenoted provision are reached.
Learned counsel submitted that Section 32A is liable to be viewed
bearing in mind its principal purpose of bringing about a cessation of
criminal proceedings that may be pending against a corporate debtor
and with the legislative measure mandating that they would come to
an end once a Resolution Plan is approved or a measure relating to
liquidation adopted. The submission was that Section 32A is merely
an extension of the protection conferred by Section 14(1)(a) and,
therefore, the impugned orders of attachment are rendered wholly
unsustainable.
19.    Appearing for the respondents, Mr. Zoheb Hossain, learned
counsel appearing for the ED argued that “proceeds of crime” as
defined under Section 2(1)(u) of PMLA is not an operational debt as
per the provisions of Section 5(21) of the IBC. It was submitted that
ED would not fall within the definition of an operational creditor as
defined by Section 5(20) of the IBC. Learned counsel submitted that
when the ED proceeds to attach properties representing proceeds of
crime, it is not doing so by virtue of being a creditor of the corporate
debtor. Mr. Hossain submitted that while an operational debt would
mean a debt arising under any law for the time being in force,
proceeds of crimes stand on a completely different pedestal and relate
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                Page 16 of 124
to ill gotten assets derived or obtained from the commission of a
scheduled offence. In view of the aforesaid, learned counsel would
submit that it would be wholly incorrect to proceed on the basis that
orders of attachment made in respect of properties which constitute
proceeds of crime is akin to an action taken by a creditor against the
assets of a debtor. Learned counsel submitted that while proceeding
to attach and confiscate proceeds of crime, the action of the ED is
essentially aimed at taking away from a person or an entity all that
may have been illegitimately secured by indulging in proscribed
criminal activity.         In support of the aforesaid submissions, Mr.
Hossain, firstly, placed reliance upon the following passages as
appearing in the decision of this Court in Deputy Director Deputy
Director of Enforcement, Delhi v. Axis Bank & Ors 22:-
“105. It is vivid that the legislature has made provision for
“provisional attachment” bearing in mind the possibility of
circumstances of urgency that might necessitate such power to be
resorted to. A person engaged in criminal activity intending to
convert the proceeds of crime into assets that can be projected as
legitimate (or untainted) would generally be in a hurry to render the
same unavailable. The entire contours of the crime may not be
known when it comes to light and the enforcement authority
embarks upon a probe. The crime of such nature is generally
executed in stealth and secrecy, multiple transactions (seemingly
legitimate) creating a web lifting the veil whereof is not an easy task.
The truth of the matter is expected to be uncovered by a detailed
probe which may take long time to undertake and conclude. The
total wrongful gain from the criminal activity cannot be computed
till the investigation is completed. The authority for “provisional”
attachment of suspect assets is to ensure that the same remain within
the reach of the law.
141. This court finds it difficult to accept the proposition that the
jurisdiction conferred on the State by PMLA to confiscate the
“proceeds of crime” concerns a property the value whereof is “debt”
due or payable to the Government (Central or State) or local
authority. The Government, when it exercises its power under
PMLA to seek attachment leading to confiscation of proceeds of
crime, does not stand as a creditor, the person alleged to be complicit
in the offence of money-laundering similarly not acquiring the status
of a debtor. The State is not claiming the prerogative to deprive such
offender of ill-gotten assets so as to be perceived to be sharing the
loot, not the least so as to levy tax thereupon such as to give it a
colour of legitimacy or lawful earning, the idea being to take away
what has been illegitimately secured by proscribed criminal activity.
143. The proceeds of crime, there is no doubt, are not even remotely
covered by the expressions “revenues, taxes, cesses” or other
“rates.” The word “revenue” is the controlling word, the expressions
following (taxes, cesses, rates) taking the colour from the same. The
word revenue, in the context of Government is to be understood to
be conveying taxation [Gopi Pershad v. State of Punjab, AIR 1957
Punjab 45 (DB)]. This is how the expression is defined by Black's
Law Dictionary, Eighth Edition as also by Cambridge English
Dictionary (accessible online). The reliance by the respondents on
the use of the expression “non-tax revenue” with reference to PMLA
under major accounting head “0047 Other Fiscal Services” in the list
of Heads of Accounts of Union and States issued by Controller
General of Accounts, Department of Expenditure in the Ministry of
Finance, Government of India under the Government of India
(Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961 is misplaced. The use of the
expression for accounting purposes - to take care of receipts flowing
into the Consolidated Fund - cannot give to the value of proceeds of
crime realised by sale of properties confiscated under PMLA the
colour of taxation.”
20.    Mr. Hossain then proceeded to submit that the decision of the
Supreme Court in P. Mohanraj had succinctly explained and
acknowledged the difference between a debtor-creditor relationship
which may otherwise arise in the context of the IBC and being one
which would stand on a completely different pedestal from an
attachment or confiscation under PMLA. Learned counsel submitted
that P. Mohanraj categorically finds and holds that the authorities
while proceeding to attach and confiscate properties under the PMLA
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                   Page 18 of 124
do not act as creditors. Learned counsel referred to the following
observations as appearing in the judgement of P. Mohanraj: -
“100. Lastly, Shri Mehta relied upon Directorate of Enforcement v.
Axis Bank [Directorate of Enforcement v. Axis Bank, 2019 SCC
OnLine Del 7854 : (2019) 259 DLT 500] , and in particular, on
paras 127, 128 and 146 to 148 for the proposition that an offence
under the Prevention of Money-Laundering Act could not be
covered under Section 14(1)(a). The Delhi High Court's reasoning
is contained in paras 139 and 141, which are set out hereinbelow:
“139. From the above discussion, it is clear that the objects
and reasons of enactment of the four legislations are
distinct, each operating in different field. There is no
overlap. While RDBA has been enacted to provide for
speedier remedy for banks and financial institutions to
recover their dues, Sarfaesi Act (with added chapter on
registration of secured creditor) aims at facilitating the
secured creditors to expeditiously and effectively enforce
their security interest. In each case, the amount to be
recovered is “due” to the claimant i.e. the banks or the
financial institutions or the secured creditor, as the case
may be, the claim being against the debtor (or his
guarantor). The Insolvency Code, in contrast, seeks to
primarily protect the interest of creditors by entrusting
them with the responsibility to seek resolution through a
professional (RP), failure on his part leading eventually to
the liquidation process.
141. This Court finds it difficult to accept the proposition
that the jurisdiction conferred on the State by PMLA to
confiscate the “proceeds of crime” concerns a property the
value whereof is “debt” due or payable to the Government
(Central or State) or local authority. The Government,
when it exercises its power under PMLA to seek
attachment leading to confiscation of proceeds of crime,
does not stand as a creditor, the person alleged to be
complicit in the offence of money-laundering similarly not
acquiring the status of a debtor. The State is not claiming
the prerogative to deprive such offender of ill-gotten assets
so as to be perceived to be sharing the loot, not the least so
as to levy tax thereupon such as to give it a colour of
legitimacy or lawful earning, the idea being to take away
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                    Page 19 of 124
what has been illegitimately secured by proscribed
criminal activity.”
This raison d'être is completely different from what has been
advocated by Shri Mehta. The confiscation of the proceeds of crime
is by the Government acting statutorily and not as a creditor. This
judgment, again, does not further his case.”
21.    Learned counsel then submitted that a person who is engaged in
or has committed the offence of money-laundering cannot be
permitted to avail or enjoy the proceeds thereof under the garb of
seeking a discharge of his civil liability owed to its creditors. It was
submitted that the provisions of the IBC cannot be used as an
“amnesty route” for an accused under the PMLA and if that
contention were to be accepted, it would defeat the very objectives
informing the confiscation regime under the PMLA. Learned counsel
submitted that the aforesaid issue is, in any case, no longer res integra
in view of the line of decisions which have unhesitatingly held that the
powers conferred on the authorities to attach properties under the
PMLA is not impacted by Section 14 of the IBC. Reliance in this
respect was firstly placed upon the judgement rendered by NCLAT in
Varrsana Ispat, where the Appellate Tribunal had held as under:
“8. Section 14 is not applicable to the criminal proceeding or any
penal action taken pursuant to the criminal proceeding or any act
having essence of crime or crime proceeds. The object of the
„Prevention of Money-laundering Act, 2002‟ is to prevent the
money-laundering and to provide confiscation of property derived
from, or involved in, money-laundering and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
12. From the aforesaid provisions, it is clear that the „Prevention of
Money-Laundering Act, 2002‟ relates to „proceeds of crime‟ and the
offence relates to „money-laundering‟ resulting confiscation of
property derived from, or involved in, money-laundering and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. Thus, as the
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                   Page 20 of 124
„Prevention of Money-laundering Act, 2002‟ or provisions therein
relates to „proceeds of crime‟, we hold that Section 14 of the „I&B
Code‟ is not applicable to such proceeding.
14. As the „Prevention of Money-laundering Act, 2002‟ relates to
different fields of penal action of „proceeds of crime‟, it invokes
simultaneously with the „I&B Code‟, having no overriding effect of
one Act over the other including the „I&B Code‟, we find no merit in
this appeal. It is accordingly dismissed. No costs.”
22.     Mr. Hossain further apprises the Court that the civil appeal
which was taken against the aforesaid decision of NCLAT came to be
dismissed by the Supreme Court on 22 July 2019. Learned counsel
would submit that in view of the dismissal of the civil appeal, not only
did the judgement of NCLAT stand merged, it also became the law of
the land as declared by the Supreme Court and thus binding on all
authorities in view of Article 141 of the Constitution.
23.     Reliance was then placed on the following observations as
made by NCLAT in Andhra Bank v Sterling Biotech Limited23:
“15. In so far the assets of the „Corporate Debtor‟ is concerned, if it
is based on the proceeds of crime, it is always open to the
„Enforcement Directorate‟ to seize the assets of the „Corporate
Debtor‟ and act in accordance with the „Prevention of Money-
laundering Act, 2002‟ (for short, „the PMLA‟).”
Mr. Hossain further urged that the flux in the legal position that may
have existed in light of the decisions rendered by the NCLT and
NCLAT in different decisions, in any case stands laid to rest in light
of the decision pronounced by the larger bench of NCLAT in Kiran
Shah where the decision in Manoj Kumar Agarwal was held to have
been rendered per incuriam and the Tribunal had held as follows: -
(Company Appeal (AT) (Insolvency) No. 601, 612, 527 of 2019),
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                      Page 21 of 124
“98. Although, Section 14 of I & B Code deals with „moratorium‟, it
is not a hindrance for the „Authority‟ and the Officers under the
„Prevention of Money-laundering Act, 2002‟ to deny person of the
tainted „Proceeds of Crime‟. Suffice it for this „Tribunal‟ to point out
that a person who is involved in „Money-laundering‟ is not to be
allowed to enjoy the fruits of „Proceeds of Crime‟ with a view to
ward off is Civil indebtedness, in respect of his Creditors.
99. As seen from the „Prevention of Money-laundering Act, 2002‟,
the purpose of the Act is to prevent „Money-laundering‟ and it deals
with confiscation of property derived from or concerned with
„Money-laundering‟ etc. In fact, „The Prevention of Money-
laundering Act, 2002‟ is to fulfill our Country‟s obligation in
adhering to the United Nations Resolutions and in regard to
Assets/Properties being the „Proceeds of Crime‟, it takes a „primacy
and precedence‟ over the „Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016‟
which promotes “Resolution‟ as its objective over Liquidation in the
considered opinion of this „Tribunal‟.
100. In the instant case, there is no „Resolution Plan‟ as approved by
the „Tribunal‟ and further no Liquidation Proceedings had ended in
the sale of Liquidation Assets of the „Corporate Debtor‟.
101. Besides this, the objective, purpose of two enactments (1) „I &
B Code‟ and (2) „PMLA‟ even though at the first blush appear to be
at logger heads, there is no repugnancy and inconsistency between
them, in lieu of the fact the text, shape and its colour are
conspicuously distinct and different, operating in their respective
spheres. More importantly, when confiscation of the „Proceeds of
Crime‟ takes place, the said Act is performed by the Government not
in its status/capacity/role as Creditor.”
24.    In view of the aforesaid, Mr. Hossain would submit that Section
14 of the IBC cannot, by any stretch of imagination, be recognised as
prohibiting an action of attachment under the PMLA. Mr. Hossain
submitted that the question of whether the provisions of the IBC
would have precedence over those engrafted in the PMLA, in any
case, stands answered in favour of the respondents as would be
evident from the following passages of the decision of the Court in
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                    Page 22 of 124
“139. From the above discussion, it is clear that the objects and
reasons of enactment of the four legislations are distinct, each
operating in different field. There is no overlap. While RDBA has
been enacted to provide for speedier remedy for banks and
financial institutions to recover their dues, SARFAESI Act (with
added chapter on registration of secured creditor) aims at
facilitating the secured creditors to expeditiously and effectively
enforce their security interest. In each case, the amount to be
recovered is “due” to the claimant i.e. the banks or the financial
institutions or the secured creditor, as the case may be, the claim
being against the debtor (or his guarantor). The Insolvency Code,
in contrast, seeks to primarily protect the interest of creditors by
entrusting them with the responsibility to seek resolution through a
professional (RP), failure on his part leading eventually to the
liquidation process.
144. The respondent have referred to the following observations of
the Supreme Court in order dated 10.08.2018 in Special Leave to
Appeal (Civil) No. 6483/2018, Principal Commissioner of Income
Tax v. Monnet Ispat and Energy Limited:—
“Given Section 238 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy
Code, 2016, it is obvious that the Code will override
anything inconsistent contained in any other enactment,
including the Income-Tax Act.
We may also refer in this connection to Dena Bank v.
Bhikhabhai Prabhudas Parekh and Co. (2000) 5 SCC 694
and its progeny, making it clear that income-tax dues,
being in the nature of Crown debts, do not take
precedence even over secured creditors, who are private
persons.”
145. Noticeably, the effect of Insolvency Code on PMLA was not
in issue before the Supreme Court in the aforesaid case, the prime
concern being the conflict arising out of claims of revenue under
Income Tax Act, 1961 vis-à-vis proceedings under the Insolvency
Code. For the same reasons, the ruling of the full bench of the
Madras High Court in Indian Overseas Bank (supra) also would
have no effect here.
146. A Resolution Professional appointed under the Insolvency
Code does not have any personal stake. He only represents the
interest of creditors, their committee having appointed and tasked
him with certain responsibility under the said law. The moratorium
enforced in terms of Section 14 of Insolvency Code cannot come in
the way of the statutory authority conferred by PMLA on the
enforcement officers for depriving a person (may be also a debtor)
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                    Page 23 of 124
of the proceeds of crime. A view to the contrary, if taken, would
defeat the objective of PMLA by opening an escape route. After
all, a person indulging in money-laundering cannot be permitted to
avail of the proceeds of crime to get a discharge for his civil
liability towards his creditors for the simple reason such assets are
not lawfully his to claim.
147. To sum up on the issue, the objective of the legislation in
PMLA being distinct from the purposes of the three other
enactments viz. RDBA, SARFAESI Act and Insolvency Code, the
latter cannot prevail over the former. There is no inconsistency.
The purpose, the text and context are different. This court thus
rejects the argument of prevalence of the said laws over PMLA.”
25.    Proceeding along this thread, Mr. Hossain also sought to draw
and sustenance and strength from the principles which were
enunciated in Axis Bank, where the learned Judge had held that the
provisions of the IBC cannot be interpreted in a fashion which would
defeat the very objective of the PMLA or open an escape route and
thus rendering the authorities under the aforesaid enactment denuded
of the power to move against proceeds of crime. It was pointed out
that in Axis Bank and, more particularly, Para 146 of the report, the
learned Judge had unequivocally held that a person indulging in
money laundering cannot be permitted to avail of the proceeds of
crime.
26.    Mr. Hossain then submitted that the IBC creates a specific bar
with respect to proceedings that may be initiated under the PMLA by
virtue of the provisions contained in Section 32A. It was submitted
that the said provision was introduced essentially to fill “critical
gaps” in the corporate insolvency framework.                   According to Mr.
Hossain, the introduction of Section 32A throws light upon the scope
of Section 14 in the sense of providing an indication of the terminal
point whereafter no further steps can be taken with respect to the
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                   Page 24 of 124
assets of the corporate debtor. Learned counsel submitted that this
Court in Nitin Jain Liquidator of PSL Limited vs. Enforcement
Directorate24 had clearly enunciated the “trigger events” under the
IBC which would constitute an embargo on attachment under the
PMLA. Referring to the said decision, Mr. Hossain submitted that the
Court had found that the provisions of Section 32A would come into
play only upon a Resolution Plan being approved or a measure
towards liquidation being adopted and those alone constituting the
“defining moment” for the aforesaid purpose. Learned counsel
referred to the following passages as appearing in the decision of the
Court in Nitin Jain: -
“96. While Mr. Malhotra, learned senior counsel appearing for the
secured creditors, has sought to invoke and draw sustenance from
the provisions of Order XXI Rule 92 and 94 of the Civil Procedure
Code to contend that the confirmation of the proposal for the
settlement of the affairs of the corporate debtor should be held to
be the determinative, the Court while not rejecting that submission
completely is of the opinion that the answer to the same cannot rest
on the pedestal of Order XXI. This since no pari materia provision
stands engrafted in the IBC. It becomes apposite to note that Order
XXI Rule 92 of the Civil Procedure Code unequivocally spells out
and mandates that the sale shall become absolute upon its
confirmation. The decisions cited by Mr. Malhotra in this respect
are also not consequently being elaborately dealt with for the
purposes of answering this particular issue.
97. This Court is of the opinion that the answer to determining
when the bar under Section 32A would come into play must be
answered bearing in mind the ethos of Section 32A and upon an
interpretation of the provisions of the IBC and the Regulations
framed thereunder. As is evident from a careful reading of Section
32A(2), the Legislature in its wisdom has provided that no action
shall be taken against the properties of the corporate debtor in
respect of an offense committed prior to the commencement of the
CIRP and once either a resolution plan comes to be approved or
when a sale of liquidation assets takes place. The objective
underlying the introduction of this provision has been eloquently
explained by the Supreme Court in Manish Kumar. The intent of
the mischief sought to be addressed is clearly borne out from the
Committee Reports as well as the SOA. The principal
consideration which appears to have weighed was the imperative
need to ensure that neither the resolution nor the liquidation
process once set into motion and fructifying and resulting in a
particular mode of resolution coming to be duly accepted and
approved, comes to be bogged down or clouded by unforeseen or
unexpected claims or events. The IBC essentially envisages the
process of resolution or liquidation to move forward unhindered.
The Legislature in its wisdom has recognised a pressing and
imperative need to insulate the implementation of measures for
restructuring, revival or liquidation of a corporate debtor from the
vagaries of litigation or prosecution once the process of resolution
or liquidation reaches the stage of the Adjudicating Authority
approving the course of action to be finally adopted in relation to
the corporate debtor. Section 32A legislatively places vital import
upon the decision of the Adjudicating Authority when it approves
the measure to be implemented in order to take the process of
liquidation or resolution to its culmination. It is this momentous
point in the statutory process that must be recognised as the
defining moment for the bar created by Section 32A coming into
effect. If it were held to be otherwise, it would place the entire
process of resolution and liquidation in jeopardy. Holding to the
contrary would result in a right being recognised as inhering in the
respondent to move against the properties of the corporate debtor
even after their sale or transfer has been approved by the
Adjudicating Authority. This would clearly militate against the
very purpose and intent of Section 32A. It becomes pertinent to
recollect that one of the primary objectives which informed the
introduction of this provision was to assure the resolution applicant
that its offer once accepted would stand sequestered from action
for enforcement of outstanding claims against the corporate debtor
or from penalties connected with offenses committed prior thereto.
The imperative for the extension of this legislative guarantee
subserves the vital aspect of maximization of value.”
27.      Drawing the attention of the Court to the decision of NCLAT in
JSW Steel Limited vs. Mahender Kumar Khandalwal & Ors.25,
Mr. Hossain laid emphasis on the fact that in the said case an order of
provisional attachment had come to be made on 10 October 2019 and
thus, admittedly, after the Resolution Plan had been approved by
NCLT on 05 September 2019. It is this factor which, according to Mr.
Hossain,      clearly    distinguishes        the    aforesaid    decision    and
consequently, the observations as appearing therein are liable to be
construed accordingly. It was pointed out that, undisputedly, in the
facts of the present case neither a Resolution Plan stands approved nor
has a measure towards liquidation been adopted. In view of the above,
it was submitted that it would be incorrect in law to hold that the
authorities under the PMLA stood restrained from proceeding to
attach properties which constituted proceeds of crime.
28.    Mr. Hossain then submitted that Section 32A is the only special
dispensation which had been adopted and enforced by the Legislature
in terms of which the powers of attachment as conferred upon the ED
are required to yield. Section 32A, according to Mr. Hossain,
essentially incorporates measures in furtherance of the principles of a
“clean slate” and a “clean break”. He referred to the Report of the
Insolvency Law Committee and which had recommended the adoption
of a measure for enabling a Resolution Applicant to take over the
properties of a corporate debtor without any prior liabilities or fetters.
It was submitted that this is evident from Paras 17.1 and 17.2 of the
Report, which reads thus: -
“17.1. Section 17 of the Code provides that on commencement
of the CIRP, the powers of management of the corporate debtor
vest with the interim resolution professional. Further, the
powers of the Board of Directors or partners of the corporate
debtor stand suspended, and are to be exercised by the interim
resolution professional. Thereafter, Section 29A, read with
Section 35(1)(f), places restrictions on related parties of the
corporate debtor from proposing a resolution plan and
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                  Page 27 of 124
purchasing the property of the corporate debtor in the CIRP and
liquidation process, respectively. Thus, in most cases, the
provisions of the Code effectuate a change in control of the
corporate debtor that results in a clean break of the corporate
debtor from its erstwhile management. However, the legal form
of the corporate debtor continues in the CIRP, and may be
preserved in the resolution plan. Additionally, while the
property of the corporate debtor may also change hands upon
resolution or liquidation, such property also continues to exist,
either as property of the corporate debtor, or in the hands of the
purchaser.
17.2. However, even after commencement of CIRP or after its
successful resolution or liquidation, the corporate debtor, along
with its property, would be susceptible to investigations or
proceedings related to criminal offences committed by it prior
to the commencement of a CIRP, leading to the imposition of
certain liabilities and restrictions on the corporate debtor and its
properties even after they were lawfully acquired by a
resolution applicant or a successful bidder, respectively.”
29.    According to Mr. Hossain, the power of attachment when
viewed in juxtaposition of the measure which ultimately came to be
adopted by the Legislature granting immunity only from the stage of
approval of the Resolution Plan or a liquidation measure being
adopted, is evidence of the intent of the authors of the statute not
envisaging an embargo operating on the powers of the ED under the
PMLA prior thereto. In view of the aforesaid, it was his submission
that the protection which came to be accorded by Section 32A cannot
possibly be read as being applicable prior to a Resolution Plan being
approved or a liquidation measure being enforced.
30.    This, according to Mr. Hossain, is manifest also when one bears
in mind the fact that if Section 14 prohibited provisional attachments
being made under the PMLA and conceived of such a bar, there would
have been no need for the introduction of Section 32A or for
provisioning for trigger events in the manner that the Parliament
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                    Page 28 of 124
ultimately chose to adopt. The submission urged on behalf of the
petitioners of Section 32A being a continuation of the intent of
Section 14 was also countered with Mr. Hossain submitting that the
Legislature being conscious of the legal position chose to introduce
and confer statutory protection only in terms of Section 32A. In view
of the above, Mr. Hossain submitted that the arguments addressed
along these lines at the behest of the petitioner is liable to be
negatived.
31.    It was then contended that PMLA is a special legislation aimed
at dealing with the offence of money-laundering. Mr. Hossain argued
that insofar as aspects relating to the aforesaid offence is concerned,
PMLA would clearly have primacy over the IBC. Mr. Hossain argued
that the Court should bear in mind that Parliament while enacting the
PMLA, chose to refrain from providing any exceptions and thus
clearly intending its provisions insofar as they related to offences of
money laundering to operate unhindered by any other statute. It was
further contended that courts in India have consistently held that
economic offences constitute a separate and distinct class and thus
must be treated differently. He further argued that PMLA is a statute
which has been enacted in light of the international obligations owed
by India by virtue of being a signatory to various treaties and
agreements. Learned counsel would submit that an interpretation of
the IBC provisions in a manner which stifles or fetters the powers
conferred upon authorities by the PMLA in aid of the fight against
organised crime and money laundering would clearly be detrimental
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                               Page 29 of 124
to the economic interests and international commitments of the
country itself.
32.    Mr. Hossain then submitted that the principal objective of the
PMLA is to prevent money-laundering and to confiscate all properties
that may have been derived or obtained from commission of the
aforesaid offence. It was urged that investigation under the PMLA is
primarily aimed at unearthing and attaching proceeds that may be
gained from the commission of scheduled offences. According to Mr.
Hossain, the power of provisional attachment aids the ultimate
confiscation of properties that may have been obtained by committing
the offence of money laundering. The IBC, on the other hand,
according to Mr. Hossain is an umbrella legislation which deals with
the subject of insolvency resolution. That statute, according to learned
counsel, is primarily concerned with a revival of a corporate debtor
and for the protection of its interests and those of its various creditors
during the insolvency resolution process. According to Mr. Hossain,
since the primary purpose of the IBC is restricted to facilitating
lenders of a corporate debtor to ensure a timely recovery or
restructuring of stressed assets, its provisions cannot possibly be
interpreted as overriding the provisions contained in the PMLA.
33.    Elaborating upon the aforesaid submissions, Mr. Hossain urged
that the view as advocated by the petitioner would clearly impact the
power of the respondent to take suitable action against money
laundering and thus derogate from India's international obligations and
may in fact have wider ramifications including impacting the position
of India before the Financial Action Task Force. Learned counsel
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                               Page 30 of 124
submitted that the view as expressed and commended for acceptance
on behalf of the respondents would be consistent with the UNODC
Model Money-laundering Proceeds of Crime in Terrorist
Financing Bill 2003 and more particularly Section 51 thereof which
“51.     Paramountcy of this Part in bankruptcy or winding up
(1) Where a person who holds realizable property is [adjudged]
(a)    property for the time being subject to a restraining order
made before the order adjudging him bankrupt; and
(b)    any proceeds of property realized by virtue of section 48(5)
or (6) for the time being in the hands of a person appointed
under section 48(2) or 68(1)(g),
is excluded from the property of the bankrupt for the purposes of
the [Bankruptcy Act].
(2) Where a person has been [adjudged] bankrupt, the powers
conferred on [the Court] by section 48 or 68 or on a person
appointed under section 48(2) or 68(1)(g) shall not be exercised in
relation to property for the time being comprised in the property of
the bankrupt for the purposes of the [Bankruptcy Act].
[(3) Where, in the case of a debtor, a receiver stands appointed
under section [ ] of the [Bankruptcy Act] and any property of
the debtor is subject to [a restraint order under or for the
purposes of that Act], the powers conferred on the receiver by
virtue of that Act do not apply to property for the time being
subject to such restraint order.]
[(4) Where a person is adjudged bankrupt and has directly or
indirectly made a gift caught by this Part:
(a)    no order shall be made by virtue of sections [ ] of the
[Bankruptcy Act] in respect of the making of the gift at
any time when the person has been charged with a serious
offence and the proceedings have not been concluded by
the acquittal of the defendant or discontinuance of the
proceedings, or when property of the person to whom the
gift was made is subject to [a restraint order or a
charging order made under or for the purposes of that
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                    Page 31 of 124
(b)    any order made by virtue of those sections after the
conclusion of the proceedings shall take into account any
realisation under this Part of property held by the person to
whom the gift was made].”
34.      Mr. Hossain then referred to the decision of the Supreme Court
in Biswanath Bhattacharya vs. Union of India26 which had
accorded a judicial seal of approval to the concept of civil forfeiture.
Mr. Hossain referred to the following passages as appearing in the
aforesaid decision:
“39. If a subject acquires property by means which are not legally
approved, the sovereign would be perfectly justified to deprive such
persons of the enjoyment of such ill-gotten wealth. There is a public
interest in ensuring that persons who cannot establish that they have
legitimate sources to acquire the assets held by them do not enjoy
such wealth. Such a deprivation, in our opinion, would certainly be
consistent with the requirement of Articles 300-A and 14 of the
Constitution which prevent the State from arbitrarily depriving a
subject of his property.
40. Whether there is a right to hold property which is the product of
crime is a question examined in many jurisdictions. To understand
the substance of such examination, we can profitably extract from an
article published in the Journal of Financial Crime, 2004 by
Anthony Kennedy. [ Head of Legal Casework, Northern Ireland for
the Assets Recovery Agency in his article “Justifying the Civil
Recovery of Criminal Proceeds” published in the Journal of
“… It has been suggested that a logical interpretation of
Article 1 of the First Protocol of the European Convention
„Everyone is entitled to own whatever property
they have (lawfully) acquired….‟
hence implying that they do not have a right under Article 1 to own
property which has been unlawfully acquired. This point was argued
in the Irish High Court in Gilligan v. Criminal Assets Bureau,
Tax Reports 424] , namely, that where a defendant is in possession
or control over assets which directly or indirectly constitute the
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                      Page 32 of 124
proceeds of crime, he has no property rights in those assets and no
valid title to them, whether protected by the Irish Constitution or by
any other law. A similar view seems to have been expressed earlier
in a dissenting opinion in Welch v. United Kingdom [(1995) 20
EHRR 247] :„in my opinion, the confiscation of property acquired by
crime, even without express prior legislation is not contrary to
Article 7 of the Convention, nor to Article 1 of the First Protocol‟.
This principle has also been explored in US jurisprudence. In United
States v. Van Horn [789 F 2d 1492 (1986)] a defendant convicted of
fraud and money laundering was not entitled to the return of the
seized proceeds since they amounted to contraband which he had no
right to possess. In United States v. Dusenbery [34 F Supp 2d 602
(1999)] the Court held that, because the respondent conceded that he
used drug proceeds to purchase a car and other personal property, he
had no ownership interest in the property and thus could not seek a
remedy against the Government‟s decision to destroy the property
without recourse to formal forfeiture proceedings. The UK
Government has impliedly adopted this perspective, stating that:
„… It is important to bear in mind the purpose of civil
recovery, namely, to establish as a matter of civil law that
there is no right to enjoy property that derives from
unlawful conduct.‟”
41. Non-conviction based asset forfeiture model also known as Civil
Forfeiture Legislation gained currency in various countries: the
United States of America, Italy, Ireland, South Africa, UK, Australia
and certain Provinces of Canada.
42. Anthony Kennedy conceptualised the civil forfeiture regime in
the following words:
“Civil forfeiture represents a move from a crime and
punishment model of justice to a preventive model of
justice. It seeks to take illegally obtained property out of the
possession of organised crime figures so as to prevent them,
first, from using it as working capital for future crimes and,
secondly, from flaunting it in such a way as they become
role models for others to follow into a lifestyle of
acquisitive crime. Civil recovery is therefore not aimed at
punishing behaviour but at removing the „trophies‟ of past
criminal behaviour and the means to commit future criminal
behaviour. While it would clearly be more desirable if
successful criminal proceedings could be instituted, the
operative theory is that „half a loaf is better than no bread‟.”
43. For all the abovementioned reasons, we are of the opinion that
the Act is not violative of Article 20 of the Constitution. Even
otherwise, as was rightly pointed out by the learned Additional
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                     Page 33 of 124
Solicitor General, in view of its inclusion in the Ninth Schedule, the
Act is immune from attack on the ground that it violates any of the
rights guaranteed under Part III of the Constitution by virtue of the
declaration under Article 31-B.”
Bearing in mind the purpose which a civil forfeiture subserves, it was
contended that the impugned orders would merit no interference.
35.    It is these rival submissions which fall for the consideration of
the Court. However, before proceeding to consider the submissions of
respective counsels, it would be profitable to briefly notice the
relevant provisions of the two statutes in the backdrop of which the
dispute itself arises. This since the answer to the question which
stands posited would have to be evaluated in the backdrop of the
intent of the two competing statutes and the various provisions
engrafted therein.
36.    IBC, as a statutory enactment, came to be formally promulgated
on 28 May 2016. While Sections 181 to 194 thereof came into force
on 05 August 2016, its other provisions came to be enforced by
separate notifications issued on 19 August 2016, 01 November 2016,
2017, 01 May 2018 and 15 November 2019. Section 14 came to be
enforced on 01 December 2016 by a notification dated 30 November
2016. A „corporate debtor‟ has been defined in Section 3(8) to mean
a corporate person who owes a debt to any person. A „creditor‟ is
defined by Section 3(10) to mean a person to whom a debt is owed
and includes a financial creditor, operational creditor, secured creditor
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                   Page 34 of 124
an unsecured creditor and a decree holder. The word „debt‟ is defined
in section 3(11) to mean a liability or obligation in respect of a claim
which is due from any person and includes a financial or an
operational debt. A „secured creditor‟ is defined in Section 3(30) to
mean a creditor in whose favour a security interest stands created. The
expression „security interest‟ is defined in Section 3(31) to include
transactions which secure payment or performance of an obligation
and also include mortgages, charges, hypothecation and the like. A
„financial creditor‟ is defined in Section 5(7) to mean a person to
whom a financial debt owed. A „financial debt‟ is defined in Section
“5(8). “financial debt” means a debt alongwith interest, if any,
which is disbursed against the consideration for the time value of
money and includes—
(a) money borrowed against the payment of interest;
(b) any amount raised by acceptance under any acceptance credit
facility or its de-materialised equivalent;
(c) any amount raised pursuant to any note purchase facility or the
issue of bonds, notes, debentures, loan stock or any similar
(d) the amount of any liability in respect of any lease or hire
purchase contract which is deemed as a finance or capital lease
under the Indian Accounting Standards or such other
accounting standards as may be prescribed;
(e) receivables sold or discounted other than any receivables sold
on non-recourse basis;
(f) any amount raised under any other transaction, including any
forward sale or purchase agreement, having the commercial
effect of a borrowing;
[Explanation.- For the purposes of this sub-clause,-
(i) any amount raised from an allottee under a real estate
project shall be deemed to be an amount having the
commercial effect of a borrowing; and
(ii)the expressions, “allottee” and “real estate project” shall
have the meanings respectively assigned to them in clauses
(d) and (zn) of section 2 of the Real Estate (Regulation and
Development) Act, 2016 (16 of 2016);]
(g) any derivative transaction entered into in connection with
protection against or benefit from fluctuation in any rate or
price and for calculating the value of any derivative
transaction, only the market value of such transaction shall be
taken into account;
(h) any counter-indemnity obligation in respect of a guarantee,
indemnity, bond, documentary letter of credit or any other
instrument issued by a bank or financial institution;
(i) the amount of any liability in respect of any of the guarantee or
indemnity for any of the items referred to in sub-clauses (a) to
(h) of this clause;”
37.    Section 5(21) falling in Part II of the Act then proceeds to
define an operational debt in the following terms:-
“5(21). “operational debt” means a claim in respect of the provision
of goods or services including employment or a debt in respect of
the payment of dues arising under any law for the time being in
force and payable to the Central Government, any State
Government or any local authority;”
38.    A „Resolution Applicant‟ is defined in terms of Section 5(25) as
being a person who individually or jointly submits a Resolution Plan
for the purposes of restructuring and resolution of a corporate debtor.
A „Resolution Plan‟ is defined in Section 5(26) to mean a plan
proposed for insolvency resolution of the corporate debtor. A financial
creditor is entitled to initiate a CIRP either by itself or jointly with
other financial creditors in terms of Section 7. As per Section 7(5) of
the IBC where an Adjudicating Authority is satisfied that a default has
occurred, it may proceed to admit the insolvency petition. Section 7(6)
of the IBC stipulates that the CIRP shall commence from the date of
admission of the application in terms of sub-section (5) noticed
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                   Page 36 of 124
hereinabove. Section 8 of the IBC confers an identical right upon an
operational creditor to initiate insolvency proceedings against a
corporate debtor. In terms of Section 9(5) of the IBC, the Adjudicating
Authority, may after due consideration and upon being satisfied that
an operational debt has remained unpaid, admit the application.
Section 13 empowers the Adjudicating Authority to declare a
moratorium for purposes specified in Section 14. Sections 13 and 14
of the IBC are extracted hereinbelow: -
“13.    Declaration of moratorium and public announcement.
(1) The Adjudicating Authority, after admission of the application
under section 7 or section 9 or section 10, shall, by an order—
(a) declare a moratorium for the purposes referred to in section 14;
(b) cause a public announcement of the initiation of corporate
insolvency resolution process and call for the submission of
claims under section 15; and
(c) appoint an interim resolution professional in the manner as laid
down in section 16.
(2) The public announcement referred to in clause (b) of sub-
section (1) shall be made immediately after the appointment of the
interim resolution professional.”
(1) Subject to provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3), on the
insolvency commencement date, the Adjudicating Authority shall
by order declare moratorium for prohibiting all of the following,
(a) the institution of suits or continuation of pending suits or
proceedings against the corporate debtor including execution
of any judgment, decree or order in any court of law, tribunal,
arbitration panel or other authority;
(b) transferring, encumbering, alienating or disposing of by the
corporate debtor any of its assets or any legal right or
beneficial interest therein;
(c) any action to foreclose, recover or enforce any security interest
created by the corporate debtor in respect of its property
including any action under the Securitisation and
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                    Page 37 of 124
Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of
Security Interest Act, 2002 (54 of 2002);
(d) the recovery of any property by an owner or lessor where such
property is occupied by or in the possession of the corporate
debtor.
[Explanation.- For the purposes of this sub-section, it is hereby
clarified that notwithstanding anything contained in any other law
for the time being in force, a license, permit, registration, quota,
concession, clearances or a similar grant or right given by the
Central Government, State Government, local authority, sectoral
regulator or any other authority constituted under any other law for
the time being in force, shall not be suspended or terminated on the
grounds of insolvency, subject to the condition that there is no
default in payment of current dues arising for the use or
continuation of license, permit, registration, quota, concession,
clearances or a similar grant or right during the moratorium period;
(2) The supply of essential goods or services to the corporate
debtor as may be specified shall not be terminated or suspended or
interrupted during moratorium period.
(2A) Where the interim resolution professional or resolution
professional, as the case may be, considers the supply of goods or
services critical to protect and preserve the value of the corporate
debtor and manage the operations of such corporate debtor as a
going concern, then the supply of such goods or services shall not
be terminated, suspended or interrupted during the period of
moratorium, except where such corporate debtor has not paid dues
arising from such supply during the moratorium period or in such
circumstances as may be specified.
(3) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply to -
(a) such transactions, agreements or other arrangements as may
be notified by the Central Government in consultation with any
financial sector regulator or any other authority:
(b) a surety in a contract of guarantee to a corporate debtor.
(4) The order of moratorium shall have effect from the date of such
order till the completion of the corporate insolvency resolution
Provided that where at any time during the corporate
insolvency resolution process period, if the Adjudicating Authority
approves the resolution plan under sub-section (1) of section 31 or
passes an order for liquidation of corporate debtor under section 33,
the moratorium shall cease to have effect from the date of such
approval or liquidation order, as the case may be.”
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                    Page 38 of 124
39.     The IBC then obliges the Adjudicating Authority to make a
public announcement with respect to the CIRP process in accordance
with the provisions contained in Section 15. Section 16 empowers the
Adjudicating Authority to appoint an Interim Resolution Professional.
Section 17 charges the Interim Resolution Professional to manage the
affairs of the corporate debtor in the interregnum and reads thus: -
“17. Management of affairs of corporate debtor by interim
resolution professional.-
(1)     From the date of appointment of the interim resolution
a) the management of the affairs of the corporate debtor shall
vest in the interim resolution professional;
b) the powers of the board of directors or the partners of the
corporate debtor, as the case may be, shall stand suspended
and be exercised by the interim resolution professional;
c) the officers and managers of the corporate debtor shall
report to the interim resolution professional and provide
access to such documents and records of the corporate
debtor as may be required by the interim resolution
d) the financial institutions maintaining accounts of the
corporate debtor shall act on the instructions of the interim
resolution professional in relation to such accounts and
furnish all information relating to the corporate debtor
available with them to the interim resolution professional.
(2)    The interim resolution professional vested with the
management of the corporate debtor shall—
a) act and execute in the name and on behalf of the corporate
debtor all deeds, receipts, and other documents, if any;
b) take such actions, in the manner and subject to such
restrictions, as may be specified by the Board;
c) have the authority to access the electronic records of
corporate debtor from information utility having financial
information of the corporate debtor;
d) have the authority to access the books of account, records
and other relevant documents of corporate debtor available
with government authorities, statutory auditors, accountants
and such other persons as may be specified.
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                    Page 39 of 124
e) be responsible for complying with the requirements under
any law for the time being in force on behalf of the
corporate debtor.”
40.    The duties of an Interim Resolution Professional are set out in
Section 18 which reads as follows: -
“18. Duties of interim resolution professional.-
The interim resolution professional shall perform the following
a) collect all information relating to the assets, finances and
operations of the corporate debtor for determining the
financial position of the corporate debtor, including
information relating to—
(i)     business operations for the previous two years;
(ii)    financial and operational payments for the previous
(iii)   list of assets and liabilities as on the initiation date;
(iv)    such other matters as may be specified;
b) receive and collate all the claims submitted by creditors to
him, pursuant to the public announcement made under
c) constitute a committee of creditors;
d) monitor the assets of the corporate debtor and manage its
operations until a resolution professional is appointed by the
committee of creditors;
e) file information collected with the information utility, if
f) take control and custody of any asset over which the
corporate debtor has ownership rights as recorded in the
balance sheet of the corporate debtor, or with information
utility or the depository of securities or any other registry
that records the ownership of assets including—
(i)     assets over which the corporate debtor has
ownership rights which may be located in a foreign
(ii)    assets that may or may not be in possession of the
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                      Page 40 of 124
(iii)     tangible assets, whether movable or immovable;
(iv)      intangible assets including intellectual property;
(v)       securities including shares held in any subsidiary of
the corporate debtor, financial instruments,
insurance policies;
(vi)      assets subject to the determination of ownership by a
court or authority;
g) to perform such other duties as may be specified by the
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, the term
“assets” shall not include the following, namely:—
(a) assets owned by a third party in possession of the
corporate debtor held under trust or under
contractual arrangements including bailment;
(b) assets of any Indian or foreign subsidiary of the
corporate debtor; and
(c) such other assets as may be notified by the Central
Government in consultation with any financial
sector regulator.”
41.    IBC envisages the constitution of a Committee of Creditors27
as per the provisions set forth in Section 21. The CoC in turn is
empowered to appoint a Resolution Professional for the purposes of
carrying forth the CIRP. The statute confers a role of primordial
importance upon the CoC since it is its ultimate decision based upon a
consideration of the economics and commercial viability of all factors
which decides the fate of the corporate debtor. The economic wisdom
of the measure which may ultimately be adopted in respect of the
corporate debtor is left to the sound judgment of the CoC. The
Resolution Plans which may be submitted are required to be placed
before the Adjudicating Authority for approval in accordance with
Section 31, which reads as follows:-
“31. Approval of resolution plan.-(1) If the Adjudicating
Authority is satisfied that the resolution plan as approved by the
committee of creditors under sub-section (4) of section 30 meets
the requirements as referred to in sub-section (2) of section 30, it
shall by order approve the resolution plan which shall be binding
on the corporate debtor and its employees, members, creditors,
including the Central Government, any State Government of any
local authority to whom a debt in respect of the payment of due4s
arising under any law for the time being in force, such as
authorities to whom statutory dues are owed, guarantors and other
stakeholders involved in the resolution plan.
Provided that the Adjudicating Authority shall, before
passing an order for approval of resolution plan under this sub-
section, satisfy that the resolution plan has provisions for its
effective implementation.
(2) Where the Adjudicating Authority is satisfied that the
resolution plan does not confirm to the requirements referred to in
sub-section (1), it may, by an order, reject the resolution plan.
(3) After the order of approval under sub-section (1),—
(a) the moratorium order passed by the Adjudicating Authority
under section 14 shall cease to have effect; and
(b) the resolution professional shall forward all records relating
to the conduct of the corporate insolvency resolution process
and the resolution plan to the Board to be recorded on its
database.
(4) The resolution applicant shall, pursuant to the resolution plan
approved under sub-section (1), obtain the necessary approval
required under any law for the time being in force within a period
of one year from the date of approval of the resolution plan by the
Adjudicating Authority under sub-section (1) or within such
period as provided for in such law, whichever is later:
Provided that where the resolution plan contains a provision
for combination as referred to in section 5 of the Competition Act,
2002 (12 of 2003), the resolution applicant shall obtain the
approval of the Competition Commission of India under that Act
prior to the approval of such resolution plan by the committee of
creditors.”
42.    Section 32A came to be introduced by virtue of the Insolvency
and Bankruptcy (Amendment)                        Act No.1 of 202028 with
retrospective effect from 28 December 2019 and reads thus: -
“32A. Liability for prior offences, etc. - (1) Notwithstanding
anything to the contrary contained in this Code or any other law for
the time being in force, the liability of a corporate debtor for an
offence committed prior to the commencement of the corporate
insolvency resolution process shall cease, and the corporate debtor
shall not be prosecuted for such an offence from the date the
resolution plan has been approved by the Adjudicating Authority
under section 31, if the resolution plan results in the change in the
management or control of the corporate debtor to a person who was
(a) a promoter or in the management or control of the
corporate debtor or a related party of such a person; or
(b) a person with regard to whom the relevant investigating
authority has, on the basis of material in its possession,
reason to believe that he had abetted or conspired for the
commission of the offence, and has submitted or filed a
report or a complaint to the relevant statutory authority or
Provided that if a prosecution had been instituted during the
corporate insolvency resolution process against such corporate
debtor, it shall stand discharged from the date of approval of
the resolution plan subject to requirements of this sub-section
having been fulfilled:
Provided further that every person who was a “designated
partner” as defined in clause (j) of section 2 of the Limited
Liability Partnership Act, 2008 (6 of 2009), or an “officer who
is in default”, as defined in clause (60) of section 2 of the
Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013), or was in any manner
incharge of, or responsible to the corporate debtor for the
conduct of its business or associated with the corporate debtor
in any manner and who was directly or indirectly involved in
the commission of such offence as per the report submitted or
complaint filed by the investigating authority, shall continue to
be liable to be prosecuted and punished for such an offence
committed by the corporate debtor notwithstanding that the
corporate debtor‟s liability has ceased under this sub-section.
28 Amending Act No. 1 of 2020
(2) No action shall be taken against the property of the corporate
debtor in relation to an offence committed prior to the
commencement of the corporate insolvency resolution process of
the corporate debtor, where such property is covered under a
resolution plan approved by the Adjudicating Authority under
section 31, which results in the change in control of the corporate
debtor to a person, or sale of liquidation assets under the provisions
of Chapter III of Part II of this Code to a person, who was not—
(i) a promoter or in the management or control of the corporate
debtor or a related party of such a person; or
(ii) a person with regard to whom the relevant investigating
authority has, on the basis of material in its possession reason
to believe that he had abetted or conspired for the commission
of the offence, and has submitted or filed a report or a
complaint to the relevant statutory authority or Court.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, it is hereby
(i) an action against the property of the corporate debtor in
relation to an offence shall include the attachment, seizure,
retention or confiscation of such property under such law as
may be applicable to the corporate debtor;
(ii) nothing in this sub-section shall be construed to bar an
action against the property of any person, other than the
corporate debtor or a person who has acquired such property
through corporate insolvency resolution process or liquidation
process under this Code and fulfils the requirements specified
in this section, against whom such an action may be taken
under such law as may be applicable.
(3) Subject to the provisions contained in sub-sections (1) and (2),
and notwithstanding the immunity given in this section, the
corporate debtor and any person who may be required to provide
assistance under such law as may be applicable to such corporate
debtor or person, shall extend all assistance and co-operation to any
authority investigating an offence committed prior to the
commencement of the corporate insolvency resolution process.”
43.    The principal objectives of Section 32A and its scheme were
noticed and explained by the Court in Nitin Jain in the following
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                    Page 44 of 124
“97. This Court is of the opinion that the answer to determining
when the bar under Section 32A would come into play must be
answered bearing in mind the ethos of Section 32A and upon an
interpretation of the provisions of the IBC and the Regulations
framed thereunder. As is evident from a careful reading of Section
32A(2), the Legislature in its wisdom has provided that no action
shall be taken against the properties of the corporate debtor in
respect of an offense committed prior to the commencement of the
CIRP and once either a resolution plan comes to be approved or
when a sale of liquidation assets takes place. The objective
underlying the introduction of this provision has been eloquently
explained by the Supreme Court in Manish Kumar. The intent of
the mischief sought to be addressed is clearly borne out from the
Committee Reports as well as the SOA. The principal consideration
which appears to have weighed was the imperative need to ensure
that neither the resolution nor the liquidation process once set into
motion and fructifying and resulting in a particular mode of
resolution coming to be duly accepted and approved, comes to be
bogged down or clouded by unforeseen or unexpected claims or
events. The IBC essentially envisages the process of resolution or
liquidation to move forward unhindered. The Legislature in its
wisdom has recognised a pressing and imperative need to insulate
the implementation of measures for restructuring, revival or
liquidation of a corporate debtor from the vagaries of litigation or
prosecution once the process of resolution or liquidation reaches
the stage of the Adjudicating Authority approving the course of
action to be finally adopted in relation to the corporate debtor.
Section 32A legislatively places vital import upon the decision of
the Adjudicating Authority when it approves the measure to be
implemented in order to take the process of liquidation or
resolution to its culmination. It is this momentous point in the
statutory process that must be recognised as the defining moment
for the bar created by Section 32A coming into effect. If it were
held to be otherwise, it would place the entire process of resolution
and liquidation in jeopardy. Holding to the contrary would result in
a right being recognised as inhering in the respondent to move
against the properties of the corporate debtor even after their sale or
transfer has been approved by the Adjudicating Authority. This
would clearly militate against the very purpose and intent of
Section 32A. It becomes pertinent to recollect that one of the
primary objectives which informed the introduction of this
provision was to assure the resolution applicant that its offer once
accepted would stand sequestered from action for enforcement of
outstanding claims against the corporate debtor or from penalties
connected with offenses committed prior thereto. The imperative
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                   Page 45 of 124
for the extension of this legislative guarantee subserves the vital
aspect of maximization of value.”
44.      The Court in Nitin Jain had also noticed the background and
the various committee reports which had preceded the introduction of
Section 32A. It also had the occasion to notice the decision of the
Supreme Court in Manish Kumar versus Union of India29 where
while negativing the constitutional challenge to Section 32A,
significant and pertinent observations came to be made explaining the
legislative intent underlying the introduction of that provision. These
aspects were noticed by the Court in Nitin Jain as under: -
“43. The SOA of Act 1 of 2020 also alludes to the need to ensure
that the successful bidder is kept immune from the liabilities
attached to the commission of an offense by the corporate debtor
prior to the commencement of the CIRP under certain
circumstances. The SOA in more explicit terms alludes to Section
32A when it records that it is intended “to provide immunity
against prosecution of the corporate debtor and action against the
property of the corporate debtor and the successful resolution
applicant subject to fulfilment of certain conditions.”
45. The SOA as well as the contemporaneous material referred to
above, indubitably establish a conscious adoption of a legislative
measure to insulate the resolution applicant from the prospect of
prosecution in respect of offenses that may have been committed
by the erstwhile management of the corporate debtor prior to
commencement of the CIRP. This legislative guarantee stands
enshrined in Section 32A (1). Similarly, the provision
unmistakably also insulates the property of the corporate debtor
from any action that may otherwise be taken in respect thereof for
an offense committed prior to the commencement of the CIRP. A
close reading of Section 32A (1) and (2) establishes that the
legislature in its wisdom has erected two unfaltering barriers. It
firstly prescribes that the offense, which may entail either
prosecution of the debtor or proceedings against its properties,
must be one which was committed prior to the commencement of
the CIRP. Secondly the cessation of liability for the offense
committed is to occur the moment when a resolution is approved
by the Adjudicating Authority or upon sale of liquidation assets.
The provision in unequivocal terms terminates the prospect of
prosecution or coercive action against properties on the happening
of either of two critical events: —
(a) the date from which a resolution plan comes to be approved by
the Adjudicating Authority, or
47. Proceeding then to rule upon the validity of the provision itself
the Supreme Court held: —
“326. We are of the clear view that no case whatsoever is
made out to seek invalidation of Section 32-A. The
boundaries of this Court's jurisdiction are clear. The
wisdom of the legislation is not open to judicial review.
Having regard to the object of the Code, the experience of
the working of the Code, the interests of all stakeholders
including most importantly the imperative need to attract
resolution applicants who would not shy away from
offering reasonable and fair value as part of the resolution
plan if the legislature thought that immunity be granted to
the corporate debtor as also its property, it hardly furnishes
a ground for this Court to interfere. The provision is
carefully thought out. It is not as if the wrongdoers are
allowed to get away. They remain liable. The
extinguishment of the criminal liability of the corporate
debtor is apparently important to the new management to
make a clean break with the past and start on a clean slate.
We must also not overlook the principle that the impugned
provision is part of an economic measure. The reverence
courts justifiably hold such laws in cannot but be
applicable in the instant case as well. The provision deals
with reference to offences committed prior to the
commencement of the CIRP. With the admission of the
application the management of the corporate debtor passes
into the hands of the interim resolution professional and
thereafter into the hands of the resolution professional
subject undoubtedly to the control by the Committee of
Creditors. As far as protection afforded to the property is
concerned there is clearly a rationale behind it. Having
regard to the object of the statute we hardly see any
manifest arbitrariness in the provision.
“327. It must be remembered that the immunity is
premised on various conditions being fulfilled. There must
be a resolution plan. It must be approved. There must be a
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                     Page 47 of 124
change in the control of the corporate debtor. The new
management cannot be the disguised avatar of the old
management. It cannot even be the related party of the
corporate debtor. The new management cannot be the
subject-matter of an investigation which has resulted in
material showing abetment or conspiracy for the
commission of the offence and the report or complaint
filed thereto. These ingredients are also insisted upon for
claiming exemption of the bar from actions against the
property. Significantly every person who was associated
with the corporate debtor in any manner and who was
directly or indirectly involved in the commission of the
offence in terms of the report submitted continues to be
liable to be prosecuted and punished for the offence
committed by the corporate debtor.
328. The corporate debtor and its property in the context
of the scheme of the Code constitute a distinct subject-
matter justifying the special treatment accorded to them.
Creation of a criminal offence as also abolishing criminal
liability must ordinarily be left to the judgment of the
legislature. Erecting a bar against action against the
property of the corporate debtor when viewed in the larger
context of the objectives sought to be achieved at the
forefront of which is maximisation of the value of the
assets which again is to be achieved at the earliest point of
time cannot become the subject of judicial veto on the
ground of violation of Article 14.
329. We would be remiss if we did not remind ourselves
that attaining public welfare very often needs delicate
balancing of conflicting interests. As to what priority must
be accorded to which interest must remain a legislative
value judgment and if seemingly the legislature in its
pursuit of the greater good appears to jettison the interests
of some, it cannot unless it strikingly ill squares with some
constitutional mandate, suffer invalidation.
330. There is no basis at all to impugn the section on the
ground that it violates Articles 19, 21 or 300-A.”
49. The learned Judges of the Supreme Court in Manish Kumar
reiterated the principal objective of maximization of value under
the IBC and the corresponding requirement of ensuring that the
resolution applicant is freed of the ghost of past offenses
committed by the corporate debtor.
50. Undisputedly and as has been explained in the decisions of the
Supreme Court noticed above, maximization of value would be
clearly impacted if a resolution applicant were asked to submit an
offer in the face of various imponderables or unspecified liabilities.
The amendment to sub-Section (1) of Section 31 and the
introduction of Section 32A undoubtedly seek to allay such
apprehensions and extend an assurance of the resolution applicant
being entitled to take over the corporate debtor on a fresh slate.
Section 32A assures the resolution applicant that it shall not be
held liable for any offense that may have been committed by the
corporate debtor prior to the initiation of the CIRP. It similarly
extends that warranty in respect of the properties of the corporate
debtor once a resolution plan stands approved or in case of a sale of
liquidation assets.
51. The principal consideration which appears to have weighed
was the imperative need to ensure that neither the resolution nor
the liquidation process once set into motion and fructifying and
resulting in a particular mode of resolution coming to be duly
accepted and approved, comes to be bogged down or clouded by
unforeseen or unexpected claims or events. The IBC essentially
envisages the process of resolution or liquidation to move forward
unhindered.
52. The Legislature in its wisdom has recognised a pressing and
imperative need to insulate the implementation of measures for
restructuring, revival or liquidation of a corporate debtor from the
vagaries of litigation or prosecution once the process of resolution
or liquidation reaches the stage of the adjudicating authority
approving the course of action to be finally adopted in relation to
the corporate debtor. The Supreme Court in Manish Kumar also
took note of the sufficient safeguards and the prerequisite
conditions that stand attached to the cessation of liabilities to
ultimately come to the conclusion that the Legislature had
undertaken a well-considered balancing exercise to ensure that
larger public interest was subserved.”
45.    Section 238 of the IBC which embodies the non obstante clause
“238. Provisions of this Code to override other laws.
The provisions of this Code shall have effect, notwithstanding
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the
time being in force or any instrument having effect by virtue of any
such law.”
46.    Turning then to the provisions of the PMLA, the Court deems it
apposite to firstly notice its Statements of Objects and Reasons as
appended to the Bill which was introduced in Parliament and the same
is extracted hereinbelow: -
It is being realised, world over, that money-laundering poses a
serious threat not only to the financial systems of countries, but
also to their integrity and sovereignty. Some of the initiatives taken
by the international community to obviate such threat are outlined
(a) the United Nations Convention Against Illicit Traffic in
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances, to which India is
a party, calls for prevention of laundering of proceeds of drug
crimes and other connected activities and confiscation of
proceeds derived from such offence.
(b) the Basle Statement of Principles, enunciated in 1989, outlined
basic policies and procedures that banks should follow in order
to assist the law enforcement agencies in tackling the problem
of money-laundering.
(c) the Financial Action Task Force established at the summit of
seven major industrial nations, held in Paris from 14th to 16th
July, 1989, to examine the problem of money-laundering has
made forty recommendations, which provide the foundation
material for comprehensive legislation to combat the problem
of money-laundering. The recommendations were classified
under various heads. Some of the important heads are—
(i) declaration of laundering of monies carried through
serious crimes a criminal offence;
(ii) to work out modalities of disclosure by financial
institutions regarding reportable transactions;
(iii) confiscation of the proceeds of crime;
(iv) declaring money-laundering to be an extraditable offence;
(v) promoting international co-operation in investigation of
money-laundering.
(d) the Political Declaration and Global Programme of Action
adopted by United Nations General Assembly by its
Resolution No. S-17/2 of 23rd February, 1990, inter alia, calls
upon the member States to develop mechanism to prevent
financial institutions from being used for laundering of drug
related money and enactment of legislation to prevent such
laundering.
(e) the United Nations in the Special Session on countering World
Drug Problem Together concluded on the 8th to the 10th June,
1998 has made another declaration regarding the need to
combat money-laundering. India is a signatory to this
declaration.
2. In view of an urgent need for the enactment or a comprehensive
legislation inter alia for preventing money-laundering and
connected activities confiscation of proceeds of crime, setting up of
agencies and mechanisms for co-ordinating measures for
combating money-laundering, etc., the Prevention of Money-
Laundering Bill, 1998 was introduced in the Lok Sabha on the 4th
August, 1998. The Bill was referred to the Standing Committee on
Finance, which presented its report on the 4th March, 1999 to the
Lok Sabha. The recommendations of the Standing Committee
accepted by the Central Government are that (a) the expressions
“banking company” and “person” may be defined; (b) in Part I of
the Schedule under Indian Penal Code the word offence under
section 477A relating to falsification of accounts should be
omitted; (c) „knowingly‟ be inserted in clause 3(b) relating to the
definition of money-laundering; (d) the banking companies
financial institutions and intermediaries should be required to
furnish information of transactions to the Director instead of
Commissioner of Income-tax (e) the banking companies should
also be brought within the ambit of clause II relating to obligations
of financial institutions and intermediaries; (f) a definite time-limit
of 24 hours should be provided for producing a person about to be
searched or arrested person before the Gazetted Officer or
Magistrate; (g) the words “unless otherwise proved to the
satisfaction of the authority concerned” may be inserted in clause
22 relating to presumption on inter-connected transactions; (h)
vacancy in the office of the Chairperson of an Appellate Tribunal,
by reason of his death, resignation or otherwise, the senior-most
member shall act as the Chairperson till the date on which a new
Chairperson appointed in accordance with the provisions of this
Act to fill the vacancy, enters upon his office; (i) the appellant
before the Appellate Tribunal may be authorised to engage any
authorised representative as defined under section 288 of the
Income-tax Act, 1961, (j) the punishment for vexatious search and
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                    Page 51 of 124
for false information may be enhanced from three months
imprisonment to two years imprisonment, or fine of rupees ten
thousand to fine of rupees fifty thousand or both; (k) the word
„good faith‟ may be incorporated in the clause relating to Bar of
legal proceedings. The Central Government have broadly accepted
the above recommendations and made provisions of the said
recommendations in the Bill.
3. In addition to above recommendations of the standing committee
the Central Government proposes to (a) relax the conditions
prescribed for grant of bail so that the Court may grant bail to a
person who is below sixteen years of age, or woman, or sick or
infirm, (b) levy of fine for default of non-compliance of the issue of
summons, etc. (c) make provisions for having reciprocal
arrangement for assistance in certain matters and procedure for
attachment and confiscation of property so as to facilitate the
transfer of funds involved in money-laundering kept outside the
country and extradition of the accused persons from abroad.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.”
47.    The expression „proceeds of crime‟ as defined in Section
2(1)(u) reads thus: -
“2(1)(u) “proceeds of crime” means any property derived or
obtained, directly or indirectly, by any person as a result of
criminal activity relating to a scheduled offence or the value of any
such property [or where such property is taken or held outside the
country, then the property equivalent in value held within the
country] [or abroad];
[Explanation: For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that
“proceeds of crime” include property not only derived or obtained
from the scheduled offence but also any property which may
directly or indirectly be derived or obtained as a result of any
criminal activity relatable to the scheduled offence;]”
48.    The word „property‟ is defined in Section 2(1)(v) as follows: -
“2(1)(v) “property” means any property or assets of every
description, whether corporeal or incorporeal, movable or
immovable, tangible or intangible and includes deeds and
instruments evidencing title to, or interest in, such property or
assets, wherever located;
[Explanation: For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that
the term “property” includes property of any kind used in the
commission of an offence under this Act or any of the scheduled
49.    The expression „transfer‟ is defined in Section 2(1)(za) as
“2(1)(za) “transfer” includes sale, purchase, mortgage, pledge, gift,
loan or any other form of transfer of right, title, possession or lien;”
50.    Section 3 defines the offence of money laundering and reads
“3. Offence of money-laundering
Whosoever directly or indirectly attempts to indulge or
knowingly assists or knowingly is a party or is actually involved in
any process or activity connected with the [proceeds of crime
including its concealment, possession, acquisition or use and
projecting or claiming] it as untainted property shall be guilty of
offence of money-laundering.
[Explanation: For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified
(i) a person shall be guilty of offence of money-laundering if such
person is found to have directly or indirectly attempted to
indulge or knowingly assisted or knowingly is a party or is
actually involved in one or more of the following processes or
activities connected with proceeds of crime, namely:—
(a) concealment; or
(e) projecting as untainted property; or
(f) claiming as untainted property,
(ii) the process or activity connected with proceeds of crime is a
continuing activity and continues till such time a person is
directly or indirectly enjoying the proceeds of crime by its
concealment or possession or acquisition or use or projecting it
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                     Page 53 of 124
as untainted property or claiming it as untainted property in
any manner whatsoever.]”
51.    The power of provisional attachment of properties as created by
Section 5 reads as under: -
“5. Attachment of property involved in money-laundering.—
(1) Where the Director or any other officer not below the rank
of Deputy Director authorised by the Director for the purposes of
this section, has reason to believe (the reason for such belief to be
recorded in writing), on the basis of material in his possession,
(a) any person is in possession of any proceeds of crime; and
(b) such proceeds of crime are likely to be concealed, transferred
or dealt with in any manner which may result in frustrating
any proceedings relating to confiscation of such proceeds of
crime under this Chapter,
he may, by order in writing, provisionally attach such property for
a period not exceeding one hundred and eighty days from the date
of the order, in such manner as may be prescribed:
PROVIDED that no such order of attachment shall be made
unless, in relation to the scheduled offence, a report has been
forwarded to a Magistrate under section 173 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, or a complaint has been filed by a
person authorised to investigate the offence mentioned in that
Schedule, before a Magistrate or court for taking cognizance of the
scheduled offence, as the case may be, or a similar report or
complaint has been made or filed under the corresponding law of
PROVIDED FURTHER that, notwithstanding anything
contained in first proviso, any property of any person may be
attached under this section if the Director or any other officer not
below the rank of Deputy Director authorised by him for the
purposes of this section has reason to believe (the reasons for such
belief to be recorded in writing), on the basis of material in his
possession, that if such property involved in money-laundering is
not attached immediately under this Chapter, the non-attachment of
the property is likely to frustrate any proceeding under this Act:
PROVIDED ALSO that for the purposes of computing the
period of one hundred and eighty days, the period during which the
proceedings under this section is stayed by the High Court, shall be
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                    Page 54 of 124
excluded and a further period not exceeding thirty days from the
date of order of vacation of such stay order shall be counted.;
(2) The Director, or any other officer not below the rank of
Deputy Director, shall, immediately after attachment under sub-
section (1), forward a copy of the order, along with the material in
his possession, referred to in that sub-section, to the Adjudicating
Authority, in a sealed envelope, the manner as may be prescribed
and such Adjudicating Authority shall keep such order and material
for such period as may be prescribed.
(3) Every order of attachment made under sub-section (1) shall
cease to have effect after the expiry of the period specified in that
sub-section or on the date of an order made under sub-section (3) of
section 8, whichever is earlier.
(4) Nothing in this section shall prevent the person interested in
the enjoyment of the immovable property attached under sub-
section (1) from such enjoyment.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, “person
interested”, in relation to any immovable property, includes all
persons claiming or entitled to claim any interest in the property.
(5) The Director or any other officer who provisionally attaches
any property under sub-section (1) shall, within a period of thirty
days from such attachment, file a complaint stating the facts of
such attachment before the Adjudicating Authority.”
52.    As would be evident from the aforesaid provision the competent
authority after passing an order of provisional attachment, is obliged
to forward a copy of the order along with all other material in its
possession to the Adjudicating Authority. Section 5(3) then stipulates
that every order of attachment shall cease to have effect upon the
expiry of 180 days or upon the making of an order under Section 8(3).
The PAO thus continues to remain in force for a period of 180 days
and it is within the aforesaid period that the Adjudicating Authority is
obliged to step in and consider the issue of whether the PAO is liable
to be confirmed. Section 8 which deals with the subject of
adjudication reads as under: -
(1) On receipt of a complaint under sub-section (5) of section 5,
or applications made under sub-section (4) of section 17 or under
sub-section (10) of section 18, if the Adjudicating Authority has
reason to believe that any person has committed an offence under
section 3 or is in possession of proceeds of crime, it may serve a
notice of not less than thirty days on such person calling upon him
to indicate the sources of his income, earning or assets, out of
which or by means of which he has acquired the property attached
under sub-section (1) of section 5, or, seized or frozen under
section 17 or section 18, the evidence on which he relies and other
relevant information and particulars, and to show cause why all or
any of such properties should not be declared to be the properties
involved in money-laundering and confiscated by the Central
PROVIDED that where a notice under this sub-section specifies
any property as being held by a person on behalf of any other
person, a copy of such notice shall also be served upon such other
PROVIDED FURTHER that where such property is held
jointly by more than one person, such notice shall be served to all
persons holding such property.
(2) The Adjudicating Authority shall, after—
(a) considering the reply, if any, to the notice issued under
(b) hearing the aggrieved person and the Director or any other
officer authorised by him in this behalf; and
(c) taking into account all relevant materials placed on record
by an order, record a finding whether all or any of the properties
referred to in the notice issued under subsection (1) are involved in
money-laundering:
PROVIDED that if the property is claimed by a person, other
than a person to whom the notice had been issued, such person
shall also be given an opportunity of being heard to prove that the
property is not involved in money-laundering.
(3) Where the Adjudicating Authority decides under sub-
section (2) that any property is involved in money-laundering, he
shall, by an order in writing, confirm the attachment of the property
made under sub-section (1) of section 5 or retention of property or
record seized or frozen under section 17 or section 18 and record a
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                    Page 56 of 124
finding to that effect, whereupon such attachment or retention or
freezing of the seized or frozen property or record shall—
(a) continue during investigation for a period not exceeding three
hundred and sixty-five days or the pendency of the
proceedings relating to any offence under this Act before a
court or under the corresponding law of any other country,
before the competent court of criminal jurisdiction outside
India, as the case may be; and
(b) become final after an order of confiscation is passed under sub-
section (5) or sub-section (7) of section 8 or section 58B or
sub-section (2A) of section 60 by the Special Court;
Explanation: For the purposes of computing the period of three
hundred and sixty-five days under clause (a), the period during
which the investigation is stayed by any court under any law
for the time being in force shall be excluded.
(4) Where the provisional order of attachment made under sub-
section (1) of section 5 has been confirmed under sub-section (3),
the Director or any other officer authorised by him in this behalf
shall forthwith take the possession of the property attached under
section 5 or frozen under sub-section (1A) of section 17, in such
manner as may be prescribed:
PROVIDED that if it is not practicable to take possession of a
property frozen under sub-section (1A) of section 17, the order of
confiscation shall have the same effect as if the property had been
taken possession of.
(5) Where on conclusion of a trial of an offence under this Act,
the Special Court finds that the offence of money-laundering has
been committed, it shall order that such property involved in the
money-laundering or which has been used for commission of the
offence of money-laundering shall stand confiscated to the Central
(6) Where on conclusion of a trial under this Act, the Special
Court finds that the offence of money-laundering has not taken
place or the property is not involved in money-laundering, it shall
order release of such property to the person entitled to receive it.
(7) Where the trial under this Act cannot be conducted by reason
of the death of the accused or the accused being declared a
proclaimed offender or for any other reason or having commenced
but could not be concluded, the Special Court shall, on an
application moved by the Director or a person claiming to be
entitled to possession of a property in respect of which an order has
been passed under sub-section (3) of section 8, pass appropriate
orders regarding confiscation or release of the property, as the case
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                    Page 57 of 124
may be, involved in the offence of money-laundering after having
regard to the material before it.
(8) Where a property stands confiscated to the Central
Government under sub-section (5), the Special Court, in such
manner as may be prescribed, may also direct the Central
Government to restore such confiscated property or part thereof of
a claimant with a legitimate interest in the property, who may have
suffered a quantifiable loss as a result of the offence of money-
PROVIDED that the Special Court shall not consider such claim
unless it is satisfied that the claimant has acted in good faith and
has suffered the loss despite having taken all reasonable
precautions and is not involved in the offence of money-
PROVIDED FURTHER that the Special Court may, if it thinks
fit, consider the claim of the claimant for the purposes of
restoration of such properties during the trial of the case in such
manner as may be prescribed.”
53.    The Adjudicating Authority upon receipt of the material under
Section 5(5) or upon an application under Section 17(4) or Section
18(10) and upon formation of the belief that a person has committed
an offence of money laundering and is in possession of proceeds of
crime, is required to serve a notice on such person to show cause why
such properties be not declared to be properties involved in money
laundering and confiscated by the Union Government. In terms of
Section 8(2) the Adjudicating Authority, after considering the replies
if any received, hearing the aggrieved persons and upon taking into
account all relevant material, may by an order record a finding
whether all or any properties are involved in money laundering. It
would be apposite to note that the powers conferred on the
Adjudicating Authority by Section 8 is essentially to review and
consider the validity of the order of provisional attachment that may
have been made by the competent authority under Section 5. In terms
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                    Page 58 of 124
of Section 8(3) the Adjudicating Authority may upon coming to form
an opinion that the property is involved in money laundering, confirm
the attachment made under Section 5(1) or retention of property or
record ceased or frozen under Sections 17 or 18. Once such an order
of confirmation is passed, the attachment, retention or freezing of
property is to continue during the process of investigation for a period
not exceeding 365 days or the pendency of proceedings that may have
been initiated in respect of an offence under the PMLA before a court.
The order passed by the Adjudicating Authority is conferred statutory
finality upon an order of confiscation coming to be passed by the
Special Court under sub-sections (5) or (7) of Section 8 or Section
58B or Section 60(2)(a). Sub-section (5) of Section 8 deals with the
consequences of the Special Court, ultimately and upon conclusion of
trial, coming to hold that the offence of money-laundering had in fact
been committed. Upon such a conclusion being reached, the Special
Court stands statutorily empowered to order confiscation of the
property in favour of the Union Government. As per Section 8(7),
where the trial under the aforesaid statute is not concluded on account
of the death of the accused or the accused being declared a proclaimed
offender or for any other reason, the Special Court may pass
appropriate orders either for confiscation or for release of the property.
54.     Section 8(8) confer the power on the Special Court to direct
restoration of confiscated property on an application of a claimant
who is able to establish that he had acquired a legitimate interest in the
same and who may have suffered a quantifiable loss as a result of the
commission of the offence of the money-laundering.
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                Page 59 of 124
55.    Section 58B which is a provision which is also noticed in
Section 8(3)(a) reads as follows: -
“58B. Letter of request of a contracting State or authority for
confiscation or release the property
Where the trial under the corresponding law of any other
country cannot be conducted by reason of the death of the accused
or the accused being declared a proclaimed offender or for any
other reason or having commenced but could not be concluded, the
Central Government shall, on receipt of a letter of request from a
court or authority in a contracting State requesting for confiscation
or release of property, as the case may be, forward the same to the
Director to move an application before the Special Court and upon
such application the Special Court shall pass appropriate orders
regarding confiscation or release of such property involved in the
offence of money-laundering.”
56.    Section 60(2A) deals with consequences of a finding of guilt
having been returned by a criminal court situate outside India and
“60. Attachment, seizure and confiscation, etc., of property in a
contracting State or India
(2A) Where on closure of the criminal case or conclusion of trial in
a criminal court outside India under the corresponding law of any
other country, such court finds that the offence of money-
laundering under the corresponding law of that country has been
committed, the Special Court shall, on receipt of an application
from the Director for execution of confiscation under sub-section
(2), order, after giving notice to the affected persons, that such
property involved in money-laundering or which has been used for
commission of the offence of money-laundering stand confiscated
to the Central Government.”
57.    The property which comes to be confiscated is to ultimately
vest in the Union Government as per Section 9, which reads thus: -
“9. Vesting of property in Central Government
Where an order of confiscation has been made under sub-
section (5) or sub-section (7) of section 8 or section 58B or sub-
section (2A) of section 60 in respect of any property of a person, all
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                   Page 60 of 124
the rights and title in such property shall vest absolutely in the
Central Government free from all encumbrances:
PROVIDED that where the Special Court or the
Adjudicating Authority, as the case may be, after giving an
opportunity of being heard to any other person interested in the
property attached under this Chapter, or seized 2 or frozen under
Chapter V, is of the opinion that any encumbrance on the property
or lease-hold interest has been created with a view to defeat the
provisions of this Chapter, it may, by order, declare such
encumbrance or lease-hold interest to be void and thereupon the
aforesaid property shall vest in the Central Government free from
such encumbrances or lease-hold interest:
PROVIDED FURTHER that nothing in this section shall
operate to discharge any person from any liability in respect of
such encumbrances which may be enforced against such person by
a suit for damages.”
58.    PMLA puts in place a structure of Special Courts for the
purposes of trial of offences under the said statute.                   These are
contained in Chapter VII thereof. The provisions of the PMLA are
accorded overriding effect in terms of Section 71, reads as under: -
“71. Act to have overriding effect
The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the
time being in force.”
It may while closing the discussion on the respective provisions of the
two competing statues, be additionally noted, that although PMLA
was a statute which was passed by Parliament on 17 January 2003, it
came to be ultimately enforced with effect from 01 July 2005.
59.    In order to answer the questions that stands posited, it would be
pertinent to firstly understand the basic ethos and objective of the
PMLA. PMLA represents the commitment of India to the Vienna and
Palermo Conventions and the global resolve to fight the scourge of
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                   Page 61 of 124
money laundering. As would be evident from its Statement of Objects
and Reasons, it is not just an act meant to punish perpetrators of the
crime of money laundering but to also deprive and confiscate
properties which may have been derived from the commission of that
offence. That approach has been adopted globally in order to spread
the message that crime would not pay, to disrupt criminal networks
and markets, as also to strike at the very heart of criminal enterprise
and the assets that they may have garnered from such activities.
PMLA also incorporates collaborative and reciprocal measures in
furtherance of the resolve of nations to tackle the menace of crime and
wealth obtained therefrom unhindered by frontiers and borders.
60.    The heart of the PMLA was captured in paragraphs 64 and 65
of the decision of the Court in Nitin Jain:-
“64. The PMLA essentially represents the commitment of the
Union to frame a comprehensive legislation to deal with the
pernicious crime of money laundering as flowing from the Political
Declaration and Global Programme of Action as adopted by the
General Assembly of the United Nations on 23 February 1990, the
Political Declaration adopted in the Special Session of the U.N.
between 8 to 10 June 1998, the Financial Action Task Force held in
Paris from 14 to 16 July 1989. Taking cognizance of the scourge of
money laundering faced by governments across the globe and the
legitimization of moneys derived from criminal activities as well as
the imperative need to deprive the perpetrators of such action of the
fruits derived from such activities, lead to the Government
introducing the Prevention of Money-laundering Bill, 1998 in
Parliament. The PMLA ultimately came to be enforced with effect
from 1 July 2005.
65. As is manifest from a reading of the long title of the PMLA, it
has essentially been promulgated to prevent money laundering and
to provide for confiscation of property derived from or involved in
the crime of money laundering. The expression “proceeds of
crime” has been defined in Section 2(u) of the PMLA to mean any
property derived or obtained whether directly or indirectly by a
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                   Page 62 of 124
person as a result of criminal activity relating to a scheduled
offence or the value of any such property and where such property
is taken or held outside the country, then property equivalent in
value thereto.”
61.     It is pertinent to note that while Section 3 creates the offence of
money laundering, Section 4 of the PMLA prescribes the punishment
for the aforesaid offence. The powers of attachment which stand
comprised in Sections 5 and 8 are an adoption of the principles of civil
forfeiture and are in implementation of the intent of the Legislature
that perpetrators of money-laundering offences are not permitted to
enjoy the fruits thereof. The principle of civil forfeiture was duly
explained by the Supreme Court in Biswanath Bhattachrya as would
be evident from the following passages of that decision which read
“33. Dealing with the question — whether such forfeiture (in the
factual setting of the case) violated Article 20 of the Constitution of
India, a Constitution Bench of this Court held that the forfeiture
contemplated in the Ordinance was not a penalty within the
meaning of Article 20 but it is only a speedier mode of recovery of
the money embezzled by the accused. [State of W.B. v. S.K. Ghosh,
AIR 1963 SC 255, p. 263, para 15: “15. … We are therefore of
opinion that forfeiture provided in Section 13(3) in case of offences
which involve the embezzlement, etc. of government money or
property is really a speedier method of realising government money
or property as compared to a suit which it is not disputed the
Government could bring for realising the money or property and is
not punishment or penalty within the meaning of Article 20(1).
Such a suit could ordinarily be brought without in any way
affecting the right to realise the fine that may have been imposed
by a criminal court in connection with the offence.”]
34. In Ajit Mills case [(1977) 4 SCC 98 : 1977 SCC (Tax) 536] ,
the question was whether it was permissible for the State
Legislature to enact that sums collected by dealers by way of sales
tax but not exigible under the State law—indeed prohibited by it—
shall be forfeited to the exchequer. The question whether such a
forfeiture was a penalty violating Article 20 did not arise in the
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                    Page 63 of 124
facts of that case. The discussion revolved around the question
whether such a forfeiture is a penalty for the violation of a
prohibition contained under Section 46 of the relevant Sales Tax
Act? The contravention of Section 46 is made punishable with
imprisonment and fine under Section 63 of the said Act. Apart from
that, Section 37 of the said Act provided for a departmental
proceeding against the dealers who violated the prohibition under
Section 46. The said departmental proceeding could result in the
forfeiture of “… any sums collected by any person by way of tax
in contravention of Section 46 …”.
35. The legal issue before this Court in Ajit Mills case [(1977) 4
SCC 98 : 1977 SCC (Tax) 536] was — whether the State
Legislature had necessary competence to provide for such
forfeiture? The answer to the query depended upon whether such a
forfeiture is a penalty for the violation of law made by the State for
the levy and collection of sales tax. If it is not a penalty but a plain
transfer of money (illegally collected by the dealer) to the State it
would be incompetent for the legislature to make such a provision
in the light of an earlier Constitution Bench decision of this Court
in R. Abdul Quader & Co. v. STO [Abdul Quader case, AIR 1964
SC 922, pp. 923-24, para 4: “4. The first question therefore that
falls for consideration is whether it was open to the State
Legislature under its powers under List II Entry 54 to make a
provision to the effect that money collected by way of tax, even
though it was not due as a tax under the Act, shall be made over to
the Government. Now it is clear that the sums so collected by way
of tax are not in fact tax exigible under the Act. So it cannot be said
that the State Legislature was directly legislating for the imposition
of sales or purchase tax under List II Entry 54 when it made such a
provision, for on the face of the provision, the amount, though
collected by way of tax, was not exigible as tax under the law. The
provision however is attempted to be justified on the ground that
though it may not be open to a State Legislature to make provision
for the recovery of an amount which is not a tax under List II Entry
54 in a law made for that purpose, it would still be open to the
legislature to provide for paying over all the amounts collected by
way of tax by persons, even though they really are not exigible as
tax, as part of the incidental and ancillary power to make provision
for the levy and collection of such tax. Now there is no dispute that
the heads of legislation in the various Lists in the Seventh Schedule
should be interpreted widely so as to take in all matters which are
of a character incidental to the topics mentioned therein. Even so,
there is a limit to such incidental or ancillary power flowing from
the legislative entries in the various Lists in the Seventh Schedule.
These incidental and ancillary powers have to be exercised in aid of
the main topic of legislation, which, in the present case, is a tax on
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                     Page 64 of 124
sale or purchase of goods. All powers necessary for the levy and
collection of the tax concerned and for seeing that the tax is not
evaded are comprised within the ambit of the legislative entry as
ancillary or incidental. But where the legislation under the relevant
entry proceeds on the basis that the amount concerned is not a tax
exigible under the law made under that entry, but even so lays
down that though it is not exigible under the law, it shall be paid
over to the Government, merely because some dealers by mistake
or otherwise have collected it as tax, it is difficult to see how such a
provision can be ancillary or incidental to the collection of tax
legitimately due under a law made under the relevant taxing entry.
We do not think that the ambit of ancillary or incidental power goes
to the extent of permitting the legislature to provide that though the
amount collected—may be wrongly—by way of tax is not exigible
under the law as made under the relevant taxing entry, it shall still
be paid over to the Government, as if it were tax. The legislature
cannot under List II Entry 54 make a provision to the effect that
even though a certain amount collected is not a tax on the sale or
purchase of goods as laid down by the law, it will still be collected
as if it was such a tax. This is what Section 11(2) has provided.
Such a provision cannot in our opinion be treated as coming within
incidental or ancillary powers which the legislature has got under
the relevant taxing entry to ensure that the tax is levied and
collected and that its evasion becomes impossible. We are therefore
of opinion that the provision contained in Section 11(2) cannot be
made under List II Entry 54 and cannot be justified even as an
incidental or ancillary provision permitted under that entry.”] .
36. As explained above, the issue and the ratio decidendi of Ajit
Mills case [(1977) 4 SCC 98 : 1977 SCC (Tax) 536] is entirely
different and has nothing to do with the application of Article 20 of
the Constitution of India.
39. If a subject acquires property by means which are not legally
approved, the sovereign would be perfectly justified to deprive such
persons of the enjoyment of such ill-gotten wealth. There is a public
interest in ensuring that persons who cannot establish that they have
legitimate sources to acquire the assets held by them do not enjoy
such wealth. Such a deprivation, in our opinion, would certainly be
consistent with the requirement of Articles 300-A and 14 of the
Constitution which prevent the State from arbitrarily depriving a
subject of his property.
40. Whether there is a right to hold property which is the product of
crime is a question examined in many jurisdictions. To understand
the substance of such examination, we can profitably extract from an
article published in the Journal of Financial Crime, 2004 by
Anthony Kennedy. [ Head of Legal Casework, Northern Ireland for
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                     Page 65 of 124
the Assets Recovery Agency in his article “Justifying the Civil
Recovery of Criminal Proceeds” published in the Journal of
“… It has been suggested that a logical interpretation of
Article 1 of the First Protocol of the European Convention
„Everyone is entitled to own whatever property
they have (lawfully) acquired….‟
hence implying that they do not have a right under Article 1 to own
property which has been unlawfully acquired. This point was argued
in the Irish High Court in Gilligan v. Criminal Assets Bureau,
Tax Reports 424], namely, that where a defendant is in possession or
control over assets which directly or indirectly constitute the
proceeds of crime, he has no property rights in those assets and no
valid title to them, whether protected by the Irish Constitution or by
any other law. A similar view seems to have been expressed earlier
in a dissenting opinion in Welch v. United Kingdom [(1995) 20
EHRR 247] :„in my opinion, the confiscation of property acquired by
crime, even without express prior legislation is not contrary to
Article 7 of the Convention, nor to Article 1 of the First Protocol‟.
This principle has also been explored in US jurisprudence. In United
States v. Van Horn [789 F 2d 1492 (1986)] a defendant convicted of
fraud and money laundering was not entitled to the return of the
seized proceeds since they amounted to contraband which he had no
right to possess. In United States v. Dusenbery [34 F Supp 2d 602
(1999)] the Court held that, because the respondent conceded that he
used drug proceeds to purchase a car and other personal property, he
had no ownership interest in the property and thus could not seek a
remedy against the Government‟s decision to destroy the property
without recourse to formal forfeiture proceedings. The UK
Government has impliedly adopted this perspective, stating that:
„… It is important to bear in mind the purpose of civil
recovery, namely, to establish as a matter of civil law that
there is no right to enjoy property that derives from
unlawful conduct.‟”
41. Non-conviction based asset forfeiture model also known as Civil
Forfeiture Legislation gained currency in various countries: the
United States of America, Italy, Ireland, South Africa, UK, Australia
and certain Provinces of Canada.
42. Anthony Kennedy conceptualised the civil forfeiture regime in
the following words:
“Civil forfeiture represents a move from a crime and
punishment model of justice to a preventive model of
justice. It seeks to take illegally obtained property out of the
possession of organised crime figures so as to prevent them,
first, from using it as working capital for future crimes and,
secondly, from flaunting it in such a way as they become
role models for others to follow into a lifestyle of
acquisitive crime. Civil recovery is therefore not aimed at
punishing behaviour but at removing the „trophies‟ of past
criminal behaviour and the means to commit future criminal
behaviour. While it would clearly be more desirable if
successful criminal proceedings could be instituted, the
operative theory is that „half a loaf is better than no bread‟.”
43. For all the abovementioned reasons, we are of the opinion that
the Act is not violative of Article 20 of the Constitution. Even
otherwise, as was rightly pointed out by the learned Additional
Solicitor General, in view of its inclusion in the Ninth Schedule, the
Act is immune from attack on the ground that it violates any of the
rights guaranteed under Part III of the Constitution by virtue of the
declaration under Article 31-B.”
62.      The provisions thus incorporated in Sections 5 and 8 of the
PMLA are in essence the adoption of the “non-conviction based asset
forfeiture model” which now stands adopted the world over in the
fight against organised crime and money laundering. These principles
were also lucidly explained by the U.S. Supreme Court in Caplin &
Drysdale, Chartered vs. United States30. The Court deems it
apposite to extract the following passages from the aforesaid
“16. Petitioner seeks to distinguish such cases for Sixth
Amendment purposes by arguing that the bank's claim to robbery
proceeds rests on "pre-existing property rights,” while the
Government's claim to forfeitable assets rests on a "penal statute”
which embodies the "fictive property-law concept of... relation-
back" and is merely "a mechanism for preventing fraudulent
conveyances of the defendant's assets, not.. a device for
determining true title to property." Brief for Petitioner 40-41. In
light of this, petitioner contends, the burden placed on defendant's
Sixth Amendment rights by the forfeiture statute outweighs the
Government's interest in forfeiture. Ibid. The premises of
petitioner's constitutional analysis are unsound in several respects.
First, the property rights given the Government by virtue of the
forfeiture statute are more substantial than petitioner acknowledges.
In § 853(c), the so-called "relation-back" provision, Congress
dictated that "[a]ll right, title and interest in property" obtained by
criminals via the illicit means described in the statute "vests in the
United States upon the commission of the act giving rise to
forfeiture." 21 U.S.C. § 853(c) (1982 ed., Supp. V). As Congress
observed when the provision was adopted, this approach, known as
the "taint theory," is one that "has long been recognized in
forfeiture cases,” including the decision in United States v. Stowell,
225, p. 200, and n. 27 (1983). In Stowell, the Court explained the
operation of a similar forfeiture provision (for violations of the
Internal Revenue Code) as follows:
"As soon as [the possessor of the forfeitable asset
committed the violation] of the internal revenue laws, the
forfeiture under those laws took effect, and (though needing
judicial condemnation to perfect it) operated from that time
as a statutory conveyance to the United States of all the
right, title and interest then remaining in the [possessor];
and was as valid and effectual, against all the world, as a
recorded deed. The right so vested in the United States
could not be defeated or impaired by any subsequent
dealings of the... [possessor]," Stowell, supra, at 19, 10
S.Ct., at 248.
17. In sum, § 853(c) reflects the application of the long-recognized
and lawful practice of vesting title to any forfeitable assets, in the
United States, at the time of the criminal act giving rise to
forfeiture. Concluding that Reckmeyer cannot give good title to
such property to petitioner because he did not hold good title is
neither extraordinary or novel. Nor does petitioner claim, as a
general proposition that the relation-back provision is
unconstitutional, or that Congress cannot, as a general matter, vest
title to assets derived from the crime in the Government, as of the
date of the criminal act in question. Petitioner's claim is that
whatever part of the assets that is necessary to pay attorney's fees
cannot be subjected to forfeiture. But given the Government's title
to Reckmeyer's assets upon conviction, to hold that the Sixth
Amendment creates some right in Reckmeyer to alienate such
assets, or creates a right on petitioner's part to receive these assets,
would be peculiar.
18. There is no constitutional principle that gives one person the
right to give another's property to a third party, even where the
person seeking to complete the exchange wishes to do so in order
to exercise a constitutionally protected right. While petitioner and
its supporting amici attempt to distinguish between the expenditure
of forfeitable assets to exercise one's Sixth Amendment rights, and
expenditures in the pursuit of other constitutionally protected
freedoms, see, e.g., Brief for American Bar Association as Amicus
Curiae 6, there is no such distinction between, or hierarchy among,
constitutional rights. If defendants have a right to spend forfeitable
assets on attorney's fees, why not on exercises of the right to speak,
practice one's religion, or travel? The full exercise of these rights,
too, depends in part on one's financial wherewithal; and forfeiture,
or even the threat of forfeiture, may similarly prevent a defendant
from enjoying these rights as fully as he might otherwise,
Nonetheless, we are not about to recognize an antiforfeiture
exception for the exercise of each such right; nor does one exist for
the exercise of Sixth Amendment rights.
19. Petitioner's "balancing analysis" to the contrary rests
substantially on the view that the Government has only a modest
interest in forfeitable assets that may be used to retain an attorney.
Petitioner takes the position that, in large part, once assets have
been paid over from client to attorney, the principal ends of
forfeiture have been achieved: dispossessing a drug dealer or
racketeer of the proceeds of his wrong-doing. See Brief for
Petitioner 39; see also 814 F.2d, at 924-925. We think that this
view misses the mark for three reasons.
20. First, the Government has a pecuniary interest in forfeiture that
goes beyond merely separating a criminal from his ill-gotten gains;
that legitimate interest extends to recovering all forfeitable assets,
for such assets are deposited in a Fund that supports law-
enforcement efforts in a variety of important and useful ways. See
28 U.S.C. § 524(c), which establishes the Department of Justice
Assets Forfeiture Fund. The sums of money that can be raised for
law-enforcement activities this way are substantial, and the
Government's interest in using the profits of crime to fund these
activities should not be discounted.
21. Second, the statute permits "rightful owners of forfeited assets
to make claims for forfeited assets before they are retained by the
interest in winning undiminished forfeiture thus includes the
objective of returning property, in full, to those wrongfully
deprived or defrauded of it. Where the Government pursues this
restitutionary end, the Government's interest in forfeiture is
virtually indistinguishable from its interest in returning to a bank
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                    Page 69 of 124
the proceeds of a bank robbery; and a forfeiture defendant's claim
of right to use such assets to hire an attorney, instead of having
them returned to their rightful owners, is no more persuasive than a
bank robber's similar claim.
22. Finally, as we have recognized previously, a major purpose
motivating congressional adoption and continued refinement of the
racketeer influenced and corrupt organizations (RICO) and CCE
forfeiture provisions has been the desire to lessen the economic
power of organized crime and drug enterprises. See Russello v
L.Ed.2d 17 (1983). This includes the use of such economic power
to retain private counsel. As the Court of Appeals put it: "Congress
has already underscored the compelling public interest in stripping
criminals such as Reckmeyer of their undeserved economic power,
and part of that undeserved power may be the ability to command
high-priced legal talent." 837 F.2d, at 649. The notion that the
Government has a legitimate interest in depriving criminals of
economic power, even insofar as that power is used to retain
counsel of choice, may be somewhat unsettling. See, e.g., Tr. of
Oral Arg. 50-52. But when a defendant claims that he has suffered
some substantial impairment of his Sixth Amendment rights by
virtue of the seizure or forfeiture of assets in his possession, such a
complaint is no more than the reflection of "the harsh reality that
the quality of a criminal defendant's representation frequently may
turn on his ability to retain the best counsel money can buy” Morris
v. Slappy, 461 U.S. 1, 23 103 S.Ct. 1610, 1622, 75 L.Ed.2d 610
(1983) (BRENNAN, J., concurring in result). Again, the Court of
Appeals put it aptly: "The modern day Jean Valjean must be
satisfied with appointed counsel. Yet the drug merchant claims that
his possession of huge sums of money... entitles him to something
more. We reject this contention, and any notion of a constitutional
right to use the proceeds of crime to finance an expensive defense.”
837 F.2d, at 649.
23. It is our view that there is a strong governmental interest in
obtaining full recovery of all forfeitable assets, an interest that
overrides any Sixth Amendment interest in permitting criminals to
use assets adjudged forfeitable to pay for their defense. Otherwise,
there would be an interference with a defendant's Sixth
Amendment rights whenever the Government freezes or takes some
property in a defendant's possession before, during, or after a
criminal trial. So-called "jeopardy assessments Internal Revenue
Service (IRS) seizures of assets to secure potential tax liabilities,
see 26 U.S.C. § 6861-may impair a defendant's ability to retain
counsel in a way similar to that complained of here. Yet these
assessments have been upheld against constitutional attack, and we
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                    Page 70 of 124
note that the respondent in Monsanto concedes their
constitutionality, see Brief for Respondent in No. 88-454, p. 37, n.
20. Moreover, petitioner's claim to a share of the forfeited assets
postconviction would suggest that the Government could never
impose a burden on assets within a defendant's control that could
be used to pay a lawyer. Criminal defendants, however, are not
exempted from federal, state, and local taxation simply because
these financial levies may deprive them of resources that could be
used to hire an attorney.
24. We therefore reject petitioner's claim of a Sixth Amendment
right of criminal defendants to use assets that are the
Government's-assets adjudged forfeitable, as Reckmeyer's were-to
pay attorneys' fees, merely because those assets are in their
possession. See also Monsanto, 491 U.S., at 613, 109 S.Ct., at
2665, which rejects a similar claim with respect to pretrial orders
and assets not yet judged forfeitable.
25. Petitioner's second constitutional claim is that the forfeiture
statute is invalid under the Due Process Clause of the Fifth
Amendment because it permits the Government to upset the
"balance of forces between the accused and his accuser." Wardius
v. Oregon, 412 U.S. 470, 474, 93 S.Ct. 2208, 2212, 37 L.Ed.2d 82
(1973). We are not sure that this contention adds anything to
petitioner's Sixth Amendment claim, because, while "[t]he
Constitution guarantees a fair trial through the Due Process
Clauses... it defines the basic elements of a fair trial largely through
the several provisions of the Sixth Amendment, “Strickland v.
80 L.Ed.2d 674 (1984). We have concluded above that the Sixth
Amendment is not offended by the forfeiture provisions at issue
here. Even if, however, the Fifth Amendment provides some added
protection not encompassed in the Sixth Amendment's more
specific provisions, we find petitioner's claim based on the Fifth
Amendment unavailing.
26. Forfeiture provisions are powerful weapons in the war on
crime; like any such weapons, their impact can be devastating
when used unjustly. But due process claims alleging such abuses
are cognizable only in specific cases of prosecutorial misconduct
(and petitioner has made no such allegation here) or when directed
to a rule that is inherently unconstitutional. "The fact that the... Act
might operate unconstitutionally under some conceivable set of
circumstances is insufficient to render it.... Invalid," United States
v. Salerno, 481 U.S. 739, 745, 107 S.Ct. 2095, 2100, 95 L.Ed.2d
697 (1987). Petitioner's claim-that the power available to
prosecutors under the statute could be abused-proves too much, for
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                      Page 71 of 124
many tools available to prosecutors can be misused in a way that
violates the rights of innocent persons. As the Court of Appeals put
it, in rejecting this claim when advanced below: "Every criminal
law carries with it the potential for abuse, but a potential for abuse
does not require a finding of facial invalidity." 837 F.2d, at 648.
27. We rejected a claim similar to petitioner's last Term, in Wheat
v. United States, 486 U.S. 153, 108 S.Ct. 1692, 100 L.Ed.2d 140
(1988). In Wheat, the petitioner argued that permitting a court to
disqualify a defendant's chosen counsel because of conflicts of
interest-over that defendant's objection to the disqualification-
would encourage the Government to "manufacture" such conflicts
to deprive a defendant of his chosen attorney. Id., at 163, 108 S.Ct.
at 1699. While acknowledging that this was possible, we declined
to fashion the per se constitutional rule petitioner sought in Wheat,
instead observing that "trial courts are undoubtedly aware of [the]
possibility" of abuse, and would have to "take it into
consideration," when dealing with disqualification motions.
28. A similar approach should be taken here. The Constitution does
not forbid the imposition of an otherwise permissible criminal
sanction, such as forfeiture, merely because in some cases
prosecutors may abuse the processes available to them, e.g., by
attempting to impose them on persons who should not be subjected
to that punishment. Cf. Brady v. United States, 397 U.S. 742, 751,
and n. 8, 90 S.Ct. 1463, 1470, and n. 8, 25 L.Ed.2d 747 (1970).
Cases involving particular abuses can be dealt with individually by
the lower courts, when (and if) any such cases arise.
29. For the reasons given above, we find that petitioner's statutory
and constitutional challenges to the forfeiture imposed here are
without merit. The judgment of the Court of Appeals is therefore
63.      While explaining the aforesaid decision, the U.S. Supreme
Court in Sila Luis vs. United States31 observed as under: -
“Pretrial freezes of untainted forfeitable assets did not emerge until
the late 20th century. ```[T]he lack of historical precedent for the
asset freeze here is "[p]erhaps the most telling indication of a
severe constitutional problem.``` Free Enterprise Fund v. Public
(quoting Free Enterprise Fund v. Public Company Accounting
dissenting)). Indeed, blanket asset freezes are so tempting that the
Government's "prolonged reticence would be amazing if [they]
were not understood to be constitutionally proscribed.” Plaut v.
Spendthrift Farm, Inc., 514 U.S. 211, 230 (1995); see Printz v.
United States, 521 U.S. 898, 907-908 (1997) (reasoning that the
lack of early federal statutes commandeering state executive
officers "suggests an assumed absence of such power” given "the
attractiveness of that course to Congress").
The common law prohibited pretrial freezes of criminal defendants'
untainted assets. As the plurality notes, ante, at 13, for in personam
criminal forfeitures like that at issue here, any interference with a
defendant's property traditionally required a conviction, Forfeiture
was "a part, or at least a consequence, of the judgment of
conviction." The Palmyra, 12 Wheat. 1, 14 (1827) (Story, J.). The
defendant's "property cannot be touched before... the forfeiture is
completed." 1 J. Chitty, A Practical Treatise on the Criminal Law
737 (5th ed. 1847). This rule applied equally "to money as well as
specific chattels," Id., at 736, And it was not limited to full-blown
physical seizures, Although the defendant's goods could be
appraised and inventoried before trial, he remained free to "sell any
of them for his own support in prison, or that of his family, or to
assist him in preparing for his defence on the trial." Id., at 737
(emphasis added). Blackstone likewise agreed that a defendant
"may bona fide sell any of his chattels, real or personal, for the
sustenance of himself and family between the [offense] and
conviction.” 4 Blackstone 380; see Fleet wood's Case, 8 Co. Rep.
171a, 171b, 77 Eng. Rep. 731, 732 (K.B. 1611) (endorsing this
rule). At most, a court could unwind prejudgment fraudulent
transfers after conviction. 4 Blackstone 381; see Jones v. Ashurt,
Skin, 357, 357-358, 90 Eng. Rep. 159 (K.B. 1693) (unwinding a
fraudulent sale after conviction because it was designed to defeat
forfeiture). Numerous English authorities confirm these common-
law principles. Chitty, supra, at 736-737 (collecting sources).
The common law did permit the Government, however, to seize
tainted assets before trial. For example, "seizure of the res has long
been considered a prerequisite to the Initiation of in rem forfeiture
proceedings. “United States v. James Daniel Good Real Property,
510 U.S. 43, 57 (1993) (emphasis added); see The Brig Ann, 9
Cranch 289, 291 (1815) (Story, J.). But such forfeitures were
traditionally "fixed... by determining what property has been
'tainted' by unlawful use." Austin v. United States, 509 U.S. 602,
627 (1993) (Scalia, J., concurring in part and concurring in
judgment). So the civil in rem forfeiture tradition tracks the tainted-
untainted line. It provides no support for the asset freeze here.
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                     Page 73 of 124
There is a similarly well-established Fourth Amendment tradition
of seizing contraband and stolen goods before trial based only on
probable cause. See Carroll v. United States, 267 U.S. 132, 149-
152 (1925) (discussing this history); Boyd v. United States, 116
U.S. 616, 623-624 (1886) (same). Tainted assets fall within this
tradition because they are the fruits or instrumentalities of crime.
So the Government may freeze tainted assets before trial based on
probable cause to believe that they are forfeitable. See United
States v. Monsanto, 491 U.S. 600, 602-603, 615-616 (1989).
Nevertheless, our precedents require "a nexus... between the item to
be seized and criminal behavior." Warden, Md. Penitentiary v.
Havden. 387 U.S. 294. 307 (1967). Untainted assets almost never
have such a nexus. The only exception is that some property that is
evidence of crime might technically qualify as "untainted" but
nevertheless has a nexus to criminal behavior. See Ibid. Thus,
untainted assets do not fall within the Fourth Amendment tradition
either.
It is certainly the case that some early American statutes did
provide for civil forfeiture of untainted substitute property. See
Registry Act, §12, 1 Stat. 293 (providing for forfeiture of a ship or
"the value thereof "); Collection Act of July 31, 1789, §22, 1 Stat.
42 (similar for goods); United States v. Bajakajian, 524 U.S. 321,
341 (1998) (collecting statutes). These statutes grew out of a
broader "six-century-long tradition of in personam customs fines
equal to one, two, three, or even four times the value of the goods
at issue." Id., at 345-346 (KENNEDY, J., dissenting).
But this long tradition of in personam customs fines does not
contradict the general rule against pretrial seizures of untainted
property. These fines in personam status strongly suggests that the
Government did not collect them by seizing property at the outset
of litigation. As described, that process was traditionally required
for in rem forfeiture of tainted assets, See supra, at____ There
appears to be scant historical evidence, however, that forfeiture
ever involved seizure of untainted assets before trial and judgment,
except in limited circumstances not relevant here. Such summary
procedures were reserved for collecting taxes and seizures during
war. See Phillips v Commissioner, 283 U.S. 589, 595 (1931);
Miller v. United States, 11 Wall. 268, 304-306 (1871). The
Government's right of action in tax and custom-fine cases may
have been the same- “a civil action of debt." Bajakajian, supra, at
343, n, 18; Stockwell v. United States, 13 Wall. 531, 543 (1871);
Adams v. Woods, 2 Cranch 336, 341 (1805). Even so, nothing
suggests trial and judgment were expendable. See Miller, supra, at
304-305 (stating in dicta that confiscating Confederate property
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                     Page 74 of 124
through in rem proceedings would have raised Fifth and Sixth
Amendment concerns had they not been a war measure).
The common law thus offers an administrable line: A criminal
defendant's untainted assets are protected from Government
interference before trial and judgment. His tainted assets, by
contrast, may be seized before trial as contraband or through a
separate in rem proceeding. Reading the Sixth Amendment to track
the historical line between tainted and untainted assets makes good
sense. It avoids case-by-case adjudication, and ensures that the
original meaning of the right to counsel does real work. The asset
freeze here infringes the right to counsel because it "is so broad that
it differs not only in degree, but in kind, from its historical
antecedents. James Daniel Good, supra, at 82 (THOMAS, J.,
concurring in part and dissenting in part).”
64.      While dealing with the aforesaid issue and the decisions of the
U.S. Supreme Court in Caplin and Sila Luis, the Court may only
incidentally observe that insofar as PMLA is concerned, it enables the
Enforcement Directorate to not only move against properties which
may have been derived or obtained directly or indirectly while
committing a scheduled offence, but also against property equivalent
in value as would be evident from a reading of the expansive
definition of the expression “proceeds of crime” in Section 2(1)(u).
65.      It also becomes important to note that the provisions for a pre-
conviction attachment of properties was consciously adopted and
incorporated in the PMLA to strengthen the fight against the offence
of money laundering. This is evident from the recordal of the
following facts by the Supreme Court in Vijay Madan Lal
Chaudhary & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors.32:-
“292. The background in which the amendment of 2013 became
necessary can be culled out from the Report titled “Anti-Money
Laundering and Combating the Financing of Terrorism” dated
25.6.2010. The relevant paragraphs of the said report read thus:
“143. It is no formal and express legal condition that a
conviction for the predicate offence is required as a
precondition to prosecute money laundering, although
some practitioners the assessment team met with felt that
only a conviction would satisfactorily meet the evidentiary
requirements. The definition of property in the PMLA (see
supra) however requires property to be “related to a
scheduled offence. Consequently, the section 3 ML
offence not being an “all crimes offence, in the absence of
case law, it is generally interpreted as requiring at the very
minimum positive proof of the specific predicate offence
before a conviction for money laundering can be obtained,
be it for third party or self-laundering.
144. Similarly, under section 8A of the NDPS Act,
although it is debatable that the person charged with
money laundering needs to have been convicted of a
predicate offence, the positive and formal proof of a nexus
with a drug related predicate offence is essential.
168. The linkage and interaction of the ML offence with a
specific predicate criminality is historically very tight in
the Indian AML regime. The concept of stand-alone
money laundering is quite strange to the practitioners, who
cannot conceive pursuing money laundering as a sui
generis autonomous offence. Some interlocutors were
even of the (arguably erroneous) opinion that only a
conviction for the predicate criminality would effectively
satisfy the evidential requirements. As said, this attitude is
largely due to the general practice in India to start a ML
investigation only on the basis of a predicate offence case.
Even if the ML investigation since recently can run
concurrently with the predicate offence enquiry, there is
no inter-agency MOU or arrangement to deal with
evidentiary issues between the various agencies in
investigating predicates and ML offences. Also, the way
the interaction between the law enforcement agencies is
presently structured carries the risk that ML prosecutions
could be delayed while the other predicate offence
investigation agencies try to secure convictions.
175. Although recently an increased focus on the ML
aspect and use of the ML provisions is to be
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                    Page 76 of 124
acknowledged, there are still some important and often
long-standing legal issues to be resolved. To that end
following measures should be taken:
-    The monetary threshold limitation of INR 3 million
for the Schedule Part B predicate offences should be
abolished.
-    The section 3 PMLA definition of the ML offence
should be brought in line with the Vienna and
Palermo Conventions so as to also fully cover the
physical concealment and the sole acquisition,
possession and use of all relevant proceeds of crime.
-    The present strict and formalistic interpretation of the
evidentiary requirements in respect of the proof of the
predicate offence should be put to the test of the
courts to develop case law and receive direction on
this fundamental legal issue.
-    The level of the maximum fine imposable on legal
persons should be raised or left at the discretion of the
court to ensure a more dissuasive effect.
-    The practice of making a conviction of legal persons
contingent on the concurrent prosecution/conviction
of a (responsible) natural person should be
abandoned.
-    Consider the abolishment of the redundant section 8A
NDPS Act drug-related ML offence or, if maintained,
bring the sanctions at a level comparable to that of the
PMLA offence.
233. Confiscation under Chapter III of the PMLA is only
possible when it relates to “proceeds of crime as defined in
s. 2(1)(u), i.e. resulting from a scheduled offence, and
when there is a conviction of such scheduled (predicate)
offence. In addition, in such cases, only proceeds of the
predicate offence can be confiscated and not the proceeds
of the ML offence itself.
234. The predicate offence conviction condition creates
fundamental difficulties when trying to confiscate the
proceeds of crime in the absence of a conviction of a
predicate offence, particularly in a stand-alone ML case,
where the laundered assets become the corpus delicti and
should be forfeitable as such. In the international context,
the predicate conviction requirement also seriously affects
the capacity to recover criminal assets where the predicate
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                   Page 77 of 124
offence has occurred outside India and the proceeds are
subsequently laundered in India (see also comments in
Section 2.1 above).
235. The definition of proceeds of crime and property in
the PMLA are broad enough to allow for confiscation of
property derived directly or indirectly from proceeds of
crime relating to a scheduled (predicate) offence,
including income, profits and other benefits from the
proceeds of crime. These definitions also allow for value
confiscation, regardless of whether the property is held or
owned by a criminal or a third party. As section 65 of the
PMLA refers to the rules in CrPC, instrumentalities and
intended instrumentalities can be confiscated in
accordance with section 102 and 451 of the CrPC.
However, there is no case law in this respect.
236. Also, the procedural provisions of Chapter III make
confiscation of the proceeds of crime contingent on a prior
seizure of attachment of the property by the Adjudicating
Authority, and consequently substantially limit the
possibilities for confiscation under the PMLA.”
“General comments”
244. Since confiscation is linked to a conviction it is not
possible to confiscate criminal proceeds when the
defendant has died during the criminal proceedings.
However, it is possible to attach and dispose of any
property of a proclaimed offender when that person has
absconded. The absence of a regulation when the
defendant has died may have a negative impact on the
effectiveness of the confiscation regime in place in India.”
293. In view of the observations made in said Report, the
FATF made recommendations as follows:
Rating     Summary of factors relative to
R.3       PC         • Confiscation of property laundered is
not covered in the relevant legislation and
depends on a conviction for a scheduled
confiscation of intended instrumentalities
used in terrorist acts or funds collected to
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                    Page 78 of 124
be used by terrorist individuals.
for property of corresponding value to be
confiscated.
294. As a sequel to these recommendations of FATF and the
observations in the stated Report, Section 5 came to be
amended vide Act 2 of 2013. In this connection, it may be
useful to refer to the Fifty Sixth Report of the Standing
Committee on Finance relating to the 2011 Bill, which reads
“5. Amendment in provisions                  implemented    by
(i) Attachment of property : The present Act in section 5
stipulates that the person from whom property is
attached must “have been charged of having
committed a scheduled offence”. It is proposed to be
deleted as property may come to rest with someone,
who has nothing to do with the scheduled offence or
even the money-laundering offence. Procedure for
attachment is at present done as provided in the
Second Schedule to the Income Tax Act, 196. Now it
is proposed in section 5(1) that the procedure will be
prescribed separately. Time for Adjudicating
Authority to confirm attachment of property by ED
has been proposed to be increased from 150 days to
180 days.
(iii) Making confiscation independent of conviction : At
present attachment of property becomes final under
section 8(3) “after the guilt of the person is proved in
the trial court and order of such trial court becomes
final”. Problems are faced in such cases where
money-laundering has been done by a person who has
not committed the scheduled offence or where
property has come to rest with someone who has not
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                    Page 79 of 124
committed any offence. Therefore, it is proposed to
amend section 8(5) to provide for attachment and
confiscation of the proceeds of crime, even if there is
no conviction, so long as it is proved that predicate
offence and money laundering offence have taken
place and the property in question (i.e. the proceeds of
crime) is involved in money laundering.”
However, the MER 2010 highlighted certain deficiencies
in the AML legislation which adversely affected the
ratings on a few FATF recommendations. The areas are
broadly summarized below:—
a)   Commodities market out of the ambit of PMLA.
b) DNFBP sector not subjected to PMLA (except
c)   Effectiveness concerns due to absence of ML
conviction.
d) Identification and verification of beneficial ownership
of legal persons.
e)   Ineffective sanctions regime for non-compliance.
India has suggested an Action Plan with short,
medium and long term objectives to address the
specific issues raised in the MER 2010 that includes
proposed amendments in the PMLA.”
295. As aforesaid, in this backdrop the amendment Act 2 of
2013 came into being. Considering the purport of the amended
provisions and the experience of implementing/enforcement
agencies, further changes became necessary to strengthen the
mechanism regarding prevention of money-laundering. It is not
right in assuming that the attachment of property (provisional)
under the second proviso, as amended, has no link with the
scheduled offence. Inasmuch as Section 5(1) envisages that
such an action can be initiated only on the basis of material in
possession of the authorised officer indicative of any person
being in possession of proceeds of crime. The precondition for
being proceeds of crime is that the property has been derived
or obtained, directly or indirectly, by any person as a result of
criminal activity relating to a scheduled offence. The sweep of
Section 5(1) is not limited to the accused named in the criminal
activity relating to a scheduled offence. It would apply to any
person (not necessarily being accused in the scheduled
offence), if he is involved in any process or activity connected
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                    Page 80 of 124
with the proceeds of crime. Such a person besides facing the
consequence of provisional attachment order, may end up in
being named as accused in the complaint to be filed by the
authorised officer concerning offence under Section 3 of the
66.     The PMLA is thus a distinct regime adopted by the Nation
aimed to strengthen the arms of enforcement agencies in the fight
against crime, representative of the new tools adopted across the
world to force the perpetrators of crime to disgorge the benefits that
may have been derived or obtained and thus stands on a pedestal
distinct and different from the insolvency regimen which has come to
be erected in terms of the IBC. The two statutes thus subserve
completely different, divergent and distinct purposes. The objectives
underlying the introduction of the PMLA, the international obligations
of the country which lead to its promulgation based upon the views
expressed by the Financial Action Task Force33 and which have
been elaborately noticed in Vijay Madanlal clearly lend credence to
the aforesaid conclusion.
67.     The Court also deems it apposite to observe that the
Government while proceeding to act under the PMLA can also not be
recognized to be acting as a creditor who seeks to enforce a debt. This
is clearly evident from the definition of the words “creditor” and
“debt” which is employed under the IBC. Its action to attach a
property is not one which is taken by a person to whom a debt may be
said to be owed. It would be relevant to note that when the ED moves
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                  Page 81 of 124
to provisionally attach properties which constitute proceeds of crime,
it does not do so acting as a creditor. The steps that are taken under the
aforesaid provisions are aimed at principally attaching properties
which have been determined as representing proceeds of crime and
thus placing a fetter on the right of the holder thereof to deal with or
fritter away the same. It essentially seeks to strip the perpetrator of the
right to enjoy the same during the pendency of proceedings under the
PMLA. The order of attachment thus puts a restraint on the further
enjoyment of the property by the possessor thereof as also to put a
restraint on its powers to transfer or alienate the same pending the trial
of the offence of money laundering by the Special Court.
68.     As was aptly observed by the Court in Axis Bank, the
Government while seeking to attach properties under the PMLA is not
liable to be viewed as exercising a sovereign prerogative to levy a tax
or to recover a debt but essentially to take away what has been
illegitimately obtained in the course of a person indulging in
proscribed criminal activity. The aforesaid view also finds resonance
in the following observations as were made by the Supreme Court in
“100. Lastly, Shri Mehta relied upon Directorate of Enforcement v.
Axis Bank [Directorate of Enforcement v. Axis Bank, 2019 SCC
OnLine Del 7854 : (2019) 259 DLT 500] , and in particular, on paras
127, 128 and 146 to 148 for the proposition that an offence under the
Prevention of Money-Laundering Act could not be covered under
Section 14(1)(a). The Delhi High Court's reasoning is contained in
paras 139 and 141, which are set out hereinbelow: (SCC OnLine
“139. From the above discussion, it is clear that the objects
and reasons of enactment of the four legislations are
distinct, each operating in different field. There is no
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                   Page 82 of 124
overlap. While RDBA has been enacted to provide for
speedier remedy for banks and financial institutions to
recover their dues, Sarfaesi Act (with added chapter on
registration of secured creditor) aims at facilitating the
secured creditors to expeditiously and effectively enforce
their security interest. In each case, the amount to be
recovered is “due” to the claimant i.e. the banks or the
financial institutions or the secured creditor, as the case may
be, the claim being against the debtor (or his guarantor).
The Insolvency Code, in contrast, seeks to primarily protect
the interest of creditors by entrusting them with the
responsibility to seek resolution through a professional
(RP), failure on his part leading eventually to the liquidation
process.
141. This Court finds it difficult to accept the proposition
that the jurisdiction conferred on the State by PMLA to
confiscate the “proceeds of crime” concerns a property the
value whereof is “debt” due or payable to the Government
(Central or State) or local authority. The Government, when
it exercises its power under PMLA to seek attachment
leading to confiscation of proceeds of crime, does not stand
as a creditor, the person alleged to be complicit in the
offence of money-laundering similarly not acquiring the
status of a debtor. The State is not claiming the prerogative
to deprive such offender of ill-gotten assets so as to be
perceived to be sharing the loot, not the least so as to levy
tax thereupon such as to give it a colour of legitimacy or
lawful earning, the idea being to take away what has been
illegitimately secured by proscribed criminal activity.”
(emphasis in original)
This raison d'être is completely different from what has been
advocated by Shri Mehta. The confiscation of the proceeds of crime is
by the Government acting statutorily and not as a creditor. This
judgment, again, does not further his case.”
69.    Regard must also be had to the fact that the word “debt” itself is
defined under the IBC to mean a liability or obligation which is due
from any person. The action of attachment and ultimate confiscation
under the PMLA is essentially to strip the possessor of the tainted
property of all rights that may have otherwise been exercisable. When
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                     Page 83 of 124
the respondents proceed to invoke the provisions of the PMLA, they
are in essence proceeding towards the ultimate confiscation of
properties unlawfully acquired or those which were obtained by the
use of proceeds garnered from the commission of a schedule offence.
70.    Turning then to the scope of the two statutes and the perceived
conflict between the two, the Court in Axis Bank had while ruling on
third-party interests observed as follows: -
“105. It is vivid that the legislature has made provision for
“provisional attachment” bearing in mind the possibility of
circumstances of urgency that might necessitate such power to be
resorted to. A person engaged in criminal activity intending to
convert the proceeds of crime into assets that can be projected as
legitimate (or untainted) would generally be in a hurry to render the
same unavailable. The entire contours of the crime may not be
known when it comes to light and the enforcement authority
embarks upon a probe. The crime of such nature is generally
executed in stealth and secrecy, multiple transactions (seemingly
legitimate) creating a web lifting the veil whereof is not an easy
task. The truth of the matter is expected to be uncovered by a
detailed probe which may take long time to undertake and
conclude. The total wrongful gain from the criminal activity cannot
be computed till the investigation is completed. The authority for
“provisional” attachment of suspect assets is to ensure that the
same remain within the reach of the law.
161. The law conceives of possibility of third party interest in
property of a person accused of money-laundering being created
legitimately or, conversely, with ulterior motive “to frustrate” or
“to defeat” the objective of law against money-laundering. In case
of tainted asset - that is to say a property acquired or obtained as a
result of criminal activity - the interest acquired by a third party
from person accused of money-laundering, even if bona fide, for
lawful and adequate consideration, cannot result in the same being
released from attachment, or escaping confiscation, since the law
intends it to “vest absolutely in the Central Government free from
all encumbrances”, the right of such third party being restricted to
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                    Page 84 of 124
sue the wrong-doer for damages, the encumbrance, if created with
the objective of defeating the law, being treated as void (Section 9).
162. But, in case an otherwise untainted asset (i.e. deemed tainted
property) is targeted by the enforcement authority for attachment
under the second or third part of the definition of “proceeds of
crime”, for the reason that such asset is equivalent in value to the
tainted asset that was derived or obtained by criminal activity but
which cannot be traced, the third party having a legitimate interest
may approach the adjudicating authority to seek its release by
showing that the interest in such property was acquired bona fide
and for lawful (and adequate) consideration, there being no intent,
while acquiring such interest or charge, to defeat or frustrate the
law, neither the said property nor the person claiming such interest
having any connection with or being privy to the offence of money-
laundering.
163. Having regard to the above scheme of the law in PMLA, it is
clear that if a bonafide third party claimant had acquired interest in
the property which is being subjected to attachment at a time
anterior to the commission of the criminal activity, the product
whereof is suspected as proceeds of crime, the acquisition of such
interest in such property (otherwise assumably untainted) by such
third party cannot conceivably be on account of intent to defeat or
frustrate this law. In this view, it can be concluded that the date or
period of the commission of criminal activity which is the basis of
such action under PMLA can be safely treated as the cut-off. From
this, it naturally follows that an interest in the property of an
accused, vesting in a third party acting bona fide, for lawful and
adequate consideration, acquired prior to the commission of the
proscribed offence evincing illicit pecuniary benefit to the former,
cannot be defeated or frustrated by attachment of such property to
such extent by the enforcement authority in exercise of its power
under Section 8 PMLA.
164. Though the sequitur to the above conclusion is that the
bonafide third party claimant has a legitimate right to proceed
ahead with enforcement of its claim in accordance with law,
notwithstanding the order of attachment under PMLA, the latter
action is not rendered irrelevant or unenforceable. To put it clearly,
in such situations as above (third party interest being prior to
criminal activity) the order of attachment under PMLA would
remain valid and operative, even though the charge or encumbrance
of such third party subsists but the State action would be restricted
to such part of the value of the property as exceeds the claim of the
third party.
165. Situation may also arise, as seems to be the factual matrix of
some of the cases at hand, wherein a secured creditor, it being a
bonafide third party claimant vis-a-vis the alternative attachable
property (or deemed tainted property) has initiated action in
accordance with law for enforcement of such interest prior to the
order of attachment under PMLA, the initiation of the latter action
unwittingly having the effect of frustrating the former. Since both
actions are in accord with law, in order to co-exist and be in
harmony with each other, following the preceding prescription, it
would be appropriate that the PMLA attachment, though remaining
valid and operative, takes a back-seat allowing the secured creditor
bonafide third party claimant to enforce its claim by disposal of the
subject property, the remainder of its value, if any, thereafter to be
made available for purposes of PMLA.”
71.    As would be evident from the aforesaid passages of that
decision, the Court had while preserving the right of the competent
authorities under the PMLA to provisionally attach properties
notwithstanding independent proceedings that may have been initiated
or would have been pending under the IBC at the relevant point of
time, accorded no precedence to the claim of the ED over that of
secured creditors or other bonafide third party claimants. It was
pertinently observed that while an attachment under the PMLA would
remain valid and operative, it would have to ultimately take a “back
seat” allowing the secured creditor or a bonafide third party claimant
to enforce its claim by disposal of the subject property and the
remainder alone being made available for the purposes of the PMLA.
72.    The IBC on the other hand is a compendious legislation which
engrafts measures pertaining to resolution of claims which may exist
against a debtor facing the spectre of insolvency. It essentially creates
a mechanism for speedy resolution of insolvency, exploration of the
possibility of its revival and for appropriate steps towards liquidation
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                   Page 86 of 124
being taken if it be ultimately found that the entity cannot be revived.
IBC is a comprehensive and all-encompassing code dealing with all
aspects relating to insolvency. It is a legislative measure aimed at
ensuring expeditious resolution of situations of insolvency and thus
protecting the rights of all stakeholders. It is these aspects which
appear to have guided the Legislature in adopting measures which
removes the erstwhile management from the seat of control over the
corporate debtor, the creation of a common platform for the
examination of claims of various parties who may have had dealings
with the debtor, the appointment of Resolution Professionals who may
be charged with exploring the possibility of resettlement and revival
of the debtor and for the adoption of appropriate steps which may
enable the debtor to get back on its feet and if ultimately found to be
unfeasible to take steps for its timely liquidation. It is a legislation
which constructs a comprehensive structure aimed at timely resolution
of stressed debtors and thus subserving the interests of its creditors
and other stakeholders. Insolvency proceedings have thus been
transformed into a collective engagement to examine whether there is
a possibility for the revival of the debtor.
73.    The moratorium provision incorporated in the IBC is
fundamentally aimed at maximisation of value, preservation of the
assets of the debtor while possibilities of its resurrection are explored
and ensuring that its various creditors do not initiate individual actions
which may hamper or impede the resolution process. It is essentially
aimed at preserving the insolvency estate and the suspension of
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                 Page 87 of 124
actions against the debtor. The moratorium order staves off actions
that may be initiated for enforcing security interests, claims by
individual creditors, a restraint against the dissipation of its assets
while the process of its restructuring is explored. It essentially seeks to
sequester the assets of the debtor from actions which may be initiated
by its creditors. It is during this crucial period that the viability of the
debtor is assessed during the CIRP.
74.    The purpose of a moratorium provision was explained by the
Viswanathan Committee in its Insolvency Committee Report, 2015
The motivation behind the moratorium is that it is value
maximizing for the entity to continue operations even as viability is
being assessed during the IRP. There should be no additional stress
on the business after the public announcement of the IRP. The
order for the moratorium during the IRP imposes a stay not just on
debt recovery actions, but also any claims or expected claims from
old lawsuits, or on new lawsuits, for any manner of recovery from
the entity. The moratorium will be active for the period over which
the IRP is active. (Viswanathan Committee Report, 2015 para
75.    The Court had already noticed the pertinent conclusions in the
subsequent report which had explained the purpose behind a
moratorium provision in the following terms:-
“8.2. The moratorium under Section 14 is intended to keep “the
corporate debtor's assets together during the insolvency resolution
process and facilitating orderly completion of the processes
envisaged during the insolvency resolution process and ensuring
that the company may continue as a going concern while the
creditors take a view on resolution of default.” Keeping the
corporate debtor running as a going concern during the CIRP helps
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                   Page 88 of 124
in achieving resolution as a going concern as well, which is likely to
maximize value for all stakeholders. In other jurisdictions too, a
moratorium may be put in place on the advent of formal insolvency
proceedings, including liquidation and reorganization proceedings.
The UNCITRAL Guide notes that a moratorium is critical during
reorganization proceedings since it “facilitates the continued
operation of the business and allows the debtor a breathing space to
organize its affairs, time for preparation and approval of a
reorganization plan and for other steps such as shedding
unprofitable activities and onerous contracts, where appropriate.”
8.11. Further, the purpose of the moratorium is to keep the assets of
the debtor together for successful insolvency resolution, and it does
not bar all actions, especially where countervailing public policy
concerns are involved. For instance, criminal proceedings are not
considered to be barred by the moratorium, since they do not
constitute “money claims or recovery” proceedings. In this regard,
the Committee also noted that in some jurisdictions, laws allow
“regulatory claims, such as those which are not designed to collect
money for the estate but to protect vital and urgent public interests,
restraining activities causing environmental damage or activities
that are detrimental to public health and safety” to be continued
during the moratorium period.”
76.    The Notes on Clauses for Section 14 in the original Bill read as
"the purposes of the moratorium include keeping the corporate
debtor's assets together during the insolvency resolution process
and facilitating orderly completion of the processes envisaged
during the insolvency resolution process and ensuring that the
company may continue as a going concern while the creditors take
a view on resolution of default and "the moratorium on initiation
and continuation of legal proceedings, including debt enforcement
action ensures a stand-still period during which creditors cannot
resort to individual enforcement action which may frustrate the
object of the corporate insolvency resolution process."
77.    The United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law34, Legislative Guide on Insolvency Law, (2005) while speaking
of a moratorium provision observes as under:-
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                   Page 89 of 124
“34. Other insolvency laws allow the commencement or
continuation of legal proceedings (without leave of the court), but
the application of the stay pre- vents enforcement of any resulting
order. Some insolvency laws limit the actions that may be pursued
and only specific actions, such as employee actions against the
debtor, can be commenced or continued, but any enforcement
action resulting from those proceedings will be stayed. In some
insolvency laws a distinction is made between regulatory and
pecuniary actions. Some laws allow claims of both a regulatory and
pecuniary nature to be continued, others only regulatory claims,
such as those which are not designed to collect money for the estate
but to protect vital and urgent public interests, restraining activities
causing environmental damage or activities that are detrimental to
public health and safety. As a procedural matter, some insolvency
laws limit the initial scope of acts and actions to which the stay
applies on commencement, but provide that upon application, the
court might extend the stay to other types of action and act.
35. To ensure transparency and predictability, it is highly desirable
that an insolvency law clearly identify the actions that are to be
included within and specifically excepted from the scope of the
stay, irrespective of who may commence those actions, whether
unsecured creditors (including priority creditors such as employees,
legislative lien holders or Governments), third parties (such as a
lessor or owner of property in the possession or use of the debtor or
occupied by the debtor), secured creditors or others. Exceptions
might include set-off rights and netting of financial contracts;
actions to protect public policy interests, such as to restrain
environmental damage or activities detrimental to public health and
safety; actions to prevent abuse, such as the use of insolvency
proceedings as a shield for illegal activities; actions commenced in
order to preserve a claim against the debtor; and actions against the
debtor for personal injury or family law claims. With respect to
claims against the debtor that have the potential for very large
compensation awards, such as mass tort claims, it is desirable that
they be included within the scope of the stay.”
78.    What would be manifest from the aforesaid enunciation of the
intent and objective of the moratorium provision is that it principally
subserves the purpose of preservation of the assets of the debtor,
enables all stakeholders to explore the possibility of its revitalisation
and if ultimately those efforts fail, for its expeditious liquidation. The
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                    Page 90 of 124
aforesaid objective would be clearly negated if individual creditors
were granted the right to enforce their claims independently. That
would not only result in a depletion of the insolvency estate, it would
ultimately jeopardise the interests of the body of creditors as a whole.
As was succinctly explained by the Supreme Court in P. Mohanraj,
clauses (a) and (b) of Section 14(1) constitute a scheme which shields
the corporate debtor from “pecuniary attacks”. It is these imperatives
which appear to inform the provisions of Section 14 of the IBC.
79.    Regard must also be had to the fact that in P. Mohanraj, the
Supreme Court had contrasted the breadth of the moratorium
envisaged under Section 14 with that provided for in Sections 85 and
96 of the IBC. It had noted that the latter two provisions were
concerned with a stay of proceedings “in respect of any debt”. It was
in that context observed that the moratorium provisioned for in
Section 14(1)(a) would be far wider and would cover any legal
proceedings “even indirectly relatable to recovery of any debt.” P.
Mohanraj was concerned with the question whether a Section 138 of
the Negotiable Instruments Act proceeding would fall within the
ambit of the expression “proceedings” as appearing in Section 14(1).
The judgment in the aforesaid case is liable to be appreciated bearing
in mind the fundamental fact that an action under Section 138 was
recognised to be principally one for the recovery of a debt owed
notwithstanding the proceedings being quasi criminal in character.
The ratio of the aforesaid decision clearly appears to be that the word
“proceedings” is not liable to draw colour or meaning from the words
institution or continuation of suits and would thus cover all
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                               Page 91 of 124
proceedings which could be viewed as being in relation to the
enforcement or recovery of a debt that may be owed by the corporate
debtor.
80.     As would be evident from the aforesaid discussion, the
primordial purpose of a moratorium as enunciated hereinabove, is
clearly distinct from the purpose and objectives of attachment action
taken under the PMLA. PMLA is not concerned with the recovery or
enforcement of a debt. Proceedings for attachment that may be
initiated in terms thereof cannot by any stretch of imagination be
viewed as being akin to an action for enforcement or recovery of a
debt. PMLA is guided by the legislative policy of confiscation of
proceeds of crime. That legislation is aimed primarily at fighting the
scourge of organised crime, the generation and retention of criminal
proceeds, denuding offenders of the economic benefits that may have
been derived or obtained by the commission of scheduled offenses and
thus become an iteration of the legislative policy that crime would not
pay. PMLA seeks to adopt, enforce and unleash punitive measures
against the commission of crime and the retention of ill-gotten gains.
81.     The Government when it seeks to initiate pre-emptive measures
which may ultimately lead to a civil forfeiture and confiscation of
tainted assets is neither seeking to enforce a debt nor is it proceeding
towards appropriation of moneys due or payable to it. Those
proceedings are not liable to be viewed as an action to recover a tax or
moneys owed to the Government. That action is fundamentally aimed
at an ultimate confiscation of properties and assets which would have
been obtained by a person by commission of a crime and thus deriving
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                Page 92 of 124
a benefit which was otherwise if not impermissible, forbidden by law.
Assets which may have been obtained by the commission of a
scheduled offense thus cannot be accorded exemption or immunity
from the rigours of the PMLA. Acceptance of such a contention would
not only run contrary to the legislative policy but also undermine the
efforts of the legislature to combat the offense of money laundering.
In fact if Section 14 were to be interpreted in the manner as suggested
by the petitioner, it would deprive the authorities charged with
implementing the provisions of the PMLA of an essential weapon in
their quest to confiscate proceeds of crime. It would be pertinent to
note that the activity of money laundering is itself aimed at
obfuscating the origins of property illegally derived from crime. It is a
process which inherently entails the layering of proceeds which itself
is a dynamic process. The power of attachment is thus an essential
tool which is designed to ensure that the tainted asset is not transferred
or alienated further and beyond the reach of the authorities itself.
82.    The Court finds itself unable to accept the submission that the
provisions of the PMLA are liable to be read as being subservient to
the moratorium provision comprised in Section 14 of the IBC for the
following additional reasons. PMLA seeks to subserve a larger public
policy imperative. The enactment represents a larger public interest,
namely the fight against crime and the debilitating impact that such
activities ultimately have on the society and the economy of nations as
a whole. Tainted assets are those which would have been obtained
through surreptitious means and modes, through layered transactions
aimed at obfuscating their origins. The legislation aims at denuding
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                Page 93 of 124
the perpetrators of crime of gains obtained from such activities. It is a
reparation measure which seeks to strip and deprive criminals of
benefits derived and retained by the adoption of illegal and dishonest
action. The PMLA is an enactment which is aimed at affecting the
disgorgement of illegal gains. The Court deems it apposite to note that
the Insolvency Law Committee Report, 2016 had pertinently observed
in Para 8.11 that the moratorium provision is not liable to be
interpreted as barring all possible actions “especially where
countervailing public policy concerns are involved”. It also took note
of laws prevailing in different jurisdictions which permit regulatory
actions which though not aimed at collecting moneys for the estate
protect other vital and urgent public interests. This view finds
reiteration in the UNCITRAL Legislative Guide on Insolvency Law
which had recognised “actions to protect public policy concerns”
falling outside the ken of a moratorium.
83.    Viewed in that light, it cannot possibly be said that actions
taken under that statute are akin or similar to steps that may be taken
by a creditor pursuing an ordinary monetary claim. The tainted
property is not a debt owed to the Government. It is not something
which is owed to the Government or a liability which is liable to be
discharged or liquidated. On an overall conspectus of the aforesaid,
the Court is of the considered opinion that on a fundamental plane, it
would be incorrect to read Section 14 as completely shutting out
actions under Sections 5 and 8 of the PMLA.
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                Page 94 of 124
84.      The scope of Section 14 of the IBC and the power of the
authorities under the PMLA Act to effect attachment is an issue which
appears to have fallen for consideration before the NCLT and the
NCLAT on various occasions in the past. Since those decisions have
also been cited before this Court, it would be apposite to briefly notice
the principles laid down therein as well as to lend a quietus to the
controversy which stands raised.
85.      However, and before proceeding to do so, it would be pertinent
to advert to certain decisions cited on behalf of the petitioner and who
contended that they are authorities for the proposition that since
proceedings of attachment under the PMLA are civil in character, they
would fall within the ambit of the moratorium provision contained in
Section 14 of the IBC. They had firstly relied upon a judgment
rendered by the Andhra Pradesh High Court in B. Rama Raju vs.
Union of India35. It becomes pertinent to note that B. Rama Raju
was dealing with a batch of writ petitions which had laid challenge to
the constitutionality of various provisions of the PMLA. This would
be evident from a perusal of the issues which stood crystallized in
paragraph 14 of the report. The said decision does not deal with the
question of attachment and the scope or ambit of the moratorium
under Section 14 at all. Similarly, the decision of the Gujarat High
Court in Foziya Godil vs. Union of India36 which was pressed into
aid by the petitioner also does not consider the question which stands
posited before this Court in the present writ petition. The same is the
position with respect to the judgment rendered by the Appellate
Tribunal for Prevention of Money Laundering handed down in
Punjab National Bank vs. Deputy Director, Directorate of
86.      Turning then to the decisions rendered by the NCLAT on the
subject, it appears that the question of the interplay between the
provisions of the PMLA and Section 14 of the IBC firstly came to be
considered in Varrsana Ispat. While dealing with the aforesaid issue,
the NCLAT enunciated the legal position as follows: -
“8. Section 14 is not applicable to the criminal proceeding or any
penal action taken pursuant to the criminal proceeding or any act
having essence of crime or crime proceeds. The object of the
„Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002‟ is to prevent the
money laundering and to provide confiscation of property derived
from, or involved in, money-laundering and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
12. From the aforesaid provisions, it is clear that the „Prevention of
Money-Laundering Act, 2002‟ relates to „proceeds of crime‟ and
the offence relates to „money-laundering‟ resulting confiscation of
property derived from, or involved in, money-laundering and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. Thus, as the
„Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002‟ or provisions therein
relates to „proceeds of crime‟, we hold that Section 14 of the „I&B
Code‟ is not applicable to such proceeding.”
87.       An identical issue fell for consideration before the NCLAT in
the matter of Sterling Biotech Limited. In the aforesaid matter, the
Appellate Tribunal observed thus: -
“15. In so far the assets of the „Corporate Debtor‟ is concerned, if it
is based on the proceeds of crime, it is always open to the
„Enforcement Directorate‟ to seize the assets of the „Corporate
Debtor‟ and act in accordance with the „Prevention of Money
Laundering Act, 2002‟ (for short, „the PMLA‟).”
88.    Subsequently and in Rotomac Global, the question of a
moratorium applying to proceedings that may be initiated under the
PMLA fell for consideration yet again. NCLAT reiterated the position
which had been elucidated in Varrsana Ispat and proceeded to
dismiss the appeal. The sole discordant note which appears to have
been struck by NCLAT was in the matter of Manoj Kumar Agarwal.
It was in this decision that the NCLAT for the first time took the
position that in light of the aims and objects of the IBC, it would be
impermissible for the authorities under the PMLA being recognised to
have a right to exercise the powers of attachment after a moratorium
had come into effect. This is evident from the following conclusions
which came to be recorded in that decision: -
“56. Taking aid from this, it appears to us that after the
attachment when matter goes before the Adjudicating Authority
under PMLA, proceeding before Adjudicating Authority for
confirmation would be civil in nature. That being so, Section 14
of IBC would be attracted and applies. In present matter, the
Provisional Attachment took place on 29th May, 2018 and
corrigendum was issued on 14th June, 2018. The CIRP started on
16th July, 2018. Once moratorium was ordered, even if the
Appellant moved the Adjudicating Authority under PMLA,
further action before Adjudicating Authority under PMLA must
be said to have been prohibited. Even if confirmation has been
done as stated to have been done on 20th November, 2018, the
same will have to be ignored. Section 14 of IBC will hit
institution and continuation of proceedings before Adjudicating
Authority under PMLA. The CIRP will of course not affect
prosecution before Special Court, till contingencies under Section
32A of IBC occur.
57. In Judgment in the matter of “P. Mohanraj v. Shah Brothers
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                  Page 97 of 124
Court of India considered the provisions of Section 138 of the
Negotiable Instrument Act and Liabilities of the Corporate Debtor
and Directors in the light of Section 14 of IBC and observed in
Paragraph 63 as under:
“63. A conspectus of these judgments would show that the
gravamen of a proceeding under Section 138, though
couched in language making the act complained of an
offence, is really in order to get back through a summary
proceeding, the amount contained in the dishonoured
cheque together with interest and costs, expeditiously and
cheaply. We have already seen how it is the victim alone
who can file the complaint which ordinarily culminates in
the payment of fine as compensation which may extend to
twice the amount of the cheque which would include the
amount of the cheque and the interest and costs thereupon.
Given our analysis of Chapter XVII of the Negotiable
Instruments Act together with the amendments made
thereto and the case law cited hereinabove, it is clear that
a quasi-criminal proceeding that is contained in Chapter
XVII of the Negotiable Instruments Act would, given the
object and context of Section 14 of the IBC, amount to a
“proceeding” within the meaning of Section 14(1)(a), the
moratorium therefore attaching to such proceeding.”
58. Thus to quasi-criminal proceeding as regards Corporate
Debtor, Section 14 applies has been found. Considering this as
well as the nature of proceedings that takes place before the
Adjudicating Authority under PMLA, it appears to us that even if
the Authority issues order of provisional attachment, the
institution and continuation of proceedings before the
Adjudicating Authority for confirmation would be hit by Section
14 of IBC.
59. Alternatively, even if for any reason it was to be held that
Section 14 of IBC would not help, it appears to us that Section
238 of IBC would still apply. Although it is argued that PMLA is
a special statute and has an overriding effect still Section 238 of
IBC is also a special statute and which is subsequent statute. IBC
has specific object, which is to consolidate and amend laws
relating to reorganisation and insolvency resolution of corporate
persons, partnership firms and individuals in a time-bound
manner for maximization of value of assets of such persons and to
promote entrepreneurship, availability of credit and balance the
interest of all stakeholders including alteration in the order of
priority of payment of Government dues.
“238. The provisions of this Code shall have effect,
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained
in any other law for the time being in force or any
instrument having effect by virtue of any such law.”
61. If this Section is perused, the provisions of this Code would
have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith
contained “in any other law” for the time being in force. Section
238 of IBC does not give over riding effect merely to Section 14.
The other provisions also are material, and will have effect if
there is anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law
for the time being in force. Thus if the Authorities under PMLA
on the basis of the attachment or seizure done or possession taken
under the said Act resist handing over the properties of the
Corporate Debtor to the IRP/RP/Liquidator the consequence of
which will be hindrance for them to keep the Corporate Debtor a
going concern till resolution takes place or liquidation
proceedings are completed, the obstructions will have to be
removed. We have already referred to the various Acts required to
be performed by IRP/RP/Liquidator to achieve the aims and
objects of IBC in time bound manner. If properties of Corporate
Debtor would not be available to keep it a going concern, or to get
the properties valued without which Resolution/Sale would not be
possible, the obstruction will have to be removed. To take over
properties of Corporate Debtor, and manage the same, and keep
Corporate Debtor a going concern are acts which fall within
purview of IBC. IRP/RP/Liquidator under IBC have duty and
right to take over and manage assets of Corporate Debtor as long
as the assets are property of the Corporate Debtor, so that the
other duties conferred on them by the statute are performed.
These are issues relating to resolution/liquidation. If hindrance is
being created by the attachment or by taking over the possession,
it would be a question of priority arising out of or in relation to
the insolvency resolution or liquidation proceedings of the
Corporate Debtor and such question can be decided by the
Adjudicating Authority under Section 60(5)(c) of IBC which
(c) any question of priorities or any question of law or
facts, arising out of or in relation to the insolvency
resolution or liquidation proceedings of the corporate
debtor or corporate person under this Code.
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                   Page 99 of 124
62. In our view, there is no conflict between PMLA and IBC and
even if a property has been attached in the PMLA which is
belonging to the Corporate Debtor, if CIRP is initiated, the
property should become available to fulfil objects of IBC till a
resolution takes place or sale of liquidation asset occurs in terms
of Section 32A.”
89.    It becomes pertinent to observe that while the earlier decision of
NCLAT in Varrsana Ispat was cited before the Bench of the NCLAT
which was hearing Manoj Kumar Agarwal, it chose not to deal with
the conclusions which had come to be recorded therein. It may only be
observed that the previous judgment in Varrsana Ispat was
perfunctorily dealt with and no cogent reasons assigned to doubt its
correctness. The legal position up to the stage of the NCLT and
NCLAT in any case ultimately came to be laid at rest by the larger
Bench of the Appellate Tribunal in Kiran Shah. Kiran Shah after
noticing the relevant statutory provisions which would apply as well
as the earlier judgments rendered by the Tribunals in this respect
while reiterating Varrsana Ispat held as under: -
“98. Although, Section 14 of I&B Code deals with „moratorium‟,
it is not a hindrance for the „Authority‟ and the Officers under the
„Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002‟ to deny a person of
the tainted „Proceeds of Crime‟. Suffice it for this „Tribunal‟ to
point out that a person who is involved in „Money Laundering‟ is
not to be allowed to enjoy the fruits of „Proceeds of Crime‟ with a
view to ward off is Civil indebtedness, in respect of his Creditors.
99. As seen from the „Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002‟,
the purpose of the Act is to prevent „Money Laundering‟ and it
deals with confiscation of property derived from or concerned with
„Money Laundering‟ etc. In fact, „The Prevention of Money
Laundering Act, 2002‟ is to fulfil our Country's obligation in
adhering to the United Nations Resolutions and in regard to
Assets/Properties being the „Proceeds of Crime‟, it takes a „primacy
and precedence‟ over the „Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016‟
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                  Page 100 of 124
which promotes “Resolution‟ as its objective over Liquidation in
the considered opinion of this „Tribunal‟.
100. In the instant case, there is no „Resolution Plan‟ as approved
by the „Tribunal‟ and further no Liquidation Proceedings had ended
in the sale of Liquidation Assets of the „Corporate Debtor‟.
101. Besides this, the objective, purpose of two enactments (1) „I &
B Code‟ and (2) „PMLA‟ even though at the first blush appear to
be at logger heads, there is no repugnancy and inconsistency
between them, in lieu of the fact the text, shape and its colour are
conspicuously distinct and different, operating in their respective
spheres. More importantly, when confiscation of the „Proceeds of
Crime‟ takes place, the said Act is performed by the Government
not in its status/capacity/role as Creditor.
108. The Hon'ble Supreme Court had confirmed the Judgment of
this Tribunal in Varrsana Ispat Ltd. v. Deputy Director of
Enforcement (Vide Comp. App. (AT) (Ins) No. 493 of 2018)
through an order dated 22.07.2019 in Civil Appeal 5546 of 2019
and the same has become final, conclusive and the same being of a
binding value upon this Tribunal. Indeed, as per Article 141 of the
Constitution of India the Judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court is
binding on this Appellate Tribunal.
109. In regard to the Judgment of the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi
in the matter of Deputy Director, Directorate of Enforcement
Delhi v. Axis Bank Reported in 2019 SCC OnLine Del 7854, it is to
be pointed out that the Hon'ble Supreme Court had granted only a
Status quo Order on 30.08.2019, but there is no stay of the
Judgment of the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi. As on date, the
Judgment of the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in the matter
of Deputy Director Directorate of Enforcement Delhi v. Axis
Bank in law is binding upon this „Tribunal‟.”
The decision of Manoj Kumar Agarwal was disapproved with the
NCLAT observing that it had come to be rendered contrary to the
principles of stare decisis.
90.    Having noticed the decisions which had been rendered by the
Tribunals on the subject it may be noted that the Madras High Court
in Joint Director, Directorate of Enforcement Vs. Asset
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                   Page 101 of 124
Reconstruction Company India Ltd and others38 made the
following pertinent observations: -
“8. Section 14 of the IBC speaks of moratorium. A declaration has
to be made through an order by the Adjudicatory Authority in this
regard. If one carefully goes through the said section, there is no
way professional attachment order passed under the provisions of
the PMLA would automatically invite a moratorium. This
provision only speaks about the consequence for institution of the
suit, for continuance and other proceedings against the Corporate
Debtor. Therefore, Section 14 of the IBC is consequent upon an
order passed by the Adjudicative Authority declaring moratorium.
This would not apply to a special enactment which travels on its
own path. After all, one cannot presume a conflict between two
enactments having it distinct roles with their objections. As stated,
it only speaks about the follow up action over a property, which is
subject matter of the proceedings before the National Company
Law Tribunal under the IBC. Thus, Section 14 would not bar a
proceeding under the PMLA.
9. Section 32-A of the IBC deals with the liability for prior
offences. This provision would get attracted in a case where the
resolution plan has been approved by the Adjudicating Authority
under Section 31 of the IBC. Therefore, when no such approval has
taken place, the Adjudicating Authority will not have any power or
authority to exercise the power under Section 32-A of the IBC. We
may note, this insertion by way of an amendment came into being
with effect from 28.12.2019 onwards.
10. Section 60 of the IBC comes under Chapter VI.
Chapter VI of the IBC deals with the Adjudicating Authority for
corporate persons. Section 65 of the IBC gives jurisdiction to the
Tribunal to entertain and dispose of any application on proceeding
by or against the Corporate Debtor. Even this proceeding would not
apply to a statutory Authority in another enactment and that too, a
special one. As observed, the scope of enquiry under PMLA is
rather wide and comprehensive.”
91.    The perceived conflict between the IBC and the PMLA fell for
consideration before a learned Judge of this Court in Axis Bank.
While answering the aforesaid issue, the Court observed thus: -
“139. From the above discussion, it is clear that the objects and
reasons of enactment of the four legislations are distinct, each
operating in different field. There is no overlap. While RDBA has
been enacted to provide for speedier remedy for banks and
financial institutions to recover their dues, SARFAESI Act (with
added chapter on registration of secured creditor) aims at
facilitating the secured creditors to expeditiously and effectively
enforce their security interest. In each case, the amount to be
recovered is “due” to the claimant i.e. the banks or the financial
institutions or the secured creditor, as the case may be, the claim
being against the debtor (or his guarantor). The Insolvency Code, in
contrast, seeks to primarily protect the interest of creditors by
entrusting them with the responsibility to seek resolution through a
professional (RP), failure on his part leading eventually to the
liquidation process.
140. The purpose, purport and import of Section 31-B inserted in
RDBA, and Section 26-E inserted in SARFAESI Act, has to be
understood in above light. The marginal heads of both the
provisions are identically worded - “Priority to secured creditors”.
Though Section 26-E of SARFAESI Act requires, as a condition
precedent, “the registration of security interest”, which is not
requisite for Section 31-B of RDBA to operate, both provisions
give precedence to realization of “debts due to” the “secured
creditor”, the clause in RDBA also clarifying it by additional
words “payable to them by sale of assets over which security
interest is created”. Each of these provisions renders secondary “all
other debts” and “revenues, taxes, cesses” and “rates” enforced by
“the Central Government, State Government or local authority”.
Section 31-B of RDBA uses the expression “due to” while Section
26-E of SARFAESI Act uses the words “payable to” in relation to
such debts, revenues, taxes, etc., the meaning being similar.
141. This court finds it difficult to accept the proposition that the
jurisdiction conferred on the State by PMLA to confiscate the
“proceeds of crime” concerns a property the value whereof is
“debt” due or payable to the Government (Central or State) or local
authority. The Government, when it exercises its power under
PMLA to seek attachment leading to confiscation of proceeds of
crime, does not stand as a creditor, the person alleged to be
complicit in the offence of money-laundering similarly not
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                   Page 103 of 124
acquiring the status of a debtor. The State is not claiming the
prerogative to deprive such offender of ill-gotten assets so as to be
perceived to be sharing the loot, not the least so as to levy tax
thereupon such as to give it a colour of legitimacy or lawful
earning, the idea being to take away what has been illegitimately
secured by proscribed criminal activity.”
92.    This Court while dealing with the scope of the two enactments
had in Nitin Jain observed as under: -
“85. As would be evident upon a consideration of the decisions
aforenoted, the IBC is primarily concerned with the subject of
restructuring of indebted corporate debtors, adoption of means for
their revival, securing the interests of creditors and for adoption of
steps for effective and timely resolution of corporate insolvency.
The PMLA, on the other hand, is a statute fundamentally concerned
with trying offenses relating to money laundering, following the
proceeds of crime and for confiscation of properties obtained in the
course of commission of those offenses or connected therewith. It
sets up an investigative and adjudicatory mechanism in respect of
offenses committed, attachment of tainted properties and other
related matters. It sets up Special Courts for trial of offenses and to
bring the guilty to book.
86. Viewed in that backdrop, it is evident that the two statutes
essentially operate over distinct subjects and subserve separate
legislative aims and policies. While the authorities under the IBC
are concerned with timely resolution of debts of a corporate debtor,
those under the PMLA are concerned with the criminality attached
to the offense of money laundering and to move towards
confiscation of properties that may be acquired by commission of
offenses specified therein. The authorities under the
aforementioned two statutes consequently must be accorded
adequate and sufficient leeway to discharge their obligations and
duties within the demarcated spheres of the two statutes.
87. In a case where in exercise of their respective powers a conflict
does arise, it is for the Courts to discern the legislative scheme and
to undertake an exercise of reconciliation enabling the authorities
to discharge their obligations to the extent that the same does not
impinge or encroach upon a facet which stands reserved and
legislatively mandated to be exclusively controlled and governed
by one of the competing statutes. The aspect of legislative fields of
IBC and PMLA and the imperative to strike a correct balance was
rightly noticed and answered by the learned Judge in Axis Bank.”
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                    Page 104 of 124
93.     On a consideration of the precedents which have come to be
rendered on the aforesaid subject, this Court finds that both NCLT and
NCLAT, have correctly taken the view that the moratorium would not
prevent the authorities under the PMLA from exercising the powers
conferred by Sections 5 and 8 notwithstanding the pendency of the
CIRP. The view as taken and expressed in the decisions aforenoted
clearly commends acceptance and reiteration for the reasons assigned
in those decisions as well as those noted by this Court in paragraphs
78-83 of this decision.
94.     The Court then deems it pertinent to observe that while
proceeding to attach the tainted property, the respondents are not in
essence effacing the property rights that may be claimed by an
individual. It is a symbolic taking over of the custody of the property
and for its preservation till such time as the proceedings that may be
initiated under the PMLA come to a conclusion. Attachment thus is
not liable to be viewed as an effacement of all rights that may exist or
be claimed to be exercisable in respect of a property. Attachment
essentially seeks to stamp the tainted property of having been found to
represent proceeds of crime pursuant to the adjudicatory process
which is undertaken under Sections 5 and 8 of the Act. It is essentially
a seizure of property bringing it into the constructive possession of a
court or as in this case, the authorities under the PMLA. Attachment
under the PMLA, as was noted hereinabove, is not an attachment for
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                               Page 105 of 124
debt but principally a measure to deprive an entity of property and
assets which comprise proceeds of crime.
95.      The effect of attachment of property was succinctly explained
by the Supreme Court in Balkrishan Gupta vs. Swadeshi Polytex
Ltd.39 as follows: -
“20. We shall first consider the effect of appointment of a Receiver
in respect of the shares in question. A perusal of the provisions of
Section 182-A of the Land Revenue Act shows that there is no
provision in it which states that on the appointment of a person as a
Receiver the property in respect of which he is so appointed vests
in him similar to the provision in Section 17 of the Presidency
Towns Insolvency Act, 1909 where on the making of an order of
adjudication the property of the insolvent wherever situate would
vest in the official assignee, or in Section 28(2) of the Provincial
Insolvency Act, 1920 which states that on the making of an order
of adjudication, the whole of the property of the insolvent would
vest in the court or in the Official Receiver. Sub-section (4) of
Section 182-A of the Land Revenue Act provides that Rules 2 to 4
of Order 40 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 shall apply in
relation to a Receiver appointed under that section. A Receiver
appointed under Order 40 of the Code of Civil Procedure only
holds the property committed to his control under the order of the
court but the property does not vest in him. The privileges of a
member can be exercised by only that person whose name is
entered in the Register of Members. A Receiver whose name is not
entered in the Register of Members cannot exercise any of those
rights unless in a proceeding to which the company concerned is a
party and an order is made therein. In Mathalone v. Bombay Life
24 Com Cas 1] it has been laid down clearly that a Receiver
appointed by a court in respect of certain shares which had not been
duly entered in the Register of Members of the company concerned
as belonging to him could not acquire certain newly issued shares
which could be obtained by the members of the company. This
Court observed at p. 143 thus:
“Mr Pathak argued that the plaintiff was entitled to relief
A and B, both in his suit as well as in the Receiver's suit
and that the Receiver's suit was wrongly dismissed by the
High Court. We are unable to agree. In our opinion, the
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                    Page 106 of 124
High Court rightly held that the Receiver appointed in the
suit of Sir Padampat could not acquire the newly issued
shares in his name. That privilege was conferred by
Section 105-C only on a person whose name was on the
Register of Members. The Receiver's name admittedly was
not in the register and the company was not bound to
entertain that application. Mr Pathak argued that that may
be so but the Receiver was not making an application in
his individual right but he had been armed by the court
with power to apply in the right of the defendant Reddy.
The fact however is that the Receiver made the application
in his own name. Even if Mr Pathak's contention is right
the company was no party to the suit filed by Sir
Padampat against Reddy and that being so, no order could
be issued to the company in that suit to recognize the
Receiver as a share-holder in place of Reddy.”
30. The consequence of attachment of certain shares of a company
held by a share-holder for purposes of sale in a proceeding under
Section 149 of the Land Revenue Act is more or less the same. The
effect of an order of attachment is what Section 149 of the Land
Revenue Act itself says. Such attachment is made according to the
law in force for the time being for the attachment and sale of
moveable property under the decree of a civil court. Section 60 of
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 says that except those items of
property mentioned in its proviso, lands, houses, or other buildings,
goods, money, bank-notes, cheques, bills of exchange, hundis,
promissory notes, Government securities, bonds or other securities
of money, debts, shares in a corporation and all other saleable
property, moveable or immovable, belonging to a judgment-debtor,
or over which, or the profits of which, he has a disposing power
which he may exercise for his own benefit, whether the same be
held in the name of the judgment-debtor, or by another person in
trust for him or on his behalf, is liable for attachment and sale in
execution of a decree against him. Section 64 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 states that where an attachment of a property is
made, any private transfer or delivery of the property attached or of
any interest therein and any payment to the judgment-debtor of any
debt, dividend or other monies contrary to such attachment, shall be
void as against all claims enforceable under the attachment. What
is forbidden under Section 64 of the Code of Civil Procedure is a
private transfer by the judgment-debtor of the property attached
contrary to the attachment, that is, contrary to the claims of the
decree-holder under the decree for realisation of which the
attachment is effected. A private transfer under Section 64 of the
Code of Civil Procedure is not absolutely void, that is, void as
against all the world but void only as against the claims enforceable
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                   Page 107 of 124
under the attachment. Until the property is actually sold, the
judgment-debtor retains title in the property attached. Under Rule
76 of Order 21 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, the shares in a
corporation which are attached may be sold through a broker. In the
alternative such shares may be sold in public auction under Rule 77
thereof. On such sale either under Rule 76 or under Rule 77, the
purchaser acquires title. Until such sale is effected, all other rights
of the judgment-debtor remain unaffected even if the shares may
have been seized by the officer of the Court under Rule 43 of Order
21 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 for the purpose of
effecting the attachment, or through a Receiver or though an order
in terms of Rule 46 of Order 21 of the Code of Civil Procedure may
have been served on the judgment-debtor or on the company
concerned.”
96.      Similarly in Kerala State Financial Enterprises Ltd. vs.
Official Liquidator40 the Supreme Court explained the concept of
attachment in the following terms: -
“10. The expression “attachment” has no definite connotation. An
order of attachment is passed for achieving a limited purpose. It is
subject to further orders as also the provisions of other statute.
11. The word “attachment” would only mean “taking into the
custody of the law the person or property of one already before the
court, or of one whom it is sought to bring before it”. It is used for
two purposes: (i) to compel the appearance of a defendant; and (ii)
to seize and hold his property for the payment of the debt. It may
also mean prohibition of transfer, conversion, disposition or
movement of property by an order issued by the court.
12. In Sardar Govindrao Mahadik v. Devi Sahai [(1982) 1 SCC
237 : AIR 1982 SC 989] this Court held: (SCC p. 268, para 58)
“58. What is the effect of attachment before judgment?
Attachment before judgment is levied where the court on
an application of the plaintiff is satisfied that the
defendant, with intent to obstruct or delay the execution of
any decree that may be passed against him (a) is about to
dispose of the whole or any part of his property, or (b) is
about to remove the whole or any part of his property from
the local limits of the jurisdiction of the court. The sole
object behind the order levying attachment before
judgment is to give an assurance to the plaintiff that his
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                     Page 108 of 124
decree if made would be satisfied. It is a sort of a
guarantee against decree becoming infructuous for want of
property available from which the plaintiff can satisfy the
decree. The provision in Section 64 of the Code of Civil
Procedure provides that where an attachment has been
made, any private transfer or delivery of the property
attached or of any interest therein and any payment to the
judgment-debtor of any debt, dividend or other monies
contrary to such attachment, shall be void as against all
claims enforceable under the attachment. What is claimed
enforceable is the claim for which the decree is made.”
13. Save and except certain special statutes in relation to recovery
of debts from the properties of a company which has been directed
to be wound up, the provisions of the Companies Act shall apply.
An order of attachment made prior to passing of an order of
winding up may not be void, but then the execution proceedings
must be allowed to continue with the leave of the court in terms of
Section 446 of the Companies Act. [See Ovation International
14. There, indisputably, exists a distinction between attachment
before judgment in terms of Order 38 of the Code of Civil
Procedure and attachment for execution of a decree under Order 21
thereof. An order of attachment before judgment passed under
Order 38 seeks to safeguard the interests of the plaintiff so that in
the event a decree is passed, the same stands satisfied. On the other
hand, the essential parties (sic purpose) of Order 21 is to see that
the process of court is not defeated once execution starts, but the
same would not mean that the provisions of the Companies Act
become wholly inapplicable. [See Faqir Chand Gupta v. Tanwar
97.    The aforesaid principles would establish that an attachment is
essentially aimed at preventing private alienations. It does not confer a
title on the authority which has taken that step. The attachment only
enables the authorities under the act to restrain any further transactions
with respect to the aforesaid property till such time as a trial with
respect to the commission of an offence of money laundering comes
to an end. Attachment under the PMLA does not result in an
extinguishment or effacement of property rights. It is essentially a
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                   Page 109 of 124
fetter placed upon the possessor of that property to deal with the same
till such time as proceedings under the aforesaid enactment come to a
definitive conclusion on the question of confiscation. As was noted
hereinabove, it is essentially an action aimed at bringing into the
control of a court or an authority, property over which multiple claims
may exist. In any case, since the act of attachment does not result in
the effacement of rights in property, it would clearly stand and survive
outside the scope of a moratorium or an action relating to an action in
respect of a debt due or payable.
98.     It may additionally be noted that an attachment that may be
come to be made under Sections 5 and 8 of the PMLA are only
temporary steps which are taken by the authorities under the aforesaid
Act in order to identify the properties which have been found to
constitute proceeds of crime. The Court notes that Section 5
empowers the Director or any other officer so designated and
may be found to be in possession of a person and which constitute
proceeds of crime. That power to provisionally attach such a property
is based upon the Director having a reason to believe that such
proceeds of crime are likely to be concealed, transferred or ferreted
away with a view to frustrate proceedings under the PMLA. The
powers so exercise by the Director under Section 5 is thereafter
subjected to a review process before the Adjudicating Authority
before whom the matter stands placed for the purposes of
confirmation.
99.     Section 5(2) enjoins the Director to forward a copy of the order
of provisional attachment along with all other materials in his
possession to the Adjudicating Authority for such purpose. On the
receipt of the aforesaid order and the accompanying material, the
Adjudicating Authority is enjoined by law to place persons who are
alleged to have committed an offence under Section 3 to appear and
show cause why the properties so attached under Section 5 be not
declared to be properties involved in money laundering and
confiscated by the Union Government. On a culmination of the
aforesaid proceedings, the Adjudicating Authority would ultimately
either pass an order of confirmation or is in case he differs with the
conclusions arrived at by the Director and after considering any
response that may be received, annul the provisional attachment.
100. However, both the orders under Sections 5 and 8 remain orders
of attachment. The passing of those orders neither result in
confiscation of those properties nor do those properties come to vest
in the Union Government upon such orders being made. As was
noticed by the Court in the earlier parts of this decision, the properties
come to be confiscated only after a Special Court proceed to render a
finding of guilt and frame orders for the properties so attached being
confiscated in favor of the Union Government. As would be evident
from a perusal of Section 8(6) where a Special Court finds or comes to
the conclusion that an offence of money-laundering has not been
established, it is obliged to release the attached property to the person
entitled to receive it.
101. The attached property comes to vest in the Union Government
only upon the passing of such an order as may be passed by the
special Court either under sub-Sections 5 or 7 of Section 8 or Sections
58B or Section 60(2)(a). The aforesaid discussion leads the Court to
conclude that the provisional attachment of properties would in any
case not violate the primary objectives of Section 14 of the IBC.
102. The Court had while noticing the submissions addressed on
behalf of the petitioner taken note of the contention that Section 238
of the IBC would confer primacy upon the said statute and thus it
would override the provisions of the PMLA bearing in mind that it
was a special statute and had come to be promulgated later in point of
time.
103. While there can be no doubt that where two special statutes
incorporate non obstante clauses it is the later enactment which would
ordinarily or normally prevail, the same cannot possibly be recognised
as constituting the solitary principle of interpretation which would
apply or an inviolable rule. It must be fundamentally borne in mind
that a non obstante clause in any statute is looked at principally in case
of an asserted irreconcilable conflict between statutes. However, that
does not preclude courts from identifying or discerning the core
objectives of the competing statutes. This would be manifest from the
following pertinent observations that were made by the Supreme
Court in Maruti Udyog Vs. Ram Lal41 -
“41. The said Act contains a non obstante clause. It is well settled
that when both statutes containing non obstante clauses are special
statutes, an endeavour should be made to give effect to both of
them. In case of conflict, the later shall prevail.
42. In Solidaire India Ltd. v. Fairgrowth Financial Services
Ltd. [(2001) 3 SCC 71] it is stated: (SCC pp. 73-74, paras 9-10)
“9. It is clear that both these Acts are special Acts. This
Court has laid down in no uncertain terms that in such an
event it is the later Act which must prevail. The decisions
cited in the above context are as follows: Maharashtra
Tubes Ltd. v. State Industrial & Investment Corpn. of
Singh v. Kasturi Lal [(1977) 1 SCC 750] ; Allahabad
Bank v. Canara Bank [(2000) 4 SCC 406] and Ram
Narain v. Simla Banking & Industrial Co. Ltd. [1956 SCR
10. We may notice that the Special Court had in another
case dealt with a similar contention. In Bhoruka Steel
Ltd. v. Fairgrowth Financial Services Ltd. [(1997) 89 Comp
Cas 547 (Special Court)] it had been contended that
recovery proceedings under the Special Court Act should be
stayed in view of the provisions of the 1985 Act. Rejecting
this contention, the Special Court had come to the
conclusion that the Special Court Act being a later
enactment would prevail. The headnote which brings out
succinctly the ratio of the said decision is as follows:
„Where there are two special statutes which contain
non obstante clauses the later statute must prevail.
This is because at the time of enactment of the later
statute, the legislature was aware of the earlier
legislation and its non obstante clause. If the
legislature still confers the later enactment with a
non obstante clause it means that the legislature
wanted that enactment to prevail. If the legislature
does not want the later enactment to prevail then it
could and would provide in the later enactment that
the provisions of the earlier enactment continue to
(See also Engg. Kamgar Union v. Electro Steels Castings
104. More importantly and while dealing with the question which
arises for determination in this case, the Court would have to bear in
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                   Page 113 of 124
mind the undisputed fact that while the PMLA was originally
promulgated on 01 July 2005, the IBC came to be enforced with effect
from 28 May 2016 and on subsequent dates when its various
provisions were separately enforced. Section 238 of the IBC came to
be energised in terms of the notification dated 30 November 2016 and
was ordained to come into effect from 01 December 2016. Section
32A of the IBC on the other was introduced by Amending Act No.1 of
2020 with retrospective effect from 28 December 2019.
105. The introduction of Section 32A constitutes an event of vital
import since it embodies a provision which effectively shut out
criminal proceedings including those under the PMLA upon the CIRP
reaching the defining moment specified therein. However, when the
Legislature introduced the said provision, it was conscious and aware
of the fact that the provisions of the PMLA could be enforced against
the properties of a corporate debtor notwithstanding the pendency of
the CIRP. This the Court notes in light of the extent to which Section
14 could be recognised to legally operate under the statutory scheme
and as has been explained hereinabove. Notwithstanding the above,
the Legislature chose to structure that provision in a manner that the
authorities under the PMLA would cease to have the power to attach
or confiscate only when a Resolution Plan had been approved or
where a measure towards liquidation had been adopted. The statutory
injunct against the invocation or utilisation of the powers available
under the PMLA was thus ordained to come into effect only once the
trigger events envisaged under Section 32A came into effect. The
Legislature thus in its wisdom chose to place an embargo upon the
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                               Page 114 of 124
continuance of criminal proceedings including action of attachment
under the PMLA only once a Resolution Plan were approved or a
measure in aid of liquidation had been adopted.
106. Section 32A which came to be introduced in 2020 in the IBC
also represents the “later” enactment for the purposes of evaluating the
non obstante clause argument as canvassed on behalf of the petitioner.
It would be pertinent to observe that subsequent amendments in an
existing statute have also been recognised to be viewed as later acts
for the purposes of answering the import of a non obstante clause. In
Bank of India Vs. Ketan Parekh42, one of the questions which arose
was whether the provisions of the Special Courts (Trial of Offenses
Relating to Transactions in Securities) Act, 1992 would have effect
notwithstanding the enforcement of the Recovery of Debts Due to
Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993 which was the later
statute. Since both statutes contained non obstante clauses, ordinarily
the 1985 Act would have had to yield being the statute promulgated
prior in point of time. However, the answer to the issue raised in
Ketan Parekh came to be impacted by the insertion of Section 9-A in
the 1985 Act by virtue of an amending act introduced 1994. Dealing
with the impact of that later amendment the Supreme Court observed
“28. In the present case, both the two Acts i.e. the Act of 1992 and
the Act of 1993 start with the non obstante clause. Section 34 of the
Act of 1993 starts with non obstante clause, likewise Section 9-A
(sic 13) of the Act of 1992. But incidentally, in this case Section 9-
A came subsequently i.e. it came on 25-1-1994. Therefore, it is a
subsequent legislation which will have the overriding effect over
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                    Page 115 of 124
the Act of 1993. But cases might arise where both the enactments
have the non obstante clause then in that case, the proper
perspective would be that one has to see the subject and the
dominant purpose for which the special enactment was made and in
case the dominant purpose is covered by that contingencies, then
notwithstanding that the Act might have come at a later point of
time still the intention can be ascertained by looking to the objects
and reasons. However, so far as the present case is concerned, it is
more than clear that Section 9-A of the Act of 1992 was amended
on 25-1-1994 whereas the Act of 1993 came in 1993. Therefore,
the Act of 1992 as amended to include Section 9-A in 1994 being
subsequent legislation will prevail and not the provisions of the Act
of 1993.”
Their Lordships in Ketan Parekh thus came to hold that
notwithstanding the original statute having been promulgated in 1985,
the provisions of Section 9A would not stand overridden by the 1993
statute since the former had come to be enforced later in point of time.
107. While the decision of the Supreme Court in Pioneer Urban
Land and Infrastructure Ltd. Vs. Union of India43 was also cited
for the consideration of the Court, it would be pertinent to note that
notwithstanding the two statutes in question there carrying non
obstante clauses, the issue was ultimately answered based upon
Section 88 of RERA which provided that its provisions would be in
addition to and not in derogation of other statutes. This would be
evident from the following observations as they appear in paragraphs
23 and 25 of the report:-
“23. A perusal of the aforesaid provisions would show that, on and
from the coming into force of RERA, all real estate projects (as
defined) would first have to be registered with the Real Estate
Regulatory Authority, which, before registering such projects,
would look into all relevant details, including delay in completion
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                     Page 116 of 124
of other projects by the developer. Importantly, the promoter is
now to make a declaration supported by an affidavit, that he
undertakes to complete the project within a certain time period, and
that 70% of the amounts realised for the project from allottees,
from time to time, shall be deposited in a separate account, which
would be spent only to defray the cost of construction and land cost
for that particular project. Registration is granted by the authority
only when it is satisfied that the promoter is a bona fide promoter
who is likely to perform his part of the bargain satisfactorily.
Registration of the project enures only for a certain period and can
only be extended due to force majeure events for a maximum
period of one year by the authority, on being satisfied that such
events have, in fact, taken place. Registration once granted, may be
revoked if it is found that the promoter defaults in complying with
the various statutory requirements or indulges in unfair practices or
irregularities. Importantly, upon revocation of registration, the
authority is to facilitate the remaining development work, which
can then be carried out either by the “competent authority” as
defined by RERA or by the association of allottees or otherwise.
The promoter at the time of booking and issue of allotment letters
has to make available to the allottees information, inter alia, as to
the stage-wise time schedule of completion of the project. Deposits
or advances beyond 10% of the estimated cost as advance payment
cannot be taken without first entering into an agreement for sale.
Importantly, the agreement for sale will now no longer be a one-
sided contract of adhesion, but in such form as may be prescribed,
which balances the rights and obligations of both the promoter and
the allottees. Importantly, under Section 18, if the promoter fails to
complete or is unable to give possession of an apartment, plot or
building in accordance with the terms of the agreement for sale, he
must return the amount received by him in respect of such
apartment, etc. with such interest as may be prescribed and must, in
addition, compensate the allottee in case of any loss caused to him.
Under Section 19, the allottee shall be entitled to claim possession
of the apartment, plot or building, as the case may be, or refund of
amount paid along with interest in accordance with the terms of the
agreement for sale. In addition, all allottees are to be responsible
for making necessary payments in instalments within the time
specified in the agreement for sale and shall be liable to pay interest
at such rate as may be prescribed for any delay in such payment.
Under Section 31, any aggrieved person may file a complaint with
the authority or the adjudicating officers set up by such authority
against any promoter, allottee or real estate agent, as the case may
be, for violation or contravention of RERA, and Rules and
Regulations made thereunder. Also, if after adjudication a
promoter, allottee or real estate agent fails to pay interest, penalty
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                   Page 117 of 124
or compensation imposed on him by the authorities under RERA,
the same shall be recoverable as arrears of land revenue. Appeals
may be filed to the Real Estate Appellate Tribunal against decisions
or orders of the authority or the adjudicating officer. From orders of
the Appellate Tribunal, appeals may thereafter be filed to the High
Court. Stiff penalties are to be awarded for breach and/or
contravention of the provisions of RERA. Importantly, under
Section 72, the adjudicating officer must first determine that the
complainant has established “default” on the part of the respondent,
after which consequential orders may then follow. Under Section
88, the provisions of RERA are in addition to and not in derogation
of the provisions of any other law for time being in force and under
Section 89, RERA is to have effect notwithstanding anything
inconsistent contained in any other law for the time being in force.
25. It is significant to note that there is no provision similar to that
of Section 88 of RERA in the Code, which is meant to be a
complete and exhaustive statement of the law insofar as its subject-
matter is concerned. Also, the non obstante clause of RERA came
into force on 1-5-2016, as opposed to the non obstante clause of the
Code which came into force on 1-12-2016. Further, the amendment
with which we are concerned has come into force only on 6-6-
2018. Given these circumstances, it is a little difficult to accede to
arguments made on behalf of the learned Senior Counsel for the
petitioners, that RERA is a special enactment which deals with real
estate development projects and must, therefore, be given
precedence over the Code, which is only a general enactment
dealing with insolvency generally. From the introduction of the
Explanation to Section 5(8)(f) of the Code, it is clear that
Parliament was aware of RERA, and applied some of its definition
provisions so that they could apply when the Code is to be
interpreted. The fact that RERA is in addition to and not in
derogation of the provisions of any other law for the time being in
force, also makes it clear that the remedies under RERA to allottees
were intended to be additional and not exclusive remedies. Also, it
is important to remember that as the authorities under RERA were
to be set up within one year from 1-5-2016, remedies before those
authorities would come into effect only on and from 1-5-2017
making it clear that the provisions of the Code, which came into
force on 1-12-2016, would apply in addition to RERA.”
108. On a consideration of the aforesaid, the Court comes to the
conclusion that Section 32A would constitute the pivot by virtue of
being the later act and thus govern the extent to which the non
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                    Page 118 of 124
obstante clause enshrined in the IBC would operate and exclude the
operation of the PMLA. As has been observed hereinabove, while
both IBC and the PMLA are special statutes in the generic sense, they
both seek to subserve independent and separate legislative objectives.
The subject matter and focus of the two legislations is clearly distinct.
When faced with a situation where both the special legislations
incorporate non obstante clauses, it becomes the duty of the Court to
discern the true intent and scope of the two legislations. Even though
the IBC and Section 238 thereof constitute the later enactment when
viewed against the PMLA which came to be enforced in 2005, the
Court is of the considered opinion that the extent to which the latter
was intended to capitulate to the IBC is an issue which must be
answered on the basis of Section 32A. The introduction of that
provision in 2020 represents the last expression of intent of the
Legislature and thus the embodiment of the extent to which the
provisions of the PMLA are to give way to proceedings initiated under
the IBC.
109. The Court has independently come to the conclusion that the
power to attach under the PMLA would not fall within the ken of
Section 14(1)(a) of the IBC. Through Section 32A, the Legislature has
authoritatively spoken of the terminal point whereafter the powers
under the PMLA would not be exercisable. The events which trigger
its application when reached would lead to the erection of an
impregnable wall which cannot be breached by invocation of the
provisions of the PMLA. The non obstante clause finding place in the
IBC thus can neither be interpreted nor countenanced to have an
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                               Page 119 of 124
impact far greater than that envisaged in Section 32A. The aforesaid
issue stands answered accordingly.
110. The Court also bears in mind that the provisional attachment of
tainted properties does not inevitably lead to the debtor or the persons
who hold the tainted property being divested of a right to establish that
the properties so attached would not constitute proceeds of crime. It
would be apposite to recollect that Axis Bank had duly dealt with the
issue of bona fide third-party interests that may have come to be
created over a period of time and the various avenues which stand
created under the PMLA itself for an aggrieved person to seek the
release of attached properties.
111. Apart from the provision of an appeal that may be taken against
the order passed by the Adjudicating Authority under Section 8 of the
PMLA, the Court also takes note of sub-section (8) of Section 8 in
terms of which an aggrieved party is granted a right to seek release of
property even after it may have been confiscated in favor of the Union
Government. The safeguards which stand created in respect of the
third parties who may have bona fide obtained an interest in the
attached properties was noticed and answered by Axis Bank as
“149. An order of attachment under PMLA, if it meets with the
statutory pre-requisites, is as lawful as an action initiated by a bank
or financial institution, or a secured creditor, for recovery of dues
legitimately claimed or for enforcement of secured interest in
accordance with RDBA or SARFAESI Act. An order of attachment
under PMLA is not rendered illegal only because a secured
creditor has a prior secured interest (charge) in the subject
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                    Page 120 of 124
property. Conversely, mere issuance of an order of attachment
under PMLA cannot, by itself, render illegal the prior charge or
encumbrance of a secured creditor, this subject to such claim of the
third party (secured creditor) being bonafide. In these conflicting
claims, a balance has to be struck. On account of exercise of the
prerogative of the State under PMLA, the lawful interest of a third
party which may have acted bonafide, and with due diligence,
cannot be put in jeopardy. The claim of bonafide third party
claimant cannot be sacrificed or defeated. A contrary view would
be unfair and unjust and, consequently, not the intention of the
legislature. The legislative scheme itself justifies this view. To
illustrate, reference may be made to sub-section (8) of Section 8
PMLA where-under a power is conferred on the special court to
direct the Central Government to “restore” a property to the
claimant with a legitimate interest even after an order of
confiscation has been passed.
150. The legislation on money-laundering, as is the case of
similarly placed other legislations providing for forfeiture or
confiscation of illegally acquired assets, contains sufficient
safeguards to protect the interest of such third parties as may have
acted bonafide. Such safeguards and rights to secure their lawful
interest in the property subjected to attachment (with intent to take
it to confiscation) have already been noticed at length with
reference to the statutory provisions. To recapitulate, and by way of
illustration, reference may be made to the opportunity afforded by
law (Section 8) to a person claiming “a legitimate interest” to
approach the adjudicating authority and the appellate tribunal, as
indeed the court, to prove that he had “acted in good faith”, taking
“all reasonable precautions”, himself not being involved in
money-laundering, to seek its “release” or “restoration”. In this
context, however, as also earlier noted, the presumptions that can
be drawn in terms of Sections 23 and 24 of PMLA are to be borne
in mind, the burden of proving facts contrary to the case of money-
laundering being on the person claiming to have acted bonafide.
162. But, in case an otherwise untainted asset (i.e. deemed tainted
property) is targeted by the enforcement authority for attachment
under the second or third part of the definition of “proceeds of
crime”, for the reason that such asset is equivalent in value to the
tainted asset that was derived or obtained by criminal activity but
which cannot be traced, the third party having a legitimate interest
may approach the adjudicating authority to seek its release by
showing that the interest in such property was acquired bona fide
and for lawful (and adequate) consideration, there being no intent,
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                   Page 121 of 124
while acquiring such interest or charge, to defeat or frustrate the
law, neither the said property nor the person claiming such interest
having any connection with or being privy to the offence of money-
laundering.
163. Having regard to the above scheme of the law in PMLA, it is
clear that if a bonafide third party claimant had acquired interest in
the property which is being subjected to attachment at a time
anterior to the commission of the criminal activity, the product
whereof is suspected as proceeds of crime, the acquisition of such
interest in such property (otherwise assumably untainted) by such
third party cannot conceivably be on account of intent to defeat or
frustrate this law. In this view, it can be concluded that the date or
period of the commission of criminal activity which is the basis of
such action under PMLA can be safely treated as the cut-off. From
this, it naturally follows that an interest in the property of an
accused, vesting in a third party acting bona fide, for lawful and
adequate consideration, acquired prior to the commission of the
proscribed offence evincing illicit pecuniary benefit to the former,
cannot be defeated or frustrated by attachment of such property to
such extent by the enforcement authority in exercise of its power
under Section 8 PMLA.
164. Though the sequitur to the above conclusion is that the
bonafide third party claimant has a legitimate right to proceed
ahead with enforcement of its claim in accordance with law,
notwithstanding the order of attachment under PMLA, the latter
action is not rendered irrelevant or unenforceable. To put it clearly,
in such situations as above (third party interest being prior to
criminal activity) the order of attachment under PMLA would
remain valid and operative, even though the charge or encumbrance
of such third party subsists but the State action would be restricted
to such part of the value of the property as exceeds the claim of the
third party.
165. Situation may also arise, as seems to be the factual matrix of
some of the cases at hand, wherein a secured creditor, it being a
bonafide third party claimant vis-a-vis the alternative attachable
property (or deemed tainted property) has initiated action in
accordance with law for enforcement of such interest prior to the
order of attachment under PMLA, the initiation of the latter action
unwittingly having the effect of frustrating the former. Since both
actions are in accord with law, in order to co-exist and be in
harmony with each other, following the preceding prescription, it
would be appropriate that the PMLA attachment, though remaining
valid and operative, takes a back-seat allowing the secured creditor
bonafide third party claimant to enforce its claim by disposal of the
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                   Page 122 of 124
subject property, the remainder of its value, if any, thereafter to be
made available for purposes of PMLA.”
112.    It would also be pertinent to note that merely because a
particular property may have come to be provisionally attached under
the PMLA, that does not confer on the enforcing authority under the
aforesaid enactment, a superior or overarching interest either in the
property or the proceeds that may ultimately be obtained upon its
disposal. This position was duly elucidated in Axis Bank in the
“165. Situation may also arise, as seems to be the factual matrix of
some of the cases at hand, wherein a secured creditor, it being a
bonafide third party claimant vis-a-vis the alternative attachable
property (or deemed tainted property) has initiated action in
accordance with law for enforcement of such interest prior to the
order of attachment under PMLA, the initiation of the latter action
unwittingly having the effect of frustrating the former. Since both
actions are in accord with law, in order to co-exist and be in
harmony with each other, following the preceding prescription, it
would be appropriate that the PMLA attachment, though remaining
valid and operative, takes a back-seat allowing the secured creditor
bonafide third party claimant to enforce its claim by disposal of the
subject property, the remainder of its value, if any, thereafter to be
made available for purposes of PMLA.”
113. Viewed in the aforenoted backdrop it is manifest that an order
of attachment when made under the PMLA does not result in the
corporate debtor or the Resolution Professional facing a fait accompli.
The statutes provide adequate means and avenues for redressal of
claims and grievances. It could be open to a Resolution Professional to
approach the competent authorities under the PMLA for such reliefs in
respect of tainted properties as may be legally permissible. Similarly,
and as was explained by Axis Bank, a PAO made by the ED under the
W.P. (C) 9531/2020                                                  Page 123 of 124
PMLA does not invest in that authority a superior or overriding right
in property. Ultimately the claims of parties over the property that
may be attached and the question of distribution and priorities would
have to be settled independently and in accordance with law.
114. Accordingly and for all the aforesaid reasons, the writ petition
shall stand dismissed. The challenge to the Provisional Attachment
Orders dated 08 July 2020 and 05 August 2020 as well as orders of
confirmation passed by the Adjudicating Authority dated 01 and 29
January 2021 on grounds as raised fails and stands negatived.
115. This order, however, shall not preclude the petitioner
Resolution Professional from seeking release of the provisionally
attached properties in accordance with law.
116. The Court further observes that the rights of the Enforcement
Directorate over the properties subject to attachment would stand
restricted to the extent that has been recognised in this decision as well
as the judgment of the Court in Axis Bank.