2           The appellant has impugned the judgment and order dated 1 st
July 2016 passed by the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Pandharpur in
Sessions Case No. 13/2014, convicting and sentencing the appellant as
-     for the offence punishable under 304, Part II of the Indian Penal
Code, to suffer rigorous imprisonment for 10 years and to pay a fine of
Rs.5,000/-, in default of payment of fine, to suffer simple imprisonment
-     for the offence punishable under Section 201 of the Indian Penal
Code, to suffer rigorous imprisonment for 2 years and to pay a fine of
Rs.3,000/-, in default of payment of fine, to suffer simple imprisonment for
3 months.
Both the aforesaid sentences were directed to run concurrently.
3            A few facts as are necessary to decide the case are as under :
The appellant is the husband, who was married to Manisha
(deceased) on 15th December 2005. From the said wedlock, the appellant
and Manisha were blessed with a daughter-Rohini. The appellant and
Manisha were residing in the Servants’ Quarters of Vitthal Hospital at
Pandharpur along with the appellant’s mother, who was serving in the said
Hospital.   According to the prosecution, the appellant was suspecting
Manisha’s character, as a result of which, there used to be frequent quarrels
between them. The incident is stated to have taken place on 19 th December
2013 at about 6:00 a.m. It is the prosecution case that Manisha was leaving
the house on the said date and time, without preparing tea, on account of
which, there was exchange of words between the appellant and deceased-
Manisha. As the appellant was suspecting Manisha’s character and as she
refused to make tea for the appellant, the appellant is alleged to have given
a blow on Manisha’s head from behind, with a hammer. The said incident
is alleged to have been witnessed by Rohini (appellant and Manisha’s
daughter), who, at the relevant time, was aged 6 years. It is the prosecution
case that soon after Manisha was assaulted, the appellant gave her a bath,
wiped the blood-stains from the spot and thereafter took Manisha to Vitthal
Hospital. As Manisha’s condition was critical, the doctor who treated
Manisha asked the appellant to shift Manisha to the Civil Hospital,
Solapur.   Pursuant thereto, Manisha was shifted to the Civil Hospital,
Solapur. Throughout, Manisha’s condition was critical and she was unable
to speak and eventually on 25th December 2013, Manisha succumbed to her
injury.
In the meantime, i.e. on 19th December 2013, Manisha’s uncle-
Macchindra Waghmare (PW 4), on learning that Manisha was admitted to
the hospital, immediately rushed to the hospital i.e. Vitthal Hospital, where
the appellant informed Macchindra that he had assaulted Manisha.
Pursuant thereto, Macchindra Waghmare (PW 4) lodged a complaint with
the Pandharpur Police Station. On registration of the FIR, investigation
commenced, statements of witnesses were recorded, panchanamas were
drawn and after investigation, charge-sheet was filed as against the
appellant for the offence punishable under Section 302 and 201 of the
Indian Penal Code, in the Court of the learned Magistrate at Pandharpur.
The said offence being Sessions triable, the case was
committed to the Court of Sessions at Pandharpur.       Charge was framed
against the appellant for the aforesaid offence, to which, the appellant
pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried. The prosecution, in support of
its case, examined 12 witnesses. Thereafter, Section 313 statement of the
appellant was recorded. The learned Judge, after hearing the parties, was
pleased to convict the appellant for the offence as stated in para 2
hereinabove.
4            Learned counsel for the appellant assailed the judgment on
several counts. He submitted that the prosecution case essentially rests on
extra-judicial confession made by the appellant to PW 4-Macchindra
Waghmare; PW 6-Nandabai Waghmare and PW 7-Dr. Bajrang Dhotre. He
submitted that the said evidence is a weak piece of evidence and that the
appellant cannot be convicted only on the basis of the extra judicial
confession made to the said witnesses. He further submitted that as far as
the child witness i.e. PW 5-Rohini is concerned, the trial Court has
discarded her evidence, for the reasons set-out in the judgment. He submits
that the incident was a result of grave and sudden provocation offered by
deceased-Manisha, when she refused to make tea for the appellant, and as
such, the sentence of the appellant be reduced to the period already
undergone by the appellant.
5             Learned A.P.P supported the judgment and order of conviction
and sentence and prayed for dismissal of the appeal. He submitted that the
reasons given by the learned Judge for discarding the evidence of the child
witness i.e. PW 5-Rohini, are flimsy and cannot be sustained. He submitted
that the evidence of PW 5-Rohini inspires confidence and that she has not
buckled in her cross-examination. He submits that Rohini’s evidence ought
to be considered, more particularly, when she was a natural witness, who
was present at the spot and had seen the appellant assaulting her mother-
Manisha (deceased). He further submitted that there is recovery of a blood
stained hammer at the instance of the accused, apart from the extra judicial
confessions made by the appellant to PW 4-Macchindra, PW 6-Nandabai
and PW 7-Dr. Bajrang Dhotre. He further submitted that the appellant after
assaulting the deceased on a flimsy ground of refusing to make tea for him,
bathed the deceased, cleaned the blood from the spot and as such wasted
valuable time in taking Manisha to the hospital, resulting in her death.
6             Perused the papers.    Having heard learned counsel for the
appellant and the learned A.P.P at length and after considering the
submissions canvassed by them and after perusing the evidence on record,
I am of the opinion that no interference is warranted in the impugned
judgment and order, for the reasons set-out hereunder;
As noted above, the prosecution allegation as against the
appellant is that the appellant would suspect the character of his wife-
Manisha.     The said fact is borne out from the evidence of PW 4-
Macchindra (Manisha’s uncle, who is the first informant in the said case) as
well as the evidence of PW 6-Nandabai (Manisha’s mother). Both the said
witnesses have categorically in their evidence stated about the ill-treatment
meted out by the appellant to Manisha i.e. of suspecting her character and
of physical assault. The incident in question is alleged to have taken place
on 19th December 2013 at about 6:00 a.m. at the Servants’ Quarter, where
the appellant was staying with Manisha and their daughter Rohini. The
said Servants’ Quarter belonged to the appellant’s mother, who was
working in the hospital. It is not in dispute that at the relevant time, the
appellant's mother was not present in the house. As noted above, there is
also an extra-judicial confession made by the appellant to PW 4-
Macchindra, PW 6-Nandabai and PW 7-Dr. Dhotre (Medical Officer at
7            Coming to the evidence on record with respect to ill-treatment
meted out by the applicant to Manisha and the extra-judicial confession
made by the applicant, the relevant witnesses in this regard are PW 4-
Macchindra and PW 6-Nandabai. As far as PW 4-Macchindra’s evidence is
concerned, he has stated that deceased-Manisha was his niece; that she was
married to the appellant on 15 th December 2005; that they were living in a
Servants’ Quarter of Vitthal Hospital for about 3 years         prior to the
incident; that Rohini (appellant and Manisha’s daughter) was also residing
with them; that the appellant was suspecting Manisha’s character and
would quarrel with her on account of the same and that on 19 th December
2013, the appellant assaulted Manisha on her head, resulting in serious
injuries, pursuant to which, the appellant admitted Manisha to Vitthal
Hospital. PW 4-Macchindra has further stated that Manisha was shifted
from Vitthal Hospital to Civil Hospital, as she was seriously injured. He
has stated that Manisha was unconscious and had sustained injuries on her
head. He has further stated that when he questioned the appellant as to
what had happened, the appellant disclosed to him that at 6:00 a.m, he had
asked Manisha to prepare tea and that when she refused to prepare tea, he
assaulted her with a hammer on her head, pursuant to which, he brought her
to the Civil Hospital. PW 4-Macchindra, on the basis of the said disclosure
made by the appellant, lodged a complaint/FIR, as against the appellant
with the Pandharpur Police Station. The said FIR is at Exhibit-23.
Although several suggestions were made to the said witness, nothing is
elicited in his cross-examination to disbelieve the said witness.           A
suggestion was also made to the said witness that the deceased fell, as a
result of which, she sustained an injury on her head, which suggestion was
denied by the witness. It was also brought on record that the appellant had
filed a complaint against the said witness and Manisha’s parents in 2010, as
a result of which, they were falsely implicating him in the said case, which
suggestion was also denied by the said witness.
8            The evidence of PW 6-Nandabai (Manisha’s mother) is similar
to the evidence of PW 4-Macchindra with respect to the ill-treatment meted
out by the appellant to her daughter-Manisha i.e. the appellant used to
suspect Manisha’s character; would quarrel with her and also assault her.
PW 6-Nandabai has stated that when she, along with others, visited the
Civil Hospital, Solapur, they learnt that Manisha was serious; that she was
not opening her eyes nor could she talk. She has stated that when she
asked the appellant what had happened, the appellant disclosed that in the
morning at 6:00 a.m, as Manisha had not given him tea and as he suspected
her character, he hit her on her head, resulting in Manisha sustaining an
injury. Again, nothing material is brought in the cross-examination, so as
to disbelieve or discredit this witness. The suggestions made to the said
witness i.e. PW 6-Nandabai have been categorically denied by her i.e. that
Manisha was injured in an accident; that no such disclosure was made by
the appellant to her; and that they had lodged a false complaint against him
because of an earlier complaint lodged by the appellant against them in
2010. Thus, from the evidence on record, it is evident that the appellant
would suspect Manisha’s character and that the appellant had made an
extra-judicial confession to PW 4-Macchindra and PW 6-Nandabai that he
had assaulted Manisha.
9            It is pertinent to note that the evidence of both the aforesaid
witnesses i.e. PW 4-Macchindra and PW 6-Nandabai is, duly corroborated
by an independent witness i.e. PW 7- Dr. Bajrang Dhotre. PW 7- Dr.
Dhotre was working as a Medical Officer at Vitthal Hospital, Pandharpur at
the relevant time. He has stated that on 19 th December 2013 at about 7:00
a.m., Manisha was admitted in the hospital; that when he examined her, he
found that she was in a serious condition, as she had suffered heavy
bleeding. He had stated that the said patient was brought by Santosh Atkar
(appellant). He has further stated that the appellant informed him i.e. gave
history that he had hit Manisha at 6:30 a.m. in the morning with a hammer
at the residential quarters of Vitthal Hospital. PW 7-Dr. Dhotre has stated
that the said history given by the appellant was reduced into writing by him
in the appellant’s words. PW 7-Dr. Dhotre has identified his handwriting
on the case papers which are exhibited at Exhibit-28. Exhibit 28 i.e. case
“Patient brought by Mr. Santosh Mahadeo Aatkar c
alleged history an assault, he hited by hammer (हातोडा),
today morning at about 6:30 A.M.; at Vitthal Hospital
residence quarters.”
PW 7- Dr. Dhotre found the following injuries on Manisha :
i) C.L.W. measuring 4 Cms. X 3.5 Cms., oozing of blood was
present. It was present at left parietal region, 5 Cms. away
from the midline, and was placed anterio posteriorely. On
clinical examination it was depressed fracture of skull.
ii)   C.L.W. measuring 3 X 1 Cm. was vertical in direction,
was muscle deep and blood mark was present. It was
situated at medial aspect of left forearm in its lower 1/3rd
part.
iii)      C.L.W. measuring 2 X 0.5 Cm. was vertical in
direction, and blood mark was present, and was at medial to
injury No.2 and it was parallel to it.
iv) C.L.W. measuring 1 X 0.5 Cm. was horizontal in
direction, and blood mark was present and was at dorsum of
left little finger on its terminal part of 1st digit.
was at dorsum of right hand.
vi) Abrasion 2 X 1 Cm. was read in colour and was at
right patellor region. It is simple in nature.
All injuries are within 6 hours old. Injury Nos. 1, 2, 3,
4 was caused by hard and blunt and hard and rough object.
Injury Nos. 5 and 6 are caused by hard and rough object.”
PW 7-Dr. Dhotre advised CT-Scan of the patient-Manisha and
asked her to be shifted to a higher center for further treatment, pursuant to
which, Manisha was taken to the Civil Hospital at Solapur. Thus, the extra-
judicial confession made by the appellant to PW 4-Macchindra and PW 6-
Nandabai is duly corroborated by PW 7-Dr. Dhotre and is supported by
Exhibit 28 i.e. the case papers. It appears that after Manisha was shifted to
the Civil Hospital at Solapur, efforts were made by the police to record her
statement, however, she was not found in a condition to record her
statement. On 25th December 2013, Manisha succumbed to her injuries.
The cause of death was stated to be head injury. Column 19 of the post-
mortem report reveals the following internal injuries :
“(i) Underscalp haematoma present over left side fronto
parieto tempora occipital region size 13 cm x 7 cm;
(ii) Comminuted depressed fracture of left parietal bone of
(iii) - Extradural haematoma present over left parietal
- Subdural haematoma present all over brain about 100
-Subarachnoid haemorrhage present all over brain surface
- Brain congested & ocetomatovy.”
10           Thus, it appears that the appellant assaulted Manisha on her
head with a hammer from behind, resulting in a grievous injury on the head
and other injuries on her person. The situs of injury is consistent with the
evidence on record.
11           As far as PW 5-Rohini is concerned, the learned Judge has
discarded her evidence as it was recorded belatedly i.e. after 11-12 days of
the incident. It is pertinent to note that the incident had taken place on 19 th
December 2013 and that Manisha succumbed to her injuries on 25 th
December 2013. PW 5-Rohini was aged 6 years at the relevant time and it
appears that on 30th December 2013, Rohini’s statement was recorded i.e.
after 5 days of her mother’s demise. Rohini’s 164 statement was also
recorded in the said case on 15th January 2014. A perusal of the evidence of
PW 5-Rohini shows that she was present in the house at the relevant time
and had witnessed the quarrel between her father (appellant) and mother
(Manisha). She has stated that because of the quarrel, she woke up and saw
her father assaulting her mother with a hammer on her head and that there
was blood on the floor. She has stated that her father, after cleaning the
floor, bathed her mother and thereafter took her to the hospital. She has
also identified the hammer (Article A), which was seized at the instance of
the appellant from the house. A perusal of the cross-examination shows
that Rohini has not buckled in her cross-examination despite a gruelling
cross and has stuck to what she has stated in her examination-in-chief. She
has denied the suggestions given in the cross-examination i.e. of not
witnessing the incident. The evidence of this witness i.e. Rohini, aged 6
years, inspires confidence and cannot be disbelieved. There is nothing in
the cross-examination of this witness to disbelieve her presence in the
house at the relevant time. Delay, per se, of a few days in recording her
statement, in the facts, cannot be said to be fatal. It will have to be borne in
mind, first the trauma of a young child, aged 6 years on seeing her mother
being assaulted by her father; the trauma of seeing not only the assault but
of seeing her mother lying there for an hour, during which, her father
(appellant) gave her mother a bath, to clean the blood and also cleaned the
spot. Manisha succumbed to her injuries on 25 th December 2013 and
Rohini’s statement was recorded on 30th December 2013 and 164 statement
on 15th January 2014. The trauma of a child loosing a loved one in such a
brutal way, will have to be borne in mind. Having regard to the facts, in
these circumstances, delay in recording her statement cannot be said to be
fatal.    Rohini’s presence cannot be doubted.          Her evidence inspires
confidence. She is a natural witness, who woke up on hearing the quarrel
between her parents and witnessed the assault on her mother by her father,
and saw her father cleaning the spot, soon thereafter.
12           The spot panchanama reveals that the room in which the
incident took place was one room with an open kitchen and a bathroom.
Thus, evidence on record shows that the incident took place in the room,
and as such Rohini could have clearly witnessed the same. The Panch to
the spot panchanama i.e. PW 2-Krishna Kale has given the description of
the room and what was seen. He has stated that when he entered the room,
he found that blood stains had been wiped off with cloth; that on entering
the bathroom, he saw blood stained blouse, petticoat, chaddar and gunny
bag lying there. The said witness corroborates PW 5-Rohini, with respect
to the spot of incident being cleaned.
13           Coupled with the aforesaid evidence, there is evidence of
recovery of a blood-stained hammer at the instance of the appellant from
behind the cooler in his house. The evidence of PW 3-Krushna Kale,
panch to the memorandum of panchanama as well as PW 12-Suresh Thorat,
API, support the recovery of the said blood-stained hammer at the instance
of the appellant. It appears from the evidence of PW 8-Vilas Salunke
(photographer), who had taken photographs of the spot that there was no
blood seen at the spot on the floor. The said photographs were taken soon
after the incident.    The said witness was examined to show that the
appellant had wiped the blood from the spot, soon after the incident, so as
to destroy evidence.
14           Learned counsel for the appellant relied on the judgment of the
Apex Court in the case of Madanlal vs. State of Punjab1. He submitted
that in the said case, the accused was convicted for the offence under
Section 304 Part (II) of the Indian Penal Code and was sentenced to suffer
imprisonment of 4 years. He submitted that as the accused’s act was a
result of grave and sudden provocation, his sentence was reduced to the
period undergone. According to the learned counsel for the appellant, since
the appellant in the present case, acted under grave and sudden
provocation, the appellant’s sentence also be reduced to the period
undergone by him.
15           A perusal of the said judgment relied upon by the learned
counsel is clearly distinguishable and has no bearing on the facts in the
present case.    The case before the Apex Court was that the appellant
therein, had caused serious injury to the deceased with a handle of a pump;
the motive of the crime was that the accused therein was hungry for 3 days
and when he asked for food from the deceased Sewadar of the `Dera’ where
free food was being supplied, the deceased refused and consequently, the
appellant, in a fit of anger, attacked the deceased on being deprived of the
power of self control. Admittedly, in that case, the appellant and the
deceased were not known to each other and the motive was hunger for 3
days. In the present case, the appellant was suspecting his wife’s character
and would assault her on account of the same. On the day of the incident
on being refused tea, the appellant assaulted Manisha with a hammer. The
deceased-Manisha, by refusing to make tea for the appellant, by no stretch
of imagination, can be said to have offered grave and sudden provocation
for the appellant to assault her, much less, such a brutal assault.
16           It would not be out of place to observe that a wife is not a
chattel or an object. Marriage ideally is a partnership based on equality.
More often than not, it is far from that. Cases such as these, are not
uncommon.       Such cases, reflect the imbalance of gender – skewed
patriarchy, the socio-cultural milieu one has grown up in, which often seeps
into a marital relationship. There is imbalance of gender roles, where wife
as a homemaker is expected to do all the household chores. Emotional
labour in a marriage is also expected to be done by the wife. Coupled with
these imbalances in the equation, is the imbalance of expectation and
subjugation. Social conditions of women also make them handover
themselves to their spouses. Thus, men, in such cases, consider themselves
as primary partners and their wives, `chattel’. To quote from a study, ‘The
Man Who Mistook His Wife For Chattel’ by Margo Wilson and Martin
“by `proprietary’, we mean first that men lay claim to
particular women as songbirds lay claim to territories, as
lions lay claim to a kill, or as people of both sexes lay claim
to valuables. Having located an individually recognizable
and potentially defensible resource packet, the proprietary
creature proceeds to advertise and exercise the intention of
defending it from rivals. Proprietariness has the further
implication, possibly peculiar to the human case, of a sense
of right or entitlement”.
This medieval notion of the wife being the property of the
husband to do as he wishes, unfortunately, still persists in the majority
mindset. Nothing but notions of patriarchy. Thus, the submission of the
learned counsel for the appellant that the deceased by refusing to make tea
for the appellant offered grave and sudden provocation, is ludicrous,
clearly untenable and unsustainable and as such deserves to be rejected. In
the facts, the appellant not only assaulted his wife, but also after assaulting
her, wasted precious and crucial time i.e. around one hour, in covering his
act by destroying evidence, by wiping the blood from the spot and bathing
Manisha before taking her to the hospital. If the appellant had rushed
Manisha to the hospital, soon after the incident, possibly her life could have
been saved and Rohini would not have lost her mother.
17          Considering the overwhelming evidence on record pointing to
the complicity, no infirmity can be found in the impugned judgment and
order convicting and sentencing the appellant for the offences mentioned in
para 2 hereinabove. The facts on record also do not warrant any reduction
in the sentence    awarded to the appellant. Accordingly, the appeal is
dismissed.