1.      This application is filed under Order 39 Rules 1 and 2 CPC seeking
―A. The Defendant, its directors, principals, proprietor,
partners, officers, employees, agents, distributors, franchisees,
representatives and assigns be restrained by an ex-parte ad
i. Telecasting/ broadcasting/ publishing or otherwise
howsoever, communicating to the public any of the
Impugned advertisements or any part thereof or any other
advertisement of a similar nature in any language or in any
manner causing the Impugned advertisement or any part
thereof or any other advertisement of a similar nature to be
IA No.8999/2021 in CS(COMM) 340/2021                                  Page 1 of 33
telecast or broadcast or communicated to the public or
published in any media including digital/electronic or social
media or in any other manner disparaging the goodwill and
reputation of the Plaintiffs and their products sold under the
ii. Using the depiction of the Plaintiffs‘ product or any other
product deceptively similar to that of the Plaintiffs‘ in its
advertisement or in any other manner infringing the
Plaintiff‘s registered trademarks and/or disparaging the
goodwill and reputation of the Plaintiff and its product sold
under the trade mark HARPIC.
iii. Using any other indicia whatsoever to associate with/
depict the Plaintiffs or their products in its advertisements
issued in any and all media whatsoever including the
B. The Defendant, its directors, principals, proprietor, partners,
officers, employees, agents, distributors, franchisees,
representatives and assigns be directed to issue a clarificatory
advertisement in video and print / digital formats in an effort to
repair the loss of reputation caused to the Plaintiff‘s HARPIC
C. Cost of the suit be awarded to the Plaintiff.‖
2.      It is the case of the plaintiff that it is an internationally renowned
company and is involved in the manufacturing of a famous toilet cleaner
under the trademark ‗HARPIC‘ in India since 2001. It is stated that HARPIC
is a household name in the category of toilet cleaners and the most widely
used toilet cleaner brand in the country. It is pointed out that the plaintiff is
the registered proprietor of the word mark ‗HARPIC‘ in class 3 bearing
registration No.347055 dated 15.03.1979. Details of registrations of the
IA No.8999/2021 in CS(COMM) 340/2021                                   Page 2 of 33
trademark are given in para 17 of the plaint. It is also stated that apart from
the above registrations, the plaintiff has also filed applications for
registration of the unique and distinctive bottle shape of the plaintiff‘s
HARPIC branded products in India in class 1 and in class 5. The
applications are pending before the Trade Mark Registry.
3.      The present dispute concerns an alleged advertisement blitzkrieg by
the defendant allegedly to vilify, denigrate and defame the plaintiff‘s
HARPIC toilet cleaner. It is stated that five advertisements have been
launched by the defendant over the weekend which completely trash the
plaintiff‘s HARPIC brand, declaring it to be ineffective and useless for the
purposes that it is used for. It is stated that the advertisement campaign is
designed to ride upon the goodwill and reputation of the ‗HARPIC‘ branded
toilet cleaner of the plaintiff, a product which represents 77.2% value market
share for toilet cleaners, and inviting consumers to substitute the same with
the defendant‘s DOMEX, a product which has a mere 5.3% market share.
4.      The first advertisement is a Television Commercial which was
launched on 23.07.2021 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘TVC’). The
screenshots of the TVC as reproduced in the plaint are as follows:
IA No.8999/2021 in CS(COMM) 340/2021                                 Page 3 of 33
IA No.8999/2021 in CS(COMM) 340/2021 Page 4 of 33
IA No.8999/2021 in CS(COMM) 340/2021 Page 5 of 33
IA No.8999/2021 in CS(COMM) 340/2021 Page 6 of 33
5.      It is claimed that the impugned advertisement is designed to denigrate
and defame the plaintiff‘s HARPIC branded toilet cleaners. The clear
portrayal is that use of HARPIC leads to bad odour and smell in the
bathroom. The impugned advertisement ridicules HARPIC consumers and
prompts them to immediately shift their preferences to DOMEX. It gives a
wrong portrayal that HARPIC has already been rejected by a majority of
consumers who have shifted their preference to DOMEX.
6.      The other advertisements are as follows:
―(i)    The second advertisement, relevant portion is as follows:
It is stated that in the above advertisement, the HARPIC
bottle is clearly identifiable and termed as an ‗ordinary toilet
cleaner‘.
(ii)    The third, a print advertisement is as follows:
IA No.8999/2021 in CS(COMM) 340/2021                                  Page 7 of 33
It is stated that the above advertisement once again seeks
to portray HARPIC as a cleaner of the toilet bowl which causes
stench after use.
(iii)   The fourth advertisement is as follows:
(iii)   The fifth advertisement, relevant portion is as follows:
Hence, the present application.
7.      The defendant in its reply has stated that it has introduced the product
DOMEX in India in 1997 with its focus on fighting the war against India‘s
sanitation issue as it aids in killing germs including bacteria, virus and fungi.
It is urged that the defendant continuously undertakes extensive research and
development to improve its products. It is stated that the defendant
recognized the consumer need in the market to tackle the issue of malodour
in toilet cleaners. In order to tackle the said issue, it is claimed that the
IA No.8999/2021 in CS(COMM) 340/2021                                   Page 8 of 33
defendant in 2015 - 2016 came up with the unique technology which helps
in making the hard surfaces such as that of a toilet bowl, hydrophobic. This
technology does not let odour causing liquids to stick to the toilet bowl, and
thereby tackles the malodour emanating from such toilet bowls. Such
technology also helps in fighting with bacteria longer and thus provides a
better long lasting hygienic solution. This technology was provided by using
a chemical compound called Silane. The hydrophobic qualities of Silane are
said to be well known. It is urged that due to the novelty of the said
technology, the defendant applied for a patent for the same through its
parent company Unilever PLC and has been granted a patent registration in
relation to the same. Further, the defendant through a known independent
laboratory, TUV SUD South Asia Pvt. Ltd., tested the said product in
comparison to the plaintiff‘s product. It is urged that as per the test
conducted, the defendant‘s product due to its patented technology fights
odour causing fluids from sticking to the toilet bowl in turn resulting in
fighting malodour better. The plaintiff‘s product does not contain any water
repellent technology. The defendant upon being satisfied with the
performance of its products, ―Domex FreshGuard‖ in order to inform the
general public about the benefits and special feature of its product, decided
to release a television commercial for the defendant‘s product showcasing
and promoting the same. The story board of the TVC as released and
reproduced by the defendant in reply to the application is as follows: -
IA No.8999/2021 in CS(COMM) 340/2021                                Page 9 of 33
IA No.8999/2021 in CS(COMM) 340/2021                  Page 10 of 33
IA No.8999/2021 in CS(COMM) 340/2021                Page 11 of 33
IA No.8999/2021 in CS(COMM) 340/2021                   Page 12 of 33
IA No.8999/2021 in CS(COMM) 340/2021                   Page 13 of 33
8.      It is stated that as is evident from the aforesaid, there is nothing
disparaging stated about the plaintiff‘s product in the defendant‘s TVC. The
TVC simply states that Domex Fresh Guard fights malodour better. Further,
it is urged that the statements made in the defendant‘s TVC are entirely
truthful as the defendant‘s product Domex FreshGuard contains patented
technology under the patent title ―Hard Surface Treatment Composition‖
9.      Regarding the print advertisement, it is stated that it is merely
informing the public that its product fights bad smell for longer and also
justifies the claim. It is urged that the said advertisement does not say
anything negative or disparaging about the plaintiff‘s product or attempts to
mislead the consumers in any manner.
10.     Regarding the YouTube videos, it is urged that the said videos do not
make any reference to the plaintiff‘s product and show a rough rendering of
a generic shape of a toilet cleaner bottle and thereafter proceed to highlight
the features of the defendant‘s product in comparison to the general toilet
cleaners. Reference is made to the alleged third party bottles having a
generic functional shape. Photos of these generic bottles are reproduced in
the reply to the application.
11.     It is stressed that the defendant‘s TVC, print advertisement, and
YouTube videos only convey to the consumer the special ability of the
defendant‘s product which is based on the patented technology and the
process of doing so does not in any manner denigrate the plaintiff‘s product.
It is further urged that the plaintiff is merely being hypersensitive and is
attempting to curb healthy competition within the market. It is stated that the
fact that the product of the defendant has steadily gained market share
IA No.8999/2021 in CS(COMM) 340/2021                                Page 14 of 33
within a period of less than one year from its launch is the root cause of the
present suit. The present suit is anticompetitive in nature and is an abuse of
the process of this court.
12.     The above matter came up for hearing on various dates and on
30.07.2021 this court in the present application passed the following
―13. I cannot help noticing the third print advertisement,
14. The above advertisement certifies the product of the
defendant as superior to that of the plaintiff. It further tends to
denigrate the product of the plaintiff. In my opinion, the said
advertisement, prima facie, at this stage, based on the averments
appears to disparage the product of the plaintiff. Balance of
convenience would also be in favour of the plaintiff. I
accordingly restrain the defendant from publishing the
aforenoted advertisement in any forum till they remove all
references to the product of the plaintiff ‗HARPIC‘.
15. As far as the other advertisements are concerned, in my
opinion, for the purpose of determining as to whether the said
advertisements are disparaging or slandering the product of the
plaintiff, a conclusion can be arrived at only after a better and
IA No.8999/2021 in CS(COMM) 340/2021                                   Page 15 of 33
detailed examination of the reply that may be filed by the
13.     I have heard learned senior counsel for the plaintiff and learned senior
counsel for the defendant. I have also perused the written submissions.
14.     The plaintiff seeks an injunction to restrain the defendant from
publishing, broadcasting or putting in public domain the five noted
advertisements above, i.e. TVC, Social Media and Print Advertisement.
15.     I may first see the legal position in this regard.
16.     Learned senior counsel for the parties have sought to rely upon
various judgments. I will confine myself to the relevant ones.
17.     Reference may be had to the judgment of a Co-ordinate Bench of this
court in the case Colgate Palmolive (India) Ltd. v. Hindustan Unilever
Ltd., 2013 SCC OnLine Del 3186. In the said judgment, the matter pertains
to whether the impugned advertisements misuse the plaintiff‘s registered
trade mark ‗Colgate‘ and are disparaging the goodwill and reputation of the
plaintiff‘s toothpaste Colgate Dental Cream Strong Teeth and as to whether
the impugned advertisements tarnish, slander and defame the worth and
reputation of the plaintiff‘s brand and products. The Co-ordinate Bench held
―21. The law as explained by the DB in Dabur Colortek is that
while it may no longer be open to a trader to make an untrue
declaration that his product is better than that of the competitor,
he can certainly compare the advantages of his goods over the
goods of the competitor. What is prohibited is for the trader to
say that his competitor‘s goods are bad. Defamation of the
competitor‘s goods is not permissible. Defamation can give rise
to an action for the recovery of damages and in such
circumstances an order restraining such defamation can be
IA No.8999/2021 in CS(COMM) 340/2021                                  Page 16 of 33
passed. It was, therefore, held that that no off-the-cuff claim
could be made by a trader that his goods are the best in the
18.     Against the above noted judgment of the Co-ordinate Bench, in
FAO(OS) 396/2013, titled ‗Colgate Palmolive Company Ltd. & Anr. v.
Hindustan Unilever Ltd., decided on 10.12.2013, the Division Bench of this
―45. The examination of the impugned TVC frame by frame
and its detailed analysis of the words used or the expressions of
the mothers and attributing a message to them, is in our opinion,
not the correct way to view any advertisement. The
advertisement must be viewed in its entirety and it is not
necessary to dissect each word or expression. In the case of
McDonald‘s Hamburgers Ltd v. Burgerking (UK) Ltd.: [1986]
F.S.R. 45, the Chancery Division stressed that the advertisement
should be considered as a whole in the case of disparagement
―Advertisements are not to be read as if they were some
testamentary provision in a will or a clause in some
agreement with every word being carefully considered and
the words as a whole being compared.
46. The relevant question to be asked is what is the story line of
the impugned TVC, the intent of the advertiser and the message
that it leaves with the consumers/prospective consumers. In the
case of Pepsi Co., Inc. and Ors. v. Hindustan Coca Cola Ltd.
and Anr.: 2003 (27) PTC 305 (Del.), a Division Bench of this
Court had held that factors which are required to be considered
while deciding the question of the disparagement are (1) Intent
of the commercial (ii) Manner of the commercial (iii) Story line
of the commercial and the message sought to be conveyed by
the commercial. These factors were further clarified by a
Division Bench in the case of Dabur India Ltd. v. Colortek
Meghalaya Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. (supra) wherein the court held as
IA No.8999/2021 in CS(COMM) 340/2021                                  Page 17 of 33
―(1) The intent of the advertisement — this can be
understood from its story line and the message sought to be
conveyed.
(2) The overall effect of the advertisement — does it
promote the advertiser‗s product or does it disparage or
In this context it must be kept in mind that while promoting
its product, the advertiser may, while comparing it with a
rival or a competing product, make an unfavourable
comparison but that might not necessarily affect the story
line and message of the advertised product or have that as its
overall effect.
(3) The manner of advertising — is the comparison by and
large truthful or does it falsely denigrate or disparage a rival
product? While truthful disparagement is permissible,
untruthful disparagement is not permissible.
48. Having stated the above, it would also be necessary to
examine the intent and the overall effect of the advertisement.
Following the decision in Dabur India Ltd. v. Colortek
Meghalaya Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. (supra), it is also important to
examine the storyline and the message that the impugned TVC
conveys to an average person who is a consumer or a
prospective consumer of the products that are advertised. An
average person cannot be assumed to be gullible and is
presumed to have the ability to ignore puffery. However, an
average viewer is likely to accept the factual representations
that are conveyed by an advertisement if the same are conveyed
as serious statements of fact and not as hyperbole. An average
viewer does not analyse an advertisement and is likely to be
receptive to the message that the advertisement projects. A
similar view has been articulated by a Single judge of this Court
in Glaxo Smithkline Consumer Healthcare Limited and others
v. Heinz India Private Limited and another: I.A.
IA No.8999/2021 in CS(COMM) 340/2021                                   Page 18 of 33
No.15233/2008 in CS (OS) No.2577/2008, Decided on
12.11.2010, wherein this court held as under:-
―An application of the principles discussed previously in
this judgment, would mean that the Court has to, as far as
possible, consider the overall effect of the advertisements; a
minute dissection of each term, or phrase is uncalled for,
and the stand point from where the Court should judge the
nature of the alleged disparagement should be not of the
aggrieved trader, but the reasonable, or average consumer,
who is conscious of trading rival's propensities to puff and
exaggerate their products. At the same time, this reasonable
or average consumer is likely to be influenced by factual
assertions made in such advertisements. Specific assertions,
or claims, in advertisements are more likely impact directly,
as contrasted with vague and general claims.
59. In our view, even if, we assume that the representation that
Pepsodent is more effective in combating germs, 4 hours after
brushing, in comparison with Colgate ST, is correct even then,
prima facie, the advertisement would be disparaging as it also
conveys the message that Colgate is ineffective and lacks the
requisite quality to maintain oral hygiene and combat tooth
decay and its usage, as depicted by the Colgate child, would
result in the user ending up with a tooth related ailment. As
explained in Dabur India Ltd. v. Colortek Meghalaya Pvt. Ltd.
& Anr. (supra) a trader cannot, while saying that his goods are
better than his competitors‗, say that his competitors‗ goods are
bad. If he says so, he really slanders the goods of his
competitors. In other words, he defames his competitors and
their goods, which is not permissible. In our view, this is
precisely what the impugned print advertisement conveys by its
advertisement theme and the visual story.
60. To sum up, in our view, the impugned TVC cannot be stated
to be per se disparaging Colgate ST. However, the voice over at
the end of the impugned TVC which states ―Naya Pepsodent
Germi Check Colgate Ke Mukable 130 pratishat Germ Attack
IA No.8999/2021 in CS(COMM) 340/2021                                 Page 19 of 33
Power‖ (freely translated means ―in comparison to Colgate
New Pepsodent Germi Check has 130% Germ Attack Power‖) is
misleading and inaccurate. Thus, this statement in the voiceover
is directed to be deleted from the impugned TVC or at the
option of the respondent, may be suitably modified to refer only
to Colgate ST (Colgate Strong Teeth). The respondent is further
directed to ensure that the Super which reads as ―Creative
Visualization of the Action of Triclosan on Cavity causing
Germs. New Pepsodent Germicheck enhances delivery of
Triclosan in the mouth. Claim based on In-Vivo study where
Germ Attack Power refers to amount of Triclosan remaining in
mouth, 4 hours after brushing, where COLGATE STRONG
TEETH is indexed at 100% and PEPSODENT GERMI CHECK
is 130%. Brush twice daily.‖ is clearly visible when the
impugned TVC is viewed on any television set. The matter is
remitted to the learned Single Judge to consider afresh the
aspect whether the essential message conveyed by the
impugned TVC is prima facie truthful or misleading in the light
19.     Reference may also be had to the judgment of another Division Bench
of this court in Dabur India Ltd. v. M/s Colortek Meghalaya Pvt. Ltd. &
Anr. (2010) SCC OnLine Del 391. That matter related to manufacturing and
marketing of a mosquito repellent cream under the brand name of odomos
by the appellant. The defendant was also manufacturing a mosquito repellent
cream under the brand name of ‗Goodnight Naturals‘. The Co-ordinate
Bench of this court rejected the application for injunction and hence, the
appeal. The Division Bench held as follows:
―10. In Tata Press Ltd. v. MTNL & Ors., (1995) 5 SCC 139
(paragraph 25) the Supreme Court held that ―commercial
speech‖ is a part of freedom of speech and expression
guaranteed under Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution. However,
what is ―commercial speech‖ was not defined or explained. In
fact, it does not appear to be possible to clearly define or
IA No.8999/2021 in CS(COMM) 340/2021                                Page 20 of 33
explain ―commercial speech‖ and, in any event, for the purposes
of this case it is not necessary for us to do so. The reason for
this is that the Supreme Court has said in Tata Press Ltd.
(paragraph 23 of the Report) that advertising as a ―commercial
speech‖ has two facets thereby postulating that an
advertisement is a species of commercial speech. The Supreme
―23. ….Advertising which is no more than a commercial
transaction is nonetheless dissemination of information
regarding the product advertised. Public at large is benefited
by the information made available through the
advertisement. In a democratic economy free flow of
commercial information is indispensable. There cannot be
honest and economical marketing by the public at large
without being educated by the information disseminated
through advertisements. The economic system in a
democracy would be handicapped without there being
11. Earlier, the Supreme Court referred to Virginia State Board
of Pharmacy v. Virginia Citizens Consumer Council Inc.,
(1975) 421 US 748 and observed in paragraph 15 that it is
almost settled law in the United States that though ―commercial
speech‖ is entitled to the First Amendment protection, the
Government was completely free to recall ―commercial speech‖
which is false, misleading, unfair, deceptive and which proposes
illegal transactions.
12. In Colgate Palmolive (India) Ltd. v. Hindustan Lever Ltd.,
(1999) 7 SCC 1, the Supreme Court observed in paragraph 36
of the Report that a distinction would always have to be made
and latitude given for an advertisement to gain a purchaser or
two. This latitude cannot and does not mean any permission for
misrepresentation but only a description of permissible
assertion. In this context, reliance was placed by the Supreme
Court on Anson‘s Law of Contract (27th Edn.) which says that
commendatory expressions are not dealt with as serious
IA No.8999/2021 in CS(COMM) 340/2021                                 Page 21 of 33
representations of fact. The view remains the same in the 28th
Edition (page 239). ―A similar latitude is allowed to a person
who wants to gain a purchaser, though it must be admitted that
the borderline of permissible assertion is not always easily
13. The Supreme Court recognized and applied in Colgate
Palmolive (India) Ltd. the rule of civil law, ―simplex
commendatio non obligat‖ – simple commendation can only be
regarded as a mere invitation to a customer without any
obligation as regards the quality of goods. It was observed that
every seller would naturally try and affirm that his wares are
good enough to be purchased (if not better than those of a rival).
14. On the basis of the law laid down by the Supreme Court, the
guiding principles for us should be the following:-
(i) An advertisement is commercial speech and is protected
by Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution.
(ii) An advertisement must not be false, misleading, unfair
or deceptive.
(iii) Of course, there would be some grey areas but these
need not necessarily be taken as serious representations of
fact but only as glorifying one‘s product.
To this extent, in our opinion, the protection of Article 19(1)(a)
of the Constitution is available. However, if an advertisement
extends beyond the grey areas and becomes a false, misleading,
unfair or deceptive advertisement, it would certainly not have
the benefit of any protection.
15. There is one other decision that we think would give some
guidance and that is Pepsi Co. Inc. & Ors. v. Hindustan Coca
Cola Ltd. & Another, 2003 (27) PTC 305 (Del.) (DB). In this
decision, a Division Bench of this Court held that while
boasting about one‘s product is permissible, disparaging a rival
IA No.8999/2021 in CS(COMM) 340/2021                                 Page 22 of 33
product is not. The fourth guiding principle for us, therefore, is:
(iv) While glorifying its product, an advertiser may not
denigrate or disparage a rival product. Similarly, in Halsbury‘s
Laws of England (Fourth Edition Reissue, Volume 28) it is
stated in paragraph 278 that ―[It] is actionable when the words
go beyond a mere puff and constitute untrue statements of fact
about a rival‘s product.‖ This view was followed, amongst
others, in Dabur India Ltd. v. Wipro Limited, Bangalore, 2006
(32) PTC 677 (Del). ―[It] is one thing to say that the defendant‘s
product is better than that of the plaintiff and it is another thing
to say that the plaintiff‘s product is inferior to that of the
16. In Pepsi Co. it was also held that certain factors have to be
kept in mind while deciding the question of disparagement.
These factors are: (i) Intent of the commercial, (ii) Manner of
the commercial, and (iii) Story line of the commercial and the
message sought to be conveyed. While we generally agree with
these factors, we would like to amplify or restate them in the
(1) The intent of the advertisement - this can be understood
from its story line and the message sought to be conveyed.
(2) The overall effect of the advertisement – does it promote
the advertiser‘s product or does it disparage or denigrate a
In this context it must be kept in mind that while promoting its
product, the advertiser may, while comparing it with a rival or a
competing product, make an unfavourable comparison but that
might not necessarily affect the story line and message of the
advertised product or have that as its overall effect.
(3) The manner of advertising – is the comparison by and
large truthful or does it falsely denigrate or disparage a rival
product? While truthful disparagement is permissible,
untruthful disparagement is not permissible.
IA No.8999/2021 in CS(COMM) 340/2021                                    Page 23 of 33
18. On balance, and by way of a conclusion, we feel that
notwithstanding the impact that a telecast may have, since
commercial speech is protected and an advertisement is
commercial speech, an advertiser must be given enough room to
play around in (the grey areas) in the advertisement brought out
by it. A plaintiff (such as the Appellant before us) ought not to
be hyper-sensitive as brought out in Dabur India. This is
because market forces, the economic climate, the nature and
quality of a product would ultimately be the deciding factors for
a consumer to make a choice. It is possible that aggressive or
catchy advertising may cause a partial or temporary damage to
the plaintiff, but ultimately the consumer would be the final
adjudicator to decide what is best for him or her.
20. Learned counsel for the Appellant submitted before us that
since his client has over 80% of the market share in the country
and a 100% market share in some States, the obvious target of
the commercial is the product of the Appellant. In our opinion,
this argument cannot be accepted. The sub-text of this argument
is an intention to create a monopoly in the market or to entrench
a monopoly that the Appellant claims it already has. If this
argument were to be accepted, then no other mosquito repellant
cream manufacturer would be able to advertise its product,
because in doing so, it would necessarily mean that the
Appellant‘s product is being targeted. All that we are required
to ascertain is whether the commercial denigrates the
Appellant‘s product or not. There is nothing in the commercial
to suggest a negative content or that there is a disparagement of
the Appellant‘s product. The commercial merely gives the
virtues of the product of the Respondents, namely, that it has
certain ingredients which perhaps no other mosquito repellant
cream has, such as tulsi, lavender and milk protein. While
comparing its product with any other product, any advertiser
would naturally highlight its positive points but this cannot be
negatively construed to mean that there is a disparagement of a
rival product. That being so, whether the Appellant‘s product is
targeted or not becomes irrelevant.
IA No.8999/2021 in CS(COMM) 340/2021                                 Page 24 of 33
23. Finally, we may mention that Reckitt & Colman of India
Ltd. v. M.P. Ramchandran and Anr., 1999 (19) PTC 741 was
referred to for the following propositions relating to
(a) A tradesman is entitled to declare his goods to be best in
the world, even though the declaration is untrue.
(b) He can also say that his goods are better than his
competitors', even though such statement is untrue.
(c) For the purpose of saying that his goods are the best in
the world or his goods are better than his competitors' he
can even compare the advantages of his goods over the
goods of others.
(d) He however, cannot, while saying that his goods are
better than his competitors', say that his competitors' goods
are bad. If he says so, he really slanders the goods of his
competitors. In other words, he defames his competitors and
their goods, which is not permissible.
(e) If there is no defamation to the goods or to the
manufacturer of such goods no action lies, but if there is
such defamation an action lies and if an action lies for
recovery of damages for defamation, then the Court is also
competent to grant an order of injunction restraining
repetition of such defamation.
These propositions have been accepted by learned Single
Judges of this Court in several cases, but in view of the law laid
down by the Supreme Court in Tata Press that false, misleading,
unfair or deceptive advertising is not protected commercial
speech, we are of the opinion that propositions (a) and (b) above
and the first part of proposition (c) are not good law. While
hyped-up advertising may be permissible, it cannot transgress
the grey areas of permissible assertion, and if does so, the
IA No.8999/2021 in CS(COMM) 340/2021                                 Page 25 of 33
advertiser must have some reasonable factual basis for the
assertion made. It is not possible, therefore, for anybody to
make an off-the-cuff or unsubstantiated claim that his goods are
the best in the world or falsely state that his goods are better
20.     Reference may also be had to the judgment of the Co-ordinate Bench
of this court in the case of Dabur India Limited v. Emami Ltd., 2019 SCC
OnLine Del 9022. That was a suit filed by the plaintiff seeking permanent
injunction against the defendant from broadcasting, printing and publishing
the ‗ZANDU CHYAVANPRASHAD‘ advertisement which was said to be
disparaging and injurious to the goodwill and reputation of Chyawanprash
including the plaintiff‘s DABAR CHYAWANPRASH. The court held as
―16. Another notable case dealing with comparative advertising
is Reckitt & Colman of India Ltd. v. M.P. Ramchandaran &
Anr 1998 SCC Online Cal 422, wherein it has been held as
―11. From the law discussed above it appears to me that the
I) A tradesman is entitled to declare his goods to be best in
the world, even though the declaration is untrue.
II) He can also say that his goods are better than his
competitors', even though such statement is untrue.
III) For the purpose of saying that his goods are the best in
the world or his goods are better than his competitors' he
can even compare the advantages of his goods over the
goods of others.
IV) He however, cannot, while saying that his goods are
IA No.8999/2021 in CS(COMM) 340/2021                                Page 26 of 33
better than his competitors', say that his competitors' goods
are bad. If he says so, he really slanders the goods of his
competitors. In other words he defames his competitors and
their goods, which is not permissible.
V) If there is no defamation to the goods or to the
manufacturer of such goods no action lies, but if there is
such defamation an action lies and if an action lies for
recovery of damages for defamation, then the Court is also
competent to grant an order of injunction restraining
28. From the reading of the above noted judgement, it emerges
that the Court has to necessarily examine the intent and overall
effect of the advertisement. The "look and feel" of an
advertisement and the message conveyed by the story line to an
average person, are the critical factors which assist the Court to
come to a right conclusion. If one were to view the proposed
modified print advertisement, it can be clearly discerned that the
Plaintiff's product is not the subject matter of comparison. The
comparison is with Chyawanprash as a generic product. As
discussed earlier the law permits comparison. While making a
comparison, a competitor can declare his goods to be the best in
the world even though the declaration is untrue, however, while
claiming that its goods are better than his competitor, he cannot
say that the competitor‘s goods are bad. Thus, puffery is
allowed, but slander and defamation of the goods of the
competitor is impermissible. The proposed Print advertisement
is only making a comparison with the generic product
―Chyawanprash‖ where a declaration is being given that the
product of the Defendant does not contain sugar. The impugned
advertisement in its modified version is highlighting the
benefits of the sugar free variant. Plaintiff's contention that
Chyawanprash has been shown to be bad or unhealthy is
misplaced. The way I see it, the modified advertisement only
gives the information and a choice or option to the
viewers/consumers who would like to buy a product that is
giving the benefit of Chyawanprash without sugar. The
IA No.8999/2021 in CS(COMM) 340/2021                                 Page 27 of 33
comparison in the present case is inevitable. The benefit of a
product without sugar can be best showcased by juxtaposing
with the variant that has sugar in it. The question whether the
sugar free variant is indeed a healthier option, is being left for
the consumer to decide. But, certainly it cannot be said that the
advertisement is in any manner implying disparagement of
21.     The broad legal position that follows from the above judgments of the
Division Bench of this court are that the advertisement must not be false,
misleading, unfair or deceptive. There may be some grey areas but these
need not necessarily be taken as serious representation of facts but only as
glorifying one‘s product. If advertisement extends beyond the grey areas and
becomes false, misleading, unfair or deceptive advertisement, it would not
be entitled the benefit of any protection. In comparative advertising, the
comparing of one‘s goods with that of the other and establishing the
superiority of one‘s goods over the other is permissible. However one
cannot make a statement that a good is bad, inferior or undesirable as that
would lead to denigrating or defaming the goods of the other.
22.     I may see the facts of this case. The TVC frames have been
reproduced as above. I have also perused the TVC in court. A perusal of the
TVC as a whole shows that it essentially seeks to claim that to remove bad
odour, DOMEX is a better solution. It does not denigrate, disparage or
malign the product of the plaintiff. Vehement submissions are made by
learned senior counsel for the plaintiff to urge that the said TVC depicts a
departmental store which is virtually full of the defendant‘s product
DOMEX while on the other hand, the product of the plaintiff is shown in a
small corner. It is also urged that a perusal of the TVC shows that the person
IA No.8999/2021 in CS(COMM) 340/2021                                 Page 28 of 33
in question first picks up a HARPIC bottle and on questioning from her
child is shown to get confused and picks up the DOMEX bottle. In my
opinion, the advertisement as a whole does not seek to prima facie denigrate
the product of the plaintiff, nor does it disparage the product of the plaintiff.
As noted above, an advertiser has to be given enough room to play around in
the advertisement. A plaintiff ought not to be hypersensitive to such an
advertisement. In my opinion, the plaintiff has failed to make out any prima
facie case regarding the TVC.
23.     The second, fourth and fifth advertisements are as follows:
IA No.8999/2021 in CS(COMM) 340/2021                                 Page 29 of 33
It is stated that in the above advertisement, the HARPIC bottle is
clearly identifiable and termed as an ‗ordinary toilet cleaner‘.
The said advertisement allegedly depicts an ordinary toilet cleaner
and claims that the product of the defendant is much superior. It was stated
by learned senior counsel for the defendant that the bottle represented in the
advertisement as an ordinary toilet cleaner does not in any manner pertain to
the plaintiff‘s product as it is a generic bottle used by various toilet cleaners
in the market. The defendant has also sought to rely upon their patent which
is a subject matter of patent No.368377 to claim that the patent of the
defendant results in a product which is a unique solution containing Silane
which ensures that the surface of the toilet bowl becomes hydrophobic and
does not let any odour causing liquids to stick to the toilet bowl thereby
fighting malodour emanating from such toilet bowls. It is urged based on
this that the defendant is only narrating actual facts i.e. the technical
superiority of its product.
24.     The above plea was denied by the learned senior counsel for the
plaintiff who submitted that the said shape of the bottle is registered by the
plaintiff and that the said act clearly seeks to denigrate and defame the
product of the plaintiff. He has also stated that the alleged patented product
IA No.8999/2021 in CS(COMM) 340/2021                                  Page 30 of 33
of the defendant does not in any manner, enhance the quality of the product
of the defendant. It is urged that the said contention of the defendant is a
false representation as no such extra cleaning takes place on account of the
noted product.
25.     I may look at the plaint in question. Relevant portion of para 17 of the
plaint which spells out the registration of marks by the plaintiff reads as
Preparations for cleaning toilets, preparations for cleaning
fabrics, scouring preparations, cleaning preparations, soap
(disinfectant), all being goods included in class 3.
Disinfectant, Pharmaceutical preparations, Medicinal
Preparations, Veterinary and Sanitary preparations, Medicated
toiletries, all being goods included in class 5.
IA No.8999/2021 in CS(COMM) 340/2021                                    Page 31 of 33
Preparations for cleaning toilets, preparations for cleaning
fabrics, scouring preparations, cleaning preparations, soap
(disinfectant), all being goods included in class 3
A comparison of the bottles depicted in the impugned print
advertisement, being the second, fourth and the fifth advertisements, prima
facie show that the same is deceptively similar to the mark that has been
duly registered by the plaintiff in class 3 on 22.02.2017 and in class 5 on the
same date. In view of this fact, it is manifest that the said three
advertisements, namely, the second, fourth and the fifth seek to depict a
mark, which is deceptively similar to the mark of the plaintiff and further
seeks to announce that the said cleaner contained in the depicted bottle is an
ordinary toilet cleaner and is apparently unable to remove the stains /
malodour in a toilet.
26.     The defendant however, relies on its patented product to state that its
claim in the advertisement is correct. In my opinion, these are disputed
questions of facts. The onus to prove that the toilet cleaner of the defendant
is technically superior to that of the plaintiff is an issue for which the onus is
on the defendant. At this stage, without evidence having being led, it is not
possible to conclude that the product of the defendant is superior to that of
the plaintiff as claimed by defendant.
27.     A bare perusal of the second, fourth and fifth advertisements shows
IA No.8999/2021 in CS(COMM) 340/2021                                   Page 32 of 33
that prima facie the said advertisements seek to denigrate and malign the
product of the plaintiff as contained in the alleged generic bottle.
28.     As far as the 3rd print advertisement is concerned, I have already
passed an interim injunction in favour of the plaintiff on 30.07.2021. I see
no reason to change my said view.
29.     The averments made in the four advertisements, namely, second,
third, fourth and fifth, in my opinion, prima facie, at this stage, appear to
disparage the product of the plaintiff. As noted above, the defendant while
promoting its product cannot be permitted to denigrate or disparage the
product of a rival. Balance of convenience is also in favour of the plaintiff. I
accordingly restrain the defendant from publishing the four advertisements
on any forum till they remove all references to the product of the plaintiff
i.e. ‗HARPIC‘ or the bottle in question, which is deceptively similar to the
registered mark of the plaintiff.
30.     With the above directions, the present application is disposed of.
IA No.8999/2021 in CS(COMM) 340/2021                                 Page 33 of 33