The petitioner is before this Court seeking a direction by
issuance of a purchase order in terms of Notification of re-tender
issued by the 2nd respondent dated 27-10-2021 and award of
contract dated 02.03.2022.
2. Heard Sri K.Satish, learned counsel appearing for the
petitioner; Sri M.Vinod Kumar, learned Additional Government
Advocate appearing for respondents 1, 3 to 5 and Smt. Sumana
Baliga M., learned counsel appearing for respondent No.2.
3. Brief facts that lead the petitioner to this Court in the
subject petition, as borne out from the pleadings, are as follows:-
The petitioner claims to be a registered Company under the
Companies Act, 1956 and is in the business of procurement of
medical and allied equipments and distribution thereto and claims
to have a Pan India presence. The 2nd respondent/ Karnataka State
Medical Supplies Corporation Limited (hereinafter referred to as ‘the
Corporation’ for short) issues a notice inviting tenders dated
27-10-2021 for procurement of 100mA Portable X-ray machines,
ICU Cots and Syringe Pump. It was to be a two cover tender, in
terms of the Karnataka Transparency in Public Procurement Act,
1999 (‘the Act’ for short) and the Karnataka Transparency in Public
Procurement Rules, 2000 (for short ‘the Rules’). The issue in the lis
concerns only item No.2 in the Tender i.e., 100mA Portable X-ray
machines. The petitioner finding itself eligible, submits the tender in
terms of the tender Notification along with another tenderer.
Therefore, there were two tenderers pursuant to the tender
notification dated 27.10.2021.
4.    After scrutiny by the Tender Scrutiny Committee, the
petitioner was declared to be technically qualified and later
emerged as the successful bidder.           On the Tender Scrutiny
Committee declaring the petitioner to be the successful bidder, the
petitioner was called for negotiations with regard to the final price
and certain reduction in the final price. The petitioner, in terms of
his communication dated 09.02.2022, reduced the price from
` 19,34,640/- to ` 18,95,947/-. After talks of negotiations were
successful,     a    notification   is     issued     by     the    2nd
respondent/Corporation notifying the award of contract in favour of
the petitioner on 02-03-2022.       Pursuant to the notification of
award, an agreement was also signed between the parties and
thereafter, a demand draft for supply of 165 Portable X-ray
machines of 100mA was submitted by the petitioner for issuance of
purchase order and a separate agreement for such purchase was
also entered into between the parties.       In spite of all these, no
purchase order was issued as was required, in terms of the tender
notification and the agreement entered into between the parties.
5.    It is at that juncture, the petitioner knocked the doors
of this court with the present petition. This Court initially directed
the learned Additional Government Advocate to secure instructions
as to what has become of the tender. After issuance of notice the
petitioner is communicated a cancellation of tender order, in terms
of its electronic mail communication dated 03.11.2022. It is then
this Court on 12-12-2022 has passed a detailed order restraining
the respondents from re-tendering and reserved liberty in the
respondents to issue purchase order in favour of the petitioner. The
said act did not come about. Therefore, the matter, with the
consent of parties, was heard.
6. The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner would
contend with vehemence that the tender did not stop at the stage
of scrutiny of documents. The petitioner emerged as the successful
bidder, award was notified in favour of the petitioner, contract was
entered into with the petitioner and a demand draft, as demanded
by the 2nd respondent, was also deposited with the 2nd respondent
for the purpose of issuance of purchase order after negotiation on
the price issue. After all these events, the 2nd respondent now
wants to cancel the tender which is contrary to law.        He would
submit that he is entitled to a mandamus at the hands of this court
for issuance of purchase order. He would further submit that in the
hope of getting a purchase order, the petitioner has procured all the
machines and has kept ready for distribution and has spent several
lakhs in the process.    The learned counsel would submit that the
action of the respondents is completely in violation of Rule 14 of the
7. On the other hand, the learned counsel representing the
2nd    respondent/Corporation    would    vehemently     refute    the
submissions to contend that if there is a fraud involved in a tender,
the tender can be cancelled at any time. There are certain charges
of corruption of officers involved in the declaration of the petitioner
to be the successful bidder which came to light later and owing to
the said complaint or discovery of fact, a decision is taken to cancel
the tender which is yet to be communicated to the petitioner. The
learned counsel would admit that the petitioner was declared to be
the successful bidder and a contract was also entered into for the
purpose of distribution of portable x-ray machines with the
8. The learned Additional Government Advocate representing
the State would toe the lines of the learned counsel for the 2nd
respondent and in support would contend that it is open to the
Government to cancel the tender at any time if there are any
violations of tender conditions.
9. I have given my anxious consideration to the submissions
made by the respective learned counsel and have perused the
material on record.
10. The afore-narrated facts are not in dispute.    The link in
the chain of events would read as follows: The records reveal that
a tender was notified for supply and installation of ICU cots, 100mA
X-ray machine and Syringe pump for Taluk and District level
hospitals under Covid-19. This appears to have been abandoned. A
re-tender notification is issued on 27-10-2021.       The title of the
tender reads as follows: “Re-tender for supply and installation of
ICU Cots, 100mA Portable X-Ray Machine and Syringe Pump for
Taluk and District level Hospitals under Covid-19”. Pursuant to the
notification of tender, the records further reveal that there were 12
participants, out of whom two were held to be technically qualified
and the petitioner emerged as the successful bidder pursuant to
him getting qualified both in technical and financial aspects.
11. The price quoted by the petitioner for each portable X-ray
machine was ` 19,34,640/-.       After the petitioner emerging as a
successful bidder, he was called for negotiations by the 2nd
respondent.     The negotiation was successful and the petitioner
reduced the unit price of the machine.         After the reduction a
notification of award of contract to the petitioner was issued. The
petitioner had submitted his bid only for 100mA x-ray machines.
The notification of award comes about on 02-03-2022.                  The
notification insofar as it is germane reads as follows:
“Sub: Re-Tender for Supply, Installation of ICU Cots,
100mA Portable X-ray Machine and Syringe Pump
for District and Taluk Level Hospitals under COVID-
2. This office Tender No.HFW/KSMSCL/COVID/
2) dated: 27-10-2021.
3. Tender Scrutiny Committee meeting dated
4. Tender Accepting Authority cum-Negotiation
meeting dated 9-02-2022.
With reference to the above, we are pleased to
confirm that your offer for the Supply and Installation of
100mA X-ray Machine has been accepted.
1       ray Machine        100       18,95,947       18,95,94,700
Thousand Seven Hundred only)
As per the decision of Tender Accepting authority, the
rest of the Quantity 65 No’s will be procured under staggered
supply based on the indent received from health institutions and
after releasing budget.
You shall submit a crossed demand draft/Pay Order
for a sum of (inclusive of Taxes) ` 56,87,841/- (Rupees:
Fifty Six Lakhs Eighty Seven Thousand Eight Hundred and
Forty one only) within 3 days from the date of this
Notification as Performance Security 3% of total amount
valid up to 60 days after the date of completion of
performance obligations including warranty. Along with
submission of Performance Security referred in the above
paragraph, you are requested to sign the Contract
Agreement within 3 days from the date of this
Notification. The final billing will be done in compliance to
the GST prevailing as on date of final billing.
The notification of award reads that the Tender Scrutiny Committee
has confirmed the offer of the petitioner for supply and installation
of portable x-ray machines. It further directed that the petitioner
has to submit a demand draft/pay order for ` 56,87,841/- and sign
the contract agreement within three days and final billing will be
done in compliance with the Rules.         Delivery schedule was also
indicated. Pursuant to the notification of award, the petitioner also
executes    an   agreement    and    submits    a   demand     draft   for
` 56,87,841/- on 8-03-2022.        Time passed by and no purchase
order was issued in favour of the petitioner in terms of the
aforesaid notification of award and execution of contract.           The
petitioner on 22-08-2022 submits a representation requesting the
2nd respondent to release the purchase order of 165 machines. The
representation reads as follows:
Sub: Request for release of Purchase order for supply of
100mA Portable X-ray machine-165 Nos.
TENDER/56/2021-22        (IND-816/CALL-2)         dated
2. Tender Scrutiny Committee meeting held on dated
3. Tender Accepting Authority cum-negotiation Meeting
dated 9-02-2022.
4. Notification of Award No. FW/KSMSCL/ COVID/
2) dated 2-03-2022.
Adverting to the above, we write to inform your goodself that
we have been declared as successful bidder in relation to tender
bearing No. HFW / KSMSCL / COVID / SIX / EQPT / RE-TENDER
/ 56 / 2021-22 (IND-816/CALL-2) dated 27-10-2021 for the
purpose of fulfillment of supply of goods privy to the said
tender, that we are privy to Notification award dated 2-
03-2022, wherein we have been declared as vendors for
the purpose of furtherance of supply of goods as per
Tender bearing No. HFW/KSMSCL/COVID/ SIX/EQPT/RE-
TENDER/56/2021-22 (IND-816/CALL-2) dated 27-10-
2021 in terms of which, we have complied with all the
terms and conditions privy to the said tender and have
performed our part of obligations/covenants including
affording performance security of ` 56,87,841/- in the
form of Demand draft.
Albeit, despite things being thus, we are not in receipt of a
formal purchase order since all necessary arrangement for the
purpose of supply of 100mA Portable X-ray machine of Model
Mars-4.2 and Make-Allengers to the tune of 165 nos. are being
sourced and are kept ready for supply and independently the
allied goods including raw material for the purpose of
manufacturing the said machines have been coursed and kept
ready for last many months giving privy to unwanted demurrage
and unproductive investment.
Be it as it may, we request you to enlarge the Purchase Order
unto us on a war footing upon being in receipt of the same the
consignee goods will be consigned in terms of the tender. We
have spent considerable time and energy and have been vexed
for no fault of ours and nothing is pending at our end in relation
to compliance for you to enlarge the Purchase order.
Looking forward for your kind considerate and shift action in this
regard.”
Even then, no purchase order was issued in favour of the petitioner.
It is then the petitioner knocks at the doors of this Court.
12. During the pendency of the writ petition and after
issuance of notice, the 2nd respondent communicates to the
petitioner that the 2nd respondent is not proceeding with the tender.
The communication dated 03-11-2022 sent through electronic mail
“Subject:   Reg; Cancellation of NOA for the equipment 100mA
X-ray machine of IND 816.
•  As per TAC committee meeting decision held on
9.02.2022, NOA was given to M/s Allengers Medical
Systems Ltd., for the equipment 100mA X-Ray machine
for 100 nos at the unit of ` 18,95,947/-. In this regard,
M/s Allengers has submitted the security deposit in the
form     of  DD.    D.D.No.055361      HDFC    Bank    of
•  There was a difference in estimated rate and quoted rate,
hence TAC committee has decided not to proceed further
and cancel the NOA which is already given to M/s
The afore-quoted communication would indicate that the estimated
rate and the quoted rate were different. Therefore, the committee
decided not to proceed further and cancel the NOA which is already
given to the petitioner. It is then this Court recording entire facts
stayed the said communication by a detailed order dated 12-12-
2022 and further directed that no fresh tender can be called for the
same work and gave liberty to the 2nd respondent to continue
execution of the contract in terms of what was awarded to the
petitioner, which would remain subject to the result of the writ
petition. After this order, the 2nd respondent has put up vehement
opposition of any order to be passed in favour of the petitioner on
the ground that it has power to withdraw or cancel the tender at
any time and the decision to cancel the tender was taken on
account of corruption allegations against officers who were part of
the Tender Scrutiny Committee though no document as such is
placed before this Court. The learned counsel for the 2nd respondent
submits that her arguments are her objections and the submissions
are on the basis of instructions. I decline to accept both. If there
are corruption charges against officers of the Tender Scrutiny
Committee, it is for the appropriate Authority to take appropriate
action. It cannot result in cancellation of a valid tender.
13. A notice inviting tender can be withdrawn or cancelled
only upto a particular stage.    Once it crosses the said stage, any
unilateral cancellation would be an arbitrary exercise of power. The
Tender Inviting Authority is empowered to cancel the tender prior
to notification of award and execution of the contract. Once the
award is notified and contract is executed it becomes a concluded
process of tender. The tender then can be cancelled only on
violation of conditions of agreement or award by the tenderer. Any
unilateral cancellation of tender in the midstream or after execution
of the contract cannot be countenanced, more particularly, when
the contracting authority is a State under Article 12 of the
Constitution of India.
14.   Article 14 of the Constitution of India mandates that
every action of the State should pass through the golden thread of
non-arbitrariness. It is not in dispute that the 2nd respondent is a
State under Article 12 of the Constitution of India. Being a State it
would not behove of the 2nd respondent to act arbitrarily; arbitrary,
I say so, for the reason that the petitioner emerges as the
successful bidder in the tender pursuant to a notice inviting tender
which was by itself a re-tender; petitioner was called for price
negotiation; price negotiation was successful and the award was
notified in favour of the petitioner on 02-03-2022. The Notification
of award directed execution of contract and production of demand
draft for ` 56,87,841/-. The petitioner complied with all the
aforesaid conditions i.e., executes the agreement and submits the
demand draft for the amount way back in the month of March
2022. All that remained was issuance of purchase order by the 2nd
respondent in favour of the petitioner.
15.    Months pass by, but no purchase order was issued. The
petitioner represented, even then no purchase order was issued. It
is at that juncture the petitioner knocked the doors of this Court.
What comes about, after issuance of notice is the cancellation of
tender by way of bald and cryptic order/communication.            In the
considered view of this Court, the act of the 2nd respondent
cancelling the tender, after the tender process got concluded,
award being notified, and contract being signed with the petitioner,
would amount to arbitrary exercise of power and violative of tenets
of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
16.    It becomes apposite to refer to Rule 14 of the Rules and
it reads as follows:
“14. Clarification to tender documents:- At any time
after the issue of the tender documents and before the opening
of the tender, the tender Inviting authority may make any
changes, modifications or amendments to the tender documents
and shall send intimation of such change to all those who have
purchased the original tender documents.”
Rule 14 empowers the Tender Inviting Authority to make
changes only in the tender up to the stage of notification of award.
Once the award is notified, it is statutorily impermissible to
withdraw or cancel the tender except for violation of the tender
conditions. In the light of the aforesaid admitted facts, the
communication dated 03-11-2022 cannot but be held to be
arbitrary and being arbitrary, it cannot be permitted to operate and
requires to be obliterated and issuance of consequential directions
to the respondents to issue purchase order in favour of the
17. For the aforesaid reasons, I pass the following:
(i)   Writ Petition is allowed and the communication dated
03-11-2022 of the 2nd respondent stands quashed.
(ii)  A mandamus issues to the 2nd respondent to issue
purchase order in favour of the petitioner pursuant to
the Tender Notification dated 27-10-2021 and award of
tender in favour of the petitioner, within 2 weeks from
the date of receipt of a copy of this order, if not earlier.
All pending applications stand disposed, as a consequence.