2.               On the basis of the complaint lodged against the
respondent               who    was  employed     as    a   clerk     with     the
appellant(s)                relating   to   demands      for   bribe     by    the
respondent                to    clear   retirement        formalities,         the
respondent came to be arrested by the Central Bureau of
Investigation on 31st August, 2015. A case was lodged
sub-section                2   read   with    Section     13(i)(d)       of    the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988. The appellant also
(CA No.2794 of 2022 @ SLP(C) No.12061/2021
passed an order of suspension against the respondent on
3rd August, 2015. This suspension was no doubt revoked
on 15th September, 2015. Appellant served respondent a
notice of the departmental enquiry on 20th March, 2017.
This prompted the respondent to move a writ petition.
In the writ petition, the following order was passed on
“Let the affidavit-of-service filed in
Court today be kept with the record.
Let   an   affidavit-in-opposition            be
filed within a period of three weeks. Let an
affidavit-in-reply thereto, if any, be filed
within a period of one week thereafter.
Let this matter appear for hearing
in the Combined Monthly List of August, 2017
within   the   first   50    matters      under     that
heading.
In  the   affidavit-in-opposition           the
respondents shall disclose the nature of the
criminal    proceeding     pending      against      the
petitioner    including     the     names      of    the
witnesses in the criminal proceeding as well
as the departmental enquiry.
The respondents shall be at liberty
to proceed with the departmental enquiry but
shall not pass any final order without the
leave of the Court.”
(CA No.2794 of 2022 @ SLP(C) No.12061/2021
3.   The     departmental       proceedings           accordingly,
continued. According to the appellant(s), the enquiry
was held and the respondent participated in the enquiry
also. At the end of the enquiry, the appellant(s) filed
an application seeking leave to pass the final orders.
This   resulted  in,   the   learned     Single     Judge    passing
judgment dated 10th, February 2021. This decision was
impugned by the respondent before the Division Bench.
In the meantime, the respondent’s service came to be
dismissed from service by order dated 2nd March, 2021.
By   the   impugned  judgment      the    Division       Bench     has
proceeded to direct that the final order of dismissal
of the respondent be stayed till the disposal of the
criminal case. It was further ordered that the order of
the   dismissal   against     the    respondent       will     become
operative on the criminal proceeding culminating in an
order   of  conviction.   The   Court    also    notes     that    the
Court   was  exercising    power   of    the    Court    of    Appeal
provided in Order 41 Rule 33.
4. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties.
The complaint of the appellant(s) is that the Division
Bench of the High Court has erred in not noticing that
principally    it   is    not    desirable       to     delay      the
(CA No.2794 of 2022 @ SLP(C) No.12061/2021
departmental proceeding on account of pendency of a
criminal case. The principle that it is desirable to
delay the departmental proceeding when a criminal trial
is also pending, is owing to the fact that the employee
would be compelled to disclose his defence before the
departmental     proceedings.         The       principle          is
inapplicable. This is for the reason that by virtue of
the order, we have referred to dated 29.06.2007, the
learned Single Judge had permitted the enquiry to go
on.  According   to   the   appellant(s),        the    respondent
participated  in   the   enquiry     and   thereafter       on    the
culmination of the enquiry in keeping with the order
passed on 29.06.2017 after the judgment of the Single
Judge dated 10.02.2021 the order of dismissal came to
be passed. The further case of the appellant(s) is that
the order of dismissal was not the subject matter of
appeal. In other words, dismissal of the respondent was
not challenged before the Division Bench.
It is also contended that a verdict of acquittal in
the  trial  which   may  occur    in   the   future     would     not
affect    the   disciplinary       proceedings         as      these
proceedings    have     purport       different        from       the
disciplinary proceedings. The principles applicable to
(CA No.2794 of 2022 @ SLP(C) No.12061/2021
disciplinary          proceedings   are    different      is   apparently
the contention.
5. Per Contra, Mr. Mahesh Prasad, learned counsel for
the respondent would point out that the impugned order
does not call for any interference. He would further
submit          that   the  disciplinary      proceedings       were     not
conducted in a proper manner.
It is pointed out that the charges, the witnesses
and       evidence     in  the  Criminal     case    and   also     in   the
departmental proceedings are the same. He relied on
& Another1.           In M. Paul Antony (supra) it was held as
20. This decision has gone two steps
further than the earlier decisions by
1. The “advisability”, “desirability” or
“propriety” of staying the departmental
proceedings “go into the scales while
judging the advisability or desirability
of staying the disciplinary proceedings”
merely as one of the factors which cannot
be considered in isolation of other
circumstances     of    the    case.      But     the
charges in the criminal case must, in any
case, be of a grave and serious nature
involving complicated questions of fact
and law.
(CA No.2794 of 2022 @ SLP(C) No.12061/2021
2. One of the contending considerations
would be that the disciplinary enquiry
cannot — and should not be — delayed
unduly. If the criminal case is unduly
delayed, that may itself be a good ground
for going ahead with the disciplinary
enquiry even though the disciplinary
proceedings were held over at an earlier
stage. It would not be in the interests
of administration that persons accused of
serious misdemeanour should be continued
in     office    indefinitely        awaiting       the
result of criminal proceedings.
21. In    another     case,       namely, Depot
Manager,       A.P.     SRTC v. Mohd.          Yousuf
548 : AIR 1997 SC 2232] again it was held
that      there    is    no    bar     to     proceed
simultaneously        with     the     departmental
enquiry and trial of a criminal case
unless the charge in the criminal case is
of a grave nature involving complicated
questions of fact and law.
6.       We may further notice that in the said judgment
this        Court     took  note    of   the   judgment      in   State     of
Rajasthan v. B.K.Meena and Ors2 wherein it was inter
“The      only  ground    suggested      in   the    above
decisions as constituting a valid ground for
setting the disciplinary proceedings is that
the     findings    of   the   trial     court    in    the
(CA No.2794 of 2022 @ SLP(C) No.12061/2021
criminal case may not be prejudiced.” This
ground has however been hedged by providing
further that this may be done in the cases
of grave nature involving question of facts
and law”.
7.       In       Pandiyan   Roadways      Corpn.       Ltd.      v.     N.
Balakrishnan3 this Court noticed two different streams
“21. There are evidently two lines of
decisions of this Court operating in the
field. One being the cases which would
come within the purview of Capt. M. Paul
Anthony v. Bharat Gold Mines Ltd. [(1999)
3 SCC 679 : 1999 SCC (L&S) 810] and G.M.
Tank v. State of Gujarat [(2006) 5 SCC
446 : 2006 SCC (L&S) 1121] . However, the
second line of decisions show that an
honourable acquittal in the criminal case
determinative in respect of order of
punishment meted out to the delinquent
officer, inter alia, when: (i) the order
of acquittal has not been passed on the
same set of facts or same set of
evidence; (ii) the effect of difference
in the standard of proof in a criminal
trial and disciplinary proceeding has not
been       considered        (see Commr.           of
Police v. Narender Singh [(2006) 4 SCC
265 : 2006 SCC (L&S) 686] ), or; where
the delinquent officer was charged with
something more than the subject-matter of
the criminal case and/or covered by a
decision of the civil court (see G.M.
1121] , Jasbir Singh v. Punjab & Sind
(CA No.2794 of 2022 @ SLP(C) No.12061/2021
Assn. v. Noida [(2007)         10     SCC    385     :
(L&S) 672 : (2007) 2 Scale 131] , para
8.       We may notice a recent judgment in Karnataka Power
Transmission Corpn. Ltd. v. C. Nagaraju and Another4
wherein it was interalia held: -
“9. Acquittal by a criminal court would
not debar an employer from exercising the
power to conduct departmental proceedings
in     accordance     with     the     rules       and
regulations.       The      two       proceedings,
criminal and departmental, are entirely
different. They operate in different
fields and have different objectives.
[Ajit Kumar Nag v. Indian Oil Corpn.
1020] In the disciplinary proceedings,
the question is whether the respondent is
guilty of such conduct as would merit his
removal     from    service       or     a    lesser
punishment, as the case may be, whereas
in the criminal proceedings, the question
is     whether    the     offences       registered
against     him   under     the     PC     Act     are
established, and if established, what
sentence should be imposed upon him. The
standard of proof, the mode of inquiry
and the rules governing inquiry and trial
in both the cases are significantly
distinct      and    different.        [State       of
Rajasthan v. B.K. Meena, (1996) 6 SCC 417
9.       We would notice that this is a case where there is
a       criminal        case    against      the      respondent.         The
appellant(s)          as   employer    also    launched      disciplinary
(CA No.2794 of 2022 @ SLP(C) No.12061/2021
proceedings. It is undoubtedly true that this Court has
taken the view that when the charges are identical and
gives rise     to complicated issues of the fact and law
and evidence is the same, it may not be appropriate to
proceed     simultaneously     in   disciplinary       proceedings,
along with the criminal case. The rationale behind the
principle largely is that the employee who is facing
the disciplinary proceeding would necessarily have to
take a stand.     This in turn would amount to revealing
his defense and therefore prejudice the employee in the
criminal proceedings. No doubt, this Court has laid
down   that   it  is   not  an    absolute      embargo      and    the
principle is one to be applied based on the facts of
each case.
10.       Even applying the principles as such to the
facts, that is, examining its impact on the destiny of
this case, we find as follows:
When    the    respondent       was     faced       with      the
disciplinary    proceeding,     he    approached      the    High
Court.    Apparently,      he     sought      stay      of     the
proceedings.    The   High     Court     did    not    deem     it
appropriate    to   grant    stay    of    the    disciplinary
proceeding.   Instead,    as    noticed     by   us   by    order
dated 29.06.2017, the proceedings were allowed to
(CA No.2794 of 2022 @ SLP(C) No.12061/2021
be continued. According to the appellant(s) proper
enquiry was held and the respondent participated.
As to whether the enquiry was held properly or not
is not a matter on which we do express our opinion.
However, at the end of the enquiry as held by the
appellant in view of the order passed by the High
Court the appellant sought permission to pass the
final order, or the appropriate order of penalty.
This  led  to   the   disposal     of    the   writ     petition
itself by the learned Single Judge. The learned
Single Judge in the judgment noticed that this is a
case where the respondent had already revealed his
defence by participating in the proceedings. It is
further found that order dated 29.06.2017, which
permitted  the    enquiry    to    be   continued       was    not
challenged.   The   learned    Single     Judge    accordingly
permitted  the   disciplinary      proceedings       to   attain
finality   at    the    hands      of     the     disciplinary
authority. The disciplinary authority accordingly
passed  an  order    dismissing       the   respondent       from
service. No doubt this is during the pendency of
the appeal.
11. In the appeal,       the   order      of   the    disciplinary
(CA No.2794 of 2022 @ SLP(C) No.12061/2021
authority dismissing the respondent was not the subject
matter of challenge by way of an amendment in the writ
petition. The Division Bench has posed the question as
to what would happen if the criminal trial culminates
in acquittal and it is thereafter that the High Court
deemed it appropriate also apparently with reference to
its power under Order 41 Rule 33 to pass the order
keeping in abeyance the order of dismissal and it was
to  become    operative     upon   the    criminal      trial     going
against the respondent.
12. We would notice that what is most pertinent is the
aspect   that   in   the   challenge     in    the    writ    petition
against the holding of the disciplinary proceedings,
obtaining of an interim order in the nature of the case
was  of   relevance    and   importance      to   the    question     at
hand. The principle involved being that when parallel
proceedings are held on the basis of identical charges
and  the   same   evidence,     the    employee     should     not    be
allowed to disclose his defence. This aspect of the
matter  is   to   be  looked    into    with    reference       to   the
effect of the order dated 29.06.2017. As a result of
the said order passed during the pendency of the writ
petition, the respondent had allegedly participated in
(CA No.2794 of 2022 @ SLP(C) No.12061/2021
the enquiry and there would be no scope for applying
that principle as such. In such circumstances, we think
that  High    Court     may   not    have    been     justified      in
passing the impugned order the result of which is that
though   the   appellant(s)     conducted       the    disciplinary
proceeding as permitted by the learned Single Judge and
the respondent allegedly participated in it and all
that   remained     was   passing      of    an    order     by     the
disciplinary    authority    and   what    is    more    during     the
pendency   of   the   appeal   no   doubt     the    order    of    the
dismissal has been passed, the appellant is forced to
retain the respondent and the order is to remain in
suspended animation       to attain finality only              if the
criminal case is decided in the future and it ends in
the conviction of the respondent. We do not think that
the High Court was justified in passing such an order
in the facts of this case.
13. We may also observe that reference made to Order 41
Rule 33 of the Civil Procedure Code may not have been
justified.    Order   41   Rule   33    no   doubt     clothes      the
appellate court with an extra ordinary power, which
however is a rare jurisdiction. It is to reach justice
in the special facts of a case. It is not an ordinary
(CA No.2794 of 2022 @ SLP(C) No.12061/2021
rule to be applied across the board in all the appeals.
In fact, the principle is interalia no doubt that even
if there is no appeal by any of the parties in the
proceedings, an order can be passed in his favour in
the appeal carried by the other side. Any order which
ought to have been passed can be passed. In this case,
there  is  no  order  against    the    appellant(s)       by    the
learned Single Judge. The order of dismissal was not
specifically   the   subject    matter      of    challenge       as
noticed. We do not think in the facts of this case,
that it is a fit case where the High Court could have
supported the directions with reference to Order 41
14. The upshot   of  the  above    discussion       is   that    the
impugned judgment cannot be sustained. Accordingly, we
allow the appeal and set aside the impugned judgment.
We, however, make it crystal clear that it will be
without prejudice to the rights of the respondent to
challenge the disciplinary proceeding in any competent
forum. We leave open all remedies and contentions of
the respondent in this regard.
The appeal is allowed as above. There will
be no order as to costs.
(CA No.2794 of 2022 @ SLP(C) No.12061/2021
All  pending  applications       stand    disposed