WP No. 22751 of 2021
WP No. 22751 of 2021
WP No. 22751 of 2021
WP No. 22751 of 2021
1. The petitioner is before this Court seeking for the
following reliefs;
a. Quash the impugned order bearing No.VU KAA AA
BEM-2/VE PAA KAA / CR-35/2020-21/1948 dated
27.10.2021 passed by the second respondent, at
Annexure-R to this writ petition;
b. Declare that the second respondent has no
jurisdiction in view of Section 70(1) of the
Karnataka cooperative Societies Act on or after
20.06.2000 in respect of petitioner society
registered under the Karnataka Co-operative
c. This Hon’ble Court may be pleased to grant time to
pay the arrears of Rs.15,85,843/- in 30 equal
monthly instalments in view of the financial
difficulties faced by the petitioner society;
d. And pass such other appropriate orders as deemed
fit to grant in the facts and circumstances of the
case in the interest of justice and equity.
2. The petitioner is a Co-operative Society registered
under the Co-operative Societies Act in the year
1957. The petitioner was carrying on the business of
running a coffee shop in Bangalore.                  The said
business was going on very well till the year 2016.
However, thereafter, it started suffering losses more
so on account of Covid 19 as also on account of the
WP No. 22751 of 2021
Bruhat Bangalore Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) having
taken up the work of redoing Church Street, which
had closed the said road for repair for a period of
nearly a year preventing the customers from visiting
the coffee hotel being run by the petitioner.
3. The petitioner, during this time having closed the
said coffee shop had not made payment of the wages
and/or contributions as statutorily mandated but had
paid only 50% of the same. It is on this allegation
that the workmen had once earlier approached the
Deputy Registrar Co-operative Societies who had
passed an order stating that he would not be in a
position to pass an order on a representation but
however, a properly instituted dispute could be
considered.
4. Thereafter, the respondent-workmen approached the
authority under the Minimum Wages Act seeking for
payment of minimum wages.         The said authority,
WP No. 22751 of 2021
vide   its  order   dated   27.10.2021    upheld    the
contention of the workmen and directed for payment
of minimum wages. It is aggrieved by the same, the
petitioner is before this Court seeking for the
aforesaid reliefs.
5. Sri.Somashekar, learned counsel for the petitioner,
would submit that:
5.1. the authority under the Minimum Wages Act
has no jurisdiction and/or authority to decide
any dispute and/or claim made by the workmen
as regards the Co-operative Society in view of
the amendment which has been brought about
to Section 70 of the Karnataka Co-operative
Societies Act, 1959 in the year 2000.
5.2. that subsequent to the said amendment, any
dispute as regards any claim of an workmen/
employee as regards wages or otherwise would
have to be referred to the Registrar for decision
WP No. 22751 of 2021
and no Civil or Labour or Revenue Court or
Industrial Tribunal shall have the jurisdiction to
entertain any suit or other proceedings in
respect of such dispute.
5.3. In this regard, he relies upon Section 70(1) of
the Karnataka Co-operative Societies Act, 1959,
(for   short,    ‘the   Act’)   which   is  reproduced
hereunder for easy reference:
70. Dispute which may             be   referred    to
Registrar for decision:
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law
for the time being in force, if any dispute touching
the constitution, management or the business of a
co-operative society 7[xxxxx] arises—
(a) among members, past members and persons
claiming through a member, past member or
(b) between any member, past members or
persons claiming through a member, past members
or deceased member, and the society, its 1[board]
or any officer, agent or employee of the society ; or
(c) between the society or its 2[board] and any
past 3[board], any officer, agent or employee, or
any past officer, past agent or past employee or
the nominee, heirs or legal representative of any
deceased officer, deceased agent or deceased
employee of the society ; or
(d) between the society and any other co-operative
society, 4[or a credit agency.]
WP No. 22751 of 2021
Such dispute shall be referred to the Registrar for
decision and [no Civil or Labour or Revenue Court
or Industrial Tribunal] shall have jurisdiction to
entertain any suit or other proceedings in respect
of such dispute
5.4. Since in Section 70(1)(c) of the Act, a dispute
between the society or its Board and any past
Board or any Officer, agent or employee or any
past officer, past agent or past employee has
been used, the dispute in the present case
relating to the present employee would also be
covered by Section 70(1)(c) of the Act making
the    embargo      as    bought    about     by    the
amendment of the year 2000 applicable to the
claim of the present workmen and the said
dispute     and/or    claim   would    have     to   be
adjudicated     only    by  the   Registrar    of   Co-
operative Society and the Labour Court would
not have any jurisdiction.
5.5. Not only the Labour Court but any authority
constituted under any other Labour Enactment
WP No. 22751 of 2021
including the authority under the Minimum
Wages Act and/or the Payment of Wages Act
would also not have jurisdiction to decide any
dispute and/or claim as minimum wages or
payment of wages.
5.6. He refers to the decision of the Hon’ble Apex
Court in the case of Dharappa v. Bijapur
more particularly Paras, 8, 11, 14, 20 and 22
thereof, which are reproduced hereunder for
easy reference:
8. The appellant contends that amended Section 70
of the KCS Act took away the jurisdiction of Labour
Courts and Industrial Tribunals functioning under
the ID Act only when the amendments to the said
section as per Act 2 of 2000 came into effect on
20-6-2000, and it did not nullify an award made by
the Labour Court prior to that date, that is on 15-
10-1996. It was also contended that the
respondent not having raised any objection about
want of jurisdiction before the Labour Court, could
not subsequently be permitted to raise the plea of
want of jurisdiction before the High Court. The
respondent on the other hand, supported the
decision of the High Court and contended that the
Labour Court had no jurisdiction having regard to
Section 70 of the KCS Act. The respondent also
contended that the award of the Labour Court was
otherwise also unsustainable as the claim itself was
hopelessly barred by limitation, delay and laches.
Therefore, the following two questions arise for our
(i) Whether the jurisdiction of Labour Court under
the ID Act, was barred by Section 70 of the KCS
Act with reference to cooperative societies and if
so, from when.
(ii) Even if Labour Court had jurisdiction, whether
the appellant was entitled to file an application
under Section 10(4-A) of the ID Act in respect of a
cause of action which occurred in 1978.
11. The effect of the amendments to Section 70 of
the KCS Act, by Act 2 of 2000 is that if any dispute
(including any dispute relating to the terms of
employment, working conditions and disciplinary
action), arose between a cooperative society and
its employees or past employees or heirs/legal
representatives of a deceased employee, on and
from 20-6-2000, such dispute had to be referred to
the Registrar for decision and no civil court or
Labour Court or Industrial Tribunal would have
jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceeding in
respect of such dispute.
14. Though the Karnataka Cooperative Societies
Act, 1959 was reserved for the assent of the
President and received his assent on 11-8-1959,
the Amendment Act 19 of 1976 which added Clause
(d) to sub-section (2) of Section 70 (whereby a
dispute between a cooperative society and its
present or past employee(s) in regard to any
disciplinary action or working conditions was
deemed to be a dispute touching the constitution,
management, or the business of a cooperative
society), was neither reserved for, nor received the
assent of the President. In the absence of the
assent of the President, Clause (d) of Section 70(2)
could not be called in aid to contend that Section
70(1)(c) of the KCS Act would prevail over the
provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act.
Consequently, even after the 1976 Amendment to
WP No. 22751 of 2021
the KCS Act, the Labour Courts and Industrial
Tribunals functioning under the ID Act continued to
have jurisdiction in regard to disputes between a
society and its workmen if the cooperative society
answered the definition of an “industry” and the
dispute was an “industrial dispute”. But when sub-
section (1) of Section 70 of the KCS Act was
further amended by Act 2 of 2000 by specifically
excluding the jurisdiction of Labour Courts and
Industrial Tribunals with the simultaneous addition
of the words “notwithstanding anything contrary
contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947” in
Clause (d) of Section 70(2) of the KCS Act, the said
Amendment Act (Act 2 of 2000) was reserved for
the assent of the President and received such
assent on 18-3-2000. The amended provisions
were given effect from 20-6-2000. Therefore, only
with effect from 20-6-2000, was the jurisdiction of
Labour Courts and Industrial Tribunals excluded in
regard to disputes between a cooperative society
and its employees (or past employees) relating to
terms of employment, service conditions or
disciplinary action. It follows therefore that in the
year 1996, the Labour Court had the jurisdiction to
make an award in regard to such a dispute. The
High Court could not have interfered with it on the
ground that Section 70 of the KCS Act was a bar to
the jurisdiction of the Labour Court to decide the
20. The Full Bench of the Karnataka High Court in
353 (FB)] , decided two issues. Firstly, it upheld
the constitutional validity of amendment of Section
70 of the KCS Act by Act 2 of 2000. That question
does not arise for our consideration and the
decision thereon does not require to be disturbed.
Secondly, it upholds and reiterates the decision in
3 Kar LJ 519 (DB)] . To that extent, it is not good
22. The resultant position can be summarised
WP No. 22751 of 2021
(a) Even though Clause (d) was added in Section
70(2) with effect from 20-1-1976, Section 70(1)
did not exclude or take away the jurisdiction of the
Labour Courts and Industrial Tribunals under the ID
Act to decide an industrial dispute between the
society and its employees. Consequently, even
after insertion of Clause (d) in Section 70(2) with
effect from 20-1-1976, the Labour Courts and
Industrial Tribunals under the ID Act, continued to
have jurisdiction to decide disputes between
societies and their employees.
(b) The jurisdiction of Labour Courts and Industrial
Tribunals to decide the disputes between
cooperative societies and their employees was
taken away only when sub-section (1) and sub-
section (2)(d) of Section 70 were amended by Act
2 of 2000 and the amendment received the assent
of the President on 18-3-2000 and was brought
into effect on 20-6-2000.
(c) The jurisdiction to decide any dispute of the
nature mentioned in Section 70(2)(d) of the KCS
Act, if it answered the definition of industrial
dispute, vested thus:
(i) exclusively with Labour Courts and Industrial
Tribunals till 20-1-1976;
(ii) concurrently with Labour Courts/Industrial
Tribunals under the ID Act and with Registrar under
Section 70 of the KCS Act between 20-1-1976 and
20-6-2000; and
(iii) exclusively with the Registrar under Section 70
of the KCS Act with effect from 20-6-2000.
5.7. By relying on the said decision, he submits that
the Hon’ble Apex Court has categorically held
that the jurisdiction to decide any dispute of the
nature mentioned in Section 70(2)(d) of the Act
WP No. 22751 of 2021
is now vested with the Registrar Co-operative
Societies and/or the Labour Court or any other
authority is barred from considering the same.
5.8. He further relies upon the decision of the
Hon’ble Apex Court in the case of Krishan
Prasad Gupta v. Controller, Printing &
Stationery2 more particularly Paras 32, 33, 34,
35 and 36 thereof, which are reproduced
hereunder for easy reference:w
32. Under sub-section (1) of Section 33-C the
amount for the recovery of which proceedings
may be initiated by a workman, may also
consist of the amount due under a settlement or
an award. This may be compared with the
definition of ‘Wages’ as contained in Section
2(vi) of the Payment of Wages Act, which also
includes “remuneration payable under any
Award or Settlement”. It is obvious that if any
part of this amount is withheld or its payment is
unreasonably delayed, the employee can
recover it under the Payment of Wages Act.
33. In Town Municipal Council v. Presiding
(1969) 2 LLJ 651] , this Court while affirming
the decision of the Mysore High Court, since
reported in Town Municipal Council v. Labour
Court [(1968) 1 LLJ 779 (Mys)] , laid down that
questions relating to payment of minimum
wages to the employee at the agreed rate or
any amount for overtime work or for work on
off-days can be considered and decided not only
under the Payment of Wages Act but also under
Section 33-C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act,
1947, and that jurisdiction of the Labour Court
under Section 33-C(2) is not barred on account
of the provisions contained in the Payment of
34. This decision has been cited only as      an
effort to indicate that claim for wages can   be
entertained not only under the Payment        of
Wages Act but also under Section 33-C(2)      of
the Industrial Disputes Act.
35. Thus, the character and function of the
Labour Court under the Industrial Disputes Act
as also the Authority under the Payment of
Wages Act are similar in purpose and both are
designed to produce the same result particularly
as some of the provisions under both the Acts
prescribe the same thing to be done.
36. The Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and the
Payment of Wages Act, 1936 are, therefore,
“corresponding law” qua each other particularly
as both are part of the same social legislative
canopy made by Parliament for immediate
amelioration of workmen's plight resulting from
non-payment, or delayed payment or, for that
matter, short payment of their wages.
5.9. He also refers to the decision of the Allahabad
High     Court    in    Civil   Misc.   Writ   Petition
No.28261/2000 in the case of Sahakari Sangh
Ltd., vs. Presiding Officer, Labour Court
and Ors.,3 more particularly Para 9 thereof,
wherein the decision of the Hon’ble Apex Court
in Kishan Prasad Gupta vs. Controller,
Printing & Stationery had been applied. The
said Para 9 is reproduced hereunder for easy
reference:
“Thus, on a comparative reading of the
judgment of the learned Single Judge in the
case of Assistant Registrar, Cooperative
Societies (supra), and the judgment of the
Supreme Court reported in Ghaziabad Zila
Sahkari Bank (supra) and in Krishan Prasad
Gupta (supra), neither the Payment of Wages
Act, 1936 has any application nor the provisions
of the Industrial Disputes Act have any
application and the only remedy available to the
Respondent no..2 in the given facts of the case
is in under the U.P. Cooperative Societies Act,
1965 and the Rules framed there under”
5.10. Relying on the extracts from the decision in
Kishan Prasad Gupta and Sahakari Sangh’s
cases, Sri.Somashekar, learned counsel for the
petitioner submits that the Payment of Wages
Act, 1976 has no application for recovery of any
wages and as such, he submits that the
appropriate     authority     under    the   Minimum
WP No. 22751 of 2021
Wages Act could not have passed orders on an
application being made by the Workmen and
the same requires to be set aside.
6. Per contra, Sri.K.Subba Rao, learned Senior Counsel
appearing   for   the    respondent-workmen     would
6.1. that the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 is a Special
Enactment, which has been enacted with the
purpose and intent of securing the wages of a
workmen and being a Special Enactment, the
same would have to be given preference over
the Karnataka Co-operative Societies Act, 1959
and/or the amendment made thereto and as
such, he submits that the workmen cannot be
deprived of the mechanism prescribed under
the said enactment.
6.2. By referring to certain notifications which have
been issued under the Minimum Wages Act, he
WP No. 22751 of 2021
submits that the employment in coffee houses
and/or coffee hotels is a scheduled employment
under the Minimum Wages Act where the
minimum wages have been prescribed for such
workmen. The same having been detailed and
the said establishment having identified and the
minimum wages fixed, it is only the recovery
proceedings which are prescribed under the
Payment of Wages Act which is required to be
applied which was so applied by the authority
under the Minimum Wages Act and the amount
directed to be recovered and as such, he
submits that there being no dispute as such,
the   Karnataka     Co-operative   Societies  Act,
whether    prior     to    amendment     or   post
amendment     would      not apply   to minimum
wages.
6.3. There is no dispute which is required to be
decided by the authority under the Minimum
WP No. 22751 of 2021
Wages Act and as such, no such dispute could
be referred to or decided by the Registrar under
the     Karnataka         Co-operative     Societies
Registration Act since it is the only question
that is required to be decided is whether the
minimum wages prescribed have been paid or
not, the employment being scheduled to the
Minimum Wages Act.           On these grounds, he
submits that the authority under Minimum
Wages    Act  being      the  proper   and   correct
authority has exercised jurisdiction in a proper
and correct manner and passed an order which
need not be interfered with by this Court.
7. Heard   Sri.Somashekar,       learned   counsel   for  the
petitioner and Sri.Bhoje Gowda T.Koller, learned AGA
for respondents No.1 to 3 and Sri.K.Subba Rao,
learned Senior Counsel for respondents No.4 to 13 -
workmen and perused papers.
WP No. 22751 of 2021
8.  The points that would arise for determination by this
1)   Whether the amendment made to Section
70 of the Karnataka Co-operative Societies
Act, 1959 would impose an embargo on an
authority under the Minimum Wages Act to
consider any claim for recovery of
minimum wages and/or would make the
remedies available under the Minimum
Wages Act, 1948 read with the Payment of
Wages Act, 1936 inapplicable to a claim
for   minimum       wages     made     by   the
2)   Whether a claim made by a workmen for
payment of minimum wages is an
industrial dispute which is mentioned and
covered by the decision of the Hon’ble
Apex Court in the case of Dharappa v.
Union Ltd. reported in (2007) 9 SCC 109?
3)   Whether the order passed by the authority
under the Minimum Wages Act requires
interference?
9.  I answer the above points as under:-
10. Answer to Point No.1: Whether the amendment
made to Section 70 of the Karnataka Co-
WP No. 22751 of 2021
operative Societies Act, 1959 would impose an
embargo on an authority under the Minimum
Wages Act to consider any claim for recovery of
minimum wages and/or would make the
remedies available under the Minimum Wages
Act, 1948 read with the Payment of Wages Act,
1936 inapplicable to a claim for minimum
wages made by the workmen?
10.1. Section   70  of   the  Karnataka    Co-operative
Societies Act, 1959 (for short, ‘the Act’) has
been reproduced hereinabove.
10.2. The said Act is a State Enactment, which has
been brought into force in order to administer
the Co-operative Societies in the State of
10.3. Section 70 of the Act deals with a dispute which
are to be referred to the Registrar for a decision
which includes in terms of Section 70(1)(c) of
the Act, dispute between the Society, any
officer, agent or employee.    Any such dispute
shall be referred to the Registrar for decision
and no Civil, Labour or Revenue Court or
WP No. 22751 of 2021
Industrial Tribunal shall have jurisdiction to
entertain any suit or other proceedings in
respect of such dispute.
10.4. The `Statement of Objects and Reasons’ of
Minimum Wages Act, 1948 reads as under:
The justification for statutory fixation of
minimum wage is obvious. Such provisions
which exist in more advanced countries are
even necessary in India, where workers'
organizations are yet poorly developed and the
workers' bargaining power is consequently
poor.
2. The Bill provides for fixation by the Provincial
Governments      of      minimum    wages     for
employments covered by Schedule to the Bill.
The items in the Schedule are those where
sweated labour is more prevalent or where
there is a big chance of exploitation of labour.
After sometime, when some experience is
gained, more categories of employment can be
added and the Bill provides for addition to the
Schedule. A higher period is allowed for fixation
of minimum wages for agricultural labour as
administrative difficulties in this case will be
more than in other employments covered by
the Schedule. The Bill provides for periodical
revision of wages fixed.
3. Provisions had been made for appointment of
Advisory Committees and Advisory Boards, the
latter for co-ordination work of the Advisory
Committees. The Committees and the Boards
will have equal representation of employers
WP No. 22751 of 2021
and workmen. Except on initial fixation of
minimum     wages, consultation      with the
Advisory Committee will be obligatory on all
occasions of revision.
4. In cases where an employer pays less than the
minimum wages fixed by the Provincial
Government a summary procedure has been
provided for recovery of the balance with
penalty and subsequent prosecution of the
offending party.
5. It is not ordinarily proposed to make any
exemptions in regard to employees of
undertakings     belonging   to   the   Central
Government except that difficulties might arise
when the sphere of duty of such an employer
covers more than one province and where the
rates of minimum wages fixed by the different
provinces may be different. For this purpose a
provision has been included that the minimum
wages fixed by a Provincial Government will
not apply to employees in any undertaking
owned by the Central Government or
employees of a Federal Railway, except with
the consent of the Central Government.
10.5. It is trite law that there is no justification for
payment of wages less than the minimum
wages and further that an organization which
pays less than minimum wages have no right to
exist as held by the Hon’ble Apex Court in the
WP No. 22751 of 2021
case    of   Bakshish     Singh      vs.   Darshan
10.6. In terms of Section 3 of the Minimum of Wages
Act, 1948, the appropriate Government shall fix
the   minimum     rates   of    wages    payable to
employees      employed      in   an   employment
specified in Part I or Part II of the Schedule and
further for employees employed in Part II of the
Schedule, the State would also be at liberty to
fix minimum wages for the whole or part of the
10.7. It is not in dispute that an employment in a
hotel is a scheduled employment where the
minimum wages have been fixed.             From the
Statement of Objects and Reasons of the
Minimum Wages Act, it           is clear that the
minimum wages are required to be fixed for all
industries.   In the event of the said minimum
wages not being paid, the recovery proceedings
have been prescribed under the Payment of
10.8. I am of the considered opinion that the dispute
which has been referred to in Section 70 of the
Act cannot cover the non-payment of wages
under the Minimum Wages Act inasmuch as
there    is   no      dispute   which    requires
determination. It is only the implementation of
the Minimum Wages Act, which is required to
be done. In the event of the employer making
payment of minimum wages, no order need to
be passed.     However, in the event of the
employer not making payment of minimum
wages, there would be a direction required to
be issued to the employer to make payment of
the minimum wages.
10.9. The context of dispute which has been used in
Section 70 of the Act is different from a claim
WP No. 22751 of 2021
for minimum wages which is the case in the
present matter.      The decision in Darappa‘s1
case was that relating to industrial dispute
relating  to   disciplinary  action  or working
conditions of a workmen.         The decision in
Kishan Prasad Gupta was a claim as regards
payment to be made under a settlement or an
award. Sahakari Sangh Limited’s case3 also
deals with an industrial dispute.
10.10. Thus, I am of the considered opinion that the
said decisions would not be appliable in the
present case and would not come to the rescue
of the petitioner. In the present case as afore
observed, the claim is for minimum wages in a
scheduled employment, the minimum wages
being notified by the Appropriate Government.
If the said payment is not made, then a claim
for recovery of the amount could be made
under the Payment of Wages Act, 1936.
WP No. 22751 of 2021
10.11. As such, I answer Point No.1 by holding that
Section   70   of   the   Karnataka  Co-operative
Societies Act, 1959        does not  impose   any
embargo on an authority under the Minimum
Wages Act to consider any claim for recovery of
minimum     wages        and  as  such, the   said
authority could consider an application for
payment of minimum wages, which if not paid,
could be recovered under the provisions of
Payment of Wages Act, 1936.
11.  Answer to Point No.2: Whether a claim made by
a workmen for payment of minimum wages is
an industrial dispute which is mentioned and
covered by the decision of the Hon’ble Apex
Court in the case of Dharappa v. Bijapur Coop.
Milk Producers Societies Union Ltd. reported in
11.1. In answer to Point No.1, I have already held
that the dispute contemplated under Section 70
of the Act is one contemplated under Industrial
Disputes Act, 1947 and not as regards non-
payment of minimum wages.           The minimum
WP No. 22751 of 2021
wages, if not paid, would only give raise to a
claim for payment of minimum wages and not a
dispute for adjudication.   In Darappa’s case1,
the Hon’ble Apex Court was ceased of a dispute
between     the  Co-operative    Society   and   a
workmen arising out of an industrial dispute,
which is not the case in the present matter.    In
fact, the industrial Disputes Act, 1947 does not
cover a claim of minimum wages.       A claim for
minimum wages has to be made under the
11.2. Hence, I answer point No.2 by holding that the
claim made by a workmen for payment of
minimum wages is not a dispute covered under
Section 70 of Karnataka Co-operative Societies
Act, 1959 nor is it covered by the decision by the
Hon’ble Apex Court in the Darappa’s1.
12. Answer to point No.3: Whether the order passed
by the authority under the Minimum Wages Act
requires interference?
WP No. 22751 of 2021
12.1. In view of my finding on Point No.1 and 2, there
is no infirmity in the order passed by the
authority under the Minimum Wages Act, 1948
requiring interference.
12.2. When the matter was listed for pronouncement of
judgment, both the counsel requested this Court
not to pronounce the judgment and they will try
and resolve the matter amicably.      Subsequent
thereto, both the petitioner and respondents have
filed their respective memo of calculations which
are at variance with each other.
12.3. Despite sufficient time having been granted, they
have been unable to arrive at any settlement and
as such, requested this Court go ahead with the
pronouncement of judgment.
13. Answer to point No.4: What Order?
13.1. There being no grounds, which have been made
out, I pass the following:
WP No. 22751 of 2021
1) The Writ Petition is dismissed.
2) The workmen are entitled to work out their
remedy before the appropriate forum.