This   appeal,  by   special    leave,   registers    a
challenge to an order dated 12th October, 2009 passed
by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh
(hereafter ‘the High Court’, for short) dismissing
Civil Writ Petition No.9191 of 2009 presented by the
appellant   and  relegating   it   to  the   remedy   of  an
appeal under section 33 of the Haryana Value Added
Tax Act, 2003 (hereafter ‘the VAT Act’, for short).
2.   Two   questions   emerge    for   decision    on   this
appeal.   First, whether the High Court was justified
in   declining    interference      on   the    ground    of
availability of an alternative remedy of appeal to
the appellant under section 33 of the VAT Act, which
it had not pursued. Should the answer to the first
question   be  in   the   negative,   we   would   next  be
required to decide whether to remit the writ petition
to the High Court for hearing it on merits or to
examine the correctness or otherwise of the orders
impugned before the High Court.
3.   It  appears   on   a  perusal   of  the  order   under
challenge   in  this   appeal   that   the  appellant   had
questioned the jurisdiction of the Deputy Excise and
for short) to reopen proceedings, in exercise of suo
motu revisional power conferred by section 34 of the
VAT Act, and to pass final orders holding that the
two assessment orders, both dated 28th           February,
2007   passed   by   the   ETO-cum-Assessing     Authority,
Kurukshetra (hereafter ‘the Assessing Authority’, for
short) for the assessment years 2003-04 and 2004-05
suffered    from    illegality     and    impropriety    as
delineated therein, viz. that the Assessing Authority
erred in levying tax on mosquito repellant (a product
manufactured by the appellant) @ 4% instead of 10%.
Keeping in view the objection raised by counsel for
the respondents that without exhausting the remedy of
appeal provided by section 33 of the VAT Act “it
would not be permissible to entertain this petition”
and upon consideration of the decision of this Court
reported in (1975) 2 SCC 436 (Titagarh Paper Mills
vs. Orissa State Electricity Board & Anr.) based on
which it was contended on their behalf that where any
right or liberty arises under a particular Act then
the  remedy  available  under  that   Act   has  to  be
availed, the High Court was of the opinion that there
can be no presumption that the appellate authority
would not be able to grant relief sought in the writ
petition; hence, the writ petition was dismissed and
the  appellants  were   relegated  to   the   appellate
4.   Before answering the questions, we feel the urge
to say a few words on the exercise of writ powers
conferred by Article 226 of the Constitution having
come across certain orders passed by the high courts
holding writ petitions as “not maintainable” merely
because  the  alternative   remedy  provided    by  the
relevant statutes has not been pursued by the parties
desirous of invocation of the writ jurisdiction. The
power to issue prerogative writs under Article 226 is
plenary in nature. Any limitation on the exercise of
such  power  must  be  traceable    in   the  Constitution
itself. Profitable reference in this regard may be
made   to  Article   329   and   ordainments     of   other
similarly   worded   articles    in    the   Constitution.
Article 226 does not, in terms, impose any limitation
or restraint on the exercise of power to issue writs.
While it is true that exercise of writ powers despite
availability of a remedy under the very statute which
has been invoked and has given rise to the action
impugned in the writ petition ought not to be made in
a  routine   manner,  yet,   the   mere    fact  that   the
petitioner before the high court, in a given case,
has not pursued the alternative remedy available to
him/it cannot mechanically be construed as a ground
for its dismissal. It is axiomatic that the high
courts (bearing in mind the facts of each particular
case) have a discretion whether to entertain a writ
petition or not. One of the self-imposed restrictions
on the exercise of power under Article 226 that has
evolved through judicial precedents is that the high
courts should normally not entertain a writ petition,
where an effective and efficacious alternative remedy
is available. At the same time, it must be remembered
that mere availability of an alternative remedy of
appeal   or   revision,    which     the   party    invoking    the
jurisdiction of the high court under Article 226 has
not pursued, would not oust the jurisdiction of the
high    court    and    render      a    writ     petition     “not
maintainable”.     In   a   long    line    of   decisions, this
Court   has   made   it   clear    that    availability      of  an
alternative remedy does not operate as an absolute
bar to the “maintainability” of a writ petition and
that the rule, which requires a party to pursue the
alternative remedy provided by a statute, is a rule
of policy, convenience and discretion rather than a
rule   of   law.   Though    elementary,       it   needs    to  be
restated          that           “entertainability”             and
“maintainability”      of   a    writ petition      are   distinct
concepts. The fine but real distinction between the
two ought not to be lost sight of. The objection as
to “maintainability” goes to the root of the matter
and if such objection were found to be of substance,
the   courts    would   be    rendered      incapable     of   even
receiving    the   lis   for    adjudication.      On   the   other
hand, the question of “entertainability” is entirely
within the realm of discretion of the high courts,
writ  remedy    being    discretionary.    A    writ  petition
despite being maintainable may not be entertained by
a high court for very many reasons or relief could
even be refused to the petitioner, despite setting up
a sound legal point, if grant of the claimed relief
would not further public interest. Hence, dismissal
of a writ petition by a high court on the ground that
the petitioner has not availed the alternative remedy
without, however, examining whether an exceptional
case has been made out for such entertainment would
not be proper.
5.   A little after the dawn of the Constitution, a
Constitution    Bench   of   this   Court   in   its  decision
reported in 1958 SCR 595 (State of Uttar Pradesh vs.
Mohd. Nooh) had the occasion to observe as follows:
“10. In the next place it must be borne in mind
that there is no rule, with regard to certiorari as
there is with mandamus, that it will lie only where
there is no other equally effective remedy. It is
well established that, provided the requisite
grounds exist, certiorari will lie although a right
of   appeal   has    been   conferred   by   statute,
(Halsbury’s Laws of England, 3rd Edn., Vol. 11, p.
130 and the cases cited there). The fact that the
aggrieved party has another and adequate remedy may
be taken into consideration by the superior court
in arriving at a conclusion as to whether it
should, in exercise of its discretion, issue a writ
of   certiorari   to   quash   the  proceedings   and
decisions of inferior courts subordinate to it and
ordinarily the superior court will decline to
interfere until the aggrieved party has exhausted
his other statutory remedies, if any. But this rule
requiring the exhaustion of statutory remedies
before the writ will be granted is a rule of
policy, convenience and discretion rather than a
rule of law and instances are numerous where a writ
of certiorari has been issued in spite of the fact
that the aggrieved party had other adequate legal
6.   At the end of the last century, this Court in
paragraph 15 of the its decision reported in (1998) 8
SCC 1 (Whirlpool Corporation vs. Registrar of Trade
Marks, Mumbai and Others) carved out the exceptions
on  the   existence    whereof    a  Writ Court    would  be
justified in entertaining a writ petition despite the
party    approaching    it    not    having    availed   the
alternative remedy provided by the statute. The same
(i)     where the writ petition seeks enforcement
of any of the fundamental rights;
(ii)    where there is violation of principles of
natural justice;
(iii) where    the   order  or   the  proceedings   are
wholly without jurisdiction; or
(iv)    where the vires of an Act is challenged.
7.   Not too long ago, this Court in its decision
reported    in  2021   SCC    OnLine   SC   884   (Assistant
Commissioner of State Tax vs. M/s. Commercial Steel
Limited)    has   reiterated    the   same   principles   in
8.   That apart, we may also usefully refer to the
decisions of this Court reported in (1977) 2 SCC 724
(State of Uttar Pradesh & ors. vs. Indian Hume Pipe
Co. Ltd.) and (2000) 10 SCC 482 (Union of India vs.
State of Haryana). What appears on a plain reading of
the former decision is that whether a certain item
falls within an entry in a sales tax statute, raises
a pure question of law and if investigation into
facts is unnecessary, the high court could entertain
a writ petition in its discretion even though the
alternative remedy was not availed of; and, unless
exercise of discretion is shown to be unreasonable or
perverse,   this Court  would   not  interfere. In  the
latter decision, this Court found the issue raised by
the   appellant  to  be    pristinely  legal  requiring
determination by the high court without putting the
appellant through the mill of statutory appeals in
the hierarchy. What follows from the said decisions
is that where the controversy is a purely legal one
and it does not involve disputed questions of fact
but only questions of law, then it should be decided
by the high court instead of dismissing the writ
petition on the ground of an alternative remedy being
9.   Now, reverting to the facts of this appeal, we
find that the appellant had claimed before the High
Court that the suo motu revisional power could not
have been exercised by the Revisional Authority in
view of the existing facts and circumstances leading
to the only conclusion that the assessment orders
were  legally    correct    and   that    the   final   orders
impugned   in   the   writ    petition    were   passed   upon
assuming    a    jurisdiction     which      the   Revisional
Authority   did   not   possess.     In   fine,   the   orders
impugned  were    passed   wholly    without    jurisdiction.
Since  a   jurisdictional      issue    was   raised  by   the
appellant in the writ petition questioning the very
competence of the Revisional Authority to exercise
suo motu power, being a pure question of law, we are
of the considered view that the plea raised in the
writ petition did deserve a consideration on merits
and the appellant’s writ petition ought not to have
been thrown out at the threshold.
10. Reliance     placed   by    the   High     Court  on   the
decision  in   Titagarh    Paper   Mills    (supra),   in  our
view,   was   completely      misplaced.     The   respondent
Electricity Board had levied coal surcharge on the
appellant   company    in   terms    of  an  agreement.   Such
agreement    contained     an    arbitration    agreement   in
clause    23.   Instead     of    pursuing   its   remedy   in
arbitration,     the   appellant     company   unsuccessfully
invoked    the    writ   jurisdiction.      This   Court   was
approached whereupon it was held that in view of the
issues raised, there was no reason why the appellant
company should not pursue its remedy in arbitration,
having solemnly accepted clause 23 of the agreement,
and instead invoke the extraordinary jurisdiction of
the high court under Article 226 of the Constitution
to determine questions which really form the subject
matter of the arbitration agreement. This decision
could not have been of any relevance having regard to
the issue presented for resolution before the High
Court   by    the    appellant,     particularly    when   the
disputes inter se were not referable to arbitration.
11. We    have   reasons    to    believe,   considering   the
nature   of   objection    raised    by  the  respondents   as
recorded by the High Court in the impugned order,
that   the   High    Court    had   mistakenly   referred   to
Titagarh Paper Mills (supra) while intending to rely
on a different decision of this Court on an appeal
preferred by the same party, reported in (1983) 2 SCC
433  (Titaghur    Paper  Mills  Co.   Ltd.  vs.   State  of
Orissa).   While    upholding   the   impugned   order   of
dismissal of the writ petition, where an order passed
by the Sales Tax Officer was under challenge, this
Court in Titaghur Paper Mills Co. Ltd. (supra) held
that the challenge being confined to the regularity
of proceedings before the Sales Tax Officer and there
being no suggestion that the concerned officer had no
jurisdiction to make an assessment, the decision in
Mohd. Nooh (supra) was clearly distinguishable since
in that case there was total lack of jurisdiction.
This Court also held that under the scheme of the
relevant Act, there was a hierarchy of authorities
before which the petitioners can get adequate redress
against   the   wrongful  acts  complained    of  and  that
since the authority of the concerned officer to make
an assessment was not in question, recourse ought to
be  taken   by   initiating  proceedings   thereunder.   As
noted above, the very jurisdiction of the Revisional
Authority     having   been   questioned    in   the   writ
petition,    the   impugned  order   of  the   High   Court
dismissing the writ petition without examining the
merits of the challenge cannot be sustained even if
the High Court were to rely on Titaghur Paper Mills
Co. Ltd. (supra) to support such order.
12. The High Court by dismissing the writ petition
committed a manifest error of law for which the order
under   challenge    is   unsustainable.    The    same  is,
accordingly, set aside.
13. Moving     on   to   decide    the   second    question,
ordering a remand is an available option for us.
However, having regard to the lapse of time (almost a
life   term   of   fourteen    years)   since    the  orders
impugned in the writ petition were made, we feel that
it would not be in the best interests of justice to
remit the matter to the High Court. Since prior to
reserving judgment on this appeal we had heard the
parties on the merits of the jurisdictional issue
that the appellant had raised before the High Court,
it  is   time   to  rule   on   the  jurisdiction    of  the
14.  The   appellant    is  engaged in    the   business  of
manufacturing, marketing      and    sales    of   household
insecticide products in various forms, viz. mosquito
coils, mats, refills,         aerosols,       baits      and
chalks under the popular brand name “Good Knight” and
“Hit”   from,    inter   alia,    its   sales    office   at
Kurukshetra, and is an ‘assessee’ under the VAT Act.
15.  In   terms   of  section 7    of  the   VAT   Act,  the
taxable goods have been classified under Schedules A,
B and C. It is found from Schedule C (as originally
enacted) that pesticides, weedicides and insecticides
were included in Entry 1 and taxable @ 4%.
16. Returns    were   filed   by  the  appellant    for  the
Assessment Years 2003-04 and 2004-05 declaring its
gross   turnover    from   manufacturing    and   sales   of
insecticides and pesticides, besides other consumer
goods. Such returns were duly accepted. However, in
view  of   an  amendment    in  Entry  67  of   Schedule   C
introduced by a notification dated 30th June, 2005,
notices were issued by the Assessing Authority as to
why tax liability @ 10% instead of 4% should not be
imposed.   Upon   hearing    the  representative     of  the
appellant, orders dated 28th February, 2007 and 28th
March, 2008 were passed by the Assessing Authority
for   the   Assessment    Years    2003-04   and    2004-05,
respectively, accepting the classification of goods
and the rate of tax as stated by the appellant in its
returns, i.e. 4%.
17.   Subsequently, the Revisional Authority called
for the assessment records of the appellant for the
Assessment Years 2003-04 and 2004-05 for revision of
the   assessment     on     classifying    the     household
insecticide   products   of   the   appellant   as  mosquito
repellants and taxable at the higher rate of tax,
i.e.   10%,   instead    of    4%.   Initially, show-cause
notices seeking to revise the assessments made for
the Assessment Years 2003-04 and 2004-05 were issued,
and  such   exercise   was   followed   up  by   identically
worded final orders, both dated 2nd March, 2009.
18. Several    legal  questions     including   validity  of
certain notifications were raised by the appellant
before the High Court in its writ petition. Apart
from the question as to whether mosquito repellants
are goods classifiable as insecticides, pesticides,
weedicides,    etc.,   one    other   question    which  the
appellant sought to raise was whether an amendment in
the schedule of classification/rates of tax could be
applied to completed assessments for the assessment
years  prior   to  the   amendment    coming   into  effect.
However, before us, the only limited question which
the appellant raised was, whether the orders of the
Revisional    Authority,     both   dated   2nd  March,    2009,
seeking   to    revise    the    orders   of    the   Assessing
Authority dated 28th February, 2007 and 28th March,
2008 pertaining to the Assessment Years 2003-04 and
2004-05, have been issued in exercise of jurisdiction
conferred by law.
19. For    facility     of    understanding,     it   would   be
convenient     at    this      stage    to     reproduce     the
material part    from    the   revisional    order   passed   in
respect of the Assessment Year 2004-05, below:
“I, xxxxxxx, Dy. Excise & Taxation Commissioner-cum-
Revisional Authority, Kurukshetra called for the
assessment record of M/s Godrej Sara Lee Ltd., Pipli
holding TIN xxxxxxx for the assessment year 2004-05.
Shri     xxxxxxx,     ETO-cum-Assessing      Authority
Kurukshetra   passed    this   assessment   order   on
28.3.2008. On examination of the assessment record,
I was prima facie of the view that the said
assessment   order   suffered   from   the   following
illegalities and impropriates (sic, improprieties):
The assessing authority erred in levying       tax  on
Mosquito Repellant @ 4% Instead of 10%
Accordingly, a show cause notice was issued for
2.3.2009. On 2.3.2009 Shri Ajay Goel, Advocate of
the firm appeared along with application for
adjournment on the plea that due to closing month of
March, 2009 the dealer is unable to get the case
decided. The application for adjournment is rejected
as the dealer has not to produce any account books
or is not to prepare any documents only law point is
involved in the case. The dealer has sold mosquito
repellant and deposited tax @ 4%. The Hon'ble
Supreme Court of India in the case of M/s Sonic
Electrochem and another vs. STO and other (1998) 12-
PHT-215 (SC) held that Jet Mat Mosquito Repellant is
not pesticides/insecticides. Therefore, these goods
are general goods and liable to tax at general rate
of tax. Hence, a notice was issued to the dealer to
explain as to why tax should not be levied at
general rate of tax on the sale of mosquito
repellants. The counsel of the firm has not offered
any arguments on the issue. In view of the decision
of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of M/s Sonic
Electrochem and another vs. STO and other (1998) 12-
PHT-215 (SC), it is unarguable clear that mosquito
repellant mats being unscheduled goods are taxable
at general rate of tax. Confusion was also cleared
with the amendment to entry 67 vide notification
dated 1.7.2005.
In view of the above facts, it is clear that
assessing authority while framing assessment has
erred in levying tax @ 4% on mosquito repellants.
Hence the assessment order dated 28.3.2008 is
revised u/s 34 of the Act ibid as under:
(Mosquito Repellants)        Tax already assessed
By the AA in original
Issue Tax Demand Notice Challan for Rs.31,73,357
along with a copy of the order to the dealer.”
20. The    assessment    order dated 28th     March, 2008 of
the Assessing Authority under section 15 of the VAT
Act pertaining to Assessment Year 2004-05, which was
sought to be revised by the Revisional Authority, had
taken into consideration the decision of this Court
reported in (1998) 6 SCC 397 (Sonic Electrochem vs.
S.T.O.). The appellant therein having sold ‘Jet Mat’,
a mosquito repellent, it was ruled by this Court that
the same was liable to tax @ 10%. Considering such
decision, a notice was issued to the appellant to
explain as to why tax should not be levied @ 10% on
the sale of ‘Godrej Mat’. Put to notice, it was inter
alia argued on behalf of the appellant before the
Assessing   Authority    that  the   Haryana   Tax  Tribunal
(hereafter ‘the Tribunal’, for short), constituted
under section 57 of the VAT Act, by its order dated
21st November, 2001 had the occasion to dismiss a
petition filed by the department seeking review of an
earlier   order dated 22nd    March, 2000.   The   Assessing
Authority extracted the relevant part of the order
21st November, 2001 of the Tribunal passed on the
review petition in its order dated 28th March, 2008,
reading as follows:
“The only limited question to be addressed is
whether the ratio of the judgment of the Hon'ble
Apex Court delivered in the above mentioned case of
M/s Sonic Electrochem and others is applicable in
the present case? This judgment of the Hon'ble
Supreme Court is clearly distinguishable from the
facts of the present case as the said judgment was
delivered in special circumstances were there was
specific an entry 129 dealing with mosquito
repellants and hence the Court held that judgment
would be covered under entry 129. However, there is
no such corresponding entry in the Haryana General
Sales Tax Act and therefore the issue would be
whether mosquito repellant would fall within the
entry dealing with insecticide etc. or not? The
Hon'ble Madras High Court, the Tribunal in the case
of Transelektra Domestic Products Pvt. Ltd., and
others vs. Commercial Tax Officer, Porur Assessment
Circle Madras and others has clearly held that
mosquito repellants containing 4% Alethrin' was an
insecticide and relying on the judgment of the
Hon'ble Madras High Court, the Tribunal in the case
of M/s Balsara Hygiene Products Ltd. Kundli
(Sonepat) vs State of Haryana has also held that
Mosquito Repellants is an insecticide and hence
liable to concessional rate of tax. The same view
has been taken by the Hon'ble Tribunal in the
impugned order and I do not find any infirmity in
this order. It has not been contested that Jet Mats
does contain 'Allethrin' which is an insecticide.
Hence, in these circumstances, the present review
petition is dismissed.”
Being bound by the decision of the Tribunal, the
Assessing Authority formed an opinion and returned a
finding   that   he   had   no  other   alternative   but   to
vacate the notice issued by him proposing to levy tax
@ 10% instead of 4% and proceeded to do so.
21. Appearing     in    support   of   the   appeal,    Mr. V.
Lakshmikumaran, learned counsel, contended that the
Assessing Authority having passed the order dated 28th
March, 2008 taking into consideration the decision of
the   Tribunal,     which    in   turn    distinguished    the
decision   in   Sonic    Electrochem     (supra),   and   such
decision   having    attained    finality,    the  Revisional
Authority could not have assumed a jurisdiction to
suo  motu   issue   the   impugned show-cause     notices   as
well as the final revisional orders under section 34
of the VAT Act holding that mosquito repellent mats
being unscheduled goods, are taxable at the general
rate   of   tax.   According     to  him,    the   Revisional
Authority   was   as   much   bound  by   the  order  of   the
Tribunal as the Assessing Authority was having regard
to the similarity of issues involved and it was not
open to such authority to take a view different from
the one expressed by the Tribunal.
22. Our attention was drawn by Mr. Lakshmikumaran to
the decision of this Court reported in 1992 SUPP (1)
SCC  443  (Union   of   India   and   Ors.   Vs.   Kamlakshi
Finance   Corporation     Ltd.)    in    support    of   the
proposition   that   in   disposing     of   quasi-judicial
issues before them, the Revenue Officers are bound by
the decisions of the appellate authorities and that
the principle of judicial discipline requires that
the orders of the higher appellate authorities are
followed unreservedly by the subordinate authorities.
23. Mr.   Lakshmikumaran,     accordingly,     prayed   that
upon  the  revisional    orders   being    set   aside,  the
orders of the Assessing Authority be restored.
24. Per contra, Mr. Alok Sangwan, learned counsel
appearing  for  the   respondents,    contended    that  the
Revisional Authority did not exceed its jurisdiction
in exercising suo motu powers under section 34 of the
VAT Act. By referring to notifications issued at or
about the relevant time amending Schedule C and the
decision in Sonic Electrochem (supra), he sought to
argue on the merits of the determination made by the
Revisional Authority and how she was right in her
findings that the mosquito repellants manufactured by
the appellant were liable to be taxed @ 10% in terms
of the decision in Sonic Electrochem (supra), and
not 4% as assessed by the Assessing Authority in the
orders under revision. He also submitted that the
orders  of   the  Revisional  Authority  do   not   merit
interference, and the appeal ought to be dismissed.
25. At the hearing, we made it clear that the issue
as to whether the impugned orders of the Revisional
Authority were sustainable on merits would not be
examined   unless  the  Court   was  persuaded   by   Mr.
Sangwan to accept that the Revisional Authority did
have the authority, competence and jurisdiction to
issue the impugned show-cause notices and pass the
consequential final revisional orders impugned in the
writ   petition   enhancing   the   liability   of    the
appellant to tax @ 10% instead of 4%.
26. Since section 34 of the VAT Act appears to have
been the source of power exercised by the Revisional
Authority, we shall first notice its contents as it
stood on the date of the impugned orders, i.e. 2nd
March, 2009. Prior to its amendment with effect from
20th March, 2009, section 34 read as follows:
“Section 34. Revision. : - (1) The Commissioner may,
on his own motion, call for the record of any case
pending before, or disposed of by, any taxing
authority for the purposes of satisfying himself as
to the legality or to the propriety of any
proceeding or of any order made therein which is
prejudicial to the interests of the State and may,
after giving the persons concerned a reasonable
opportunity of being heard, pass such order in
relation thereto, as he may think fit:
Provided that no order passed by a taxing authority
shall be revised on an issue, which on appeal or in
any other proceeding from such order is pending
before, or has been settled by, an appellate
authority or the High Court or the Supreme Court, as
Provided further that no order shall be revised
after the expiry of a period of three years from the
date of the supply of the copy of such order to the
assessee except where the order is revised as a
result of retrospective change in law or on the
basis of a decision of the Tribunal in a similar
case or on the basis of law declared by the High
Court or the Supreme Court.”
(2) The State Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, confer on any officer not below
the rank of Deputy Excise and Taxation Commissioner,
the powers of the Commissioner under sub-section (1)
to be exercised subject to such exceptions,
conditions and restrictions as may be specified in
the notification and where an officer on whom such
power have been conferred passes an order under this
section, such order shall be deemed to have been
passed by the Commissioner under sub-section (1).”
27. To the extent relevant for the present decision,
suo motu power of revision could be exercised by the
Revisional Authority for the purposes of satisfying
himself as to the legality or propriety of any order
made in any proceeding which is prejudicial to the
interests of the State. The first proviso, however,
imposed a restriction on exercise of such suo motu
power, if an issue had been settled, inter alia, by
an appellate authority. Thus, the sine qua non for
exercise    of    power    under    section     34   is   the
satisfaction    of  the   Revisional    Authority    that  an
order has been made by a taxing authority in any
proceeding prejudicial to the interests of the State,
the legality or propriety of which appears to him to
be prima facie vulnerable. Nevertheless, such power
cannot be exercised if the issue involved is pending
before or has been settled by an appellate authority.
It   cannot    be   disputed     that    the    Tribunal   is
comprehended     within    the    meaning    of    ‘appellate
authority’ as defined in section 2(b) of the VAT Act.
28. These being the contours of section 34, as it
then   stood,   it   needs    to   be  seen   how    far  the
Revisional Authority was justified in drawing power
from such provision and exercising it.
29. A bare perusal of the impugned revisional orders
reveals   that    the   decision    in   Sonic    Electrochem
(supra) formed the plinth for the satisfaction that
the orders of assessment are liable to be revised.
The    decision     in    Sonic    Electrochem      (supra)    was
rendered upon consideration of the Gujarat Sales Tax
Act, 1969 (hereafter ‘the Sales Tax Act’, for short).
The short question that arose for a decision was,
whether ‘Jet Mat’ produced by the appellant therein
would come within Entry 129 of Schedule II Part A of
the Sales Tax Act, issued under section 49 thereof.
Entry 129, at the relevant point of time, read thus:
Sl. No. Description     of Rate of sales      Rate of purchase
129      Mosquito           Twelve paise in   Twelve   Paise   in
repellents         the rupee         the
30. Having       regard    to    the   specific     entry,    i.e.
Entry    129,    dealing   with   mosquito    repellents,     this
Court    overruled     the    contention     of   the   appellant
therein that ‘Jet Mat’ would not come within the
ambit of Entry 129 since one of its constituents
happens to be an insecticide. It was also held that
the product manufactured by the appellant therein,
viz.    ‘Jet    Mat’,   which    was   commercially     known    as
“Mosquito     Repellent     Mat”   is   a  mosquito     repellant
notwithstanding      the   fact    that   it   not   only   repels
mosquitoes but is also capable of killing mosquitoes.
For the reasons assigned in the decision, it was held
that ‘Jet Mat’ is not an insecticide which would be
entitled for partial exemption under Entry 98 of the
31. It   is,   therefore,   clear   that   because  of the
specific entry dealing with mosquito repellents, this
Court held ‘Jet Mat’ to be covered under Entry 129.
32. As    the   Tribunal    in   its    order   dated  21st
November, 2001 found, there was no such corresponding
entry in the VAT Act. Bearing in mind the same as
well as on consideration of a decision of the Madras
High  Court   and  other   decisions,    the  Tribunal had
proceeded to hold that mosquito repellents containing
4% ‘Alethrin’ was an insecticide and hence, liable to
concessional rate of tax.
33. While    deciding   the    present    appeal,  we  are
primarily concerned with the issue of assumption of
jurisdiction by the Revisional Authority on the face
of the unchallenged order of the Tribunal dated 21 st
November,   2001,   and  not   with   the   merits  of the
decision   either  given   by   the  Tribunal   or  by the
Revisional Authority. What stares at the face of the
respondents is that the aforesaid decision of the
Tribunal,  quoted    in  the    order    of   the   Assessing
Authority,  has   attained    finality.     Once   the   issue
stands  finally   concluded,     the   decision    binds   the
State,  a  fortiori,    the   Revisional     Authority.    The
decision of the Tribunal may not be acceptable to the
Revisional  Authority,    but   that   cannot    furnish   any
ground  to  such   authority    to   perceive    that   it  is
either not bound by the same or that it need not be
followed. The first proviso, in such a case, gets
activated and would operate as a bar to the exercise
of powers by the Revisional Authority.
34. In our view, the Revisional Authority might have
been justified in exercising suo motu power to revise
the order of the Assessing Authority had the decision
of  the  Tribunal   been   set   aside   or   its   operation
stayed  by  a  competent     Court.   So   long   it   is  not
disputed that the Tribunal’s decision, having regard
to the framework of classification of products/tax
liability   then    existing,      continues      to    remain
operative and such framework too continues to remain
operative when the impugned revisional orders were
made, the Revisional Authority was left with no other
choice but to follow the decision of the Tribunal
without   any   reservation.    Unless    the  discipline    of
adhering to decisions made by the higher authorities
is   maintained,     there    would    be   utter    chaos   in
administration     of    tax    laws     apart   from     undue
harassment to assesses. We share the view expressed
35. In the midst of hearing, we had enquired from
Mr. Sangwan whether there has been any decision of
any other competent Tribunal or High Court taking a
view different from the one taken by the Tribunal in
its   order    dated   21st   November,    2001,    which   was
considered    by  the   Assessing    Authority.    Fairly,   he
answered in the negative. If only Mr. Sangwan could
have   invited   our   attention    to  any   such   decision,
which were acceptable to us, the issue decided by the
Tribunal could have been reopened on the ground that
it is a debatable issue and interference with the
final orders passed by the Revisional Authority may
not have been resorted to, leaving the appellant to
pursue the appellate remedy under the VAT Act.
36. There is also substance in the contention of Mr.
Lakshmikumaran that suo motu power of revision, on
the terms of section 34, could have been exercised
only if the orders sought to be revised suffered from
any illegality or impropriety.
37. A decision may be questioned as suffering from
an illegality if its maker fails to understand the
law    that  regulates     his   decision    making   power
correctly or if he fails to give effect to any law
that holds the field and binds the parties. On the
other hand, having regard to the purpose section 34
seeks to serve, to take exception to a decision on
the ground of lack of propriety of any proceedings or
order   passed   in  such   proceedings,   it   essentially
ought to relate to a procedural impropriety. It is
incumbent for the accuser to show that the decision
maker has failed to observe the standard procedures
applicable   in    case   of   exercise   of   his   power.
Additionally, to impeach an order on the ground of
moral impropriety, it has to be shown that the weight
of    facts    together     with   the    applicable    law
overwhelmingly points to one course of action but the
decision has surprisingly gone the other way, giving
reason to suspect misbehaviour or misconduct in the
sphere of activity of the decision maker warranting a
38. There is nothing on record to justify either
illegality or (procedural/moral) impropriety in the
proceedings    before    the   Assessing    Authority    or  the
orders passed by him, as such. As noted above, the
Assessing Authority was bound by the order of the
Tribunal and elected to follow it having no other
option.   Such    decision     of   the   Tribunal    was   even
binding    on   the     Revisional      Authority.     In   such
circumstances, to brand the orders of the Assessing
Authority     as     suffering       from     illegality     and
impropriety appears to us to be not only unjustified
but also demonstrates thorough lack of understanding
of  the  principle     regulating     exercise     of suo   motu
revisional power by a quasi-judicial authority apart
from being in breach of the principle of judicial
discipline, while confronted with orders passed by a
superior Tribunal/Court. We are inclined to the view
that it is not the Assessing Authority’s orders but
those   passed    by   the    Revisional    Authority,     which
suffer from a patent illegality.
39. For    the   foregoing     reasons,    we   have  no   other
option    but    to    invalidate      the     impugned    final
revisional    orders    dated    2nd  March,     2009   for  the
Assessment Years 2003-04 and 2004-05. It is ordered
40. The interim order dated 18th January, 2010 is
made absolute.
41. The appeal stands allowed. However, the parties
are left to bear their own costs.