1)   The petitioners in this petition have sought following reliefs:
a) Issue a Writ of Mandamus commanding the
respondents to make appointments against the quota
of jobs exclusively provided for Kashmiri Non-
Migrant Pandits under the Prime Minister’s Package
and to specify the quota of the posts out of 1997
posts    advertised     by    the    respondents   vide
aforementioned Advertisement Notification dated
01.12.2020, for Kashmiri Non Migrant Pandits.
b) Issue a Writ of Mandamus, commanding the
respondents to accept the candidature of the
petitioners against the posts applied for by the
petitioners and allow the petitioners to participate in
the selection process.
c) Any other writ, order or direction which this
Hon’ble Court may deem fit and proper also be
issued in favour of the petitioners and against the
respondents.
2)     The case projected by the petitioners is that in the year 2009,
Government of India issued Prime Minister’s Package for return and
rehabilitation to Kashmiri migrants in Kashmir Valley. The PM’s
package aforesaid was executed and implemented by the then State
Government       by   promulgating     SRO    412    dated    30.12.2009.
Subsequently on the basis of a survey conducted with respect to plight
of Kashmiri Hindus who stayed within Valley and did not migrate in
the wake of law and order situation created due to onslaught of
militancy in early 1990s. It was on the basis of aforesaid survey
conducted with respect to the living conditions of non-migrant Hindu
community of Kashmir, SRO 412 of 2009 was amended by SRO 425
of 2017 and the people belonging to Hindu community who had
stayed back in the Valley and did not migrate in 1990, were also
extended the benefits of special recruitment drive which was a part of
PM’s package for Kashmiri migrants.
3)     It is contended that on 1st December, 2020, the respondents
issued an advertisement for filling up 1997 posts while carrying
recruitment drive in accordance with SRO 412 of 2009 as amended
vide SRO 425 of 2017. The advertisement was also open for the
persons who had not migrated. They were, however, required to
produce bona fide certificates to be issued by the concerned Deputy
Commissioners to certify that such candidates had not migrated and
were, accordingly, not registered with the Commissioner (Relief). The
Deputy Commissioners were also to certify that the candidates,
seeking benefit of special recruitment drive carried pursuant to Prime
Minister’s package, belonged to the community described as
“Kashmiri Pandits”. The Deputy Commissioners, without any
justification, chose not to grant such certificates in respect of a group
of non-migrant Kashmiri Hindus, who according to them did not
belong to the community of “Kashmiri Pandits”.
4)      Having been denied the bonafide certificates by the Deputy
Commissioners, the petitioners filed the instant petition and sought,
by way of interim measure, their participation in the selection process
without submitting the bonafide certificates from the Deputy
Commissioners. This Court vide order dated 1 st of March, 2021,
allowed the petitioners to participate in the selection process for the
posts advertised by the respondents vide Advertisement Notice
bearing No.03 of 2020 dated 1st of December, 2020. It is submitted
that the selection process has been almost concluded and selection list
framed. The respondents have, however, withheld the selection of the
petitioners on the ground that they do not meet the requirement of
production of “Kashmiri Pandit” certificate issued by the competent
5)     The petitioners claim the benefit of SRO 425 of 2017 on the
ground that said SRO is an outcome of census carried by the
Government of India with regard to the living conditions of Hindus in
the Valley who despite adversity had opted not to migrate from the
valley during turmoil in the year 1990 and, therefore, the benefit of
Prime Minister’s Package cannot be restricted to only one community
i.e. “Kashmiri Pandits” and ignoring other Hindu castes, communities
and clans who have similarly suffered. All Hindus, it is submitted,
who are residing in the Valley and have not migrated, constitute one
class and their further classification on the basis of their identities is
not permissible in law. There is an allegation made by the petitioners
that even SRO 425 of 2017, as is understood by the respondents, is
not being followed in letter and spirit, in that, the respondents have in
many cases issued bonafide certificates of “Kashmiri Pandits” in
favour of candidates who are similarly situated with the petitioners
and carry the surname of “Singh”. This, in nutshell, is the factual
matrix and the legal submissions made by the petitioners.
6)     Respondent No.6 has opposed the writ petition and has in its
objections submitted that various posts were created by Government
of India under Prime Minister’s Special Package for Kashmiri
migrants. These posts have been created on supernumerary basis
across various departments and in terms of Rule 2 of the Jammu &
Kashmir Migrants (Special Drive) Recruitment Rules, 2009, notified
vide SRO 412 of 2009 dated 30.12.2009 read with amendments
carried vide SRO 425 of 2017 dated 10.10.2017, following category
of persons are entitled to apply against these posts:
i. A person who has migrated from Kashmir Valley
after 1st of November, 1989 and is registered as
ii. A person who has migrated from Kashmir Valley
after 1st of November, 1989, but has not been so
registered with the Relief Commissioner on the
ground of his being in service of Government in
any moving officer or having left the Valley or any
other part of the State in pursuit of occupation or
vocation or otherwise and is possessed of
immovable property at the place from where he
has migrated but is unable to ordinarily reside
iii. An internally displaced person who has migrated
within Valley from his original place of residence
in Kashmir Valley for security reasons and is
iv. A person who belongs to the Kashmiri Pandit
Family and has not migrated from Kashmir Valley
after 1st of November 1989 and is presently
7)     It is further submitted that category of persons mentioned at (i),
(ii) and (iii) above, the Relief and Rehabilitation Commissioner for
Migrants is the designated authority for authentication of migrant
status of the applicants. It is his duty to ensure that the applicant is a
bonafide migrant while as for the category of persons mentioned at
(iv) above, the Deputy Commissioner concerned is the designated
authority for authentication of status of the applicant as also to issue
the bonafide certificate to the candidate to the effect that he/she
belongs to a Kashmiri Pandit family and has not migrated from the
Valley and that he/she is presently residing in the concerned district.
There is, however, no separate quota within the quota available for
any migrant or non-migrant community in respect of these posts. It is,
thus, submitted that in the absence of challenge to the Recruitment
Rules of 2009, as amended vide SRO 425 of 2017, by the petitioners,
the full effect to the rules is required to be given. The petitioners who
are neither migrants falling in category (i), (ii) and (iii) nor do they
belong to Kashmiri Pandit family are not eligible to participate in the
selection process. The Deputy Commissioners have rightly declined to
grant them bonafide certificates in this regard.
8)     Another set of objections has been filed by respondent No.4 and
5 which are also on similar lines. It is, however, submitted by
respondent No.4 and 5 that the Government of India, Ministry of
Home Affairs, vide communication No.12013/6/2014-K-V dated
04.12.2015, sanctioned additional 3000 Government jobs for
Kashmiri migrants. The communication aforesaid provided as under:
“It has been decided that the Government of India would
fund the additional 3000 State Government jobs, which
were to be funded by the State Government in the Prime
Minister’s Package-2008 for the return and rehabilitation
of the Kashmiri Migrants. The Kashmiri Pandit families
who did not leave the Kashmir Valley during the terrorist
violence, that began in the State in the early 1990, and
who are still residing in the Kashmir Valley, will also be
eligible for these jobs and preferably formula of one job
per family is to be adopted. The Government of India
will bear the cost towards salary and other expenditure in
respect of these 3000 jobs/posts for 10 years or till these
posts are absorbed against regular posts in the State
9)     In the objections, it is further submitted that Kashmiri Pandits
in the Valley under the umbrella of Kashmiri Sangarsh Samiti filed
OWP No.1956/2016, which was disposed of by this Court vide
judgment dated 31.05.2016 with a direction to the respondents to
consider the claim of the petitioners in accordance with rules within a
period of six weeks from the date of receipt of the order. A contempt
petition was, thereafter, filed seeking implementation of the aforesaid
judgment dated 31st May, 2016. The matter was considered and it was
found that with a view to confer benefit upon non-migrant Kashmir
Pandit families, it was necessary to amend the Rules of 2009.
Accordingly, vide SRO 425 dated 10.10.2017, the Rules of 2009 were
amended to include non-migrant Kashmiri Pandits also for the
purposes of benefit of Prime Minister’s Special Package for return and
rehabilitation and, accordingly, 500 posts of different categories were
earmarked for “non-migrant Kashmiri Pandit” families who were still
residing in the Kashmir Valley and were not registered with the Relief
Organization (Migrants), Jammu, as internally displaced persons. It is
further submitted that the Sikh community living in Valley also
approached this Court by way of OWP No.2048/2017 to throw
challenge to SRO 425 on the ground that Sikh community too had
similarly suffered like non-migrant Kashmiri Pandits and, therefore,
were also entitled to have benefit of Prime Minister’s Special Package
for return and rehabilitation and, therefore, they should also be
considered for 500 posts earmarked for non-migrant Kashmiri Pandits
residing in Kashmir Valley. This Court vide its judgment dated
14.02.2019 rejected the contention of petitioner Sikh community that
SRO 425 dated 10th October, 2017 was ultra vires. However, this
Court quashed Government Order No.96-DMRRR of 2017 dated 13th
November, 2017, being contrary to statutory rules. The respondents
were, however, directed to proceed in the matter in accordance with
law. The matter, it is submitted, was taken up with the Department of
Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs who vide its letter dated 9th of
May, 2019 returned the file with the advice to proceed strictly in
accordance with the judgment of this Court by taking a decision in
accordance with law. It is, thus, submitted that once this Court, in its
judgment dated 14th of February, 2019, has not found non-migrant
Sikh community, which too had stayed back in the Valley and had not
migrated during 1990 like the non-migrant Kashmiri Pandits,
similarly situated and on par with non-migrant Kashmiri Pandits, as
such, the petition of the petitioners herein, whose claim is virtually
identical to the non-migrant Sikhs, cannot be entertained, more so,
when the judgment dated 14.02.2019 has attained finality and
implemented by the Government. This is in a nutshell stand of
respondent No.4 and 5.
10)    Having heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the
record, I am of the considered view that the issue primarily raised by
the petitioners is no longer res integra. Similar issue has been
considered by this Court in OWP No.2048/2017 titled Kashmiri Sikh
Community and others v. State of J&K and others decided vide
judgment dated 14.02.2019. The parity sought by the Sikhs residing in
the Valley who had not migrated in the wake of 1990 turmoil, with the
non-migrant Kashmiri Pandits for the purposes of implementation of
Prime Minister’s Special Package of employment and rehabilitation
has not been accepted by this Court and the classification made by
SRO 425 of 2017 has been held to be valid, there is hardly any scope
for the petitioners to raise the similar contention yet again. Paras 25 to
27 of the judgment dated14.02.2019 (supra) are quoted as under:
25. From careful reading of the Rules of 2009 and
amendments carried thereto vide SRO impugned in
this petition, it is abundantly clear that a class
different form the migrants has been created for
conferring the benefit of the Prime Minister’s
Package for return and rehabilitation of Kashmiri
Migrants. The class identified under the impugned
SRO is a community of Kashmiri Pandits, who did
not migrate in the wake of turmoil in the Valley and
stayed back despite adverse conditions perceivably
prevailing for their community. This classification
has been necessitated pursuant to the several
representations received for and on behalf of this
community, which was living in a very pitiable and
pathetic condition in the Valley. The Government of
India also took note of the fact that these handful
families had not migrated due to reasons of their
poverty, economic conditions, a sense of security
instilled in them by their supporting neighbourhood,
etcetera, etcetera. They stayed back and braved the
adverse conditions in the Valley, which seriously
impacted growth of their families educationally and
economically. Taking note of their plight and the
persistent pitiable conditions, a policy decision was
taken to confer the benefit of the Prime Minister’s
Package of return and rehabilitation on this
community as well. As noted above, this was not a
hollow exercise by the Government of India. Not
only it collected the relevant empirical data but also
appointed a Standing Parliamentary Committee to go
recommendations. As is averred by the respondents
in their affidavit that as per the records available
with the Relief and Rehabilitation Commissioner
(Migrant), Jammu, there are 15700 Hindu Relief
families and 22062 Hindu Non-Relief families,
consisting of 49859 souls and 82740 souls
respectively. Besides there are 1336 Relief Sikh
families and 353 Non-Relief Sikh families consisting
of 5043 souls and 1502 souls respectively registered
with the Relief Organization. In the light of the
aforesaid data placed on record, the respondents
have pleaded that the effect of migration in the wake
of turmoil in the Valley was more on the Kashmiri
Pandit community than other communities. It is
though conceded that handful of Sikh families too
migrated from the Valley but majority decided to
stay back and has been residing peacefully. It is on
recommendations of the Parliamentary Standing
Committee constituted for the purpose that the
Government appears to have taken a policy decision
to extend some helping hand to this distressed
Kashmiri Pandit community.
26. From the aforesaid discussion and in view of the
stand taken by the respondents, it cannot be said that
the Sikh Community is similarly placed with the
Kashmiri Pandits. There appears to be intelligible
differentia, which distinguishes Kashmiri Pandits,
who have stayed back in the Valley and did not
migrate when lakhs of their community members
left their home and hearth in view of the then
prevailing security scenario in the Valley. The
classification clearly distinguishes Kashmiri Pandit
community from Sikh Community living in the
Valley, which has been left out of group. This
classification based on intelligible differentia has a
definite nexus with the object sought to be achieved
by the Rules of 2009 as amended vide impugned
SRO, and is meant to ameliorate the lot of Kashmiri
Pandits who preferred to stay back and did not flee
despite unsavoury security conditions in the Valley
in the year 1989-90. The target killings of members
of their community instilled sense of fear and
insecurity in their minds, which made their living in
the Valley possible only at the cost of their lives.
This sense of insecurity was all pervasive. In the
milieu, there were certain families who decided not
to migrate either because they were poverty ridden
or did not have resources to move out or that they
neighbourhood not to be afraid of. Whatever be the
reasons, they decided to stay back but suffered due
to unsavoury and not too good conditions in the
Valley for the community. As per 137th report of the
Standing Parliamentary Committee, their condition
continued to worsen. They lacked behind in
education and fared very bad on the economic front.
Taking into account all these factors and the
historical background responsible for en masse
exodus of the community, the Central Government
decided to provide some relief and succour to these
families of Kashmiri Pandits. It is in this background
that a policy decision was taken by the Government
to treat these families of Kashmiri Pandits, staying in
the Valley, at par with the migrants for the purposes
of providing the employment package. This
necessitated the amendment in the Rules of 2009, so
as to include Kashmiri Pandits, staying in the Valley,
also as beneficiary of the Prime Minister’s Package
for return and rehabilitation of Kashmiri Migrants,
issued from time to time.
Viewed thus, it cannot be said, by any stretch
of imagination or reasoning, that the classification
intelligible differentia or that differentia has no
nexus with the object sought to be achieved. If the
rehabilitation of migrants, it would make no sense if
the same does not provide for rehabilitation of those
who have not fled from the Valley despite adverse
conditions and have stayed back.
27. In view of the foregoing discussion, I find that
legislation but makes a valid classification which is
permissible under Article 14 and 16 of the
11)    Faced with the aforesaid position, learned counsel for the
petitioners submitted that having regard to the background which
preceded the delivery of Prime Minister’s revised package of
employment and rehabilitation, there is no escape from the conclusion
that the benefit of employment is envisaged for those Hindus who are
residing in the Valley and did not migrate during the year 1990. The
term “Kashmiri Pandits” used in SRO 425 of 2017 is wide enough to
include all non-migrant castes and communities of Hindus residing in
the Valley and have similarly suffered as non-migrant Kashmiri
Pandits, argues ld. Counsel for petitioners.
12)    The argument raised is preposterous and cannot be accepted in
the face of clear language of SRO 425 of 2017. It needs to be noticed
that the petitioners have not challenged SRO 425 whereby the Rules
of 2009 have been amended to provide the category of non-migrant
Kashmiri Pandits for admitting them to the benefit of revised package
of Prime Minister for employment and rehabilitation. In the absence
of such challenge, the only question that remains to be determined in
this petition is whether the petitioners, who are, admittedly, not
Kashmiri Pandits but belong to different castes of Hindus, can be
brought within the definition of “Kashmiri Pandits”.
13)    It is vehemently contended by Mr. Altaf Mehraj, learned
counsel for the petitioners, that in the absence of any definition of
“Kashmiri Pandits” given in the SRO, all Hindus, who are staying in
Kashmir Valley and did not migrate like non-migrant Kashmiri
Pandits, should be treated as “Kashmiri Pandits”.
14)    Despite great amount of persuasion by Mr. Altaf Mehraj,
learned counsel for the petitioners, I regret my inability to accept such
broad definition of “Kashmiri Pandits”. It is true that neither in SRO
425 nor in the Rules of 2009 as amended vide SRO 425 of 2017, the
term “Kashmiri Pandit family” has been defined. What is, however,
defined in Rule 2(ca) is the term “Kashmiri Pandit” which means a
person belonging to “Kashmiri Pandit Family” who has not migrated
from Kashmir Valley after 1st of November, 1989 and is presently
residing in Kashmir Valley. In the absence of specific definition of the
term “Kashmiri Pandit family”, the only way to find out the true
meaning of the term is to apply the common parlance principle. There
is no denying the fact that in common parlance, Kashmiri Pandit is a
community of Kashmiri speaking Brahmins living in the Valley from
generations and are distinctly identified by their dress, customs and
traditions etc. etc. “Kashmiri Pandits”, is a separately identifiable
community distinct from other Hindus residing in the Valley like
Rajputs, Brahmins other than Kashmiri Pandits, Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes and many others. It is, thus, difficult to accept the
contention of learned counsel for the petitioners that the
petitioners, who are mostly Kshatriyas, Rajputs, Scheduled Caste
non- Kashmiri Brahmins etc. etc. should be treated as Kashmiri
Pandits and admitted to the benefits of Prime Minister’s revised
package for return and rehabilitation of Kashmiri migrants given
effect to by the Rules of 2009 read with SRO 425 of 2017.
15)     For the foregoing reasons, I find no merit in the petition and the
same is, accordingly, dismissed along with connected application.