This revision is directed against the order dated 05.11.2019
(Annexure P-1) passed by the Court of learned Additional District Judge,
Narnaul, whereby an application moved by defendants (respondents herein)
to condone the delay of 1066 days in filing the appeal titled ‘State of
Haryana & Others vs. Dr. Rohtash [CNR N: HRNR01-005807-2017], has
been allowed.
2.           It is contended on behalf of the petitioner/plaintiff that his suit
for grant of decree of mandatory & perpetual injunction was decreed by
learned Trial Court vide judgment dated 16.12.2014 (Annexure P-2). The
impugned order Ex.P8 dated 08.02.2010 was held to be illegal. Injunction
was granted restraining the defendants/respondent from making any
deduction from the salary of the plaintiff fixed by the Civil Surgeon vide
order dated 27.02.2009.
3.           Against the above said judgment/decree, defendants filed an
appeal on 16.12.2017 along with an application to condone the huge delay of
1066 days. That application has been allowed by learned Additional District
Judge, Narnaul.    It is contended that there was no justification to condone
the delay. In a similar matter titled as K.K. Yadav Vs. State of Haryana, the
department went upto Hon’ble Supreme Court of India without any delay.
Hon'ble Supreme Court ruled against the department in the similar
circumstances and therefore, the appeal filed by the defendants with a huge
delay of 1066 days, is nothing but a measure to harass the petitioner.
4.           Notice of motion.
5.           Ms. Vibha Tiwari, AAG, Haryana has accepted the notice.
Counsels for both the parties have been heard.
6.           As evident from the impugned order, to justify the plea for
condonation of delay, it was pleaded by the defendants that Assistant
District Attorney Narnaul had opined that the judgement of the trial Court
was fit to file appeal.     File was sent for recommendation to the Legal
Remembrancer to the Government of Haryana, who agreed with the opinion
of the District Attorney and directed the appellants to file the appeal. The
letter was marked by appellant No.4 to the concerned official namely Vijay
Singh Assistant, who did not prepare the necessary papers regarding filing of
the appeal with the help of the District Attorney Narnaul and rather, he lost
the file. The matter was later on brought to the notice of appellant No.4 by
the accountant and all this caused the delay of 1066 days in filing the appeal,
which was not intentional.
7.           In order to condone the delay, Ld. ADJ has relied on State of
Nagaland Vs. Lipok Ao 2005 (2) CCC 422, wherein it was observed by
Page No.2 out of 7 pages
Hon’ble Supreme Court that the court should always take a justice oriented
approach while considering an application for condonation of delay. If the
court is convinced that there had been an attempt on the part of government
officials or public servants to defeat justice by causing delay, the court in
view of the large public interest, should take a lenient view in such situations
and condone the delay, howsoever huge may be the delay; and to decide the
matter on merits.
8.            In State of Madhya Pradesh & Ors. Vs Bherulal, SLP (c)
no.9217 of 2020, decided on 15.10.2020, Hon’ble Supreme Court of India
was considering application to condone the delay of 663 days. Expressing its
anguish-ment on the issue of the government agencies ignoring the period of
prescribed limitation, Hon’ble Supreme Court observed as under:-
“We have raised the issue that if the Government machinery is so
inefficient and incapable of filing appeals/petitions in time, the solution
may lie in requesting the Legislature to expand the time period for
filing limitation for Government authorities because of their gross
incompetence. That is not so. Till the Statute subsists, the
appeals/petitions have to be filed as per the Statues prescribed.”
Hon’ble Supreme Court then noticed that although some leeway is given for
the government inefficiencies but the authorities keep on relying on judicial
pronouncements for a period of time when technology had not advanced and
a greater leeway was given to the Government, as was done in Collector,
Land Acquisition Anantnag and another vs Katiji and other (1987) 2
9.            Hon’ble Supreme Court then observed that position was later
elucidated in Office of the Chief Post Master General vs. Living Media India Ltd.
(2012) 3 SCC 563, wherein it was observed by Hon’ble Apex Court as
Page No.3 out of 7 pages
“12) It is not in dispute that the person(s) concerned were well
aware or conversant with the issues involved including the
prescribed period of limitation for taking up the matter by way of
filing a special leave petition in this Court. They cannot claim that
they have a separate period of limitation when the Department was
possessed with competent persons familiar with court proceedings.
In the absence of plausible and acceptable explanation, we are
posing a question why the delay is to be condoned mechanically
merely because the Government or a wing of the Government is a
party before us.
Though we are conscious of the fact that in a matter of
condonation of delay when there was no gross negligence or
deliberate inaction or lack of bonafide, a liberal concession has to
be adopted to advance substantial justice, we are of the view that in
the facts and circumstances, the Department cannot take advantage
of various earlier decisions. The claim on account of impersonal
machinery and inherited bureaucratic methodology of making
several notes cannot be accepted in view of the modern
technologies being used and available. The law of limitation
undoubtedly binds everybody including the Government.
13)     In our view, it is the right time to inform all the government
bodies, their agencies and instrumentalities that unless they have
reasonable and acceptable explanation for the delay and there was
bonafide effort, there is no need to accept the usual explanation
that the file was kept pending for several months/years due to
considerable degree of procedural red- tape in the process. The
government departments are under a special obligation to ensure
that they perform their duties with diligence and commitment.
Condonation of delay is an exception and should not be used as an
anticipated benefit for government departments. The law shelters
everyone under the same light and should not be swirled for the
benefit of a few. Considering the fact that there was no proper
explanation offered by the Department for the delay except
mentioning of various dates, according to us, the Department has
Page No.4 out of 7 pages
miserably failed to give any acceptable and cogent reasons
sufficient to condone such a huge delay.”
10.          Hon’ble Supreme Court in Bherulal’s case (supra) then
“5.     A preposterous proposition is sought to be propounded that
if there is some merit in the case, the period of delay is to be given
a go-by. If a case is good on merits, it will succeed in any case. It
is really a bar of limitation which can even shut out good cases.
This does not, of course, take away the jurisdiction of the Court in
an appropriate case to condone the delay.
6.      We are also of the view that the aforesaid approach is being
adopted in what we have categorized earlier as “certificate cases”.
The object appears to be to obtain a certificate of dismissal from
the Supreme Court to put a quietus to the issue and thus, say that
nothing could be done because the highest Court has dismissed the
appeal. It is to complete this formality and save the skin of officers
who may be at default that such a process is followed. We have on
earlier occasions also strongly deprecated such a practice and
process. There seems to be no improvement. The purpose of
coming to this Court is not to obtain such certificates and if the
Government suffers losses, it is time when the concerned officer
responsible for the same bears the consequences. The irony is that
in none of the cases any action is taken against the officers, who sit
on the files and do nothing.
7.      We are thus, constrained to send a signal and we propose to
do in all matters today, where there are such inordinate delays that
the Government or State authorities coming before us must pay for
wastage of judicial time which has its own value. Such costs can
be recovered from the officers responsible.”
After making the aforesaid observation, the Hon’ble Supreme Court not only
dismissed the special leave petition being time barred but also imposed costs
Page No.5 out of 7 pages
11.           Besides above, in State of Punjab vs Charanjit Singh, Law
Finder Doc Id # 42406, it was observed by a coordinate Bench of this Court
that even if it is true that procedure adopted in the government offices is
lengthy and time consuming, this does not provide an excuse for condoning
any amount of delay only because the law in condoning the delay is liberal.
If the files are handled negligently, the law of limitation require to initiate
proceedings within prescribed time and on special consideration is shown
for the State.
12.           In State of Punjab Vs Smt. Shindo, Law Finder Doc Id #
809476, a Division bench of this High Court observed that state as a litigant
cannot be treated differently than an ordinary litigant by applying different
yard sticks in the matter of condonation of delay or otherwise. In the appeal
before High Court, delay of 241 days was sought to be condoned. The
ground for seeking condonation was that file shuffled between one law
officer and another three times over, before it got approval of the Advocate
General. Holding the same to be no sufficient ground for condoning the
delay, the appeal was dismissed.
13.           When in the light of above legal position, the facts of the case
are analyzed, it is noticed that appellants have been grossly negligent in
filing the appeal before first appellate court, as inaction on their part for
long time has resulted into delay of three years.
14.           In present case, the reasons given for condonation of delay by
the appellants were not at all justified.      Simply by stating that file moved
from one office to another for seeking opinion and then was lost by one of
Page No.6 out of 7 pages
the official, the appellants (respondents herein) cannot be allowed to file an
appeal with delay of more than 03 years, without bringing on record any fact
as to the action taken against the erring officers/officials.
15.           It is noticed by this Court that in large number of cases, the
Government seeks to condone the delay on the similar grounds. Despite
repeated directions given by this Court as well as by the Hon'ble Apex Court
in plethora of authorities, there appears to be no change in the attitude of the
State Government. The appeals are filed with impunity by the Government
with huge delays and delay is sought to be condoned by assuming as if
there is no statute like Limitation Act or under the assumption that
application for whatever delay, will be condoned by the Court. Rarely any
action is taken against erring officials/public servants for their inaction of
not taking the decision well within time resulting in huge delays. This
practice must be put to stop.
16.           In view of above, the impugned order passed by learned first
appellate court, condoning the huge delay of 1066 days i.e., more than 03
years, cannot be sustained.      The impugned order is hereby set aside. The
revision is accordingly accepted.