The State by C.I.D. filed this petition under Section 482
of the Code of Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 (for short,
‘Cr.P.C.’) being aggrieved by the order dated 8-8-2016 passed
by the Principal District and Sessions Judge, Mysuru,
(hereinafter referred to as ‘Trial Court’) in Crime No.116 of
2013 for having rejected the charge-sheet filed by the Police
Inspector, Financial and Vigilance Unit, C.I.D., Bengaluru.
2.    The petitioner-State is the complainant and the
respondents are the accused before the Trial Court.         The
ranks of the parties before the Trial Court are retained for the
sake of convenience.
3. The case of the prosecution is that, accused No.1 is
the Greenbuds Agro Farms Limited Company and accused
Nos.2 to 5 are the Managing Directors and Directors of the
said Company.       It is alleged that, they have collected
investments from the general public and cheated the public
up to Rs.12,95,13,433/-. The individual investors have filed
complaints before different Police Stations in Mysuru District.
The    State   Government,    by    its order,   appointed   the
jurisdictional    Assistant   Commissioner      as   Competent
Authority for the purpose of taking action against the accused
under Section 5 of the Karnataka Protection of Interest of
Depositors in Financial Establishments Act, 2004 (hereinafter
referred to as ‘Act’). Accordingly, investigation has been done
and a common charge-sheet came to be filed by the Police
Inspector, Financial and Vigilance Unit, C.I.D., before the
Trial Court. The Trial Court, by its impugned order, rejected
the charge-sheet filed under the Act on the ground that the
Police Inspector is not the Competent Officer to file the report
or for taking action and hence, the accused were discharged
for the offence punishable under Section 9 of the Act.
However, liberty was granted to the Investigating Officer to file
charge-sheet before the jurisdictional Magistrate for the
offences punishable under the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for
short, ‘IPC’), which is under challenge before this Court.
4.   Heard the arguments of the learned State Public
Prosecutor-I for the petitioner-State and perused the records.
Learned counsel for the        respondents-accused remained
absent in spite of granting sufficient opportunities by way of
5. Previously, this Court dismissed the petition on 12-
6-2020 and later, restored the same on 1-10-2020. At that
time, the learned counsel for the respondents appeared and
submitted no objection to recall the order. Accordingly, I.A.
No.1 of 2020 was allowed and the petition was restored by
recalling the order of dismissal.
6. The learned State Public Prosecutor-I has contended
that as per Section 4 of the Cr.P.C., the Special Court
established under the Act is having power to try the offences
punishable under the IPC as well as the offences punishable
under the Special Law, but the Trial Court misread Section 5
of the Act and committed error in discharging the accused,
even though liberty was granted for filing charge-sheet before
the Magistrate by ignoring the special provisions of law. Even
if the charge-sheet is returned, the question of discharging
the accused is illegal.  Hence, he prayed for setting aside the
7. Admittedly, the accused were involved in cheating of
depositors, who invested in their Company and they were
many complaints filed by the individual investors in different
Police Stations of Mysuru District for the offences punishable
both under Section IPC, especially Section 420 of the IPC, and
Section 9 of the Act.   In view of the order of the Government,
the Assistant Commissioner was appointed as per Section 5
of the Act for making enquiry and to file report. However, the
said report of the Assistant Commissioner, who is a
Competent Authority, required to deal with the investments of
the Company or other property believed to have been acquired
from out of the deposits and to attach the said investments
under Section 3 of the Act and to protect the interest of the
investors in accordance with the procedure laid down in the
Special Act. Section 9 of the Act prescribes punishment for
the offence committed by the Company which is liable for
punishment of both imprisonment as well as fine.         As per
Section 18 of the Act, the Cr.P.C. is applicable and the Special
Court shall follow the procedure specified in the Cr.P.C. for
the trial of warrant cases by the Magistrate, which is nothing
but a Judicial Magistrate, First Class or Metropolitan
Magistrate.     Once the complaint is lodged against the
Company for cheating the investors as per Section 154 of the
Cr.P.C. before the Police and once the case is registered, the
Investigating Officer is required to file charge-sheet against
the offenders as per Section 173 of the Cr.P.C.      The Special
Court has been established for trying the offences committed
under Section 10 of the Act.       Therefore, the Investigating
Officer is required to file charge-sheet before the Special
Court established under the Act.
8. As per Section 4(2) of the Cr.P.C., all offences under
any other law shall be investigated, inquired into, tried and
otherwise dealt with according to the same provisions, but
subject to any enactment for the time being in force
regulating the manner or place of investigating, inquiring
into, trying or otherwise dealing with such offences.     Such
being the case, bifurcating the offences punishable under IPC
and Special Law is not correct. Both the offences are required
to be tried together by the Special Court established under
9. Though the Trial Court rightly refused to accept the
charge-sheet, but committed error in discharging the accused
and directing the Investigating Officer to file charge-sheet
before the jurisdictional Magistrate.   Once the Special Court
is established, the question of discharging the accused for the
reasons that the charge-sheet is filed by incompetent
Investigating Officer does not arise.  The Trial Court misread
the provisions of Special Act and has not considered Section 4
of the Cr.P.C.
10.  The Investigating Officer committed mistake in
filing common charge-sheet for the various crime registered in
different Police Stations which is impermissible.      In this
regard, the Division Bench of the Delhi High Court in the case
of STATE v. KHIMJI BHAI JADEJA (Crl. Ref. No.1 of 2014
dated 8-7-2019) has considered the judgments of various
High Courts as well as Supreme Court and held that filing an
amalgamated charge-sheet is impermissible. At paragraph
“76. From Chapter XII of the Cr.P.C., it is evident
that upon disclosure of information in relation to
commission of a cognizable offence, the police is
bound to register the FIR. The registration of FIR
sets into motion the process of investigation. The
same culminates into the filing of the final report by
the police officer before the Magistrate. Thus, in
respect of every FIR, there would be a separate
final report and, there could be, further report(s) in
terms of Section 173(8).
80. Thus, our answer to question (b) is that in
respect of each FIR, a separate final report [and
wherever necessary supplementary/ further charge
sheet(s)] have to be filed, and there is no question of
amalgamation of the final reports that may be filed
in respect of different FIRs. The amalgamation,
strictly in terms of Section 219 Cr.P.C., would be
considered by the Court/ Magistrate at the stage of
framing of charge, since Section 219(1) mandates
that where the requirements set out in the said
Section are met, the accused "may be charged with,
and tried at one trial for, any number of them not
exceeding three".”
11. I am in respectful agreement with the view taken by
the Division Bench of the Delhi High Court. On perusal of the
judgment stated supra, it is clear that, the offences which are
similar in nature committed by the same accused within
twelve months can be tried together by framing a common
charge as per Section 219 of the Cr.P.C., but the question of
filing common charge-sheet in multiple crimes or complaints
is impermissible.
12. In a similar provisions of the Special Act, at Tamil
Nadu, the Madras High Court in an unreported judgment in
the case of P.S. CHELLAMUTHU AND OTHERS v. THE
ANOTHER in Crl.O.P. Nos.21711 and 35339 of 2007
dated 4-12-2008 has considered the similar Special Act
namely, Tamil Nadu Protection of interests of Depositors (in
Financial Establishments) Act, 1997, wherein it has held that
in respect of trying the offences by the Special Court and
taking cognizance, the Cr.P.C. would apply.
13. Similarly, in the Special Act, Section 18 of the Act
empowers the Special Court for taking cognizance, trying the
accused person by following the procedures specified in the
Cr.P.C.    The first conviction shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six years with
fine and which may be extend to Rs.1.00 lakh and proviso to
Section 9 of the Act prescribes that the imprisonment shall
not be less than three years in the absence of special and
adequate reasons.        Part 2 of Schedule-I of the Cr.P.C.
prescribes the classification of offences against other laws. If
the offence punishable for three years and upwards, but not
more than seven years, the offence is cognizable and bailable.
The Special Act is silent about offence under the present Act
is whether cognizable or non-cognizable.         Thereby, the
Cr.P.C. is applicable.    As per part 2 of Schedule I of the
Cr.P.C., the offence under Section 9 is cognizable and non-
bailable.    That apart, as per Section 18(2) of the Act, the
anticipatory bail is applicable, which shows that the offences
are non-bailable. Such being the case, the Trial Court came
to wrong conclusion that as per Section 5 of the Act, the
Police Officer was incompetent to file the charge-sheet. Filing
the report by the Competent Authority to the Government is
different aspect in respect of returning the money to the
investors and protecting the investment made by the accused
Company out of the investors’ amount. So far as punishment
in criminal cases is concerned, the Police or Special Police
have power to file final report before the Special Court.
However, the question of filing common charge-sheet for
various complaints filed by the individual investors in
different Police Station limits is against the law and the
question of filing amalgamated charge-sheet does not arise
and it is impermissible under the Cr.P.C.
14. Therefore, the State-C.I.D. Police have no authority
to   file  common    charge-sheet    in   different  complaints.
However, the Investigating Officer has to file separate charge-
sheet against each crime registered by the Police on
individual complaint. Thereafter, the Special Court shall take
cognizance of the offences both punishable under the IPC and
the Special Act by following the Cr.P.C. and dispose of the
matter in accordance with law.     So far as on the report of the
Competent Authority, it has to be submitted to the State
Government and later, the Trial Court on the report of the
Competent Officer to attach or seize the properties and
investments under Section 3 of the Act for the purpose of
protecting the interests and refunding the money to the
investors as per Section 12 of the Act.
15.   For the reasons stated above, the Trial Court
committed error in rejecting the charge-sheet on the ground
that the Investigating Officer is not the Competent Authority
to file the charge-sheet and wrongly discharged the accused
for the offence punishable under Section 9 of the Act and also
committed error in directing the Investigating Officer to file
the charge-sheet before the jurisdictional Magistrate in
respect of the offences punishable under the IPC.     Therefore,
the impugned order requires to be quashed.
16.   Accordingly, the petition is allowed.     The order
dated 8-8-2016 passed by the Principal District and Sessions
Judge, Mysuru, in Crime No.116 of 2013 is hereby quashed.
Discharging the accused is hereby set aside.
17. Further, the Special Court is directed to return the
charge-sheet to the Investigating Officer in order to file
separate charge-sheet in respect of the each individual
complaints and thereafter, the Trial Court shall proceed in
accordance with law.
Registry to intimate the Trial Court forthwith.