1.Heard          learned  Senior      Advocate   Mr.Amit          Desai,
learned Senior Advocate Mr. N. D. Nanavati, learned
Senior Advocate Mr.Mihir Joshi, learned                        Senior
Advocate Mr. R. S. Sanjanwala, learned Senior
Advocate Jal Unwalla for the applicants in respective
applications and learned Public Prosecutor Mr.Mitesh
Amin appearing with learned APP               Mr. L. B. Dabhi
with Mr.Ronak Raval for the respondent State.
2.Issue Rule returnable forthwith, in Criminal Misc.
Applications No.15771, 15772 and 15558 of 2022.
Learned APP waives service of notice of Rule for the
respondent State.
3.The         applicants   apprehending        their      arrest          in
connection with 3 different FIRs namely (1) FIR
No.11192018220218/2022                   registered              with
(Rural) on 26.7.2022 for the offences punishable
under Sections 302, 328, 120B of IPC and 67-1A of
No.11190001220293/2022                 registered               with
Barwada         Police  Station,      District      Botad           on
26.7.2022        for  the    offences     punishable           under
Sections 302, 328, 120B of IPC and 67-1A of Gujarat
Prohibition              Act;              and                     FIR
Station, District Botad on 26.7.2022 for the
offences punishable under Sections 302, 328, 120B
of IPC and 65(a) and 67-1A of Gujarat Prohibition Act,
have preferred these applications praying for grant of
pre-arrest bail.
4.It would be pertinent to mention here that originally
while the FIR, lodged with the Dhandhuka Police
Station, had been registered alleging commission of
offence punishable under Sections 302, 328, 120B of
IPC and 67-1A and whereas the Investigating Officer
had submitted report dated 3.8.2022 for addition of
offences punishable under sections 304, 308, 120,
118, 201, 202, 284, 34 of IPC and Sections 81 and 83
of Gujarat Prohibition Act and whereas vide order
dated 4.8.2022, the learned Additional Chief Judicial
Magistrate, Dhandhuka had directed the report to be
kept with the FIR.
5.It is noted that since the allegations made in all 3
FIRs are more or less the same, and whereas since
the apprehension of the applicants is based, in all 3
FIRs, upon a single set of transaction, therefore, to
avoid repetition and for the sake of brevity, these
applications concerning 3 different FIRs are being
decided by the present common order.
6.In all the FIRs in question, the allegations inter alia
are about commission of offences, which are in the
nature of selling spurious country made liquor that
has unfortunately resulted in the death of 46 persons
in total, and injuries being caused to 82 persons.
During the course of investigation, it was revealed
that the spurious country made liquor was, in fact,
made from a poisonous chemical named methyl
alcohol, and whereas it was also revealed that the
said methyl alcohol was sold by an employee of a
Company named M/s.Amos Corporation, which was
inter alia engaged in the business of bottling methyl
alcohol. The applicants before this Court being one
Managing Director, three Directors and an employee
of     the      company in    question, (other       than        the
employee, who had actually allegedly sold the ethyl
alcohol, who has already been arrested).
7.Before adverting to the facts, it would pertinent to
mention that both the sides namely learned Sr.
Advocates for the applicants and learned Public
Prosecutor for the respondent State have made
lengthy arguments on various issues and whereas, in
the considered opinion of this Court, since a decision
in a pre-arrest bail application does not envisage
meticulous examination and findings on facts and
law, the submissions of both the sides are referred to
in brief.
8.Submissions on behalf of the applicants:
8.1. Learned Sr. Advocate Mr.Desai for the applicant
– Managing Director of the Company in question
would submit that an employee of the Company,
one Mr.Jayesh Khavadiya, who was also the
authorized person of the Company for dealing with
the methyl alcohol, appears to have stolen around
600 ltrs of methyl alcohol from the premises of the
Company and appears to have sold the methyl
alcohol to some of the other co-accused, who in
turn had sold it to some of the other co-accused
and whereas the said co-accused, who were in the
business of selling country made liquor, had mixed
water with the methyl alcohol and sold it to their
customers. Learned Sr. Advocate Mr.Desai would
submit that as far as the applicants are concerned,
the allegations with regard to sale of              methyl
alcohol started with Jayesh and ended with Jayesh.
It is submitted that the Company in question has
all the requisite permissions and licences, more
particularly licence in the form of MA-1 and MA-2
under the Gujarat Prohibition Act, 1949 and
whereas it is not the case of any of the authorities
that the Company in question was dealing with the
substance     i.e.    methyl        alcohol     without          any
requisite    permission.          Learned     Sr.      Advocate
Mr.Desai would submit that as a matter of fact, the
accused Jayesh i.e. the employee of M/s.Amos
Corporation was otherwise a trusted employee of
the Company and as per the provisions of the
Gujarat Prohibition Act, the said accused Jayesh
was an authorized person, more particularly a
Nokarnama/nomination             being    issued         by       the
Company       naming     the       said  accused             Jayesh
Khavadiya and approved by the authorized officer
of       the Prohibition,        Abkari     and        Methanol
8.2. Learned Sr. Advocate Mr.Desai would submit
that while the FIR inter alia alleges offences
punishable under Section 302, as such there is no
such allegation against the applicant Managing
Director, which could be co-relatable to the offence
punishable     under    Section  302,   and        whereas
commission of offence under Section 304, which is
alleged     in   FIR      No.11192018220218/2022
registered with Dhandhuka Police Station may be
the offence, which could be invoked against the
applicant – Managing Director.
8.3. Learned Sr. Advocate Mr.Desai would submit
that while again Section 304 (Part-I) could not
have been invoked against the applicant and more
particularly since there is not act which is alleged
to have been committed by the applicants with the
intention of causing death. Learned Sr. Advocate
would submit that even with regard to an offence
punishable under Section 304 (Part-II) an essential
ingredient for alleging such an offence is that the
act must have been done with the knowledge that
such act was by itself likely to cause death. It is
submitted      that  the       allegation   being that an
employee namely Jayesh had stolen the                       methyl
alcohol from the premises of the Company, and
whereas since the applicants have been sought to
be      arraigned   only     on    the   ground        that       the
applicants being Managing Director, Directors or
employee of M/s.Amos Corporation, they have
been unnecessarily sought to be apprehended.
Learned Sr. Advocate Mr.Desai would submit that
as such there is no material to show that the
applicants had, in any manner, committed the act
in question, more particularly with the knowledge
that the act of sale of methyl alcohol would cause
death but without any intention to cause death.
Learned       Sr.  Advocate         in  support         of      such
submission would rely upon the decision of the
Hon’ble Apex Court in case of Keshub Mahindra
Vs. State of M.P., reported in (1996) 6 SCC
129, Samsher Khan Vs. State (NCT) of Delhi,
reported in (2000) 8 SCC 568, in case of Shiv
Kumar Jatia V. Staff of NCT of Delhi, reported
in (2019) 17 SCC 193, in case of Joseph Kurian
Philip Jose v/s State of Kerala, reported in
reported in (1994) 6 SCC 535, in case of M/s.
Cheminova India Ltd. & Anr. Vs. State of
Punjab      and   Anr.,         reported      in        (2021)
SCConline SC 573 and a decision of this Court in
case of Dharmendrabhai @ Bakabhai Joitaram
Patel Vs. State of Gujarat in Criminal Misc.
Application No.5325 of 2013.
8.4. Learned Sr. Advocate Mr.Desai would further
submit that while the Company had been handling
methyl alcohol since 2008 and whereas the
present bottling of methyl alcohol having started
since 2019 and since there has been no breach of
duty, as alleged, at the most, assuming without
admitting, what could be alleged against the
applicant was an offence punishable under Section
304-A that is for causing death by negligence,
which also is a bailable offence.
8.5. Learned Sr. Advocate would thereafter refer to
Sections 65A and Section 79 of Gujarat Prohibition
Act. Learned Sr. Advocate Mr.Desai would submit
that Section 65A inter alia states with regard to
punishment for Laththa. Laththa being defined as
spurious      liquor  containing        methanol or             other
poisonous substance, which may cause harmful or
injurious effects to the human body.                            It is
submitted that Section 65A(3) inter alia states with
regard      to   a   person         supplying    material           for
manufacture of Laththa, which could be the
allegation that could be levelled against Jayesh,
since Section 65A(1) envisaging punishment for
manufacturing, transporting or having possession
of Laththa and Section 65A(2) specifying the
punishment for manufacture, sale, etc., of Laththa,
more particularly where there is a death on
consumption of laththa, both of the contingencies
may not be applicable to Jayesh and, in any case,
would not be allegations, which could be levelled
against the applicants.
8.6. Insofar as Section 79 of the Gujarat Prohibition
Act is concerned, the same, according to the
learned Sr. Advocate, is with regard to liability of
the licensee for acts of his servant. It is submitted
that the said Section makes a licensee vicariously
responsible and whereas the licensee is made as
responsible as the actual offender for any offence
committed by his employee for acting with his
express or implied permission, unless the licensee
establishes      that     all      due    and       reasonable
precautions were exercised.            It is submitted that
the person who was handling the methyl alcohol
on day-to-day basis was Jayesh, i.e. the accused
who         has been      arrested       and      whereas             a
Naukarnamu/nomination was also issued in his
favour approved by the Department.                     It is also
submitted that an employee, Rajendra Dasadiya,
who is a B.E. (Chemical) Engineer was also
appointed          as  a    Supervisor       over      Jayesh         and
whereas          a   Naukarnamu/nomination                was         also
issued in favour of the other employee.                              It is
submitted by the learned Sr. Advocate Mr.Desai
that all such due and reasonable precautions were
exercised by the applicants and, therefore, there
may         not    be  a    reasonable        cause       to      allege
commission of offence punishable under Section
79 against the applicants.                Learned Sr. Advocate
would further rely upon proviso to Section 79,
which inter alia states that no person, other than
the      actual     offender,       shall   be    punished            with
imprisonment, except such person, other than the
offender, committing default of payment of fine. It
is, thus, submitted that even as far as vicarious
liability       is   concerned,        except       the       licensee
committing a default in payment of fine, the
licensee           would     not       be     sentenced               with
imprisonment. Learned Sr. Advocate would further
submit that a plain reading of the proviso making
it clear that the offence being bailable the
applicant may be considered for release on
anticipatory bail.
8.7. Learned Sr. Advocate would also submit in this
regard that while due and reasonable precaution
had been taken, the applicant could not be alleged
to have not taken impossible precautions with
regard to handling of methyl alcohol.                   It is
submitted that prima facie Jayesh had stolen
methyl alcohol and for such an act, the applicants
could not be stated to have not taken due and
reasonable precautions when all precautions which
would have been taken in normal course of
business, had been taken by the applicant.
8.8. Learned Sr. Advocate would also refer to the
affidavit by the Investigating Officer, which inter
alia states about the applicants neither having
remained present nor produced any documentary
evidence.    It is submitted that as far as the
documentary evidence part is concerned, the
entire record of the Company has been seized by
the Prohibition Department and, therefore, there
was no document available with the applicants.
8.9. Learned Sr. Advocate also refer to paragraph
10.1 of the affidavit, more particularly with regard
to an amount of Rs.35 lac having been paid to
accused Jayesh within a period of three years,
inter alia implying that the applicants are in
connivance with Jayesh.         It is submitted by the
learned Sr. Advocate that the said amount, as
rightly mentioned in the affidavit-in-reply, has
been paid over a period of three years. Over and
above the same, it is submitted that Jayesh, who is
supervising the bottling of the methyl alcohol was
also paying salary to labourers/workmen, who are
engaged in the said operation and whereas the
amount of Rs.35 lac spread over a period of three
years also includes such amount which was paid
by Jayesh to other labourers/workmen.
8.10.          Learned Sr. Advocate would also take this
Court through the decision of the Hon’ble Apex
Court in case of Sushila Aggarwal and others
Vs.       State   (NCT     of      Delhi)   and        another,
reported in (2020) 5 SCC 1, more particularly
elaborating the observations of the Hon’ble Apex
Court in support of his contention as to why
custodial interrogation of the applicant is not
required. Learned Sr. Advocate would also refer to
a decision of this Court in case of Girishbhai
Maganlal Pandya Vs. State of Gujarat in
Criminal Misc. Application No.2942 of 2014
dated 23.3.2015, in support of his submission
and would request this Court to release the
applicant on pre-arrest bail.
learned Sr. Advocate Mr.Mihir Joshi, learned Sr.
Advocate Mr.R. S. Sanjanwala and learned Sr.
Advocate Mr.Jal Unwalla on behalf of the other
applicants would submit that the applicants are
independent/non-Executive             Directors.            In    this
regard,        financial     statements        of      M/s.Amos
Enterprise        Pvt.   Limited     of    which       M/s.Amos
Corporation is a sub-entity, is relied upon to show
that       while   the    applicant     of   Criminal           Misc.
Applications No.15158, 15772 and 15170 of 2022
was the Managing Director, and whereas applicant
of Criminal Misc. Applications No.15165, 15169,
and 15771 of 2022 being the employee, all other
applicants are shown as Independent Directors or
non-Executive Directors, as the case may be. It is
submitted that paragraph 8 of the affidavit-in-reply
lists the grounds against the applicants, more
particularly having regard to provisions of Section
79 of the Gujarat Prohibition Act. It is submitted
that paragraph 8(i) inter alia alleges that the
Company knew about the shortfall on basis of E-
mails sent by M/s.Finar Limited i.e. the supplier of
Methyl Alcohol and whereas no corrective steps
were taken.        Paragraph 8(j) inter alia states that
since the bank account of M/s.Amos Corporation
also showed the Managing Director as well as the
independent Director and Executive Directors as
authorized       persons       for   financial    transactions,
therefore, it should not be contended by the
independent, non-Executive Directors were not
engaged in day-to-day affairs of the Company.
Paragraph         8(k)    states      about     the        criminal
negligence on part of the applicants in engaging a
10th Pass person i.e. Jayesh for handling the
substance, which was extreme poisonous.
8.12.          Learned    Sr.      Advocate     Mr.Joshi          would
submit       that   while     the    applicants,      whom           he
represents,        are      independent        non-Executive
Directors and whereas, in any case, insofar as the
allegations with regard to shortfall and allegations
with regard to negligence in appointing a 10 th pass
person i.e. co-accused Jayesh to handle the
poisonous substance, has already been touched
upon by learned Sr. Advocate Mr.Desai appearing
for the Managing Director and whereas insofar as
the aspect with regard to independent Directors
being authorized to make financial transactions on
behalf       of  the   Company        or attending           Board
Meetings of the Company, by itself would not
denude the applicants of the status of persons of
Directors not engaged in the day-to-day affairs of
the Company in question.
8.13.          Learned    Sr.      Advocate   Mr.Joshi          would
further rely upon Section 299 of IPC, which states
about culpable homicide. Learned Sr. Advocates
would submit that Section 299 envisages certain
acts being done by a person causing death or
bodily      injury   etc.,    and    whereas     learned          Sr.
Advocate would also refer to Section 32 of IPC i.e.
with regard to general explanations and would
submit that Section 32 inter alia states that except
where a contrary intention appears, the words
which refer to an act being done would also extend
to illegal omissions. Learned Sr. Advocates would
submit that considering the definition of culpable
homicide, which requires positive acts to be
committed by the accused, in the same manner
the illegal omission should also be a specific
omission and whereas mere negligence would not
make out a case of criminal negligence against the
independent, non-Executive Directors.             Learned
Sr. Advocate Mr.Mihir Joshi, in support of such
contention would rely upon the decision of the
Hon’ble Apex Court in case of Shantibhai J.
Vaghela & Anr. Vs. State of Gujarat and Anr.,
reported in (2012) 13 SCC 231.
8.14.          Learned Sr. Advocate Mr.Joshi would also
reiterate the submissions made by the learned Sr.
Advocate Mr.Desai that for bringing the applicants
under the ambit of an offence punishable under
Section 304 of IPC, there has to be a specific
breach of duty alleged, which breach of duty was
proximate cause of death. It is submitted that the
allegation of general omission to do a particular
duty may not suffice. Learned Sr. Advocate would
thereafter rely upon the decision of the Hon’ble
Apex        Court    in    case       of   Kurban          Hussein
Mohammedali              Rangwalla           Vs.       State           of
Maharashtra, reported in 1965 (2) SCR 622 to
submit that even for alleging an offence under
Section 304A, it should be shown that the death
was the direct result of rash and negligent act of
the accused and whereas the act concerned must
be      proximate       cause        of  the    death         without
involvement of negligence of another.                              It is
submitted that such act on part of the present
applicants      i.e.   the     independent       Directors/non-
Executive       Directors        is    not  found       anywhere.
Learned Sr. Advocate Mr.Joshi would, therefore,
submit that as no case for custodial interrogation
of the independent, non-Executive Directors being
made out, this Court may consider releasing them
on pre-arrest bail.
8.15.          Learned Sr. Advocate Mr.Jal Unwalla on
behalf      of   the   applicant     of    Criminal          Misc.
Application No.15165, No.15771 and No.15169 of
2022 would submit that the applicant was an
employee of the Company namely M/s.Amos
Corporation. It is submitted that the present
applicant is holding a degree of B.E. (Chemical)
and has experience of over 23 years in this field.
Learned Sr. Advocate would submit that while the
allegation is insofar as the said applicant is that he
was       not  remaining      present   or   available           for
investigation as found at paragraph 8(d) of the
affidavit-in-reply. It is submitted that as against
the present applicant, no allegation of even
negligence has been made in the affidavit-in-reply.
It is submitted by the learned Sr. Advocate that
from the facts it would appear that the                   methyl
alcohol had been stolen by Jayesh from the
premises of the Company and had later on sold it
to other co-accused. It is submitted that while the
present applicant was appointed as Supervisor,
including over Jayesh and whereas when the
allegation is that the junior employee had stolen
the offending chemical in question, no criminality
could be presumed, more particularly there being
no positive act or even positive omission alleged
against the applicant concerned. Thus submitting
learned Sr. Advocate has requested this Court to
release the applicant on pre-arrest bail.
9.Submissions on behalf of the State:-
9.1. These applications are vehemently contested by
the learned Public Prosecutor Mr.Mitesh Amin
appearing     with   learned      APPs   Mr.Dabhi            and
Mr.Raval for the respondent State.             Learned PP
would submit that the investigation till now has
revealed that the methyl alcohol which had been
sold by the bootleggers as country made liquor
resulting   in  46   deaths      and  82    injuries         had
originated from the godown of the Company in
question, where the applicants are Managing
Director, Directors or employee.          It is submitted
that while an attempt is being made to submit that
methyl      alcohol was       stolen from      the       factory
premises, there is no material to show that                    the
applicants have taken any action with regard to
such theft.      Learned PP would, in this regard,
submit that such statements made by persons
apprehending their arrest require a closer scrutiny.
9.2. Learned PP would further submit that while
reliance is placed on Section 65A of Gujarat
Prohibition Act to submit that the material for
manufacture of laththa had been supplied by
Jayesh and not the applicant, there is as such no
material or basis to make such a submission, more
particularly when investigation has revealed that
the methyl alcohol had originated from the factory
premises of the applicants.
9.3. Learned PP would submit that financial records
of M/s.Finar Limited were analyzed and it would
reveal that there is a shortfall of 2604 ltrs of
methyl alcohol, comparing the quantity sent and
the quantity received from M/s.Amos. Learned PP
would submit that only a custodial interrogation
would reveal the details with regard to such
shortfall.
9.4. Learned PP would also refer to the licence Form
MA-1 more particularly Condition No.5(1) and 5(2)
and would submit that the licence imposes a
prohibition on the licensee.      Learned PP would
submit that Condition No.5(1) and 5(2) inter alia
prohibiting use of      methyl alcohol for making a
beverage or as a mixture with a beverage or
partially as a beverage or as an ingredient in any
medicine.    Learned PP would submit that such
being the exact nature of prohibition, having
regard to the fact that methyl alcohol had been
used in preparation of the laththa as a beverage,
the licensee i.e. the Managing Director and other
Directors cannot be heard to state that they did
not have any role in the entire episode. Learned PP
would       also    submit         that    as         far         as
Naukarnama/nomination is concerned i.e. for a
limited purpose and whereas more particularly
because the person who had allegedly stolen the
methyl      alcohol   was        a  nominated/authorized
person, the applicants cannot be heard to contend
that they may not be liable for the incident in
question. Learned PP would submit that insofar as
the said person i.e. Jayesh, who has stolen the
material in question it appears that he had
received approximately Rs.35 lac in last three
years and whereas In last one year he has
received Rs.9 lac in his bank account from the
applicant Company. It is submitted that custodial
interrogation is also required to find out the exact
nature of the transactions.
9.5. Learned PP would also submit that Section 79 of
the Gujarat Prohibition Act clearly imposes a
liability on the licensee for any act done by a
person employed by him and whereas in view of
such a specific provision the applicants cannot be
heard to state that the applicants cannot be held
vicariously liable.       Learned PP would also supply
certain       documents            collected      during            the
investigation,      more        particularly     showing            the
presence        of    the        independent/non-Executive
Directors in the Board Meeting of the Company.
Learned PP would submit that independent/non-
Executive Directors having financial authority and
attending almost 75% to 100% of the Board
Meetings of the Company would show that though
they        were   appointed          as    independent/non-
Executive Directors, yet they were engaged in day-
to-day affairs of the Company.
9.6. Learned PP would also submit that a custodial
interrogation      is    elicitation      oriented        and         an
interrogation with protection would reduce the
interrogation to a mere ritual. Learned PP in this
regard would refer to a decision of the Hon’ble
Apex Court in case of State through CBI Vs. Anil
Sharma,        reported        in    (1997)    7     SCC         187.
Learned PP would further contend that grant of
anticipatory      bail     to       the   applicants,           more
particularly when the investigation is in progress
would       prejudice     the       full, fair    and         proper
investigation and hence, it is requested that this
Court may not exercise discretion in favour of the
applicants.
9.7. Learned PP would submit that insofar as the
decision relied upon by the learned Sr. Advocate
for the applicants, except the decision of the
Hon’ble Apex Court in case of Sushila Aggarwal
and others (supra), all other judgements may not
be relevant, more particularly such decisions being
passed at the stage of quashing of complaints
under Section 482 or at various other stages and
whereas none of the decisions would be at a stage
where the Court was considering a plea for grant
of pre-arrest bail.
9.8. Learned      PP  would        submit   that     insofar         as
decision    of    Shiv     Kumar       Jatia      (supra)          is
concerned, the said decision was in context of an
application for quashing of a complaint under
Section 482 of Cr.P.C., after the charge-sheet had
been filed, whereas in the instant case, the
investigation is not complete.             Insofar as the
decision of Joseph Kurian Philip Jose (supra), it
is submitted by the learned PP that the decision of
the Hon’ble Apex Court was against the judgement
of the Kerala High Court, whereby the appellants
were convicted.      Learned PP would also submit
that while the facts of the case was also with
regard to persons dying after consuming spurious
liquor and whereas it is submitted that from the
observations of the Hon’ble Apex Court, it appears
that the liquor was adulterated with methyl alcohol
to the extent of 2.64%. Learned PP would submit
that as against the same, it is revealed that the
spurious liquor which had been consumed by the
deceased and the injured contained methyl alcohol
to the extent of 97-98%.
9.9. Learned PP would also submit that decision of
the       Hon’ble   Apex        Court   in   case        of      M/s.
Cheminova India Ltd. & Anr. (supra) was also in
context of a quashing application under Section
482 of Cr.P.C. It is submitted that insofar as the
decision in case of Shantibhai J. Vaghela & Anr.
(supra), the decision was again in context of a
quashing application. It is further submitted that
the decision of the Hon’ble Apex Court in case of
(supra) was the decision against conviction of
accused. Learned PP would submit that having
regard to the said decisions that since the
observations of the Hon’ble Apex Court were at a
completely        different       context,   therefore,            the
decision would not be in any manner applicable.
9.10.          Learned PP would also submit that insofar
as Criminal Misc. Application No.5325 of 2013 is
concerned, while the decision was rendered in
context of an application under Section 482 of
Cr.P.C., at the same time from the decision it
appears that impeccable scientific material had
been placed before this Court, which had weighed
with the Court and such not being the situation in
the instant case. It is also insofar as the decision
in case of Girishbhai Maganlal Pandya (supra),
it is submitted that the decision was rendered in
context of an application under Section 482 of
Cr.P.C., more particularly challenging the order
whereby       the  Sessions       Court     had        rejected
discharge application filed by the applicants. It is
submitted by the learned PP that as of now the
investigation is open and what would be the
charge      that  would      be   levelled     against          the
applicants is not discernible at this stage. Hence,
a decision given by this Court, where order of
discharge was challenged, may not be helpful to
the applicants.
9.11.           Learned PP would submit, in conclusion,
that even considering the submissions of the
applicants, it is clear that the            methyl alcohol,
which had caused around 46 deaths and 82
injuries, had originated from the factory of the
applicants. Learned PP would submit that since no
special circumstances has been shown by the
applicants for grant of pre-arrest bail and having
regard to the fact that investigation has prima
facie       revealed some         role of   the     applicants,
therefore, this Court may not exercise discretion in
favour of the applicants.
10.1.           Learned   Sr.       Advocate     Mr.Desai,              in
rejoinder, would take this Court through the
decision of the Hon’ble Apex Court in case of
Sushila Aggarwal and others (supra) and would
submit that the theory of power to be exercised
under Section 438 of Cr.P.C., only in exceptional
circumstances has been put to rest in the decision
of the Constitutional Bench in the said decision. It
is submitted that the Hon’ble Apex Court has
clearly observed that the accused is not required
to make out a special case for grant of anticipatory
bail.      Learned Sr. Advocate Mr.Desai, as regards
the amount of Rs.35 lac, which were travelled to
Jayesh, would reiterate his submission that the
same was for a period of three years and whereas
Jayesh was incharge of labourers, who were doing
this work. Learned Sr. Advocate would also submit
that as far as the dealing between M/s.Amos
Corporation and M/s.Finar Limited is concerned,
there does not appear to be any shortfall and
whereas it is submitted that the Companies used
to reconcile their books of accounts regularly and
as a matter of fact, till recently i.e. up to May –
June        2022  books      of    accounts     have         been
reconciled. It is also submitted that as far as the
shortfall      is  concerned,       the  Companies             have
devised a system whereby the Companies in
question would immediately refer to the other
Company on E-mail about the short fall and
appropriate reconciliation would be done. Learned
Sr. Advocate has also relied upon certain E-mails
to show that as and when E-mail had been sent by
M/s.Finar Limited showing shortfalls the same had
been        replied  and       ultimately    a     satisfactory
conclusion had been arrived at between both the
parties that there being no shortfalls.
10.2.          It is also submitted by the learned Sr.
Advocate that while the books of accounts of
M/s.Finar Limited had been looked into by the
Chartered         Accountants        appointed          by        the
Investigating       Agency        who   had    come           to      a
conclusion about 2600 ltrs of methyl alcohol being
short, but at the same time books of accounts of
M/s.Amos Corporation had not been verified.
10.3.          It is submitted that as such Gujarat Methyl
Alcohol Rules 1981, more particularly Rule 6(7)
inter alia permits writing off loss in transit or
shortage         up  to   5%       subject to   the       licensee
informing Licensing Authority within 96 hours from
the time of arrival of methyl alcohol consignment
when such transit loss exceeds 5%. It is submitted
by the learned Sr. Advocate Mr.Desai that the
shortfall of 2604 ltrs as could be discernible from
the submissions of learned PP is of the duration of
over three years and considering the extent of the
total transaction between the parties would only
come to around 0.15% of the transaction between
the Companies during the said period. Learned Sr.
Advocate would submit that the said loss being
within the permissible criteria of 5%, which could
be written off as loss without prior permission of
the Licensing Authority, such an alleged shortfall
ought not to be a reason for which custodial
interrogation of the applicants is sought for.
10.4.          Learned Sr. Advocate has also referred to
the decision of the Hon’ble Apex Court in case of
S.M.S. Pharmaceuticals Ltd vs Neeta Bhalla
& Anr, reported in (2005) 8 SCC 89 and in case
of Sunil Bharti Mittal vs CBI, reported in
(2015) 4 SCC 609 in support of his submission
that the Directors and/or the Managing Directors
could not be held responsible vicariously. Having
regard to such submissions, learned Sr. Advocate
would once again reiterate that this Court may
consider releasing the applicants on pre-arrest
bail.
10.5.          Learned  Sr.     Advocate  Mr.Desai           would
further submit that the act in question i.e. methyl
alcohol which had originated from the Company of
the applicants having been sold as spurious liquor
resulting in death of 46 persons and injury caused
to around 82 persons was absolutely unfortunate.
Learned Sr. Advocate would submit that the
applicants, without admitting or accepting the
liability and without accepting any wrong doing
and expecting any concession from this Court on
that count, would submit that just with a view to
provide some succor to the family members of the
deceased and some assistance to the injured
persons, the applicants are ready and willing to
deposit an amount of Rs.2.20 crore in the ratio of
Rs.3 lac per deceased and Rs.1 lac per injured
person, which may be appropriately directed to be
distributed by this Court.      Learned Sr. Advocate
would further submit that such deposit of the
amount is absolutely voluntary and whereas in
case at a later stage in any proceedings if the
applicants are found liable to pay any fine or
compensation with regard to the present incident,
then they will not request the said amounts
deposited to be set off against such fine or
compensation.    Learned Sr. Advocate would also
submit that an additional affidavit would also be
filed by the Managing Director undertaking to
deposit such amount before any authority as may
be deemed appropriate by this Court.                      After
hearing of this application had concluded, an
affidavit   of  the    applicant  of    Criminal          Misc.
Application No.15170 of 2022, i.e. the Managing
Director of the Company had been filed showing
willingness to contribute an amount of Rs.2.20
crore to the victims.
11.        At this stage, at the direction of this Court, the
learned PP has tendered the statement of Mr.Jayesh
Khavadiya i.e. the accused who is alleged to have
actually taken the methyl alcohol from the premises
of the Company and sold it to other co-accused,
recorded immediately after his arrest and also a
statement recorded under Section 164 of Cr.P.C.
Both the statements have been perused by this
12.        Heard learned Advocates for the respective
parties. Perused the documents on record, including
the investigation papers as well as the statement
under Section 164 of Cr.P.C., of one of the accused as
referred to herein above.
13.        While this Court does not intend to discuss the
material and evidence in detail, suffice it to state that
the      following     aspects         have   been       taken         into
consideration         by   this     Court   for   deciding          these
13.1.          While    this    Court     has   considered             the
submissions made on behalf of the applicants and
the State, as well as the statements of Jayesh
Khawadiya both before the Investigating Officer as
well as before the Judicial Magistrate, it appears to
this Court that the statement of Jayesh is one of
the most crucial aspects that would decide the role
of the present applicants;
13.2.          It prima facie appears from the statements
of Jayesh both before the I.O., and particularly in
his statement under Section 164 of Cr.P.C., that
Jayesh had sold 600 ltrs of methyl alcohol to the
co-accused for a consideration of Rs.41,500/-.                     It
appears that before the said transaction he had
sent a small quantity i.e. 1 ltr., of methyl alcohol
to the said co-accused for testing as a sample. It
also appears that the entire operation i.e. of calling
the auto-rickshaw, loading         auto-rickshaw, taking
the material to the destination spot and handing
over the material and taking the cash had been
done by Jayesh.             It also appears from the
statement, more particularly under Section 164
that Jayesh had expressed regret and remorse
over his act.
13.3.          It also appears that the transaction of
selling Methyl Alcohol was not a continuous
transaction, more particularly in view of the fact
that prior to 600 ltrs. being stolen and sold, Jayesh
had, for the first time, given 1 ltr., methyl alcohol
as a sample to the co-accused for testing;
13.4.          Insofar as the applicants are concerned, it
prima facie appears to this Court that there is no
material to allege commission of offence under
Section 302 of IPC;
13.5.          It further appears to this Court that prima
facie there is no material either alleged in the FIR
or gathered during investigation, whereby prima
facie involvement of the applicants for offences
punishable under Section 304 (Part-I) of the IPC
could be alleged;
a)         It appears that while there is no overtact
attributed to the present applicants done with
the intention of causing death, even insofar as
an omission of not doing any particular act is
concerned, prima facie there does not appear to
be any intention, which could be attributed to
the present applicants;
13.6.          Having regard to the decisions of the
Hon’ble Apex Court in case of Keshub Mahindra
(supra), as also the view taken by this Court in
Criminal      Misc. Application     No.5325        of      2013,
referred to herein above, prima facie for alleging
an offence under Section 304(Part-II) an essential
requirement would be that the accused had a
knowledge that by committing such an act of
commission or omission death was likely to be
caused. Prima facie it appears to this Court that
there is no allegation against the applicants of
committing any particular act with the knowledge
that the same would cause death;
13.7.          Such  observation,     notwithstanding             the
contention of the learned PP Mr.Mitesh Amin that
there has been a shortfall of around 2600 ltrs., of
methyl alcohol and whereas it appears to this
Court that such shortfall was spread over a period
of three years and well within the permissible
limits of writing off, as found in Rule 6(7) of the
13.8.          It also appears to this Court that the
shortfall of 2600 ltrs., was upon examination of the
books of accounts of M/s.Finar only and whereas it
would only be clear after examining the books of
accounts of both the parties as to whether there
would be any actual shortfall;
13.9.          It also appears that the books of accounts
and all records have been seized by the Gujarat
13.10.         This Court is also of the prima facie opinion
that, in view of the statements of Jayesh referred
to herein above, it would be the said accused, who
could be stated to be done an act punishable
under Section 65A(3) of the Gujarat Prohibition
13.11.         This   Court    has      also appreciated            that
Section 79 of the Gujarat Prohibition Act, which
holds the licensee vicariously liable, does not
envisage punishment of imprisonment to any
person except the actual offender and whereas
any person other than the actual offender could be
sentenced with imprisonment only of default of
payment of fine;
13.12.         This Court has also considered that the
applicants before this Court have no criminal
antecedents, and whereas the Managing Director
is aged about 58 years, one of the independent
Director is aged 90 years, the other independent
Director is aged around 84 years, the non-
Executive       Director    aged     53  years,       and        the
employee is aged 56 years.
13.13.         Considering the fact situation in context of
the law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court in
case of        Siddharam Satlingappa Mhetre v.
State of Maharashtra and Ors. reported in
(2011)1 SCC 694, it appears that while the
accusation       against      the   applicants       of      being
involved in the offence, which is a very serious
and grave offence, yet prima facie it appears that
there is neither any overt act or illegal omission,
which could be attributed to the applicants.                        It
also appears that the applicants do not have any
antecedents of being involved in any criminal
activity or being convicted and imprisoned by a
Court in respect of any cognizable offence. It also
appears that there is no apprehension raised that
the applicants are likely to flee from justice. It
also appears that while, as noted herein above,
there is no prima facie case of any overt act or
illegal     omission    as       alleged  to     have         been
committed by the applicants and whereas in any
case, since the licence to deal with the product in
question has been suspended/cancelled, there is
no likelihood of any repetition of the offences in
question.      While it does not appear that the
accusations have been made with the object of
injuring or humiliating the applicants by arresting
them, more particularly since the investigation
has prima facie revealed that the tragedy had
occurred on account of the deceased and the
injured drinking spurious liquor, which contained
Methyl Alcohol which had originated from the
factory premises of the applicants, yet as noted
herein above, in view of the prima facie findings
of there being no overtact or illegal omission
attributed to the present applicants, this Court
would be inclined to hold in favour of the
applicants.      Furthermore,       insofar         as       the
anticipatory   bail     affecting   cases        of       large
magnitude or affecting large number of people,
while it appears to this Court that the magnitude
of offence is huge, but at the same time, it also
appears, more particularly as noted herein above,
prima facie from the statement of accused Jayesh
that the applicants may not have been complicit
and thus, in the considered opinion of this Court,
anticipatory bail to the applicants would not have
any adverse consequence.         Furthermore, insofar
as the balance which is required to be struck
between the two factors, in the considered
opinion of this Court, considering the prima facie
observation of this Court that the applicants may
not be stated to have done any overtact or illegal
omission, therefore, while no prejudice could be
caused to the free, fair and full investigation, but
at the same time, arrest of the applicants would
result in harassment, humiliation and unjustified
detention of the accused and, therefore, the
balance would tilt in favour of the applicants
herein.      Furthermore, there is no apprehension
raised      by the Investigating      Officer that             the
applicants could either tamper the witnesses and
whereas       since the       complainants      are       Police
Officers i.e. the State itself, therefore, there could
not be any apprehension that they could be
threatened. Again, considering the magnitude of
the offences and the fact that the chemical which
caused large number of deaths and even large
number of injured victims had originated from the
factory of the applicants and, therefore, it could
not be said that the prosecution was frivolous, yet
considering the aspect of no specific overt act
being made out against the present applicants or
even any specific illegal omission also not being
made out and further in view of the statement of
Jayesh since it appears that the transaction of
selling Methyl Alcohol had been undertaken by
Jayesh individually and independently and also
considering the fact that such transaction of sale
of Methyl Alcohol does not appear to be a regular
feature, therefore, in the considered opinion of
this Court, discretion can be exercised in favour of
the applicants.
14.        Having regard to the circumstances noted
above, and considering the law laid down by the
Hon’ble Apex Court, this Court is inclined to
consider this application.
15.        This Court has also appreciated the gesture on
part of the applicants of providing an amount of
Rs.2.20 crore to be paid as compensation to the
victims of the unfortunate tragedy and whereas it is
clarified that the same is not an aspect which has
weighed with this Court while considering this
application.
a)         Insofar as the amount of compensation is
concerned, the same shall be deposited by the
applicants as per their undertaking within a
period of four weeks from the date of receipt of
this order with the Gujarat State Legal Services
Authority.     Furthermore, since the FIRs have
been registered within the jurisdiction of two
different     Districts      i.e. District     Botad         and
District Ahmedabad, the Secretary, District
Legal Services Authority, Botad District and the
District Ahmedabad (Rural), shall coordinate
with the Investigating Officers and the Public
Prosecutors and prepare a list of legal heirs of
the victims of the tragedy in question and a list
of persons injured.              Based upon such lists
prepared, the Secretaries of the concerned
Districts shall seek for disbursement in the
ratio of Rs.3,00,000/- (Rupees three lac only)
per deceased victim and Rs.1,00,000/- (Rupees
one lac only) for the injured victim and whereas
the Gujarat State Legal Services Authority shall
appropriately disburse the amount in favour of
the Secretaries of the concerned District Legal
Services        Authorities,        who       shall          then
appropriately disburse the amounts to the legal
heirs of the deceased victims and the injured,
after due verification of their identities.
b)         It is required to be observed here that as
per the information supplied to this Court, 46
persons have expired and 82 persons have
received injuries, therefore, the total amount of
Rs.2.20 crore would be distributed in the
manner as : 46 (deceased) x Rs.3,00,000/- =
Rs.1,38,00,000/- + 82 (injured) x Rs.1,00,000/-
= 82,00,000/- = Rs.2,20,00,000/-. It is directed
that the Secretaries of the concerned District
Legal Services Authorities shall prepare the
report insofar as the deceased and the injured
persons within a period of four weeks from the
date of receipt of this order and whereas the
same shall be forwarded as directed herein
above to the Secretary, Gujarat State Legal
Ahmedabad and upon receipt of such report,
the Secretary,    Gujarat State Legal Services
shall forthwith distribute the said amount in
favour of the Secretaries of the District Legal
Services   Authority         concerned.            Further
disbursal to the legal heirs of the deceased
victim and the injured victim shall be done
within a period of two weeks thereafter.                  The
Secretaries of the concerned Districts are at
liberty to take assistance of the learned APP of
the concerned Districts and/or the Investigating
Officer to prepare the reports.            In case any
clarification is required, it would be open for
the concerned Secretaries or the Secretary,
High Court, Ahmedabad to approach this Court.
Furthermore, in case the number of deceased
or injured exceeds the number intimated by the
Investigating Officer to this Court, then also it
would be open for the Secretaries to inform this
Court and whereas this Court hopes that
appropriate addition to the amount of Rs.2.20
crore shall be made by the applicants herein.
Authority shall supervise the entire exercise
and an appropriate report would be tendered to
this    Court   after       the entire     exercise            of
disbursement is over.
16.        This Court seeks to refer to an observation
made by a learned Single Judge of this Court
(Coram: J. B. Pardiwala, J – as he then was) at
paragraph 49 in case of                 Girishbhai Maganlal
Pandya (supra), which reads as thus:-
”49.        Dictating this judgment was a very painful
experience. The very thought of a four year old
child getting crushed beneath the tyres of his own
school bus makes my heart bleed with pain and
agony. I can also imagine the pain and agony the
parents of the deceased must be undergoing even
as on today. However, such thoughts should not
allow the mind of a judge to get boggled,
otherwise justice cannot be done. However, harsh
one may find the law, but at the same time, the
law remains the law and it has got to be
respected.”
This Court is also anguished and pained at the
thought         of 46 persons losing their lives rendering
their families destitute and 82 persons injured, on
account of a completely avoidable tragedy.                          This
Court would sympathize with the families of the
unfortunate deceased and also with the injured and
their families.        However, as observed by the Court
in the above quoted paragraph, this Court has not
allowed such thoughts to distract or boggle down its
mind while passing this order.
17.        In the result, the present applications are
allowed by directing that in the event of applicants
herein being arrested pursuant to FIRs: (1) FIR
No.11192018220218/2022               registered             with
registered with Barwada Police Station, District
Botad; and (3) FIR No.11190006220446/2022
Ranpur Police Station, District Botad,                         the
applicants shall be released on anticipatory bail on
furnishing a personal bond of Rs.1,00,000/- (Rupees
One lac only) each with one surety of like amount
each, on the following conditions that the applicants:
(a)     shall cooperate with the investigation and make
themselves available for interrogation whenever
(b)     shall remain present at the concerned Police
Station on 23.09.2022 between 11:00 a.m. and 2:00
(c)     shall     not  directly      or   indirectly     make         any
inducement,         threat   or      promise    to     any       person
acquainted with the fact of the case so as to
dissuade him from disclosing such facts to the Court
or to any police officer;
(d)     shall     not  obstruct        or   hamper      the       police
investigation and not to play mischief with the
evidence collected or yet to be collected by the
(e)     shall not leave India without the permission of
the Court and, if having passport shall surrender the
same before the Trial Court within a week;
(f)     shall at the time of execution of bond, furnish
the        permanent      residential         address         to       the
Investigating Officer and the Court concerned and
shall not change their residence till the final disposal
of the case or till further orders;
(g)     shall mark their presence once in a month (on
1st Monday) for a period of next six months at the
concerned Police Station;
18.        Despite this order, it would be open for the
Investigating Agency to file an application for police
remand          of  the   applicants        to  the      competent
Magistrate, if he thinks it just and proper and
learned Magistrate would decide it on merits. The
applicants shall remain present before the learned
Magistrate on the first date of hearing of such
application and on all subsequent occasions, as may
be directed by the learned Magistrate. This would be
sufficient to treat the accused in the judicial custody
for the purpose of entertaining application of the
prosecution for police remand. This is, however,
without prejudice to the right of the accused to seek
stay against an order of remand, if ultimately
granted, and the power of the learned Magistrate to
consider such a request in accordance with law. It is
clarified that the applicants, even if, remanded to
the police custody, upon completion of such period
of police remand, shall be set free immediately,
subject to other conditions of this anticipatory bail
order.
19.        At the trial, the Trial Court shall not be
influenced by the prima facie observations made by
this Court while enlarging the applicant on bail. Rule
is made absolute to the aforesaid extent.               Direct
service is permitted.