2.     Feeling aggrieved by the said order, appellant has preferred
present appeal under Section 14(A) of the Atrocities Act.
3.     Heard learned advocates for the respective parties and learned
APP for the respondent-State.
4.       Learned advocate for the appellant has submitted that
appellant is falsely roped in the present offence and nothing to do
with the said offence. That if the allegations levelled in the FIR is
seen, and if it is believed then also no any ingredients of Section
3(2)(5-a) of Atrocities Act are made out. That from the bare of the
FIR, it appears that no any abusive words are used by the appellant
or other persons regarding the caste of the complainant as appellant
was not aware about the caste of the complainant. That appellant has
no any criminal antecedent as per the affidavit of Investigating
Officer. Hence, it was requested by learned advocate for the
appellant to allow present criminal appeal.
5.     From the other side, learned advocate appearing for the
respondent No.2 and learned APP for the respondent No.1-State
have strongly opposed the prayer made by the appellant referring the
schedule in the Act, it is submitted that prosecution has rightly added
Section 3(2) (5-a) of Atrocities Act. That being a government
servant, appellant has committed this offence along with other co-
accused persons, which is clearly established from the contents of
the complaint itself lodged before the police authorities. It is further
submitted that prima facie, appellant is involved in the present
offence and therefore, no lenient view can be taken by this court in
favour of the present appellant. Ultimately, learned advocate
appearing for the respondent No.2 and learned APP for the
respondent State have requested to dismiss the present appeal.
6.     Having considered the facts of the case as well as arguments
advanced by learned advocates appearing for the respective parties
and learned APP for the respondent-State, it appears that on
02.09.2021 at about 8:30 p.m. in night hours, when the complainant
and one other employee were present at sub-station of G.E.B. at that
point of time, present appellant called the complainant and started
saying that whey they had cut off the lights of his village and thereby
started abusing him on phone and further it is that after some time
appellant along with other three persons came at the sub-station and
started giving kick and fist blows and also had given threates and
thereafter he had left the place and the complainant and other
employees were taken to hospital by other staff members.
7.     If we read the entire FIR, no any abusive words were used by
the present appellant or any other persons in respect of the caste of
the complainant as appellant was not at all aware about the caste of
the complainant. It also appears from the record that subsequent
report was submitted by the Police Officer of the Vadnagar Police
Station to learned Judicial Magistrate at Kheralu to add Section 3(2)
(5-a) of the Atrocities Act disclosing that     after registering the
complaint, as the complainant was member of the Scheduled Caste
or Scheduled Tribe, this Section 3(2)(5-a) was requested to be added
in the FIR. There is no mention in the subsequent report of the
Police Officer of Vadnagar Police Station that appellant had a
knowledge in respect of the caste of the respondent No.2.
Investigating Officer came into knowledge about the caste of the
respondent No.2 and therefore, this report appears to be submitted
8.     If we consider the judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court
delivered in the case of Subhash Kashinath Mahajan Vs. State of
Maharashtra reported in 2018(6) SCC 454, wherein the Hon'ble
Supreme Court has held that there is no absolute bar against grant of
anticipatory bail in cases under the Atrocities Act if no prima facie
case is made out or where on judicial scrutiny the complaint is found
to be prima facie mala fide. View taken by the High Court of Gujarat
in the case of Pankaj D. Suthar (supra) and Dr.N.T. Desai (supra)
was approved by the Hon'ble Supreme Court. From the averments
made in the complaint, basic ingredients of the offence, as alleged
are missing in the complaint. Merely any particular word alleging
someone caste would not involve the present appellant in the
offence. There are no specific allegations made by the complainant
against the present appellant in his complaint of committing any
offence       under   the   provisions       of  Sections        3(2)(5)(a),
3(g),3(p),3(r),3(s)(z)(c)& u/s. 8 of the Atrocity Act.
9.     In the case of Union of India Vs. State of Maharashtra in
Review Petition (Cri.) No.228 of 2018 in Criminal Appeal No.416
of 2018, it was opined that direction nos.(iii) and (iv) issued by the
Hon'ble Supreme Court deserve to be and are hereby recalled and
consequently we hold that direction no.(v), also vanishes. The other
directions remained as it is as there is no bar in granting anticipatory
bail. This Court has made scrutiny of the complaint and prima facie,
it is found that there are no specific averments, attracting the
provisions of the Act as mentioned in the complaint.
10.    In the case of Gorige Pentaiah v. State of Andhra Pradesh
and Ors, reported in (2008)12 Supreme Court Cases 531, it was held
that according to Section 3(i)(x) of the Atrocity Act, the complainant
ought to have alleged that the appellant- accused was not a member
of the Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe, he was intentionally
insulted or intimidated by the accused with intent to humiliate in a
place within public view.
11.    From the facts of the police papers produced on record, it
appears that there are no averments or allegations made by the
respondent No.2 to attract any provisions of the Atrocities Act.
Considering the decision rendered in the aforesaid citations and
considering the allegations made against the present appellant by the
respondent and role played by the present appellant, this Court is
inclined to accept the prayer made by present appellant.
12.    In the result, present Criminal Appeal is allowed and the
impugned judgment and order dated 20.10.2021 passed in Criminal
Misc. Application No. 504 of 2021 by           learned 3 rd Additional
Sessions Judge, Mehsana at Visnagar is hereby quashed and set
aside. The appellant is ordered to be enlarged on bail in the event of
his arrest on furnishing a bond of Rs. 10,000/- with surety of like
amount on the following conditions that the appellant:-
(a) shall cooperate with the investigation and make himself
available for interrogation whenever required;
(b) shall remain present at concerned Police Station on
09.03.2022 between 11.00 a.m. and 2.00 p.m.;
(c) shall not directly or indirectly make any inducement,
threat or promise to any person acquainted with the fact of
the case so as to dissuade her from disclosing such facts to
(d) shall not obstruct or hamper the police investigation and
not to play mischief with the evidence collected or yet to be
(e) shall at the time of execution of bond, furnish the address
to the investigating officer and the court concerned and shall
not change his residence till the final disposal of the case till
(f) shall not leave India without the permission of the Trial
Court and if having passport shall deposit the same before
(g) it would be open to the Investigating Officer to file an
application for remand if he considers it proper and just and
the learned Magistrate would decide it on merits;
13.    Despite this order, it would be open for the Investigating
Agency to apply to the competent Magistrate, for police remand of
the appellant. The appellant shall remain present before the learned
Magistrate on the first date of hearing of such application and on all
subsequent occasions, as may be directed by the learned Magistrate.
This would be sufficient to treat the accused in the judicial custody
for the purpose of entertaining application of the prosecution for
police remand.
14.    This is, however, without prejudice to the right of the accused
to seek stay against an order of remand, if, ultimately, granted and
the power of the learned Magistrate to consider such a request in
accordance with law. It is clarified that the appellant, even if,
remanded to the police custody, upon completion of such period of
police remand, shall be set free immediately, subject to other
conditions of this anticipatory bail order.
15.    At the trial, the trial Court shall not be influenced by the prima
facie observations made by this Court while enlarging the appellant
on bail.
16.      Registry is directed to send a copy of this order to the
concerned Police Station as well as learned Sessions Court
concerned through fax or email forthwith.