The present petitions have been filed by the secured creditor
assailing the order dated 8th April, 2019 followed by order dated
The  respondent/borrower    after   committing   default   and  his
account              becoming   NPA,   proceedings    were   initiated   under   the
Securitization               and   Reconstruction     of   Financial    Assets   and
Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 (hereinafter referred to
as “the Act”) and on an application filed under Section 14 of the
Act, the authorized officer along with the Commissioner on 29 th
January, 2019, took over the physical possession of the secured
asset and that came to be challenged by the respondent/borrower in
WP No.3702 of 2019 and thereafter further action was initiated by
the petitioner in publishing the auction-cum-sale notice dated 27 th
February,  2019.     Later  WP   No.7806   of   2019   came  to   be   filed
assailing the auction notice.
It reveals from the record that after filing of the writ
petitions,  the  respondent/borrower     approached    the  Debt   Recovery
Tribunal with an appeal SA No.109 of 2019 along with an application
for stay on auction, a conditional order came to be passed by the
Debt  Recovery   Tribunal    dated  28th   March,    2019   directing    the
petitioner  bank  to   proceed  with  the    auction   sale,   but   not  to
confirm the same.
The High Court, taking note of the conditional order of DRT
dated 28th March 2019, passed under the order impugned dated 8th
April, 2019 with a further direction to the petitioner to return
the possession of the subject property to the respondent/borrower
and  by  a subsequent    order  dated  13th   April,   2019  made   certain
modifications in regard to payment of instalments that became the
subject matter of challenge at the instance of the petitioner bank
by filing of the instant petitions.
While issuing notice on 3rd July, 2019, this Court granted
interim  relief   to  the  petitioner    and  directed   the  parties  to
maintain status quo.      Pursuant thereto, the subject property in
question on which security interest is created by the petitioner
remained in possession of the petitioner and it is not disputed
that the possession of the secured assets (subject property) is
still with the petitioner.
It   is   informed   to  this    Court   that   the   securitization
application filed by the Respondent borrower came to be dismissed
in default on 16th July, 2019 and no steps were taken for its
restoration by the respondent.
Since the substantive issue was to be examined by the DRT in
the pending SA No.109 of 2019 and since the respondent/borrower has
remained a defaulter and after the account became NPA, possession
of the secured assets was taken over by the petitioner bank, in
this backdrop, nothing further survives to be examined in this
petition and the special leave petition has become infructuous.
Before parting with the order, we would like to observe that
this Court is consistent of the view and can be noticed from the
judgment in United Bank of India vs. Satyawati Tandon & Ors. (2010)
8 SCC 110, that when a remedy under the statute is available and in
the    instant    case    which    indeed      was   availed     by   the
respondent/borrower, filing of a writ petition under Article 226 of
the Constitution is to be discouraged by the High Court.
Consequently, the special leave petitions in the light of the
above observations are dismissed as having become infructuous.
Pending application(s) if any, shall stand disposed of.