Present:     Ms. Riffi Bala Birla, Advocate for the petitioner.
Ms. Gurmeet Kaur Gill, Sr. Panel Counsel for respondent-UOI.
Prayer is for grant of anticipatory bail in case NCB Crime
No.30 dated 14.04.2021 under Sections 8,21,23,29,61 of NDPS Act, 1985
registered at Police Station NCB, Chandigarh.
Complaint was filed by the Union of India through Narcotics
Control Bureau, Chandigarh against Rinku Singh (petitioner), Gurpreet
Singh @ Mangal and Babbu @ Satnam Singh under Section 36-A of NDPS
Act with the allegations that on 14.04.2021 a specific information was
received by Sandeep Kumar Yadav, Assistant Director, NCB, Amritsar that
on 14.04.2021, the troops of 52 BN, BSF have recovered six packets of
suspected Narcotics Drugs, one Mobile, One plastic bottle containing some
liquid substance from the possession of one Indian national Gurpreet Singh
@ Mangal Singh and that on further search of the area two more packets of
the suspected Narcotics Drugs were recovered which the BSF wanted to
hand over to the Narcotics Control Bureau. On receipt of this information
further proceedings were carried out and notice under Section 50 of NDPS
Act was served upon the apprehended accused Gurpreet Singh @ Mangal
Singh. During interrogation of the apprehended accused, he admitted that
CRM-M-13912 of 2022                                          #2#
he came to collect the contraband on the asking of and in connivance with
the present petitioner Rinku Singh and Babbu Singh @ Satnam Singh. It
was on the basis of such information that the present petitioner was also
nominated in this case and complaint under Section 36-A of NDPS Act
instituted against him and other co-accused.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that no recovery has
been effected. The petitioner is being implicated only on the disclosure
statement of co-accused.
Upon notice, a reply by way of affidavit of Rahul Saini,
Intelligence Officer, NCB, Chandigarh has been filed on behalf of
respondent (NCB) wherein it is stated that the accused Gurpreet Singh was
served with the notice under Section 67 of NDPS Act, 1985 and he admitted
the manner and factum of recovery. He further disclosed his mobile number
as 7814583205 and Babbu's mobile number as 9465615010 and Rinku i.e
present petitioner's mobile number as 7717388860. He further disclosed
that around 10 days ago, he had met Babbu and Rinku at Joginder da dhaba
at Fazilka where Babbu informed him and Rinku that he had contacts with
Pakistani Smuggler and he would get packets of Heroin from him and they
would get Rupees 02 Lakhs for each Packet. Thereafter Babbu got him and
Rinku and checked out the area of BOP Lakha Choki, BSF. Babbu further
informed him and Rinku that on Baisakhi i.e 13th April, the Pakistani
Smuggler would come near the wire of BSF and on being signaled, they
would throw the packets inside the Indian border and both of them have to
pick those packets. Accused Gurpreet further disclosed that according to
the plan, on the day of Baisakhi, he alongwith Rinku went to the area of
BSF Chowki, Lakha Asli. Rinku sent his location from his mobile to the
CRM-M-13912 of 2022                                           #3#
Pakistani Smuggler. Rinku stopped behind the wires tied on the border and
hid in the wheat fields near the wires. After some time as per the plan, the
Pakistani smuggler threw two stones and then he also threw one stone and
thereafter, Pakistani Smuggler threw the packets of Heroin inside the Indian
Border but on hearing the sounds of packets, the BSF got alerted and came
to the place where the packets were thrown. He further disclosed that he hid
in the wheat fields and picked up those 06 packets and placed those packets
on his body. Thereafter, the BSF troops came towards him and handed over
a notice and conducted his personal search. Hence, the present petitioner
had actively participated in the conspiracy and smuggling of commercial
quantity of Heroin from Pakistan to India.
It is further stated in the reply that the co-accused Satnam Singh
@ Babbu were also arrested in this case, who made statements u/s 67 of
NDPS Act and disclosed that he knew Gurpreet Singh and Rinku. He
informed them that they had to pick the packets of Heroin thrown by
Pakistani Smuggler inside the Indian Border and they would get Rupees 02
lakhs for each packet. He further disclosed that the present petitioner ran
away from the spot and he identified the photographs of Gurpreet Singh and
Rinku. Hence, the present petitioner was actively involved in the smuggling
of Heroin and went to the BSF Chowki Lakhawali for receiving the
commercial quantity of contraband from Pakistani Smuggler. It is further
averred that the petitioner was issued several notices dated 17.04.2021,
07.07.2021 and 06.08.2021 besides being given ample time to join the
investigation but he did not join the investigation and evaded the process of
law. The present petitioner was actively involved in the conspiracy of
transporting commercial quantity of contraband from Pakistan to India and
CRM-M-13912 of 2022                                          #4#
does not deserve any relief from this Court. It is stated that the CDR
analysis revealed that there were sufficient communication between
Gurpreet Singh, Rinku Singh (petitioner) and Satnam @ Babbu. It shows
that to run the network of illegal drug business, they had frequently
communicated with each other. After analysis of CDR all accused were
found connected with each other.          All the aforesaid co-accused have
specifically named the present petitioner. The co-accused have also verified
his photographs and disclosed in detail about the plan of smuggling of
Heroin. The petitioner is found indulged in the trafficking of Commercial
quantity of Heroin after thorough investigation. Apart from the statements
of co-accused, there is substantial evidence against the petitioner in the form
of call detail records.
From the reply aforesaid, the role and active involvement of the
petitioner is apparent.
In view thereof, no ground is made out for grant of anticipatory
bail to the petitioner.