438 CR.P.C. No. - 1826 of 2022
Counsel for Applicant :- Vimlendu Tripathi,Anshul Kumar Singhal
Counsel for Opposite Party :- Sanjay Kumar Yadav
(1) Pleadings have been exchanged between the
parties and the matter is ripe for final disposal.
(2) Heard Shri Vimlendu Tripathi, learned counsel
for the applicant, Shri Gyan Prakash, learned
Senior Counsel assisted by Shri Sanjay Kumar
Yadav, learned counsel for the C.B.I. and Shri
Ghanshyam              Verma,          learned         Additional
Government Advocate representing the State and
perused the record.
(3) The instant application is being moved by the
applicant, namely, Tarun Aggarwal invoking the
powers of Section 438 Cr.P.C. that he has every
reason to believe that he may be arrested on the
accusation of having committed a non-bailable
offence in connection with Case Crime No.
RC1202017A0013, under Sections 120-B, 420,
467, 468, 471 IPC and 13(2) r/w 13(1)(d) of
Prevention of Corruption Act, police station C.B.I.
(4) From the record, it is evident that the applicant
has approached this Court after getting his
anticipatory bail rejected from the court of
sessions vide order dated 16.2.2022.
(5) Learned counsel for the applicant has drawn
attention of the Court to Clause-7 of Section 438
Cr.P.C. (U.P. Act No.4 of 2019), which read thus :
"(7) If an application under this section has
been made by any person to the High Court,
no application by the same person shall be
entertained by the Court of Session."
(6) After interpreting the aforesaid clause, it is
clear that the Legislature in its own wisdom
bestowed two avenues upon the accused with a
rider that if the accused has chosen to come to the
High Court straightaway, then he would not be
relegated back to exhaust his remedy before the
Court of Session first. In this regard, learned
counsel for the applicant has placed reliance upon
the Full Bench judgment of this Court in the case
of Ankit Bharti and others Vs. State of U.P.
and another, 2020(3) ADJ 575 in which the Bench
has directed to spell out the extraordinary and
special reasons for coming to the High Court. After
perusal of those pleadings/reasons in this regard,
this Court is satisfied that the reasons mentioned
therein are quite convincing to entertain the
present anticipatory bail application before this
Court itself.
(7) Prior notice of this bail application was served
in the office of Government Advocate and as per
Chapter XVIII, Rule 18 of the Allahabad High Court
Rules and as per direction dated 20.11.2020 of this
Court in Criminal Misc. Anticipatory Bail
Application u/s 438 Cr.P.C. No.8072 of 2020,
Govind Mishra @ Chhotu Versus State of U.P.,
hence, this anticipatory bail application is being
heard. Grant of further time to the learned A.G.A.
as per Section 438(3) Cr.P.C. (U.P. Amendment) is
not required.
(8) It is given to understand that the charge sheet
has been submitted in the matter by the C.B.I. and
the Magistrate concerned has taken cognizance to
the offence and process have been issued against
the applicant during the pendency of this
anticipatory bail application.
(9) The applicant-Tarun Aggarwal is an Advocate
and was appointed as Standing/Additional Lawyer
(panel lawyer) for the branches of Syndicate Bank
in district Ghaziabad vide appointment letter dated
8.2.2014 issued by the Assistant General Manager,
Ghaziabad. In the loan matter, the Bank often seek
a legal opinion from the panel lawyers. The
applicant was given search report-cum-legal
opinion in total thirteen matter of the Bank, out of
which in eight his search report-cum-legal opinion
found to be perfectly in order and the Bank has
acted upon his report/opinion
(10) It also come to the surface that during
investigation, the Central Bureau of Investigation
has recorded the statement of another panel
lawyer, namely, Amit Jain under Sections 161
Cr.P.C. as a witness, who in his statement recorded
under Section 161 Cr.P.C. opined that out of
thirteen cases, in which the applicant has given
the search report-cum-legal opinion, only five
matters were found to be tainted one.
(11) On this factual premise, a prosecution has
been raised against the applicant. In the F.I.R., it is
clearly mentioned that the role of the applicant-
Tarun Aggarwal, who submitted a legal opinion-
cum-search report in some of the matter, is
(12) After having indepth probe into the matter,
the only material against the applicant is the
statement of Mr. Amit Jain, the another panel
lawyer of the said Bank.
(13) A short counter affidavit filed by Shri Sanjay
Kumar Yadav, learned counsel for the C.B.I.
annexing the statement of witness-Amit Jain
recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C. I have perused
the statement of Amit Jain, Advocate containing
the six matters, in which Shri Jain has given his
(14) Shri Vimlendu Tripathi, learned counsel for the
applicant submits that Shri Amit Jain, Advocate has
given the report as incorrect, but it was given a
colour of fake search-cum-legal opinion, has been
branded by the C.B.I. This could not be for the
vested interest also or the question of perception.
The so-called 161 Cr.P.C. statement cannot be
taken as gospel thuth, that too by a professional
(15) Further Shri Tripathi has placed reliance upon
the decision of Hon'ble the Apex Court in the case
of     Central    Bureau       of    Investigation,
Hyderabad vs. K. Narayana Rao reported in
2012 (Supp.) ACC 308. The relevant paragraph
Nos. 20, 23 and 26 of the said judgment are
reproduced herein below:
"(20) The ingredients of the offence of criminal
conspiracy are that there should be an agreement
between the persons who are alleged to conspire
and the said agreement should be for doing of an
illegal act or for doing, by illegal means, an act
which by itself may not be illegal. In other words,
the essence of criminal conspiracy is an agreement
to do an illegal act and such an agreement can be
proved     either    by   direct   evidence    or   by
circumstantial evidence or by both and in a matter
of common experience that direct evidence to prove
conspiracy is rarely available. Accordingly, the
circumstances     proved before       and after    the
occurrence have to be considered to decide about
the complicity of the accused. Even if some acts are
proved to have committed, it must be clear that
they were so committed in pursuance of an
agreement made between the accused persons who
were parties to the alleged conspiracy. Inferences
from such proved circumstances regarding the guilt
may be drawn only when such circumstances are
incapable of any other reasonable explanation. In
other words, an offence of conspiracy cannot be
deemed to have been established on mere suspicion
and surmises or inference which are not supported
by cogent and acceptable evidence.
(23) A lawyer does not tell his client that he shall
win the case in all circumstances. Likewise a
physician would not assure the patient of full
recovery in every case. A surgeon cannot and does
not guarantee that the result of surgery would
invariably be beneficial, much less to the extent of
100% for the person operated on. The only
assurance which such a professional can give or can
be given by implication is that he is possessed of
the requisite skill in that branch of profession which
he is practising and while undertaking the
performance of the task entrusted to him, he would
be exercising his skill with reasonable competence.
This    is  what     the   person   approaching    the
professional can expect. Judged by this standard, a
professional may be held liable for negligence on
one of the two findings, viz., either he was not
possessed of the requisite skill which he professed
to have possessed, or, he did not exercise, with
reasonable competence in the given case, the skill
which he did possess.
(26) Therefore, the liability against an opining
advocate arises only when the lawyer was an active
participant in a plan to defraud the Bank. In the
given case, there is no evidence to prove that A-6
was abetting or aiding the original conspirators."
(16) Besides this, Shri Vimlendu Tripathi, learned
counsel for the applicant has drawn the attention
of the Court towards the appointment letter of the
applicant-Tarun Aggarwal, in which he was only
entrusted the work of issuing legal notices or
furnishing legal opinions and filing of execution
petitions/civil suits. In the afore-mentioned
appointment letter, it also mentioned that the
opinion/certification of the applicant would be an
input for the Bank decision making. Shri Tripathi
contended that it could be out of sheer oversight,
the applicant-Tarun Aggarwal could not point out
the deficiencies in the documents, but on this
bona fides can not be questioned.
(17) Per contra, Shri Gyan Prakash, learned Senior
Counsel appearing for the C.B.I. vehemently
opposed the prayer of anticipatory bail application
by contending that non-bailable warrants have
been issued against the applicant, which are
pending against him. Though, the same has been
issued during the pendency of the present
anticipatory bail application.
(18) Shri Gyan Prakash, learned Senior Advocate
further submits that Mr. Gian Chand Verma, the
then Senior Branch Manager of Ghaziabd Baishali
Branch, who had sanctioned the loans was
approached this Court by filing the anticipatory
bail application being Criminal Misc. Anticipatory
Bail Application No. 2420 of 2022 and the same
was disposed of by the Coordinate Bench of this
Court vide order dated 31.3.2022, and aggrieved
by the said order, he has filed Special Leave
Petition before Hon'ble the Supreme Court, which
was also disposed of. Thereafter, the Gian Chand
Verma, Senior Branch Manager has again
approached this Court by filing second anticipatory
bail application being Criminal Misc. Anticipatory
of 200, which is still pending before this Court and
no order has been passed in the said second
anticipatory bail application. Thus, it is contended
that the case of the present applicant is at par
with the case of Senior Branch Manager.
(19) I am afraid to accept the contention of Shri
Gyan Prakash, learned Senior Counsel. The
applicant is a purely professional Advocate, who
has allegedly given mistaken legal advice, as per
opinion of one Amit Jain, yet another professional
Advocate, but to brand every mistake as a
conspiracy, the prosecution has long way to go to
establish this fact.
(20) It has been contended by the learned counsel
for the applicant that the applicant has got no
criminal antecedents and he has not undergone
any imprisonment after conviction by any court of
law in relation to any cognizable offence
previously. An assurance was also advanced by
learned counsel for the applicant on behalf of the
applicant that he would render all requisite co-
operation and assistance in the process of law and
with the investigating agency and shall not create
any hindrance to reach to its logical conclusion
and shall not flee away from the course of justice.
(21) Learned counsel for the applicant has
strenuously argued that the applicant has been
made target just to besmirch his reputation and
belittle him in the public estimate by the
informant. Number of arguments were advanced
by learned counsel for the applicant to
demonstrate the falsity of the accusation made in
the FIR against the applicant by the informant.
Learned counsel for the applicant has also relied
upon the judgements in the cases of Arnesh
Kumar vs State of Bihar and another, (2014) 8
SCC 273; Joginder Kumar vs State of U.P. and
others (1994) 4 SCC 260 and Sanaul Haque vs
State of U.P. and another, 2008 Cri. LJ 1998, to
buttress his contentions.
(22) In this backdrop of legal as well as factual
proposition, learned counsel for the applicant has
submitted that since the applicant has already
participated in the investigation and the charge
sheet has been submitted and he undertakes that
he would regularly participate in the trial too.
(23) After the close scrutiny of Section 438 Cr.P.C.
(U.P. Act No.4 of 2019) and its relevant clauses,
the Court is satisfied that the applicant has made
out the case for interim order protecting the liberty
of applicant in connection with aforesaid case
crime during trial upto framing of charge.
(24) Looking to the facts of the case, reasonable
apprehension of arrest, taking into consideration
the gravity and nature of accusation, and there
being no possibility of his fleeing from justice, this
Court is of the view that applicant is entitled for
anticipatory bail upto framing of charge.
(25) Till the framing of CHARGE, in the event of
arrest of the applicant Tarun Aggarwal involved in
the aforesaid case shall be released on
anticipatory bail on his furnishing a personal bond
of Rs.50,000/- with two sureties each in the like
amount to the satisfaction of the Station House
Officer of the police station concerned with the
following conditions:-
(1) The applicant shall not, directly or indirectly
make any inducement, threat or promise to any
person acquainted with the facts of the case so as
to dissuade him from disclosing such facts to the
court or to any police officer or tamper with the
evidence.
(2) The applicant shall not leave India without the
previous permission of the court.
(3) In default of any of the conditions mentioned
above or it is found that applicant has obtained
this order concealing any material facts, the
investigating officer shall be at liberty to file
appropriate application        for  cancellation    of
anticipatory bail granted to the applicant.
The application is disposed of.
Digitally signed by SUMAIRA AQUIL
Location: High Court of Judicature