The Intelligence Officer, Narcotic Control Bureau (NCB), Chennai is
the complainant. The appellant, Anandam Gundluru is the accused. The
complaint against the appellant alleging conscious possession of about
1½ kg of Heroin with intention to transport illegally to Kuwait, thereby
committed offences under Sections 8(c) r/w 21(c), 22(b), 23(c) and 29 of
Narcotic Drug and Psychotropic Substances Act, tried before the Special
Court for NDPS Act Cases at Chennai in C.C.No.15/2015.
2.    To prove the charges 8 witnesses, 47 documents and 10
Material Objects were relied on the said of the complainant. The Trial court
found the accused guilty of offence under Sections 21 (c) and 23 (c) of
NDPS Act. Found him not guilty of offence under Sections 22 (b) and 29 of
the NDPS Act.
3.    Aggrieved by the conviction and sentence of 10 years RI with
fine of Rs.1,00,000/-, in default to undergo one year RI for each of the
offence, the present appeal is filed.
4.  The facts of the case as spoken by the witnesses:-
PW-1 (Mr.M.R.Aravind), the Intelligent Officer of NCB, Chennai
while in Office on 15/09/2014 received an information through phone that
one Venkateswara Rao of Chittor, Andra Pradesh (absconding accused)
through Anandam Gundluru (accused/appellant herein) planning to send
1 ½ Kg of Heroin by Fly Emirates Flight, which leaves Chennai at 21.45 hrs
that night. This telephonic information was reduced into writing (Ex.P-1)
and placed before PW-7 (Mr.Dev Anand, the Superintendent, NCB). As per
the direction of PW-7, he formed a Team and reached Chennai Airport. Got
introduced       to  Mr.S.Kathiresan     (Security  Officer,  Air    India)    and
P.Muthu Selvakumar (Senior Ramp Service Agent) and requested them to
be witnesses to the proceedings. They proceeded to the Custom
Examination Area in the depature hall of Chennai International Airport.
They started checking the passports of the passengers coming after
immigration clearance. They identified Anandam Gundluru (accused) from
his passport and interrogated him, after disclosing their identity. The
intention to search him and his baggage was conveyed to the accused
through PW-4 (A. Ravi Kannan, Surveillance Assistant, NCB). The right
under Section 50 of the NDPS Act was explained to the accused. Through
the Fly Emirates staff, the checked-in-luggage bags of the accused were
brought and identified with the baggage tags. On examining the black
colour Air bag, they found many packets of food items and at the bottom a
black colour polythene packet wrapped with brown colour adhesive tape
was found. On opening the packet, they found 3 Food Grade packets. In side
the first food grade packet, they found brown colour powder, which tested
positive to heroin, when tested with the field test kit. 958 grams of heroin
was seized and sealed with NCB mark in separate packet after drawing two
samples each 5 grams. The samples were marked as S-1 and S-2. The
balance 948 grams packet marked as P-1. Inside the second food grade
packet, they found brown colour powder, which tested positive to heroin
when tested with the field test kit. 419 grams of heroin was seized and
sealed with NCB mark, in separate packet after drawing two samples each 5
grams. The samples were marked as S-3 and S-4. The balance 409 grams
packet marked as P-2. Inside the third food grade packet, they found
crystalline powder. When tested with the field test kit, it answered
Methamphetamine. It weighed 10 grams. Two samples each 5 grams was
drawn and packed with NCB seal. The samples were marked as S-5 and S-6.
5. Thereafter, personal search was conducted. Two boarding
passes, 2 baggage tags, E-ticket to Kuwait, Passport, Kuwait Visa,
cellphone, INR Rs.500/- were all seized under mahazar Ex.P-3 in the
presence the independent witnesses S.Kathiresan (PW-6) and Muthu
Selvakumar (not examined). The seized articles M.O-1 to M.O-10 along
with the accused were brought to NCB office.
6. PW-2[Mr.N.Venkatesan], Investigating Officer, NCB, had
recorded the Statement of the accused under Section 67 of the NDPS Act,
which is marked as Ex.P-10. It was recorded in Telugu, the mother tongue
of the accused.(English free translation of it is was done by PW-4 and
marked as Ex.P-23). Being satisfied that the accused had conscious
possession of contraband and had carried it intentionally to transport to
Kuwait, he was arrested by PW-4 [A.Ravikannan], Investigating Officer,
NCB. After informing the wife of the accused about the arrest, PW-
3[Mr.D.Satish Kumar], Investigating Officer, NCB had produced the
accused along with the seized contraband before the Judicial Magistrate for
remand. The Remand Report is Ex.P-14. The accused was sent to Puzhal
Prison. As per the direction of the Judicial Magistrate, the properties were
taken back to be produced before the Special Court for NDPS Act Cases.
The properties were deposited in the NCB Godown along with Forwarding
Memo Ex.P-16. On 19/09/2017, PW-3, made a request to the Special Court
to receive the properties and out of it, to send the samples marked as S-1, S-
3 and S-5 for qualitative chemical analysis. Accordingly, the samples were
sent to the Customs House Lab. On receipt of the samples, the Assistant
Chemical Examiner, Mr.N.Ponnusamy (PW-5) submitted his report Ex.P-25
stating that the brown colour powder found in packets marked as S-1 and S-
3 answered the test for the presence of Diacetyl morphine (Heroin), whereas
the crystalline powder in the packet S-5 does not answers the test of
Methamphetamine. However, the sample may be sent to Central Forensic
Lab at Hyderabad for exact identification.
7. PW-7 [Mr.I.Dev Anand], Superintendent, NCB, Chennai after
receiving the reports from the Investigating Officer’s under Section 57 of
the Act, regarding the arrest and seizure of contraband, entrusted the
investigation to PW-8, Mr.P.Kratu Shukal. PW-8, through NCB, Hyderabad
organised the house search of the accused. The search mahazar is Ex.P-29.
The call details of the Phone No:9553063069 Ex.P-40 (user: Venkatesawara
Rao, Subscriber-his brother Chitti Babu) was collected from the service
provider. To Venkateswara Rao and to Chitti Babu, who is the brother of
the absconding accused Venkateswara Rao, summons issued thrice, but
returned. Steps to trace him taken but failed. Mr.P.Tathaiah, the father of
Venkateswara Rao and Chitti Babu, was examined. In his statement
(Ex.P-42) Tathaiah had stated that, his son Chitti Babu went to Kuwait two
years ago, but he lost contact. When two of his villagers by name Suresh
and Narayana came back from Kuwait, a month ago, they informed him that
his son Chitti Babu is detained in Kuwait prison.
8.   Finding of the trial Court:
Regarding the averment that the prosecution failed to comply the
mandate of Section 50 of the NDPS Act, during the course of search and
seizure, the trial Court has observed that, the contraband was recovered
from the airbag of the accused, which was handed over by the accused to the
staff of Flight Operator for loading after customs check. The bags were
brought back by the staff to the examination hall and searched. Therefore,
Section 50 of the NDPS Act, which is to be followed in case of search of the
person does not apply. From the evidence of PW-1 to PW-4, though
intimation about the option under Section 50 of the Act not necessary, the
accused was informed about his right and he has declined to exercise the
option to be searched before a Gazatted Officer or Judicial Magistrate.
9.   For the plea that the accused was not conscious of the
contraband found in his possession, since it was given by the absconding
accused Venkateswara Rao saying it contains wheat flour and tamarind.
Innocently, the accused received it since few more villagers also gave
eateries and snacks to be handed over to their relatives at Kuwait. The
presumption of culpability rebutted through the statement of the accused,
the trial Court, after considering the judgments in Mohan Lal –vs- State of
Rajasthan reported in [(2015) 6 SCC 222]; and Noor Aga –vs- State of
Punjab reported in [(2008) 6 SCC 417] relied by the learned counsel for the
appellant/accused and Dharmpal Singh –vs- State of Punjab reported in
[(2010) Supreme (SC) 839]; Megh Singh –vs- State of Pubjab reported in
[(2004) SCC (Cri) 58]; and Madan Lal and another –vs- State of
Himachal Pradesh reported in [2003 (7) SCC 465] relied by the Special
Public Prosecutor for NCB, held that the possession of the contraband by
the accused with “animus”, custody and dominion by referring the
statement of the accused that, initially, he was scared to receive the parcel
given by Venkateswara Rao and refused, but he convinced him and assured
nothing to get scared. The call details between the accused and
Venkateswara Rao proves that the accused was in frequent contact on the
day of his travel to Kuwait, carrying the contraband. He has received a
sealed parcel with knowledge that it contains something not to be carried.
Therefore, he cannot plead absence of culpable mental state.
10. As far as charge under Section 22 (b) of the NDPS Act,
considering the chemical analyst report received from Hyderabad Central
Forensic Lab, that the crystal power in S-5 does not answer positive to
Methamphetamine or any other narcotic drug, the complainant failed to
prove the charge under Section 22(b) of NDPS Act and hence, found the
accused not guilty of offence under Section 22(b) of NDPS Act.
11. As far as charge under Sections 8(c) r/w 29 of the NDPS Act,
the trial Court held that, since the case against the second accused
Venkateswara Rao was not taken on file, the charge of conspiracy against
sole accused not sustainable. Observing that there is no iota of evidence
available in respect of the abetment and criminal conspiracy between the
accused, acquitted the accused from the charge under Section 29 of NDPS
The Learned Counsel for the appellant submitted that, the appellant
has been truthful in his statement and had disclosed the source of the
contraband and his lack of conscious possession. The use of the expression
that he was scared to receive the parcel given by Venkateswara Rao is taken
adverse by the trial Court to infer his culpable mental state. The accused
being the first time traveller to abroad, was scared of carrying things for
others and had bonafidely expressed his apprehension, when Venkateswara
Rao requested him to carry Wheat flour and Tamarind. Further, the alleged
collection of call detail records (CDR) between the accused and
Venkateswara Rao, during the relevant period was not proved through the
manner known to law. Thathiah and the police constable who recorded his
statement were not examined as witness before the Court by the
prosecution. The Station House Officer K.V.Palle Mandal, Chittor District,
Andhra Pradesh, who certified the translated version of Thathaiah statement
was not examined. Despite that, the trial Court relied upon the statement of
the Thathiah recorded by Police Constable as admissible piece of evidence
and convicted the accused.
13. The point for consideration in this case is whether the trial
Court correct in holding the accused guilty of possession of heroin relying
upon Sections 35 and 54 of the NDPS Act, which provides for presumption
of culpable mental state and the animus to possess.
14. The seizure of 1.377 kgs of heroin at the Chennai International
Airport Examination Area from the bag of the accused is well proved
through Ex.P-2 seizure mahazar, Ex.P-3 Boarding pass, Ex.P-4 E-Ticket
receipts, baggage tags with Airport Authority seals. The accused in this case
admits the recovery of the contraband from his Airbag. According to the
accused, it was given by one Venkateswara Rao. The case of the
complainant also that Venkateswara Roa is not a fictitious person or an
15. According to the prosecution, Venkateswara Rao is an
absconding accused. The attempt to secure him had gone futile. The accused
and the said Venkateswara Rao were in contact through phone. The Call
Details record proves that for nearly 3 months the accused and
Venkateswara Rao were in touch with each other and were frequently
conversing over phone. Particularly, on the day before seizure and on the
date of the seizure i.e., 14/09/2014 and 15/09/2014 several calls between
the mobile number 9553063069 (used by Venkateswara Rao) and
8374877513 (used by the accused) recorded. The accused in his statement
Ex.P-10 (English translation Ex.P-23) has informed to the Investigating
Officer that the mobile number 9553063069 was used by Venkateswara
Rao. From the statement of Thathaiah, it is proved by the complainant that
Chittibabu in whose name the mobile number 9553063069 registered is
confined in Kuwait prison and that SIM is used by his brother
16. The letter of Idea Cellular Pvt. Ltd., along with the annexures
received by PW-8 is marked as Ex.P-39. The CAF & CDR (28 sheets),
forms part of the annexure to this communication. During the trial, the
Learned Counsel for the accused has raised objection for marking this
document, since the author of the letter i.e., The Assistant Manager, legal,
Regulatory & Alternate Nodal Officer of M/s Idea Cellular Ltd., not before
the Court to testify the document. However, the trial Court has received the
document recording the objection and relied upon the entries found in the
print out of CDR, which is a secondary evidence and falls within the
meaning of Electronic Evidence. The document received, despite objection,
but not discussed about its admissibility in its judgment. Further, the
electronic evidence was not certified by an Affidavit by the person, in
whose custody and possession of the data was available.
17. The other document relied by the trial Court to presume
culpable mental state of the accused under Section 35 of the NDPS Act is
the statement of Thathiah. This statement is recorded by a police constable
which is translated from Telugu to English by the Station House Officer.
The previous statement of an witness to a police officer is admitted and
marked as prosecution exhibit. The said document is marked through PW-8,
who is not competent to speak about the content of the document.
Nevertheless, the trial Court has admitted the previous statement of the
witness given to the police contrary to the Law of Evidence and convicted
the accused presuming that the accused had conscious possession of the
contraband.
18. The trial Court for reasons not properly explained had failed to
follow the dictum laid by the Supreme Court in Mohal lal case (cited
supra), which has followed its earlier judgments in Noor Aga and Bhola
Singh (cited supra). It has wrongly applied the dictum laid in Madan lal
and Megh Singh judgments which are factually different from the case in
hand.
19. In this case, the accused claims that he was not aware of the
content in the parcel given by Venkateswara Rao. He pleads innocence that
like few other villagers, Venkateswara Rao came and gave the parcel saying
it contains tamarind and wheat flour. He without any hesitation identified
his bag and allowed the officials to examine his bag. Till the officials
disclosed him the brown colour powder is heroin, he was not aware of the
character of the powder he was carrying. The case of the accused
consistently is that the possession of heroin was not conscious. By
preponderance of probability, the accused has rebutted the presumption of
culpable mental state. To establish that the possession was conscious, the
prosecution relies on the Call Details Record Ex.P-39 and the Statement of
20. As pointed earlier, these two exhibits are not admissible. Ex.P-
39 being an electronic evidence is not accompanied with the certified under
Section 65 B of the Evidence Act, 1872. The person responsible for the
custody of the electronic data remains not examined. No proof produced by
complainant that cell number 837487513 belongs to the accused. The
seizure of the Nokia Cell phone with SIM card, which is marked as M.O-10,
is not a proof for the fact that the SIM Card in that cell phone is 837487513.
21.  Ex.P-42, the previous statement recorded by Police Constable
under Section 161(3) of Cr.P.C had been treated par with the statement
recorded under Section 67 of the NDPS Act by the Empower Officer of
NCB authorised to summon witnesses and record statements. The trial Court
erred in referring this inadmissible document to presume culpable mental
state of the accused. The complainant had failed to probe the case properly.
To say the least, the perfunctory investigation noticed at all stage. Having
shown Venkateswara Rao, an absconding accused in the complaint, no
effort       has been taken to proceed against him further. The information
allegedly collected from Tathaiah the father of the accused that one of his
sons detained in Kuwait prison and his cell phone was used by the
absconding accused Venkateswara Rao, not further investigated to verify
the statement. The author of the letter, who gave the CDR was not
examined. Tathaiah was not examined and also the police constable, who
alleged recorded his statement also not examined. The trial Court itself not
convinced of the charge that this accused conspired with the absconding
accused Venkateswara Rao to commit the crime of drug trafficking.
22. Though not in all cases, the carrier can plead absence of
culpability, in the peculiar circumstances and facts of this case as narrated
above, the knowledge of contraband in the Airbag cannot be attributed to
the accused/appellant. Through his statement it is probablised that he had
carried the parcel given by Venkateswara Rao, without knowing that it is a
prohibited substance. By preponderance of probability, the accused had
established the absence of knowledge, contrarily Ex.P-39 and Ex.P-42
relied by the complainant does not prove that the accused was conscious of
the presence of heroin in the parcel given to him by Venkateswara Rao.
23. As a result, this Criminal appeal is allowed. The judgment
passed by the II Additional Special Court under NDPS Act, Chennai made
in C.C. No. 15 of 2015 dated 09.01.2017 is hereby set aside. Fine amount
paid, if any, by the appellant shall be refunded to him. Bail bond executed,
if any, shall stand cancelled. The accused is set at liberty in this case. The
prison authority shall release him from the prison if his presence in jail is
not required in any other case.
1.The Special Judge, II Additional Special Court under
4.The Central Prison for Men, Puzhal, Chennai.