01.  The present writ petition has been filed by the petitioners seeking a writ in
the nature of mandamus commanding upon the respondents to settle down
their medical claims (medical reimbursement) in respect of the treatment
provided to the deceased-husband of petitioner No. 1 and father of
petitioner Nos. 2 to 4. Besides this, they are also seeking relief of
compassionate employment to any of the legal heirs of the deceased-Shri
02.  The present writ petition has been preferred by the legal representatives of
Sh. Maharaj Krishan Bhat, who was working as a Telephone Mechanic in
the Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited (BSNL) at Kupwara, Kashmir.
03.  It has been averred in the writ petition that Sh. Maharaj Krishan Bhat was
the husband of the petitioner No. 1 and the father of petitioner Nos. 2 to 4
The case of the petitioner is that in the month of October, 2009 when the
deceased was performing his duties in Kupwara, Kashmir he got seriously
ill and was shifted to Government Medical College Hospital, Jammu.
Since his health condition continued to deteriorate, he was shifted to
Apollo Hospital, New Delhi in the Emergency Wing where doctors
attended him and he was advised certain tests to be carried out. Further
stand of the petitioners is that on the basis of all those tests conducted on
him, the deceased was diagnosed as suffering from blood cancer. It is
stated by the petitioners that since the family of the deceased did not have
enough resources to get him treated in the Apollo Hospital at New Delhi,
he came to be shifted to the All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New
Delhi (AIIMS) in a serious condition where he came to be admitted in the
Emergency Wing. Later on, the deceased came to be referred to the
Oncology Department of the Institute where the response of the doctors
towards the deceased was not good, as such, finding no alternative the
deceased was shifted back to Apollo Hospital, New Delhi for
04. It is averred in the petition that the petitioners have filed various
representations before the respondent Department from time to time for
providing them the medical claims (medical reimbursement) of the
deceased with all the details i.e. medical diagnosis, medical bills, etc and
also prayed for compassionate appointment of any of the family members
of the deceased. Further stand of the petitioners is that they have also filed
representation before the Minister for Communication and Information
Technology and also to the General Manager, Bharat Sanchar Nigam
Limited (BSNL), J&K Circle, Jammu, which were not accorded
consideration and as such, the petitioners were left with no other option
but to file the present writ petition.
05. Per contra, response has been filed by respondent Nos. 2 to 4 in which
respondents have taken a stand that as per the Policy guidelines regarding
Compassionate Appointment, there should be 55 or more net points for
consideration by the Corporate Office High Power Committee for
compassionate grounds but the petitioners scored 31 points only, as such,
they are to be treated as non-indigent and their case needs no consideration
and rejected.
06. The respondents have further submitted that as per the communication
received from DE NTR, Srinagar vide No. E-4/Staff/DE/SKC/2017-18
dated 04.12.2017, no medical bills have been received in the said office
from the petitioners. It is the specific stand of the respondents that no
receipt of medical bills having submitted has been even found enclosed
with writ petition also, as such, no action could have been taken by the
respondents.
07. Further stand of the respondents is that on receipt of representation, which
has been annexed as Annexure-D with the writ petition, their case for
compassionate appointment was processed but none of them were found
suitable/entitled for compassionate appointment in view of the fact that as
per the Policy guidelines regarding Compassionate Ground Appointments,
there should be 55 or more net points for consideration by the Corporate
Office High Power Committee for compassionate grounds, but the
petitioners scored 31 points only, as such, they are to be treated as non-
indigent and their case needs no consideration and rejected. It is further
stated that insofar as the claim of petitioner No. 4-Rekha Devi is
concerned, since she is married and is not dependent family member of the
deceased employee, her case was rejected on that ground also.
08. In the light of the categoric stand taken by the respondents, the petitioners
have confined their relief only with regard to the medical reimbursement.
Learned counsel for the petitioners submits that he has personally handed
over the medical bills to learned counsel for the respondents in the open
Court and this Court vide order dated 11.04.2022 granted time to learned
counsel for the respondents to consider the claim of the petitioners and
also for filing the status of the said bills.
09. Since the petitioners have not pressed their relief for compassionate
appointment, so the present petition is adjudicated only insofar as the
medical reimbursement claim is concerned.
10. The respondents have also filed a compliance report in terms of the order
dated 05.02.2020 wherein a specific stand has been taken that in pursuance
to the direction dated 05.02.2020, the Division Engineer Admin O/o DGM
Mtce NTR, BSNL Jammu issued a communication to the Director Apollo
Hospital, New Delhi vide letter No. DGMM-JK/ A-72/2019-20/32 dated
25.02.2020, for providing the date of admission and date of discharge of
deceased Sh. M.K Bhat for treatment from the said hospital. It is
respectfully submitted that even the then Accounts Officer, office of
Singh Nagar, Jalandhar, namely, Sardar Sarabjeet Singh Dua has also
visited the aforesaid Hospital on 27.02.2020 and after great & hectic
efforts was able to meet an official of the Hospital and enquired from him
about the record of the deceased namely Sh. M.K Bhat with respect to the
date of admission and date of discharge from the Hospital of the deceased
Sh. M.K. Bhat, who in turn expressed his inability to give details in this
regard because the case was very old and he gave two telephone numbers
with the stamp affixed of Indraprastha Apollo Hospital, New Delhi, for
further enquiry of two officials namely Sh. H.N Jha Mobile No.
9958290218 and Sh. Gagan Mobile No. 9958290221. Para- 4 and 5 of the
aforesaid compliance report are also reproduced as under:-
“4. It is respectfully submitted that on enquiry from those
officials of the hospital it came to know that they are posted as
AGMs and both of them telephonically informed the
respondent No.4 that the concerned person is one Sh. Surinder
Singh who is AGM (billing) having Contact. No. 9958290459.
After great efforts it was informed by the said AGM (billing)
that since the case is very old and their software has also been
changed, therefore, they are unable to trace, the date of
admission and date of discharge of Late. Sh. M.K Bhat. On
being apprised that the said information is required in
respectful compliance to the Order dated 05.02.2020 and
accordingly he was requested to provide the aforesaid
information in black and white/ in the shape of Certificate. It is
respectfully submitted where upon the said official of the
Hospital sought some time to trace the record regarding the
date of admission and date of discharge of the deceased but
nothing has been received for more than one week. When
nothing was heard from the end of hospital authorities for a
considerable period of time with regard to the issuance of
certificate in terms of Hon'ble High Court Order, the then
account officer i.e. respondent No. 4, again requested the said
official of the hospital and on the request of the said official on
13.03.2020 had even sent email from his official address to the
said official as well as to another official of the hospital on the
following email address surender_s@apollohospitalsdelhi.com
and hriday_n@apollohospitalsdelhi.com. It is respectfully
submitted that the then Accounts Officer i.e., Respondent No. 4
even sent whats app message to the said Sh. Surinder Singh
requesting for the cooperation.
5. That despite all out efforts made by the respondents as
stated hereinabove nothing has been heard from the Hospital
authorities till date. Since no record of the deceased regarding
date of admission and date of discharge has been made
available by the Hospital authorities, therefore, the petitioners
may be directed to place on record the same for the just
disposal of the writ petition.”
11. It is admitted position that the husband of petitioner No. 1 has undergone
the treatment for blood cancer from Apollo Hospital as is evident from the
medical bills annexed with the writ petition as also the remaining bills
which were handed over by learned counsel for the petitioners to the
counsel for the respondents in open Court.
12. It has been submitted by learned counsel for the petitioners that few of the
medical bills must have been missing keeping in view the fact that the age
of the widow as she may not have kept all the medical bills.
13. Learned counsel for the petitioners submits that whatever bills were lying
with petitioner No. 1, the same had been submitted to learned counsel for
the respondents for processing but till date the respondents, inspite of
various representations from time to time, have not accorded consideration
to the medical reimbursement claim of the petitioners.
14. A Scheme has been formulated for medical policy for the BSNL
employees known as “BSNL Employees Medical Reimbursement Policy”
which has come into force on 24.02.2003 and Clause 1.5 of the aforesaid
Scheme specifically provides that all serving and retired employees of
BNSL including deputationists would be eligible under this Scheme.
Clause 1.5 is reproduced as under:-
“All serving and retired employees of BSNL including
deputationists will be eligible for this scheme. However, the
employees in order to avail of this scheme have to opt for this
scheme whereby they will not be allowed the facility under CGHS
Scheme. The employees opting for this scheme, can avail of
Domiciliary treatment either from P & T dispensaries or from any
Registered Medical Practitioners (RMPs) depending on their option
to be exercised while registering for this scheme. The employees
opting for this scheme will be eligible for Indoor treatment as per
this scheme.”
15.  From a bare perusal of the aforesaid Scheme, it is emphatically clear that
by virtue of clause 2.2.0, an employee (including retired employee) and
his/her dependants shall be entitled to reimbursement of expenses at the
approved rates at all hospitals recognized from time to time by the
management. For facility of reference, clause 2.2.0 is reproduced as under:
“An employee (including retired employee) and his/her
dependants shall be entitled to the reimbursement of expenses
at the approved rates at all hospitals recognized from time to
time by the management. Till such time as approved rates in
recognized hospitals are not notified by BSNL management,
the reimbursement will be as per actual expenses basis.
Entitlement under this clause will be separate and distinct from
the ceiling amount prescribed in para 2.1.0 and 2.1.1 under
domiciliary/outdoor treatment. All expenditure incurred in
connection with the treatment will be reimbursable subject to a
limit on the room rent which will be as per Annexure-I”
Entitlement of Room/Bed for Indoor Treatment
5.       CMD & Board Directors (Full Time)  Deluxe room with A.C.
16. The aforesaid Scheme also provides for recognized hospitals/nursing
homes and clause 2.2.2 provides that in emergency cases, the
reimbursement would be allowed for treatment in non-recognized hospital
with the approval of CGM for field office employees and concerned
Director of BSNL Board for C.O. employees. Clauses 2.2.2. and 2.2.3 are
2.2.2    Treatment in non-recognised hospitals:
In emergency cases, the reimbursement will be allowed for
treatment in non-recognised hospital with the approval of
CGM for field office employees and concerned Director of
BSNL Board for C.O. employees. The amount will be restricted
to rates applicable for a particular recognized hospital to be
notified by CGM/BSNL C.O.
2.2.3 Advance for medical treatment in hospital:
Working Employees may be allowed advance towards
expenses on hospitalization where long duration treatment or
major operation becomes necessary. Advance shall be paid to
the employees, based on estimates to be obtained from the
hospitals as per CGHS scheme of Central Government.
17. Clause 3.0 deals with the procedure for reimbursement of claim which
inter alia provides that all claims of medical expenses shall be made in
prescribed proforma supported by necessary bills, vouchers, certificates
and prescriptions etc. and shall be subject to the procedure laid down by
the management from time to time.
18. Thus, from a bare perusal of the aforesaid Scheme, it transpires that the
respondents were under legal obligation qua the petitioners to consider
their claim for reimbursement of expenses at the approved rates
inconformity with the aforesaid BSNL Medical Reimbursement Scheme
which has come into force w.e.f. 24.02.2003.
19. While according consideration to the case of the petitioners, the
respondents have to keep in mind that the technicality of the rules and
regulations are not required to be followed just in a mechanical manner so
as to frustrate the very purpose of the Scheme. Each case has to be
examined on its own facts before taking any final decision. It goes without
saying that to preserve health and medical aid in furtherance of the self
preservation is a part of right of life as envisaged under Article 21 of the
Constitution of India and in the present case, the petitioners are held
entitled for medical reimbursement of their expenses.
20. The Apex Court, in its recent decision in the case of Shiv Kant Jha Vs.
Union of India reported as 2018(3) SLR 328 (S.C.) has observed as
13. It is a settled legal position that the Government employee
during his life time or after his retirement is entitled to get the
benefit of the medical facilities and no fetters can be placed on his
rights. It is acceptable to common sense, that ultimate decision as to
how a patient should be treated vests only with the Doctor, who is
well versed and expert both on academic qualification and
experience gained. Very little scope is left to the patient or his
relative to decide as to the manner in which the ailment should be
treated. Speciality Hospitals are established for treatment of
specified ailments and services of Doctors specialized in a
discipline are availed by patients only to ensure proper, required
and safe treatment. Can it be said that taking treatment in Speciality
Hospital by itself would deprive a person to claim reimbursement
solely on the ground that the said Hospital is not included in the
Government Order. The right to medical claim cannot be denied
merely because the name of the hospital is not included in the
Government Order. The real test must be the factum of treatment.
Before any medical claim is honoured, the authorities are bound to
ensure as to whether the claimant had actually taken treatment and
the factum of treatment is supported by records duly certified by
Doctors/Hospitals concerned. Once, it is established, the claim
cannot be denied on technical grounds. Clearly, in the present case,
by taking a very inhuman approach, the officials of the CGHS have
denied the grant of medical reimbursement in full to the petitioner
forcing him to approach this Court.
21. Even the Apex Court has been so liberal in medical reimbursement case
and held that the employee could not be denied reimbursement solely on
that ground in case an employee had taken treatment in speciality hospital
by itself which was not at all recognized or approved by the State or not
included in the Government order.
22. It also goes without saying that the amount of medical reimbursement is
constitutional obligation towards sufferer which is a beneficial legislation
in a welfare State for its employees, therefore, the rules and instructions
formulated should be construed liberally in favour of the employees for
granting them the relief rather than to adopt the wooden attitude to deprive
the person of his/her dues.
23.    Thus, there is no denial of the fact that under Article 21 of the Constitution
of India provides for an obligation to bear the medical expenses of its
employees while in service and also after having retired. The respondents
on receipt of the aforesaid bills and various representations from time to
time cannot deny to process the claim of the petitioners and the long delay
in such like matters cannot be condoned on the part of the respondents.
24.    Thus, in the light of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court
coupled with the BSNL Employees Medical Reimbursement Scheme, the
respondents are under legal obligation to process the medical bills of the
petitioners expeditiously and disburse the same.
25.    Accordingly, the present writ petition is allowed and the respondents are
directed to process the medical bills of the deceased and release the same
in favour of the petitioners within a period of two months from the date
the copy of this order is served upon respondents in respect of which all
the bills required have already been submitted by the petitioners besides
completing all the medical formalities.
26.    In view of the above, the present petition is disposed of along with
connected application(s).