The petitioners in these petitions call in question First
Information Report registered on 17-02-022 by the Central Bureau
Investigation in No. RC0782022E0001 for offences punishable
under Sections 13(2) read with 13(1)(d) of the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988 (hereinafter referred to as ‘the Act’ for short)
and Section 120B read with Section 420 of the IPC.
2. The petitioner in Criminal Petition No.7325 of 2022 is the
company/accused No.1. Petitioners in Criminal Petition No.7345 of
2022 who are accused 2 to 5 are Directors of the Company/accused
No.1.   Since all the petitioners challenge the very same crime
registered against them, these cases are taken up together and
considered by this common order.
3. The petitioner in Criminal Petition No.7325 of 2022 is
‘Associate Lumbers Private Limited’ (hereinafter referred to as ‘the
Company’ for short). The Company, one incorporated under the
Companies Act, 1956, is engaged in the business of trading timber,
teakwood, packing cases, plywood and other wood products. It is
the claim of the Company that the Company had been a customer
of the then Corporation Bank (‘the Bank’ for short) presently
merged with the 2nd respondent/Union Bank of India since 1988.
On 05-03-2003, on an application made by the Company, a loan
facility was extended by Poonja Arcade Branch, Mangalore of the
Bank. The same was sanctioned and a credit limit of Rs.23/- crores
was      granted  on   05-03-2003.        The    credit    limit   was
extended/enhanced from time to time at the request of the
petitioner and on 21-09-2015 loan account was renewed and
enhanced to Rs.60/- crores. The date     21-09-2015 was the last of
the renewal made for a credit limit of Rs.60/- crores. It is the claim
of the petitioner/Company that due to economic slowdown in the
domestic market there was severe cash crunch generated and the
Company was not in a position to pay the debt in time.
4. On account of the account becoming a non-performing
asset, the Bank took several actions against the petitioner/
Company by initiating proceedings under the SARFAESI Act,
through which a portion of the outstanding dues to the credit facility
was recovered. Not stopping at that, the Bank in terms of Reserve
Bank of India guidelines declared the account of the Company to be
a fraud, and account holders to be willful defaulters and initiated
several proceedings to recover the amount. Those proceedings are
not the one that is the issue in the case at hand. After initiation of
proceedings under the SARFAESI Act and also getting in possession
of the recovery certificate from, the hands of the competent fora,
the Bank registered a complaint against the petitioner/Company on
15-02-2022 terming the account to be a fraud and alleging offences
of cheating, criminal conspiracy by the petitioner and its Directors.
5. On the basis of the said complaint, the Central Bureau of
Investigation   (‘CBI’ for  short)  registered   FIR   in  Crime   No.
RC0782022E0001 for offences punishable under Section 13(2) r/w
Section 13(1)(d) of the Act and Section 120B r/w 420 of the IPC.
The petitioners in both these petitions called in question the action
of the Bank in declaring the account of the petitioner to be a fraud
in terms of the Master Circular issued by the RBI before this Court
in Writ Petition No.5223 of 2022.     A Division Bench of this Court
directed that no coercive action shall be taken against the
petitioners pursuant to the fraud classification. After passing of the
aforesaid interim order, the present petitions are preferred by the
petitioners calling in question the very registration of crime. This
Court by an order dated 12-08-2022 following, what the Division
Bench had directed i.e., not to take coercive steps, directed that no
coercive steps shall be taken against the petitioners.
6. Heard Sri Ashok Haranahalli, Sri Hashmath Pasha and
Sri   C.V.Nagesh,    learned  senior   counsel   appearing   for  the
petitioners, Sri P.Prasanna Kumar, learned Special Public Prosecutor
for respondent No.1 and Sri V.B.Ravishankar, learned counsel for
7. The learned senior counsel Sri Ashok Haranahalli and Sri
Hashmath Pasha, in unison, would contend that the complaint itself
narrates that there is no staff accountability issue in the case at
hand and the classification of fraud of the petitioner/Company is
after 4 years of getting recovery certificate by the Bank at its
hands. They would submit once having initiated proceedings under
the SARFAESI Act and having obtained recovery certificate against
the petitioners, the account could not have been declared to be a
fraud and complaint of the nature that is found could not have been
registered against the petitioners. The counsel would submit that
the Bank has sold immovable properties and other securities that
were available with them. The crime is registered on a solitary
score that those properties did not fetch the amount that the Bank
was entitled to get and, therefore, would submit that the entire
proceedings should be obliterated.
8. The learned senior counsel Sri C.V.Nagesh would take this
Court through the complaint so registered. The complaint is
registered for offences punishable both under the Act and the IPC.
For invoking the Act, there is no public servant involved in the case
at hand. The public servants are given a clean chit in the complaint
itself. For the IPC offences, the CBI would not get jurisdiction to
register a complaint against the petitioner/ Company and when the
CBI had no jurisdiction to register the complaint the entire
proceedings have to be quashed. He would further emphasise the
fact that the CBI draws its strength for entering into these
proceedings only on the basis of Master Circular issued by the
Reserve Bank of India which cannot confer jurisdiction, as any
circular or Master Circular issued under any enactment will not
confer jurisdiction, but only in cases where the statute itself
confers. Therefore, he would submit that the entire registration of
crime by the CBI is rendered without jurisdiction.
9. Joining the issue, the learned senior counsel Sri Hashmath
Pasha would submit that the offence punishable under Section 120B
of the IPC cannot be a standalone offence as the FIR is for the
offences punishable under Section 120B r/w 420 of the IPC; the
substantive offence being Section 120B of the IPC. Therefore, the
entire proceeding is vitiated.      He would also place reliance on a
judgment     rendered    by   this   Court   in the  case   of STEEL
HYPERMART INIDA PRIVATE LIMITED AND OTHERS v. CBI
AND ANOTHER – Criminal Petition No.919 of 2021 decided on
2.08.2022 to contend that once a writ petition is pending against
declaration of the account of the petitioner to be a fraud, the entire
action of registration of crime is vitiated.
10. On the other hand, the learned Special Public Prosecutor
representing the respondent/CBI Sri P.Prasanna Kumar            would
vehemently refute the submissions to contend that the Circular
itself empowers the CBI to register the crime. In fact, the Bank has
to complain to the CBI in terms of the Master Circular if the loan
transaction or the amount that has slipped into becoming an
NPA/fraud is between Rs.25/- crores to Rs.50/- crores. Admittedly
in the case at hand, the amount does come within the said figure.
The circular also directs that even if a public servant is not involved,
such cases shall be entrusted to the CBI only. He would, therefore,
contend that the question of CBI having no jurisdiction is imaginary
and deserves to be rejected. He would place reliance upon the
judgments of the Apex Court which have recognized the said Master
Circular and entrustment of case to the CBI in the case of
ANOTHER v. RESERVE BANK OF INDIA – (1992)2 SCC 343;
Five Judge Bench judgment of the Apex Court in the case of
CENTRAL BANK OF INDIA v. RAVINDRA AND OTHERS -
(2002) 1 SCC 367 and a judgment of the Apex Court in the case
of R.VENKATKRISHNAN v. CBI - (2009)11 SCC 737. The
learned counsel would further submit that Section 120B of the IPC
is a standalone offence and can definitely be charged with and
proceeded in a trial. He would contend that FIR is now registered.
It cannot be an encyclopedia of offences or the offenders. The
matter is now under investigation. Public servants who are now
given a clean chit can also be added later, at the time when the
charge sheet is filed. Therefore, it is too early in the day to contend
that in the absence of public servant, there cannot be a crime under
the Act. He would also submit that the petition be dismissed, as
there is no scope for entertainment of the petition at this juncture.
11.   The    learned   counsel     appearing    for   the   Bank
Sri V.B.Ravishankar, taking this Court through the documents
appended to the statement of objections would contend that the
account of the petitioners though was old, it is on the auditing that
took place in the year 2015 the Bank gets to know that
hypothecated movable goods – timber and wood articles were
clandestinely sold by the petitioners.     Though the Bank also had
sold movables, the sale of goods by the Company has generated a
loss of Rs.23/- crores to the Bank and therefore, it was declared to
be a fraud, as out of deceit they have sold hypothecated goods.
Therefore, the learned counsel would contend that it is a matter of
trial as the petitioners have defrauded the Bank. Both the counsel
appearing for the respondents, in unison, seek dismissal of the
12. I have given my anxious consideration to the submissions
made by the respective learned counsel and perused the material
on record.
13. The afore-narrated facts are not in dispute as they are all
a matter of record, but they would require reiteration with little
elaboration. The Company and the Directors of the Company are
the petitioners in the cases at hand. The business of the Company
is not in dispute. The loan that was sanctioned to the petitioners’
right from 2003 is also not in dispute. Last of the renewal and
sanction of the enhanced capital is on 21.09.2015 is an undisputed
fact. The sanction accorded to the petitioners for extension of credit
limit up to Rs.60/- crores was on the following conditions:
Security:         Hypothecation of stocks/book debts of
the Company.
Rate of Interest: BR+3.10% i.e., 13.35% p.a. at present
subject to revision from time to time. The
Bank reserves the right to vary the negative
spread, at any future date.
1.   Drawings to be regulated within available Drawing Power.
2.   The goods procured on DA basis under LC, if any, shall be
shown separately in the stock statements and the same
shall not be reckoned for computation of drawing power
until such raw materials are fully paid for by the
3.   The Company shall submit monthly statement on
stock/receivables within 45 days from the close of
the month to which it pertains. The Book Debt
statements submitted monthly shall contain age
wise breakup of receivables and details of bills
discounted/purchased, if any.
4.   The book debts of upto 180 days are to be reckoned for
the purpose of arriving drawing power. Branch to inspect
regularly and deeply at least in every month the entire
receivables quality to ensure that the entire receivable is
realizable while computing for DP.
5.   The Company shall; arrange to submit once in six
months the statement of Book debt duly certified by
a Chartered Accountant., with age-wise break-up.
6.   Working capital demand loan shall be carved out as per
our extant internal guidelines.”
1.   Releases under the limit be made only against irrevocable
LCs/confirmed orders.
2.   Advance under the limit shall be covered under WTPCG of
ECGC. Necessary reporting requirement shall be complied
with.
3.   No PCL shall be released if earlier PCL/export bill has
become overdue.
4.   In the event of non-shipment/non-export of goods
covered under the packing credit loan, the rate of interest
shall be charged at commercial rate as per the Bank/RBI
rules.
5.     Packing credit shall not be granted for exports to
Countries placed under restricted cover by ECGC.
6.     Stock statement shall be submitted by the Company at
monthly intervals.
Branch is permitted extension of the period of the PCFC facility
of USD 250000 which has fallen due for closure on 31-12-2013
by another 90 days subject to compliance of requirements of
reporting to ECGC.”
After the enhancement of loan in terms of conditions stipulated
therein, a stock audit report of the Company was undertaken by
one M/s Kamath & Kamath Associates. What comes out is the
opinion or summary of the said audit which reads as follows:
Availability of adequate drawing power in relation to limits
sanctioned/availed from the Banking system:
Total       Working    Total           balance  Aggregate     Excess of
Capital        (W.C)   outstanding under WC     drawing       drawings
limits    sanctioned   limits     from     the  power         over DP
by the Banking         Banking system as on     available
System                 date of inspection
Rs.60.00 crores         Rs.59.14 Crores        Rs.58.01        1.13
The drawing power is restricted to the limits sanctioned.
Note: In case of excess of drawings over DP, the share of DP of
Corporation Bank vis-à-vis excess drawings, if any, may be
mentioned separately.
In view of the time gap between the end of the month and
the submission of the stock/book debts statement (45
days), we have calculated the availability of the necessary
drawing power as on 30-06-2015, the last stock/book debts
statement made available to us. A proper reconciliation of
the stock and book debts as on the date of the statement
and as on the date of our verification has been made by us.”
The summary/observations and general check list are as follows:
“1.   The unit has not been subjected to legal audit as
per the terms of sanction. A search report may be
obtained after inspection of the records for creation
of the appropriate charge on the assets of the
company.
2.    The limits are secured collateral by EMG of LAND &
Building of the company situated at Vas Lane,
Attavar, Mangalore, valued at Rs.40 lakhs. The
latest tax paid receipt & annual Encumbrance
Certificate of the property mortgaged is not held.
Valuation reports of the properties mortgaged are
not held.
3.    The sanctioning authority has waived insurance for
stock of round logs held by them. The company
does not hold insurance for cut piece woods except
as stated elsewhere. The company’s undertaking to
assume full risk and responsibility in case of loss is
not held by the branch.
4.    The company is not showing the stock received
under import bills received on DA basis, if any. Age
wise bifurcation of book debts as certified by
Chartered Accountant is not held on half-yearly
basis as stipulated.
5.    The company has a credit rating from CARE with the
rating of “CARE D” as against “CARE B+” in the
previous rating cycle.
6.    The company enjoys the status of a star export
house for the period 1-04-2012 to 31-03-2017 as
per the certificate awarded by the Office of the
Zonal Joint Director of Foreign Trade, Ministry of
Based upon the said audit report and other factors i.e., inspection
carried out in the stock yard, a communication is made by the Bank
which reads as follows:
zMr.Satish S.Agicha, All C/o No.1 as above.
Sub: Inspection of Stock at Chennai hypothecated to the Bank
for the credit facilities availed.
With reference to the above, we wish to inform you the
On 7-02-2018 we have visited Chennai to inspect the
stock held/stored at 33/1A, Annai Avenue, Vinayaga
Chennai-600060. In the earlier occasions you had
arranged for the inspection of the stock at the said place
only. At this time when we visited the above said
place/yard, we have not found the name board of your
Company. The Security guard present in the place has
informed that you have shifted all your stock from the
said yard/place to some other place and he is not aware
of the address of the new place reportedly shifted by you.
We have made all efforts to locate/ascertain your new
address/stock yard at Chennai for stock inspection and even
tried your telephone number to ascertain the address. However,
we could not get you on the telephone and also could not locate
your new address where you have stored the tock in trade.
Therefore, please arrange for the inspection of stock
hypothecated to the Bank for the loan availed by you
immediately.”
This is the genesis of the problem. The communication is made on
08-02-2018 based upon the aforesaid report as continuously the
stocks which were held in hypothecation were not being divulged to
the Bank. It is then action under the SARFAESI Act had been taken
up and proceedings before the Debt Recovery Tribunal were also
initiated. These are facts that are not in dispute. Later, when the
aforesaid communication for divulging of the address where the
stocks are kept did not come about, the Bank then declares the
petitioners’ account to be a fraud under the Master Circular on fraud
classification issued by the Reserve Bank of India in the year 2019.
During the period when the decision of declaration of fraud was
being taken to its logical end, the Debt Recovery Tribunal in
O.A.No.1136 of 2017 initiated by the Bank has ordered in favour of
the Bank. A Review Application is filed by the petitioners and the
same is pending consideration before the Debt Recovery Appellate
Tribunal. Those are not the issues in the case at hand.
14. On declaration of fraud a complaint comes to be
registered against the petitioners before the CBI by the Bank on 15-
02-2022. Clauses of the complaint which are germane to be noticed
are extracted hereunder for the purpose of ready reference:
M/s Associate Lumbers Pvt.Ltd. (ALPL) was incorporated on 10th
May 1986 as a private company for carrying on the business of
trading in timber. The company was provided with CIN –
U20101MH1986PTC039719 and registration No.039719. The
Company has its Registered Office at Associated House 85-A,
Victoria Road, Mustafa Bazar, Mumbai-4000010 and
operates from its offices at Mumbai, Delhi, Kandla, Tuticorin and
Mangalore. The Associate Lumbers group of companies is an
agglomeration of two business houses viz., (i) M/s Farouq
Soudagar Darvesh & Co and (ii) M/s Jawahar Saw Mills (Agicha).
The Company imports logs from foreign countries (particularly
from Myanmar) through different parts of India, viz., Mangalore,
Cochin, Chennai, Tuticorin, Visakhapatnam and Mumbai. The
affairs of the Company are managed by Mr. Mohamed Farouk
Suleman Darvesh and Mr. Manoharlal Satramdas Agicha, who
are the Directors of the Company.
resident of 85-A, Victoria Road, Mustafa Bazar, Mazagaon,
Mumbai – 400001 also at 7 Perry Cross Road, Bandra (W),
Srichand Satramdas Agicha (DIN-00364370) resident of
Kunjethur Village, Manjeshwar Taluk, Kasargod District also at
Ebrahim Suleman Dervesh (DIN -00364630) resident of 85-
also at ‘HOOR MANZIL’ 7 Perry Cross Road, Bandra (W),
Manoharlal Satramdas Agicha (DIN – 00364700) resident of The
also at No.6, Perry Cross Road, Bandra (W) Mumbai-400050.
The company was doing business with our Poonja Arcade
Branch, Mangalore (erstwhile Corporation Bank) since 2003. The
limit of RS.60.00 crores were last renewed on 27-03-2014 with
sub-limits of Import Trust Receipt Loa/CC (Hyp.) WCDL/dl OF
50.00 Crores., PCL/PCFC/FDBN/P/ PSCFC of 14.00 crores,
DBC/BDD/BE 10.00 Crores, Bank Guarantee of Rs.10.00
Crores., Buyers credit of 30.00 Crores and foreign Currency DL
of 37.80 Crores. A short renewal was done on 21-09-2015 of
the above limit of 60.00 crores. Personal guarantee was given
for the above mentioned limits by 4 directors and 3 other
persons. The Account was classified as NPA as the account
remained irregular and interest was not served for more than 3
months as on 29-01-2016 effective date of account turning NPA
was 31.10.2015 as per RBI Inspection and the laid down
procedure of the Bank. The outstanding amount as on the date
of NPA was Rs.560058977.00.”
4.1    The investigation conducted by Vigilance Division, Head
Office, Mangalore has observed the following:
4.2    The then Corporation Bank, Poonja Arcade Branch,
Mangalore obtained a letter of Undertaking from the
Company stating that it would not undertake guarantee to
any other company without the permission from our Bank
during the tenure of credit facility. However, the borrower
Company extended the corporate guarantee to other loan
accounts.
4.3 On verifying the statement of the CC account of the
Company, it was found that the sale proceeds were not
routed through said account. The major part (more than
50%) of the Sundry Debtors were of the sister concerns
viz., M/s Farouq Soudagar Darvesh & Co Pvt.Ltd. and M/s
4.4 M/s Farouq Soudagar Darvesh & Co.Pvt.Ltd. have the
directors Mr. Mohd. Farouk Suleman Darvesh, Mr.Ebrahim
M.F., Darvesh and Mr.Rurab Darvesh.
4.5 M/s Jawahar Saw Mills having registered address at 47,
have directors Mr. Gaurav M. Agicha, Mr., Rajesh
4.6 It can be clearly seen that the directors of all the
companies belonged to the same families i.e., ‘Darvesh
and Agicha family’ and hence they could easily divert the
funds.
4.7 During 2014-15 an amount of Rs.9.19 crore was diverted
from CC account through NEFT/RTGS/ transfer to the
accounts of M/s Farouq Soudaar Darvesh & Co.Pvt.Ltd.
4.8 In addition to the above, an amount of Rs.2.82 crore was
diverted from CC account of M/s Associate Lumbers
through RTGS/NEFT to their account held with Union Bank
of India, where M/s Farouq Soudagar Darvesh & Co. Ltd.
is enjoying credit limits. The above details indicate
diversion of funds.
4.9 It was observed by the Bank officials and stock auditor
that the stocks of the company claimed to be held at
Chennai yard was not found at the time of inspection. The
company had disposed of the stocks without taking prior
consent of the Bank and did not bring the proceeds to
clear the dues of the Bank.
4.10 The Branch has reported that even though the
Company/Directors have the capacity to repay the loan,
they are not extending any co-operation to clear the
overdue.
4.11 Stock Audit Observations: As per the Stock Audit
Report dated 9-09-2015 conducted by M/s Kamath
& Kamath Associates, the total Book Debts as on
30.06.2015 was Rs.32,75,12,625/-, outstanding up
to 180 days. The Associate Concerns viz., M/s
Jawahar Saw Mills and M/s Farouq Soudagar
Darvesh & Co.Pvt.Ltd. were having more than 50%
of the total outstanding of the Book Debts
[Rs.2,09,25,208/- and Rs.14,55,01,571.00 (6.38%
and 44.43%)]. As per the auditors, there was an
excess drawing, aggregating to an extent of Rs.1.13
crore over the aggregate DP available for the
working facilities.
The above reports clearly indicated diversion of funds and the
account was declared as fraud on 12-04-2019 and the same was
reported to RBI on 2-05-2019. We respectfully submit that the
loan is not a consortium loan account.
The sale proceeds of the stock of Company were not
routed through their CC account held with the Branch and
the Company resorted to Diversion of Funds. The major
part (more than 50%) of the Sundry Debtors of the
Company pertains to its sister concerns viz., M/s Farouq
Soudagar Darvesh and Co.Pvt.Ltd., and M/s Jawahar Saw
Mills. The stocks of the Company were disposed of by the
company and proceeds not brought in to clear the Bank
SARFAESI: Demand notice issued on 08-03-2017; Mangalore
property sold out (e-auction dated 12-02-2019) and registered
in favour of buyer in April 2019 for Rs.1.00 crore. Possession
notice of ‘Sharma Resorts Complex’ Gandhidham, District –
Kuchehh State – Gujrat have been issued on 14-06-2017.
Demand notice dated 6-12-2017 and possession notice dated
21-06-2018 have been issued for Kirti Nagar Packaging
Complex, Kriti Nagar, New Delhi. The Bank have been ordered
to maintain Status Quo against the Kirti Nagar property under
SA 276/2018 by DRT-1, New Delhi. The case is now listed 18-
02-2022 for hearing matter.
Suit file: DERT Suit is filed in Bangalore DRT-1 on 18.07.2017
(O.A.1136/2017) has been disposed on 29.01.2021.
We submit that the documents pertaining to the account are
with the Bank the same will be produced as and when required.
We also submit that the Staff Accountability Study has
been conducted in the account and no staff found
accountable. However, the role and involvement of any
unknown persons or others may also be looked into.
In view of the above facts, we request you to
register our complaint against the Company M/s
Associate Lumbers Pvt.td., and its directors and any other
unknown persons including any public servant involved
for committing the act of fraud with an intention to gain
wrongfully and thereby causing wrongful loss to the Bank
to the extent of Rs.122.19 crores. We request you to take
appropriate actions against those involved in committing
the offences of Fraud, Cheating, Criminal breach of trust
and criminal misappropriation of funds. All the required
documents connected to this complaint are with the Bank
and will be provided to your office as and when
required.”
It is based upon this complaint, a FIR comes to be registered by the
CBI.    The issue now to be considered is, in the teeth of the
complaint, not alleging offences against any of the staff or public
servants, whether a complaint can be made to the CBI and the CBI
in turn could have registered a crime. The Reserve Bank of India
has issued certain Master Circulars or guidelines for Prevention,
Classification and Reporting of Frauds and is communicated to all
the Banks. In the guidelines Clause-8 of the said Master Circular
deals with guidelines for reporting frauds to Police/CBI and Clause
8.1 therein reads as follows:-
8.1   RBI has advised that in dealing with cases of fraud/
embezzlement, banks should not merely be actuated by the
necessity of recovering expeditiously the amount involved,
but should also be motivated by public interest and the need
for ensuring that the guilty persons do not go unpunished.
Therefore, as a general rule, the following cases should
invariably be referred to the State Police or to the CBI as
Amount involved      Agency to whom                 Remarks
in the fraud       complaint should
Below Rs.3 crore         State Police    If committed by staff.
1. Above            To the local
2. Rs.1 lakh &        To the State CID   To be lodged by the Regional
above but below /Economic Offices Head of the Bank concerned.
Rs.3.00 lakh          Wing of the State
Rs.3 crore and               CBI         To     be lodged with Anti
above and up to                          Corruption    Branch    of  CBI
Rs.25 crore                              (where staff involvement is
prima facie evident)
More than Rs.25              CBI         To be lodged with Banking
Crore and up to                        Security and Fraud Cell
Rs.50 crore                            (BSFC) of CBI (irrespective
of the involvement of a
More than Rs.50            CBI         To be lodged with the Joint
Clause 8.1 mandates that the amount involved in the fraud, if it is
more than Rs.25.00 crores and up to Rs.50.00 crores the Bank
would complain to the Banking Security and Fraud Cell of the CBI
“irrespective   of   the   involvement      of  a   public    servant”
Therefore, there can be no submission that the CBI cannot be
complained of in a Bank fraud which does not involve any public
servant. The Master Circular mandates that the Bank shall complain
to the CBI if the amount involved is between Rs.25.00 crores to
Rs.50.00 crores.   Therefore, the jurisdiction of the CBI is amount
specific, as depicted in the Master Circular and it cannot be said
that the CBI does not get any jurisdiction to entertain complaints
where there are no public servants.
15. The jurisdiction of the CBI, as narrated hereinabove, is in
terms of the Master Circular or guidelines issued by the RBI. The
Apex Court has considered the purport of the circular so issued by
the RBI and for the purpose for which it is issued and holds that
those circulars have statutory flavour as they are guidelines and
administrative     instructions   issued    in  terms     of   the   Banking
Regulation Act. The Apex Court in the case of CENTRAL BANK OF
INDIA v. RAVINDRA AND OTHERS1 has held as follows:
“56. In view of the law having been settled with
this judgment, it is expected henceforth from the banks,
bound by the directives of the Reserve Bank of India, to
make an averment in the plaint that interest/compound
interest has been charged at such rates, and capitalised
at such periodical rests, as are permitted by, and do not
run counter to, the directives of the Reserve Bank of
India. A statement of account shall be filed in the court showing
details and giving particulars of debit entries, and if debit entry
relates to interest then setting out also the rate of, and the
period for which, the interest has been charged. On the court
being prima facie satisfied, if a dispute is raised in that regard,
of the permissibility of debits, the onus would be on the
borrower to show why the amount of debit balance appearing at
the foot of the account and claimed as principal sum cannot be
so accepted and adjudged. This practice would narrow down the
scope of controversy in suits filed by banking institutions and
enable an expeditious disposal of the suits, the issues wherein
are by and large capable of being determined by documentary
evidence. RBI directives have not only statutory flavour,
any contravention thereof or any default in compliance
therewith is punishable under sub-section (4) of Section
46 of Banking Regulation Act, 1949. The court can act on
an assumption that transactions or dealings have taken
place and accounts maintained by banks in conformity
with RBI directives.”
The Apex Court in the aforesaid paragraph holds that RBI directives
have not only a statutory flavour but any contravention thereof or
any default in compliance therewith is punishable under sub-section
(4) of Section 46 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949. The Court
can act on an assumption that transactions or dealings have taken
place and accounts maintained by Banks in conformity with RBI
guidelines. Therefore, the Five Judge Bench of the Apex Court
clearly holds that the guidelines/directives issued by the RBI, to
have a statutory flavour. If it is held by the Apex Court that those
guidelines have statutory flavour, the contention of the learned
senior counsel that the CBI would not get jurisdiction unless it is
conferred by the statute tumbles down. The CBI does have
jurisdiction in terms of what is depicted in the Master Circulars and
such Master Circulars are held to have a statutory flavour.
16. The jurisdiction of the RBI to issue such circulars in
furtherance of its role of being a ‘Bankers Bank’ or a ‘Lender of the
Last Resort’ (LLR) is recognized by the Apex Court way back in the
year 1992 in the case of PEERLESS GENRAL FINANCE AND
INVESTMENT CO.LTD. AND ANOTHER v. RESERVE BANK OF
INDIA2 wherein the Apex Court following its earlier dictum has held
“53. In State of U.P. v. Babu Ram Upadhya [(1961) 2
SCR 679: AIR 1961 SC 751: (1961) 1 Cri LJ 773] this Court held
that rules made under a statute must be treated, for all
purposes of construction or obligations, exactly as if they were
in that Act and are to the same effect as if they were contained
in the Act and are to be judicially noticed for all purposes of
construction or obligations. The statutory rules cannot be
described or equated with administrative directions. In D.K.V.
Prasada Rao v. Government of A.P. [AIR 1984 AP 75: (1983) 2
Andh WR 344] the same view was laid down. Therefore, the
directions are incorporated and become part of the Act
itself. They must be governed by the same principles as
the statute itself. The statutory presumption that the
legislature inserted every part thereof for a purpose and
the legislative intention should be given effect to, would
be applicable to the impugned directions.
54. The RBI issued the directions to regulate the
operations of the RNBCs, to safeguard the interest of the
depositors. Payment of interest, bonus, premium or other
advantage, in whatever name it may be called is reward
for waiting or parting with liquidity. It is paid because of
positive time preference (one rupee today is preferred to
one rupee tomorrow) on the part of the depositor.
Therefore, the directions avowed to preserve the right of
the depositors to receive back the amount deposited with
the contracted rate of interest; it aims to prevent
depletion of the deposits collected from the weaker
segments of the society and also tends to affect free flow
of the business of the RNBCs who would desire to operate
in their own way. The question, therefore, emerges
whether the directions in paras (6) and (12) violate
Articles 14 and 19(1)(g) of the Constitution.”
(Emphasis supplied)
The Apex Court here also holds that the directions issued by the
RBI are incorporated to become part of the Act itself. They must be
governed by the same principles as the statute itself. The statutory
presumption is that the legislature has inserted every part thereof
for a purpose and the legislative intention of such purpose should
be given effect to and that would become applicable to the
directions. Therefore, the Apex Court has consistently held that the
directives of the RBI by way of its Master Circular do have the
legislative intent and statutory flavour and it is the Master Circular
of the kind that had fallen for interpretation before the Apex Court,
which are the ones that are continued by the RBI. Objection, taken
to by contending that the CBI in terms of the directives of the RBI
cannot get jurisdiction unless the statute accords such jurisdiction,
is rendered unsustainable and the submission sans countenance.
17. Insofar as the contention that these offences cannot be
looked into as there is no public servant involved in the case at
hand, the offences that are alleged are punishable under Section
120B and 420 of the IPC. It is necessary to notice the Delhi Special
Police Establishment Act, 1946 (for short ‘the 1946 Act’) under
which the Central Bureau of Investigation takes its genesis. Section
3 of the 1946 Act reads as follows:
“3. Offences to be investigate by special police
establishment. – The Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, specify the offences or classes of
offences which are to be investigated by the Delhi Special
In terms of Section 3, the Central Government by notification is
empowered to declare the offences or classes of offences that could
be investigated by the Delhi Special Police Establishment. The
Government of India in terms of Section 3 has issued notification
which forms part of the CBI Manual as to what are the offences that
can be investigated into by the CBI which forms part of the Indian
Penal Code. Both Sections 420 and 120B of the IPC, form a part of
the said notification. Therefore, the contention that the CBI would
not get jurisdiction to enquire into any offence other than the
offences under the Act is again rendered unacceptable.
18. The aforesaid submission is made on the strength of the
fact that the staff accountability being given up at the time of
registration of the complaint. It is rather surprising to note as to
how staff accountability has been given up in the case at hand, as
the report of the auditor clearly brought out grave lacunae in the
sanctioning process. Such lacuna in the sanctioning process only
has led to registration of the complaint before the CBI by the Bank.
But while so registering a crime, the staff accountability is
completely given up though the offence under the Act is invoked
against unknown officials. The matter is still at the stage of
investigation. The CBI is investigating into the matter and not yet
filed its final report. It is too early in the day for the petitioners to
contend that no Bank official being named as accused, the offence
under the Act is unnecessarily made, only to empower the CBI to
conduct      investigation   are   all  contentions   that  cannot    be
countenanced at this stage.
19. The complaint or the FIR, as it is settled principle of law,
cannot be a mirror to all the allegations or offences as it triggers
conduct of investigation.       There are scores and scores of cases
where the complaint itself does not inspire confidence or is filled
with several embellishments where this Court has exercised its
jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C. and obliterated the
proceedings against those accused. This is not a case where the
proceedings at the stage of investigation should be interfered with,
in the light of unequivocal finding by the Committee that conducted
audit and also inspection later in the year 2017 where no staff was
available at the place where they mandated to be available.
Therefore, this is not a case where this Court would interfere at the
stage of investigation. The matter requires to be investigated into
on every aspect – role of public servants, as also, the role of the
petitioners, as it is prima facie brought out in the complaint against
the petitioners and giving up of the staff qua their accountability is
also, prima facie, is a matter to be investigated into.
20. Reference being made to a judgment rendered by this
Court in the case of STEEL HYPERMART INIDA PRIVATE
LIMITED AND OTHERS v. CBI AND ANOTHER3 to contend that
this  Court    has   quashed    the  crime    registered against Steel
Hypermart at the crime stage itself and, therefore, the finding so
rendered by the Court would cover the issue in the case at hand is
Criminal Petition No.919 of 2021 decided on 02.08.2022
again unacceptable. This Court in STEEL HYPERMART has held as
“13. In the light of the afore-quoted framework, if the
facts narrated in the case at hand are considered, the
unmistakable inference would be that the entire proceedings
having been initiated against the petitioners in terms of the
afore-quoted circulars, the submission that the circulars are not
applicable to the facts of the case at hand is rendered
unsustainable, as it is fundamentally flawed. The issue with
regard to applicability of the circular or otherwise, will have to
be placed to the background, in the light of the other
submission made by the learned senior counsel for the
petitioners with regard to the act of the respondents in
overreaching the order, albeit, interim, passed by this Court.
14. The petitioners had been declared to be willful
defaulters    by   communications      dated   14-02-2020      and
20.02.2020 by invoking the aforesaid circulars. They were
called in question before this Court in Writ Petition No.4777 of
2020. This Court granted an interim order of stay of all further
proceedings pursuant to declaration of the petitioner/company
to be a willful defaulter. The interim order was operating up to
15-04-2021. On 15-04-2021 the counsel appearing for the 2nd
respondent appeared before the Court and submitted that the
petition may be disposed of remitting the matter to the Review
Committee of the Indian Bank. Reserving liberty to the
Committee to consider the matter afresh in the light of the
judgment of the Apex Court in the case of State Bank of India
v. M/s Jah Developers Private Limited, an order is passed by
the Court accepting the submission of the learned counsel for
the Indian Bank while disposing of the petition, which reads as
Sri Shashi Kiran Shetty, learned senior Advocate
for the respondent-Indian Bank,, in his usual fairness,
submits that this petition may be disposed of by
remitting the matter to the Review Committee of the
Indian Bank, reserving liberty to the Committee to
consider the matter afresh in the light of the decision of
the Hon’ble Supreme Court in State Bank of India Vs.
of 2019).
2. Shri Akshay Ravindra Prabhu, learned Advocate
for petitioners is satisfied with the submission of learned
senior Advocate.
3. In view of the submission of Sri Shashi Kiran
Shetty, this petition is disposed of by remitting the
matter to the Review Committee of the Indian Bank to
consider the same afresh in the light of the judgment of
the Apex Court referred to supra.”
The order was passed on 15-04-2021.                 What the 2nd
respondent/ Bank would do is register a complaint before the
CBI on 12.01.2021, the knowledge of which was never with the
petitioners. It is not demonstrated by the 2nd respondent/Bank
that the petitioners had the knowledge of registration of crime
at any time before summons. Though the complaint was made
by the 2nd respondent/Bank on 12-01-2021, it appeared before
the Court and made a submission that the root of the matter
would be re-considered, the root of the matter being declaration
of the petitioner/company as a willful defaulter. To a pointed
query of this Court to the learned counsel representing the 2nd
respondent as to what has happened to the submission made on
15-04-2021 before this Court with regard to re-consideration of
the case of the petitioner to be a willful defaulter, the learned
senior counsel would submit that the matter is still pending
consideration before the competent authority. Therefore, from
15-04-2021 till 14.07.2022 there was no progress in re-
consideration of the case of the petitioner to be a willful
15. The entire issue of declaration of the petitioner
as willful defaulter and subsequent action of registration
of a crime was on the basis of the declaration of the
petitioner to be a willful defaulter or a fraudulent
borrower. That having been stayed by this Court and the
stay being in operation up to 15-04-2021, the 2nd
respondent concealing the said fact of pendency of the case,
could not have registered the crime, as the basis for registration
of crime was the account being slipped into NPA on whatever
account it would be, and the declaration of the petitioner as
willful defaulter having been stayed, it could not have appeared
before the Court without divulging the fact that a complaint had
already been registered before the CBI, get the matter disposed
of to re-consider the very root that led to registration of the
crime. If the very root is to be reconsidered according to
the Bank, it can hardly be justified as to how a crime
could be registered in the teeth of subsistence of interim
order during the pendency of the writ petition and
subsistence of reconsideration at the hands of the 2nd
respondent/Bank. It is not the merit of the matter that needs
consideration at the hands of this Court, but it is the act of the
2nd respondent/Bank in trying to overreach the interim order of
this Court by registering the crime.
16. As a matter of fact even disposal of the writ petition
did not obliterate the interim order. The petition was disposed of
by remitting the matter to the Review Committee to consider
the same afresh that too on the submission made by the senior
counsel representing the respondent/Bank. Therefore, the very
act of the Bank in registering the crime during subsistence of
the interim order and getting the matter closed where interim
order was subsisting on the ground that it would reconsider the
very declaration of the petitioner to be a willful defaulter was
flawed. Without arriving at the said decision even as on date,
the 2nd respondent cannot now justify that the proceedings have
to go on pursuant to registration of crime. The meat in the merit
of the matter need not be gone into at this juncture, as it is on
the submission of the 2nd respondent/Bank itself, in the earlier
proceedings, the matter is required to be reconsidered from the
issue of declaring the petitioner to be willful defaulter.
17. The submission of the learned senior counsel
representing the 2nd respondent/Bank that master
circulars are not even applicable to the case at hand is to
be repelled as it is fundamentally flawed, as every action
against the petitioner is taken under the master circulars.
Since the matter is pending consideration before the
Review Committee of the Indian Bank even as on date, it
would be highly inappropriate to permit the 1st
respondent/ CBI to continue with the proceedings which
were registered in the teeth and contrary to the interim
order passed by this Court.
18. The other submissions made by the learned senior
counsel with regard to the declaration of willful defaulter or a
fraud would have to be placed behind the curtains, albeit, for
the present, as it would depend upon the outcome of the
decision of the Review Committee, before whom all the issues of
declaration of the petitioner to be a willful defaulter are pending
consideration. All further actions of the respondents would
depend upon the outcome of the Review Committee decision.
Permitting further proceedings to continue in the teeth of the
aforesaid facts would become an abuse of the process of law
and result in permitting an action which is initiated in an
attempt to overreach the orders of this Court, which action sans
countenance.”
This Court has held that Master Circulars are applicable to Banks
and there was declaration of STEEL HYPERMART to be willful
defaulter in terms of the Circulars, but what merited consideration
was that there was an interim order of stay of the very declaration
that STEEL HYPERMART was a willful defaulter or a fraud. When
the matter was stayed by this Court, the complaint comes to be
registered. Without divulging to the Court that the complaint had
been registered, a submission was made that they would reconsider
the very act of declaring the STEEL HYPERMART to be a willful
defaulter. Therefore, it cut at the very root and the Bank had
conceded before the Court that they would reconsider the act of
STEEL HYPERMART being declared to be a willful defaulter. It is in
that light in two circumstances the case was allowed – one being
the concession of the Bank that they would reconsider the case and
the fact that in the teeth of an interim order subsisting a complaint
could not have been registered as all further proceedings pursuant
to declaration of STEEL HYPERMART as willful defaulter had been
stayed. None of those circumstances would arise in the case at
21. The contention of the learned senior counsel is that the
petitioners also have approached this Court in a writ petition where
the declaration of the petitioners to be willful defaulter is called in
question. A Division Bench in the said writ petition noticing the
judgment of the Division Bench of the High Court of Telangana has
passed an interim order on 08-03-2022 which reads as follows:
“Sri Uday Holla, learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner.
Heard on the question of admission as well as on the
prayer for interim relief.
Issue emergent notice to the respondents.
Learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner submits that the
Circular dated 01.07.2016 as updated on 03.07.2017 issued by
the Reserve Bank of India is unconstitutional, in as much as, the
Reserve Bank of India has delegated the essential legislative
function. It is further submitted that the petitioner is entitled to
be put on notice before their accounts are declared to be
fraudulent. It is further submitted that a Division Bench of the
High Court of Telangana has already adjudicated upon the
validity of the aforesaid circular and struck down the same and
has held that the principles of natural justice have to read in the
provisions of the circular. It is also fairly stated that against the
aforesaid order passed by the Division Bench of the High Court
of Telangana, a special leave petition was preferred before the
Supreme Court of India which has been entertained vide order
dated 15.04.2021 passed in SLP.No.3931/2021 and the order of
the Division Bench passed by the Telangana High Court in so far
as it pertains to requirement of personal hearing, has been
stayed. It is, therefore, submitted that as the mandatory
measure, the respondents be restrained from taking any
coercive action against the petitioner.
In view of the aforesaid submission and in the facts of the
case, the respondents shall not take any coercive action against
the petitioner in pursuance of the impugned notification dated
01.07.2016 as amended on 03.07.2017, till the next date of
hearing.
List this petition along with         W.P.No.5214/2022      for
analogous hearing on 30.03.2022.”
What is directed is that the respondents shall not take any coercive
action against the petitioner pursuant to the impugned notification
dated 01-07-2016 as amended on 03-07-2017.                         Those two
notifications are the Master circulars.             What it directed is no
coercive action shall be taken. It is not a blanket interim order that
is granted in favour of the petitioner herein like the one that was
granted in the case of STEEL HYPERMART. In the case of STEEL
HYPERMART there was an interim order of stay of all further
proceedings. Those were the admitted facts therein. Therefore, the
order that no coercive step would be taken against the petitioners
in terms of the declaration of their accounts to be a fraud cannot be
considered to be a blanket stay, as it is neither eclipsed nor
extinguished, if, it is neither, then the petitioners cannot derive any
benefit of the said order. At best coercive step would be that their
personal liberty should not be curtailed on the strength of
registration of crime pursuant to the declaration of the account to
be a fraud. That would not mean that no proceeding could be
instituted or investigated into. The facts in the case of STEEL
HYPERMART are entirely different from what are obtaining in the
case at hand. Crime in the case at hand is registered on
15.02.2022, interim order, as aforesaid, not to take coercive steps
is granted on 08.03.2022.       Therefore, by then crime had already
been registered.
22. It is also not in dispute that the Bank has exercised its
right and has instituted proceedings before the Debt Recovery
Tribunal invoking the provisions of the SARFAESI Act and are also
in possession of the recovery certificate with regard to immovable
that was the subject matter of security and certain movables are
also sold, but the issue is the sale of movables i.e., the
hypothecated stock by the petitioners is what forms the crux of the
complaint. This Court again in plethora of cases has clearly held
that when the jurisdiction of the Tribunal is invoked by the Bank,
unless such an action is declared to be a fraud, they cannot
maintain two proceedings – one before the Debt Recovery Tribunal
and the other setting the criminal law in motion. If the account is
declared to be a fraud and the account holders to be willful
defaulters, then it would become open to initiate such proceedings
in terms of the Master Circular.          Therefore, having initiated
recovery proceedings before the Debt Recovery Tribunal and having
a recovery certificate in their hand would not mean that the
proceedings cannot be initiated against these petitioners, to iterate
the matter is still at the state of investigation. In the peculiar facts
of this case, it is too premature for this Court to interfere in the
allegations of the nature that is made in the case at hand.         The
petitioners always have remedies in law at a later stage of the
23. The other contention that criminal conspiracy as obtaining
under Section 120B of the IPC is not a standalone offence and what
is alleged is criminal conspiracy read with cheating cannot mean
that there is any offence even as contended by the learned senior
counsel Sri Hashmath Pasha is again unacceptable. The Apex Court
in plethora of cases has held that offence of criminal conspiracy can
be a standalone offence in certain circumstances particularly in
cases where money is borrowed from the Banks. To quote one, in
the case of R.VENKATKRISHNAN v. CBI4 the Apex Court has held
“72. Criminal conspiracy in terms of Section 120-B of the
Code is an independent offence. It is punishable separately.
Prosecution, therefore, must prove the same by applying
the legal principles which are applicable for the purpose
of proving a criminal misconduct on the part of an
accused. A criminal conspiracy must be put to action and
so long a crime is merely generated in the mind of the
criminal, it does not become punishable. Thoughts, even
criminal in character, often involuntary, are not crimes
but when they take concrete shape of an agreement to do
or cause to be done an illegal act or an act which is not
illegal but by illegal means then even if nothing further is
done, the agreement would give rise to a criminal
conspiracy.
73. The ingredients     of   the  offence   of  criminal
(i)   an agreement between two or more persons;
(ii)  the agreement must relate               to  doing    or
causing to be done either
(b)    an act which is not illegal in itself but is
done by illegal means.
Condition precedent, therefore, for holding the accused
persons guilty of a charge of criminal conspiracy must,
therefore, be considered on the anvil of a fact which must
be established by the prosecution viz. meeting point of
two or more persons for doing or causing to be done an
illegal act or an act by illegal means.
74. The courts, however, while drawing an inference from
the materials brought on record to arrive at a finding as to
whether the charges of the criminal conspiracy have been
proved or not, must always bear in mind that a conspiracy is
hatched in secrecy and it is, thus, difficult, if not impossible, to
obtain direct evidence to establish the same. The manner and
circumstances in which the offences have been committed and
the level of involvement of the accused persons therein are
relevant factors. For the said purpose, it is necessary to prove
that the propounders had expressly agreed to or caused to be
done the illegal act but it may also be proved otherwise by
adduction of circumstantial evidence and/or by necessary
implication. (See Mohd. Usman Mohammad Hussain Maniyar
v. State of Maharashtra [(1981) 2 SCC 443 : 1981 SCC (Cri)
(Emphasis supplied)
In the light of the said judgment rendered by the Apex Court, the
contention of the learned senior counsel as also the judgment
rendered by the Apex Court in the case of LEO ROY FREY v. THE
SUPERINTENDENT, DISTRICT JAIL – AIR 1958 SC 119 to
contend that Section 120B of the IPC cannot be laid as a main
offence again is rendered unacceptable.
24. Plethora of judgments relied on by the respective learned
senior counsel representing the petitioners other than what is
considered hereinabove would all be inapplicable to the facts of the
case at hand and would not merit any consideration at this stage of
the proceedings.
25. In view of the preceding analysis, I do not find any merit
to    entertain  the  petitions.  Accordingly,  the  petitions  stand
It is made clear that the observations made in the course of
this order are only for the purpose of consideration of the case of
the petitioners under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C.