:       (Per the Hon’ble the Chief Justice Satish Chandra Sharma)
Regard being had to the similitude in the controversy
involved in the present cases, the writ petitions were
analogously heard and by a common order, they are being
disposed of by this Court.
Facts of the Writ Petition No.10496 of 2021 are
narrated hereunder.
The petitioner No.1 was appointed as Reserve Sub
Inspector on 18.05.1992, he was promoted as Assistant
Commandant on 17.03.2017 and finally superannuated
on 28.02.2021. The other petitioners have also furnished
their service details and the fact remains that all of them
are retired Government servants.
The submission of the petitioners is that the Ruling
Telangana Rashtra Samithi (TRS) Party in the year 2018
has given an assurance at the time of elections for
enhancing the age of superannuation of Telangana
Government employees to 61 years and the matter was
pending for consideration. The petitioners further stated
that His Excellency the Governor of Telangana in a
Republic Day Speech given on 26.01.2021 has also made
a promise in respect of enhancement of retirement age.
The petitioners further stated that the First Pay Revision
Commission of Telangana State submitted its Report on
31.12.2020     giving  its   findings   on   various    aspects
including enhancement of pay and retirement age of the
employees and one of its recommendation was to enhance
the age of retirement from 58 years to 60 years. The
petitioners further stated that the Report was submitted
on 31.12.2020 and therefore, the age of superannuation
should have been enhanced from the date of the Report to
the State Government. The petitioners further stated that
the State Legislature has passed the Telangana Public
Employment      (Regulation    of  Age   of  Superannuation)
(Amendment) Act, 2021. The petitioners have reproduced
the Statement of Objects and Reasons for introduction of
the Bill, which is reproduced as under:-
“The issue of enhancing the superannuation age for
Government employees has been under consideration of the
Government for some time for reasons such as increase in
the expectancy, health conditions and late entry into
Government service due to increase in the qualifying age.
The issue was accordingly referred to the First Telangana
Pay Revision Commission for examination. The Pay Revision
Commission in its Report recommended from 58 years to 60
years. Government have considered the report of the Pay
Revision Commission and after further consultation with
various Employees and Service Associations and due
examination of all the relevant factors, decided that it would
be appropriate to enhance the age of superannuation for all
State Government employees, whose age of superannuation
at present is 58 years or 60 years, to 61 years, by suitably
amending the Telangana Public Employment (Regulation of
Age of Superannuation) Act, 1984.”
The petitioners’ contention is that in the aforesaid
Bill, there was no stipulation in respect of date of
enforcement. However, the Telangana Government issued
G.O.Ms.No.45,       Finance     (HRM.III)     Department,      dated
30.03.2021, appointing 30th day of March, 2021 as the
date    on   which     the    Telangana      Public    Employment
(Regulation of Age of Superannuation) (Amendment) Act,
2021 shall come into force. The petitioners’ grievance is
that the age of superannuation has been enhanced from
58 years to 61 years with effect from 30.03.2021 and the
employees superannuated prior to the aforesaid date have
been discriminated and therefore, the Amending Act of
2021 and Government Order, i.e., G.O.Ms.No.45, dated
30.03.2021 are violative of Articles 14, 16 and 20 of the
Constitution of India. The petitioners have raised various
grounds in challenging the cut-off date fixed under the
Government Order and the Amending Act of 2021. The
contention of the petitioners is that the Amending Act,
keeping in view the Pay Revision Commission’s Report,
should have been made applicable with retrospective
effect i.e., from 31.12.2020 and the cut-off date as fixed by
the State Government, keeping in view the law laid in the
case of D.S.Nakara v. Union of India1, is violative of Articles
14, 16 and 20 of the Constitution of India.
It is also argued by the petitioners that once a
promise has been made by the State Government for
enhancing the age of superannuation from 58 years to 61
years in the year 2018 at the time of Assembly Elections,
the     State     Government  cannot  deny    the  benefit   of
enhancement in retirement age in the light of the promise
and the Governor has also made a promise to the
employees in respect of enhancement of retirement age,
hence, the fixation of cut-off date as 31.03.2021 is bad,
illegal and opposed to law in the light of the doctrine of
promissory estoppel, the petitioners are also entitled for
the benefit of Amending Act and G.O.Ms.No.45, dated
30.03.2021. It has also been argued before this Court that
once the Pay Revision Commission has submitted a
Report       on    31.12.2020 for enhancement      of  age   of
superannuation from 58 years to 60 years and as in
respect of granting higher pay scale, the Report has been
accepted with retrospective effect, the enhancement in age
of superannuation should also have been accepted with
retrospective effect, and therefore, the Amending Act and
G.O.Ms.No.45, dated 30.03.2021 to the extent the cut-off
date has been fixed as 30.03.2021 deserves to be quashed
by this Court.
It has also been argued that in respect of grant of
higher     pay   scale,  City   Compensatory    Allowance,
Consolidated Pay and Family Pension, in the matter of
enhancement of gratuity, in the matter of additional
quantum of pension, in the matter of contributory pension
scheme and in the matter of enhancement of medical
facilities etc., various Government Orders have been
issued granting the benefit with effect from 01.07.2018
and the contention of the petitioners is that once the Pay
Revision Commission recommendations for other benefits
are granted with effect from 01.07.2018, the enhancement
in the age of superannuation should also be granted from
01.07.2018 and therefore, to that extent the fixation of
cut-off date as 30.03.2021 vide G.O.Ms.No.45, dated
30.03.2021 is bad in law and also ultra vires.
Learned counsel for the petitioners has placed
reliance upon the Judgment delivered in the case of
Purshottam Lal v. Union of India2. This Court has carefully
gone through the aforesaid Judgment and in the aforesaid
Judgment, there were two classes of employees and on
August 21, 1957, the Government of India set up a
Commission of Enquiry (Second Pay Commission) for
Revision        of Pay and  the  Second   Pay  Commission
submitted its Report on August, 24, 1959. Upgradation
was granted to a class of employees with effect from July,
1959 and the other class was not granted upgradation
from the same date. The Hon’ble Supreme Court has held
that once the Government has made reference in respect
of all Government employees and if it accepts the
recommendations,        it is  bound   to  implement     the
recommendations in respect of all Government employees.
It has been further held that if it does not implement the
Report regarding some employees only, it commits breach
of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India. In those
circumstances in the aforesaid case, it was held that the
other employees shall also be entitled for revision of pay
from the same date from which the other employees have
been granted the benefit of revision. In the present case,
no such contingency is involved as the enhanced date of
superannuation has been done in respect of all categories
of employees and one single cut-off date has been fixed
again       in    respect   of   all    categories   of   employees,
i.e., 30.03.2021 and therefore, it does not help the
petitioners at all.
The learned counsel for the petitioners also placed
reliance on D.S.Nakara (supra), but in the aforesaid case
also, in respect of pensioners on account of cut-off date
fixed by the Government, two classes of pensioners were
created and in that case also, the apex Court has held
that there cannot be two classes of pensioners and in the
present case, there is no such contingency involved. There
is only one class of employees and in respect of all
employees of the State of Telangana, the date of
superannuation has been enhanced. The Government has
fixed the same date as the cut-off date for all the
categories        of   employees.      Hence,    the    question  of
interference by this Court in the peculiar facts does not
The learned counsel for the petitioner also placed
reliance upon the Judgment delivered in the case of
B.Prabhakara        Rao  v.  State   of  Andhra    Pradesh3.  In the
aforesaid case, the Government of Andhra Pradesh
decided to reduce the age of superannuation of its
employees from 58 years to 55 years in February, 1983
and        it   was        the  case  of curtailing  the age of
superannuation. The facts of the present case are
distinguishable on facts. In the present case, we are
dealing         with        the  enhancement    in  the  age of
superannuation and the issue of fixation of cut-off date in
the matter of implementation of the Government Order by
which the age of superannuation has been enhanced from
58 years to 61 years and therefore, the aforesaid
Judgment does not help the petitioners in any manner.
Reliance is also placed by the learned counsel for the
petitioners upon the Judgment in the case of All Manipur
Pensioners Association v. State of Manipur4. In the aforesaid
case, there was a dispute in the matter of grant of revised
pension differently to those who retired after 01.01.1996
and those who retired before 01.01.1996. The present
case relates to enhancement in the age of superannuation
as already stated earlier. The aforesaid judgment does not
help the petitioners.
Reliance is also placed by the learned counsel for the
petitioners upon the Judgment in the case of Savitribai
Narsayya Guddapa v. State of Maharashtra5. In the aforesaid
case, the revised pay scales of Sixth Pay Commission were
made applicable to all the employees from 01.01.2006 but
the revised provisions of pension modified were made
applicable to the employees those who stood retired from
27.02.2009 and the benefit was denied to the employees
retired between 01.01.2006 to 26.02.2009. The Bombay
High Court keeping in view the Judgment delivered in the
case of D.S.Nakara (supra) has held that the Government
Resolution, to the extent of cut-off date, is discriminative
and unconstitutional. In the present case, there are no
two classes of pensioners and there are no two different
dates of retirement for retired employees. The only issue
involved is whether the petitioners, who are retired
Government servants, are entitled for enhancement in the
age of retirement that too after the retirement by making
the Government Order and the Amending Act applicable
with retrospective affect. Hence, the aforesaid Judgment
does not help the petitioners.
Reliance is also placed by the learned counsel for the
petitioners upon the Judgment delivered in the case of
Central Board of Dawoodi Bohra Community v. State of
Maharashtra6 and it has been argued before this Court that
keeping in view the doctrine of legitimate expectation as a
promise was made for enhancement in the age of
superannuation and also as the recommendation was
made by the Pay Revision Commission in its Report, the
enhancement in the age of superannuation should have
been amended and enforced with retrospective effect.
This Court has carefully gone through all the
judgments relied upon by the learned counsel for the
petitioners and also taken into account all the grounds
raised. It is true that the First Pay Revision Commission,
Telangana submitted its report on 31.12.2020 and the
recommendations were made in respect of enhancement
of pay scales, enhancement of House Rent Allowance,
enhancement of City Compensatory Allowance, Advance
Increments, Loans and Advances, Leave Benefits as well
as in respect of various other benefits including the
enhancement of age of superannuation from 58 years to
60 years. The Report submitted by the First Pay Revision
Commission, Telangana was not accepted in toto by the
State Government even in respect of granting pay scales
and other benefits. It is true that higher pay scales were
granted based upon the recommendations of the First Pay
Revision     Commission.      However,    the    benefit  of
enhancement      of   age   of    superannuation   was   not
considered at the relevant point of time by the State
Government. The State Legislature has finally amended
the Telangana Public Employment (Regulation of Age of
Superannuation) Act, 1984 by enhancing the age of
superannuation from 58 years to 61 years and by the
Government Order vide G.O.Ms.No.45, dated 30.03.2021,
the appointed day has been Notified as 30.03.2021.
In the considered opinion of this Court, the fixation
of cut-off date does not warrant any interference as
fixation of cut-off date always leave a large number of
employees unsatisfied. The petitioners have not been able
to   establish  before   this   Court   as   to   how   it  is
discriminatory, arbitrary or violative of Articles 14, 16 and
21 of the Constitution of India.
The assurance given by some Ruling Party or by the
Chief Minister or even by His Excellency the Governor
does not become the law of the land. It is the domain of
the Legislature to enact an Act or to amend an Act and the
same has rightly been done by the State Legislature by
amending the Telangana Public Employment (Regulation
of Age of Superannuation) Act, 1984 with the Telangana
Public Employment (Regulation of Age of Superannuation)
(Amendment) Act, 2021 (Act No.3 of 2021).
The issue of promissory estoppel and the issue
relating to the policy decision and public function has
been considered by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in its
landmark Judgment in the case of New Okhla Industrial
Development Authority v. B.D.Singhal7.
In the aforesaid case, the Hon’ble Supreme Court in
“27. The argument of the respondents that the appellant-
authority is estopped from claiming that the government
order issued on 30 September 2012 cannot be given
retrospective effect from 9 July 2012 since the Board
resolution proposed an increase in the retirement age of its
employees with ‘immediate effect’ is unsustainable. For the
principle of promissory estoppel to apply, one party must
have made an unequivocal promise, intending to create or
affect a legal relationship between the parties (Monnet Ispat
and Energy Ltd., v. Union of India [(2012) 11 SCC
1]. The recommendation of NOIDA cannot create or alter the
legal relationship since it is subject to the approval of the
government. Justice H.L. Gokhale in a concurring opinion
in Monnet Ispat and Energy Ltd. v. Union of India clarified
that the principle of promissory estoppel will not apply if the
communication       issued     was  either   a  proposal    or  a
recommendation. The learned judge observed:
“289. As we have seen earlier, for invoking the
principle of promissory estoppel there has to be a
promise, and on that basis the party concerned must
have acted to its prejudice. In the instant case it was only
a proposal, and it was very much made clear that it was
to be approved by the Central Government, prior whereto
it could not be construed as containing a promise.
Besides, equity cannot be used against a statutory
provision or notification.”
28. In State of Jharkhand v. Brahmputra Metallics Ltd.,
Ranchi (Civil Appeal Nos.3860-62 of 2020), this court
speaking     through     of   one   us   (D.Y.  Chandrachud      J)
elaborated on the doctrine of legitimate expectation, which
is grounded in fairness and reasonableness. Explaining that
there is a legitimate expectation that the actions of the State
are fair and reasonable, it was observed:
“45. …The state must discard the colonial notion that
it is a sovereign handing out doles at its will. Its policies
give rise to legitimate expectations that the state will act
according to what it puts forth in the public realm. In all
its actions, the State is bound to act fairly, in a
transparent manner. This is an elementary requirement of
the guarantee against arbitrary state action which Article
14 of the Constitution adopts.”
29. Since the enhancement of the age of superannuation
is a ‘public function’ channelised by the provisions of the
statute    and   the   service    regulations,  the    doctrine  of
promissory estoppel cannot be used to challenge the action
of NOIDA. Though NOIDA sought the approval of the State
government for the enhancement with ‘immediate effect’, it
never intended or portrayed to have intended to give
retrospective     effect    to   the   prospectively     applicable
Government order. The representation of NOIDA could not
have given rise to a legitimate expectation since it was a
mere recommendation which was subject to the approval of
the State Government. Hence, the doctrine of legitimate
expectation also finds no application to the facts of the
present case.
30. The reliance placed by the respondents on Dayanand
Chakrawarthy (supra) to argue that they were willing to
work till they attained the age of sixty years but were not
permitted to, and thus the principle of ‘no work no pay’
would     not   be   applicable    is  misplaced.     In Dayanand
Chakrawarthy, the issue before the two judge Bench of this
court    was   whether      prescription   of  different  ages   of
retirement based on the mode of recruitment under the UP
Jal Nigam (Retirement on attaining Age of Superannuation)
Regulations, 2005 was unconstitutional for violating Article
14 of the Constitution. This court held that the differential
superannuating age was discriminatory. However, by virtue
of Regulation 31 of the UP Jal Nigam Services of Engineers
(Public Health Branch) Regulations, 1978 the service
conditions of State government employees is applicable to
the UP Jal Nigam employees. Therefore when the Jal Nigam
through an Office memorandum had resolved that the age of
retirement for its employees shall be fifty eight years, though
it was sixty years for State government employees, it was set
aside by this court in Harwinder Kumar v. Chief Engineer,
Karmik [(2005) 13 SCC 300]. In Harwinder Kumar and the
subsequent cases (U.P Jal Nigam v. Jaswant Singh (2006) 11
SCC 464; U.P Jal Nigam v. Radhey Shyam Gautam [(2007)
11 SCC 507)] involving the age of retirement of the UP Jal
Nigam employees, this court had held that employees who
had approached the courts shall be entitled to full salary
until the age of sixty years. It was in this context that a two
judge bench of this court speaking through Mukhopadhaya
J     made      the    following    observation    in Dayanand
“48. …We observe that the principle of “no pay no
work” is not applicable to the employees who were
guided by specific rules like Leave Rules, etc. relating to
absence from duty. Such principle can be applied to only
those employees who were not guided by any specific
rule relating to absence from duty. If an employee is
prevented by the employer from performing his duties, the
employee cannot be blamed for having not worked, and
the principle of “no pay no work” shall not be applicable
to such employee.”
31. In Dayanand       Chakrawarthy,    the  court   directed
payment of arrears deeming the employees to have worked
till sixty years in spite of no interim order being issued in
that regard because (i) the Office Memorandum was
held ultra    vires;  (ii) Harwinder   Kumar, Jaswant     Singh,
and Radhey Shyam Gautam had already held that the age of
retirement of the Jal Nigam employees shall be 60 years
unless a regulation prescribing a lower retirement age is
issued in terms of Regulation 31, and had extended this
benefit to all the parties who had filed writ petitions.
Therefore, the above observation must be read in the
context of the distinct factual situation in the case.
32. The argument of the employees that since they had
moved the Chief Minister with a representation in August
2012 before their date of superannuation which was to fall
at the end of the month and that they should have the
benefit of the enhancement in the age of superannuation
has no substance. On 31 August 2012, the respondents
moved the High Court but no interim relief was granted to
them and they attained the age of superannuation. They
have not worked in service thereafter. Since the High
Court's     judgment   dismissing    the    challenge  to    the
government order dated 30 September 2012 has attained
finality, the submission cannot be accepted.
33. For the above reasons, we allow the appeals and set
aside the impugned judgment and order of the Division
Bench at Lucknow of the High Court of Judicature at
Allahabad dated 25 January 2018 in WA No 43780 of 2012.
The Writ Petition shall in consequence stand dismissed.
There shall be no order as to costs.
34. Pending application(s), if any, stands disposed of.”
The Hon’ble Supreme Court, while deciding the
aforesaid case, has taken into account the doctrine of
legitimate expectation and therefore, keeping in view the
Judgment delivered by the apex Court in the aforesaid
case and the law laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme
Court, this Court is of the considered opinion that fixation
of cut-off date in the matter of grant of enhancement of
age as 30.03.2021 does not warrant any interference.
In the case of New Okhla Industrial Development
Authority (supra), the State of Uttar Pradesh has acceded
to the proposal for enhancement of age of superannuation
of its employees of New Okhla Industrial Development
Authority from 58 years to 60 years prospectively and a
Division of the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad set
aside the decision of the State Government to give
prospective   effect  to   the    enhancement    of age    of
superannuation and in exercise of its power of judicial
review under Article 226 of the Constitution of India
directed that the retrospective effect be given to the
Government     Order    from     29.09.2002.   The  Hon’ble
Supreme Court has set aside the order passed by the
Division Bench of Allahabad High Court and therefore,
this Court also in the light of the aforesaid, does not find
any reason to interfere with the Amending Act No.3 of
2021 and the Government Order vide G.O.Ms.No.45,
dated 30.03.2021, keeping in view all the facts and
grounds raised by the petitioners and to direct the State
to grant the benefit of the Amending Act and the
Government Order with retrospective effect.
Resultantly,   the  writ  petitions  are   dismissed.
Miscellaneous petitions, if any pending, shall stand
dismissed. There shall be no order as to costs.
Note: LR copy be marked.