This matrimonial appeal filed by wife is directed against the
judgment of the Family Court, Mavelikkara (for short, 'the court
below') dismissing the original petition filed by her against her
husband for divorce on the ground of cruelty and desertion.
2.   The   marriage   between    the   appellant    and  the
respondent was solemnized on 28/6/2009 as per the Hindu
religious rites and ceremonies. In the wedlock, a child was born
3.    The appellant as well as the respondent were working
at Sultanate of Oman at the time of marriage.      After a few days
of marriage, i.e, on 15/7/2009, the appellant and the respondent
went back to Sultanate of Oman to resume their job. According
to the appellant, while they were living together in Sultanate of
Oman, the respondent made false allegations of unchastity
against her and the said allegations were spread among his
relatives as well as the co-workers of her father. The appellant
alleged that the respondent spread about the said false
allegations of unchastity to his maternal uncle, Sri.Hari and his
aunt, Smt.Usha Pillai, residing at U.S.A who in turn sent Ext. A2
email message to her alleging infidelity on her part. According to
the appellant, the said false imputation of adulterous conduct
made by the respondent lowered her reputation in the estimate
of others including co-workers and, thus, she cannot be expected
to live with the respondent. It is further alleged that while they
were living together at Sultanate of Oman, the respondent used
to pick up quarrels with her on the issue of unchastity and on
1/3/2012, he brutally assaulted her as well. It is also alleged that,
from 1/3/2012 onwards, she has been living separately from the
respondent who has deserted her with permanent intention to
break the marital relationship between them. It was in these
circumstances, the appellant preferred the Original Petition for
dissolution of marriage on the ground of cruelty and desertion.
4.   The respondent entered appearance in the court below
and filed objection statement. He specifically denied the instance
of cruelty allegedly exercised by him on the appellant and
pleaded in the original petition. The respondent also denied the
allegation in the original petition that he has made false
allegation of unchastity against the appellant. According to him, it
was the appellant who often quarelled with him and failed to
discharge her marital obligation. It is also contended that the
appellant has always been highly passionate for luxurious life and
he was forced to succumb to her needs. Ext. A2 email was
denied. He asserted that he is ready to reside with the appellant
and discharge his marital obligations even now. The respondent
sought for the dismissal of the petition.
5.   The respondent has also filed a petition under the
Guardian and Wards Act for the permanent custody of the child
before the court below.       Both original petitions were tried
together by the court below. On the side of the appellant, PW1
and PW2 were examined and Exts. A1 to A3 were marked. On the
side of the respondent, RW1 and RW2 were examined and Exts.
B1 to B5 series were marked. After trial, the court below found
that the appellant has failed to prove cruelty as well as desertion
and accordingly the original petition was dismissed as per the
impugned     judgment.   Challenging    the  said  judgment,    the
appellant preferred this appeal.
6.   We have heard Sri.Nagaraj Narayanan, the learned
counsel for the appellant and Sri.Jacob P.Alex, the learned counsel
for the respondent.
7.   The learned counsel for the appellant submitted that
the appellant is not pressing the prayer for dissolution of
marriage on the ground of desertion. Thus, what survives for
consideration is only the ground of cruelty.
8.   The learned counsel for the appellant assails the
impugned judgment on the ground that the court below was
unreasonable and unrealistic in the appreciation of oral as well as
documentary evidence. The learned counsel submitted that the
evidence on record, both oral and documentary, would clearly
prove that the respondent has exercised cruelty, both physically
and mentally, on the appellant. The learned counsel for the
respondent on the contrary submitted that the evidence on
record is insufficient to prove cruelty alleged so as to grant a
decree for dissolution of marriage and, thus, the court below was
absolutely justified in dismissing the original petition.
9.   As stated already, at the time of marriage, both the
appellant and the respondent were employed at Sultanate of
Oman. The father of the appellant was employed in the same
company where the respondent was employed. After a few days
of marriage, the appellant and the respondent went to Sultanate
of Oman and they resided together. According to the appellant,
during this period, matrimonial dispute developed between them
which were further intensified by passage of time. It is specifically
alleged by the appellant that, on 1/3/2012, there was an incident
of physical assault and from the said date onwards they have
been living separately. This is specifically disputed by the
respondent. However, the respondent also admits that since
23/3/2014, they have been living separately.
10.   Cruelty as a matrimonial offence is the conduct in
relation to or in respect of matrimonial duties and obligations. It
is settled that physical violence is not absolutely essential to
constitute cruelty; a cruelty complained of may be mental or
physical. Mental cruelty is a state of mind and feeling with one of
the spouses due to the behaviour or behavioural pattern by the
other and inference can be drawn from the attending facts and
circumstances     taken  cumulatively.  The   Supreme     Court    in
Dr.N.G.Dastane v. Mrs.S.Dastane (AIR 1995 SC 1534)               has
held that the standard of proof in matrimonial cases would be
same as in civil cases, i.e., the Court has to decide the cases
based on preponderance of probabilities. Therefore, the Court has
to see what are the probabilities in a case and legal cruelty has to
be found out, not merely as a matter of fact, but as the effect on
the mind of the complainant spouse because of the acts or
omissions of the other.
11.   The main allegation of mental cruelty on the part of
the respondent canvassed by the appellant is the false allegation
of unchastity made by him against her. It is settled that the
unsubstantiated accusation and character assassination by one
spouse against the other would constitute mental cruelty. The
Supreme Court in Vijaykumar Ramchandra Bhate v. Neela
Vijaykumar      Bhate    (AIR  2003    SC   2462)   has   held  that
unsubstantiated disgusting accusations made by one spouse
against the other in the written statement constitutes mental
cruelty for sustaining the claim for divorce. In K. Srinivas Rao v.
D. A. Deepa (AIR 2013 SC 2176), it was held that making
unfounded indecent defamatory allegations against the spouse or
his or her relatives in the pleadings amount to causing mental
cruelty to the other spouse.     Again, the Supreme Court in Raj
Talreja v. Kavita Talreja (2017 KHC 6335) has held that the
reckless, defamatory and false accusations made by the wife
against her husband, his family members and colleagues would
definitely have the effect of lowering his reputation in the eyes of
his peers and, thus amounts to cruelty. In Gangadharan v. T. T.
Thankam (AIR 1988 Kerala 244), this Court held that false,
scandalous, malicious, baseless and unproved allegation made by
one spouse, whether by letters or written statement or by any
other mode, amounts to cruelty.
12.   The appellant relies on her own evidence as PW1 and
the oral testimony of her mother, who was examined as PW2 and
Ext. A2, the copy of the email, to prove the case set up by her.
The court below on appreciation of evidence found that the oral
testimonies of PW1 and PW2 are not reliable and that Ext. A2
cannot be relied on without examining its author. It was further
found that the there is nothing on record to show that the
imputations in Ext. A2 regarding the infidelity of the appellant
was furnished by the respondent to his aunt, who sent Ext.A2 to
him. Relying on the entries in Ext. B4 passport of the respondent,
it was found that the respondent was in India on 1/3/2012, the
date of the alleged physical cruelty, and hence, the said incident
also cannot be said to be proved.
13.  The pleadings, oral evidence of PW1 and PW2 as well
as the contents in Ext. A2 have to be appreciated and evaluated
together to find out whether the case set up by the appellant that
the respondent has made false accusation of unchastity against
her is true or not. There is specific pleading in the petition that
while the parties were living together at Sultanate of Oman, the
respondent made false allegation of unchastity against the
appellant, the allegation was also spread among the relatives of
the respondent as well as among the co-workers of the father of
the appellant and that the respondent spread about the alleged
unchastity to his uncle and aunt residing at USA and on 4/3/2012,
the respondent's aunt Smt.Usha Pillai sent an email message to
the appellant alleging that she was caught hold of by police with
a boy friend and both of them were taken to police station. The
appellant asserted that there was no such incident as alleged in
the email and there is absolutely no truth in the allegation of
unchastity levelled against her. The appellant also gave oral
evidence in tune with the pleadings.
14.  To corroborate her oral testimony, the appellant has
produced the most crucial document Ext. A2, the copy of the
email. The learned counsel for the respondent submitted that Ext.
A2 could not have been even admitted in view of the provisions
of Sections 65 and 65B of the Evidence Act. The learned counsel
further submitted that Ext. A2 is only an unauthenticated copy
and its author has not been examined and hence no reliance can
be placed on the same. The counsel also submitted that even if it
is admitted that Ext. A2 is an email message sent by Smt. Usha
Pillai, the aunt of the respondent, then also, the respondent
cannot be held liable for its contents inasmuch as nowhere is it
stated in Ext. A2 that the information about the illicit affair of the
appellant was furnished by the respondent. We are unable to
agree with the learned counsel for the respondent.
15.  The technicalities of the Evidence Act cannot be
imported to a proceedings before the Family Court because
Section 14 of the Family Courts Act authorizes a Family Court to
receive    as   evidence   any    report, statement,      document,
information or matter that may, in its opinion assist it to deal
effectually with a dispute irrespective of whether it is relevant or
admissible under the Indian Evidence Act, 1972. It is discernible
from Section 14 that the technicalities of Indian Evidence Act
regarding the admissibility or relevancy of evidence are not
strictly applicable to the proceedings under the Family Court and
in the matrimonial dispute before the Family Court, a discretion
has been given to the court to rely on the documents produced if
the court is satisfied that it is required to assist the court to
effectively deal with the dispute.
16.  Now, we will come to the contents of Ext. A2. Ext. A2
mail was sent by the aunt of the respondent Smt. Usha Pillai to
the appellant on 04/03/2012. In fact, it was in response to a mail
sent by the appellant to her on 29/01/2012. The said mail also
forms part of Ext. A2. A reading of the mail dated 29/01/2012
would show that the appellant informed about her strained
relationship with the respondent to Smt.Usha Pillai and sought
her version in the matter. A reading of the mail dated 04/03/2012
which runs into two pages would show that Smt.Usha Pillai and
her husband Sri.Hari knew about the marital problems between
the appellant and the respondent and they had intervened in it.
It is specifically stated in the mail that Smt.Usha Pillai had spoken
to the respondent about the marital problems between him and
the appellant and she heard what the respondent has to say in
the matter.     It is also further stated in the said mail that the
respondent had knowledge about the boy friend of the appellant
even before the marriage. There is a specific aspersion in Ext. A2
that the appellant was caught hold of by police along with a boy
friend and both of them were taken to police station. It is further
stated in Ext. A2 that the respondent had told Smt. Usha Pillai
and her husband that the appellant was trying to get the baby’s
surgery done without his consent. Smt. Usha Pillai has even
doubted the paternity of the child. The respondent was cross-
examined in length as to the contents of Ext. A2. He deposed
that he came to know of Ext. A2 and its contents including the
allegation regarding unchastity when he received the notice in
the original petition. Still, he did not ask about it to Smt.Usha
Pillai. At the same time, he stated that he enquired about Ext. A2
with his uncle, the husband of Smt. Usha Pillai, who admitted that
Smt. Usha Pillai had sent Ext. A2 to the appellant. He also stated
that he picked up quarrel with his uncle on that count. That apart,
in the original petition for custody filed by the respondent before
the court below, he has stated that the appellant had an affair
with another person. All these circumstances indicate that it was
the respondent who told Smt. Usha Pillai that the appellant was
caught hold of by the police along with a boy friend and both of
them were taken to the police station. Fore all theses reasons,
we are of the view that the contents in Ext. A2 can safely be
relied upon.
17.   PW2, the mother of PW1, has also given evidence that
the respondent used to pick up quarrel with the appellant alleging
that she was having extra-marital relationship with another
person.   She deposed that the respondent has spread the said
allegation among his relatives. Even though PW2 has been cross-
examined in length, nothing tangible has been brought out to
discredit her testimony.    We also find no reason to disbelieve the
evidence tendered by PW1 that the allegation of unchastity was
spread by the respondent among the co-workers of her father.
Admittedly, father of the appellant and the respondent were
working in the same company in the Sultanate of Oman. The
respondent has miserably failed to substantiate the imputation
made by him that the appellant has relationship with another
person and she is an unchaste woman. Levelling disgusting
accusation      of   unchastity   and    attributing   aspersions of
perfidiousness to the wife would undoubtedly amount to worst
form of mental cruelty. No wife can tolerate such accusation. On
going through the relevant portions of imputations in Ext. A2, we
find that they are of such quality, magnitude and consequence as
to cause reasonable apprehension in the mind of the appellant
that it is not safe for her to continue the marital tie. Inasmuch as
the mental cruelty on this ground has been established, it is
immaterial whether the allegation of physical assault on 1/3/2012
has been substantiated or not in order to grant a decree for
dissolution of marriage on the ground of cruelty.
18.     On an overall appreciation of the pleadings and
evidence, we find that the appellant has made out a case for
granting a decree for dissolution of marriage on the ground of
cruelty u/s 13(1)(ib) of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955. The court
below went wrong          in dismissing   the original petition for
dissolution of marriage. The impugned judgment, thus, rejecting
the prayer for dissolution of marriage on the ground of cruelty is
liable to be set aside. We do so.
In the result, the appeal is allowed. The impugned judgment
is set aside.     OP No.758/2014 on the file of Family Court,
Mavelikkara is allowed. The marriage between the appellant and
the respondent solemnized on 28/6/2009 stands dissolved. No
order as to costs.