The first petitioner is the wife of the second petitioner.
The first petitioner is pregnant and the gestation of her
pregnancy corresponds to 22 weeks. The petitioners seek, in this
proceedings, directions to the respondents to allow the first
petitioner to terminate her pregnancy medically. It is alleged by
the petitioners that since the outer time limit prescribed in terms
of the provisions of the Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act,
1971 for termination of the pregnancy is over, the respondents
are refusing to terminate her pregnancy. The case set out by the
petitioners in the writ petition is that the continuance of the
pregnancy would involve a risk to the life of the first petitioner .
It is also the case of the petitioners that there is a substantial risk
that if the child were born to the first petitioner, it would suffer
from physical and mental abnormalities.
2.     Heard the learned counsel for the petitioners as
also the learned Government Pleader.
3.     On 9.8.2021, this court passed the following
Kottayam is impleaded suo motu as the additional eighth
respondent in the writ petition.
2. The Permanent Medical Board constituted at the
Medical    College    Hospital,  Kottayam   in  terms  of  G.O.(Rt)
No.2444/2020/H&FWD dated 31.12.2020 is directed to examine
the first petitioner and give a report before this Court as to
whether continuance of her pregnancy would involve a risk to
her life or any grave injury to her physical or mental health. The
Medical Board shall also examine whether there is a substantial
risk that if the child were born, it would suffer from any serious
physical or mental abnormality.
3. The first petitioner shall make herself available
before the additional eighth respondent along with a copy of this
order    and   the    said  respondent   shall  immediately  make
necessary arrangements for her examination by the Permanent
List this matter on 13.08.2021.”
4.      Based    on the      interim    order    aforesaid,    the
Permanent Medical Board at the Medical College Hospital,
Kottayam examined the first petitioner on 11.8.2021 and the
report of medical examination is made available to the Court.
The relevant portion of the report of the Permanent Medical
“Sheis primigravida, married 10 months, with LMP on 9/3/21: GA :
22 wks.H/o ANC from Lekshmi Hospital, Ernakulam, NT scan at 12
wks was normal.       Anomaly scan on 26/7/21 showed bilateral
hypoplastic nasal bone. Amniocentesis and FISH analysis showed
abnormal sex chromosome (Klinefelter syndrome).
Past histroy of CVA with seizures at 2 1/2 yrs of age on tab: Zeptol
200mgBd; Frisium 20mgBD, Levigress, 100mg BD.            H/O visual
impairment and delayed mile stones.
O/E patient conscious and cooperative & needs support for
activities.
Pulse rate : 72 per mt, BP:110/70mm of Hg, Ht.155cm, wt.71kg
USG (11/8/21 from Dept.of Radio Diagnosis, GMCK)
SLIUP 21wks 1 day variable presentation. Nasal bone length
right : 6.6mm, left 7.0mm(>5th percentile, normal for Indian
population). No gross congenital anomalies, uterine artery
Doppler normal).
Cardiology & Pulmonology Opinion : Foetal cardio echo normal;
persons with Klinefelter syndrome have increased risk of metabolic
cardio vascular disease in long run.    It is not a life threatening
abnormality.
Neurology Opinion : The mother has mild mental retardation, visual
disturbances, seizures, and weakness of (L) lower limb with a
permanent disability of 55% as certified by District Medical Board,
Ernakulam.     The foetus has no brain malformations on USG,
Amniocentesis      and    FISH  revealed     klinefelter   syndrome.
Neurological manifestations of Klinefelter syndrome include mental
subnormality, dyslexia, ADHD. However it is not a life threatening
condition.
Phychiatry opinion : The mother has mild mental retardation and
impaired adaptive skills. She might find it difficult to cope with the
child rearing demands of a baby with disability.
Paediatrics opinion : Klinefelter syndrome is a chromosomal
anomaly associated with variable mental subnormality, endocrine
problems, and psychological issues in later life. However it is not a
life threatening disorder.
Klinefelter   syndrome  is   a  chromosomal       anomally
associated with variable mental subnormality, endocrine problems,
and psychological issues in later life.     However it is not a life
threatening disorder.
Since mother (Karthika Sumesh) has          mild mental
retardation and impaired adaptive skills. She might find it difficult to
cope with the child rearing demands of a baby with disability.
For     the    above   mentioned    reasons,      MTP     is
recommended.”
5.    As evident from the report, the fetus is suffering
from klinefelter syndrome.              The first petitioner is a person
suffering from mild mental retardation, visual disturbances,
seizures and weaknesses of the left lower limb with a permanent
disability of 55%. Though it is stated in the opinion that
klinefelter syndrome is not a life threatening disorder, if the said
fetus disorder is analysed in the light of the provision contained
in sub-Section(3) of Section 3 of the Act, it can be seen that this
is a case where it can be held that the continuance of the
pregnancy of the first petitioner would involve injury to the
physical and mental health of the first petitioner. I take this view
also for the reason that the Permanent Medical Board consisting
of 8 expert doctors have recommended for medical termination.
6.     The freedom of a pregnant woman in making a
choice as to whether the pregnancy should be continued cannot
be taken away. Likewise, the right of the mother to terminate the
pregnancy medically even after the permissible period in terms
of the provisions of the Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act,
has been recognised by the courts, if there is substantial risk
that if the child were born, it would suffer from abnormalities as
to be seriously handicapped.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed and the first
petitioner is permitted to undergo the procedure for termination
of the pregnancy. The respondents concerned would be free to
undertake the said procedure at the risk of the first petitioner.