Appellant :- Babu Pasi alias Babu Lal Pasi and another
Respondent :- State of U.P.
Counsel for Appellant :- J.N.Chaudhary, H B Singh, Harendra
(The judgment is pronounced in terms of Chapter VII Sub-rule
(2) of Rule (1) of the Allahabad High Court Rules, 1952 by
(1)    Eleven accused persons, namely, Babu Pasi alias Babu Lal
Sewak, Neta alias Kunni, Chandra Kishore, Lalaunoo, Ram
Rup, Ram Chandra, were tried by the VI Additional Sessions
Judge, Unnao in Sessions Trial No. 210 of 1981 : State Vs. Babu
Lal and others.
(2)    It is pertinent to mention here that during the trial, accused Babu
Lal Master died, whereas accused Vinod Kumar and Babu Lal
Dom were absconding, hence their trial was separated from
aforesaid eleven accused persons and the trial Court had charged
accused Ringu Pasi and Babu Lal Pasi under Sections 302 read
with Section 34 I.P.C. for committing murder of Shiv Balak and
Ram Balak and under Section 404 I.P.C. for having taken arms
from the deceased persons; and accused Ramesh, Madan Lal,
Ram Swaroop, Ganga Sewak, Neta alias Kunni, Chandra
Kishore, Lalaunoo, Ram Roop and Ram Chandra were charged
under Sections 201, 148, 302 read with Section 34 I.P.C. and
Section 302 I.P.C. read with Section 114 I.P.C.
(3) Vide judgment and order dated 17.07.1982, the VI Additional
Sessions Judge, Unnao, acquitted nine accused persons, namely,
Ramesh, Madan Lal, Ram Swaroop, Ganga Sewak, Neta alias
Kunni, Chandra Kishor, Lalaunoo, Ram Roop, Ram Chandra and
convicted two accused persons, namely, Babu Pasi alias Babu
Lal Pasi (appellant no.1 herein), Ringu Pasi (appellant no.2
herein) under Section 302 read with Section 34 I.P.C. and
Section 404 I.P.C. and sentenced them in the manner as stated
“(i) Under section 302 read with Section 34
(ii) Under Section 404 I.P.C. to undergo one
year’s R.I.”
Both the sentences were directed to run concurrently.
(4) Feeling aggrieved by their conviction and sentence above vide
judgment and order dated 17.07.1982, Babu Pasi alias Babu Lal
Pasi (appellant no.1 herein ) and Ringu Pasi (appellant no.2
herein) have preferred the instant criminal appeal under Section
374 (2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
(5)  It is pertinent to mention here that no appeal against the acquittal
of nine accused persons, namely, Ramesh, Madan Lal, Ram
Swaroop, Ganga Sewak, Neta alias Kunni, Chandra Kishor,
Lalaunoo, Ram Roop, Ram Chandra, has been filed either by the
State or by the complainant’s side.
(6)  It transpires from the record that during pendency of the instant
appeal, appellant no.1-Babu Pasi alias Babu Lal Pasi died on
12.07.2015, hence the instant criminal appeal filed on his behalf
stands abated vide order dated 07.02.2019.        Now the instant
criminal appeal survives only in respect of appellant no.2-Ringu
(7)  Shorn off unnecessary details, the case of the prosecution is as
Gaya Prasad Singh (informant), son of Sheo Darshan Singh
Kachi, who is the resident of village Hamirpur, Police Station
Bihar, District Unnao, has lodged an F.I.R., alleging therein that
in the year 1979, Chandrika Pasi of his village was murdered, in
which his son Ram Balak (deceased), his nephew Raj Narayan
son of Suryawali Kachi, Dinesh Chandra (injured) and Harish
Chandra alias Kunne, sons of Udai Shanker Shukla, resident of
village Bhagwant Nagar, Police Station Bihar, were challaned and
in this case, on 30.09.1980, they were required to be present in
Court. On that date i.e. on 30.09.1980, his another civil case was
listed in Civil Court.
On 30.09.1980, his son Ram Balak (deceased), Shiv Balak
(deceased) and his brother Vishnu Dutt came to kachahari (Court)
for doing pairvi in both the cases. On the said date, the relatives
of Chandrika Pasi and his companions, namely, Babu Lal Pasi
Master, Ringu Pasi, Babu Pasi (accused), residents of Village
Osiya, Police Station Bighapur, were also gone along with other
2-3 friends to kachahari (court) for doing pairvi of the case of
In the Court, some hot talk took place between his sons and Babu
Lal Master etc. Thereafter, Babu Lal said that “[kqu dk cnyk [kqu ls
pqdk;k tk;sxk” (blood would be avenged for blood), which was also
heard by Ram Narayan Kadi, who had gone there for pairvi of his
brother Raj Narayan. On the said date, the case was posted for
On 06.10.1980, he (informant Gaya Prasad Singh), his sons Ram
Balak (deceased), Shiv Balak (deceased), his nephew Raj
Narayan and Shivdhar Singh sons of Ganga Singh, resident of
village Bhunau Kheda, Ram Balak Yadav son of Kali Prasad
resident of village Pitua Kheda, Ramdas Lohar son of Bhalu, Ram
Balak son of Satya Narayan Pasi resident of Village Hamirpur,
Police Station Bihar, District Unnao, were gone to kachahari
(Court) but the case was posted for 07.10.1980, then, they were
coming from Kanpur to Buxer through a bus, bearing registration
No. U.T.T. 7367, upon which his grand-child Upendra Singh
(P.W.1) son of Shiv Balak (deceased) was also returning from
Kanpur. Babu Pasi, Ringu Pasi (appellants) of Usiya also boarded
on the said bus from Unnao.
When the bus was started to go from Bighapur to Buxer, then, 3-4
men from Bighapur also boarded the said bus and when the bus
moved ahead from frjkgk (a place where three road met with each
other) of Usiya village at around 05:30 p.m., loud sound jksdks jksdks
(stop stop) came inside the bus from its behind and 3-4 fire also
happened in the bus. Thereafter, the bus, after running about 150
yard, stopped and then, they saw that Ram Balak (deceased) and
Shiv Balak (deceased) got shot and fell on their seats and near to
them, Babu Pasi, Ringu (appellants) and 24 year old wheatish
colour boy wearing a red bushirt were holding a katta (pistol) in
their hands and while abusing the passengers, asked them that
bastard get out from the bus and ran away and if someone spoke,
he too would be shot. Thereafter, while snatching the rifle of his
son Ram Balak (deceased) and a single bore gun of Shiv Balak
(deceased) by Babu Pasi            and Ringu Pasi (appellants),
respectively, they took it in their hands.
Thereafter, Dinesh Chandra Shukla (injured), who was sitting in
front of the seat of the next gate with his rifle facing his face
towards back, was caught holding his rifle by a wheatish man
wearing Khakhi paint and bushirt and appeared to be a young age.
Thereafter, Dinesh tried to escape from the grip of a wheatish
man but he was jerked by him and then, while pulling over from
bus with rifle, the said wheatish man snatched his rifle.
Thereafter, all the passengers got out of the bus and hid under the
trees here and there. They (informant Gaya Prasad Singh and
Upendra Singh (P.W.1) also ran away and hid here and there
under the cover.
As soon as the bus stopped the side of the road, Babu Lal Pasi
Master (accused), who was armed with one bore gun and along
with him 10-12 persons, who armed with Katta (pistol) and
shotguns (vn~/kh canwds), started firing. When the passengers got
down, Babu Lal Master (accused) had said that dead body of the
bastard be taken out from the bus, thereupon 3-4 persons entered
into the bus and took out the dead body of his two sons, who died
on account of shot inside the bus and thereafter, took away the
dead bodies of his two sons to the south of the road towards the
field. Thereafter, on saying of Babu Lal Master (accused), one of
his companion, after soaking his angaucha (towel) in water,
entered into the bus and cleaned the blood that had fallen in it.
A passenger, who was running towards the east and fell into the
water about seven yards east of the road, was too shot by the
miscreants. Two miscreants picked up his body and took him
towards south of the road towards agriculture. The miscreants
fired 15-16 shots and all the miscreants went south through the
Hearing the fire sound, the men working in the nearby fields came
on the road and saw the incident and recognized the miscreants.
After the miscreants ran away, the said people came near the bus.
The passenger, who had boarded the bus from Bighapur, told his
name as Lallu Yadav of Mardan Khera, Kishan Mohan of Usiya,
Jagmohan Singh of Akwabad, Police Station Bighapur. The men,
who had gathered on the spot and who had seen and recognized
the miscreants, told that the red bushirt miscreant was Vinod
Kumar Chamar; the name of the person wearing Khakhi paint and
bushirt was Babal Lal Dom of village Usiya and the name of the
other miscreants was Kunni alias Neta, Ram Chandra Ahir,
Ahir of Usiya, Lalaunu Pasi of village Bhagrar, Chandra Kishore
Lohar of village Aram police station Bighapur Unnao. The name
of 3-4 miscreants could not tell by them but they said they would
recognize by seeing them.
It has further been stated by the informant Gaya Prasad Singh that
his son Shiv Balak was wearing half black tericoat bushirt, in
which big white check was made, one rainy shoe, one rose colour
aunguacha having its corner green, H.M.T. Automatic white dial
white Kesh and a watch connected with chain amounting to
Rs.400/-; and Ram Balak was wearing tericot bellbottom and
tericot bushirt, rainy shoe, Omax automatic of catechu color and a
watch connected with chain amounting to Rs. 400/-. They were
also having license of rifle and gun and cartridge. The window of
the bus where his sons were sitting got broken on the shot of
miscreants and the seat where his sons were sitting in the bus,
were having entry of gun shot and blood stained. On account of
the shot of the miscreants, Dinesh Shukla and 2-3 persons were
also sustained injuries. The name of the miscreants told by the
persons came there after the incident, has not been known by him
prior to the incident. He, Upendra Singh, Shivdhar Singh, Ram
Balak Yadav, Ram Balak Pasi, Ram Das Lohar had seen the
miscreants and recognized them and when they came in front of
them, he can recognized them. He and his family members can
identify the belongings of his sons when they come in front of
them.
(8)  Thereafter, informant Gaya Prasad Singh Kachi got the FIR
scribed at Bighapur Bus Station through Upendra Singh (P.W.1),
who after scribing it read it over to him and thereafter got his
signature on it and subsequently handed it over to informant
Gaya Prasad, who, then, proceeded to Police Station Bighapur
and lodged it.
(9)  The evidence of Syed Ibtida Husain Rizvi (P.W. 8) shows that on
06.10.1980, he was posted as Constable Clerk at Police Station
Bighapur and on the said date, at 07:15 p.m., informant Gaya
Prasad came and filed his written FIR (Ext. Ka.1), on the basis of
which he prepared the chik FIR (Ext. Ka.33).
(10)  A perusal of the chik FIR shows that the distance between the
place of incident and Police Station Bighapur was 3 miles. It is
significant to mention that a perusal of the chik FIR also shows
that on its basis, Case Crime No. 144 of 1980, under Sections
396, 201 I.P.C. was registered against appellants and 3-4
unknown persons.
(11)  The evidence of SI Hari Shanker Singh (P.W. 7), in short, shows
In October, 1980, he was posted as Station Officer at police
station Bighapur. On 06.10.1980, this case was registered in his
presence at the police station. He commenced the investigation
and proceeded to the place of incident along with the informant
(Gaya Prasad Singh) and other witnesses from police station,
where Station Officer of police station Bihar and S.I. R.P. Shukla
along with Constables were met at the place of the occurrence.
He, thereafter, instructed them to search the dead bodies of the
deceased and also to search the accused persons. Thereafter, he
recorded the statements of Krishna Mohan and Lalloo etc.
On 07.10.1980, at 02:00 a.m., he again commenced the
investigation and at the place of occurrence, he recorded the
statement of witness Upendra Singh (P.W.1) etc. Subsequently, he
inspected the place of occurrence and on the pointing out of the
informant and other witnesses, he prepared the site plan (Ext.
Ka.5). From the place of incident, he seized two empty catridges,
blood stained earth lying on the road on the side of the bus and
plain earth near it in two containers under a recovery memo. He
also seized four pellets, fVdyh dkjrwl, and a ticket of roadways bus
in two containers under a recovery memo. He also seized the
blood stained earth and plain earth from the places ‘N’ and ‘Q’
shown in the site map in two separate containers under a recovery
memo. He also seized blood stained <Sapk, plain branch of <Sapk,
blood stained earth and plain earth from the place shown as ‘>’ in
the site plan in two separate containers under the recovery memo.
Their recovery memo is Ext. Ka. 6 to Ext. Ka. 9.
On the date itself, the dead body of the deceased Shiv Balak was
recovered on excavating the field of Devideen and he then
prepared a recovery memo (Ext. Ka. 10). Thereafter, the dead
body of another person was recovered from that field on
excavating it but due to darkness, the Panchayatnama of any
corpse could not be done. The dead body of Shiv Balak was
identified by Upendra Singh (P.W.1). The accused persons were
searched but they were not found at their home. He and other
people remained on the spot for the supervision of the dead
On 08.10.1980, at about 07:00 a.m., he prepared panchayatnama
of the dead body of the deceased Shiv Balak (Ext. Ka. 12), photo
lash (Ext. Ka. 13), challan lash (Ext. Ka. 14) and a letter to
C.M.O. (Ext. Ka. 15) and handed over the dead body of the
deceased Shiv Balak in a sealed condition for post-mortem to
Constable Ram Vilash etc. To identify the dead body of the
unknown person, it was brought from the field of Devideen to
Urmiya Tiraha and got identified from the people who were
coming and going there. But after not being identified, Ramdas
Photographer was called from Janta Studio Bighapur and photo of
the dead body of the unknown person was taken in his presence.
Thereafter, photographer had handed over the positive photograph
of the unknown person to him (Ext. Ka. 14 and Ext. Ka. 15).
Thereafter, he prepared the panchayatnama of the dead body of
the unknown person (Ext. Ka. 16), photo lash (Ext. Ka. 17),
challan lash (Ext. Ka. 18) and a letter to C.M.O. (Ext. Ka. 19) and
handed it over to aforesaid Constable Ram Bilas etc. in a sealed
Thereafter, he came at Bighapur Bus Stand, where the bus was
standing.   From inside the bus, he seized one briefcase (Ext.
Ka.16) and articles found inside of it under recovery momo (Ext.
Ka. 20). The address was known from the letter found in the
briefcase. He also recovered six pellets and 2 vnn fVdyh from
inside the bus, which was taken in possession and prepared its
recovery memo. He seized the pieces of mirror of broken window
inside the bus in a container under recovery memo (Ext. Ka. 23).
He found blood on the rexine on the seat of the bus and therefore
he cut the blood stained rexine and seized it under recovery memo
(Ext. Ka. 24). He also prepared the site plan of the bus (Ext. Ka.
22). The injury report of Dinesh Chandra was received at the
police station, which was copied and after that he came at police
On 09.10.1980, he went to the house of Shiv Kumar Trivedi of
village Babu Kheda along with recovered items Ext. Ka. 16
wherein his son Rama Shanker met and he identified the briefcase
and clothes inside it and said it was his brother-in-law. Smt. Shail
Kumari has said that the briefcase and its article were of his
On 11.10.1980, he handed over the custody of the bus to Sri
R.P.Singh, Station Officer, Unnao and got receipt thereof (Ext.
Ka. 24). On the date itself, another dead body was found in the
field of aforesaid Devideen on excavating (Ext. Ka. 26) but it
could not be identified at that time, therefore, informant Gaya
Prasad was called. He prepared the site map of that place (Ext.
Ka.25). He, thereafter, left the unknown dead body under the
supervision of S.I. R. P. Shukla and came to Unnao and informed
On 12.10.1980, informant Gaya Prasad came there, identified the
dead body and told that it was his son Ram Balak. He, thereafter,
prepared panchayatnama of the dead body of Ram Balak (Ext.
Ka. 27), photo lash (Ext. Ka. 28), challan lash (Ext. Ka 29) and a
letter to C.M.O. (Ext. Ka. 30). He thereafter sealed the dead body
of Ram Balak and handed it over to Constable Ram Pal etc. for
On 14.10.1980, he recorded the statements of Head Moharrir Ram
Asre Tiwari, Constable Ram Bilas Yadav and Ram Pal.            On
15.10.1980, he came to Unnao and under the order of the Court,
Kunni alias Neta was taken in police custody for 48 hours and
brought him to police, where he recorded his statement.        On
20.10.1980, at about 03:30 a.m., he arrested Madan Pal Cheddi
from the Tiraha of Unnao-Raibareli road and Maiku Teli road at
the east of village Sikandarpur. On the search of accused Chhedi,
he recovered a country-made pistol, four live cartridges and a
wrist watch and prepared two separate recovery memo. On the
pointing out of accused Madan and Cheddi, he recovered a bag
(Ext. Ka. 26), which was buried in the ground under the water in
the field of Ludhai Pasi, in which one angaucha (towel) was
On 23.10.1980, he went to Kanpur and searched other accused
persons but he could not find them. On 24.10.1980, photographer
Ram Baran had given him five photograph.
On 24.10.1980, he came to know that accused Babu Lal Master,
Babu Lal, Ringu, Ramesh, Vinod Kumar and Chandra Kishore
(accused) were surrendered themselves in the Court of Chief
Judicial Magistrate, Lucknow.      On 28.10.1980, he received
information from the Court of J.M.-8, Unnao         that aforesaid
accused persons came to Unnao Jail from the Lucknow Jail on
26.10.1980. On 31.10.1980, he learnt that accused Ramroop,
Ram Swaroop and Gram Sewak surrendered themselves in the
Court of Unnao on 28.10.1980 and accused Babu Lal Dom
surrendered himself in Court on 29.10.1980. On 02.11.1980, the
property of the accused Lalaunoo and Chandra Kumar was
attached and handed it over to Munni Lal. On 06.11.1980, he
came to know that accused Ram Chandra surrendered himself on
03.11.1980. On 10.11.1980, he conducted the proceedings for
reporting the identification of aungaucha and watch and on
12.11.1980, he conducted the proceedings for reporting the
identification of accused persons. Thereafter, he was transferred
to Kotwali and further investigation was done by Jora Singh
(12)  The evidence of H.C. Ram Asre (P.W.9) shows that in the month
of October, 1980, he was posted as Head Moharrir at Police
Station Bighapur.    On 09.10.1980, Devideen, son of Lalloo,
resident of Ibrahimpur, P.S. Saraini, District Raibareli, came at
the police station. He stated that Devideen was sent for medical
examination along with Constable Sriram with chithi majroobi
(letter for medical examination)       at Primary Health Centre,
Bighapur.    On 20.10.1980, he took accused Madan Lal and
Chhedi Lal from police station Bighapur at 11:10 a.m. and
detained them at District Jail, Unnao.
In cross-examination, P.W.9 H.C. Ram Asrey had deposed before
the trial Court that accused Madan and Cheddi were arrested on
20.10.1980 and at 10:15 a.m., they were brought at police station.
The injuries of Devideen, which he had seen, were mentioned in
the G.D.
(13)  The evidence of Sri Janardan Singh (P.W.10) shows that on
29.12.1980 and also on 03.01.1980, he was posted as Executive
Magistrate at District Unnao. On 03.01.1981, he conducted the
identification parade of accused Vinod Kumar, Babulal son of
Dhannu Dom and Ramesh and Ram Chandra, Ram Swaroop,
Ramroop, Ganga Sewak, Madan Lal, Lalaunu alias Chandra
Kumar and Chandra Kishore at District Jail, Unnao. A separate
parade consisting of 10-10 undertrial prisoners with each accused
was prepared and the witnesses were called one by one. During
identification, they were made to sit in such a place where they
would not have a conversation with the coming witnesses nor
made any indication. The result of the identification parade was
that the accused Babu Lal was correctly recognized by the
witness Gaya Prasad Singh; accused Chandra Kishore was
correctly recognized by the witness Upendra Singh; accused
Vinod Kumar and Madan Lal were corrected recognized by the
witness Ramdas. He prepared the proceedings of identification
directly, which is in his handwriting and signed (Ext. Ka.38)
Similarly, on 29.12.1980, he conducted the identification parade
of blood stained aungaucha (Ext.1) at his office. The result of
such identification was that witnesses Gaya Prasad Singh,
Upendra Singh, Gajendra Singh and Devendra Singh had
correctly identified the said aungaucha. He had prepared the
proceedings in respect of the identification, which is in his
handwritten and signature (Ext. 39)
In cross-examination, P.W.10 has stated that at the time of
identification of goods, they did not get information who is the
accused in this case and who is his lawyer, hence the accused was
not informed about the identification proceedings. Witness Gaya
Prasad had made one mistake in identifying the other accused;
witness Upendra Singh also made nine mistakes in identifying
other accused; witness Dinesh Chandra made ten mistakes in
identifying ten accused. The statements given by the witness to
him were “MdSrh o dRy djrs oDr ekSds ij ns[kk Fkk”. Witness Upendra
was also given the same statement to him.
(14)  The evidence of Constable Shiv Charan Mishra (P.W.11) shows
that on 29.12.1980, he was posted as Court Moharrir in the Court
of Special Executive Magistrate. On that date, he brought out a
sealed bundle good from Sadar Malkhana, Unnao to the Court
and after completion of identification proceedings, he brought
the sealed bundle good from the Court and lodged it to Sadar
Malkhana. The goods belonged to this case.
(15)  The evidence of Head Constable Annirudh Prasad (P.W.13)
shows that on 21.10.1980, he was posted as Moharrir at Sadar
Malkhana. On the said date, two sealed bundle of this case was
deposited by Constable CP 31 Jagdish Prasad in Sadar Malkhana.
He also stated that on 29.12.1980, one sealed and stamped
bundle, in which bag and angaucha were there, was brought by
Constable Shiv Charan Mishra (P.W.11) to the Court for
identification and after identification of the aforesaid goods,
Constable Shiv Charan Mishra (P.W.11) deposited it in a sealed
condition in Sadar Malkhana.
(16)  The evidence of Ram Baran Verma (P.W.14) shows that in the
year 1977, he was doing the work of photography at Bighapur,
where he has a studio. On 08.10.1980, he took the negative of
Ext. 14, 15. 17, 18 and 19 and he also brought it. He further
stated that the same has been filed by him in the Court, in which
Ext. 27, 28, 29, 30 and 31 were mentioned. He further stated that
for this negative, he prepared the positive photograph print (Ext.
14, 15, 17, 18 and 19) and gave it to the Inspector.
In cross-examination, P.W.14 has stated that the bazar (market) of
Bighapur is closing once in a week i.e. on Monday. On that day
when he prepared the photo, bazar (market) was also closing on
Monday. He clicked the photo of the dead body at the tiraha of
Usiya and also clicked the photo of the bus at Bus Stand
(17)  The evidence of P.W.15 Jora Singh shows that on 29.11.1980, he
was posted as Station Officer at Police Station Bighapur. He
took the investigation of the case himself after transfer of the
Investigating Officer Sri Hari Shanker (P.W.7. After completion
of the investigation, the appellants and the acquitted accused
were charge-sheeted vide charge-sheet dated 11.01.1981 (Ext.
In cross-examination, P.W.15 has stated before the trial Court that
he did not send the blood stained items to Chemical Examiner for
examination. On asking the reasons thereof, he stated that he was
not paying attention.
(18)  Going backward, the injuries of Dinesh Chandra Shukla and
Devi Deen were examined on 07.10.1980 and 09.10.1980, at
1:30 p.m. and 03:30 p.m. at District Hospital, Unnao and Primary
Health Centre, Bighapur by Dr. Vrij Narayan Saxena (P.W.3) and
Dr. Keshav Gupta (P.W.12), respectively, who found injuries on
their person as enumerated hereinafter :-
1.  Incised wound 2 cm x 0.25 cm x .15 cm on the 1st
past aspect of left forearm 5 cm above the
medial epicondyle tailing present on the above
side, margins clear cut.
2.  Abrasion 2 cm x 2 cm on the lateral aspect of
Rt. knee joint.
(probed). Feeling of Hard Mass like a pallet
3 cm medial to wound area all around the
and out from Lt. tibial tubercli measuring 1
cm in diameter. Muscle deep (probed).
(19)  It is significant to mention here that Dr. Vrij Narayan Saxena
(P.W.3), who examined the injured Dinesh Chandra Shukla, has
deposed before the trial Court that on 07.10.1980, he was posted
as Emergency Medical Officer, District Hospital, Unnao and on
the said date, he conducted the medical examination of injured
Dinesh Chandra Shukla.       On examination of injured Dinesh
Chandra Shukla, he found two injuries on his person. As per his
opinion, injuries were one day old; injury no.1 could be
attributable by sharp edged weapon and injury no.2             by
scrubbing; these injuries could be attributable on 06.10.1980 at
05:30 p.m.; and the injury of knee could be caused by falling
rough paved road.
In cross-examination, P.W.3- Dr. Vrij Narayan Saxena has
deposed that none of the these two injuries could be caused by
fire arm; and both the injuries are superficial and could be self-
inflicted.
(20)  As stated hereinabove, the injuries of Devi Deen was examined
by Dr. Keshav Gupta (P.W.12), who deposed before the trial
Court that on 09.10.1980, he was posted as Medical Officer in
Primary Health Centre, Bighapur. On the said date, at 03:30 p.m.,
he examined the injured Devideen, who was brought by
Constable Sri Ram of Bighapur Police Station.             On the
examination of injured Devi Deen, he found two injuries on his
person. As per his opinion, injuries could be attributable by any
fire arm weapon; duration of the injuries at the time of
examination was about three days old; he advised x-ray for both
the injuries; he prepared the injury report (Ext. Ka. 42); and all
the injuries on his person could be attributable on 06.10.1980 at
05:30 p.m.
In cross-examination, he had deposed before the trial Court that
on 06.10.1980, he went to Bighapur. The hospital of Bighapur is
at a distance of 2 kms from the police station.
(21)  The autopsies on the dead bodies of deceased persons, namely,
(1) unknown person, (2) Shiv Balak and (3) Ram Balak, were
conducted on 09.10.1980, 08.10.1980 and 13.10.1980 at 01:30
p.m., 04.00 p.m. and 1:30 p.m., by Dr. Adarsh Sanghi (P.W. 4),
Dr. J.N. Bajpai (P.W.5) and Dr. R.R. Aacharya (P.W.16), who
found on their person ante-mortem injuries, enumerated
“Ante-mortem injuries of unknown person
1.    Gun shot wound of entry circular in shape 1 1/2”
x 11/2” x chest cavity deep. On the upper part
of the chest 11/2” below left sterno clavicular
joint margins inverted and contused.
right cheek, 1/2” away from right alae of nose.
The under lying maxillary bone is cut.
3.    Incised wound 3” x 1/2” x bone deep over right
cheek 1/2” interior to injury no.2.
4.    Circular lacerated wound 1/2” x 1/3” x muscle
deep just above right elbow joint.
5.    Lacerated wound 1/2” x 1/3” x muscle deep on
right fore-arm back 2” below elbow joint.
6.    Gun shot wound of entry 11/2” x 11/4” x muscle
deep on the anterior part of left buttock 3” is
below iliac crest. Margins inverted and
muscle deep on the anterior part of the right
buttock in an area of 3 1/2“ x 2”. Margins
“Ante-mortem injuries of Shiv Balak, son of
1.     Multiple incised wounds in an area of 6” x 6” x
bone deep carsury lev on left side of face, left
side of nose, left side of cheek and left side
of chin. Margins (illigble) clear cut.
injury no.2 and 11/2” from the right nipple.
4.     Gun shot wounds of entry 1” x 1” into
abdomen upper part. 9th below left arm pit 7th
outer to unsclicus.”
“Ante-mortem injuries of Ram Balak, son of Gaya
on (L) face from (L) ear to lower jaw. Maxillary
bones (L) mandible bone of (L) skull cut.
2.     Incised wound on (L) neck 3.0 x 1.0 cm x bone
deep middle.
3.     Incised injury 8.0 x 0.5 cm x muscle deep on
mid, upper abdomen.
region scapular region, oblique 2.0 x 1.5 cm
direction from (L) to (R). Scapular bone (L),
back of IV & V rib (L) broken found at (R)
The cause of death spelt out in the autopsy reports of the deceased
persons was shock and haemorrhage as a result of ante-mortem
injuries which they had suffered.
(22)  It is signification to mention here that in their depositions in the
trial Court, Dr. Adarsh Sanghai (P.W.4), Dr. J.N. Bajpai (P.W.5)
and Dr. R.R. Aacharya (P.W.16) have reiterated the said cause of
death of the deceased (1) unknown person, (2) Shiv Balak and
(3) Ram Balak, respectively.
(23) P.W.4-Adarsh Sanghai has deposed before the trial Court that on
09.10.1980, he was posted for post-mortem duty and on that date,
at about 01:30 p.m., he conducted the post-mortem of the dead
body of an unknown person, which was sent by S.O. Bighapur
and brought it by C.P.282 Ram Bilash Yadav in a sealed
condition and identified it by him. On examination, he initially
found that the age of the deceased was about 30 years; it had
been almost three days old since he died; the body physique was
average; the stiffness of the body after death had ended; the
decomposition of the body had begun; the body was covered
with mud; the insects were crawling on the body; and blisters
were present on the whole body.
He further stated that on internal examination, it was found that
the brain was decomposed; in the bone of pleura, one bending,
two pellete, about half litre blood and fluid were found; both
right and left lungs were torn; heart was torn and empty; the
upper part of the sternum bone was broken; about 50 grams of
semi-digested food was present in the stomach; small intestine
was empty; and faces were present in the large intestine. He has
further deposed that he found five big pellet and one piece of
bending from the body of the deceased, which was sealed and
sent to S.P. Unnao. The report of post-mortem is in his
handwriting and signature (Ext. Ka.3). The death of the deceased
could be attributable on 06.10.1980 at 05:30 p.m. Injuries no. 4
and 5 could not be caused by fire arm. He further stated that it
is difficult to distinguish between the injuries caused soon before
the death and within half an hour immediately after the death.
In his cross-examination, P.W.4-Dr. Adarsh Sanghai has deposed
that the clotting of the blood starts immediately after death.
When the blood starts clotting, the dripping of the blood
decreases. After the death, skin and subcutaneous tissue etc.
starts getting hard.      It is difficult to say that within 10-15
minutes, it becomes hard. After hardening, the inflicted injuries
could be distinguishable from earlier injuries of death. He had
minutely observed the injuries found during the post-mortem.
Injuries No. 2, 3, 4, and 5 were ante-mortem. He further stated
that at this moment, it is difficult to say where there was blood in
these injuries as it is not mentioned in the report. He is not the
ballistic expert. As per his opinion, bending could go into the
body on firing from three feet with a pistol. The blackening and
tattooing will not come in the condition of wearing clothes. One
injury i.e. No.1 appears to have been inflicted within three feet.
The death is also possible on 06.10.1980 at around 7-8 pm. The
name and address of the deceased was unknown at the time of
post-mortem. In the winter season, the blood coagulates quickly.
(24) P.W.5-Dr. J.N. Bajpai, in his examination-in-chief, has deposed
that on 08.10.1980, he was posted as Radiologist at District
Hospital, Unnao and on that date, at 04:00 p.m., he conducted the
post-mortem examination of the deceased Shiv Balak Singh,
which was brought by Constable 354 C.P. Ram Pal Singh, Police
Station Bighapur in a sealed condition and identified it by him.
On examination, initially he found that the age of the deceased
was about 40 years and it had been almost 2 days since he died.
The physical appearance of the deceased was normal. There was
mud on the body of the deceased. The post-death stiffness was
not present and no sign of rot was found. He further deposed that
on internal examination, he found that right side bone of the
chest and seventh rib bone were broken; eighth and ninth rib on
the left side of the chest were broken; the pleura on the right side
had ruptured; about half a liter of blood was present in the pleural
cavity; the right lung was torn; the membrane above the heart
was also torn and was empty; the peritoneum was also torn; one
liter of fluid was present in abdominal cavity; stomach and small
intestine were empty and stool was present in large intestine;
liver was ruptured on the right side; the spleen was also torn. He
further stated that he prepared the post-mortem report (Ext. Ka.
4). The death could be possible on 06.10.1980 at 05:30 p.m. He
also stated that gun shot injury would come from firing from
close range because blackening was present. If injury no. 1 is
caused immediately after death, it is difficult to distinguish it as
ante-mortem and post-mortem. He stated that in his opinion,
injuries no. 3 and 4 of the fire arm cannot be done after the
In his cross-examination, P.W.5 has deposed that he cannot say
from how many shots, injuries no. 2, 3 and 4 would have come.
He cannot say whether injuries no. 2, 3 and 4 came from one shot
or from three shots.       These injuries could be possible on
06.10.1980, at 7-8 p.m.
(25)  The evidence of P.W.16- Dr. R.R. Acharya shows that on
13.10.1980, he was posted as Orthopedic Surgeon in District
Hospital, Unnao. On the said date, at 1:30 p.m., he conducted
the post-mortem of the deceased Ram Balak, son of Gaya Prasad,
which was brought by C.P. 359 Ram Nath Singh of police station
Bighapur in a sealed condition and identified by him.           On
examination of the body of the deceased Ram Balak, he opined
that the deceased was about 40 years old and it had been almost 7
days since he died. On internal examination, he found that the
left side skull bone was chopped off; the stomach and small
intestine were empty; gas and faces were present somewhere in
the large intestine. He further stated that injuries no. 1, 2 and 3
was inflicted with a sharp edged weapon and injury number 4
was inflicted by a fire arm. He had prepared the post-mortem
report (Ext. Ka. 45) at the time of inspection, which was in his
handwriting and signature. The death of the deceaed could be
possible on 06.10.1980 at 05:30 pm.
In cross-examination, he has stated that the death of the deceased
could be more possible on account of injury no.1. The injury no.1
was more fatal than injury no.4. He further stated that it could not
be possible for a man to survive after injury no.1. Injury no.1
could also be possible after death. He also stated that advance
sign of decomposition in the dead body was present. The maggots
flies were present in the dead body of the deceased. The skin was
shriveled and the skin was also come out somewhere from the
dead body. He could not find the mud on the dead body of the
deceased.
(26)  The case was committed to the Court of Session in the usual
manner where the convicts/appellants Ringu Pasi and Babu Pasi
were charged under Sections 302 read with Section 34 I.P.C. for
committing the murder of Sheo Balak and Ram Balak and under
Section 404 I.P.C. for having taken arms from the deceased
persons; and the acquitted accused, namely, Ramesh, Madan Lal,
Ram Swaroop, Ganga Sewak, Neta alias Kunni, Chandra Kishor,
Lalaunoo, Ram Roop and Ram Chandra, were charged under
Sections 201, 148, 302/34, 302/114 I.P.C. They pleaded not
guilty to the charges and claimed to be tried. Their defence was
of denial.
(27)  During the trial, in all, the prosecution examined 16 (sixteen)
witnesses, namely, P.W.1 Upendra Singh, P.W.2 Lallu, P.W.3 Dr.
Singh and P.W.16 Dr. R. R. Aacharya. Out of sixteen witnesses,
three of them, namely, Upendra Singh (P.W.1), Lallu (P.W. 2) and
Krishna Mohan (P.W.6) were examined as eye-witnesses.
(28)  P.W.1-Upendra Singh, in his examination-in-chief, has deposed
before the trial Court that he is the resident of village Hamirpur,
police station Bihar. Village Usiya police station Bighapur is
about 25 km away from his village. The deceased Shiv Balak and
Ram Balak was his father and uncle, respectively. The name of
his grand-father is Sri Gaya Prasad Singh. His uncle Ram Balak
lived separately from his father. He was studying in Kanpur at
the time of incident. Chandrika Pasi of his village was murdered
about 7-8 months before this incident, in which his uncle Ram
Balak and Raj Narayan etc. were challaned. Raj Narayan
happens to be his uncle in a distant relationship. Dinesh Chandra
and Harish Chandra, who were accused in the murder of
Chandrika Pasi, is a resident of village Bhagwant Nagar.
The hearing in Chandrika’s murder case was fixed on 06.10.1980
at Unnao. On 06.10.1980, he was coming from Kanpur to his
village by bus. This bus goes from Kanpur to Buxar. Buxar lies
ahead of Bhagwant Nagar. The bus starts from Kanpur at 3 or
3.30 pm in the evening. The number of that bus was U.T.T. 7367.
For going from Kanpur to Buxar, the bus goes via Unnao. When
the bus arrived at Unnao Bus Station, his father (deceased Shiv
Balak) and uncle Ram Balak (deceased), grand-father Gaya
Prasad (informant), Harish Chandra and injured Dinesh Chandra,
Ram Balak Yadav resident of Pituakheda, Shivadhar Singh
resident of Munaukheda, Ram Das Lohar resident of Hamirpur,
Ram Balak Pasi resident of Hamirpur met him. At that time, his
father (deceased Shiv Balak) was armed with 12 bore licensee
gun; his uncle Ram Balak (deceased) was armed with rifle; and
Dinesh Chandra (injured) was armed with rifle. They all were
sitting on that bus. He was sitting on a two seater with his grand-
father. His father (deceased Shiv Balak), uncle (deceased Ram
Balak) and Harishchandra were seated behind him on the bus.
Shivdhar, Ram Das, Ram Balak Yadav and Ram Balak Pasi were
sitting on the rear seat of the bus. Babu Lal Pasi and Ringu Pasi
(convicts/appellants) were also sitting from Unnao Bus Station on
this bus. He knew both of them from earlier. Both of them used to
come at Chandrika’s house of his village with Babu Lal Pasi
Master. After this incident, Babu Lal Pasi Master was killed in
After crossing Unnao, the bus reached at Bighapur Bus Station,
where some passenger got off and some passengers boarded on
the bus. The tiraha (an intersection of three roads) of Usiya is
about 4-5 kms from Bighapur Bus Stand. For going from
Bighapur to Bhagwant Nagar, the bus goes through Usiya tiraha
(an intersection of three roads). After running from Bighapur, the
bus stopped at the tiraha (an intersection of three roads) of Usiya.
When the bus went 50-60 yards from the tiraha of Usiya, a loud
sound of “jksdks jksdks (stop stop)” inside the bus came behind it and
3-4 fires also happened in the bus. When he looked back, he saw
that his father (deceased Shiv Balak) and his uncle (deceased Ram
Balak) got shot and they rolled on the seat. The bus stopped after
running about 100-125 yards from the place where the bullet was
fired. He saw that Babu Lal Pasi, Ringu Pasi and a 22-24 year’s
old boy wearing red bushirt were standing near the seat of his
father and uncle and all of them were armed with Katta (gun).
Later on he came to know that the name of the boy wearing a red
bushirt was Vinod Kumar. The rifle of his uncle was snatched by
accused Babu Lal Pasi and his father’s gun was snatched by
accused Ringu. All three people abused the passengers and asked
them to get off the bus and they had said that “ugh mrjksxs rks xksyh
ekj nasxs”. One boy wearing khakhi paint and bushirt was standing
near Dinesh Chandra and that boy started to snatch the rifle of
Dinesh and dragged Dinesh down from the next door of the bus
and snatched his rifle. On this, the people sitting inside the bus
got out and hid here and there. They (P.W.1 and his grand-father
Gaya Prasad) also got down and got under cover.
P.W.1 has further deposed that after getting down from the bus, he
saw Babu Lal Master standing on the side of the road with a
single bore gun in his hand and along with him, 10-12 men were
standing by carrying अद्धी (half) guns and Katta (gun) and they
also started firing.
When the passengers went to the north, Babu Lal Master said that
“lkyks dh yk’k ckgj fudky yks" (take out the dead body of the
bastard). On this, 3-4 men entered the bus and brought out the
dead bodies of his father and uncle and carried them towards the
fields on the south side of the road. On the saying of Babu Lal
Master, one of his companions wiped blood inside the bus with a
towel. When an unknown passenger of a bus was running towards
east, then, two men chased him and shot him 100-125 yards away
from the bus, from which he died. Two miscreants also hanged his
dead body and took it towards the south.
P.W.1 has further stated that about 15-16 fires took place there.
The people around were coming on listening to the sound of fire
and had seen the incident. The people came near them (P.W.1, his
grand-father and other passengers) after the accused fled. His
grand-father had a conversation with those people and his grand-
father asked the names of the accused. A passenger, who had
landed on the Usiya Tiraha, had also come there and he told his name
as Krishna Mohan. Krishna Mohan and other villagers had told the
name of the assailant, who was wearing the Khakhi paint and bushirt,
as Babu Lal Dom and also told the names of other accused as Madan
Sevak, Kunni alias Neta, Chandrakishore Luhar, Babulal Pasi, Master
Babu Pasi, Ringu Pasi, Laloni Pasi, Magraya. Out of these, he already
knew Babu Pasi, Ringu Pasi and Kunni. Apart from these, there were
also 3-4 assailants, whose names were not given by the villagers nor
known to them. This incident is around 5:30 pm in the evening.
The passengers had already gone but he (P.W.1), his grand-father,
Das Lohar, driver & conductor of the Bus went to Bihar Police Station
by bus and when reached at Takia Bus Stand, his grand-father had
talked to someone, then, that person told that the place of incident
comes under police station Bighapur. Thereafter, they returned from
that bus for Bighapur.     After coming to Bighapur, the bus was
parked at the bus station. The police station Bighapur is inside
the basti from Bighapur Bus Station, where bus could not go. He
further stated that he scribed the report on the dictation of his
grand-father and whatever his grand-father told him, he wrote the
same in the report and handed it over to his grand-father. He has
proved the report (Ext.Ka.1). Thereafter, he, Shiv Adhar Singh,
Ram Balak Yadav, Ram Balak Pasi, Ramdas Lohar went to
village Hamirpur for giving information.
P.W.1 had further deposed that his father and uncle had weared
the wrist watch. His father had also taken towel (angaucha). The
miscreants had taken away the towel (angaucha) and wrist watch.
His father and uncle had a lisence, which the miscreants also
brought. At the time of incident, Dinesh Chandra sustained
injuries on his hand while taking away his rifle by the miscreants.
At that time, 2-3 passengers had also sustained injuries.
P.W.1 has also stated that he had gone to the District Jail, Uanno
to identify the miscreants, wherein he identified Chandra Kishore
Luhar. He further stated that he had seen Chandra Kishore Luhar
for the first time at the time of the incident and thereafter, at the
time of identification proceedings and in between, he had not seen
to him (Chandra Kishore Luhar). He did not even know him
(Chandra Kishore Luhar) before it.
P.W.1 has stated that his father Gaya Prasad is 75 years old and
now he did not see and hear properly. Jageshwar is his younger
uncle, who lived separately from him. He had told the number of
gun, bicycle and license to the Inspector after looking at the
documents of the house. On 07.10.1980, the body of his father
Shiv Balak was found in the field and he identified it.
(29) P.W.2-Lallu, in his examination-in-chief, has deposed that he
lives in village Mardan Kheda, Usiya. He knows Babu Lal
Master, who has been killed. Babul Lal Master was the resident
of village Usiya and was a teacher in Katra Diwan Kheda. He
knew Chandrika resident of Hamirpur. The maternal house of
Chandrika was at village Katra, Diwankheda. Babu Lal was the
master and Chandrika was the passi (iklh). Before this incident,
Chandrika was killed. He had seen the mother of Chandika
coming and going to the house of Babu Lal Master after the
killing of Chandrika.
It was about 16-17 months ago from today (27.02.1982). He
went to Bighapur market. It was 05:00 or 05:15 in the evening.
He came to bus stand from Bighapur market, where he met
Jagmohan and Krishnamohan. He had to leave for his home by
bus. When the bus came from Unnao going towards Buxer,
Jagmohan and Krishna Mohan boarded the same bus. He also
stated that EkS ftl lhV ij CkSBk Fkk mlds vkxs ,d lhV NksMdj rhu lhVj
okyh lhV ij ,d vkneh jk;Qy fy, o ,d cUnwd fy, o rhljk vkneh [kkyh
gkFk cSBs FksA (leaving one seat in front of his seat where he was
sitting, on the three seater seat, a man with a rifle, another man
with a gun, a man with empty handed were sitting). The man,
who was empty handed, was sitting on the side of the window
and the man, who was armed with rifle, was sitting in the middle
of them. He had seen Babu Lal Pasi and Ringu Pasi (accused)
sitting on the two-seater seat next to these three people. He knew
both of them before. A man was also sitting behind the driver’s
seat facing them. When the bus was about to leave, Vinod Pasi
resident of Kusia had boarded inside the bus from the back door
of the bus. He (Vinod Pasi) was wearing a red shirt. He (Vinod
Pasi) came and stood near Ringu (accused). Babu Lal Dom
(accused) resident of Usiya had also boarded inside the bus from
the front door, who was wearing khakhi paint and bushirt. He
(Babu Lal Dom) was standing next to the man armed with the
rifle sitting behind the driver’s seat. He knew Vinod and Babu
Lal Dom (accused) prior to it.
P.W.2 had further stated that the bus had reached the tiraha
(intersection road) of Usiya from Bighapur at around 5.30 pm,
where Krishna Mohan got down from the bus. He (P.W.2) had to
get down at Akwabad, which was ahead of Usiya Tiraha. He
further stated that when the bus would have reached about 50
yards from Usiya tiraha, then, Babu Lal Pasi and Ringu Pasi
(accused) stood up; made the sound of jksdks jksdks (stop stop); got
up from their seats; and came to the gallery of the bus and from
there, they (Babu Lal Pasi and Ringu Pasi) fired shot from their
two kattas upon the men, who were armed with rifle and gun.
Vinod had also fired with a katta. The gunman and rifleman had
rolled on their seats as soon as shot. Thereafter, the bus stopped
west of the culvert after covering a distance of about 100 yards.
Babu Lal Pasi (accused) said that lkyks fudy dj Hkkx tkvks vxj dksbZ
cksysxk rks mls Hkh xksyh ekj nsxs (bastard go out and run away, if
anyone speaks, then they will shoot him too).
Thereafter, the gun and rifle were snatched from the deceased by
Ringu and Babu Lal Pasi, respectively. Babu Lal Dom (accused)
also tried to get rid of the rifle from the second man but when
that second man did not relieve the rifle, then, Babu Lal Dom
jolted him and dragged him out of the bus and snatched the rifle
outside. Thereafter, all the passengers got out of the bus and
started running away. He (P.W.2) also got out of the bus and
covered himself behind a tree on the side of the road. When he
came out of the bus, he saw Babulal Master, Madan Pasi,
Swaroop, Ram Roop, Ganga Sevak, Ram Chandra, Kunni and
four more men to whom he did not recognize, were also standing
north of the bus. Babu Lal Master had a gun in his hand and the
rest of the people had अद्धी (half) guns and Katta (gun). Babu Lal
Master and his associates had fired 10-12 shots. Babu Lal Master
said that bu lkyks dh yk’ks [khp yks (drag the dead bodies of these
bastard). On this, Ramesh, Madan, Chandra Kishore and Lalaunu
went inside the bus. Chandra Kishore and Lalaunu were armed
with Katta. Ramesh and Madan were empty handed. These four
men took two dead bodies from the bus, hung them and went
south. Thereafter, Babu Lal Master said that cl dk [kwu ikasN Mkyks
(wipe the blood of the bus), on which Ramroop Pasi went inside
the bus after soaking a towel.
P.W.2 had also stated that a man, who ran towards north, was
chased by Ram Chandra and Kunni and both of them fired at
him, thereupon he had fallen and thereafter, his dead body was
taken away by Ram Chandra and Kunni towards South direction.
Later on all the accused were gone. After the accused left, he
went near the bus. Jagmohan and Krishna Mohan also came near
the bus and many more people from the village had come. A man
had asked them the names of the miscreants, then, they had told
the names of the miscreants. After asking the names of the
miscreants, that person also asked them the names and addresses
of the people. He stated that apart from these three deceased
persons, he saw blood coming out from the injuries of 2-3
persons. Thereafter, 6-7 men of the same bus sat down and went
towards Takia. He stated that Takia Patan is the same place. He
(P.W.2) was staying there. Later on, a lot of people had gathered
there. After about half an hour of departure, the same bus came
from the side of the Takia and went towards Bighapur.            He
already knew all the accused.
(30)  P.W.6-Krishna Mohan, in his examination-in-chief, has deposed
that his grocery shop is in village Usiya. It is a matter of about a
year ago. He had gone to the market of Bighapur to get the items
of his shop.    Around 5 o'clock in the evening, he came to
Bighapur Bus Stand with his luggage to go to his village. At
Bighapur bus stand, he met Lallu Yadav resident of Mardan
Kheda and Jagmohan Singh resident of Akbabad. Then, he sat on
the bus going towards Buxer at bus stand. All three of them
(P.W.6, Lallu Yadav and Jagmohan Singh) sat on the bus. Inside
the bus, he saw Ringu, Babu also sat in the bus. These people
(Ringu and Babu) were sitting on a two-seater seat in the bus and
next to them, he saw three men sitting on the three-seater seat,
out of which, one had a rifle and the other had a double barrel
gun. The man armed with the rifle was sitting in the middle and
the empty-handed man was sitting at the window. A man was
sitting behind the seat of the driver with a rifle and his face was
towards them (P.W.6 and others). When the bus was about to run,
his acquaintances Vinod Pasi and Babu Lal Dom also boarded.
Babu Lal Dom was then wearing a khaki paint bushirt and Vinod
Kumar was wearing a red shirt. Babu Lal was standing near the
rifle man who was sitting behind the driver of the bus and Vinod
stood near Ringu Pasi. He was sitting in the back seat of the bus
on which 4-5 other people were sitting besides him (P.W.6). The
conductor sat in the front seat near the window.
After moving from Bighapur, the bus reached Usiya Tiraha
around 5:30 pm. He got off the bus at the Tiraha. The bus had
moved forward thereafter. When the bus had moved forward
about 50 yards, then, he heard the sound of gunfire from inside
the bus. Afterwards, the bus stopped in front of the culvert about
40-50 kms towards the Tiraha. He saw the passengers of the bus
getting out of the bus. Some of the passengers were standing here
and there and some had fled. He saw 10-12 men standing near the
bus, among them Babu Lal Master armed with single bore gun
and     Coolie alias Neta, Madan Lalaunu, Chandra Kishore,
and 3-4 other men whom he did not recognize, armed with अद्धी
(half) guns and Katta (gun), were there. When the bus stopped,
these people started firing. Babu Lal Master had asked to take out
the dead body and at his behest, Ramesh, Chandra Kishore,
Madan and Lalaunu had entered the bus and brought out the
bodies of two men. These four people had gone towards south
with the corpse. Outside the bus, a passenger had run towards the
east, then, he was told by Kunni and Ramroop and later on P.W.6
said that Coolie and Madan had run. Both of them had killed him.
Thereafter, P.W.6 has said that Coolie and Ram Chandra had shot
him and had gone towards south with his dead body. When the
bus stopped, Ringu armed with gun and Babu Pasi armed with a
rifle came out from the bus. Babu Lal Dom had dragged the
person outside the bus, who was armed with rifle and sat behind
the seat of driver. Babu Lal Master had asked to wipe the blood of
the bus, on which Ramroop went inside after soaking the towel.
He had heard about 15-16 fires in total. He saw this incident from
where he had landed after moving a little further. Apart from him,
Harish Chandra, Ram Kumar and many other villagers had seen
this incident. After the accused had fled, they went near to the
bus. On being asked, the names and addresses of the accused
were given. Accused went towards the boaring of Babu Lal
Master in south side. He also stated that to go from Bighapur to
Usiya, one has to take a ticket for Akbabad and ticket of Usiya
Tiraha is not being given. On that day, he had taken the ticket of
Akbabad in the bus from the conductor itself. Babulal Master had
been murdered.
(31) After completion of prosecution evidence, statements of
accused persons were recorded under Section 313 Cr.P.C., who
denied the alleged incident and stated before the trial Court that
they have been falsely implicated due to enmity.
(32)  The trial Court has not placed reliance upon the testimony of
P.W.6-Krishna Mohan as his testimony is self-contradictory on
material points. However, the trial Court believed the evidence
of Upendra Singh (P.W. 1) and Lallu (P.W. 2) and convicted and
sentenced the appellants, Babu Pasi alias Babu Lal Pasi and
Ringu Pasi in the manner stated in paragraph-3. It, however,
acquitted the remaining accused, namely, Ramesh, Madal Lal,
Ram Swaroop, Ganga Sewak, Neta alias Kunni, Chandra
Kishore, Lalaunoo, Ram Rup, Ram Chandra. It is pertinent to
mention that the State of U.P. has not challenged their acquittal
by preferring an appeal under Section 378 (1) Cr. P.C.
(33)  As mentioned earlier, aggrieved by their convictions and
sentences, the convicts/appellants Babu Pasi alias Babu Lal
Pasi and Ringu Pasi preferred the instant criminal appeal and
during pendency of the instant appeal, appellant no.1-Babu Pasi
alias Babu Lal Pasi died and the instant appeal filed on his behalf
stood abated vide order dated 07.02.2019.        Now, the instant
appeal survives only in respect of appellant no.2-Ringu Pasi.
(34) Sri H.B. Singh, learned Counsel for the appellant no.2-Ringu
Pasi, has submitted that
I.     The alleged incident took place on 06.10.1980 at 05:30 p.m.,
whereas the FIR of the said incident was lodged on
06.10.1980 at 07:50 p.m. at police station Bighapur, District
Unnao, which is situated at a distance of 3 miles i.e. 04.83
kms, from the place of the incident, hence the F.I.R. has not
been lodged promptly. Furthermore, the F.I.R. runs about four
pages, which is voluminous and casts doubt that it has been
lodged by much consultation and deliberation.
II. The informant Gaya Prasad, injured Dinesh Chandra Shukla,
injured Devi Deen, driver and conductor of the bus, were not
examined by the prosecution though they are material
witnesses, which casts doubt on the reason for the purported
presence of P.W.1 and P.W.2 at the place of the incident and
also non-examination of them is fatal to the prosecution case.
III. The trial Court has failed to take cognizance of the fact that no
motive has been attributed to the appellant no.2-Ringu Pasi
for commission of the offence, therefore, the appellant no.2-
Ringu Pasi could not have been found guilty of the charge
levelled against him.
IV. P.W.1 is the son of the deceased Shiv Balak and nephew of the
deceased Ram Balak, whereas P.W.2 was having previous
enmity with co-accused Ramchandra. Furthermore, father of
appellant no.2-Ringu Pasi, namely, Baijnath, was the surety of
the accused in the cross case filed by P.W.2-Lallu against
Ramchandra, Palangi and others. On account of the enmity,
P.W.2 had disclosed the names of the accused/appellants to the
informant Gaya Prasad and P.W.1-Upendra Singh and on that
basis, appellants were falsely implicated in the case. Hence,
these two eye-witnesses i.e. P.W.1 and P.W.2 are interested
and partitioned witnesses and as such, their testimony have to
be scrutinized with caution but the trial Court committed a
serious error in not appreciating the evidence of these eye-
witnesses with great care and caution.
V. Though there were gunshot injuries inflicted upon the
deceased Shiv Balak and Ram Balak but no recovery of the
weapon of assault was made.
VI. The evidence of P.W.1 and P.W.2 indicates that there was prior
enmity between the deceased and family members of the
accused persons and their companions because of which false
implication cannot be ruled out.
VII. Thus, according to the learned counsel, the prosecution has
failed to establish the charge of murder against the appellant
no.2-Ringu Pasi beyond reasonable doubt.
(35) Ms. Smiti Sahai, learned Additional Government Advocate
appearing on behalf of the State, on the other hand, supported the
impugned judgment of the trial Court and argued that :-
I.    The incident took place at 5.30 pm, while the FIR was
lodged at 07:50 pm on the basis of the written report filed
by the informant Gaya Prasad. The police station was
admittedly situated at a distance of 4.82 Kms (3 miles)
from the place of occurrence. There is no delay in lodging
the FIR. Furthermore, the FIR contains a detailed account
of the nature of the incident and spells out the role is
attributed to the appellants.
II.    The evidence of the eye-witnesses supported by other
ocular and documentary evidence has been rightly
examined and appreciated by the trial court.
III. No adverse inference can be drawn against the prosecution
for non-examination of the informant Gaya Prasad Singh
and other     witnesses because the prosecution has fully
established the charge against the appellants beyond
reasonable doubt by leading reliable and convincing
evidence.
IV.   In the presence of direct evidence, motive recedes to the
background. Therefore, the prosecution does not need to
prove the motive of the appellant no.2-Ringu Pasi to
murder the deceased.
V.    On these grounds, it has been urged on behalf of the State
that the finding of guilt which was arrived at by the trial
Court, is not liable to warrant any interference in appeal.
(36)  We have heard the learned counsel for the respective parties at
length and have carefully gone through the impugned judgment
and order of conviction and sentence passed by the learned trial
Court. We have also re-appreciated the entire evidence on record,
particularly the depositions of P.W.1 Upendra Singh and P.W.2-
Lallu. We have also considered the injuries found on the three
dead bodies of the deceased persons and injuries found on the
body of the two injured persons.
(37) The crucial question in this appeal is whether the evidence of the
three eye witnesses viz. Upendra Singh P.W. 1, Lallu P.W. 2 and
Krishna Mohan P.W.6 inspires confidence or not. Our considered
answer to the said question is in the negative. We may
straightway mention that these witnesses had also implicated 09
other co-accused persons and all of them have been clearly
acquitted by the learned trial Court on all counts. As stated
earlier, the State of Uttar Pradesh has not challenged the acquittal
of these nine acquitted persons.
(38) The trial Court, after analyzing the evidence of P.W.6-Krishna
Mohan, formed the opinion that he gave self-contradictory
version on most material points viz. as to who chased the
unknown person and shot dead and took his body, therefore, his
presence on the spot is doubtful. In this backdrop, the trial Court
has rightly not placed reliance upon the testimony of P.W.6-
(39) Now, out of two eye witnesses i.e. P.W.1 and P.W.2, the evidence
of Upendra Singh P.W. 1 can be straight way rejected by us on
the ground that although the deceased had been done to death at
about 05:30 p.m., on 06.10.1980, Upendra Singh (P.W.1) could
not identify the acquitted accused/convicts-appellants. He could
only identify Chandra Kishore (acquitted accused) at the test
identification parade held on 03.01.1981, by Sri Janardan Singh,
the Special Executive Magistrate, Unnao (P.W. 10). In our view,
if P.W.1 (Upendra Singh) could not identify the appellants after
about three months after the incident what is the sanctity to be
attached to his nominating the appellants in his statement in the
trial Court. More so, P.W.10-Sri Janardan Singh, the Special
Executive Magistrate, Unnao, in his cross-examination, had
deposed before the trial Court that informant Gaya Prasad made
one mistake in identifying the other accused persons; Upendra
Singh (P.W.1) also made nine mistakes in identifying the other
accused persons and none of them were identified by him;
witness Dinesh Chandra (injured) made ten mistakes in
identifying the ten accused persons.          P.W.10, in his cross-
examination, had also deposed before the trial Court that “xokgku
us tks c;ku esjs lkeus fn, Fks “MdSrh o dRy djrs oDr EkkSds ij ns[kk FkkA”
(The statement, which was given by the witnesses, before him
that “while committing robbery and murder, saw on the spot”). It
means that the witnesses i.e. P.W.1-Upendra Singh, informant
Gaya Prasad, injured Dinesh Chandra, stated before P.W.10-Sri
Janardan Singh that they saw the identified accused persons
while committing robbery and murder on the spot. But the
prosecution case is not that the accused/appellants had committed
robbery and also murdered the deceased. This is all the more so
because in his cross-examination, P.W.1-Upendra Singh has
deposed that the names of the accused/appellants were stated to
him after the incident by Krishna Mohan, Lallu Mohan (P.W.2),
Jagmohan Singh and other nearby villages and on that basis, he
knew the names of the accused persons after the incident.
(40) Apart from the aforesaid, P.W.1-Upendra Singh, in his cross-
examination, had deposed before the trial Court that at the time
of the incident, there were about 60-70 passengers in the bus, out
of which, six man were armed with fire arms, however, out of
these six man, he didn't see anyone firing. He also deposed in the
cross-examination that he could not see how many people fired
inside the bus. P.W.1-Upendra Singh had further deposed that at
the time of the incident, he (P.W.1) and his grand-father Gaya
Prasad (informant) were sitting in two seater seat and behind 2-3
seat of them, his father Shiv Balak (deceased), his uncle Ram
Balak (deceased) and Harishchandra were sitting in three seater
seat. Shivadhar, Ram Das, Ram Balak Yadav and Ram Balak Pasi
were sitting in the rear seat of the bus. Injured Dinesh Chandra
was sitting behind the seat of driver with his rifle. He also stated
that he knew Babulal Pasi and Ringu Pasi (appellants) prior to
the incident as they used to come to Chandrika Pasi’s house and
Babu Lal Pasi Master before the incident. However, this
statement of P.W.1-Upendra Singh was denied by the accused
Ringu Pasi and Babu Lal Pasi in their statement under Section
313 Cr.P.C. He said that he did not know Chandrika Pasi.
(41) It also comes out from the depositions of P.W.1-Upendra Singh
that both appellants Babulal Pasi and Ringu Pasi boarded the bus
from Unnao Bus Stand. P.W.1, in his cross-examination, has
stated that “tgkW eS cSBk Fkk ogh ls cSBs&CkSBs esjh ckrphr esjs firk o pkpk ls
gqbZ Fkh” (from where he sat, he had a conversation with his father
and uncle while sitting).         Meaning thereby, from Unnao Bus
Station to the place of occurrence, he (P.W.1) had a conversation
with his father and his uncle, who sat behind 2-3 seats in three
seater seat. At that relevant time, both accused/ appellants Babu
Lal Pasi and Ringu Pasi were sitting just near to the seat of his
father, his uncle and Harishchandra.          In such circumstances,
Babu Lal Pasi and Ringu Pasi (appellants) were very well aware
that P.W.1-Upendra Singh and his grand-father Gaya Prasad
(informant) are the family members of Ram Balak and Shiv
Balak (deceased) and Harish Chandra who sat with Ram Balak
and Shiv Balak (deceased) in the window seat of three seater seat
of the bus, was also known to the deceased. P.W.1-Upendra
Singh, in his cross-examination, has deposed that “fdlh cnek’k us
esjs mij Qk;j ugh fd;k u eq>s ekjk ihVk u esjs ikl vk;kA” (none of the
miscreants had fired upon him nor assaulted him nor came near
to him). He has also stated that “fdlh cnek’k us eq>ls :i;s iSlks ds
gksus ds ckor ugh iwNk FkkA” (none of the miscreants had asked him
about the money). P.W.1-Upendra Singh had stated before the
trial Court that when the bus went 50-60 yards from the tiraha
(an intersection of three roads) of Usiya, a loud sound “jksdks jksdks”
(stop stop) inside the bus came behind him and 3-4 fires also
happened in the bus and then at this moment, he turned back and
saw that his father Shiv Balak and his uncle Ram Balak got shot;
they rolled on the seat; Babu Lal Pasi, Ringu Pasi and a 22-24
year’s old boy wearing red bushirt were standing near the seat of
his father and uncle with Katta (pistol); and snatched the gun of
his father and rifle of his uncle. P.W.1, in his cross-examination,
has categorically admitted the fact that “Qk;j gksus ij eS vius firk o
pkpk dh vksj nkSMk ugh FkkA fdlh Qk;j djus okys dks idMus dh dksf’k’k eSus
ugh dh FkhA” (after firing, he did not run towards his father and
uncle. He did not try to catch any person who fired).
(42) Considering     the    aforesaid   circumstances,     it  is   quite
strange/improbable that Ram Balak, Shiv Balak (deceased) and
Harish Chandra were sitting together in three seater seat in the
bus; after shot to Shiv Balak and Ram Balak with Katta, accused/
appellants had neither made any injury to Harishchandra who sat
in the window seat with Shiv Balak and Ram Balak nor the
accused/appellants had made any effort to cause injuries to P.W.1
and his grand-father Gaya Prasad even knowing very well that
deceased Shiv Balak was the father of P.W.1 and deceased Ram
Balak was the uncle of P.W.1. It is also quite surprising that
P.W.1-Upendra Singh and informant Gaya Prasad did not try to
save the deceased persons, who were their family members, from
grip the accused/appellants nor raised any alarm or made hue and
cry at that moment. But surprisingly, they (P.W.1, informant
Gaya Prasad, Harischandra and other passengers) all peacefully
took their items from the bus; got down from the bus; hid behind
the tree; and from there all three persons and other passengers
saw the accused/appellants bring out the dead bodies of the
deceased (Ram Balak, Shiv Balak). P.W.1 had also admitted the
fact that he did not see any one to fire upon his father Shiv Balak
and his uncle Ram Balak, however, he knew the name of these
accused persons on the saying of Krishna Mohan, Lallu Yadav
(P.W.2), Jagmohan and other villagers, who were said to be
travelling with the said bus. But surprisingly, Krishna Mohan,
Jagmohan and other villagers were not examined by the
prosecution. All the circumstances as discussed hereinabove
shows that the testimony of P.W.1-Upendra Singh is not credible
and creates doubt upon the prosecution story and it appears that
P.W.1-Upendra Singh and his grand-father Gaya Prasad were not
present at the place of the incident
(43) We are also not inclined to place any reliance on the testimony of
Lallu P.W. 2. We have our grave doubts about his claim of having
seen the incident. In his examination-in-chief, he stated that on
the date of the incident, he went to the Bighapur Market and at
about 05:00-05:15 p.m., he went from Bighapur Market to
Bighapur     Bus    Stand,     where  he    met   Jagmohan     and
Krishnamohan. All of them boarded on a bus coming from
Unnao and going towards Buxer. After boarding on the bus, he
saw that leaving one seat in front of his seat where he was sitting
in the bus, on the three seater seat, a man with a rifle, another
man with a gun, a man with empty handed were sitting, whereas
Babu Lal Pasi and Ringu Pasi (accused) were sitting on the two-
seater seat next to these three peoples. He also saw that a man
was also sitting behind the driver’s seat by facing face towards
them. When the bus was about to leave, Vinod Pasi resident of
Kusia wearing a red shirt had boarded inside the bus from the
back door of the bus and stood near Ringu (accused). Babu Lal
Dom (accused) resident of Usiya had also boarded inside the bus
from the front door, who was wearing khakhi paint and bushirt
and stood next to the man armed with the rifle sitting behind the
driver’s seat. He knew Babu Lal, Ringu Pasi, Vinod and Babu
Lal Dom (accused) before.          P.W.2 has further deposed that
Krishna Mohan got down from the bus at tiraha (intersection
road) of Usiya at around 5.30 pm but he (P.W.2) had to get down
at Akwabad, which was ahead of Usiya Tiraha. He further stated
that when the bus would have reached about 50 yards from Usiya
tiraha, then, Babu Lal Pasi and Ringu Pasi (accused) stood up;
made the sound of jksdks jksdks (stop stop); got up from their seats;
and came to the gallery of the bus and from there, they (Babu Lal
Pasi and Ringu Pasi) fired shot from their two kattas upon the
men, who were armed with rifle and gun. Vinod had also fired
with a katta. Thereafter, the gunman and rifleman had rolled on
their seats as soon as shot.
(44) As per the aforesaid depositions of P.W.2, it transpires that
accused Babu Lal Pasi, Ringu Pasi and Vinod armed with Katta
fired upon the men armed with rifle and gun sat in the three
seater seat. It is admitted by P.W.2 also that the man, who was
empty handed and sitting with rifleman and gunman in a window
seat of three seater seat, did not receive any injury. P.W.1, in his
cross-examination, had stated that the names of the accused
persons were stated to him and his grand-father Gaya Prasad
(informant) by Krishna Mohan, Lallu (P.W.2). From the
depositions of P.W.1, it transpires that accused/appellants were
very well aware of the relationship of the deceased with P.W.1,
informant and Harishchandra, still the accused/appellants did
nothing to them and all of them were allowed by the
accused/appellants to keep their articles from the bus, got down
the bus and hid behind the tree. P.W.2 had also supported the
statement of the P.W.1. Thus, it appears that the testimony of
P.W.2 is not trustworthy.
(45) P.W.16-Dr. R.R. Acharya, who conducted the post-mortem report
of deceased Ram Balak, has stated before the trial Court that
injuries no. 1, 2 and 3 (incised wounds) could be attributable by
the sharp edged weapon, whereas injury no.4 could be
attributable by fire arm. In his cross-examination, P.W.16-Dr.
R.R. Acharya has deposed that “e`rd dh e`R;q pksV ua0 1 ls gh gksuk
vf/kd laHko gS” (the death of the deceased is mostly possible by
injury no.1). He further stated that “pksV ua0 1 ua0 4 dh vis{kk vf/kd
izk.k?kkrd FkhA” (injury no.1 was more fatal than injury no.4). He
also deposed that “pksV ua0 1 Hkh ejus ds ckn dh laHko ugh gSA ” (injury
no.1 is also not possible after death). From this statement of
P.W.16-Dr. R.R. Acharya, it transpires that injury no.1 i.e.
“incised wound 12.0 cm x 4.0 cm x bone-deep on the face from
(L) ear to lower jaw. Maxillary bones (L) mandible bone of (L)
skull cut.” is more fatal than injury no.4 i.e. firearm wound and
further injury no.1 is also not possible after death meaning
thereby it was caused before death.
(46) It is pertinent to mention that both P.W.1-Upendra Singh and
P.W.2-Lallu had deposed before the trial Court that appellants
Babu Lal Pasi and Ringu Pasi had fired upon Ram Balak and
Shiv Balak with Kattas (pistol), due to which, they died on the
spot.    Except the allegation of firing with Kattas upon the
deceased, both the eye-witnesses had not stated other mode of
assault upon the deceased persons. That being the position, as to
how the injury no.1 i.e. incised wound, on the dead body of the
deceased Ram Balak came, has not been explained by the
prosecution by giving any evidence in this regard. Furthermore,
the prosecution has also not explained how one multiple incised
wound came on the body of the deceased Sheo Balak and two
other incised wound in addition to incised wound (injury no.1)
came on the body of the deceased Ram Balak.             In these
backgrounds, it appears that both eye-witnesses i.e. P.W.1-
Upendra Singh and P.W.2-Lallu were not seen the incident.
(47) It is also relevant to add that both P.W.1 and P.W.2 have made
depositions to the effect that prior enmity existed between the
members of the P.W.1 and P.W.2 one side and the members of the
accused/appellants on the other side. P.W.1, in his cross-
examination, has deposed that in the year 1973, Chandrika (since
deceased) had lodged a case under Section 307 I.P.C. against his
father and uncle. He further deposed that in the murder of
Chandrika, his uncle Ram Balak, another uncle Ram Narayan,
witness Dinesh Chandra (injured herein) and Harishchandra
(who was sitting along with the deceased Ram Balak and Shiv
Balak at the time of the incident in a window seat of three seater
seat of the bus) were accused. P.W.2, in his cross-examination,
has stated that he had enmity with Ramroop, Ram Swaroop,
Ganga Sewak and Ramchandra (acquitted accused) and he had a
criminal case against them and the second case are going on. He
further stated that the second case, which was filed, is a cross
case under Sections 323 and 325 I.P.C.. He stated that along with
him 12 peoples were accused and from the side of Ram Roop
etc., 16 peoples were accused. In the cross case, bail was granted
to them. P.W.2 has further stated that at the time of the incident,
the said cross criminal case under Sections 323, 325 I.P.C. was
going on. He further stated that jkeLo:i ls 1977 essa >xMk gqvk Fkk
mlds ckn jke:i cxSjg ls >xMk gqvkA ge yksxks dk >xMk jkeLo:i vkfn ls
1977 ls 'kq: gqvk gSA dzkl dsl dh isf’k;ks ij jkeLo:i oxSjg vkrs gS rFkk ge
lc yksx Hkh vkrs gSaA        P.W.2 has further deposed in cross-
examination that in his cross case, accused Ramchandra, Smt.
Batasa and his father Palangi are also the accused. He also stated
that he knew the father of appellant Ringu, namely, Baijnath.
According to the appellants, in the cross-case, Baijnath, who is
the father of appellant Ringu, was the surety of Palangi.
Thus, it appears that there was long enmity between the parties,
hence involving the accused/appellants falsely in a criminal case
such as the instant case by P.W.1 and P.W.2 cannot be ruled out.
(48) Learned Additional Government Advocate strenuously urged that
the circumstance that the FIR of the incident was lodged
promptly i.e. about 1 hour 50 minutes of the incident taking place
and in the same, the act of causing injuries to the deceased with a
fire arms has been attributed to the appellants speaks volumes in
favour about the participation of the appellants in the murder of
the deceased. We have reflected over the said submission of
learned AGA. On the first blush, it was certainly very attractive.
However, on a deeper scrutiny, we realised that all that glitters is
not gold. It is well-settled that the FIR can only be used to
contradict or corroborate the maker and is not substantive
evidence. The substantive evidence are the statements of the
witnesses in Court. The substantive evidence in the instant case
was in the form of the evidence of the three eye witnesses viz.
Upendra Singh P.W. 1, Lallu P.W. 2 and Krishna Mohan P.W.6
and that we have rejected for the reasons stated by us above.
Hence this submission of learned AGA fails.
(49) As it is manifest, neither the informant Gaya Prasad nor injured
Dinesh Shukla and Devideen nor driver and conductor of the bus
has been examined by the prosecution. Submission of appellants
is that they are natural witnesses and no explanation has been
given for their non- examination and hence, adverse inference
against the prosecution deserves to be drawn.
(50) In the case of Surinder Kumar v. State of Haryana : (2011) 10
SCC 173, the Apex Court has held that though in a different
context, that a failure on the part of the prosecution in non-
examining the two children, aged about six and four years,
respectively, when both of them were present at the site of the
crime, amounted to failure on the part of the prosecution.
(51) In State of H.P. v. Gian Chand : (2001) 6 SCC 71, the Apex
Court, while dealing with non-examination of material witnesses
has expressed that:-
"14 ... Non-examination of a material witness
is not a mathematical formula for discarding
the weight of the testimony available on
record, howsoever natural, trustworthy and
convincing it may be. The charge of
court leveled against the prosecution should
be examined in the background of the facts
evidence adduced and available on record. If
the Court finds the evidence adduced
worthy of being relied on then the testimony
has to be accepted and acted on though
examined. However, if the available evidence
suffers from some infirmity or cannot be
(52) In Takhaji Hiraji v. Thakore Kubersing Chamansing and
others : (2001) 6 SCC 145, the Apex Court has held that it is true
that if a material witness, who would unfold the genesis of the
incident or an essential part of the prosecution case, not
convincingly brought to fore otherwise, or where there is a gap or
infirmity in the prosecution case which could have been supplied
or made good by examining a witness who though available is
not examined, the prosecution case can be termed as suffering
from a deficiency and withholding of such a material witness
would oblige the court to draw an adverse inference against the
prosecution by holding that if the witness would have been
examined it would not have supported the prosecution case. On
the other hand if already overwhelming evidence is available and
examination of other witnesses would only be a repetition or
duplication of the evidence already adduced, non-examination of
such other witnesses may not be material. In such a case the
court ought to scrutinise the worth of the evidence adduced. The
Court should pose the question whether in the facts and
circumstances of the case, it was necessary to examine such other
witness. If so, whether such witness was available to be
examined and yet was being withheld from the court. If the
answer is positive then only a question of drawing an adverse
inference may arise. If the witnesses already examined are
reliable and the testimony coming from their mouth is
unimpeachable, the Court can safely act upon it, uninfluenced by
the factum of non-examination of other witnesses.
(53) In Dahari v. State of U.P. : (2012) 10 SCC 256 while discussing
the non-examination of a material witness, the Apex Court
expressed the view that when he was not the only competent
witness who would have been fully capable of explaining the
factual situation correctly.   The prosecution case stood fully
corroborated by the medical evidence and the testimony of other
reliable witnesses, no adverse inference could be drawn against
the prosecution.
(54) From the aforesaid authorities, it is quite vivid that non-
examination of material witnesses would not always create a dent
in the prosecution's case. However, as has been held in the case
of State of H.P. v. Gian Chand (supra), the charge of
withholding a material witness from the Court levelled against
the prosecution should be examined in the background of facts
and circumstances of each case to find out whether the witnesses
were available for being examined in the Court and were yet
withheld by the prosecution. That apart, the Court has first to
assess the trustworthiness of the evidence adduced and available
on record. If the court finds the evidence adduced worthy of
being relied on then the testimony has to be accepted and acted
on. There may be other witnesses available who could also have
been examined but were not examined. Another aspect which is
required to be seen whether such witness or witnesses are the
only competent witnesses who could have been fully capable of
explaining correctly the factual situation.
(55) In the instant case, we have already noticed that informant-Gaya
Prasad, who was sitting along with P.W.1 in the bus;
Harishchandra, who was sitting along with the deceased in the
window seat of three seater seat of the bus; injured Dinesh
Chandra Shukla and Devideen; and conduct and driver of the
bus, were the eye-witness. They are the most natural and
competent witnesses. They really could have thrown immense
light on the factual score, but for the reasons best known to the
prosecution, they have not been examined. It is also not the case
of the prosecution that they had not been cited as their evidence
would have been duplication or repetition of evidence or there
was an apprehension that they would have not supported the case
of the prosecution. In the absence of any explanation whatsoever,
we are of the considered opinion that it has affected the case of
the prosecution.
(56) P.W.1-Upendra Singh, in his cross-examination, had stated that
on account of extra old age and loss of vision, informant-Gaya
Prasad was not produced before the trial Court. This explanation
seems to be true. However, as stated hereinabove, there were
other material eye-witnesses i.e. Harishchandra, injured Dinesh
Chandra Shukla and Devi Deen, and conducter and driver of the
bus still, no exaplantion has been produced by the prosecution
for their non-examination in the trial Court. Therefore, we are of
the considered view that the conviction recorded by the trial
Court on the testimony of P.W.1 and P.W.2 without any
corroboration is unsustainable.
(57) At this juncture, we feel distressed by the thought that the triple
murderer is going unpunished but we cannot and should not be
swayed by our emotions. What we have to see is whether the
prosecution has led cogent, truthful and credible evidence to
establish the guilt of the appellants beyond reasonable doubt.
Such evidence in our judgement is wanting in the instant case. It
might be that the prosecution case may be true. But before a
conviction can be recorded/sustained a Court has to be satisfied
that the prosecution case must be true. Emphasising this, the
Apex Court in the case of Sarwan Singh v. State of Punjab :
1957 AIR 637, in paragraph 11 observed thus :-
It may be as Mr. Gopal Singh strenuously urged
before us that there is an element of truth in the
prosecution story against both the appellants Mr.
Gopal Singh contended that, considered as a
whole the prosecution story may be true; but
between 'may be true' and 'must be true' there is
inevitably a long distance to travel and the whole
of this distance must be covered by legal, reliable
and unimpeachable evidence."
(58) In the instant case, the distance between 'may be true' and 'must
be true' has not been covered by the prosecution by adducing
legal, reliable and unimpeachable evidence.
(59) Pursuant to the above discussion, we are squarely satisfied that
the instant is a fit case in which the appellant no.2-Ringu Pasi
deserves the benefit of doubt. We propose giving him the benefit
of that doubt.
(60) In the result, the instant criminal appeal is allowed.         The
judgment and order dated 17.07.1982 passed in Sessions Trial
No. 210 of 1981 so far as it relates to the appellant no.2-Ringu
Pasi is hereby set aside. The appellant no.2-Ringu Pasi is
acquitted from the charges levelled against him. He is in jail. He
shall be set at liberty forthwith if no longer required in any other
criminal case.
(61) Appellant no.2-Ringu Pasi is directed to file personal bond and
two sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction of the
Court concerned in compliance with Section 437-A of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
(62) Let a copy of this judgment and the original record be transmitted
to the trial court concerned forthwith for necessary information
and compliance.