1.    This Transfer Civil Miscellaneous Petition is filed by
the petitioner/wife against the respondent/husband under
Section 24 of the Civil Procedure Code, 1908 (for short
‘CPC’) for withdrawal of FCOP No.994 of 2021 pending on
the file of the Judge, Family Court at City Civil Court
Hyderabad and to transfer the same to the Judge, Family
Court at Karimnagar and pass any such other orders as
this Court deems fit and proper.
2.    Notice of the respondent/husband is served. He filed
a detailed counter denying the petition averments. Heard
the   learned    counsel   on   both    sides.  The   detailed
submissions have been made by both the parties, which
are more or less on pleaded lines. Therefore, it may not be
necessary    for   this  Court   to   refer  in  detail  such
submissions. However, the submissions so made have
received due consideration of the Court.
Tr.CMP No.4 of 2022
3.     The main averments of the affidavit filed in support of
the petition that the petitioner is legally wedded wife of the
respondent, their marriage was solemnized on 26.11.2017,
they led happy marital life for some time and out of the
wedlock, they were blessed with a male child. Thereafter,
differences arouse between them, she was driven out of the
house of the respondent and ever since then she is living
with her parents. The respondent has filed OP No.994 of
2021 on the file of the Judge, Family Court at City Civil
Court, Hyderabad for dissolution of marriage. It is causing
lot of inconvenience to her to attend the Court at
Hyderabad on each and every date of hearing along with
her minor child by travelling a distance of 200 kms,
accordingly prayed to withdraw FCOP No.994 of 2021 from
the file of Family Court, City Civil Court, Hyderabad and to
transfer the same to the Family Court at Karimnagar.
4.     The respondent has filed a detailed counter. The
main averments of the counter are that the distance
between Karimnagar and Hyderabad is only 145 kms and
not 200 kms as stated by the petitioner. It takes hardly
Tr.CMP No.4 of 2022
2½ hours by public transport to reach Hyderabad from
Karimnagar. The petitioner did not appear before the Court
on 17.11.2021 and the Court is directed the petitioner to
bring the child on 30.10.2021 and also on 30.11.2021, but
she has intentionally failed to produce the minor child.
Though the matter was adjourned to 18.02.2022 for filing
counter, she in utter disobeyed of the court directions,
failed to produce the minor child at any point of time. He
has taken a plea that he is ready and willing to pay the
conveyance charges to the petitioner for attending the
Court on each and every date of hearing and that the
convenience of wife is not a ground for transfer of
matrimonial dispute.
5.    Section 24 of CPC deals with the general power of the
High Court and District Courts for transfer of proceedings
from one court to another court.        The claim of the
petitioner is that she is the legally wedded wife of the
respondent and that out of wedlock, she gave a birth to a
male child, she along with her male child are living with
her parents. This aspect of the petitioner’s case is not in
Tr.CMP No.4 of 2022
dispute by the respondent. His only contention is that the
petitioner has failed to attend the proceedings before the
Family Court regularly. She has also failed to produce the
minor child, despite instructions from the Family Court,
Hyderabad and that the respondent is ready to pay the
conveyance charges of the petitioner for her attendance on
each and every date of hearing. The learned counsel for the
respondent/husband has relied on the principles relied on
the following decisions:
i)    Kalpana         Deviprakash         Thakar    v.   Deviprakash
ii)   Anindita Das v. Srijit Das2;
iii) Teena Chhabra v. Manish Chhabra3;
iv) Kanagalakshmi v. A. Venkatesan4;
v)    Priyanka Batra v. Manish Batra5;
vi) Gargi Konar v. Jagjeet Singh6;
vii) Sarita Singh alias Babli Baghel v. A.P. Baghel7; and
viii)   Preeti    Sharma       v.    Manjit     Sharma   (unreported
judgment of Hon’ble Supreme Court in T.P. (Civil)
No.117-118 of 2004;
Tr.CMP No.4 of 2022
I have given my thoughtful consideration to the
principles laid in the above decisions.
6.      Per contra, the learned counsel for the petitioner/wife
has relied on the principles laid in Rajani Kishor Pardeshi
v. Kishor babulal Pardeshi8 and argued that in such
matrimonial disputes, the convenience of the wife is to be
preferred over the convenience of the husband and the wife
is entitled for the withdrawal of FCOP pending on the file of
the Judge, Family Court at City Civil Court, Hyderabad
and to transfer the same to the Judge, Family Court at
Karimnagar where she is living.
7.      The Hon’ble Supreme Court in another decision
reported in Sangeetha alias Shreya v. Prasant Vijay
Wargiya9 while dealing with the similar facts held that
between husband and wife, the convenience of the wife
must prevail particularly when the wife has a 2 ½ year-old
8.      In Sumita Singh v. Kumar Sanjay and another10 also
in a case of divorce filed by the husband against the wife,
the Apex Court held that it is the wife’s convenience that
must be looked into while considering the transfer petition.
9.      Reverting back to the facts of the present case, it is
not the case of the respondent/husband that the petitioner
/wife is gainfully employed and that she is able to maintain
herself and their minor son. It is also not the case of the
respondent that he has been paying the maintenance
either to his wife or to their minor child. In such facts and
circumstances of the case, as the respondent/husband has
not taken any steps ever since the birth of minor child
either to look after him or to pay any maintenance, such
offer of the husband that he is ready and willing to pay the
conveyance charges to the wife for her appearance before
the Judge, Family Court at Hyderabad on each and every
date of hearing has no bona fides and not acceptable.
10.     I have given my thoughtful consideration to the
principles laid in the decision laid by the learned counsel
for the respondent/husband. Though the Hon’ble Supreme
Court in all the above decisions held that the convenience
of wife can be compensated by the husband by paying
conveyance charges, each case depends on its own facts
and the principles laid in the above decisions are
distinguishable with the facts of the present case. A close
similarity between one case and another case itself is not
sufficient to apply the principles laid in the above
decisions, more so, in view of the fact that there are no
bona fides in the offer made by the husband and it is not
his case that he has either paid maintenance or other
expenses to his minor child or to his wife at any point of
11.   In such facts and circumstances of the case, the
principles laid in the decisions 1 to 8 cited supra relied by
the learned counsel for the respondent/husband are not
helpful to the respondent as there are no bona fides in the
offer made by the respondent/husband.
12.   Whereas, in view of the principles laid by the Hon’ble
Supreme Court of India in Rajani Kishor Pardeshi and
Tr.CMP No.4 of 2022
Sangeetha’s     cases    (8th   &     9th supra),   between      the
convenience of husband and wife, the convenience of wife
along with minor child will prevail and it has to be given
preference    over   the   convenience of the respondent/
13.    In that view of the matter and for the reasons stated
above, I find justification in the request of the petitioner/
wife for withdrawal of FCOP pending on the file of Judge,
Family Court at Hyderabad and to transfer the same to the
Judge, Family Court at Karimnagar.
14.    In the result, the Transfer Civil Miscellaneous Petition
is allowed. FCOP No.994 of 2021 pending on the file of the
Judge, Family Court at City Civil Court, Hyderabad is
ordered to be withdrawn and transferred to the Judge,
Family Court at Karimnagar.
15.    In   the  facts   and     circumstances     of  the    case,
considering the request of the learned counsel for the
respondent,     the    learned      Judge,   Family    Court      at
Karimnagar is directed to expedite the disposal of the
matter, without granting unnecessary adjournments. The
Tr.CMP No.4 of 2022
learned   Judge,    Family    Court    at City   Civil  Court,
Hyderabad, shall transmit the entire record in FCOP
No.994 of 2021 duly indexed, within one month from the
date of receipt of a copy of this order. However, there shall
be no order as to costs.
As a sequel, interlocutory applications, if any pending
shall stand closed.