1.    The present petition is filed under Section 439 Cr.P.C praying for
regular bail in Sessions Case No. 267/ 2018 before the Special Judge,
NDPS, Patiala House Court for offences under Section 8, 21, 27A, 29 NDPS
2.    Before delving into the bail application, it is necessary to briefly lay
down the factual summation of the prosecution’s case, they are stated as
a)   Briefly put the story of the prosecution is that on 22.02.2018,
Intelligence Officer Pradeep Singh received secret tip that the
Petitioner, travelling by Train from Hazrat Nizamuddin Station,
Delhi to Mumbai, was carrying illegal contraband in her
baggage. This information was reduced to writing and a team
was assembled headed by Anand Kumar, I.O. left for Hazrat
b)  At the Railway Station, two lady constables Suman Lata and
Sudesh Kumari agreed to join the team as independent
witnesses. At the designated time of boarding, the Petitioner
was seen & identified by the NCB officials and stopped by
them and asked questions about her trip and destination. The
Petitioner introduced herself as Sonia Naik, showed them her
rail ticket and identification card.
c)  Mr. Anand Kumar, I.O. after ascertaining her details served a
Section 50 Notice on the Petitioner and informed her of her
rights of being searched by a Gazetted office or in the presence
of Magistrate. The Petitioner replied in writing on the notice
that she did not want to be checked in the presence of a G.O./
Magistrate. The I.O. offered his team to be checked by the
Petitioner which she declined. A lady officer duly conducted
personal searched on her in the presence of an Independent
witness. Nothing was found on her body. The lady officer then
checked her maroon bag where amongst other things a gray bag
with marking of Baby was found to be a decoy and upon tearing
open the bag two plastic packets were tied together in a linen
cloth, they were found to be a crystalline substance suspected to
be illegal contraband. A test of that crystalline substance was
done on the spot and it tested positive to be Methamphetamine.
She was found to be in possession of 600 grams of
Methamphetamine. Seizure of the substance was done in
accordance with the NDPS Rules and seizure panchanama was
prepared.
d)  On being asked about where she procured the substance the
Petitioner told the I.O. that she was given the drugs by Nigerian
native a.k.a. Moses Henry and gave his mobile number. A
notice u/s 67 of NDPS dated 22.02.2018 was served on the
Petitioner to appear before I.O. Vikas Yadav for further
enquires. The Petitioner complied and appeared before the I.O.
and stated that she is a native of Goa and shifted to Bombay in
2017 for a job in the Film Industry and in Bombay met a
Nigerian person namely Cosmos who introduced her to his
friend, Oba from Delhi who later became her boyfriend and told
her that he was engaged in the Cloth Business. She stated that
Oba introduced her to Charles Ezih @ Papa and Moses Henry.
It is said that she further stated Charles Ezih, Moses knew the
Petitioner was traveling from Delhi to Mumbai and that Moses
gave a bag to her at Charles’ house in Delhi which was to be
given to Cosmos on her arrival in Mumbai. She stated that she
did not know the contents of the bag given by Moses to her. It
is further stated that Petitioner gave material details such as
addresses of the persons which she mentioned in her statement
and the same was recorded, reduced to writing and was signed
by the Petitioner.
e)  Based on the details about Charles Ezih given in the statement
of the Petitioner, steps were taken for conducting search in the
residence of Charles Ezih. A team headed by Pradeep Singh, IO
formed a team with an independent witness to conduct a search
operation at the residence of Charles Ezih. Charles Ezih on
being questioned about the 600gms of Methamphetamine found
in possession of the Petitioner, Charles Ezih confirmed that
Moses Henry had given the Methamphetamine to the Petitioner.
Thereafter, a notice u/s 50 NDPS Act was served on him and no
incriminating substance was found in his possession and he was
arrested. 180 grams of Cocaine was recovered from his house.
f)   Thereafter, Moses Henry was tracked down after being chased
and was taken to Mata Roop Raani Maggo Hospital for
treatment for the injuries he had sustained. Search of his house
indicated that he was in the process of destroying the narcotic
drug in his possession to avoid getting nabbed and two
measuring scales were found from there.
g)   Investigation was further done and statements of all witnesses
vis a vis the arrest, disclosures, discoveries were duly recorded
and narcotic samples were sent to CRCL Pusa Road for testing.
A report under Section 57 of the NDPS Act 1985 regarding the
seizure of the two-baby carrier, weighing machine, torn
polythene wet with water was submitted, V.V. Singh
Superintendent NCB on 24.02.2018 and a report of the arrest of
the Petitioner was submitted too.
3.     Material on record discloses that the Petitioner was in constant touch
with the other accused.
4.     The Ld. Special Court in SC No. 267 of 2018, Patiala House vide
order dated 17.8.2019 rejected the bail of the Petitioner. The Court while
dismissing the bail reasoned that the Petitioner was caught with narcotics, in
commercial quantity, in her possession at a Nizamuddin Railway Station and
on her disclosure statements to the I.O., Charles Ezih, another Nigerian
national, were arrested and 180gms of Cocaine was found in the possession
of Charles Ezih. Further, the Court recorded that, he gave disclosure
statements admitting to his guilt in indulging, financing purchasing, trading
and selling contraband and that the other accused Moses Henry has been
absconding ever since and has been declared a Proclaimed Offender. The
Court observed that the Petitioner to be prima facie a case against the
petitioner has been made out for the offences she is charged with, and it
appears that she had been trafficking commercial quantity of narcotics.
5.     The Petitioner approached this Hon’ble Court against the order
rejecting bail by Special Court. This Court vide order dated 06.11.2019 in
Bail Application 2630 of 2019 allowed the Petitioner to withdraw the
6.     The Petitioner approached this Court praying to be released on
Medical Bail. This Court after going purely through the medical records
vide order dated 24.8.2020 granted Medical Bail to the Petitioner for a
period of 45 Days. This Court vide order dated 12.10.2020 extended the
interim bail of the Petitioner by another two months. This Court on
10.12.2020 re-extended the bail of the Petitioner by two months.
7.     Heard both parties and seen the record. Mr. Raghav Sharma, Ld.
Counsel appeared for the Petitioner. Mr. Ajay Digpaul, Ld. Counsel
appeared for the Respondent State opposing the bail.
8.     The learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the arrest of the
petitioner is contrary to the provisions of the NDPS Act. He states that if the
secret information was received by the NCB Officers that a lady is carrying
narcotics, despite the information no lady officer accompanied the NCB
officials. He further submits that ultimately the petitioner was searched by a
lady railway police official. He further states that the incident took place on
22.02.2018, the panchnama was prepared on 22.02.2018 and signed by two
lady police officials i.e. Suman Lata and Women Constable Sushila. But,
they were examined only much later. He therefore states that this is a
violation of Section 67 of the NDPS Act.
9.      The learned counsel for the petitioner further states that the
accused/petitioner was searched in a toilet inside the train and her bag was
not there with her and the possibility of the bag being tampered with cannot
be ruled out. The learned counsel for the petitioner states that this is a clear
violation of Section 50 of the NDPS Act. The learned counsel for the
petitioner states that though the petitioner had waived off the presence of
any Gazetted Officer and has said that NCB lady officers can carry out the
search. But that does not absolve the duty of the State to fulfill Section 50
of the NDPS Act. The learned counsel for the petitioner places reliance on
the judgment of the Supreme Court in Arif Khan v. State of Uttarakhand,
(2018) 18 SCC 380. He further places reliance on the judgment of the
Supreme Court in Harbeer Singh v. Sheeshpal, (2016) 16 SCC 418, to
contend that delay in recording of statements of the prosecution witnesses
under Section 161 CrPC, although those witnesses were or could be
available for examination when the investigating officer visited the scene of
occurrence or soon thereafter, would cast a doubt upon the prosecution case.
He further submits that the Petitioner is a educated girl with no criminal
record and has deep roots in the society. He further contends that the
petitioner has retracted her statement.
10.    The learned counsel for the petitioner places reliance on the
observations made by this Court while extending the Bail to the Petitioner
and referred to her satisfactory conduct based on which this Court was
pleased to grant her two extensions of 60 days each. He submitted that
previous Bail conditions imposed by this Court have been scrupulously
observed by the Petitioner and that the conduct of the Petitioner in jail has
been good. He therefore submitted considering the fact that the chargesheet
has been filed, Trial is continuing and that Petitioner would like to continue
her academic courses and considering she has a bright future she should be
enlarged on bail.
11.    Per Contra, learned counsel for the State contends that there is no
delay in recording the witnesses. He states that seizure was made on
22.02.2018. He states that on the same day notice under Section 67 NDPS
Act was given to them for examination on 23.03.2018 and what has been
recorded in panchanama has been elicited out there. He therefore states that
the Courts are only considering the bail of the petitioner and there is no
violation of any requirement under Section 67 of the NDPS Act. He would
further contend that the judgment of Arif Khan (supra) relied on by the
learned counsel for the petitioner has been clarified by a Division Bench of
this Court in Nabi Alam v. State (Govt. of NCT of Delhi), 2021 SCC Del
12.    Mr. Digpaul submitted that the Petitioner was found in the possession
of 600 Gms. of Methamphetamine which is a commercial quantity. This was
recovered from her baggage where it was kept clandestinely in a bag marked
as ‘Baby Carrier’. He argued that the punishment prescribed under the
provisions the Petitioner is charged with is minimum rigorous imprisonment
for ten years which could be extended till 20 years. He argued that the
NDPS Act is a special law with a uni-directional objective to curb the
menace of drugs and narcotics in the country and society and therefore the
trite criminal law principles of presumption of innocence and prosecution to
bear the burden of proof stands nullified in the face of express provisions in
Section 35 and Section 54 of NDPS Act which presume mental and
possessory guilt until the contrary is proven.
13.     Mr. Digpaul submitted that although the statement given by Petitioner
under Section 67 has been retracted, but the statement has led to arrest of
two Nigerians residing in Delhi Charles Ezih and during search proceedings
at his house 180 Gms of Cocaine was found in his possession, and Moses
Henry Oyendu from whose house 660 Gms of Methamphetamine was
seized. Her statement, he argued, led to unearthing of a nexus of persons
who have been involved in illicit narcotic trading, the two others have been
declared Proclaimed Offender and the search for them is ongoing. He argued
that in the complaint it has been stated that the other accused Charles Ezih &
Moses Henry Oyendu have been living in India illegally as their Visa is
expired and their Passports were ingenuine & fabricated.
14.     A perusal of the record indicates that the Petitioner was traveling from
Delhi to Bombay by Train from Hazrat Nizamuddin Railway Station when
she was intercepted by officials of the NCB on a secret tip and served a
notice under Section 50 NDPS Act and she was informed of her rights
available under Section 50 of the NDPS Act and was given an option to be
searched before a Gazetted Officer or a Magistrate but the petitioner waived
off her right under Section 50 of the NDPS Act and had agreed for search by
any NCB lady officer. Accordingly, two lady railway police officials had
been requested to conduct the search. The Petitioner after being taken into
custody disclosed that she got the contraband from Moses Henry Onyendu
when she was at the house of Charles Ezih, this was later recorded by the
NCB under Section 67 NDPS Act. Based on this statement, the NCB
conducted search from the house of Charles Ezih and Henry Onyendu and at
both the places large commercial quantities of Methamphetamine and
Cocaine respectively were seized along with measuring scales. One accused
is still yet to be nabbed and has been declared a Proclaimed Offender. The
Petitioner has retracted her statement later given to NCB on 22.6.2018,
however, the retraction of statement is a non issue now since the disclosure
statement has resulted in the discovery of other accused persons in whose
possession copious quantity of contraband which has furthered the probe
into finding the link of its origin and tracing the head of the drug
cartel/network. There appears to be a        prima facie evidence that the
Petitioner was in the possession of 600Gms of Methamphetamine at
Nizamuddin Railway Station on 22.2.2018.
15.     The reliance made by the learned counsel for the petitioner on
Harbeer Singh (supra) is misplaced and would not apply at this juncture. He
contend that the delay in recording the statement under Section 161 Cr.P.C
need not to be considered at this juncture and it is a matter of trial. In any
event, even the notice to the witnesses were given on the very same day and
they were asked to give their statements on 23.03.2018.
16.   The learned counsel for the petitioner has placed reliance on the
judgment of the Supreme Court on para 20 of the judgment of the Supreme
Court in Arif Khan (supra). The said para reads as under:
"20. Their Lordships have held in Vijaysinh
Chandubha Jadeja [Vijaysinh Chandubha Jadeja v.
State of Gujarat, (2011) 1 SCC 609 : (2011) 1 SCC
(Cri) 497] that the requirements of Section 50 of the
provisions of Section 50 must be strictly complied with.
It is held that it is imperative on the part of the police
officer to apprise the person intended to be searched of
his right under Section 50 to be searched only before a
gazetted officer or a Magistrate. It is held that it is
equally mandatory on the part of the authorised officer
to make the suspect aware of the existence of his right
to be searched before a gazetted officer or a
Magistrate, if so required by him and this requires a
strict compliance. It is ruled that the suspect person
may or may not choose to exercise the right provided
to him under Section 50 of the NDPS Act but so far as
the officer is concerned, an obligation is cast upon him
under Section 50 of the NDPS Act to apprise the
suspect of his right to be searched before a gazetted
officer or a Magistrate. (See also Ashok Kumar
Sharma v. State of Rajasthan [Ashok Kumar Sharma v.
State of Rajasthan, (2013) 2 SCC 67 : (2013) 1 SCC
(Cri) 829] and Narcotics Control Bureau v. Sukh Dev
Raj Sodhi [Narcotics Control Bureau v. Sukh Dev Raj
17.   A Division Bench of this Court has considered the issue of waiver of
Section 50 and the observation made in Arif Khan (supra) and it has
"21. Coming now to the emphasis placed on behalf of
the applicant/accused on the judgment rendered by the
Supreme Court in Arif Khan @ Agha Khan (supra), the
question that needs to be considered is whether that
decision is an authority for the proposition that
notwithstanding the person proposed to be searched
has, after being duly apprised of his right to be
searched before a Gazetted Officer or Magistrate, but
has expressly waived this right in clear and
unequivocal terms; it is still mandatory that his search
be conducted only before a Gazetted Officer or
22. In this behalf, it is necessary to consider the
observations of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Arif
Khan @ Agha Khan (supra), the relevant paragraphs
of which decision are being extracted hereinbelow:—
conferred on the authorities under Section
aforementioned questions after taking into
the subject.
before a gazetted officer or a Magistrate.
him and this requires a strict compliance.
23. A plain reading of the above extracted paragraphs
leads to but one inescapable conclusion that their
Lordships of the Hon'ble Supreme Court whilst
following the ratio of the decision of the Constitution
Bench in Vijaysinh Chandubha Jadeja (supra) held
that the same has settled the position of law in this
behalf to the effect that, whilst it is imperative on the
part of the empowered officer to apprise the person of
his right to be searched only before a Gazetted Officer
or Magistrate; and this requires a strict compliance;
the Hon'ble Court simultaneously proceeded to
reiterate that, in Vijaysinh Chandubha Jadeja (supra)
“it is ruled that the suspect person may or may not
choose to exercise the right provided to him under
Section 50 of the NDPS Act”. In this view of the
matter, the reliance placed by counsel for the
applicant/accused on the decision of the Supreme
Court in Arif Khan @ Agha Khan (supra), in our
18.   Grant or rejection of bail under the NDPS Act is governed by Section
37 of the NDPS Act. The Supreme Court in State of Kerala V. Rajesh,
(2020) 12 SCC 122, has reiterated the principles on which bail can be
granted under the NDPS Act.
“19. The scheme of Section 37 reveals that the
exercise of power to grant bail is not only subject to
the limitations contained under Section 439 CrPC,
but is also subject to the limitation placed by Section
37 which commences with non obstante clause. The
operative part of the said section is in the negative
form prescribing the enlargement of bail to any
person accused of commission of an offence under
the Act, unless twin conditions are satisfied. The first
condition is that the prosecution must be given an
opportunity to oppose the application; and the
second, is that the court must be satisfied that there
are reasonable grounds for believing that he is not
guilty of such offence. If either of these two
conditions is not satisfied, the ban for granting bail
operates.
20. The expression “reasonable grounds” means
something more than prima facie grounds. It
contemplates substantial probable causes for believing
that the accused is not guilty of the alleged offence.
The reasonable belief contemplated in the provision
requires existence of such facts and circumstances as
are sufficient in themselves to justify satisfaction that
the accused is not guilty of the alleged offence. In the
case on hand, the High Court seems to have completely
overlooked the underlying object of Section 37 that in
addition to the limitations provided under the CrPC, or
any other law for the time being in force, regulating
the grant of bail, its liberal approach in the matter of
bail under the NDPS Act is indeed uncalled for.
21. We may further like to observe that the learned
Single Judge has failed to record a finding mandated
under Section 37 of the NDPS Act which is a sine qua
non for granting bail to the accused under the NDPS
19.    A three-judge bench of the Supreme Court in Collector of Customs v.
Ahmadalieva Nodira, (2004) 3 SCC 549, succinctly referred to what the
limitations on the exercise of power under Section 37 NDPS are as follows:
“7. The limitations on granting of bail come in only
when the question of granting bail arises on merits.
Apart from the grant of opportunity to the Public
Prosecutor, the other twin conditions which really have
relevance so far as the present accused-respondent is
concerned, are: the satisfaction of the court that there
are reasonable grounds for believing that the accused
is not guilty of the alleged offence and that he is not
likely to commit any offence while on bail. The
conditions are cumulative and not alternative. The
satisfaction contemplated regarding the accused being
not guilty has to be based on reasonable grounds. The
expression “reasonable grounds” means something
more than prima facie grounds. It contemplates
substantial probable causes for believing that the
accused is not guilty of the alleged offence. The
reasonable belief contemplated in the provision
requires existence of such facts and circumstances as
are sufficient in themselves to justify satisfaction that
the accused is not guilty of the alleged offence. In the
case at hand the High Court seems to have completely
overlooked the underlying object of Section 37. It did
not take note of the confessional statement recorded
under Section 67 of the Act”
20.    The Supreme Court in State of M.P. v. Kojad, (2001) 7 SCC 673,
embarked to elucidate as to why bail conditions under the NDPS are
stringent to the extent of being severe & uncompromising, it held as follows:
“5.….The purpose for which the Act was enacted and
the menace of drug trafficking which it intends to
curtail is evident from its scheme. A perusal of Section
37 of the Act leaves no doubt in the mind of the Court
that a person accused of an offence, punishable for a
term of imprisonment of 5 years or more, shall
generally be not released on bail. Negation of Bail is
the rule and its grant an exception under sub-clause
(ii) of clause (b) of Section 37(1). For granting the
bail the Court must, on the basis of the record
produced before it, be satisfied that there are
reasonable grounds for believing that the accused is
not guilty of the offences with which he is charged
and further that he is not likely to commit any offence
while on bail. It has further to be noticed that the
conditions for granting the bail, specified in clause
(b) of sub-section(1) of Section 37 are in addition to
the limitations provided under the Code of Criminal
Procedure or any other law for the time being in
force regulating the grant of bail. Liberal approach in
the matter of bail under the Act is uncalled for.”
21.    On a careful reading of the facts and its juxtaposition with the
arguments advanced, it is clear that the Petitioner on 22.02.2018 was found
in the possession of Methamphetamine and the same has been verified by
conducting a chemical test of the sample of the seized material. The
disclosure statement has lead to the arrest of two Nigerian accused in whose
possession narcotics was found. It has also been discovered by the NCB that
these two accused were living illegally in India on fake passports. Material
on record discloses that the petitioner is a part of a network which deals in
supply/sale of Narcotics. This is evident from the subsequent recoveries of
Narcotics from foreign nationals. The clean & tidy track record of the
Petitioner does not absolve her from being in possession of 600 Gms of
Methamphetamine. An uneducated person may claim no knowledge of the
substance found in his/her possession and may raise a defense of the
substance being planted on them but being a highly educated person, there is
greater presumption that carrying large quantities of narcotics is a crime and
that it would entail consequences in law which could be harsh and
irrevocable. The quantity recovered from the Petitioner is commercial
quantity. For the said reasons, the Petitioners case doesn’t fall within the
twin parameters of Section 37 of the NDPS Act.
22.    For the aforesaid reasons this Court is not inclined to grant bail to the
Petitioner. The petition is dismissed along with the pending application(s).
23.    Before parting, this Court deems fit to clarify that none of the
observations in this order may tantamount to a comment on the merits of the
case. The Trial Court is directed to ignore this order while considering the
case in Trial.