Case :- CRIMINAL APPEAL No. - 1407 of 2011
Respondent :- State of U.P.
Counsel for Appellant :- Awadhesh Kumar
Counsel for Respondent :- Govt. Advocate
1.     This appeal has been preferred by the appellant-Jagveer
Singh @ Bantu against the judgement and order dated
28.02.2011 passed by Additional Sessions Judge, Court
No.02, Pilibhit, in Session Trial No.179 of 2009 (State Vs.
Jagveer Singh @ Bantu) arising out of Case Crime No.1657
of 2008, under Sections 498-A & 306 IPC and Section ¾
District- Pilibhit, by which the learned trial court convicted
and sentenced the appellant- Jagveer Singh @ Bantu for five
years rigorous imprisonment and Rs.10,000/- fine (three
months imprisonment for default of fine) under Section 306
IPC and two years rigorous imprisonment and Rs.3,000/- fine
(one month imprisonment in default of fine) for the offence
under Section 498A IPC. All sentences are directed to run
2.     The brief relevant facts of this case are that on
14.12.2008, informant Madan Lal submitted a written report
in P.S.- Jahanabad, District- Pilibhit, with the averments that
his grand-daughter (daughter of his daughter) Laxmi Devi
was married to Jagveer Singh @ Bantu s/o Khoob Chandra
resident of Village-Jalipura in April, 2008. They have given
sufficient dowry according to their financial capacity but
Jagveer Singh and his parents were not satisfied with the
dowry. So, they used to torture Laxmi Devi. Laxmi Devi on
several occasions made complaints regarding the demand of
additional dowry and torture due to non-fulfillment of the
demand. Several times they tried to convince Jagveer Singh,
but Jagveer Singh used to quarrel with them also. Villagers of
Jagveer Singh's village informed us in the morning at 10
O'clock through telephone that Laxmi Devi has been killed. It
was evident that she was given poison.
3.     On the above written report, the Case Crime No.1657
of 2008, under Section 498A, 304B IPC and Section ¾
Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, was registered at P.S.-
Jahanabad, District- Pilibhit on the same day against the
appellant- Jagveer Singh and his parents. Postmortem of
Laxmi Devi was conducted and cause of death could not be
ascertained, therefore, viscera was preserved. After inquest of
the dead-body of the deceased, report from Forensic Science
Laboratory, Lucknow (Ex.ka7) was received. In the report,
aluminum phosphide poison was found in viscera of the
deceased, therefore, charge sheet was submitted against
Jagveer and his father Khoob Chandra under the above
mentioned offences.
4.     Learned trial court framed charges under Section 498A,
304B IPC and ¾ Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, against both
the accused persons. Learned trial court, after conducting full
trial, acquitted Khoob Chandra for all charges framed against
him, but convicted Jagveer Singh @ Bantu under Section 306
IPC for five years rigorous imprisonment and Rs.10,000/-
fine and under Section 498A IPC for two years rigorous
imprisonment and Rs.3,000/- fine. Hence, this appeal.
5.      Heard Shri Awadhesh Kumar Srivastav, learned counsel
for the appellant and Shri S.S. Sachan, learned AGA,
appearing for the State.
6.      Learned counsel for the appellant argued that the
appellant has been falsely implicated in this case by the
informant and wrongly convicted by the trial court. No
offence is made out against the appellant. Learned counsel for
the appellant further submitted that initially a case was
registered against the appellant under Section 304B, 498A
IPC and ¾ Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, and it was alleged in
the First Information Report that appellant and his parents
were not happy and satisfied with the dowry given in the
marriage of the deceased and they used to demand additional
dowry and also used to torture for non-fulfillment of the
dowry, but no such evidence has come out on the record and
learned trial court acquitted the accused- Khoob Chandra for
all the charges and convicted the appellant- Jagveer Singh
under Section 306 IPC only, therefore, it is clear from the
judgement of the learned lower court that prosecution story
was not believed to be true by the trial court and allegations
of demand and torture were found false. Learned counsel for
the appellant argued that when prosecution story was not
found true then trial court should have acquitted the appellant
7.     Learned counsel for the appellant next submitted that in
this case a suicide-note had come into the picture. Suicide-
note was found from the room of the deceased by the
Investigating Officer. Entire case is based on it and in the
entire suicide-note there is no allegation of demand of dowry
or torture and moreover there is no allegation against the
appellant for instigating the deceased to commit suicide, but
learned trial court did not consider the suicide-note in right
perspective. Learned counsel for the appellant further
submitted that the informant, who is Nana of the deceased
and real brother of the deceased Rakesh @ Satish Kumar
admitted in their statements that suicide-note was written in
the hand-writing of the deceased, therefore, there was no
dispute regarding the suicide-note and prosecution witnesses
admitted it to be in the hand-writing of deceased-Laxmi Devi.
There is no averment in the suicide-note regarding abetment
on the part of appellant to commit suicide. Appellant and
deceased had cordial relations. Learned trial court has quoted
the suicide-note in the judgement, which does not disclose
any abetment even then trial court convicted the appellant and
sentenced him under Section 306 IPC. Learned counsel for
the appellant argued that for abetment, there should be
immediate instigation, but it is not so in suicide-note. In this
way, appellant is wrongly convicted by the trial court,
therefore, the instant appeal may be allowed.
8.     Learned AGA submitted that there was cruelty against
the deceased by appellant and due to this cruelty trial court
convicted the appellant for the offence under Section 498-A
IPC. Learned AGA next submitted that suicide-note shows
that appellant had driven out the deceased from his life due to
which the deceased was mentally disturbed and could not
tolerate keeping herself out of life of the appellant.
9.     Learned AGA also submitted that although in suicide-
note, deceased has written to his brother that her husband and
her-in-laws should not be harassed and no case should be
registered against them after her death, but law will take its
own course. Learned trial court, after believing the averments
of the suicide-note, came to the conclusion that deceased was
very uncomfortable and under mental disturbance when the
appellant drove out her from his life, although, they were
residing together. Due to this mental agony and disturbances,
she committed suicide for which appellant was responsible
and, therefore, learned trial court rightly convicted the
appellant under Section 306 IPC.
10.    Prosecution case is that appellant and his parents were
not satisfied with the dowry given in marriage of deceased
and they used to demand additional dowry and torturing the
deceased for not meeting out the same. Prosecution has also
brought this case before the court that due to non-fulfillment
of demand of additional dowry, Laxmi Devi was killed by
poison. To prove its case, prosecution produced two witnesses
of fact, PW1- Madan Lal and PW2- Rakesh Kumar @ Satish
Kumar. PW-1 is the informant and Nana of deceased and PW-
2 is the real brother of the deceased. In their respective
statements, both the witnesses have reiterated the demand of
Rs.50,000/- and a four wheeler as additional dowry from the
family of the deceased. Both the above witnesses have stated
in their examination-in-chief that due to non-fulfillment of
demand of additional dowry, deceased was killed by poison.
Both the witnesses supported the version of first information
report in their examination-in-chief, but a suicide note,
written by the deceased, is the main basis of this case, which
was found by Investigating Officer from the room of the
deceased. On believing the averments of suicide-note, trial
court acquitted Khoob Chandra, father of the appellant and
convicted the appellant, not for offence of dowry death but
for the offence of abetment to suicide under Section 306 IPC.
The learned trial court has opined in the judgement that this
fact is not proved on the basis of evidence available on record
that husband or father-in-law of deceased have ever tortured
her in connection with demand of dowry and trial court gave
finding that appellant has separated the deceased from his life
which comes in the category of mental cruelty which is clear
from the suicide-note, therefore, in this way, the appellant had
created such a circumstance and situation before the
deceased, which inspired the deceased to commit suicide by
consuming the poison and, therefore, the appellant was solely
responsible for abetting the deceased to commit suicide.
11.    This Court is not at all convinced with the above
findings of the trial court regarding mental cruelty and
abetment to commit suicide by the appellant.
12.    Prosecution witness PW1- Madan Lal and PW2-
Rakesh Kumar have failed to prove the version of FIR
regarding the demand of additional dowry, torture and killing
the deceased by administering the poison to her. The version
of the First Information Report is the genesis of this case, but
during the course of investigation the suicide-note of
deceased was found and it changed the entire story of the
13.    Learned trial court found that appellant tortured the
deceased mentally and he had created such a situation before
the deceased by separating her from his life that she was not
left with any other option but to commit suicide. This finding
of trial court is not in-consonance with the settled position of
law regarding abetment. Abetment to suicide is provided
306. Abetment of suicide.—If any person commits
suicide, whoever abets the commission of such suicide,
shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to ten years,
14.    Before discussing the law of abetment it is relevant to
quote the provision of Section 107 IPC which is as under:-
107. Abetment of a thing.—A person abets the doing of a
(Firstly) — Instigates any person to do that thing; or
(Secondly) —Engages with one or more other person or
persons in any conspiracy for the doing of that thing, if
an act or illegal omission takes place in pursuance of that
conspiracy, and in order to the doing of that thing; or
(Thirdly) — Intentionally aids, by any act or illegal
omission, the doing of that thing. Explanation 1.—A
person who, by wilful misrepresentation,      or by wilful
concealment of a material fact which he is bound to dis-
close, voluntarily causes or procures, or attempts to
cause or procure, a thing to be done, is said to instigate
the doing of that thing. Illustration A, a public officer, is
authorized by a warrant from a Court of Justice to
apprehend Z. B, knowing that fact and also that C is not
Z, wilfully represents to A that C is Z, and thereby
intentionally causes A to apprehend C. Here B abets by
instigation the apprehension of C. Explanation 2.—
Whoever, either prior to or at the time of the commission
of an act, does anything in order to facilitate the
commission of that act, and thereby facilitate the
commission thereof, is said to aid the doing of that act."
15.    Hon'ble Supreme Court has held in Amalendu Pal
Vs. State of West Bengal (2010) 1 SCC 707 that "it
is also to be borne in mind that in cases of alleged abetment
of suicide there must be proof of direct or indirect acts of
incitement to the commission of the suicide. Merely on the
allegation of harassment without there being any positive
action proximate to the time of the occurrence on the part of
the accused which led or compelled the person to commit
suicide, conviction in terms of Section 306 IPC is not
16.    Before a person may be said to have abetted the
commission of suicide, he must have played an active role by
an act of instigation or by doing certain act to facilitate the
commission of suicide. As per provision of Section 107 IPC,
it is very much clear that for abetment a person should do
something to instigate any person to do something or engages
with one or more persons in any conspiracy to do that thing or
intentionally aids, by any act or illegal omissions, to do that
particular thing. In this case, it was necessary for appellant to
be convicted him for the offence under Section 306 IPC that
he should have instigated the deceased to commit suicide or
he should have engaged with one or more persons in any
conspiracy to abet the deceased to commit suicide or he
should have intentionally aided by any act for abetting her to
commit suicide.
17.    Hon'ble Apex Court in Chheena Vs. Vijay Kumar
Mahajan (2010) 12 SCC 190 held that abetment
involves a mental process of instigating a person or
intentionally aiding a person in doing of a thing. Without a
positive act on the part of the accused to instigate or aid in
committing suicide, conviction cannot be sustained. It is also
held by the Hon'ble Apex Court in that judgement that in
order to convict a person under Section 306 IPC there has to
be a clear mens rea to commit the offence. It also requires an
active act or direct act which led the deceased to commit
suicide seeing no option and that act must have been intended
to push the deceased into such a position that he committed
18.    In Rajesh Vs. State of Haryana 2019 (1) JIC
791 (SC) , Hon'ble Apex Court held that conviction under
Section 306 IPC is not sustainable on the allegation of
harassment without there being any positive action proximate
to the time of the occurrence on the part of the accused,
which led or compelled the person to commit suicide. In
order to bring a case within the purview of Section 306 IPC,
there must be a case of suicide and in the commission of the
said offence, the person who is said to have abetted the
commission of the suicide must have played an active role by
an act of instigation   or by doing certain act to facilitate the
commission of the suicide. Therefore, the act of abetment by
the person charged with the said office must be proved and
established by the prosecution before he could be convicted
19.    The Full Bench of Hon'ble Apex Court in Gurcharan
Singh Vs. State of Punjab 2020 (4) JIC 336 (SC) held
that "as in all crimes, mens rea has to be established. To prove
the offence of abetment, as specified under Section 107 IPC,
the state of mind to commit a particular crime must be visible,
to determine the culpability in order to prove mens rea, there
has to be something on record to establish or show that the
appellant herein had a guilty mind and in furtherance of that
state of mind, abetted the suicide of the deceased.
20.    In the case in hand, the trial court has referred the
suicide-note left by the deceased which shows the sole reason
of committing the suicide by the deceased was that she was
separated by the appellant from his life. In the opinion of this
Court, the aforesaid reason could not be the reason which
could come under the category of the abetment. There is
absolutely nothing in the suicide-note, which would make
him responsible for an offence under Section 306 IPC. This
Court finds nothing in the suicide-note suggesting abetment
to commit suicide. There is nothing in the suicide note which
can be said to be proximate reason to commit suicide by the
deceased. The aforesaid suicide note does not show any mens
rea on the part of the appellant. No guilty mind of appellant is
shown by any statement in suicide note as referred by the trial
court. Further, suicide note does not show the fact that there
was any instigation or even cruelty on the part of appellant
due to which the deceased was left with no option but to
commit suicide because if the appellant had separated the
deceased from his life, it was not compelling reason which
put the deceased in a situation where she had no option but to
commit suicide. Learned trial court has given finding that
there was mental cruelty on the part of appellant towards the
deceased and on the basis of this finding, appellant was
convicted under Section 498A IPC, but this Court is not
convinced with this finding also because firstly there was no
averment of demand of additional dowry of Rs.50,000/- and a
four wheeler in the FIR. The statements of PW-1 and PW-2
show that they did not state this fact before the Investigating
Officer also, both the above witnesses have stated the fact of
demanding Rs.50,000/- and a four wheeler for the first time
before the trial court, therefore, these averments will come
under the category of improvement. Moreover, entire suicide-
note does not contain any such demand of dowry or torturing
the deceased. Learned trial court has wrongly given the
finding of mental cruelty on the basis that appellant drove out
the deceased from his life. In the absence of mens rea and
proximate cause for abetting the suicide, learned trial court
has wrongly appreciated the law regarding the abetment.
21.    On the basis of above discussion, this Court is of the
definite opinion that learned trial court did not appreciate the
evidence on record in right perspective and wrongly
convicted the appellant for the offence under Sections 306
IPC and 498A IPC.
22.    Hence, the appeal is liable to be allowed.
23.    Accordingly, the appeal is allowed. Conviction and
sentence of appellant as awarded is hereby set aside.
Appellant is on bail, his bail bond is cancelled and sureties
are discharged.